THE HISTORY OF The Valorous and VVitty-KNIGHT-ERRANT, Don-Quixote, of the
Mancha.

Translated out of the Spanish; now newly Corrected and Amended.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Hodgkinsonne, for Andrew Crook. 1652.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, his very good friend, the Lord of Walden, etc.
MIne Honorable Lord; having Translated some five or six years ago, the
History of Don-Quixote, out of the Spanish tongue into the English, in the
space of forty days; being thereunto more then half enforced, through the
importunity of a very deer friend, that was desirous to understand the subject:
After I had given once a view thereof, I cast it aside, where it lay long time
neglected in a corner, and so little regarded by me, as I never once set hand
to review or correct the same. Since when, at the entreatie of others my
friends, I was content to let it come to light conditionally, that some one or
other would peruse and and amend the errors escaped; my many affairs hindering
me from undergoing that labor. Now I understand by the Printer, that the Copy
was presented to your Honor; which did at the first somewhat disgust me,
because as it must pass, I fear much, it will prove far unworthy, either of your
Noble view or protection. Yet since it is mine, though abortive, I do humbly
entreat, that your Honor will lend it a favorable countenance, thereby to
animate the Parent thereof to produce in time some worthier subject, in your
Honorable name, whose many rare Virtues have already rendered me so highly
devoted to your service, as I will some day give very evident tokens of the
same; and till then I rest,

Your Honors most affectionate Servitor, Thomas Shelton.

The Authors Preface to the Reader.
THou may believe me (gentle Reader) without swearing, that I could willingly
desire this book (as a child of understanding) to be the most beautiful,
gallant and discreet that might possibly be imagined. But I could not
transgress the order of Nature, wherein every thing begets his like: which
being so what could my sterile and ill-tild wit engender, but the History of a
dry, toasted, and humorous son, full of various thoughts and conceits, never
before imagined of any other; much like one who was engendered within some
noisome prison, where all discommodities have taken possession, and all
doleful noyses made their habitation? seeing that rest, pleasant places,
amenity of the fields, the cheerfulness of clear sky, the murmuring noise of
the cristal fountains, and quiet repose of the spirit, are great helps for the
most barren Muses to show themselves fruitful, and to bring forth into the
world such births as may enrich it with admiration and delight. It often times
befalls, that a father has a child both by by birth evil favored and quite
devoid of all perfection, and yet the love that he bears him is such, as it
casts a mask over his eyes, which hinders his descerning of the faults and
simplicities thereof, and makes him rather to deem them discretions and beauty,
and so tells them to his friends for witty jests and conceits. But I (though in
show a father, yet in truth but a step-father to Don Quixote) will not be born
away by the violent current of the modern custom now a days; and therefore
entreat thee with the tears almost in mine eyes, as many others are wont to
do, (most dear Reader) to pardon and dissemble the faults which thou shall
discern in this my soon; for thou art neither his kinsman nor friend, and thou
have thy soul in thy body, and thy free will therein as absolute as the best,
and thou art in thine own house, wherein thou art as absolute a Lord, as the
King is of his subsidies, and thou know well the common Proverb, that Under
my cloak a fig for the King, all which does exempt thee, and makes thee free
from all respect and obligation; and so thou may holdly say of this History
whatsoever thou shall think good, without fear either to be controled for the
evil, or rewarded for the good thou shall speak thereof.

I would very fain have presented it unto thee pure and Naked, without the
ornament of a Preface, or the rabblement and Catalogue of the wonted Sonnets,
Epigrams, Poems, Elegies, etc. which are wont to be put at the beginning of
Books. For I dare say unto thee, that (although it cost me some pains to
compose it) yet in no respect did it equalize that which I took to make this
preface which thou do now read. I took oftentimes my pen in my hand to write
it, and as often set it down again, as not knowing what I should write, and
being once in amuse with my Paper before me, my Pen in mine ear, mine elbow on
the table, and my hand on my cheek, imagining what I might write; there entered
a friend of mine unexpectedly, who was a very discreet and pleasantly witted
man; who seeing me so pensative, demanded of me the reason of my musing: And
not concealing it from him, said, That I bethought my self on my preface I was
to make to Don Quixotes History, which did so much trouble me, as I neither
mean to make any at all, nor publish the History of the Acts of so noble a
Knight: For how can I choose quoth I) but be much confounded at that which the
old legislator (the Vulgar) will say when it sees that after the end of so many
years (as are spent since I first step in the bosom of oblivion) I come out
laden with my gray hairs, and bring with me a Book as dry as a Kex, void of
invention, barren of good phrase, poor of conceits, and altogether empty both
of learning and eloquence; without quotations on the margents, or annotations
in the end of the Book, wherewith I see other Books are still adorned, be they
never so idle, fabulous and profane: so full of sentences of Aristotle and
Plato and the other crew of the Philosophers, as admires the Readers, and makes
them believe that these Authors were very learned and eloquent. And after,
when they cite Plutarch or Cicero, what can they say, but that they are the
sayings of S. Thomas or other Doctors of the Church? observing herein so
ingenious a method, as in one line they will paint you an enamoured gull, and
in the other will lay you down a little seeming devout sermon, so that it is a
great pleasure and delight to read or hear it; all which things must be
wanting in my Book, for neither have I any thing to cite on the margent or note
in the end, and much less do I know what Authors I follow, to put them at the
beginning as the custom is, by the letter of the A.B.C. beginning with
Aristotle, and ending in Xenophon, or in Zoylus, or Zeuxis. Although the one
was a Railer, and the other a Painter. So likewise shall my Book want Sonnets
at the beginning, at least such Sonnets whose Authors be Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Bishops, Ladies or famous Poets. Although if I would demand them of two
or three Ahtificers of mine acquaintance, I know they would make me some such,
as those of the most renowed in Spain would in no wise be able to equal or
compare with them.

Finally good Sir, and my very deer friend (quoth I) I do resolve that Sir Don
Quixote remain intombed among the old Records of the Mancha, until heaven
ordain some to adorn him with the many graces that are yet wanting: for I find
my self wholly unable to remedy them, through mine insufficiency and little
learning; and also because I am naturally lazy and unwilling to go searching
for Authors to say that which I can say well enough without them. And hence
proceeded the perplexity, and ecstasy wherein you found me plunged. My friend
hearing that, and striking himself on the fore head, after a long and loud
laughter said: In good faith friend, I have now at last delivered my self of a
long and intricate error wherewith I was possessed all the time of our
acquaintance; for hitherto I accounted thee ever to be discreet and prudent in
all thy Actions, but now I see plainly that thou art as far from that I took
thee to be, as Heaven is from the Earth.

How is it possible, that things of so small moment and so easy to be
redressed, can have force to suspend and swallow up so ripe a wit as yours has
seemed to be, and so fitted to break up and trample over the greatest
difficulties that can be propounded? This proceeds not in good sooth from
defect of will, but from superfluity of sloth, and penury of discourse: will thou see whether that I say be true or no? Listen then attentively a while, and
thou shall perceive how in the twinkling of an eye, I will confound all these
difficulties, and supply all the wants which do suspend and affright thee from
publishing to the world The History of the famous DON-QUIXOTE, the light and
mirror of all Knighthood Errant.

Say I pray thee, quoth I (hearing what he had said) after what manner do
thou think to replenish the vacuity of my fear, and reduce the Chaos of my
confusion to any cleernesse and light? And he replied: The first thing whereat
thou stopest, of Sonnets, Epigrams, Eglogues, etc. (which are wanting for the
beginning, and ought to be written by grave and noble persons) may be remedied,
if thou thy self wilt but take a little pain to compass them, and thou may
after name them as thou please, and father them on Prester John of the
Indians, or the Emperor of Trapisonde, whom I know were held to be famous
Poets; and suppose they were not, but that some pedantes and presumptuous,
fellows, would backbite thee and murmur against this truth, thou need not
weigh them two straws; for although they could prove it to be an untruth, yet
cannot they cut off thy hand for it.

As touching citations in the margent, and Authors out of whom thou may
collect sentences and sayings, to insert in thy History, there is nothing else
to be done, but to bob into it some latin sentences that thou know already
by rote, or may get easily with a little labor: as for example, When thou
treatest of liberty and thraldom, thou may cite that non been pro toto
libertas venditur auro: and presently quote Horace, or he whosoever else that
said it, on the margent. If thou should speak of the power of death, have
presently recourse to that, of Pallida mors equo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,
Regumque turres. If of the instability of friends, thou have at hand Cato
freely offering his disti^hon. Donec eris foelix multos numerabis amicos.
Tempora si iuerint nubila, solus eris. If of riches, quantum quisque sua
nummorum servat in arca tantum habet and fidei. If of love, hei mihi quod
nullis amor est medicabilis herbis. And so with these latin Authorities, and
other such like, they will at least account thee a good Grammarian, and the
being of such a one, is of no little honor and profit in this our age. As
touching the addition of annotations in the end of thy Book, thou may boldly
observe this course. If thou namest any Giant in thy Book, procure that it be
the Giant Goliath; and with this alone (which almost will cost thee nothing)
thou have gotten a fair annotation; for thou may say, The Giant Golias or
Goliat was a Philistine, whom the Shepherd David slew with the blow of a
stone in the vale of Terebintho, as is recounted in the Book of Kings, in the
chapter wherein thou shall find it written.

After all this, to show that thou art learned in humane letters, and a
Cosmographer, take some occasion to make mention of the River Tagus, and thou
shall presently find thy self stored with another notable notation, saying the
River Tagus was so called of a King of Spain, it takes it beginning from such a
place, and dies in the Ocean Seas, kissing first the walls of the famous City
of Lisborne: And some are of opinion, that the sands thereof are of Gold, etc.
If thou will treat of Thieves, I will recite the History of Cacus to thee, for
I know it by memory. If of Whores or Curtezans, there thou have the Bishop of
Mondonnedo, who will lend thee Lamia, Layda, and Flora, whose annotation will
gain thee no small credit. If of cruel persons, Ovid will tender Medea. If of
Enchanters and Witches, Homer has Calipso and Virgill Circe. If of valorous
Captains, Julius Caesar shall lend himself in his commentaries to thee; and
Plutarch shall give thee a thousand Alexanders. If thou do treat of Love,
and have but two ounces of the Thuscane language, thou shall encounter with
Lion the Hebrew, who will replenish thy vessels with store in that kind; but
if thou will not travel for it into strange Countries, thou have here at home
in thy house Fonseca of the love of God, wherein is deciphered all that either
thou, or the most ingenious capacity can desire to learn of that subject. In
conclusion, there is nothing else to be done, but that thou only endeavor to
name those names, or to touch those Histories in thine own which I have here
related, and leave the adding of Annotations and citations unto me, for I do
promise thee that I will both fill up the margent, and also spend four or five
sheets of advantage at the end of the Book.

Now let us come to the citation of Authors, which other Books have, and thine
wants, the remedy hereof is very easy; for thou need do naught else but
seek out a Book that does quote them all from the Letter A until Z, as thou
said thy self but even now, and thou shall set that very same Alphabet to
thine own Book, for although the little necessity that thou had to use their
assistance in thy work, will presently convict thee of falsehood, it makes no
matter, and perhaps there may not a few be found so simple as to believe that
thou have holp thy self in, the Narration of thy most simple and sincere
History, with all their authorities. And though that large Catalogue of Authors
do serve to none other purpose; yet will it at least give some authority to
the Book at the first blush: and the rather, because none will be so mad as to
stand to examine whether thou do follow them or no, seeing they can gain
nothing by the matter. Yet if I do not err in the consideration of so weighty
an affair, this Book of thine needs none of all these things, for as much as
it is only an invective against Books of Knighthood, a subject whereof
Aristotle never dreamed, Saint Basil said nothing, Cicero never heard any word.
Nor do the punctualities of truth, nor observations of Astrology fall within
the Sphere of such fabulous jestings. Nor do Geometrical dimentions impart it
anything; nor the confutation of arguments usurped by Rhetoric; nor ought it
to preach unto any the mixture of holy matters with profane (a motly wherewith
no Christian well should be attyred) only it has need to help it self with
imitation; for, by how much the more it shall excel therein, by so much the
more will the work be esteemed. And since that thy labor does aim at no more
then to diminish the authority and acceptance that Books of Chivalrie have in
the world, and among the vulgar, there is no occasion why thou should go
begging of sentences from Philosophers, fables from Poets, Orations from
Rhetoritians, or miracles from the Saints, but only endeavor to deliver with
significant, plain, honest, and well-ordered words thy joviall and cheerful
discourse, expressing as near as thou may possibly thy intention, making thy
conceits clear, and not intricate or dark; and labor also, that the melancholy
Mare by the reading thereof, may be urged to laughter, the pleasant
disposition increased, the simple not cloyed; and that the judicious may admire
thy invention, the grave not despise it, the prudent applaude it. In
conclusion, let thy project be to overthrow the ill-compiled Machina, and bulk
of those knightly Books, abhorred by many, but applauded by more. For if thou
bring this to pass, thou have not achieved a small matter.

I listened with very great attention to my friends Speech; and his reasons are
so firmly imprinted in my mind, as without making any reply unto them, I
approved them all for good, and framed my preface of them: Wherein (sweet
Reader) thou may perceive my friends discretion, my happiness to meet with
so good a counselor at such a pinch, and thine own ease in finding so plainly
and sincerely related, The History of the famous DON-QUIXOTE of the Mancha, of
whom it is the common opinion of all the inhabitants bordering on the Fields of
Montiel, that he was the most chaste, enamoured and valiant Knight that has
been seen, read, or heard of these many ages. I will not indeer the benefit and
service I have done thee, by making thee acquainted with so Noble and
Honorable a Knight, but only do desire that thou gratify me for the notice
of the famous Sancho Panca his Squire; in whom, in mine opinion, are deciphered
all the Squire-like graces dispersed throughout the vain rout of Knightly
Books: And herewithall I bid thee farewell, and do not forget me.

Vale.
Certain Sonnets, written by Knights Errant, Ladies, Squires, and Horses, in
the praise of DON-QUIXOTE, his Dame, his Squire, and Steed.
AMADIS of Gaul in praise of Don-Quixote.
THou that my doleful life did imitate,
When absent and disdained, it befell,
Devoid of Joy, I a repentant state
Did lead, and on the poor Rock's top did dwell:
Thou that the streams so often from thine eyes
Did suck of scalding tears digustfull brine;
And without Pewter, Copper, Plate likewise,
Wast on the bare earth often constrained to dine.
Live on one thing secure eternally,
That whilst bright Phoebus shall his Horses spur
Through the fourth Spheres dilated Monarchy,
Thy name shall be renowned near and fur.
And, as amongst Countries, thine is best alone,
So shall thine Author, Peers, on earth have none.
DON BELIANIS of Greece to Don Quixote of the Mancha.
I Tore, I hackt, abolisht, said and did,
More then Knight Errant else on earth has done:
I dextrous, valiant, and so stout beside,
Have thousand wrongs revenged, millions undone.
I have done Acts, that my fame eternize:
In Love I courteous and so peerlesse was:
Giants, as if but Dwarfs, I did despise:
And yet no time of Love plaints, I let pass.
I have held Fortune prostrate at my feet;
And by my wit seized on occasions top,
Whose wandering steps I led where I thought meet:
And though beyond the Moor my soaring hope
Did crown my hap with all felicity;
Yet Great Quixote, do I envy thee.
The Knight of the Sun ALPHEBO, to Don Quixote.
MY Sword could not at all compare with thine,
Spanish Alphebo! full of courtesy:
Nor thine Arms valor can be matched by mine,
Though I was feared where days both spring and dye.
Empires I scorned, and the vast Monarchy
Of the orient ruddie (offered me in vain)
I left, that I the sovereign face might see,
Of my Aurora, fair Claridiane.
Whom, as by miracle, I surely loved:
So banished by disgrace, even very Hell
Quaked at mine Arm, that did his fury tame:
But thou illustrious, Gothe, Quixote! have proved
Thy Valor, for Dulcinea's sake, so well,
As both on earth have gained eternal fame.
ORLANDO FURIOSO, Peer of France, to Don Quixote of the Mancha.
THought thou art not a Peer, thou have no peer,
Who might among ten thousand Peers be one;
Nor shall thou never any Peer have here,
Who ever conquering, vanquished was of none.
Quixote, IN me Orlando! that, cast away
For fair Angelica, crossed remotest Seas,
And did such Trophies on Fames Altar lay,
As pass oblivions reach, many degrees.
Nor can I be thy Peer; for Peerlesnesse
Is to thy prowes due and great renown,
Although I lost, as well as thou, my wit:
Yet mine thou may be, if thy good success
Make thee the proud Moor tame, and Schite that crown
Us equals in disgrace and loving fit.
SOLIS DAN, to Don Quixote of the Mancha.
MAugre the ravings that are set abroach,
And rumble up and down thy troubled brain:
Yet none thine Acts, Quixote, can reproach,
Or thy proceedings tax as vile or vain.
Thy feats shall be thy fairest ornament
(Seeing wrongs to 'ndoe, thou go thus about)
Although with blows a thousand times y-shent,
Thou were well nigh, yea 'ven by the miscreant rout.
And if thy fair Dulcinea shall wrong,
By mis-regard thy fairer expectation,
And to thy cares will lend no lightning ear:
Then let this comfort all thy woes out wear,
That Sancho faild in Brokers occupation,
He foolish, cruel she; thou without tongue.
The Princess ORIANA of Great Britain, to Lady Dulcinea del Toboso.
Happy those, which for more commodity
And ease, Dulcinea fair! could bring to pass
That Green Witch where Toboso is, might be,
And London changed, where thy Knights Village was.
Happy she that might body and soul adorn
With thy rich Liv'ry, and thy high desire;
And see thy happy Knight by honor borne
In cruel combat, broaching out his ire.
But happiest she that might so cleanly escape
From Amadis, as thou have whilome done
From thy well mannered Knight, courteous Quixote:
O! were I she, I Would envy no ones hap,
And had been merry, when I most did moan
And taken my pleasure, without paying shot.
GANDALINE, Amadis of Gauls Squire, to Sancho Panca, Don Quixotes Squire.
HAil famous man! whom fortune has so blist
When first in Squire-like trade, it thee did place,
As thou did soft and sweetly pass disgrace,
E're thou thereof the threatening danger wist.
The Shovell or Sickle little do resist
The wandering exercise; for now is in grace
Plain Squire-like dealing, which does quite deface
His Pride that would the Moor boar with his fist.
Thine Ass I jointly envy and thy name,
And eke thy Wallet I do emulate,
An argument of thy great providence:
Hail once again; who cause so good a man,
Thy worths our Spanish Ovid does relate,
And lovely chaunts them with all reverence.
A Dialogue between Babieca, Horse to the Cid a famous Conqueror of Spain; and
Rozinante, Don Quixotes Courser.
Ba. HOw haps it Rozinant, thou art so lean?

To. Because I travel still, and never eat:

Ba. Thy want of Barley and Straw, what does it mean?

To. That of my Lord a bit I cannot get.

Ba. Away sir Jade! you are ill mannered,
Whose Asses tongue your Lord does thus abase.

To. If you did see how he is enamoured,
You would conclude, that he is the greater Ass.

Ba. Is love a folly?

(Roz.) Sure it is no wit.

Ba. Thou art a Metaphisician.

(Roz.) For want of meat.

Ba. Complain upon the Squire.

(Roz.) What profits it?
Or how shall I my woeful plaints repeat!
Since though the world imputes slownesse to me,
Yet greater Jades my Lord and Sancho be.

The Table of the first part of the delightful History of Don-Quixote.
CHAPTER. I
Wherein is rehearsed the calling and exercises of the renowned Gentleman Don
Quixote of the Mancha.
CHAP. II.
Treating of the first sally that Don Quixote made to seek Adventures.
CHAP. III.
Wherein is recounted the pleasant manner observed in the Knighting of Don
Quixote.
CHAP. IV.
Of that which befell to our Knight, after he had departed from the Inn.
CHAP. V.
Whereing is prosecuted the former narration of our Knights misfortunes.
CHAP. VI.
Of the pleasant and curious search and inquisition made by the Curate and
Barber of Don Quixotes Library.
CHAP. VII.
Of the second departure that the good Knight Don Quixote made from his house
to seek Adventures.
CHAP. VIII.
Of the good success Don Quixote had in the dreadful and never imagined
Adventure of the Wind-mills, with other accidents worthy to be recounted.
The Table of the second part of the delightful History of Don Quixote of
Mancha.
CHAPTER. I.
THerein is concluded and finished the fearful battle which the gallant
Biscain sought with Don Quixote.
CHAP. II.
Of that which besell to Don Quixote, after he had left the Ladies.
CHAP. III.
Of that which passed between Don Quixote, and certain Goatheards.
CHAP. IV.
Of that which one of the Goatheards recounted to those that traveled with Don
Quixote.
CHAP. V.
Wherein is finished the History of the Pastora Marcella, with other
accidents.
CHAP. VI.
Wherein are rehearsed the despairing verses of the dead Shepherd, with other
unexpected events.
The Table of the third part of the delightful History of Don Quixote of
Mancha.
CHAPTER. I.
Wherein is rehearsed the unfortunate Adventure happened to Don Quixote, by
encountering with certain Yanguesian Carries.
CHAP. II.
Of that which befell the ingenious Knight within the Inn which he supposed
to be a Castle.
CHAP. III.
Wherein are laid down the innumerable misfortunes that Don Quixote and his
good Squire Sancho passed in the Inn, the which he to his damage supposed to
be a Castle.
CHAP. IV.
Specifying the discourses passed between Sancho and his Lord Don Quixote, with
other occurrences worthy the recital.
CHAP. V.
Of the discreet discourses had between Sancho and his Lord, with the
succeeding Adventures of a dead body and other notable things.
CHAP. VI.
Of a wonderful Adventure achieved with less hazard then ever any other
Knight did any, by the valorous Don Quixote of the Mancha.
CHAP. VII.
Of the high Adventure and rich Prize of the Helmet of Mambrino, with other
successes befaln the invincible Knight.
CHAP. VIII.
Of the liberty that Don Quixote gave to many wretches, that were a carrying
perforce to a place they desired not.
CHAP. IX.
Of that which befell the famous Don Quixote in Sierra Morena, and was one of
the rarest Adventures which in this authentical History is recounted.
CHAP. X.
Wherein is prosecuted the Adventure of Sierra Morena.
CHAP. XI.
Which treats of the strange Adventures that happened to the Knight of the Mancha
in Sierra Morena; and of the penance he did there in imitation of Beltinibros.
CHAP. XII.
Wherein are prosecuted the pranks played by Don Quixote in his amorous humors
in the mountains of Sierra Morena.
CHAP. XIII.
How the Curate and Barber put their design in practice; with many other
things worthy to be recorded in this famous History.
The Table of the fourth part of the delightful History of Don Quixote.
CHAPTER. I.
Wherein is discoursed the new and pleasant Adventure that happened to the
Carate and Barber in Sierra Morena.
CHAP. II.
Which treats of the discretion of the beautiful Dorotea; and of the
artificial manner used to dissuade the amorous Knight from continuing his
penance; and how he was gotten away: with many other delightful and pleasant
occurrences.
CHAP. III.
Of many pleasant discourses passed between Don Quixote and those of his
compaine, after he had abandoxed the rigorous place of his penance.
CHAP. IV.
Of the pleasant discourses continnued between Don Quixote and his Squire
Sancho Panca, with other Adventures.
CHAP. V.
Treating of that which befell all Don Quixotes train in the Inn.
CHAP. VI.
Wherein is recounted the novell of the Curious Impertinent.
CHAP. VII.
Wherein is prosecuted the novell of the Curious Impertinent.
CHAP. VIII.
Wherein is finished the novell of the Curious Impertinent: And likewise
recounted the rough encounter passed between Don Quixote and certain bags of
red Wine.
CHAP. IX.
Which treats of many rare successes befallen in the Inn.
CHAP. X.
Wherein is prosecuted the History of the famous Princess Micomicona, with
other delightful Adventures.
CHAP. XI.
Treating of the curious discourse made by Don Quixote upon the exercise of
Arms and Letters.
CHAP. XII.
Wherein the Captive recounteth his life, and other accidents.
CHAP. XIII.
Wherein is prosecuted the History of the Captive.
CHAP. XIV.
Wherein the Captive yet continues the pleasant narration of his life.
CHAP. XV.
Which speaks of that which befell afterward in the Inn, and of sundry other
things worthy of knowledge.
CHAP. XVI.
Wherein is recounted the History of the Lackie, with other strange Adventures
befaln in the Inn.
CHAP. XVII.
Wherein are prosecuted the wonderful Adventures of the Inn.
CHAP. XVIII.
Wherein are decided the controversies of Mambrino's Helmet, and the Asses
Pannell; with other strange Adventures most doubtlesly befaln.
CHAP. XIX.
In which is finished the notable Adventure of the Troopers; and the great
ferocitie of our good Knight Don Quixote; and how he was enchanted.
CHAP. XX.
Wherein is prosecuted the manner of Don Quixotes enchantment, with other
famous occurrences.
CHAP. XXI.
Wherein the Canon continues his discourse upon Books of Chivalrie; With many
other things worthy of his note.
CHAP. XXII.
Wherein is laid down the very discreet discourse that passed between Sancho
Panca, and his Lord Don Quixote.
CHAP. XXIII.
Of the discreet contention passed between Don Quixote and the Canon, with
other accidents.
CHAP. XXIV.
Relating that which the Goatheard told to those that carried away Don Quixote.
CHAP. XXV.
Of the falling out of Don Quixote with the Goatheard: with the Adventure of
the disciplinants, to which the Knight gave end, although to his cost.
THE Delightfull-Historie of the most ingenious Knight, DON QUIXOTE of the
Mancha.
The first Part.
CHAP. I.
Wherein is rehearsed the Calling, and Exercise, of the Renowned Gentleman,
Don-Quixote of the Mancha.
THere lived not long since in a certain Vilage of the Mancha (the hame whereof
I purposely omit) a Gentleman of their calling that use to pile up in their
Halls old Lances, Halbards, Morrions, and such other Armours and Weapons. He
was besides Master of an ancient Target, a Lean Stallion, and a swift
Grayhound. His pot consisted daily of somewhat more Beef then Mutton, a Galli
mawfry each night, Collops and Eggs on Saturdayes, Lentils on Fridayes, and now
and then a lean Pigeon on Sundays, did consume three parts of his Rents; the
rest and remnant thereof was spent on a Jerkin of fine Puke, a pair of Velvet
hose, with Pantofles of the same for the Holy Days, and one Suit of the finest
Vesture; for therewithal he honored and see out his person on the work days.
He had in his house a woman servant of about forty years old, and a Niece not
yet twenty, and a man that served him both in field and at home and could
saddle his Horse, and likewise manage a pruning hook. The Master himself was
about fifty years old, of a strong complexion, dry flesh, and a withered face:
He was an early riser, and a great friend of hunting. Some affirm that his
surname was Qixada or Quesada (for in this there is some varience among the
Authors that write his life) although it may be gathered by very probable
conjectures, that he was called Quixanall Yet all this concerns our Historical
Relation but little^ Let it then suffice, that in the Narration thereof we will
not vary a jot from the truth.

You shall therefore wit, that this Gentleman above named, the spirts that he
was idle (which was the longer part of the year) did apply himself wholly to
the reading of Books of Knighthood, and that with such gusts and delights, as
he almost wholly neglected the exercise of hunting; yea, and the very
administration of his household affairs: and his curiosity and folly came to
that pass, that he made away many Acres of arable Land to buy him books of
that kind, and therefore he brought to his house as many as ever he could get
of that Subject: And among them all, none pleased him better then those which
famous Felician of Silva composed. For the smoothness of his Prose, with now
and then some intricate sentence meddled, seemed to him peerlesse; and
principally when he did read the courtings, or Letters of challenge that
Knights sent to Ladies, or one to another; where, in many places he found
written, The reason of the unreasonablenesse, which against my reason is
wrought, does so weaken my reason, as withal reason I do justly complain on
your Beauty. And also when he read the high Heavens, which with your Divinity
do fortify you divinely with the Stars, and make you deserveresse of the
Deserts which your Greatness deserves, etc. With these and other such
passages, the poor Gentleman grew distracted, and was breaking his brains day
and night, to understand and unbowell their sense. An endless labor; foreven
Aristotle himself would not understand them, though he were again resuscitated
only for that purpose. He did not like so much the unproportionate blows that
Don Belianie gave and took in fight; for, as he imagined, were the Surgeons
never so cunning that cured them, yet was it impossible but that the Patient
his Face and all his Body must remain full of scars and tokens: yet did he
praise notwithstanding in the Author of that History, the conclusion of his
book, with the promise of the endless adventure; and many times he himself had
a desire to take pen and finish it exactly, as it is there promised; and would
doubtlesly have performed it, and that (...) with happy success, if other more
urgent and continual thoughts had not disturbed him.

Many times did he fall at varience with the Curate of his Village (who was a
learned man, graduated in Ciguenca) touching who was the better Knight,
Palmerin of England, or Amadis de Gaul: But Mr. Nicholas the Barber of the
same Town would affirm, that none of both arrived in worth to the Knight of the
Sun; and if any one Knight might paragon with him, it was infallibly Don
Galaor, Amadis de Gaule's brother, whose nature might fitly be accommodated to
any thing; For he was not so coy and whyning a Knight as his brother, and that
in matters of Valor, he did not bate him an Ace.

In resolution, he plunged himself so deeply in his reading of these books, as
he spent many times in the Lecture of them whole days and nights; and in the
end, through his little sleep and much reading, he dried up his brains in such
sort, as he lost wholly his Judgment. His fantasy was filled with those things
that he read, of Enchantments, Quairels, Battles, Challenges, Wounds, Wooings,
Loves, Tempests, and other impossible follies. And these toys did so firmly
possess his imagination with an infallible opinion, that all that Machina of
dreamed inventions which he read, was true, as he accounted no History in the
World to be so certain and sincere as they were. He was wont to say, that the
Gid Ruydiaz (A famous Captain of the Spanish Nation.) was a very good Knight,
but not to be compared to the Knight of the burning Sword, which with one
thwart blow cut asunder two fierce and mighty Giants. He agreed better with
Bernarde del Carpio, because he flew the enchanted Rowland in Roncesuales. He
likewise liked of the shift Hercules used when he smothered Antean, the son of
the earth, between his arms. He praised the Giant Margant marvelously, because,
though he was of that Monstrom Progeny, who are commonly all of them proud and
rude, yet he only was affable and courteous. But he agreed best of all with
Reinauld of Mount Alban; and most of all then, when he saw him fallie out of
his Castle to Rob as many as ever he could meet: And when moreover he Robbed the
Idol of Mahome's made of God, as his History recounts, and would be content to
give his old woman; yea, and his Niece also, for a good opportunity on the
Traitor Galalon, that he might Lamb-skin and trample him into Powder.

Finally, his wit being wholly extinguished; he fell into one of the strangest
conceits that ever madman stumbled on in this World, to wit, It seemed unto
him very requisite and behoovefull, as well for the augmentation of his Honor,
as also for the benefit of the Commonwealth, that he himself should become a
Knight Errant, and go throughout the World, with his Horse and Armor to seek
Adventures, and practice in person all that he had read was used by Knights of
yoare; revenging all kind of injuries, and offering him-self to occasions and
dangers: which being once happily achieved, might gain him eternal renown.
The poor soul did already figure himself crowned, through the valor of his
Arm, at least Emperor of Trapesonda; and led thus by these soothing thoughts,
and borne away with the exceeding delight he found in them, he hastened all
that he might, to effect his urging desires.

And first of all he caused certain old rusty Arms to be scowred, that
belonged to his great Grandfather, and lay many ages neglected and forgotten,
in a by-corner of his house; he trimmed them and dressed them the best he
might, and then perceived a great defect they had; for they wanted an helmet,
and had only a plain morrion; but he by his industry supplied that want, and
framed with certain Papers pasted together, a Beaver for his Morrion. True it
is, that to make trial whether his pasted Beaver was strong enough, and might
abide the adventure of a blow; he out with his sword and gave it a blow or two,
and with the very first did quite undo his whole weeks labor: the facility
wherewithal it was dissolved liked him nothing; wherefore to assure him self
better the next time from the like danger, he made it anew, placing certain
Iron bars within it, in so artificial manner, as he rested at once satisfied,
both with his invention, and also the solidity of the work; and without making
a second trial, he deputed and held it in estimation of a most excellent
Beaver. Then did he presently visit his Horse, who (though he had more quarters
then pence in a sixpence, through leanness, and more faults then Gonellas)
having nothing on him but skin and bone; yet he thought that neither Alexanders
Bucephalus, nor the Cid his horse Balie^a, were in any respect equal to him.
He spent four days devising him a name: for (as he reasoned to himself) it was
not fit that so famous a Knights horse, and chiefly being so good a beast,
should want a known name; and therefore he endeavored to give him such a one,
as should both declare what sometime he had been, before he pertained to a
Knight Errant, and also what at present he was: for it stood greatly with
reason, seeing his Lord and Master changed his estate and vocation, that he
should alter likewise his denomination, and get a new one, that were famous and
altisonant, as becomed the new order and exercise which he now professed: and
therefore after many other names which he framed, blotted out, rejected, added,
undid, and turned again to frame in his memory and imagination, he finally
concluded to name him Rozinante, (A horse of labor or carriage, in Spanish, is
called Rozin, and the word Ante signifies Before; so that Rozinante is a horse
that sometime was of carriage.) A name in his opinion lofty, full, and
significant, of what he had been when he was a plain Jade, before he was
exalted to his new dignity; being, as he thought, the best carriage Beast of
the World. The name being thus given to his Horse, and so to his mind, he
resolved to give himself a name also; and in that thought he labored other
eight days; and in conclusion, called himself Don-Quixote; whence (as is said)
the Authors of this most true History deduce, that he was undoubtedly named
Quixada, and not Quesada, as others would have it. And remembering that the
valorous Amadis was not satisfied only with the dry name of Amadis, but added
thereunto the name of his Kingdom and Country, to render his own more
redoubted, terming himself Amadis de Gaula; so he, like a good Knight, would
add to his own, that also of his Province, and call himself Don Quixote of the
Mancha, wherewith it appeared, that he very lively declared his Lineage and
Country, which he did honor, by taking it for his surname.

His Armor being scowred, his Morrion transformed into an Helmet, his Horse
named, and himself confirmed with a new name also; he forthwith bethought
himself, that now he wanted nothing but a Lady, on whom he might bestow his
service and affection; for the Knight Errant that is lovelesse, resembles a
Tree that wants leaves and fruit, or a body without a soul: and therefore he
was wont to say, If I should for my sins, or by good hap, encounter there
abroad with some Giant (as Knights Errant do ordinarily) and that I should
overthrow him with one blow to the ground, or cut him with a stroke in two
halves, or finally overcome, or make him yield to me, would it not be very
expedient to have some Lady, to whom I might present him? And that he entering
in her presence, do kneel before my sweet Lady, and say unto her with an
humble and submissive voice; Madam, I am the Giant Caraculiambro, Lord of the
Island called Malindran^a, whom the never-too-much-praised Knight Don-Quixote
de la Mancha has overcome in single Combat; and has commanded to present my
self to your greatness, that it may please your highness to dispose of me
according unto your liking! O ^ how glad was our Knight when he had made this
discourse to himself, but chiefly when he had found out one whom he might call
his Lady? For as it is imagined, there dwelled in the next Village unto his
Manor, a young handsome wench, with whom he was sometime in Love, although, as
is understood, she never knew or took notice thereof. She was called Aldonsa
Lorenso, and her he thought fittest to entitle with the name of Lady of his
thoughts, and searching a name for her that should not vary much from her own,
and yet should draw and aver somewhat to that of a Princess or great Lady,
he called her D^lcinea del Toboso (for there she was borne) a name in his
conceit harmonious, strange, and significant, like to all the others that he
had given to his things.

CHAP. II.
Of the first Sally that Don-Quixote made to seek Adventures.
THings being thus ordered, he would defer the execution of his designs no
longer, being spurred on the more vehemently, by the want which he esteemed his
delays wrought in the World, according to the wrongs that he resolved to
right, the harms he meant to redress, the excesses he would amend, the abuses
that he would better, and the debts he would satisfy. And therefore without
acquainting any living creature with his intentions he, unseen of any, upon a
certain Morning, somewhat before the day (being one of the warmest of July)
Armed himself Cap a pie, mounted on Rozinante, laced on his ill-contrived
Helmet, embraced his Target, took his Lance, and by a Postern door of his
base-Court issued out to the Field, marveilous jocund and content to see with
what facility he had commenced his good desires. But scarce had he sallied to
the Fields, when he was suddenly assaulted by a terrible thought, and such a
one as did well nigh overthrow his former good purposes; which was, he
remembered he was not yet dubbed Knight; and therefore by the Laws of Knighthood,
neither could nor ought to Combat with any Knight. And though he were one, yet
ought he to wear white Armor like a new Knight, without any device in his
shield until he did win it by force of Arms.

These thoughts did make him stagger in his purposes; but his follies
prevailing more then any other reason, he purposed to cause himself to be
Knighted by the first he met, to the imitation of many others that did the
same, as he had read in the books which distracted him. As touching white
Armor, he resolved with the first opportunity, to scower his own so well, that
they should rest whiter then Ermines: And thus he pacified his mind and
prosecuted his Journey, without choosing any other way then that which his horse
pleased, believing that therein consisted the vigor of Knightly adventures. Our
burnished Adventurer traveling thus onward, did parle with himself in this
manner: Who doubts in the ensuing Ages, when the true History of my famous Acts
shall come to light, but that the wise man who shall write it, will begin it,
when he comes to declare this my first Sally so early in the morning, after
this manner? Scarce had the ruddy Apollo spread over the face of the vast and
spacious earth the golden twists of his beautyfull hairs; and scarce had the
little enameld Birds with their naked tongues saluted with sweet and
mellistuous [Mellodious] harmony, the arrival of Ros^e Aurora; when abandoning
her jealous husbands soft Couch, she shows her self to mortal wights through
the gates and windows of the Manchegall Orizon, [His Country the Mancha.] When
the famous Knight Don-Quixote of the Mancha, abandoning the slothful plumes,
did mount upon his renowned Horse Rozinante, and began to travel through the
ancient and known Fields of Moh^^^l, (as indeed he did) and following still on
with his discourse, he said: O! happy the age, and fortunate the time, wherein
my famous feats shall be revealed, feats worthy to be graven in Brass, carved
in Marble, and delivered with most curious Art in Tables, for a future
instruction and memory. And, thou wise Enchanter, whosoever thou be, whom it
shall concern to be the Chronicler of this strange History, I desire thee not
to forget my good horse Rozinante, mine eternal and inseparable Companion in
all my Journies and Courses. And then, as if he were verily enamoured, he said,
O Princess Dulcinea, Lady of this captive heart, much wrong have thou done me
by dismissing me, and reproaching me with the rigorous Decree and Commandment,
Not to appear before thy beauty: I pray thee, sweet Lady, deign to remember
thee of this poor subjected heart, that for thy Love suffers so many tortures.
And with these words he inserted a thousand other ravings, all after the very
same manner that his books taught him, imitating as near as he could, their
very phrase and language, and did ride there withal so slow a pace, and the
Sun did mount so swiftly, and with so great heat, as it was sufficient to melt
his brains if he had had any left.

He traveled almost all that day without encountering any thing worthy the
recital, which made him to fret for anger: for he desired to encounter
presently some one, upon whom he might make trial of his invincible strength.
Some Authors write, that his first adventure was that of the L^picean straits;
others, that of the Winde-mills: But what I could only find out in this
affair, and which I have found written in the Annals of the Mancha is, that he
traveled all that day long, and at night both he and his Horse were tired, and
marvellously pressed by hunger, and looking about him on every side, to see
whether he could discover any Castle or Sheepfold, wherein he might retire
himself for that night, and remedy his wants; he perceived an Inn near unto the
highway, wherein he traveled, which was as welcome a sight to him as if he
had seen a Star that did address him to the Porch, if not to the Palace of his
redemption. Then spurring his horse, he hyed all he might toward it, and
arrived much about night fall. There stood by chance at the Inn door, two young
women Adventurers likewise, which traveled toward Sivill with certain
Carriers, and did by chance take up their lodging in that Inn the same evening;
and for as much as our Knight Errant esteemed all which he thought, saw, or
imagined, was done or did really pass in the very same form, as he had read
the like in his books; forthwith as soon as he espied the Vent, he feigned to
himself that it was a Castle with four Turrets, whereof the Pinacles were of
glistring silver, without omitting the Drawbridge, deep Fosse, and other
adherents belonging to the like places: And approaching by little and little to
the Vent, when he drew near to it, checking Rozin^nte with the bridle, he
rested a while to see whether any Dwarf would mount on the battlements to give
warning with the sound of a Trumpet, how some Knight did approach the Castle:
but seeing they staid so long, and also that Rozinante kept a colle to go to
his Stable, he went to the Inn door, and there beheld the two loose Baggages
that stood at it, whom he presently supposed to be two beautiful Damze^s or
lovely Ladies, that did solace themselves before the Castle gates. And in this
space it befell by chance, that a certain Swine heard as he gathered together
his Hogs, blew the horn, whereat they are wont to come together; and instantly
Don-Quixote imagined, it was what he desired, to wit, some Dwarf who gave
notice of his arrival; and therefore with marveilous satisfaction of mind he
approached to the Inn and Ladies; who beholding one Armed in that manner to
draw so near, with his Lance and Target, they made much haste, being greatly
affrighted, to get to their lodging. But Don-Quixote perceiving their fear by
their flight, lifting up his pasted Beaver, and discovering his withered and
dusty countenance, did accost them with gentle demeanor and grave words in this
manner: Let not your Ladyships fly, nor fear any outrage; for to the order of
Knighthood which I do profess, it touches nor appertains not to wrong any
body, and least of all such worthy Damzels as your presences denote you to be.
The wenches looked on him very earnestly, and did search with their eyes for
the visage, which his ill-fashioned Beaver did conceal: but when they heard
themselves termed damzels, a thing so far from their profession, they could not
contain there laughter, which was so loud, as Don-Quixote waxed ashamed thereat;
and therefore said to them; Modesty is a comely ornament of the beautiful, and
the excessive laughter that springs from a light occasion must be reputed great
folly: But I do not object this unto you to make you the more ashamed, or that
you should take it in ill part; for my desire is none other then to do you all
the honor and service I may. This he spoke unto them in such uncouth words, as
they could not understand him, which was an occasion, joined with his own
uncomelinesse, to increase their laughter and his wrath, which would have
passed the bounds of reason, if the Innkeeper had not come out at the instant;
being a man who by reason of his exceeding fatness must needs have been of a
very peaceable condition, who beholding that counterfeit figure, all Armed in
so unsuitable Armor as were his Bridle, Lance, Target, and Corslet, was very
near to have kept the Damzels company in the pleasant shows of this merriment:
but fearing in effect the Machina and bulk contrived of so various furnitures,
he determined to speak him fairly; and therefore began to him in this manner:
If your Worship (Sir Knight) do seek for Lodging, you may chalk your self a
Bed (for there is none in this Inn) wherein you shall find all other things in
abundance. Don-Quixote noting the lowliness of the Constable of that Fortress
(for such the Inn and Innkeeper seemed unto him) answered, Any thing, Sir
Constable, may serve me; for mine Arms are mine ornaments, and Battles mine
ease, etc. The Host thought he had called him a Castellano or Constable, [Here
the Spanish is Castellano; that is in the Spanish tongue, either a Constable of
a Castle or one born in Castile.] because he esteemed him to be one of the
sincere and honest men of Castile, whereas he was indeed an Andaluzian, and of
the Commark of S. Lucars, no less thievish then Cacus, nor less malicious and
crafty then a Student or Page: and therefore he answered him thus: If that be
so, your Bed must be hard Rocks, and your sleep a perpetual Watching; and
being such, you may boldly alight, and shall find certainly here occasion and
opportunity to hold you waking this twelvemonth more, for one night: and saying
so, laid hold on Don-Quixote's stirrup, who did forthwith alight, though it was
with great difficulty and pain (as one that had not eaten all the day one crum)
and then he requested his Host to have special care of his horse, saying, He
was one of the best pieces that ever eat bread. The Innkeeper viewed and
reviewed him, to whom he did not seem half so good as Don-Quixote valued him;
and setting him up in the Stable, he turned to see what his Ghuest would
command, who was a disarming by both the Damzels (which were by this time
reconciled to him) who, though they had taken off his breast plate and back
parts; yet knew they not how, nor could any wise undo his Gorget, nor take off
his conterfeit Beaver, which he had fastened on with green Ribbands; and by
reason the knots were so intricate, it was requisite they should be cut,
whereunto he would not in any wise agree; and therefore remained all the night
with his Helmet on, and was the strangest and pleasantest figure thereby that
one might behold. And as he was a disarming (imagining those light wenches that
holp him, to be certain principal Ladies and Dames of that Castle) he said
unto them with a very good grace, Never was any Knight so well attended on, and
served by Ladies as was Don-Quixote; when he departed from his Village Damzels
attended on him, and Princesses on his Horse. O Rozinante! for (Ladies) that is
the name of my Horse, and Don-Quixote de la Mancha is mine own. For although I
meant at the first not to have discovered my self, until the Acts done in your
service and benefit should manifest me; yet the necessity of accommodating to
our present purpose, the old Romance of Sir Lancelot, has been an occasion
that you should know my name before the right season: But the time will come
wherein your Ladyships may command me, and I obey, and then the valor of mine
arm shall discover the desire I have to do you service.

The wenches being unaccustomed to hear so Rhetorical terms, answered never a
word to him, but only demanded, whether he would eat any thing? That I would
replied Don-Quixote, for as much as I think the taking of a little meat would
be very behoovefull for me. It chanced by hap to be on Friday, and therefore
there was no other meat in the Inn, then a few pieces of a Fish called in
Castile Abadexo, in Andaluzia, Bacallao, and in some places Curadillo, and in
others Truchuela, and is but poor-Iohn.

They demanded of him therefore, whether he would eat thereof? giving it the
name, used in that place, of Truchuela, or little Trout; for there was no other
Fish in all the Inn to present unto him but such. Why then (quoth Don-Quixote)
bring it in; for if there be many little Trouts, they may serve me instead of a
great one; i^ being all one to me, to be paid my money (if I were to receive
any) in eight single Realls, or to be paid the same in one Real of eight. And
moreover those little Trouts are perhaps like unto Veal, which is much more
delicate flesh then Beef; or the Kid which is better then the Goat; but be it
what it list, let it be brought in presently; for the labor and weight of arms
cannot be well borne without the well supplying of the Guts. Then was there
straight laid a Table at the Inn door, that he might take the air; and the Host
brought him a portion of evill-watered, and worse boiled poor-John, and a loaf
as black and hoary as his Harness: But the only sport was to behold him eat:
for by reason his Helmet was on, and his Beaver lifted, he could put nothing
into his mouth himself, if others did not help him to find the way; and
therefore one of those Ladies served his turn in that: but it was altogether
impossible to give him drink after that manner, and would have remained so for
ever, if the Innkeeper had not boared a Cane, and setting the one end in his
mouth, powered down the wine at the other: all which he suffered most patiently,
because he would not break the Ribbands of his Helmet. And as he sat at
Supper, there arrived by chance a Sow-gelder, who as soon as he came to the
Inn, did sound four or five times a whistle of Canes, the which did confirm
Don-Quixote, that he was in some famous Castle, where he was served with
Music, and that the poor-John was Trouts; the Bread of the finest Flower; the
Whores, Ladies; and the Innkeeper, Constable of the Castle; Wherefore he
accounted his resolution and departure from his own house very well employed.
But that which did most afflict him, was, that he was not yet dubbed Knight,
for as much as he was fully persuaded, that he could not lawfully enterprise,
or follow any adventure, until he received the order of Knight-hoood.

CHAP. III.
Wherein is recounted the pleasant manner observed in the Knighting of
Don-Quixote.
AND being thus tossed in mind, he made a short beggarly supper; which being
finished, he called for his Horse, and shutting the Stable door very fast, he
laid himself down upon his knees in it before him, saying, I will never rise
from the place where I am valourous Knight, until your courtesy shall grant
unto me a Boon that I mean to demand of you, the which will redound unto your
renown, and also to the profit of all humane kind. The Innkeeper seeing his
ghest at his feet, and hearing him speak those words, remained confounded
beholding him, not knowing what he might do or say, and did study and labor
to make him arise: But all was in vain, until he must have promised unto him,
that he would grant him any gift that he sought at his hands. I did never
expect less (replied Don-Quixote) from your magnificence, my Lord: And
therefore I say unto you that the boon which I demand. of you, and that has
been granted unto me by your liberality, is, that to morrow in the morning you
will dubb me Knight, and this night I will watch mine Armor in the Chapel of
your Castle, and in the morning, as I have said, the rest of my desires shall
be accomplished, that I may go in due manner throughout the four parts of the
World, to seek Adventures, to the benefit of the needy, as is the duty of
Knighthood, and of Knights Errant, as I am; whose desires are wholly inclined
and dedicated to such achievements. The Host, who, as we noted before, was a
great giber, and had before gathered some arguments of the defect of wit in his
ghest, did wholly now persuade himself that his suspicions were true, when he
heard him speak in that manner: and that he might have an occasion of laughter,
he resolved to feed his humor that night, and therefore answered him, that he
had very great reason in that which he desired and sought, and that such
projects were proper and natural to Knigh^s of the garb and worth he seemed
to be of: And that he himself likewise in his youthful years had followed that
honorable exercise, going through diverse parts of the World to seek
Adventures, without either omitting the dangers of Malaga, [Percheles] the
Isles of Riaran, the compass of Sivill, the [Azuguezo] Quick-silverhouse of
Segovia, the Olive-field of Valencia, the Circuit of Granada, the Wharf of S.
Lucor, the Potro or Cowlt of Cordova, [The Potron of Cordova is a certain
Fountain wherein stands a Pegasus, and to that fountain resort a number of
cunny-catching fellows, as Duke Humfrey at Paules] and the little Taverns of
Toledo; and many other places, wherein he practiced the dexterity of his
hands, doing many wrongs, soliciting many widows, undoing certain maidens,
and deceiving many Pupils, and finally making himself known and famous in all
the Tribunals and Courts almost of all Spain, and that at last he had retired
himself to that his Castle, where he was sustained with his own and other
men's goods, entertaining in it all Knights Errant, of whatsoever quality and
condition they were; only for the great affection he bore toward them, and to
the end they might divide with him part of their winnings in recompense of his
good will; he added besides, that there was no Chapel in his Castle, wherein
he might watch his Arms, for he had broken it down to build it up a new: But
notwithstanding he knew very well, that in a case of necessity they might
lawfully be watched in any other place, and therefore he might watch them
that night in the base Court of the Castle; for in the morning, an't pleased
God, the Ceremonies requisite should be done in such sort as he should
remain a dubbed Knight, in so good fashion as in all the World he could not
be bettered. He demanded of Don-Quixote whether he had any money? who
answered that he had not a blanck, for he had never read in any History of
Knights Errant, that any one of them ever carried any money. To this his Host
replied, that he was deceived; for admit that Histories made no mention
thereof, because the Authors of them deemed it not necessary to express a
thing so manifest and needful to be carried as was money and clean shyrts, it
was not therefore to be credited that they had none; and therefore he should
hold for most certain and manifest, That all the Knights Errant, with the story
of whose Acts so many Books are replenished and heaped, had their purses well
lined for that which might befall, and did moreover carry with them a little
Casket of ointments and salves, to cure the wounds which they received, for
they had not the commodity of a Surgeon to cure them, every time that they
fought abroad in the fields and deserts, if they had not by chance some wise
Enchanter to their friend, who would presently succor them, bringing unto
them, in some Cloud, through the Air, some Damzell or Dwarf, with a Viol of
water of so great virtue, as tasting one drop thereof, they remained as whole
of their sores and wounds, as if they had never received any: But when they had
not that benefit, the Knights of times past held it for a very commendable and
secure course that their Squires should be provided of money and other
necessary things, as Lynt and Ointments for to cure themselves; and when it
befell that the like Knights had no Squires to attend upon them (which happened
but very seldom) then would they themselves carry all this provision behind them
on their Horses, in some slight and subtle Wallets, which could scarce be
perceived, as a thing of very great consequence. For, if it were not upon such
an occasion, the carriage of Wallets was not very tolerable among Knights
Errant. And in this respect he did advise him, seeing he might yet command
him, as one that by receiving the Order of Knighthood at his hands, should very
shortly become his God-childe, that he should not travel from thence forward
without money and other the preventions he had then given unto him; and he
should perceive himself how behoovefull they would prove unto him, when he
least expected it.

Don Quixote promised to accomplish all that he had counseled him to do,
with all punctualitie; and so Order was forthwith given how he should watch
his Arms in a great yard that lay near unto one side of the Inn: Wherefore
Don-Quixote gathering all his Arms together, laid them on a Cistern that stood
near unto a Well: And buckling on his Target he laid hold on his Lance, and
walked up and down before the Cisterne very demurely, and when he began to
walk, the night likewise began to lock up the splendour of the day. The
In-keeper, in the mean season, recounted to all the rest that lodged in the
Inn, the folly of his Guest, the watching of his Arms, and the Knighthood
which he expected to receive. They all admired very much at so strange a kind
of folly, and went out to behold him from a far off, and saw that sometimes he
pranced too and fro with a quiet gesture, other times, leaning upon his Lance,
he looked upon his Armor, without beholding any other thing save his Arms for
a good space.

The night being shut up at last wholly, but with such cleerenesse of the
Moon, as it might well compare with his brightness that lent her her
splendour; every thing which our new Knight did, was easily perceived by all the
beholders. In this season one of the Carriers that lodged in the Inn resolved
to water his Mules, and for that purpose it was necessary to remove
Don-Quixotes Armor that lay on the Cistern; who seeing him approach, said unto
him with a loud voice: O thou! whosoever thou be, bold Knight, that come
to touch the Armor of the most valorous Adventurer that ever gyrded sword,
look well what thou do, and touch them not, if thou meanest not to leave thy
life in payment of thy presumption. The Carrier made no account of those words
(but it were better he had, for it would have redounded to his benefit) but
rather laying hold on the leatherings, threw the Armor a pretty way off from
him which being perceived by Don-Quixote, he lifted up his eyes toward
heaven, and addressing his thoughts (as it seemed) to his Lady Dulcinea, he
said; Assist me dear Lady in this first dangerous affront and adventure
offered to this breast, that is enthralled to thee, and let not thy favor and
protection fail me in this my first Trance. And uttering these and other
such words, he let slip his Target, and lifting up his Lance with both hands,
he paid the Carrier so round a knock therewithal on the Pate, as he
overthrew him to the ground in so evil taki^g, as if he had seconded it with
another, he should not have needed any Surgeon to cure him. This done he
gathered up his Armor again, and laying them where they had-beene before, he
walked after up and down by them, with as much quietness as he did at the
first.

But very soon after, another Carrier without knowing what had happened (for his
companion lay yet in a Trance on the ground) came also to give his Mules water,
and coming to take away the Arms, that he might free the Cistern of
encumbrances, and take water the easier: Don-Quixote saying nothing, nor
imploring favor of his Mistress or any other, let slip again his Target, and
lifting his Lance, without breaking of it in pieces, made more then three of
the second Carriers noddle; for he broke it in four places. All the People of
the Inn, and amongst them the Host likewise repaired at this time to the
noise: which Don-Quixote perceiving, embracing his Targe^, and laying hand on
his sword, he said: O Lady of all Beauty, Courage and Vigor of my weakened
heart, it is now high time that thou do convert the eyes of thy greatness to
this thy captive Knight, who does expect so marveilous great an Adventure.
Saying thus, he recovered as he thought so great courage, that if all the
Cariers of the world had assailed him, he would not go one step backward. The
wounded men's fellows, seeing them so evil dight, from a far off began to
rain stones on Don-Quixote, who did defend himself the best he might with his
Target, and durst not depart from the Cistern, lest he should seem to abandon
his Arms. The Inkeeper cried to them to let him alone; for he had already
informed them that he was mad, and for such a one would escape scot free
although he had slain them all. Don-Quixote likewise cried out louder, terming
them all disloyal men and traitors, and that the Lord of the Castle was a
treacherous and bad Knight, seeing that he consented that Knights Errant
should be so basely used; and that if he had not yet received the Order of
Knighthood, he would make him understand his treason, but of you base and
rascally Kenell (quoth he) I make no reckoning at all: throw at me, approach,
draw near, and do me all the hurt you may, for you shall ere long receive
the reward you shall carry for this your madness and outrage: Which words he
spoke with such great spirit and boldness, as he stroke a terrible fear into
all those that assaulted him: and therefore moved both by it, and the Inkeepers
persuasions, they left often throwing stones at him, and he permitted them to
carry away the wounded men, and returned to the guard of his Arms, with as
great quietness and gravity, as he did at the beginning.

The Inkeeper did not like very much these tricks of his Guest, and therefore
he determined to abbreviate, and give him the unfortunate Order of Knighthood
forthwith, before some other disaster befell: and with this resolution coming
unto him, he excused himself of the insolences those base fellows had used
to him, without his privity or consent, but their rashness, as he said,
remained well chastized: He added how he had already told unto him, that there
was no Chapel in his Castle, and that for what yet rested unperfected of their
intention, it was not necessary, because the chief point of remaining
Knighted consisted chiefly in blows of the neck and shoulders, as he had read
in the ceremonial Book of the Order, and that, that might be given in the
very midst of the fields; and that he had already accomplished the obligation
of watching his Arms, which with only two hours watch might be fullfilled;
how much more after having watched four, as he had done. All this Don-Quixote
believed, and therefore answered, That he was most ready to obey him, and
requested him to conclude with all the brevity possible: for if he saw
himself Knighted, and were once again assaulted, he meant not to leave one
person alive in all the Castle, except those which the Constable should
command, whom he would spare for his sake.

The Constable being thus advertised, and fearful that he would put this his
deliberation in execution, brought out a Book presently, wherein he was wont
to write down the accounts of the straw and Barley which he delivered from
time to time, to such Carriers as lodged in his Inn, for their Beasts: and
with a But of a candle which a boy held lighted in his hand before him,
accompanied by the two Damzels above mentioned, he came to Don-Quixote, whom
he commanded to kneel upon his knees and reading in his Manual (as it seemed
some devout Orison) he held up his hand in the midst of the Lecture, and gave
him a good blow on the neck, and after that gave him another trim thwack over
the shoulders with his own sword (always murmuring something between the teeth,
as if he prayed) this being done, he commanded one of the Ladies to gyrd on
his sword, which she did with a singular good grace and dexterity, which was
much, the matter being of it self so ridiculous, as it wanted but little to
make a man burst with laughter at every passage of the Ceremonies: but the
prowess which they had already beheld in the new Knight, did lymit and contain
their delight: At the gyrding on of his sword, the good Lady said, God make you
a fortunate Knight, and give you good success in all your debates. Don-Quixote
demanded then how she was called, that he might thence forward know to whom
he was so much obleged for the favor received? and she answered with great
buxomnesse that she was named Tolosa, and was a Butchers daughter of Toledo,
that dwelt in Sancho Benegas street, and that she would ever honor him as her
Lord, Don-Quixote replied, requesting her, for his sake, to call her self from
thence forth the Lady Tolosa which she promised to perform. The other Lady
buckled on his Spur, with whom he had the very like conference, and asking her
name, she told him she was called Molinera, and was daughter to an honest
Miller of Antequera: her likewise our Knight entreated to call her self the
Lady Molinera, proferring her new services and favors. The new and never seen
before Ceremonies being thus speedily finished, as it seemed with a gallop,
Don-Quixote could not rest until he was mounted on horseback, that he might
go to seek Adventures; wherefore causing Rozinante to be instantly sadled,
he leaped on him, and embracing his Host, he said unto him such strange
things, gratifying the favor he had done him in dubbing him Knight, as it is
impossible to hit upon the manner of recounting them right. The Inkeeper that
he might be quickly rid of him, did answer his words with others no less
^hetoricall, but was in his speech somewhat breefer; and without demanding of
him any thing for his lodging, he suffered him to depart in a fortunate hour.

CHAP. IV.
Of that which befell to our Knight, after he had departed from the Inn.
AVRORA began to display her beauties about the time that Don-Quixote issued
out of the Inn, so content, lively and jocund to behold himself Knighted, as
his very horse gyrts were ready to burst for joy: but calling to memory the
Counsels that his Host had given him, touching the most needful implements
that he was ever to carry about him, of money and clean shirts, he determined
to return to his House, and to provide himself of them, and also of a Squire:
making account to entertain a certain labourer, his neighbor, who was poor
and had children, but yet one very fit for this purpose and Squirely function,
belonging to Knighthood. With this determination he turned Rozinante toward
the way of his own Village, who knowing, in a manner, his will, began to trot
on with so good a pace, as he seemed not to touch the ground. He had not
traveled far, when he thought that he heard certain weak and delicate cries,
like to those of one that complained, to issue out from the thickest of a Wood
that stood on the right hand. And scarce had he heard them when he said: I
render infinite thanks to heaven for the favor it does me, by proferring me
so soon occasion wherein I may accomplish the duty of my profession, and
gather the fruits of my good desires: these Plaints doubtlesly be of some
distressed man or woman, who needs my favor and aid. Then turning the
reins, he guided Rozinante toward the place from whence he thought the
complaints sallyed; and within a few paces after he had entered into the
thicket, he saw a Mare tied unto an Holme Oak, and to another was tied a
young youth all naked from the middle upward, of about the age of fifteen
years, and was he that cried so pitifully: and not without cause, for a
certain Countryman of comely personage did whip him with a gyrdle, and
accompanied every blow with a reprehension and counsel, for he said; The
tongue must peace, and the Eyes be wary: and the boy answered I will never do
it again, good Master; for the passion of God, I will never do it again. And I
promise to have more care of your things from henceforth.

But Don-Quixote viewing all that passed, said with an angry voice:
Discourteous Knight, it is very uncomly to see thee deal thus with one that
cannot defend himself, mount therefore on horseback and take thy Lance (for the
Farmer had also a Lance leaning to the very same tree whereunto his Mare was
tied) for I will make thee know that it is the use of Cowards to do that which
thou do. The other beholding such an Antic to hover over him, all laden
with Arms, and brandishing of his Lance toward his face, made full account
that he should be slain, and therefore he answered with very mild and
submissive words saying, Sir Knight, the boy which I chastise is mine own
servant, and keeps for me a slock of sheep in this Commarke; who is grown so
neglignet, as he loses one of them every other day, and because I correct him
for his carelessenesse and knavery, he says I do it through covetousness
and pinching, as meaning to defraud him of his wages; but before God, and in
Conscience he belies me. What? the Lie in my presence rascally Clown? quoth
Don-Quixote, by the Sun that shines on us, I am about to run thee through and
through with my Lance base Carle; pay him instantly without more replying, or
else by that God which does manage our sublunar affairs, I will conclude thee,
and annihilate thee in moment; loose him forthwith. The Countreyman hanging
down of his head, made no reply, but loosed his servant; of whom Don-Quixote
demanded how much did his Master owe unto him? he said nine Months hire, at
seven Reals a Month. Don-Quixote made then the account, and found that all
amounted to sixty one Reals, and therefore commanded the Farmer to pay the
money presently, if he meaned not to die for it. The fearful Countryman
answered, That by the Trance wherein he was then, and by the Oath he had made
(which was none at all, for he swoar not) that he ought not so much; for
there should be deducted out of the accounts three pair of shoes he had
given unto him, and a Real for twice letting him blood, being sick. All is
well, quoth Don-Quixote, but let the price of the shoes and letting blood, go
for the blows which thou have given him without any desert; for if he have
broken the leather of those shoes thou have bestowed on him, thou have likewise
torn the skin of his body; and if the Barbe^ took away his blood being sick,
thou have taken it out, he being in health; so as in that respect he owes
thee nothing. The damage is Sir Knight, replied the boys Master, that I have
no money here about me. Let Andrew come with me to my house, and I will pay
him his wages, one Real upon another. I go with him, quoth the boy, evil
befall me^ then. No Sir, I never meant it; for as soon as ^ver he were alone,
he would fley me like S. Bartholomew. He will not dare to do it, quoth
Don-Quixote, for my command is sufficient to make him respect me, and so that
he will swear to me to observe it, by the Order of Knighthood which he has
received, I will set him free, and assure thee of the payment. Good Sir, quoth
the youth, mark well what you say, for this man my Master, is no Knight, nor
did ever receive any Order of Knighthood, for he is John Haldudo the rich man,
a dweller of Qui^tanar. That makes no matter, quoth Don-Quixote, for there may
be Knights of the Haldudos: and what is more, every one is son of his works.
That Is true, quoth Andrew, but of what works can this my Master be son?
seeing he denies me my wages, and my sweat and labor? I do not deny thy
wages, friend Andrew, quoth his Master; do me but the pleasure to come with
me, and I swear by all the Orders of Knighthood that are in the World, to pay
thee as I have said, one Real upon another, yea and those also perfumed. For
the perfuming I thank thee, quoth Don-Quixote, give it him in Reals, and with
that I will rest satisfied; and see that thou fullfillest it as thou have
sworn: if not, I swear again to thee by the same Oath to return and search
thee, and chastise thee, and I will find thee out, though thou should hide
thy self better then a Lizard; and if thou desire to note who commands thee
this, that thou may remain more firmly obliged to accomplish it, know that
I am the valorous Don-Quixote of the Mancha, the righter of wrongs and undoer
of injuries, and so farewell: and do not forget what thou have promised and
sworn, on pain of the pains already pronounced. And saying these words, he
spurred Rozinante, and in short space was got far off from them. The Countryman
pursued him with his eye, and perceiving that he was past the wood, and quite
out of sight, he returned to his man Andrew, and said to him, come to me
child, for I will pay thee what I owe thee; as that righter of wrongs has
left me commanded. That I swear, quoth Andrew, and you shall deal discreetly
in fullfilling that good Knights commandment, who I pray God may live a
thousand years; for seeing he is so valorous and so just a judge, I swear by
Rocque, that if you pay me not, he shall return and execute what he
promised. I also do swear the same, quoth the Farmer, but in respect of the
great affection I bear unto thee, I will augment the debt, to increase the
payment; and catching the youth by the arm, he tied him again to the Oak,
where he gave him so many blows as he left him for dead; call now master
Andrew (quoth he) for the righter of wrongs, and thou shall see that he
cannot undo this, although I believe it is not yet ended to be done; for I
have yet a desire to flea thee alive, as thou did thy self fear:
Notwithstanding all these threats, he untied him at last, and gave him leave
to go seek out his Judge, to the end he might execute the Sentence
pronounced. Andrew departed somewhat discontent, swearing to search for the
valorous Don-Quixote of the Mancha, and recount unto him, word for word, all
that had past, and that he should pay the abuse with usury: but for all his
threats he departed weeping, and his Master remained behind laughing; and in
this manner the valorous Don-Quixote redressed that wrong.

Who glad above measure for his success, accounting himself to have given a
most noble beginning to his feats of Arms, did travel toward his Village,
with very great satisfaction of himself, and said in a low tune these words
following: Well may thou call thy self happy above all other women of the
earth, O! above all Beauties beautiful Dulcinea of Toboso, since thy good
fortune was such, to hold subject and prostrate to thy will and desire, so
valiant and renowned a Knight as is, and ever shall be, Don-Quixote of the
Mancha, who as all the world knows, received the Order of Knighthood but
yesterday, and has destroyed to day the greatest outrage and wrong that want
of reason could form, or cruelty commit. To day did he take away the whip out
of that pitiless enemies hand, which did so c^uelly scourge without occasion
the delicate Infant.

In this discourse he came to a way that divided it self into four, and
presently these thwarting cross ways represented themselves unto his
imagination, which often times held Knights Errant in suspense which way they
should take, and that he might imitate them; he stood still a while, and
after he had bethought himself well, he let slip the reins to Rozinante,
subjecting his will to that of his horse, who presently pursued his first
Design, which was to return home unto his own slable: and having traveled
some two miles, Don-Quixote discovered a great troup of People, who as it was
after known, were certain Merchants of Tol^do, that rode toward M^^^^ to buy
silkest they were six in number, and came with their Quitaso^^ [a thing made
like a (...) and is used by Travelers to keep away the (...)] or shadows of
the (...), four serving^ men on horseback, and three La^quies^ Scarce had
Don-Quixote perceived them, when he straight imagined them to be a new^
Adventure: and because he would (...) as much as was possible the passages
which he read in this books, he represented this to himself to be just such
an Adventure as he purposed to (...). And (...) comely gesture hardiness,
set^ing himself well in the stirdops, he set his (...) into his rest, and
embraced his Targe^, and placing himself in the midst of the way, he stood
awayting when those Knights Errant should arive; (...) now he judged and took
them for such: and when they were so near as they might hear and (...) him,
he li^^ed up his voice and said: Let all the world stund and pass no further,
if all the world will not confess, that there is not in all the world a more
beautiful (...) then the Empress of the Mancha, the peerless D^loin^^ of
Toboso. The Merchants stayed at these words to behold the mavelous and
ridiculous shape of him that spoke them, and by his fashion and them joined,
did incontinently gather his folly and distraction, and notwithstanding would
leisurely behold to what tended that confession which he exacted of them; and
therefore one of them who was somewhat given to gibing, and was withal very
discreet, said unto him, Sir Knight, we do not know that good Lady of whom
you speak: show her therefore to us, and if she be so beautiful as you
affirm, we will willingly and without any compulsion confess the truth which
you now demand of us. If I did show her to you, replied Don-Quixote, what
masterie were it then for you to acknowledge a truth so notorious? The
consequence of mine affairs consists in this, that without beholding her, you
do believe, confess, affirm, swear and defend it; which if you refuse to
perform, I challenge you all to Battle, proud and unreasonable folk, and
whether you come one by one (as the order of Knighthood requires) or all at
once, as is the custom and dishonorable practice of men of your brood, here
will I expect and await you all, trusting in the reason which I have on my
side, Sir Knight, replied the Merchant, I request you in all these Princes
names, as many as we be here, that to the end we may not burden our
Consciences, confessing a thing which we never beheld nor heard, and chiefly
being so prejudicial to the Empresses and Queens of the Kingdoms of Alcarria
and Estremadura, you will please to show us some portraiture of that Lady,
although it be no biger then a grain of Wheat: for by one thread we may judge
of the whole olew, and we will with this favor rest secure and satisfied, and
you likewise remain content and appaid. And I do believe moreover, that we are
already so inclined to your side, that although her picture showed her to be
blind of the one eye, and at the other that she ran fire and brimstone; yet
would we notwithstanding, to please you, say in her favor all that you listed.
There drops not base Scoundrels, quoth Don-Quixote, all inflamed with choler;
there drops not, I say, from her that which thou say, but Amber and Civet
among bombase: and she is not blind of an eye, or crook-back'd; but is
straighter then a spindle of Guadarama^ but all of you together shall pay for
the great blasphemy thou have spoken against so immense a beauty, as is that of
my Mistrisse. And saying so, he abased his La^^ce against him that had
answered, with such fury and anger, as if good fortune had not so ordained it,
that Rozinante should stumble, and fall in the midst of the Carriere, it had
gone very ill with the bold Merchant. Rozinante fell in fine, and his Master
reeled over a good piece of the field; and though he attempted to rise, yet
was he never able, he was so encombred by his Lance, Target, Sp^^, Helmet, and
his weighty old A^^ur. And in the mean while that he strived to arise, and
could not, he cried, Fly not cowardly Folk, abide base people, abide; for I
lie not here through mine own fault, but through the defect of my horse.

One of the Lacquies that came in the company, and seemed to be a man of none
of the best intentions, hearing the poor overthrown Knight speak such insolent
words, could not forbear them without returning him an answer on his ribbs; and
with that intention approaching to him, he took his Lance, and after he had
broken it in pieces, he gave Don Quixote so many blows with one of them, that
in despite of his Armor he threshed him sike a shea^ of Wheat. His Masters
cried to him, commanding him, not to beat him so much, but that he should leave
him: But all would not serve, for the youth was angry, and would not leave off
the play, until he had avoided the rest of his ^holer. And therefore running
for the other pieces of the broken Lance, he broak them all on the miserable
fallen Knight; who, for all the tempest of blows that rained on him, did never
shut his mouth, but threatened heaven and earth, and those [Malan^rines]
Murderers; for such they seemed to him. The Lacquie tired himself: last, and
the Merchants followed on their way, carrying with them occasion enough of talk
of the poor belabored Knight; who, when he saw himself alone, turned again to
make trial whether he might arise: but if he could not do it when he was
whole and sound, how was it possible he being so bruised and almost destroyed?
And yet he accounted himself very happy, preswading himself that his disgrace
was proper and incident to Knights Errant, and did attribute all to the fault
of his horse, and could in no wise get up, all his body was so [Bramado]
bruised and laden with blows.

CHAP. V.
Wherein is prosecuted the former Narration of our Knights misfortunes.
BUt seeing in effect that he could not stir himself, he resolved to have
recourse to his ordinary remedy, which was to think on some passage of his
Histories; and in the instant his folly presented to his memory that of
Valdovinos, and the Marquess of Mantua, then when Carloto had left him wounded
in the Mountain. A History known by children, not hidden to youg men, much
celebrated, yea, and believed by many old men; and is yet for all that no more
authentical then are Mahomets Miracles. This History, as it seemed to him, was
most fit for the trance wherein he was; and therefore he began, with signs of
great pain, to tumble up and down, and pronounce with a languishing breath the
same that they feign the wounded Knight to have said in the wood: Where art
thou Lady deer! that griev'st not at my smart?
Or thou do it not know; or thou disloyal art.
And after this manner he did prosecute the old song, until these verses that
say: O noble Marquess of Mantua, my carnal Lord and Uncle. And it befell by
chance, that at the very same time there past by the place where he lay a man
of his own Village, who was his neighbor, and returned after having carried a
loaf of wheat to the Mill; who beholding a man stretched on the ground, he came
over to him, and demanded what he was, and what was it that caused him to
complain so dolefully? Don-Quixote did verily belive that it was his Uncle, the
Marquess of Mantua; and so gave him no other answer, but only followed on in
the repetition of his old Romance, wherein he gave him account of his
misfortune, and of the love the Emperors son bore to his Spouse, all in the
very same manner that the Ballad recounts it. The laborer remained much
astonished, hearing those follies. And taking off his Vizard, which with the
Lacquies blows was broken all to pieces, he wiped his face that was full of
dust^ and scarce had he done it when he knew him, to whom he said; Master
Quixada (for so he was probably called when he had his wits, before he left the
state of a staid Yeoman, to become a wandering Knight) who has used you after
this mannner? But he continued his Romance, answering out of it, to every
question that was put to him. Which the good man perceiving, disarmed him the
best he could, to see whether he had any wound, but he could see no blood, or
any token on him of hurt. Afterward he endeavored to raise him from the
ground, which he did at the last with much ado; and mounted him on his Ass,
as a Beast of easiest carriage. He gathered then together all his Arms, and
left not behind so much as the splinters of the Lance, and tied them
altogether upon Rozinante, whom he took by the bridle, and the Ass by his
halter, and led them both in that equipage fair and easily toward his Village,
being very pensative to hear the follies that Don-Quixote spoak. And
Don-Quixote was no less melancholy, who was so beaten and bruised, as he could
hardly hold himself upon the Ass; and ever and anon he breathed forth such
grievons sighs, as he seemed to fix them in Heaven; which moved his neighbor
to entreat him again to declare unto him the cause of his grief. And it seems
none other, but that the very Devil himself did call to his memory, Histories
accommodated to his successes. For in that instant, wholly forgeting Valdovinos
he remembered the Moor Abindaraez then, when the Constable of Antequera Roderick
Narvaez had taken him, and carried him prisoner to his Castle. So that when his
neighbor turned again to ask of him how he did, and what ailed him; he
answered the very same words and speech that Captive Abencerrase said to
Narvaez, just as he had read them in Diana of Montemayor, where the History is
written; applying it so properly to his purpose, that the labourer grew almost
mad for anger to hear that Machina of follies; by which he collected that his
neighbor was distracted, and therefore he hied as fast as possible he could
to the Village, that so he might free himself from the vexation that
Don-Quixotes idle and prolixe discourse gave unto him. At the end whereof the
Knight said, Don Rodericke of Narvaez: You shall understand that this
beautiful Xarifa, of whom I spoak, is now the fair Dulcinea of Toboso; for
whom I have done, I do, and will do such famous acts of Knighthood as ever
have been, are, and shall be seen in all the World. To this his neighbor
answered, do not you perceive Sir, sinner that I am, how I am neither Don
Roderick de Narvaez, nor the Marquess of Mantua, but Peter Alonso your
neighbor; nor are you Valdovinos, nor Abindaraez, but the honorable yeoman
Master Quixada. I know very well who I am quoth Don-Quixote, and also I know
that I may not only be those whom I have named, but also all the twelve Peers
of France, yea and the nine worthies; since mine Acts shall surpass all those
that ever they did together, or every one of them apart.

With these and such other discourses they arived at last at their Village
about Sunset, but the labourer awayted until it waxed somewhat dark, because
folk should not view the Knight so simply mounted. And when he saw his time
he entered into the Town, and went to Don-Quixotes house, which he found full
of confusion. There was the Curate and the Barbar of the Village, both of them
Don-Quixotes great friends: to whom the old woman of the house said in a
lamentable manner; What do you think Master Licentiate Pere Perez (for so the
Curate was called) of my Masters misfortune? These six days neither he nor
his horse have appeared, nor the Target, Lance or Armor, unfortunate woman
that I am, I do suspect, and I am as sure it is true as that I shall die; how
those accursed Books of Knighthood which he has, and is wont to read
ordinarily, have turned his judgment; for now I remember that I have heard him
say often times, speaking to himself, that he would become a Knight Errant,
and go seek Adventures throughout the World. Let such Books be recommended
to Satan and Barrabas, which have destroyed in this sort the most delicate
understanding of all the Mancha. His Niese affirmed the same, and did add,
moreover you shall understand good Master Nicholus (for so hight the Barbar)
that it many times befell my Uncle to continue the Lecture of those unhappy
Books of disventures two days and two nights together. At the end of which,
throwing the book away from him, he would lay hand on his Sword, and would fall
a slashing of the walls, and when he were wearied, he would say that he had
slain four Giants as great as four Towers, and the sweat that dropped down,
through the labor he took, he would say was blood that gushed out of those
wounds which he had received in the conflict, and then would he quaffe off a
great pot full of cold water, and straight he did become whole and quiet;
saying, that water was a most precious drink, which the wise man Esquife, a
great Enchanter or Sorcerer, and his friend, had brought unto him. But I am in
the fault of all this, who never advertised you both of mine Uncles raving, to
the end you might have redrest it ere it came to these terms, and burnt all
those Excommunicate Books; for he had many that deserved the Fire as much as
if they were Heretical. That do I likewise affirm, quoth Master Curate, and
in soothe to morrow shall not pass over us, without making a public Process
against them, and condemn them to be burned in the Fire, that they may not
minister occasion again to such as may read them, to do that which I fear my
good friend has done.

The Labourer and Don-Quixote stood hearing all that which was said, and then
he perfectly found the disease of his neighbor, and therefore he began to
cry aloud; Open the doors to Lord Valdovinos, and to the Lord Marquess of
Mantua, who comes very sore wounded and hurt, and to the Lord Moore Abindaraez,
whom the valorous Rodericke of Narvaez Constable of Antequera brings as his
Prisoner. All the household ran out, hearing these cries, and some knowing
their friend, the others their Master and Uncle, who had not yet alighted from
the Ass, because he was not able, they ran to embrace him, but he forbad them,
saying stand still and touch me not, for I return very sore wounded and hurt,
through default of my horse, carry me to my bed, and if it be possible send for
the wise Viganda, that she may cure and look to my hurt. See in an ill hour
(quoth the old woman straight way) if my heart did not very well foretell me on
which foot my Master halted; come up in good time, for we shall know how to
cure you well enough without sending for that Viganda you have mentioned;
Accursed say I, once again, and a hundred times accursed may those books of
Knighthood be, which have brought you to such a state: With that they bore him
up to his bed, and searching for his wounds could not find any, and then he
said all was but bruising, by reason of a great fall he had with his horse
Rozinante, as he fought with ten Giants, the most unmeasurable and boldest
that might be found in a great part of the Earth. Hearken quoth the Curate,
we have also Giants in the dance: by mine honesty I will burn them all before
to morrow at night. Then did they ask a thousand questions of Don-Quixote, but
he would answer to none of them, and only requested them to give him some
meat and suffer him to sleep, seeing rest was most behoovefull for him. All
which was done, and the Curate informed himself at large of the laboring man,
in what sort he had found Don-Quixote, which he recounted to him, and also
the follies he said, both at his finding and bringing to Town; which did
kindle more earnestly the Licentiates desire to do what he had resolved the
next day; which was to call his friend the Barber M. Nicholas, with whom he
came to Don-Quixotes House.

CHAP. VI.
Of the pleasant and curious search made, by the Curate and the Barbar of
Don-Quixotes Library.
WHO slept yet soundly. The Curate sought for the keys of the Library, the
only authors of his harm; which the Gentleman's Niese gave unto him very
willingly: All of them entered into it, and among the rest the old woman,
wherein they found more then a hundred great Volumes, and those very well
bound, beside the small ones. And as soon as the old woman had seen them,
she departed very hastily out of the chamber, and eftsoons returned with as
great speed, with a holy water pot and a sprinkler in her hand, and said; Hold
Master Licentiate and sprinkle this chamber all about, lest there should lurk
in it some one Inchanter of ^he many which these books contain, and cry
quittance with us for the penalties we mean to inflict on these Books, by
banishing them out of this world. The simplicity of the good old woman caused
the Licentiat to laugh: who commanded the Barber to fetch him down the Books
from their shelves, one by one, that he might peruse their Arguments; for it
might happen some to be found, which in no fort deserved to be chastised with
Fire. No, replied the Niese, no; you ought not to pardon any of them, seeing
they have all been offenders; it is better you throw them all into the base
Court, and there make a pile of them, and then set them a Fire; if not, they
may be carried into the yard, and there make a bon-fire of them, and the smoke
will offend no body; the old woman said as much, both of them thirsted so much
for the death of these Innocents, but the Curate would not condescend thereto,
until he had first read the Titles, at the lest, of every book.

The first that Master Nicholas put into his hands, was that of Amadis of
Gaul; which the Curate perusing a while, this comes not to me first of all
others without some mystery: for as I have heard told, this is the first Book
of Knighthood that ever was printed in Spain, and all the others have had their
beginning and original from this; and therefore methinks that we must condemn
him to the fire, without all remission, as the Dogmatizer and head of so bad a
Sect. Not so, fie quoth the Barber, for I have heard that it is the very best
contrived book of all those of that kind; and therefore he is to be pardoned,
as the only complete one of his profession. That is true replied the Curate,
and for that reason we do give him his life for this time. Let us see that
other which lies next unto him. It is, quoth the Barber, The [Las S^rgas page
73.] Adventure of Splandian Amadis of Gauls lawfully begotten son: Yet on mine
honesty, replied the Curate, his fathers goodness shall nothing avail him,
take this book old Masters and open the window, throw it down into the yard,
and let it lay the foundation of our heap for the fire we mean to make. She did
what was commanded with great alacrity, and so the good Splandian fled into the
yard, to expect with all patience the fire, which he was threatened to abide.
Forward quoth the Curate. This that comes now, said the Barber, is Amadis of
Greece; and as I conjecture, all those that lie on this side are of the same
lineage of Amadis. Then let them go all to the yard, quoth the Curate, in
exchange of burning Queen Pintiquinestra, and the Shepherd Darinel, with his
Eglogues, and the subtle and intricate Discourses of the Author, which are able
^o entangle the father that engendered me, if he went in form of a Knight
Errant. I am of the same opinion, quoth the Barber: And I also, said the Niese.
Then since it is so, quoth the old wife, let them come, and to the yard with
them all. They were rendered all up unto her, which were many in number:
wherefore, to save a labor of going up and down the stairs, she threw them out
at the window.

What bundle is that, quoth the Curate? This is, answered Master Nicholas, Don
Olivante of Laura. The author of that book, quoth the Curate composed
likewise The Garden of flowers, and in good sooth I can scarce resolve which of
the two works is truest, or to speak better, is less lying: only this much I
can determine; that this must go to the yard, being a book foolish and
arrogant. This that follows is Florismarte of Hircania, quoth the Barber. Is
Lord Florismarte there? then replied the Curate; then by mine honesty he shall
briefly make his arrest in the yard, in despite of his wonderful birth and
famous Adventures; for the drouth and harshnesse of his style deserves no
greater favor. To the yard with him, and this other (good Masters.) with a
very good will, quoth old Mumpsimus; and straight way did execute his
commandment with no small gladness. This is Platyr (quoth the Barber.) It is
an ancient book replied the Curate, wherein I find nothing meriting pardon; let
him, without any reply, keep company with the rest. Forthwith it was done. Then
was another book opened, and they saw the title thereof to be The Knight of the
Cross. For the holy title which this book bears, quoth the Curate, his
ignorance might be pardoned: but it is a common saying, The Devil lurks
behind the Cross: wherefore let it go to the fire. The Barber taking another
book, said; This is The Mirror of Knighthood. I know his worship well, quoth
the Curate. There goes among those books, I see, the Lord Raynold of Montalban
with his friends and companions, all of them greater Thieves then Cacus, [A
Thief that used to steal Cattle, and pull them backward, by the tails, that
none might trace them] and the twelve Peers of France, with the Historiographer
Turpin. I am in truth about to condemn them only to exile, for as much as they
contain some part of the famous Poet Matthew Boyardo his invention. Out of
which the Christian Poet Lodovick Ariosto did likewise weave his work, which if
I can find among these, and that he speaks not his own native tongue, I Will use
him with no respect; but if he talk in his own language, I will put him, for
honors sake, on my head. If that be so, quoth the Barber, I have him at home
in the Italian, but cannot understand him. Neither were it good you should
understand him, replied the Curate; and here we would willingly have excused
the good Captain that translated it into Spanish, from that labor, or bringing
it into Spain, if it had pleased himself. For he has deprived it of much
natural worth in the translation; a fault incident to all those that presume
to translate Verses out of one language into another: for, though they employ
all their industry and wit therein, they can never arive to the height of that
Primitive conceit, which they bring with them in their first birth. I say
therefore that this book, and all the others that may be found in this
Library, to treat of French affairs, be cast and deposited in some dry
Vault, until we may determine with more deliberation, what we should do
with them: always excepting Bernardo del Carpio, which must be there amongst
the rest, and another called Roncesualles; for these two coming to my hands,
shall be rendered up to those of the old guardian, and from hers into the
fires, without any remission. All which was confirmed by the Barbar, who did
ratify his Sentence, holding it for good and discreet, because he knew the
Curate to be so virtuous a man, and so great a friend of the truth, as he
would say nothing contrary to it for all the goods of the world.

And then opening another book, he saw it was Palmerin de Oliva, near unto
which stood another, entitled Palmerin of England: which the ^icenciat
perceiving, said let Oliva be presently rent in pieces, and burned in such
sort, that even the very ashes thereof may not be found: and let Palmerin of
England be preserved, as a thing rarely delectable, and let such another box as
that which Alexander found among Darius spoils, and depured to keep Homers
works, be made for it: for gossip this book has sufficient authority for two
reasons; the first, because of it self it is very good and excellently
contrived; the other, for as much as the report runs, that a certain discreet
King of Portugal was the author thereof. All the Adventures of the Castle of
Miraguarda, are excellent and artificial. The discourses very clear and
courtly, observing evermore a decorum in him that speaks, with great propriety
and conceit, therefore I say Master Nicholas, if you think good, this and
Amadis de Gaul may be preserved from the fire; and let all the rest without
farther search or regard perish. In the devils name do not so, gentle gossip
(replied the Barbar) for this which I hold now in my hand is the famous Don
Belianis: What he? quoth the Curate, the second, third and fourth part thereof
have great need of some Ruybarbe to purge his excessive choler, and we must
moreover take out of him all that of the Castle of Fame, and other
impertinencies of more consequence. Therefore we give them a terminus
Vltramarinus, and as they shall be corrected, so will we use Mercy or justice
toward them; and in the mean space Gossip, you may keep them at your house,
but permit no man to read them. I am pleased, quoth the Barbar, and being
unwilling to tire himself any more by reading of Titles, he bad the old woman
to take all the great volumes, and throw them into the yard; the words were not
spoken to a Mome or deaf person, but to one that had more desire to burn them
then to weave a peace of Linen, were it never so great and fine; and therefore
taking eight of them together, she threw them all out of the window, and
returning the second time, thinking to carry away a great many at once, one of
them fell at the Barbers feet, who desirous to know the Title, saw that it was
the History of the famous Knight Tirante the white. Good God, quoth the Curate
with a loud voice, is Tirante the white here? Give me it Gossip, for I make
account to find in it a Treasure of delight. and a copious Mine of pastime.
Here is Don Quireleison of Montalban, a valiant Knight, and his brother Thomas
of Montalban, and the Knight Fonseca, and the combat which the valiant
Detriante fought with Alano, and the witty conceits of the damzell
Plazerdeminida, with the love and guiles of the widow Reposada, and of the
Empress enamoured on her Squire Ipolite. I say unto you gossip, that this
book is for the style, one of the best of the world; in it Knights do eat
and drink and sleep, and die in their beds naturally, and make their
testaments before their death; with many other things, which all other books
of this subject do want, yet notwithstanding, if I might be Judge, the Author
thereof deserved, because he purposely penned and writ so many follies, to be
sent to the Galleys for all the days of his life. Carry it home and read it,
and you shall see all that I have said thereof to be true. I believe it very
well, quoth the Barber. But what shall we do with these little books that
remain? These as I take, said the Curate are not books of Knighthood, but of
Poetry; and opening one, he perceived it was The Diana of Montemayor, and
believing that all the rest were of that stamp, he said, these deserve not to
be burned with the rest, for they have not, nor can do so much hurt as books
of Knighthood, being all of them works full of understanding and conceits, and
do not prejudice any other. O good Sir, quoth Don-Quixote his Niese, your
reverence shall likewise do well to have them also burned, lest that mine
Uncle after h^^ be cured of his Knightly disease, may fall, by reading of
these, in an humor of becoming a Shepherd, and so wander through the woods
and fields, singing of Round lays; and playing on a Crowd; and what is more
dangerous then to become a Poet? which is as some say, an incurable and
infectious disease. This maiden says true, quoth the Curate, and it will not
be amiss to remove this stumbling block and occasion out of our friends way;
and since we begin with the Diana of Montemayor, I am of opinion that it be
not burned, but only that all that which treates of the wise Felicia, and of
the enchanted water be taken away, and also all the longer verses, and let him
remain with his Proses, and the honor of being the best of that kind. This
that follows, quoth the Barber, is the Diana called the second, written by him
of Salamanca, and this other is of the same name, whose Author is Gil Polo. Let
that of Salamanca answered Master Parson, augment the number of the condemned
in the yard, and that of Gil Polo be kept as charity, as if it were Apollo his
own work: and go forward speedily good Gossip, for it grows late. This
book, quoth the Barber, opening of another is, The twelve books of the
fortunes of Love, written by Anthony L^fraso, the (...) Poet. By the holy
Orders which I have received, quoth the Curate; since Apollo was Apollo, and
the Muses Muses, and Poets Poets, was never written so delightful band
extravagant a work as this; and that in his way and vain, it is the only one
of all the books that have everissued of that kind to view the light of the
world, and he that has not read it may make account that he has never read
matter of delight. Give it to men Gossip, for I do prize more the finding of
it, then I would the gift of a Ca^^ocke of the best sat in of Florence and so
with great joy be laid it aside, and the Barbar prosecuted, saying, these that
follow be, The Shepherd of I^e^^, The Nymphs of Enares; and the Rec^^ing of
the (...). Then there is no more to be done but to deliver them up to the
secular arm of the old wife, and do not demand the reason, for that were never
to make an end. This that comes is The Shepherd of Filida. That is not a
Shepherd, quoth the Curate, but a very complete Courtier, let it be reserved
as a precious jewel, This great one that follows, is, said the Barber
intituled^ The Treasure of diverse Poems; If they had not been so many, replied
the Curate, they would have been more esteemed. It is necessary that this book
be carded and purged of certain base things, that lurk among his high
conceits. Let Him be kept, both because the Author is my very great friend,
and in regard of other more Heroical and lost in works he has written. This
is, said the Barber, The ditty book of Lopez Maldonad^. The Author of that
work is likewise my great friend, replied the Parson, and his lines pronounced
by himself do ravish the hearers, and such is the sweetness of his voice
when he sings them, as it does enchant the ear. He is somewhat prolix in his
Eglogues, but that which is good, is never superfluous; let him be kept among
the choysest. But what book is that which lies next unto him? The Galatea of
Michael Cervantes quoth the Barber. That Cervantes, said the Curate, is my old
acquaintance this many a year, and I know he is more practiced in misfortunes
then in verses: His book has some good invention in it, he intends and
propounds somewhat, but concludes nothing; therefore we must expect the second
Part, which he has promised, perhaps his amendment may obtain him a general
remission, which until now is denied him; and whilst we expect the sight of
his second work, keep this part closely imprisoned in your lodging. I am very
well content to do so, good Gossip, said the Barber; and here there come three
together, The Auracana of Don Alonso de Ercilla, The Austriada of John Ruffo,
one of the Magistrates of Cordova, and The Monserrato of Christopher de Virnes,
a Valentian Poet. All these three books, quoth the Curate, are the best that
are written in heroical verse in the Castilian tongue, and may compare with
the most famous of Italy: reserve them as the richest pawns that Spain enjoys
of Poetry. The Curate with this grew weary to see so many books, and so he
would have all the rest burned at all adventures. But the Barber ere the
Sentence was given had opened by chance one entitled The Tears of Angelica. I
would have shed those tears my self, said the Curate, if I had wittingly caused
such a book to be burned; for the Author thereof, was one of the most famous
Poets of the World, not only of Spain: And was most happy in the translation of
certain Fables of Ovid.

CHAP. VII.
Of the second departure which our good Knight, Don-Quixote, made from his
house, to seek Adventures,
WHile they were thus busied, Don-Quixote began to cry aloud, saying, Here,
here valourous Knights, here it is needful that you show the force of your
valiant arms; for the Courtiers begin to bear away the best of the Tourney.
The folk repairing to this rumor and noise, was an occasion, that any farther
speech and visitation of the books was omitted; and therefore it is to be
suspected, that The Ca^^le^^ and Lion of Spain, with the acts of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, written by Don Luis de Avila, were burned, without being
ever seen or heard; and perhaps if the Curate had seen them, they should not
have pas'd under so rigorous a sentence. When they all arrived to Don-Quixote
his Chamber he was risen already, out of his Bed, and continued still his
outcries, cutting and flashing on every side, being as b^^^dly awake, as if he
never had slept. Wherefore, taking him in their arms, they returned him by main
force into his Bed, and after he was somewhat quiet and settled, he said turning
himself to the Curate, In good sooth Lord Archbishop Turpin, it is a great
dishonor to us that are called the twelve Peers, to permit the Knights of the
Court to bear thus away the glory of the Tournay without more ado; seeing that
we the Adventures have gained the prize thereof the three foremost days. Hold
your peace good Gossip, quoth the Curate, for fortune may be pleased to change
the success; and what is lost to day, may be wonn again to morrow: Look you to
your health for the present; for you seem at least to be very much tired, if
besides, you be not sore wounded. Wounded, no, quoth Don-Quixote! but doubtless
I am somewhat bruised: for that Bastard Don Rowland has beaten me to powder
with the stock of an Oake-tree; and all for envy, because he sees that I only
dare oppose my self to his valor: But let me be never again called Raynold of
Montealban, if he pay not deerly for it, as soon as I rise from this Bed, in
despite of all his enchantment. But I pray you call for my breakfast, for I
know it will do me much good, and have the revenge of this wrong to my charge.
Presently meat was brought; and after he had eaten he fell a sleep, and they
remained astonished at his wonderful madness. That night the old woman burned
all the books that she found in the house and yard; and some there were burned,
that deserved, for their worthynesse, to be kept up in everlasting Treasuries,
if their fortunes and the laziness of the Searchers had permitted it. And so
the proverb was verrified in them, That the Just pays sometimes for the
Sinners. One of the remedies which the Curate and the Barber prescribed for
that present, to help their friends Disease, was, that they should change his
Chamber, and dam up his Study, to the end, that when he arose, he might not
find them: for perhaps by removing the cause, they might also take away the
effects: And moreover, they bad them to say, that a certain Inchanter had
carried them away, study and all; which device was presently put in practice.
And within two days after, Don-Quixote got up, and the first thing he did, was
to go and visit his books; and seeing he could not find the Chamber in the
same place where he had left it, he went up and down to find it. Sometimes he
came to the place where the door stood, and felt it with his hands, and then
would turn his eyes up and down here and there to seek it, without speaking a
word. But at last after deliberation, he asked of the old woman, the way to his
books? She as one well-schooled before what she should answer, said, What
Study? or what nothing is this you look for? There is now no more Study nor
books in this house; for the very Devil himself carried all away with him. It
was not the Devil, said his Niese, but an Inchanter that came here one night
upon a cloud, the day after you departed from hence; and alighting down from a
Serpent, upon which he rode, he entered into the study, and what he did therein
I know not; and within a while after he fled out at the roof of the house, and
left all the house full of smoke: And when we accorded to see what he had done,
we could neither see Book or Study: only this much the old woman. And I do
remember very well, that the naughty old man at his departure said, with a loud
voice, that he for hidden enmity that he bore to the Lord of those books had
done all the harm to the house that they might perceive when he were departed,
and added that he was named the wise Muniaton Frestron, you would have said,
quoth Don-Quixote. I know not, quoth the old woman, whether he height Frestron
or Friton, but well I wot, that his name ended with Ton. That is true, quoth
Don-Quixote, and he is a very wise Inchanter, and my great adversary, and looks
on me with a sinister eye; for he knows by his Art and Science, that I shall in
time fight a single combat with a Knight, his very great friend, and overcome
him in battle, without being able to be by him assisted, and therefore he
labors to do me all the hurt he may: and I have sent him word, that he
strives in vain to divert or shun that, which is by heaven already decreed. Who
doubts of that, quoth his Niese? But I pray you good Uncle say; what need have
you to thrust your self into these difficulties and brabbles? were it not
better to rest you quietly in your own house, then to wander through the world,
searching bread of [Buscardo pan de Trastrigo p. 47.) blasted corn? without
once considering, how many there go to seek for wool, that return again shorn
themselves. O Niese! quoth Don-Quixote, how ill do thou understand the
matter? before I permit my self to be shorn, I will pill and pluck away the
beards of as many as shall dare or imagine to touch but a hair only of me. To
these words the woman would make no reply, because they saw his choler increase.

Fifteen days he remained quietly at home, without giving any argument of
seconding his former vanities: in which time past many pleasant encounters
between him and his two gossips, the Curate and Barber, upon that point which
he defended, to wit, that the world needed nothing so much as Knights errant,
and that the erraticall Knighthood ought to be again renewed therein. Master
Parson would contradict him sometimes, and other times yield unto that he
urged; for had they not observed that manner of proceeding, it were impossible
to bring him to any conformity. In this space Don-Quixote dealt with a certain
labourer his neighbor, an honest man (if the title of honesty may be given to
the poor) but one of a very shallow wit; in resolution he said so much to him,
and persuaded him so earnesty, and made him so large promises, as the poor
fellow determined to go away with him, and serve him as his Squire.
Don-Quixote among many other things bad him to dispose himself willingly to
depart with him; for now and then such an adventure might present it self, that
in as short space as one would take up a couple of straws, an Island might be
won, and he be left as Governor thereof. With these and such like promises
Sancho Panca, for so he was called, left his wife and children, and agreed to
be his Squire. Afterward Don-Quixote began to cast plots how to come by some
money; which he achieved by selling one thing, pawning another, and turning
all up-side down. At last he got a pretty sum, and accommodating himself with a
buckler which he had borrowed of a friend, and patching up his broken Beaver
again as well he could: he advertised his Squire Sancho of the day and hour
wherein he meant to depart, that he might likewise furnish himself with that
which he thought needful; but above all things he charged him to provide
himself of a Wallet; which he promised to perform, and said that he meant also
to carry a very good Ass, which he had of his own, because he was not wont to
travel much a foot. In that of the Ass Don-Quixote stood a while pensive,
calling to mind whether ever he had read, that any Knight Errant carried his
Squire Assishly mounted; but he could not remember any authority for it: yet
notwithstanding he resolved that he might bring his beast, with intention to
accomodate him more honorably, when occasion were offered, by dismounting the
first-discourteous Knight they met, from his horse, and giving it to his
Squire; he also furnished himself with Shirts, and as many other things as he
might, according unto the Innkeepers advise. All which being finished, Sancho
Panca without bidding his wife and children farewell, or Don-Quixote his Niese
and old servant, they both departed one night out of the Village unknown to any
person living; and they traveled so far that night, as they were sure in the
morning not to be found, although they were pursued. Sancho Pancha rode on his
beast like a Patriark with his Wallet and Bottle, and a mavelous longing to
see himself Governor of the Island which his master had promised unto him.

Don-Quixote took by chance the same very course and way that he had done in
his first voyage through the field of Montiel, wherein he traveled then with
less vexation then the first; for by reason it was early, and the Sun beams
stroke not directly down, but athwart; the heat did not trouble them much. And
Sancho Pancha seeing the opportunity good, said to his Master, I pray you have
care good Sir Knight, that you forget not that Government of the Island which
you have promised me, for I shall be able to Govern it, were it never so great.
To which Don-Quixote replied; You must understand friend Sancho Pancha, that it
was a custom very much used by ancient Knights Errant, to make their Squires
Governors of the Islands and Kingdoms that they conquered; and I am resolved
that so good a custom shall never be abolished by me; but rather I will pass
and exceed them therein: for they sometimes, and as I take it, did for the
greater part expect until their Squires waxed aged, and after they were cloyed
with service, and had suffered many bad days and worse nights; then did they
bestow upon them some title of an Earl, or at least of a Marquess of some
Valley or Province, of more or less account. But if thou live, and I
withal; it may happen, that I may conquer such a Kingdom within six days,
that has other Kingdoms adherent to it, which would fall out as just as it
were cast in a mould for thy purpose, whom I would crown presently King of one
of them. And do not account this to be any great matter, for things and
chances do happen to such Knights Adventurers as I am, by so unexpected and
wonderful ways and means, as I might give thee very easily, a great deal more
then I have promised. After that manner, said Sancho Pancha, if I were a King
through some miracle of those which you say, then should Iean Gutierez my wife
become a Queen, and my children Princes. Who doubts of that, said Don-Quixote?
That do I, replied Sancha Panca; for I am fully persuaded, that although God
would rain Kingdoms down upon the earth, none of them would sit well on Mary
Gutierez her head. For Sir, you must understand that she is not worth a Dodkin
for a Queen. To be a Countess would agree with her better; and yet I pray God
that she be able to discharge that calling. Commend thou the matter to God,
quoth Don-Quixote, that he may give her that which is most convenient for her.
But do not thou abase thy mind so much, as to content thy self with less
then at the least to be a Viceroy. I will not, good Sir, quoth Sancho,
especially seeing I have so worthy a Lord and Master as your self, who knows
how to give me all that may turn to my benefit, and that I shall be able to
discharge in good sort.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the good success Don-Quixote had, in the dreadful and never imagined
adventure of the Winde-mils, with other accidents worthy to be recorded.
AS thus they discoursed, they discovered some thirty or forty Wind-mils, that
are in that field; and as soon as Don- Quixote espied them, he said to his
Squire, Fortuue does address our affairs better then we our selves could
desire; for behold there, friend Sancho Panca, how there appears thirty or
forty monstrous Giants, with whom I mean to fight, and deprive them all of
their lives, with whose spoils we will begin to be rich, for this is a good
War, and a great service unto God, to take away so bad a seed from the face
of the Earth. What Giants? quoth Sancho Panca, Those that thou see there,
quoth his Lord, with the long arms, and some there are of that race, whose
arms are almost two leagues long, I pray you understand, quoth Sancho Panca,
that those which appear there, are no Giants but Windmills; and that which
seems in them to be arms, are their Sails, that are swinged about by the
Wind, do also make the Mill go. It seems well, quoth Don-Quixote, that thou
art not yet acquainted with matter of Adventures: they are Giants, and if thou
be afraid, go aside and pray whilst I enter into cruel and unequal
battle with them: And saying so, he spurred his horse Rozinante, without
taking heed to his Squire Sanchoes cries, advertising him how they were
doubtless Windmills that he did assault, and no Giants; but he went so fully
persuaded that they were Giants as he neither heard his Squires outcries, nor
did discern what they were, although he drew very near to them, but rather
said as loud as he could: Fly not ye Cowards and vile creatures, for it is
only one Knight that assaults you. With this the wind increased, and the Mill
Sails began to turn about, which Don-Quixote, espying, said, although thou
movedst more arms then the Giant Briares, thou shall stoop to me, and after
saying this, and commending himself most devoutly to his Lady Dulcinea,
desiring her to succor him in that trance, covering himself well with his
Buckler, and setting his Lance on his rest, he spurred on Rozinante, and
encountered with the first Mill that was before him, and striking his Lance
into the Sail, the wind swinged it about with such fury, that it broke his
Lance into shivers, carrying him and his Horse after it, and finally tumbled
him a good way off from it on the field in very evil plight. Sancho Panca
repaired presently to succor him as fast as his Ass could drive; and when he
arived. he found him not able to stir, he had gotten such a crush with
Rozinante. Good God, quoth Sancho, did I not foretell unto you that you should
look well what you did, for they were none other then Windmills, nor could any
think otherwise, unless he had also Windmills in his brains. Peace Sancho,
quoth Don-Quixote, (for matters of War are more subject then any other thing
to continual change; how much more seeing I do verily persuade my self, that
the wise Freston who robbed my Study and Books, has transformed these Giants
into Mills, to deprive me of the glory of the Victory; such is the enmity he
bears toward me. But yet in fine, all his bad arts shall but little prevail
against the goodness of my Sword. God grant it, as he may, said Sancho Panca,
and then helped him to arise, and presently he mounted on Rozinante, who was
half shoulder-pitcht [Medio spaldado] by rough encounter; and discoursing upon
that Adventure, they followed on the way which guided toward the passage or
gate of Lapice (A passage through the Mountains) for there as Don-Quixote
avouched, it was not possible but to find many Adventures, because it was a
through-fare much frequented, and yet he affirmed that he went very much
grieved because he wanted a Lance, and telling it to his Squire he said, I
remember how I have read that a certain Spanish Knight, called Diego Peers of
Vargas, having broken his Sword in a Battle, tore off a great branch or stock
from an Oak tree, and did such marvailes with it that day, and battered so
many Moors, as he remained with the surname of Machuca, which signifies a
stumpe, and as well he as all his Progeny were ever after that day called
Vargas and Machuca, I tell thee this, because I mean to tear another branch,
such, or as good as that at least, from the first Oak, we shall encounter, and
I mean to atchieve such Adventures therewithal, as thou will account thy self
fortunate, for having merited to behold them, and be a witness of things
almost incredible. In Gods name quoth Sancho, I do believe every word you
said: But I pray you sit right in your saddle; for you ride sideling, which
proceeds, as I suppose, of the bruising you got by your fall. Thou say true,
quoth Don-Quixote; And if I do not complain of the grief, the reason is;
because Knights Errant use not to complain of any wound, although their guts
did issue out thereof. If it be so (quoth Sancho) I know not what to say; but
God knows that I would be glad to hear you to complain when any thing grieves
you. Of my self I dare affirm, that I must complain of the least grief that I
have, if it be not likewise meant that the Squires of Knights Errants must not
complain of any harm. Don-Quixote could not refrain laughter, hearing the
simplicity of his Squire; and after showed unto him, that he might lawfully
complain, both when he pleased, and as much as he listed, with desire, or
without it; for he had never yet read any thing to the contrary, in the order
of Knighthood. Then Sancho said unto him, that it was dinner time: To whom he
answered, that he needed no repast; but if he had will to eat, he might begin
when he pleased. Sancho having obtained his license, did accommodate himself
on his Ass back, the best he might, taking out of his Wallet some
Belly-munition; he rode after his Master traveling and eating at once, and
that with great leisure; and ever and anon he lifted up his bottle with such
pleasure as the best fed Victualer of Malaga might envy his state; and whilst
he rode multiplying of quaffs in that manner, he never remembered any of the
promises his Master had made him; nor did he hold the fetch of Adventures to be
a labor, but rather a great recreation and ease, were they never so dangerous.
In conclusion they past over that night under certain Trees, from one of which
Don-Quixote ^oar a withered branch, which might serve him in some sort for a
Lance; and therefore he set thereon the iron of his own, which he had reserved
when it was broken. All that night Don-Quixote slept not one wink, but thought
upon his Lady Dulcinea, that he might conform himself to what he had read in
his books of Adventures, when Knights passed over many nights without sleep in
forests and fields only entertained by memory of their Mistrisses. But Sancho
spent not his time so vainly; for having his stomach well stuffed, and that not
with Succory water, he carried smoothly away the whole night in one sleep: and
if his Master had not called him up, neither the Sunbeams which struck on his
visage, nor the melody of the Birds, which were many, and did cheerfully
welcome the approach of the new day, could have been able to awake him: At his
arriving he gave one assay to the bottle, which he found to be somewhat more
weak then it was the night before, whereat his heart was somewhat grieved; for
he mistrusted that they took not a course to remedy that defect so soon as he
wished: Nor could Done Quixote break his fast, who, as we have said, meant only
to sustein himself with pleasant remembrances. Then did they return to their
commenced way toward the Port of Lapice, which they discovered about three of
the clock in the afternoon. Here (said Don-Quixote) as soon as he kend it, may
we (friend Sancho) thrust our hands up to the very elbows in that which is
called Adventures. But observe well this Caveat which I shall give thee, that
although thou see me in the greatest dangers of the World, thou must not set
hand to thy sword in my defense, if thou do not see that those which assault
me be base and vile vulgar people; for in such a case thou may assist me.
Marry if they be Knights thou may not do so in any wise, nor is it
permitted by the laws of arms, that thou may help me, until thou be
likewise dubbed knight thy self. I do assure you Sir, quoth Sancho, that herein
you shall be most punctually obeyed: And therefore chiefly, in respect that I
am of mine own nature a quiet and peaceable man, and a mortal enemy of
thrusting my self into stirrs or quarrels: Yet it is true that touching the
defense of mine own person, I will not be altogether so observant of those
Laws, seeing that both divine and humane allow every man to defend himself from
any one that would wrong him. I say no less, answered Don-Quixote, but in this
of ayding me against any Knight, thou must set bounds to thy natural impulses.
I say I will do so, quoth Sancho; and I will observe this commandment as
punctually, as that of keeping holy the Saboth day.

Whilst thus they reasoned, there appeared in the way two Monks of S. Benets
Order, mounted on two Dromedaries; for the Mules whereon they rode were but
little less. They wore masks with spectacles in them, to keep away the dust
from their faces; and each of them besides boar their Umbrills; after them came
a Coach, and four or five a horseback accompanying it, and two Lacquies that
ran hard by it. There came therein, as it was after known, a certain Biscaine
Lady, which traveled toward Sivil, where her husband so journed at the
present, and was going to the Indies, with an honorable charge: The Monks rode
not with her although they traveled the same way. Scarce had Don-Quixote
perceived them, when he said to his Squire; Either I am deceived, or else this
will prove the most famous Adventure that ever has been seen. For these two
great black bulk, which appear there, are questionless Inchanters that steal,
or carry away perforce, some Princess in that Coach; and therefore I must with
all my power undo that wrong. This will be worse then the adventure of the
Windmills, quoth Sancho. Do not you see Sir, that those are Friars of S.
Benets Order? and the Coach can be none other then of some travelers.
Therefore listen to mine advice, and see well what you do, lest the Devil
deceive you. I have said already to thee Sancho, that thou art very ignorant in
matter of Adventures. What I say is true, as now thou shall see. And saying so,
he spurred on his horse, and placed himself just in the midst of the way, by
which the Friars came; and when they approached so near, as he supposed they
might hear him, he said with a loud voice: Divilish and wicked people, leave
presently those high Princesses which you violantly carry away with you in that
Coach; or if you will not, prepare your selves to recive sudden death, as a
just punishment of your bad works. The Friars held their horses, and were
amazed both at the shape and words of Don-Quixote. To whom they answered, Sir
Knight, we are neither divillish nor wicked, but religious men of S. Benets
Order, that travel about our affairs; and we know not whether or no there
comes any Princesses forced in this Coach. With me fair words take no effect,
quoth Don-Quixote. For I know you very well treacherous knaves; and then,
without expecting their reply, he set spurs to Rozinante, and laying his Lance
on the thigh, charged the first Friar with such fury and rage, that if he had
not suffered himself willingly to fall off his Mule, he would not only have
overthrown him against his will; but likewise have slain, or at least wounded
him very ill with the blow. The second religious man seeing how ill his
companion was used made no words; but seting spurs to that Castle his Mule,
did fly away through the field, as swift as the wind it self. Sancho Panca
seeing the Monk overthrown, dismounted very speedily off his Ass, and ran over
to him, and would have ransackt his habits. In this arrived the Monks two
Lacquies, and demanded of him why he thus dispoyled the Friar? Sancho replied,
that it was his due by the Law of arms, as lawful spoils gained in battle by
his Lord Don-Quixote. The Lacquies which understood not the jest, nor knew not
what words of battle or spoils meant, seeing that Don-Quixote was now out of
the way speaking with those that came in the Coach, set both at once upon
Sancho, and left him not a hair in his beard; but they plucked, and did so
trample him under their feet, as they left him stretched on the ground without
either breath or feeling. The Monk cutting off all delays, mounted again on
horse back, all affrighted, having scarce any drop of blood left in his face
through fear. And being once up, he spurred after his fellow, who expected him a
good way off, staying to see the success of that assault; and being unwilling
to attend the end of that strange Adventure, they did prosecute their journey,
blessing and crossing themselves as if the Devil did pursue them.

Don-Quixote, as is rehearsed, was in this season speaking to the Lady of the
Coach, to whom he said, Your beauty deer Lady, may dispose from henceforth of
your person, as best ye likes; for the pride of your Robbers lies now
prostrated on the ground, by this my invincible arm. And because you may not
be troubled to know your deliverer his name, know that I am called Don-Quixote
de la Mancha; a Knight Errant and Adventurer, and Captive to the Peerlesse and
Bautifull Lady Dulcinea of Toboso: and in reward of the benefit which you have
received at my hands, I demand nothing else but that you return to Toboso; and
there present your selves in my name before my Lady, and recount unto her, what
I have done to obtain your Liberty. To all these words which Don-Quixote said,
a certain Biscaine Squire that accompanied the Coach, gave ear; who seeing that
Don-Quixote suffered not the Coach to pass onward, but said that it must
presently return back to Toboso, he drew near to him, and laying hold on his
Lance, he said in his bad Spanish and worse Basquish; Get thee away Knight in
an ill hour; by the God that created me, if thou leave not the Coach, I will
kill thee, as sure as I am a Biscaine. Don-Quixote understanding him, did
answer with great staidness; If thou wer'st a Knight [Cavallero in Spanish is
taken as well for a Gentleman as for a Knight] as thou art not, I would by this
have punished thy folly and presumption, crafty creature. The Biscaine replied
with great fury; Not I a Gentleman? I swear God thou lie, as well as I am a
Christian: If thou cast away thy Lance, and draw thy sword, [pag. 58.] thou
shall see the water as soon as thou shall carry away the Cat: A Biscaine by
Land, and a Gentleman by Sea, a Gentleman in despite of the Devil; and thou
lie if other things thou say. Straight thou shall see that, said Agrages,
replied Don-Quixote; and throwing his Lannce to the ground, he out with his
Sword, and took his Buckler, and set on the Biscaine, with resolution to kill
him. The Biscaine seeing him approach in that manner, although he desired to
alight off his Mule, which was not to be trusted, being one of those naughty
ones which are wont to be hired, yet had he no leisure to do any other thing
then to draw out his Sword: but it befell him happily to be near to the Coach,
out of which he snatched a Cushion that served him for a Shield, and presently
the one made upon the other like mortal enemies. Those that were present
labored all that they might, but in vain, to compound the matter between them;
for the Biscaine swore in his bad Language, that if they hindered him from
ending the Battle, he would put his Lady, and all the rest that dared to
disturb him to the Sword.

The Lady astonished and fearful of that which she beheld, commanded the
Coachman to go a little out of the way, and face aloo^e, beholding the
rigorous conflict. In the progress whereof the Biscaine gave Don-Quixote over
the Target a mighty blow on one of the shoulders, where if it had not found
resistance in his armor, it would doubtlesly have cleft him down to the
girdle. Don-Quixote feelling the weight of that unmeasurable blow, cried with a
loud voice, saying, O Dulcinea, Lady of my soul, the flower of all beauty,
succor this thy Knight, who to set forth thy worth, finds himself in this
dangerous trance. The saying of these words, the griping fast of his Sword, the
covering of himself well with his Buckler, and the assayling of the Biscaine,
was done all in one instant, resolving to venture all the success of the
battle on that one only blow. The Bicaine, who perceived him come in that
manner, perceived by his doughtinesse his intention, and resolved to do the
like, and therefore expected him very well covered with his Cushion, not being
able to manage his Mule as he wished from one part to another, who was not
able to go a step, it was so wearied, as a beast never before used to the like
toys. Don-Quixote, as we have said, came against the weary Biscaine, with his
Sword lifted a loft, with a full resolution to part him in two, and all the
beholders stood with great fear suspended to see the success of those
monstrous blows wherewithal they threatened one another. And the Lady of the
Coach with her Gentlewomen made a thousand Vows and Offerings to all the
devoute places of Spain, to the end that God might deliver the Squire and
themselves out of that great danger wherein they were.

But it is to be deplored how in this very point and term, the Author of this
History leaves this Battle depending, excusing himself that he could find no
more written of the Acts of Don-Quixote then those which he has already
recounted. True it is that the second writer of this work would not believe
that so curious a History was drowned in the jaws of Oblivion, or that the
wits of the Mancha were so little curious as not to reserve among their
Treasuries or Records, some papers treating of this famous Knight; and
therefore encouraged by this presumption, he did not despair to find the end
of this pleasant History; which Heaven being propicious to him, he got at
last, after the manner that shall be recounted in the second Part.

THE Delightful History of the most witty Knight DON-QUIXOTE of the Mancha.
The Second Part.
CHAP. I.
Wherein is related the events of the fearful Battle which the gallant
Biscaine fought with Don-Quixote.
WE left the valorous Biscaine and the famous Don-Quixote, in the first Part,
with their Swords lifted up and naked, in terms to discharge one upon another
two furious Cleevers, and such, as if they had lighted rightly, would cut and
divide them both from the top to the toe, and open them like a Pomgranat. And
that in so doubtful a taking the delightful History stopped and remained
dismembered, the Author thereof leaving us no notice where we might find the
rest of the narration. This grieved me not a little, but wholly turned the
pleasure I took in reading the beginning thereof into disgust, thinking how
small commodity was offered, to find out so much as in my opinion wanted of
this so delectable a tale. It seemed unto me almost impossible, and contrary
to all good order, that so good a Knight should want some wise man that would
undertake his wonderful prowesses and feats of Chivalry. A thing that none of
those Knights Errant ever wanted, of whom People speak, for each of them had
one or two wise men of purpose, that did not only write their Acts, but also
depainted their very least thoughts and toys, were they never so hidden. And
surely so good a Knight could not be so unfortunate as to want that wherewith
Platyr and others his like abounded: and therefore could not induce my self to
believe, that so gallant a History might remain maimed and lame, and did
rather cast the fault upon the malice of the time, who is a consumer and
devourer of all things, which had either hidden or consumed it. Me thought on
the other side, seeing that among his books were found some modern works,
such as the Vndeceiving of Jealousy, and the Nymphs and Sheepheards of
Henares. That also his own History must have been new; and if that it were
not written, yet was the memory of him fresh among the dwellers of his own
Village, and the other Villages adjoining. This imagination held me suspended
and desirous to learn really and truly all the life and miracles of our famous
Spanyard, Don-Quixote of the Mancha, the light and mirror of all Manchicall
Chivalrie; being the first who in this our age and time, so full of calamities,
did undergo the travells and exercise of arms Errant; and undid wrongs,
succored widows, protected Damzels that rode up and down with their whips
and Palfreys, and with all their virginity on their backs from hill to hill,
and dale to dale; for if it happened not that some lewd miscreant, or some Clown
with a hatchet and long hair, or some monstrous Giant did force them, Damzels
there were in times past that at the end of fourscore years, all which time
they never slept one day under a roof, went as entyre and pure may dens to
their Graves, as the very mother that bore them. Therefore I say, that as well
for this as for many other good respects, our gallant Don-Quixote is worthy of
continual and memorable praises; nor can the like be justly denied to my
self, for the labor and diligence which I used to find out the end of this
grateful History, although I know very well that if Heaven, Chance, and
Fortune had not assisted me, the world had been deprived of the delight and
pastime that men may take for almost two hours together, who shall with
diligent attention read it. The manner therefore of finding it was this.

Being one day walking in the Exchange of Toledo, a certain Boy by chance would
have sold diverse old quires and scroules of books to a Squire that walked up
and down in that place, and I being addicted to read such scroules, though I
found them torn in the streets, borne away by this my natural inclination,
took one of the quires in my hand, and perceived it to be written in
Arabicall Characters, and seeing that although I knew the Letters, yet could I
not read the substance, I looked about to view whether I could perceive any
Moor turned Spanyard thereabouts, that could read them; nor was it very
difficult to find there such an Interpreter, for if I had searched one of
another better and more ancient language [to Wit a Iew] that place would easily
afford him. In fine, my good fortune presented one to me, to whom telling my
desire, and giving him the book in his hand, he opened it, and having read a
little therein, began to laugh, I demanded of him why he laughed? and he
answered, at that marginall note which the book had. I bad him to expound it
to me, and with that took him a little aside, and he continuing still his
laughter said, there is written here on this margin these words. This Dulcinea
of Toboso so many times spoaken of in this History, had the best hand for
powdring of Porkes, of any woman in all the Mancha. When I heard it make
mention of Dulcinea of Toboso, I rested amazed and suspended, and imagined
forthwith that those quires contained the History of Don-Quixote, with this
conceit I hastened him to read the ibegnning, which he did, and translating the
Arabicall into Spanish in a trice, he said that it began thus. The History of
Don-Quixote of the Mancha, written by Cyde Hamete Benegeli, an Arabicall
Historiographer. Much discretion was requisite to dissemble the content of mind
I conceived when I heard the Title of the book, and preventing the Squire, I
bought all the boys scroles and papers for a Riall, and were he of discretion,
or knew my desire, he might have promised himself easily, and also have borne
away with him more then six Reals for his Merchandise. I departed after with
the Moor to the Cloister of the great Church, and I requested him to turn me
all the Arabicall sheets that treated of Don-Quixote into Spanish, without
adding or taking away any thing from them; and I would pay him what he listed
for his pains: he demanded fifty pounds of Raisons, and three Bushells of
Wheat, and promised to translate them speedily, well, and faithfully. But I, to
hasten the matter more, least I should lose such an unexpected and welcome
treasure, brought him to my house, where he translated all the work in less
then a month and a half, even in the manner that it is here recounted.

There was painted in the first Quier very naturally the battle betwixt
Don-Quixote and the Biscaine; even in the same manner that the History relates
it, with their Swords lifted aloft, the one covered with his Buckler, the other
with the Cushion: and the Biscaines Mule was delivered so naturally as a man
might perceive it was hired; although he stood farther often then the shot of a
Cross-bow. The Biscaine had a title written under his feet, that said, Don
Sancho de Azpetia, for so belike he was called: and at Rozinante his feet,
there was another that said Don-Quixote. Rozinante was mavelous well
pourtraited, so long and lank, so thin and lean, so like one laboring with an
incurable consumption, as he did show very clearly with what consideration and
propriety he had given unto him the name Rozinante. By him stood Sancho Panca,
holding his Ass by the halter; at whose feet was another scroule, saying,
Sancho Cancas: And I think the reason thereof was, that as his picture showed,
he had a great belly, a short stature, and thick legs. And therefore I judge
he was called Panca or Canca, for both these names were written of him
indifferently in the History. There were other little things in it worthy
nothing; but all of them are of no great Importance, nor any thing necessary
for the true relation of the History, for none is ill if it be true. And if any
objection be made against the truth of this; it can be none other then that the
Author was a Moor; and it is a known propriety of that Nation to be lying: Yet
in respect that they hate us so mortally, it is to be conjectured that in this
History there is rather want and concealment of our Knights worthy acts, then
any superfluity; which I imagine the rather, because I find in the progress
thereof many times, that when he might; and ought to have advanced his penn in
our Knights praises, he does as it were of purpose pass them over in silence.
Which was very ill done, seeing that Historiographers ought and should be very
precise, true, and unpassionate; and that neither profit, or fear, rancor or
affection should make them to tread awry from the truth, whose mother is
History; the Emulatresse of time; the depository of actions; the witness of
things past; and advertiser of things to come. In this History I know a man
may find all that he can desire in the most pleasing manner; and if they want
any thing to be desired, I am of opinion that it is through the fault of that
ungracious knave that translated it, rather then through any defect in the
subject. Finally, the second part thereof (according to the translation) began
in this manner.

The trenchant Swords of the two valorous and enraged combatants being listed a
loft, it seemed that they threatened Heaven, the Earth, and the Depths. Such was
their hardness and courage: And the first that discharged his blow was the
Biscaine, which fell with such force and fury, as if the Sword had not turned a
little in the way, that only blow had been sufficient to set an end to the
rigorous Contention, and all other the Adventures of our Knight. But his good
fortune which resolved him for greate^ Affairs, did wrest his adversaries Sword
away in such sort, as though he stroke him on the left shoulder, yet did it no
more ha^^ then disarm all that side carrying away with it a great part of his
Beaver, with the half of his ear; all which fell to the ground with a
dreadful ruin, leaving him in very ill case for a good time. Good God! who is
he that can well describe at this present, the fury that entered in the heart of
our Manchegan, seeing himself used in that manner? Let us say no more, but that
it was such, that stretching himself again in the stirrops, and griping his
Sword fast in both his hands, he discharged such a terrible blow on the
Biscaine, hitting him right upon the Cushion and by it on the head, that the
strength and thickness thereof so little availed him, that as if a whole
Mountain had fallen upon him, the blood gushed out of his mouth, nose, and ears,
all at once, and he to^teredi so on his Mule, that every step he took, he was
ready to fall off, as he would indeed if he had not taken him by the neck: yet
nevertheless he lost the stirrops, and loosing his gripe of the Mule, it being
likewise frighted by that terrible blow, ran away as fast as it could, about
the Fields, and within two or three winches overthrew him to the ground. All
which Don-Quixote stood beholding with great quietness; and as soon as he saw
him fall, he leapt off his Horse, and ran over to him very speedily; and
setting the point of his Sword on his eyes, he bad him yield himself, or else
he would cut off his head. The Biscaine was so amazed as he could not speak a
word; and it had succeeded very ill with him, considering Don-Quixote fury, if
the Ladies of the Coach, which until then had beheld the Conflict with great
anguish, had not come where he was, and earnestly be sought him to do them the
favor to pardon their Squiers life. Don-Quixote answered with a great
loftiness and gravity. Truly fair Ladies I am well appaid to grant you your
request, but it must be with this agreement and condition, that this Knight
shall promise me to go to Toboso, and present himself in my name to the
Peerlesse Lady Daloinea, to the end she may dispose of him as she pleases.
The timorous and comfortless Lady without considering what Don-Quixote
demanded, or asking what Dul^^ was, promised that her Squire should accomplish
all that he pleased to command. Why then quoth Don-Quixote, trusting to your
promise, I Will do him no more harm, although he has well deserved it at my
hands.

CHAP. II.
Of that which after befell unto Don-Quixote, when he had left the Ladies.
BY this Sancho Panca had gotten up, though somewhat abused by Friars Lackeyes,
and stood attentively beholding his Lords combat, and prayed to God with all
his heart, that it would please him to give him the victory; and that he might
therein winn some Island, whereof he might make him governor, as he had
promised. And seeing the controversy ended at last, and that his Lord
remounted upon Rozinante; he came to hold him the stirrup, and cast himself on
his knees before him ere he got up, and taking him by the hand, he kissed it,
saying, I desire that it will please you good my Lord Don-Quixote, to bestow
upon me the government of that Island which in this terrible Battle you have
won; for though it were never so great, yet do I find my self able enough
to govern it, as well as any other whatsoever that ever governed Island in this
world. To this demand Don-Quixote answered, thou must note friend Sancha, that
this Adventure, and others of this kind are not adventures of Islands, but of
thwartings and high ways, wherein nothing else is gained but a broaken pate,
or the loss of an ear. Have patience a while, for Adventures will be offered,
whereby thou shall not only be made a Governor, but also a greater man. Sancho
rendered him many thanks, and kissing his hand again, and the skirt of his
Habergeon; he did help him to get up on Rozinante, and he leapt on his Ass,
and followed his Lord: who with a swift pace, without taking leave or speaking
to those of the Coach, he entered into a wood that was hard at hand. Sancho
followed him as fast as his beast could trot; but Rozinante went off so
swiftly, as he perceiving he was like to be left behind, was forced to call
aloud to his Master that he would stay for him; which Don-Quixote did by
checking Rozinante with the bridle, until his wearied Squire did arrive: who,
as soon as he came, said unto him; Methinks (Sir) that it will not be amiss to
retire our selves to some Church; for according as that man is ill dight with
whom you fought. I certainly persuade my self that they will give notice of the
fact to the Holy Brotherhood, and they will seek to apprehend us; which if they
do, in good faith before we can get out of their claws, I fear me we shall
sweat for it. Peace, quoth Don-Quixote, where have thou ever read or seen that
Knight Errant, that has been brought before the Judge, though he committed
never so many homicides and slaughters? I know nothing of Omicills, quoth
Sancho, nor have I cared in my life for any; but well I wot that it concerns
the Holy Brotherhood to deal with such as fight in the Fields, and in that
other I will not intermeddle. Then be not afraid friend, quoth Don-Quixote, for
I will deliver thee out of the hands of the Caldeans; how much more out of
those of the Brotherhood? But tell me in very good earnest, whether thou did
ever see a more valarous Knight then I am, on the face of the earth? did
thou ever read in Histories of any other that has or ever had more courage in
assayling; more breath in persevering; more dexterity in offending; or more art
in overthrowing, then I? The truth is, quoth Sancho, that I have never read any
History; for I can neither read nor write: But that which I dare wager is, that
I never in any life served a bolder Master then you are; and I pray God that we
pay not for this boldness, there where I have said, That which I request you
is, that you will cure your self, for you lose much blood by that ear, and
here I have lint and a little Vnguentum Album in my Wallet. All this might be
excused, quoth Don-Quixote, if I had remembered to make a Violl-full of the
Balsamum of Fierebras, for with one drop of it we might spare both time, and
want well all those other Medecines. What Violl, and what Balsamum is that,
said Sancho Panca? It is, answered Don-Quixote, a Balsamum whereof I have the
receipt in memory, which one possessing he needs not fear death, nor ought he
to think that he may be killed by any wound: and therefore after I have made
it, and given it unto thee, thou have nothing else to do. but when thou shall
see that in any Bateel I be cloven in twain (as many times it happens) thou
shall take fair and softly that part of my Body that is fallen to the ground,
and put it up again with great subtlety, on the part that rests in the Saddle,
before the blood congeale, having evermore great care that thou place it just
and equally, then presently after thou shall give me two draughts of that
Balsamum of which I have spoken, and thou shall see me straight become founder
then an Apple. If that be true, quoth Sancho, I do presently here renounce
the government of the Island you promised, and will demand nothing else in
recompense of my services of you, but only the receipt of this precious liquor;
for I am certain that an ounce thereof will be worth two Rials in any place,
and when I have it I should need nothing else to gain my living easily and
honestly. But let me know, is it costly in making? With less then three
Reals, quoth Don-Quixote, a man may make three gallons of it, But I mean to
reach thee greater secrets then this, and do thee greater favors also. And
now let me cure my self, for mine ear grieves me more then I would wish.
Sancho then took out of his Wallet his lynt and ointment to cure his Master.
But when Don-Quixote saw that the vizar of his Helmet was broken, he was ready
to run mad; and setting his hand to his Sword, and lifting up his eyes to
heaven, he said, I vow to the creator of all things, and to the four Gospels
where they are largest written, to lead such another life as the great
Marquess of Mantua did, when he swore to revenge the death of his Nephew
Valdovinos, which was; not to eat on Table cloth, nor sport with his Wife,
and other things, which although I do not now remember, I give them here for
expressed, until I take complete revenge on him that has done me this
outrage.

Sancho hearing this said, you must note, Sir Don-Quixote, that if the Knight
has accomplished that which you ordained, to go and present himself before
my Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, then has he fully satisfied his debt, and
deserves no new punishment, except he commit a new fault. Thou have spoken
well and hit the mark right, said Don-Quixote, and therefore I disanull the
Oath, in that of taking any new revenge on him; but I make it, and confirm it
again, that I will lead the life I have said until I take another Helmet like,
or as good as this, perforce from some Knight. And do not think Sancho that I
make this resolution lightly, or as they say, with the smoke of strawes, for I
have an Author whom I may very well imitate herein, for the very like in every
respect past about Mambrinoes Helmet, which cost Sacriphante so dearly. I
would have you resign those kind of Oaths to the Devil, quoth Sancho, for
they will hurt your health, and prejudice your Conscience. If not, tell me
now, I beseech you if we shall not these many days encounter with any that
wears a Helmet, what shall we do? Will you accomplish the Oath in despite
of all the inconveniences and discommodities that ensue thereof? to wit, to
sleep in your clothes, nor to sleep in any dwelling, and a thousand other
penitencies, which the Oath of the mad old man, the Marquess of Mantua
contained, which you mean to ratify now? Do not you consider that armed men
travel not in any of these ways, but Carriers, and Waggoners, who not only
carry no Helmets, but also for the most part never heard speak of them in
their lives? Thou do deceive thy self saying so, replied Don-Quixote, for we
shall not haunt these ways two hours, before we shall see more armed Knights
then were at the siege of Albraca, to conquer Angelica the fair. Well then,
let it be so, quoth Sancho, and I pray God it befall us well, whom I devoutly
beseech that the time may come of gayning that Island which costs me so dear,
and after let me die presently and I care not. I have already said to thee
Sancho, quoth his Lord, that thou should not trouble thy self in any wise
about this Affair; for if an Island were wanting, we have then the Kingdom of
Denmark or that of Sobradisa, which will come as fit for thy purpose as a Ring
to thy finger, and principally thou art to rejoice, because they are on the
continent. But omitting this till his own time; see whether thou have any thing
in they Wallet, and let us eat it, that afterward we may go search out some
Castle, wherein we may lodge this night, and make the Balsamum which I have told
thee. For I vow to God that this ear grieves me marvellously. I have here an
Onion, replied the Squire, a piece of Cheese and a few crusts of bread, but
such gross meats are not befitting so noble a Knight as you are. How ill do
thou understand it? answered Don-Quixote. I let thee to understand Sancho, that
it is an honor for Knights Errant, not to eat once in a months space; and if
by chance they should eat, to eat only of that which is next at hand. And this
thou might certainly conceive, had thou read so many books as I have done.
For though I past over many, yet did I never find recorded in any, that
Knights Errant did ever eat, but by mere chance and Adventure, or in some
costly Banquests that were made for them, and all the other days they past
over with herbs and roots: and though it is to be understood that they could
not live without meat, and supplying the other needs of nature, because they
were in effect men as we are: It is likewise to be understood, that spending
the greater part of their lives in Forests and Deserts, and that too without a
Cook, that their most ordinary meats were but course and rusticall, such as
thou do now offer unto me. So that friend Sancho, let not that trouble thee
which is my pleasure, nor go not thou about to make a new world, or to hoist
Knight Errantry off of her hinges. Pardon me good Sir, quoth Sancho; for by
reason I can neither read nor write, as I have said once before I have not
fallne rightly in the Rules and Laws of Knighthood; and from hence forth my
Wallet shall be well furnished with all Kinds of dry fruits for you, because
you are a Knight: and for my self, seeing I am none, I will provide Fowls and
other things, that are of more substance. I say not Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote,
that it is a forcible Law to Knights Errant, not to eat any other things then
such fruits; but that their most ordinary sustenance could be none other then
those, and some herbs they found up and down the Fields, which they knew very
well, and so do I also. It is a virtue, quoth Sancho, to know those Herbs;
for as I imagine that knowledge will some day stand us in stead: And saying so,
he took out the provision he had, which they both eat together with good
conformity. But being desirous to search out a place where they might lodge that
night, they did much shorten their poor dinner, and mounting anon a horseback,
they made as much haste as they could, to find out some dwellings, before the
night did fall; but the Sun and their hopes did fail them at once, they being
near the Cabins of certain Goat-heards; and therefore they concluded to take up
their lodging there for that night: For, though Sancho's grief was great, to
lie out of a Village yet Don-Quixote's joy exceeded it far, considering he
must sleep under open Heaven, because he made account as often as this befell
him, that he did a worthy act, which did facilitate and ratify the practice of
his Chivalry.

CHAP. III.
Of that which past between Don-Quixote and certain Goat-heards.
HE was entertained very cheerfully by the Goat-heards, and Sancho having set
up Rozinante and his Ass, as well as he could, he presently repaired to the
smell of certain pieces of Goat-flesh, that stood boiling in a Kettle over the
Fire; and although he thought in that very moment to try whether they were in
season to be translated out of the Kettle into the Stomach, he did omit it,
because he saw the Herds take them off the Fire, and spreading certain
Sheepskins, which they had for that purpose on the ground, lay in a trice
their rusticall table, and invited the Master and man with very cheerful
mind, to come and take part of that which they had. There sat down round
about the skinns six of them, which were all that dwelled in that Fold; having
first (using some course complements) placed Don-Quixote upon a Trough, turning
the bottom up. Don-Quixote sat down and Sancho stood, to serve the Cup, which
was made of horn. His Master seeing him a foot, said, Sancho, to the end thou
may perceive the good included in wandering Knighthood, and also in what
possibility they are, which exercise themselves in any ministry thereof, to
arrive briefly to honor and reputation in the World. My will is that thou
do sit here by my side and in company with this good people, and that thou
be one and the very selfsame thing with me, who am thy Master and natural
Lord, that thou eat in my dish, and drink in the same cup wherein I drink: for
the same may be said of Chivalrie that is of Love, to wit, that it makes all
things equal. I yield you great thanks, quoth Sancho, yet dare I avouch unto
you, that so I had therewithal to eat well, I could eat it as well or better
standing and alone, then if I sat by an Emperor. And besides, if I must say
the truth, me thinks that which I eat in a corner without ceremonies,
curiosity, or respect of any, though it were but bread and an Onion, smacks a
great deal better then Turkey-Cocks at other Tables, where I must chew my meat
leisurely, drink but little, wipe my hands often, must not neese nor cough
though I have a desire, or be like to choke, nor do other things that
solitude and liberty bring with them. So that (good Sir) I would have you
convert these honors that you would bestow upon me in respect that I am an
adherent to Chivalry, as I am being your Squire, into things more essential
and profitable for me then these; and though I remain as thankful for them, as
if they were received, yet do I here renounce from this time until the worlds
end. For all that thou shall sit, for the humble shall be exalted; and so
taking him by the arm he forced him to sit down near himself.

The Goat-heards did not understand that Gibbrish of Squires and Knights
Errant, and therefore did nothing else but eat and hold their peace, and look
on their guests, that tossed in with their fists whole slices, with good grace
and stomachs. The course of flesh being ended, they served in on the rugges a
great quantity of sheld Akorns, and half a Cheese harder then if it were made
of rough-casting, the horn stood not the while idle; for it went round about
so often, now full, now empty, much like a Conduit of Noria, [Arcaduzed Noria.
p. 76.) And in a trice it emptied one of the two winebags that ley there in the
public view. After that Don-Quixote had satisfied his appetite well, he took
up a handful of Akorns. and beholding them earnestly, he began to discourse in
this manner. Happy time, and fortunate ages were those, whereon our Ancestors
bestowed the title of Golden, not because Gould (so much prized in this our
iron age) was gotten in that happy time without any labors, but because those
which lived in that time, knew not these two words Thine and Mine: in that holy
Age all things were in common. No man needed for his ordinary sustenance to do
ought else then lift up his hand, and take it from the strong Oak, which did
liberally invite them to gather his sweet and savory fruit. The clear Fountains
and running Rivers did offer them these savorie and transparent waters in
magnificent abundance. In the clifts of Rocks and hollow Trees did the careful
and discreet Bees erect their Commonwealth, offering to every hand without
interest, the fertile cropp of their sweetest travails. The lofty Cork-Trees
did dismiss of themselves, without any art then that of their native
liberality, their broad and light rindes. Wherewithal Horses were at first
covered, being sustained by rusticall stakes, to none other end, but for to
keep back the inclemencies of the Air. All then was peace, all Amity, and all
Concord: as yet the ploughshare presumed not with rude encounter to open and
search the compassionate bowels of our first mother; for she without
compulsion offered up, through all the parts of her fertile and spacious bosom,
all that which might satisfy, sustein, and delight those children which it
then had: Yea it was then that the simple and beautiful young Sheepheardesse
went from Valley to Valley, and Hill to Hill, with their hairs sometimes
plaited, sometime disheveled, without other apparel then that which was
requisite to cover comelily that which modesty wills, and ever would have
concealed. Then were of no request the Attires and Ornaments which are now used
by those that esteem the purple of Tire and the so-many-waies-marterized-Silk
so much: but only certain green leaves of Burdocks and Ivy intertexed and
woven together; wherewithal perhaps they went as gorgeously and comely decked,
as now our Court-dames with all their rare and outlandish inventions that
idleness and curiosity has found out. Then were the amorous conceits of the
mind, simply and sincerely delivered, and imbellished in the very form and
manner that she had conceived them, without any artificial contexture of words
to indeer them: Fraud, Deceit, or Malice had not then meddled themselves with
Plainness and Truth: Justice was then in her proper terms, Favor daring not
to trouble or confound her, or the respect of profit, which do now Prosecute,
Blemish, and disturb her so much. The Law of Corruption, or taking Bribes had
not yet possessed the understanding of the Judge; for then was neither Judge, nor
person to be judged. Maidens and Honesty wandered then, I say, where they
listed, alone signiorizing secure, that no Stranger, Liberty, or Lascivious
intent could prejudice it, or their own native desire or will any way indamage
it. But now in these our detestable times no damzel is safe, although she be
hid and shut up in another new Labyrinth, like that of Creet; for even there it
self the amorous Plague would enter, either by some cranie, or by the air, or
by the continual urgings of cursed Care, to infect her. For whose protection
and security was last instituted, by success of times, the order of
Knigh-hood, to defend Damzels, protect Widows, and assist Orphans and
distressed Wights. Of this Order am I, friends, Goatheards, whom I do heartily
thank for the good entertainment which you do give unto me and my Squire: for
although that every one living is obliged by the Law of Nature, to favor
Knights Errant; yet notwithstanding, knowing that you knew not this Obligation,
and yet did receive and make much of me, it stands with all reason that I do
render you thanks with all my heart!

Our Knight made this long Oration (which might have been well excused) because
the Achorns that were given unto him, called to his mind the golden World: and
therefore the humor took him to make the Goat-heards that unprofitable
discourse, who heard him all amazed and suspended with very great attention all
the while. Sancho likewise held his peace, eating Acorns, and in the mean while
visited very often the second wine-bagg, which, because it might be fresh, was
hanged upon a Cork-Tree. Don-Quixote had spent more time in his Speech then in
his Supper; at the end whereof one of the Goat-heards said, To the end that you
may more assuredly know, Sir Knight Errant, that we do entertain you with
prompt and ready will, we will likewise make you some pastime, by hearing one
of our companions sing, who is a Heard of good understanding, and very amorous
withal, and can besides read and write, and plays so well on a Rebeck, that
there is nothing to be desired. Scarce had the Goat-Heard ended his Speech,
when the sound of the Rebeck touched his ear, and within a while after he
arrived that played on it, being a youth of some twenty years old, and one of a
very good grace and countenance. His fellows demanded if he had supped, and
answering that he had; he which did offer the courtesy, said, then Anthony
thou may do us a pleasure by singing a little, that this Gentleman our
Guest may see, that we enjoy amid'st these Groves and Woods, those that know
what Music is: we have told him already thy good qualities, and therefore we
desire that thou show them, to verify our words. And therefore I desire thee
by thy life, that thou will sit and sing the Ditty which thy Uncle the
Prebendary made of thy Love, and was so well liked off in our Village. I am
content, quoth the youth, and without further entreaty, sitting down on the
trunk of a lopped Oak, he turned his Rebeck, and after a while began with a
singular good grace to sing in this manner. I Know Olalia thou do me adore!
Though yet to me the same thou have not said:
Nor shown it once, by one poor glaunce or more
Since love is soonest by such tongues bewrayed.
Yet 'cause I ever held thee to be wise,
It me assures thou bear me good will;
And he is not unfortunate that sees
How his affections are not taken ill.
Yet for all this, Olalia it is true!
I, by observance, gather to my woe;
Thy mind is framed of brass, by Art undue,
And flint thy bosom is, though it seem snow;
And yet amidst thy rigors, Winter-face
And other shifts, thou usest to delay me,
Sometimes hope, peeping out, does promise Grace;
But, woe is me, I fear it is to betray me.
Sweetest! once in the balance of thy mind,
Poise with just weights my Faith, which never yet
Diminisht, though disfavour it did find;
Nor can increase more, though thou favord'st it:
If Love be courteous (as some men say)
By thy humanity I must collect
My hopes, hows'ever thou do use delay,
Shall reap, at last, the good I do expect.
If many services be of esteem
Or power to render a hard heart benign;
Such things I did for thee, as make me deems
I have the match gained, and thou shall be mine;
For if at any time thou have taken heed,
Thou more then once might view how I was clad,
To honor thee on Mondaies with the Weed
Which, worn on Sondaies, got me credit had.
For Love and Brav'ry still themselves consort,
Because they both shoot ever at one end;
Which made me when I did to thee resort
Still to be neat and fine I did contend:
Here I omit the daunces I have done,
And Musicks I have at thy Window given;
When thou did at Cock-crow listen alone,
And seem'dst, hearing my voice, to be in Heaven.
I do not, eke, the praises here recount
Which of thy beauty I so often have said;
Which though they all were true, were likewise wont
To make thee (Envious!) me for spite upbraid,
When to Teresa, she of Berrocal,
I, of thy worths discourse, did sometime shape:
Good God! quoth she, you seem an Angels thrall,
And yet, for Idol, you adore an Ape.
She to her Bugles thanks may give and chains,
False hairs, and other shifts that she does use
To mend her beauty, with a thousand pains
And guiles, which might loves very self abuse.
Wroth at her words, I gave her straight the lie,
Which did her and her Cousin so offend;
As me to fight he challenged presently,
And well thou know of our debate the end:
I mean not thee, to purchase at a clap,
Nor to that end do I thy favor sue,
Thereby thine honor either to entrap,
Or thee persuade to take courses undue.
The Church has bands which do so surely hold,
As no silk string for strength comes to them near;
To thrust thy neck once in the yoke be bold.
And see if I, to follow thee, will fear.
If thou will not, here solemnly I Vow
By holliest Saint, enwrapt in precious Shrine,
Never to leave those hills where I dwell now,
If It be not to become a Capucine.


Here the Goat-heard ended his Ditty, and although Don-Quixote entreated him to
sing somewhat else. yet would not Sancho Panca consent to it; who was at that
time better disposed to sleep then to hear Music: and therefore said to his
Master, you had better provide your self of a place wherein to sleep this night
then to hear Music, for the labor that these good men endure all the day
long, does not permit that they likewise spend the night in singing. I
understand thee well enough Sancho, answered Don-Quixote, nor did I think
less, but that thy manifold visitations of the wine-bottle, would rather
desire to be recompensed with sleep then with Music. The Wine liked us all
well, quoth Sancho, I do not deny it, replied Don-Quixote, but go thou and
lay thee down where thou please, for it becomes much more men of my
profession to watch then to sleep. Yet notwithstanding it will not be amiss
to lay somewhat again to mine ear, for it grieves me very much. One of the
Goat-heards beholding the hurt, bad him be of good cheer, for he would apply
a remedy that should cure it easily. And taking some Rosemary leaves of many
that grew thereabouts, he hewed them, and after mixed a little salt among
them, and applied this Medecin to the ear, he bound it up well with a cloth,
assuring him that he needed to use no other Medecin, as it proved after in
effect.

CHAP. IV.
Of that which one of the Goat-heards recounted to those that were with
Don-Quixote.
ABOUT this time arived another youth, one of those that brought them provision
from the Village, who said, Companions do not you know what passes in the
Village? How can we know it being absent? says another of them. Then wit,
quoth the youth, that the famous Shepherd, and Student Chrysostom died this
morning, and they murmur that he died for love of that divellish less
Mareela, William the rich his daughter, she that goes up and down these
Plains and Hills among us in the habit of a Sheepheardesse; Do thou mean
Marcela, quoth one of them? Even her, I say, answered the other; and the jest
is, that he has commanded in his Testament, that he be buried in the
fields, as if he were a Moor; and that it be at the foot of the Rock, where the
Fountain stands of the Cork-Tree. For that according to same, and as they say,
he himself affirmed, was the place wherein he viewed her first. And he has
likewise commanded such other things to be done, as the ancienter sort of the
Village do not allow, nor think fit to be performed; for they seem to be
ceremonies of the Gentiles. To all which objections his great friend Ambrosio
the Student, who likewise apparelled himself like a Shepherd, at once with
him answers, that all shall be accomplished, without omission of any thing, as
Chrysostom has ordained, and all the Village is in an uproar about this
affair, and yet it is said that what Ambrosio and all the other Sheepheards his
friends do pretend shall in fine be done: and to morrow morning they will come
to the place I have named to bury him with great pomp: and as I suppose it
will be a thing worthy the seeing: at leastwise I will not omit to go and
behold it, although I were sure that I could not return the same day to the
Village. We will all do the same, quoth the Goat-heards, and will draw Lots
who shall tarry here to keep all our Herds. Thou say well Peter, quoth one
of them, although that labor may be excused, for I mean to stay behind for
you all, which you must not attribute to any virtue, or little curiosity in me;
but rather to the fork that pricked my foot the other day, and makes me unable
to travel from hence. We do thank thee notwithstanding, quoth Peter, for thy
good will. And Don-Quixote, who heard all their discourse, entreated Peter to
tell him who that dead man was, and what the Sheepheardesse of whom they spoak.

Peter made answer, that what he knew of the affair was, that the dead person
was a rich Gentleman of a certain Village, seated among those mountains, who
had studied many years in Salamanca, and after returned home to his house, with
the opinion to be a very wise and learned man: But principally it was reported
of him, that he was skillfull in Astronomy, and all that which passed above in
heaven, in the Sun and the Moon; for he would tell us most punctually the
clips of the Sun and the Moon. Friend, quoth Don-Quixote, the darkning of
these two greater Luminaries is called an Eclipse, and not a Clipse. But Peter
stopping not at those trifles, did prosecute his History, saying; he did also
Prognosticate, when the year would be abundant or Estill. Thou would say
Sterril, quoth Don-Quixote. Sterril or Estil, said Peter, all is one for my
purpose: And I say, that by his words, his father and his other friends, that
gave credit to him, became very rich: For they did all that he counseled them,
who would say unto them; sow Barley this year and no Wheat. In this you may sow
Pease and no Barley. The next year will be good for Oil. The three ensuing you
shall not gather a drop. That Science is called Astrology, quoth Don-Quixote.
I know not how it is called, replied Peter, but I know well he knew all this
and much more. Finally, a few months after he came from Salamanca, he appeared
one day apparalled like a Shepherd with his Flock, and leather Coat; having
laid aside the long habits that he wore, being a Scholar, and jointly with him
came also a great friend of his, and fellow Student called Ambrosio, apparraled
like a Shepherd. I did almost forget to tell how Crisostome the dead man was
a great maker of Verses; insomuch that he made the Carols of Christmas day at
night, and the plays for Corpus Christi day, which the youths of our Village
did represent, and all them affirmed, that they were most excellent. When those
of the Village saw the two Scholars so suddenly clad like Sheepheards, they
were amazed, and could not guess the cause that moved them to make so
wonderful a change. And about this time Chrisostome's father died, and he
remained possessed of a great deal of goods, as well moveable as immovable;
and no little quantity of Cattle great and small, and also a great sum of
money; of all which the young man remained a dissolute Lord. And truly he
deserved it all; for he was a good fellow, charitable, and a friend of good
folk; and he had a face like a blessing. It came at last to be understood, that
the cause of changing his habit was none other, then for to go up and down
through these Deserts after the Sheepherdesse Marcela, whom our Heard named
before; of whom the poor dead Crisostome was become enamoured. And I will tell
you now, because it is fit you should know it, what this wanton Less is,
perhaps, and I think without perhaps, you have not heard the like thing in all
the days of your life, although you had lived more years then Sarna. Say
Sarra, quoth Don-Quixote, being not able any longer to hear him to change one
word for another. The Sarna or Scabb, quoth Peter, lives long enough too. And
if you go thus Sir, interrupting my tale at every pace, we shall not be able
to end it in a year. Pardon me friend, quoth Don-Quixote; for I speak to thee
by reason there was such difference between Sarna and Sarra. But thou do
answer well; for the Sarna or Scab lives longer then Sarra: and therefore
prosecute thy History; for I will not interrupt thee any more. I say then deer
Sir of my Soul, quoth the Goat-heard, that there was in our Village a Farmer
that was yet richer then Crisostomes father, who was called William, to whom
fortune gave in the end of his great riches a daughter called Marcela, of whose
birth her mother died, who was the best woman that dwelled in all this circuit.
Me thinks I do now see her quick before me, with that face which had on the
one side the Sun, and on the other side the Moon; and above all, she was a
thriftie huswife, and a great friend to the poor: For which I believe that her
soul is this very hour enjoying of the Gods in the other World. For grief of
the loss of so good a wife, her husband William likewise dyed, leaving his
daughter Marcela young and rich in the custody of his Uncle, who was a Priest,
and Curate of our Village. The child grew with such beauty as it made us
remember that of her mother, which was very great. And yet notwithstanding they
judged that the daughters would surpass hers, as indeed it did: for when she
arrived to the age of fourteen or fifteen years old, no man beheld her, that
did not bless God for making her so fair: and most men remained enamoured and
cast away for her love. Her Uncle kept her with very great care and closeness:
And yet nevertheless the fame of her great beauty did spread it self in such
sort, that as well for it as for her great Riches, her Uncle was not only
requested by those of our Village, but also was prayed, solicited, and
importuned by all those that dwelled many leagues about, and that by the very
best of them, to give her to them in marriage. But he (who is a good Christian
every inch of him) although he desired to marry her presently as soon as she
was of age, yet would he not do it without her good will, without ever
respecting the gain and profit he might make by the possession of her goods,
whilst he desired her marriage. And in good sooth this was spoaken of, to the
good Priest his commendation, in more then one meeting of the people of our
Village. For I would have you to wit, Sir Errant, that in these little Villages
they talk of all things, and make account, as I do, that the Priest must have
been too good who could obliege his Parishiones to speak so well of him, and
especially in the Villages. Thou have reason, quoth Don-Quixote; and therefore
follow on, for the History is very pleasant, and thou good Peter do recount
it with a very good grace. I pray God, said Peter, that I never want our
Herds; for it is that which makes to the purpose. And in the rest you shall
understand, that although her Uncle propounded and told to his Niese the
quality of every woer of the many that desired her for wife, and entreated her
to marry and choose at her pleasure; yet would she never answer other, but that
she would not marry as then, and that in respect of her over green years, she
did not find her self able enough yet to bear the burden of marriage. With
these just excuses which she seemed to give, her Uncle lest off importuning of
her, and did expect until she were farther entered into years; and that she
might know how to choose one that might like her. For he was wont to say, and
that very well, That Parents were not to place or bestow their Children, where
they bore no liking. But see here when we least imagined it, the coy Marcela
appeared one morning to become a Sheepheardesse; and neither her Uncle, nor all
those of the Village which dissuaded her from it, could work any effect, but
she would needs go to the Fields, and keep her own Sheep with the other young
Lasses of the Town. And she coming thus in public, when her beauty was seen
without hindrance, I cannot possibly tell unto you, how many rich youths, as
well Gentlemen as Farmers, have taken on them the habit of Chrysostom, and
follow woing of her up and down those Fields. One of which, as is said already,
was our dead man, of whom it is said, that leaving to love her, he had at last
made her his Idol. Nor is it to be thought that because Marcela set her self in
that liberty, and so loose a life, and of so little or no keeping, that
therefore she has given the least token or shadow of dishonesty or negligence:
nay rather such is the watchfullnesse wherewithal she looks to her honor,
that among so many as serve and solicit her, not one has praised or can
justly vaunt himself to have received at her hands, the least hope that may be
to obtain his desires. For although she did not fly or shun the company and
conversation of Sheepheards, and does use them courteously and friendly,
whenever any one of them begin to discover their intention, be it ever so
just and holy, as that of Matrimony, she casts them away from her, as with a
sling.

And with this manner of proceeding she does more harm in this Country, then
if the Plague had entered into it by her means, for her affability and beauty
does draw to it the hearts of those which do serve and love her: But her
disdain and resolution do conduct them to terms of desparation: and so they
know not what to say unto her, but to call her with a loud voice cruel and
ungrateful, with other titles like unto this, which do clearly manifest the
nature of her condition; and Sir, if you staid here but a few days, you should
hear these Mountains resound with the lamentations of those wretches that
follow her. There is a certain place not far off, wherein are about two dozen
of Beech-trees, and there is not any one of them in whose rind is not engraven
Marcelas name, and over some names graven also a crown in the same tree, as if
her lover would plainly denote that Marcela bears it away, and deserves the
Garland of all humane beauty. Here sighs one Shepherd, there another
complains, in another place are heard amorous ditties, here in another
doleful and despayring laments: Some one there is that passes over all the
whole hours of the night at the foot of an Oak or Rock, and there without
folding once his weeping eyes, swallowed and transported by his thoughts, the
Sun finds him there in the morning: and some other there is, who without
giving wade or truce to his sighs, does amidst the fervor of the most
fastidious heat of the Summer, stretched upon the burning sand, breathe his
pitiful complaints to Heaven: and of this, and of him, and of those, and
these, the beautiful Marcela does indifferently and quietly triumph: all we
that know her, do await to see wherein this her loftiness will finish, or who
shall be so happy as to gain dominion over so terrible a condition, and enjoy
so peerlesse a beauty. And because all that I have recounted is so notorious a
truth, it make me more easily believe that our companion has told, that is
said of the occasion of Chrisostome's death: and therefore I do counsel you
Sir, that you do not omit to be present to morrow at his burial, which will
be worthy the seeing; for Chrysostom has many friends, and the place wherein
he commanded himself to be buried is not half a league from hence. I do mean
to be there, said Don-Quixote, and do render thee many thanks for the delight
thou have given me, by the relation of so pleasant a History. O, quoth the
Goat-Heard, I do not yet know the half of the Adventures succeeded to
Marcela's lovers; but peradventure we may meet some Shepherd on the way to
morrow that will tell them unto us. And for the present you will do well to
go take your rest under some roof, for the air might hurt your wound, although
the Medicine be such that I have applied to it, that any contrary accidents
needs not much to be feared. Sancho Panca being wholly out of patience with the
Goat-Heards long discourse, did solicit for his part his Master so
effectually as he brought him at last into Peter's Cabin, to take his rest for
that night; whereinto after he had entered, he bestowed the remnant of the might
in remembrances of his Lady Dulcinea in imitation of Marcelaes Lovers. Sancho
Panca did lay himself down between Rozinante and his Ass, and slept it out,
not like a disfavored Lover, but like a man stamped and bruised with tramplings.

CHAP. V.
Wherein is finished the History of the Sheepheardesse Marcela, with other
accidents.
BUT scarce had the day begun to discover it self by the Oriental windows,
when five of the six Goat-heards arising, went to awake Don-Quixote, and
demanded of him whether he yet intended to go to Chrisostome's Burial, and
that they would accompany him. Don-Quixote that desired nothing more, got up
and commanded Sancho to saddle and empannell in a trice; which he did with
great expedition, and with the like they all presently began their journey. And
they had not yet gone a quarter of a league, when at the crossing of a pathway
they saw six Sheepheards coming toward them, apparrelled with black skinns,
and crowned with Garlands of Cypress and bitter Enula Campana. Every one of
them carried in his hand a thick truncheon of Elm. There came likewise with
them two Gentlemen a horseback, very well furnished for the way, with other
three Lacquies that attended on them. And as soon as they encountered, they
saluted one another courteously, and demanded whether they traveled; and
knowing that they all went toward the place of the burial, they began their
journey together. One of the horsemen speaking to his companion, said, I think
(Mr. Vivaldo) we shall account the time well employed that we shall stay to see
this so famous an entertainment; for it cannot choose but be famous according to
the wonderful things these Sheepheards have recounted unto us, as well of the
dead Shepherd, as also of the murdering Sheepheardesse. It seems so to me
likewise, quoth Vivaldo. And I say, I would not only stay one day, but a whole
week rather then miss to behold it. Don-Quixote demanded of them, what they
had heard of Marcela and Chrysostom? The Traveller answered, That they had
encountered that morning with those Sheepheards, and that by reason they had
seen them apparrelled in that mournful attire, they demanded of them the
occasion thereof, and one of them rehearsed it, recounting the strangeness and
beauty of a certain Sheepheardesse called Marcela; and the amorous pursuits of
her by many, with the death of that Chrysostom, to whose burial they rode.
Finally, he told all that again to him, that Peter had told the night before.

This discourse thus ended, another began, and was, that he who was called
Vivaldo, demanded of Don-Quixote the occasion that moved him to travel thus
armed through so peaceable a country? To whom Don-Quixote answered, the
profession of my exercise does not license or permit me to do other: Good
days, cockering and ease were invented for soft Courtiers; but Travel,
Unrest, and Arms were only invented and made for those which the world terms
Knights Errant, of which number I my self (although unworthy) am one, and the
least of all. Scarce had they heard him say this, when they all held him to be
wood. And to find out the truth better, Viualdo did ask him again, what meant
the word Knights Errant? Have you not read then, quoth Don-Quixote, the
Histories and Annals of England, wherein are treated the famous acts of King
Arthur, whom we continually call in our Castilian Romance, King Artus? of whom
it is an ancient and common tradition in the Kingdom of Great Britain, that
he never dyed, but that he was turned by art of Enchantment into a Crow; and
that in process of time he shall return again to reign, and recover his
Scepter and Kingdom. For which reason, it cannot be proved, that ever since
that time until this, any English man has killed a Crow. In this good Kings
time was first instituted the famous order of Knighthood, of the Knights of the
Round Table, and the love that is there recounted, did in every respect pass
as it is laid down between Sir Lancelot du Lake, and Queen Genever the
honorable Lady Quintaniona being a dealer, and privy thereto. Whence sprung
that so famous a Dittie, and so celebrated here in Spain of, Never was Knight
of Ladies so well served as Lancelot when that he in Britain arrived, etc.
with that progress so sweet and delightful of his amorous and valiant Acts:
And from that time forward, the Order of Knight went from hand to hand,
dilating and spreading it self through many and sundry parts of the World. And
in it were famous and renowned for their feats of Arms, the valiant Amadis of
Gaul, with all his progeny until the fifth generation: and the valourous
Felixmarte of Hircania; and the never-duely-praised Tirante the White, together
with Sir Bevis of Hampton, Sir Gay of Warwick, Sir Eglemore, with diverse
others of that Nation and Age. And almost in our days we saw, and communed,
and heard of the invincible and valiant Knight Don Belianis of Greece! This
then good Sirs, is to be a Knight Errant; and that which I have said is the
Order of Chivalry: wherein, as I have already said, I, although a sinner, have
made profession, and the same do I profess that those Knights professed, whom
I have above mentioned; and therefore I travel through these Solitudes and
Deserts, seeking Adventures, with full resolution to offer mine own Arm and
Person to the most dangerous that fortune shall present, in the aid of weak and
needy persons.

By these reasons of Don-Quixot's the travelers perfectly perceived that he
was none of the wisest, and knew the kind of folly wherewithal he was
crossed, whereat those remained wonderfully admired: that by the relation of
the others came to understand it: and Vivaldo who was very discreet, and
likewise of a pleasant disposition, to the end they might pass over the rest
of the way without heavines unto the rock of the burial, which the Sheepheards
said was near at hand, he resolved to give him further occasion to pass
onward with his follies, and therefore said unto him. Me thinks, Sir Knight,
that you have professed one of the most austere professions in the world. And I
do constantly hold that even that of the Charterhouse Munkes is not near so
straight. It may be as straight as our profession, quoth Don-Quixote, but that
it should be so necessary for the world, I am within the breadth of two fingers
to call it in doubt. For if we would speak a truth, the Soldier that puts in
execution his Captains command, does no less then the very Captain that
commands him. Hence I infer, That Religious men do with all peace and
quietness seek of Heaven the good of the Earth. But Soldiers and we Knights
do put in execution that which they demand, defending it with the valor of
our Arms, and files of our Swords: not under any roof; but under the wide
Heavens, made as it were in Summer a mark to the insupportable Sun beams, and
in Winter to the rage of withering Frosts. So that we are the Ministers of God
on earth, and the Arms wherewith he executeh here his Justice. And as the
Affairs of War, and things thereunto pertaining, cannot be put in execution
without sweat, labor and travel; it follows that those which profess warfare
take questionless greater pain then those which in quiet, peace, and rest do
pray unto God, that he will favor and assist those that need it. I mean not
therefore to affirm, nor does it once pass through my thought, that the state
of a Knight Errant is as perfect as that of a retired religious man, but only
would infer through that which I my self suffer, that it is doubtlesly more
laborious, more battered, hungry, thirsty, miserable, torn and lousy. For the
Knights Errant of times past, did without all doubt, suffer much woe and misery
in the discourse of their life. And if some of them ascended at last to
Empires, won by the force of their life. And if some of them ascended at last
to Empires, won by the force of their Arms, in good faith it cost them a great
part of their sweat and blood: And if those which mounted to so high a degree
had wanted those inchanters and wise men that assisted them, they would have
remained much defrauded of their desires, and greatly deceived of their hopes.
I am of the same opinion, replied the Traveller: but one thing among many
others has seemed to me very ill in Knights Errant, which is when they
perceive themselves in any occasion to begin any great and dangerous Adventure,
in which appears manifest peril of losing their lives, they never in the
instant of attempting it remember to commend themselves to God, as every
Christian is bound to do in like dangers; but rather do it to their Ladies
with so great desire and devotion as if they were their Gods; a thing which in
my opinion smells of gentillisme. Sir, quoth Don-Quixote, they can do no less
in any wise, and the Knight Errant which did any other, would digress much
from his duty. For now it is a received use and custom of errant Chivalry,
that the Knight adventurous, who attempting of any great feat of Arms shall
have his Lady in place, do mildly and amorously turn his eyes toward her, as
it were by them demanding that she do favor and protect him in that ambiguous
trance which he undertakes; and moreover if none do hear him, he is bound to
say certain words between his teeth, by which he shall with all his heart
commend himself to her: and of this we have innumerable examples in Histories.
Nor is it therefore to be understood that they do omit to commend themselves
to God, for they have time and leisure enough to do it, in the progress of
the work.

For all that, replied the Traveller, there remains in me yet one scruple,
which is, That often times, as I have read, some speech begins between two
Knights Errant, and from one word to another their choler begins to be
inflamed, and they to turn their horses, and to take up a good piece of the
Field, and without any more ado, to run as fast as ever they can drive to
encounter again; and in the midest of their race, do commend themselves to
their dames, and that which commonly ensues of this encountering is, that one of
them falls down, thrown over the crupper of his horse, past through and through
by his enemies Lance; and it befalls the other, that if he had not caught
fast, of his horse main, he had likewise fallen. And I here cannot perceive how
he that is slain had any leisure to commend himself unto God in the discourse
of this so accelerate and hasty a work. Me thinks it were better that those
words which he spent in his race on his Lady, were bestowed as they ought, and
as every Christian is bound to bestow them. And the rather, because I
conjecture, that all Knights Errant have not Ladies to whom they may commend
themselves; for all of them are not amorous.

That cannot be, answered Don-Quixote, I say it cannot be that there is any
Knight Errant without a Lady: For it is as proper and essential to such to be
enamoured, as to Heaven to have stars: And I dare warrant that no History has
yet been seen, wherein is found a Knight Errant without love: for by the very
reason that he were found without them, he would be convinced to be no
legitimate Knight, but a Bastard; and that he entered into the Fortress of
Chivalry, not by the Gate, but by leaping over the Staccado like a Robber and a
Thief.

Yet notwithstanding, replied the other, I have read (if I do not forget my
self) that Don Gataor, brother to the valourous Amadis du Gaul, had never any
certain Mistress, to whom he might commend himself; and yet for all that he was
nothing less accounted of, and was a most valiant and famous Knight. To that
objection our Don-Quixote answered, One Swallow makes not a Summer. How much
more that I know, that the Knight whom you allege, was secretly very much
enamoured? besides that that his inclination of loving all Ladies well, which
he thought were fair, was a natural inclination, which he could not govern so
well. But it is in conclusion sufficiently verified, that yet he had one Lady
whom he crowned Queen of his Will, to whom he did also commend himself very
often and secretly, for he did not a little glory to be so secret in his Loves.

Then Sir, if it be of the essence of all Knights errant to be in love, quoth
the traveller, then may it likewise be presumed that you are also enamoured,
seeing that it is annexed to the profession? And if you do not prize your self
to be as secret as Don Gataor, I do entreat you as earnestly as I may, in
all this companies name and mine own, that it will please you to tell us the
name, country, quality and beauty of your Lady, for I am sure she would
account her self happy to think that all the world does know she is beloved
and served by so worthy a Knight as is your self. Here Don-Quixote breathing
forth a deep sigh, said, I cannot affirm whether my sweet Enemy delight or no,
that the world know how much she is beloved, or that I serve her. Only I dare
avouch (answering to that which you so courteously demanded) that her name is
Dulcinea, her country Toboso, a Village of Mancha: her calling must be at
least of a Princess, seeing she is my Queen and Lady, her beauty sovereign;
for in her are verified, and give glorious luster to all those impossible and
Chimericall attributes of beauty, that Poets give to their Mistresses; that her
hairs are gold, her forehead the Elisian fields, her brows the Arkes of
Heaven, her Eyes Suns, her cheeks Roses, her Lips Currall, her Teeth
Pearls, her neck Alablaster, her Bosom Marble, Ivory her Hands, and her
whiteness Snow; and the Parts which modesty conceales from humane sight, such
as I think and understand, that the discreet consideration may prize, but never
be able to equalize them: her lineage, progeny, and pedigree we desire to know
likewise, quoth Vivaldo. To which Don Quixote answered, she is not of the
ancient Roman Curcios, Cayes, or Scipios, nor of the modern Colomnas or
Vrsinos, nor of the Moncadas or Requesenes of Catalunia, and much less of the
Rebelias and Villanovas of Valencia, Palafoxes, Nucas, Rocabertis, Corelias,
Alagones, Vrreas, Fozes and Gurreas of Aragon, Cerdas, Manziquez, Mendocas, and
Guzmanes of Castile, Lancasters, Palias and Meneses of Portugal; but she is of
those of Toboso of the Mancha; a lineage which though it be modern is such as
may give a generous beginning to the most noble families of ensuing ages. And
let none contradict me in this, if it be not with those conditions that
Cerbino put at the foot of Orlandoes Armor, To wit: Let none from hence
presume these Arms to move,
But he that with Orlando dares his force to prove.
Although my lineage be of the Cachopines of Laredo, replied the Traveller, yet
dare I not to compare it with that of Toboso in the Mancha, although to speak
sinceerely, I never heard any mention of that lineage you say until now, What
quoth Don-Quixote, is it possible that you never heard of it till now?

All the company traveled, giving marveilous attention to the reasons of those
two; and even the very Goatheards and Sheepheards began to perceive the great
want of judgment that was in Don-Quixote, only Sancho Panca did verily
believe, that all his Masters words were most true, as one that knew what he
was, from the very time of his birth. But that wherein his belief staggered
somewhat, was of the beautiful Dulcinea of Toboso; for he had never heard
speak in his life before of such a name or Princess, although he had dwelled
so many years hard by Toboso.

And as they traveled in these discourses, they beheld discending betwixt the
clift of two lofty Mountains to the number of twenty Sheepheards, all
apparelled in skins of black wool, and crowned with Garlands; which as they
perceived afterward, were all of Ewe and Cypress; six of them carried a
Beer, covered with many sorts of flowers and boughs. Which one of the
Goatheards espying, he said, those that come there are they which bring
Chrisostom's body, and the foot of that Mountain is the place where he has
commanded them to bury him. These words were occasion to make them haste to
arive in time; which they did just about the instant that the others had said
down the Corpse on the ground: and four of them, with sharp pickaxes did dig
the Grave at the side of a hard Rock. The one and the others saluted themselves
very courteously, and then Don-Quixote, and such as came with him, began to
behold the Beer, wherein they saw laid a dead body, all covered with flowers,
and apparelled like a Shepherd of some thirty years old; and his dead
countenance showed that he was very beautiful and an able bodied man. He had
placed round about him in the Beer, certain Books, and many Papers, some open
and some shut, and altogether, as well those that beheld this, as they which
made the grave; and all the others that were present kept a mavelous silence,
until one of them which carried the dead man, said to another; See well
Ambrosio, whether this be the place that Crisostome meant seeing that thou
would have all so punctually observed, which he commanded in his Testament.
This is it, answered Ambrosio; for many times my unfortunate friend recounted
to me in it the History of his mishaps; even there he told me that he had seen
that cruel enemy of mankind first; and there it was, where he first broak his
affection to as honest as they were amorous: and there was the last time
wherein Marcela did end to resolve, and began to disdain him, in such sort that
she set end to the Tragedy of his miserable life. And here in memory of so
many misfortunes he commanded himself to be committed to the bowels of eternal
oblivion, and turning himself to Don-Quixote, and to the other Travelers, he
said: This body Sirs which you do now behold with pitiful eyes, was the
depository of a soul wherein heaven had hourded up an infinite part of his
Treasures. This is the body of Crisostome, who was peerlesse in wit, without
fellow for courtesy, rare for comeliness, a Phoenix for friendship,
magnificent without measure, grave without presumption, pleasant without
offense; and finally, the first in all that which is good, and second to none
in all unfortunate mischances. He loved well, and was hated; he adored, and was
disdained; he prayed to one no less savage then a Beast; he importuned a
heart as hard a Marble; he pursued the Wind; he cried to Deserts; he served
Ingratitude; and he obtained for reward, the spoils of death in the midst of
the carier of his life: to which a Sheepheardesse has given end whom he
labored to eternize, to the end she might ever live in the memories of men, as
those papers which you see there might very well prove, had he not commanded me
to sacrifice them to the fire, as soon as his body was rendered to the earth.

If you did so, quoth Vivaldo, you would use greater rigor and cruelty toward
them then their very Lord, nor is it discreet or justly done, that his will be
accomplished, who commands any thing repugnant to reason. Nor should Augustus
Caesar himself have gained the reputation of wisdom, if he had permited that
to be put in execution which the divine Mantuan had by his will ordained. So
that Seignior Ambrosio, now that you commit your friends body to the earth, do
not therefore commit his labor to oblivion: for though he ordained it as one
injured, yet are not you to accomplish it, as one void of discretion: but
rather cause, by giving life to these papers, that the cruelty of Marcela may
live eternally, that it may serve as a document to those that shall breath in
ensuing ages, how they may avoid and shun the like downfalls: For both my self
and all those that come here in my company, do already know the History of
your enamoured and despairing friend; the occasion of his death; and what he
commanded e're he deceased: out of which lamentable relation may be collected,
how great has been the Crnelty of Marcela; the Love of Crisostome; the Faith
of your Affection, and the Conclusion which those make, which do rashly run
through that way, which indiscreet Love does present to their view. We
understood yester night of Crisostomes death, and that he should be enterred in
this place; and therefore we omitted our intended journies both for curiosity
and pity, and resolved to come and behold with our eyes that, the relation
whereof did so much grieve us in the hearing: And therefore we desire thee
(discreet Ambrosio) both in reward of this our compassion, and also of the
desire which springs in our breasts to remedy this disaster, if it were
possible: but chiefly I for my part request thee, that omitting to burn these
Papers, thou will license me to take away some of them. And saying so, without
expecting the Sheepheards answer, he stretched out his hand and took some of
them that were next to him. Which Ambrosio perceiving, said, I will consent Sir
for courtesies sake, that you remain Lord of those which you have seized upon;
but to imagine that I would omit to burn these that rest, were a very vain
thought. Vivaldo, who did long to see what the Papers contained which he had
gotten, did unfold presently one of them which had this title, A Dittie of
despair. Ambrosio overheard him, and said; That is the last paper which this
unfortunate Shepherd wrote; and because Sir, that you may see the terms to
which his mishaps conducted him; I pray you to read it; but in such manner as
you may be heard; for you shall have leisure enough to do it whilst the grave
is a diging. I will do it with all my heart, replied Vivaldo; and all those
that were present, having the like desire, they gathered about him; and he
reading it with a clear voice pronounced it thus.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein are rehearsed the dispayring Verses of the dead Shepherd, with other
unexpected accidents.
The Canzone of Chrysostom.
1
SInce cruel thou (I publish) do desire,
From tongue to tongue, and the one to the other Pole
The efficacy of thy rigor sharp,
IN le Hell constrain to assist my souls desire,
And in my breast infuse a tun of dole.
Whereon my voice, as it is wont, may Harp,
And labor, as I wish, at once to carp
And tell my sorrows and thy Murdring deeds;
The dreadful voice and accents shall agree,
And, with them; meet for greater torture be
Lumps of my wreched bowels, which still bleeds.
Then listen, and lend once attentive ear,
Not well consorted tunes, but howling to hear,
That from my bitter bosoms dopth takes flight;
And by constrained raving born away,
Issues forth for mine ease and thy despite.
2
The Lion's roaring, and the dreadful howles
Of ravening Wolf, and hissing terrible
Of squamy Serpent; and the fearful bleate
Of some sad Monster; of fore-telling-foules,
The Pies crackling, and rumor horrible
Of the contending Wind, as it does beat
The Sea; and implacable bellows, yet
Of vanquished Bull; and of the Turtle sole
The feeling mourning and the doleful song
Of the envious-Owle, with the dyre plaints among,
Of all the infernal Squadron full of dole,
Sallie with my lamenting Soul a round
All mixed with so strange unusual sound,
As all the Senses may confounded be;
For my fierce torment, a new way exact,
Wherein I may recount my Misery,
3
The doleful Echoes of so great confusion,
Shall not resound over father Tagus sands,
Nor touch the Olive-watring Betis ears,
Of my dire pangs IN le only make effusion
Among those steep Rocks, and hollow bottom lands,
With mortified tongue, but living tears:
Sometimes in hidden Dales where naught appears,
Or in unhaunted plains free from access;
Or where the Sun could never intrude a Beam;
Amidst the venomous crew of Beasts unclean,
Whose wants, with bounty, the free plains redress;
For though among those vast and Desert downs,
The hollow Echo indistinctly sounds
Thy matchless rigor, and my cruel pain,
Yet by the privilege of my niggard Fates,
It will their force throughout the world proclaim.
4
A disdain kills; and patience runs a ground,
By a suspicion either false or true;
But Jealousy with greater rigor slayes,
A prolix absence does our life confound.
Against fear of oblivion to ensue,
Firm hope of best success gives little ease,
Inevitable death lurks in all these.
But I (O unseen Miracle) do still live
Jealous, absent, disdained, and certain too
Of the suspicions that my life undo!
Drowned in Oblivion which my fire revives,
And amongst all those pains I never scope
Got, to behold the shadow once of hope:
Nor thus despaired would I it allow;
But cause I may more aggravate my moanes,
To live ever without it, here I vow.
5
Can hope and fear, at once, in one consist?
Or is it reason that it should be so?
Seeing the cause more certain is of fear;
If before me dyre Jealousy exist,
Shall I deflect mine eyes? since it will show
It self by a thousand wounds in my soul there.
Or, who will not the gates unto Despair
Wide open set, after that he has spied
Murdring disdain? and noted each suspicion
To seeming truth transformed? O sour conversion!
Whilst Verity by Falsehood is beli'd?
O Tyrant of Loves state, fierce Jealousy,
With cruel chains, these hands together tie,
With stubborn cords couple them, rough Disdain;
But woe is me, with bloody victory
Your memory, is by my sufferance slain!
6
I die, in fine, and cause I Will not expect
In death or life for the least good success:
I obstinate will rest in Fantasy.
And say he does well, that does affect.
And eke the Soul most liberty possess,
That is most thrall to Loves old Tyranny.
And will affirm mine ever enemy
In her fair shrine, a fairer soul contains:
And her oblivion from my fault to spring,
And to excuse her wrongs will witness bring,
That Love by her in peace his state maintains,
And with a hard knot, and this strange opinion,
I will accelerate the wretched summon,
To which guided I am by her scorns rife,
And offer to the air Body and Soul,
Without hope or reward of future life.
7
Thou that by multiplying wrongs do show
The reason forcing me to use violence
Unto this loathsome life, grown to me hateful,
Since now by signs notorious thou may know
From my hearts deepest wound; how willingly sense
Does sacrifice me to thy scorns ungrateful.
If my deserts have seemd to thee so bootefull,
As thy fair eyes clear heaven should be ore-cast
And clouded at my death; yet do not so,
For I Will no recompense take for the woe:
By which, of my Souls spoils possessed thou wast:
But rather laughing at my funerals sad,
Show how mine end, begins to make thee glad.
But it is a folly to advise thee this,
For I know in my deaths acceleration
Consists thy glory and thy chiefest bliss:
8
Let Tantalus from the profoundest deeps
Come, for it is high time now, with his thirst:
And Sisifus with his oppressing stone.
Let Ticius bring his Raven that never sleeps,
And Ixion make no stay with wheel accursed,
Nor the three Sisters ever laboring on.
And let them all at once their mortal moan;
Translate into my breast, and lovely sound
(If it may be a debt due to despair)
And chant sad obsequies with doleful air,
Over a Corse unworthy of the ground.
And the three-fac'd-infernall Porter Grimme,
With thousand Monsters and Chymaeraes dim,
Relish the dolorous descant out amain.
For greater Pomp then this I think not fit
That any dying Lover should obtain.
9
Despayring Canzone do not thou complain,
When thou my sad soci'ty shall refrain:
But rather since the cause whence thou did spring,
By my misfortune grows more fortunate
Even in the Grave, thou must shun sorrowing.
Chrisostomes Canzone liked wonderfully all the hearers, although the reader
thereof affirmed that it was not conformable to the relation that he had
received of Marcelaes virtue and care of her self. For in it Crisostome did
complain of jealousies, suspicions, and absence, being all of them things that
did prejudice Marcelaes good fame. To this objection Ambrosio answered (as one
that knew very well the most hidden secrets of his friend) you must understand
Sir, to the end you may better satisfy your own doubt, That when the
unfortunate Shepherd wrote that Canzone, he was absent from Marcela; from
whose presence he had wittingly withdrawn himself, to see if he could deface
some part of his excessive passions, procured by absence. And as every thing
does vex an absent Lover, and every fear afflict him; so was Crisostome
likewise tormented by imagined jealousies and feared suspicions, as much as if
they were real and true. And with this remains the truth in her perfection and
point of Marcelaes virtue; who excepting that she is cruel, and somewhat
arrogant, and very disdainful; very envy it self neither ought, nor can
attaint her of the least defect. You have reason, quoth Vivaldo, and so
desiring to read another paper, he was interrupted by a mavelous vision (for
such it seemed) that unexpectedly offered it self to their view: Which was,
That on the top of the Rock wherein they made the grave, appeared the
Sheepheardesse Marcela, so fair, that her beauty surpassed far the fame that
was spread thereof; such as had not beheld her before, did look on her then
with admiration and silence; and those which were wont to view her remained no
less suspended then the others, which never had seen her. But scarce had
Ambrosio eyed her, when with an irefull and disdaining mind, he spoke these
words. Come thou by chance, O fierce Basilisk of these Mountains! to see
whether the wounds of this wretch will yet bleed at thy presence? Or do thou
come to insult and vaunt in the Tragical feats of thy stern nature? Or to
behold from that height, like another merciless Nero, the Fire of inflamed
Rome? Or arrogantly to trample this unfortunate Carcass, as the ungrateful
daughter did her father Tarquin's? Tell us quickly, why thou come, or what
thou do most desire? For seeing I know that Crisostomes thoughts never
disobeyed thee in life, I will likewise cause that all those his friends shall
serve and reverence thee.

I come not here, good Ambrosio, to any of those ends thou say, quoth
Marcela; but only to turn for mine honor, and give the world to understand,
how little reason have all those which make me the Author either of their own
pains, or of Crisostom's death; and therefore I desire all you that be here
present, to lend attention unto me; for I mean not to spend much time^ or
words, to persuade to the disceet, so manifest a truth. Heaven, as you say,
has made me beautiful, and that so much that my feature moves you to love,
almost whether you will or no. And for the affection you show unto me, you say
I and you affirm, that I ought to love you again: I know by the natural
instinct that Jove has bestowed on me, That each fair thing is amiable: but I
cannot conceive, why, for the reason of being beloved, the party that is so
beloved for her beauty, should be bound to love her Lover, although he be
foul. And seeing that foul things are worthy of hate, It is a bad argument to
say, I love thee because fair; and therefore thou must affect me although
uncomely. But set the case that the beauties occur equal on both sides, it
follows not therefore, that their desires should run one way: For all beauties
do not enamour; for some do only delight the sight, and subject not the will:
For if all beauties did enamour and subject together, men's wills would ever run
confused and straying, without being able to make any election; for the
beautiful subjects being infinite, the desires must also perforce be infinite:
And as I have heard, true Love brooks no division, and must needs be voluntary,
and not enforced. Which being so, as I presume it is; why would you have me
subject my will forcibly, without any other obligation then that, that you say
you love me? If not, tell me: If heaven had made me foul, as it has made me
beautiful, Could I justly complain of you because you affected me not? How
much more, seeing you ought to consider, that I did not choose the beauty I
have; for, such as it is, heaven bestowed it gratis, without my demanding or
electing it. And even as the Viper deserves no blame for the poison she
carries, although therewithal she kill, seeing it was bestowed on her by
nature: So do I as little merit to be reprehended because beautiful; for
beauty in an honest woman is like fire a far off, or a sharp edged Sword; for
neither that burns nor this cuts any but such as come near them. Honor and
Virtues are the ornaments of the Soul, without which, the fairest body is not
to be esteemed such. And if that honesty be one of the virtues that adorneth
and beautifieth most the body and Soul; Why should she that is beloved,
because fair, adventure the loss thereof, to answer his intention, which only
for his pleasures sake labors that she may lose it, with all his force and
industry? I was born free, and because I might live freely, I made election of
the solitude of the Fields: The Trees of these mountains are my companions; the
clear water of these streams my mirrours. With the Trees and Waters I
communicate my thoughts and beauty: I am a parted Fire, and a Sword laid
aloof. Those whom I have enamoured with my sight, I have undeceived with my
words. And if desires be sustained by hopes, I never having given any to
Chrysostom or to any other, it may well be said, that he was rather slain by
his own obstinacy, then by my cruelty. And if I be charged that his thoughts
were honest; and that I was therefore obliged to answer unto them: I say, that
when in that very place where you make his Sepulcher, he first broak his mind
unto me: I told him that mine intention was to live in perpetual solitude;
and that only the earth should gather the fruits of my solitariness, and the
spoils of my beauty. And if he would after this my resolution persist
obstinately without all hope, and against the wind; what wonder is it that he
should be drowned in the midst of the Gulf of his rashness? If I had
entertained him, then were I false: If I had pleased him, then should I do
against my better purposes and projects. He strived being persuaded to the
contrary: He dispaired e're he was hated. See then if it be reason that I bear
the blame of his torment. Let him complain who has been deceived: Let him
despair to whom his promised hopes have failed: Let him confess it whom I
shall ever call: Let him vaunt whom I shall admit. But let him not call me
cruel or an homicide, whom I never promised, deceived, called, or admitted.
Heaven has not yet ordained that I should Love by destiny; and to think that I
will do it by election may be excused. And let this general caveat serve
every one of those which solicit me for his particular benefit: And let it he
known, that if any shall hereafter dye for my Love, that he dies not jealous or
unfortunate: For whosoever loves not any, breeds not in reason jealousy in
any; nor should any resolutions to any be accounted disdaynings. He that calls
me a Savage and Basilisk, let him shun me as a hurtful and prejudicial thing.
He that calls me ungrateful, let him not serve me. He that is strange, let him
not know me. He that is cruel, let him not follow me: For this Savage, this
Basilisk, this Ingrate, this Cruel and Strange one, will neither seek, serve,
know, or pursue any of them. For if Crisostomes impatience and headlong desire
slew him; why should mine honest proceeding and care be inculped therewithal?
If I preserve mine integrity in the society of these Trees; why would any
desire me to lose it, seeing every one covets to have the like himself, to
converse the better among men? I have, as you all know, riches enough of mine
own, and therefore do not covet other men's. I have a free condition, and I do
not please to subject me: Neither do I love or hate any. I do not deceive
this man, or solicit that other; Nor do I jest with one, and pass the time
with another. The honest conversation of the Pastoraes of these Villages, and
the care of my Goats do entertain me. My desires are limited by these
Mountains; and if they do issue from hence, it is to contemplate the beauty of
Heaven, steps wherewithal the Soul travells toward her first dwelling. And
ending here, without desiring to hear any answer, she turned her back and
entered into the thickest part of the wood, that was there at hand, leaving all
those that were presently marvellously admired at her beauty and discretion.

Some of the Sheepheards present, that were wounded by the powerful beams of
her beautiful eyes, made profer to pursue her, without reaping any profit out
of her manifest resolution made there in their hearing; which Don-Quixote
noting, and thinking that the use of this Chivalry did jump fitly with that
occasion, by succouring distressed Damzels, laying hand on the pommell of his
sword, he said in loud and intelligible words: Let no person of whatsoever
state or condition he be, presume to follow the fair Marcela, under pain of
falling into my furious indignation. She has shown by clear and sufficient
reasons, the little or no fault she had in Crisostomes death, and how far she
lives from meaning to condescend to the desires of any of her Lovers; for which
respect it is just, that instead of being pursued and persecuted, she be
honored and esteemed by all the good men of the world; for she shows in it,
that it is only she alone that lives therein with honest intention. Now whether
it was through Don-Quixotes menaces, or whether because Ambrosio requested them
to conclude with the obligation they ought to their good friend: none of the
Sheepheards moved or departed from thence until the grave being made, and
Crisostomes Papers burned, they laid the body into it, with many tears of the
beholders. They shut the Sepulcher with a great stone, until a Monument were
wrought, which Ambrosio said he went to have made, with an Epitaph to this
sense. HEre, of a loving Swain,
The Frozen Carcass lies;
Who was a Heard likewise,
And dyed through disdain.
Stern rigor has him slain,
Of a coy fair ingrate,
By whom love does dilate
Her Tyranny amain.


They presently strewed on the grave many flowers and boughs, and every one
condoling a while with his friend Ambrosio, did afterward bid him farewell, and
departed. The like did Vivaldo and his companion: And Don-Quixote, bidding his
Host and the Travelers adieu, they requested him to come with them to Sivill,
because it was a place so fit for the finding of Adventures, as in every street
and corner thereof are offered more then in any other place whatsoever.
Don-Quixote rendered them thanks for their advice, and the good will they seemed
to have to gratify him, and said, he neither ought nor would go to Sivill,
until he had freed all those Mountains of Thieves and Robbers, whereof, as
fame ran, they were full. The Travelers perceiving his good intention, would
not importune him more; but bidding him again farewell, they departed, and
followed on their journey; in which they wanted not matter of discourse, as
well of the History of Marcela and Crisostome, as of the follies of
Don-Quixote, who determined to go in the search of the Sheepheardesse Marcela,
and offer unto her, all that he was able to do in her service: But it befell
him not as he thought, as shall be rehearsed in the discourse of this true
History. Giving end here to the second Part.

THE Delightful History of the most witty Knight DON-QUIXOTE of the Mancha.
The Third Part.
CHAP. I.
Wherein is rehearsed the unfortunate-Adventure happened to Don-Quixote, by
encountering with certain Yanguesian Carriers.
THE wise Cyd Hamete Venengeli recounteth, that as soon as Don-Quixote had
taken leave of the Goatheards, his Hosts, the night before, and of all those
that were present at the burial of the Sheep-heard Crysostome; he and his
Squire did presently enter into the same Wood, into which they had seen the
beautiful Sheepheardesse Marcela enter before; And having traveled in it
about the space of two hours without finding of her, they arived in fine to a
pleasant Meadow, enriched with abundance of flourishing grass, near unto
which runs a delightful and refreshing stream, which did invite, yea
constrain them thereby to pass over the heat of the day, which did then
begin to enter with great fervor and vehemence. Don-Quixote and Sancho
alighted, and leaving the Ass and Rozinante to the spaciousness of these
Plains, to feed on the plenty of grass that was there, they ransackt their
Wallet, where without any ceremony the master and man did eat with good
accord and fellowship, what they found therein. Sancho had neglected to tie
Rozinante sure, that he knew him to be so sober and little wanton, as all the
Mares of the Pasture of Cordova could not make him to think the least sinister
thought. But Fortune did ordain, or rather the Devil who sleeps not at all
hours, that a Troop of Galician Mares, belonging to certain Yanguesian
Carriers, did feed up and down in the same Valley: which Carriers are wont,
with their beasts, to pass over the heates in places situated near unto
grass and water. And that wherein Don-Quixote happened to be, was very fit for
their purpose. It therefore befell that Rozinante took a certain desire to
sollace himself with the Lady Mares, and therefore as soon as he had smelt
them, abandoning his natural pace and custom, without taking leave of his
Master, he begen a little swift trot, and went to communicate his necessities
to them. But they, who as it seemed, had more desire to feed then to sollace
them, entertained him with their heels and teeth, in such sort, as they broke
all his gyrts, and left him in his naked hair, having overthrown the Saddle.
But that which surely grieved him most was, that the Carriers perceiving the
violence that was offered by him to their Mares, repaired presently to their
succors, with clubs and truncheons, and did so belabour him, as they farely
laid him along. Now in this season Don-Quixote and Sancho (which beheld the
bombasting of Rozinante) approached breathless, and Don-Quixote said to
Sancho, for as much as I can perceive friend Sancho these men are no Knights,
but base rascally people of vile quality: I say it, because thou may help me
to take due revenge for the outrage which they have done before our face to
Rozinante. What a devil quoth Sancho, what revenge should we take, if these
be more then twenty, and we but two, and peradventure but one and a half. I
am worth a hundred, replied Don-Quixote, and without making any longer
discourse, he set hand to his sword, and flew upon the Yanguesians, and Sancho
Panca moved by his Lords example did the like: when with the first blow
Don-Quixote piercing a buffe coat that one of them wore, wounded him
grievously in the shoulder. The Yanguesians seeing themselves so rudely handled
by two men only, they being so many, ran to the stakes and truncheons of their
Carriage, and hemming in their Adversaries in the midst of them. they laid on
them with admirable speed and vehemence. True it is that at the second Peale
they struck Sancho down to the ground, and the like happened to Don-Quixote, his
dexterity and courage being nothing availeable in that trance; and his fate so
ordayning he fell just at his Coursers feet, who had not yet gotten up; by
which we may ponder the fury wherewithal truncheons batter, being placed in
wrathful and rusticall fists. The Carriers perceiving the evil they had
committed, trussing up their loading with all possible speed, followed on
their way, leaving both the Adventurers in a bad fashion, and a worse talent.
The first that came to himself was Sancho Panca, who seeing his Lord near unto
him, said with a weak and pitiful voice, Sir Don-Quixote! O Sir Don-Quixote!
what would thou have brother Sancho, replied the Knight, with the like
efeminate and doleful tune? I would, quoth Sancho have of your worship, a
draught or two of the liquor of Feoblas, if you have any of it at hand, perhaps
it is good to cure broken bones, as well as it helps wounds, What would we
want, unhappy that I am replied Don-Quixote, if I had it here, but I swear
unto these Sancho Panca, by the faith of a Knight errant, that before two days
pass (if fortune dispose not otherwise) I will have it in my power, or it
shall hardly escape my hands. I pray you, quoth Sancho, within how many days
think you shall we be able to stir our feet? I can say of my self, quoth
the crushed Knight, that I cannot set a certain term to the days of our
recovery, but I am in the fault of all; for I should not have drawn my Sword
against men that are not Knights, as well as I am, and therefore I believe that
the God of Battles has permitted that this punishment should be given unto
me, in pain of transgressing the laws of Knighthood. Wherefore brother
Sancho, it is requisite that thou be advertized of that which I shall say
unto thee now, for it imports both our goods very much, and is, that when
thou beholdest that the like rascally Rabble do us any wrong, do not wait
till I set hand to my Sword against them; for I will not do it in any sort:
But draw thou thine and chastise them at thy pleasure; and if any Knights shall
come to their assistance and succor, I shall know then how to defend thee, and
offend them with all my force, for thou have by this perceived by a thousand
signs and experiences, how far the valor of this mine invincible Arm
extends it self (so arrogant remained the poor Knight, through the victory
he had gotten of the hardy Biscaine.) But this advice of his Lord seemed not
so good to Sancho Panca, as that he would omit to answer unto him, saying,
Sir, I am a peaceable, quiet and sober man, and can dissemble any injury, for I
have wife and children to maintain and bring up; wherefore let this likewise
be an advice to you (seeing it cannot be a commandment) that I will not set
hand to my Sword in any wise, be it against Clown or Knight; and that from
this time forward, I do pardon, before God, all the wrongs that they have
done, or shall do unto me, whether they were, be, or shall be done by high
or low person, rich or poor, Gentleman or Churl, without excepting any state
or condition. Which being heard by his Lord, he said; I could wish to have
breath enough, that I might answer thee with a little more case, or that the
grief which I feel in this rib were assuaged ever so little, that I might
Panca make thee understand the error wherein thou art. Come here poor fool, if
the gale of fortune hitherto so contrary, do turn in our favor swelling the
sails of our desire in such sort as we may securely and without any hindrance
arrive at the Haven of any of those Islands, which I have promised unto thee;
what would become of thee, if I conquering it, did make thee Lord thereof,
seeing thou would disable thy self in respect thou are not a Knight, nor
desire to be one, nor would have valor or will to revenge thine injuries,
or to defend thy Lordships? For thou must understand, that in the Kingdoms and
Provinces newly conquered, the minds of the Inhabitants are never so thoroughly
appeased or weded to the affection of their new Lord, that it is not to be
feared, that they will work some noveltie to alter things again, and turn, as
men say, afresh to try Fortune. And it is therefore requisite that the new
possessor have understanding to Govern, and valor to offend, and defend
himself in any Adventure whatsoever. In this last that has befaln us, quoth
Sancho, I would I had ^ad that understanding and valor of which you speak; but
I vow unto you, by the faith of a poor man, that I am now fitter for plasters
then discourses. I pray you try whether you can arise, and we will help
Rozinante, although he deserves it not; for he was the principal cause of all
these troubles; I would never have believed the like before of Rozinante, whom,
I ever held to be as chaste and peaceable a person as my self. In fine, they
say well, that one must have a long time to come to the knowledge of bodies;
and that there is nothing in this life secure.

Who durst affirm that after those mighty blows which you gave to that
unfortunate Knight Errant, would succeed so in post, and as it were in your
pursuit this so furious a tempest of staves, that has discharged it on our
shoulders? Thine Sancho, replied Don-Quixote, are perhaps accustomed to bear
the like showers, but mine nursed between [Sinabafa^] Cottens and Hollands; it
is most evident that they must feel the grief of this disgrace. And were it not
that I imagine, (but why do I say imagine?) I know certainly that all these
incommodities are annexed to the exercise of Arms, I would here dye for very
wrath and displeasure. To this the Squire answered, Sir, seeing these disgraces
are of the [Cosecha] essence of Knighthood, I pray you whether they succeed
very often, or whether they have certain times limited wherein they befall? For
me thinks within two Adventures more, we shall wholly remain dis^^abled for the
third, if the Gods in mercy do not succor us. Know friend Sancho, replied
Don-Quixote, That the life of Knights Errant is subject to a thousand dangers
and misfortunes: And it is also as well in the next degree and power to make
them Kings and Emperors, as experience has shown in sundry Knights, of whose
Histories I have entire notice. And I could recount unto thee now (did the pain
I suffer permit me) of some of them which have mounted to those high degrees
which I have said, only by the valor of their Arm. And the very same men found
them both before and after, in diverse miseries and calamities. For the valorus
Amadis of Gaul saw himself in the power of his mortal enemy Arcalaus the
Inchanter, of whom the opinion runs infallible, that he gave unto him, being
his prisoner, more then two hundred stripes with his horse bridle, after he had
tied him to a pillar in his base-Court. And there is moreover a secret Author
of no little credit, who says, That the Cavalier del Febo, being taken in a
Gin, like unto a snatch, that slipped under his feet in a certain Castle, after
the fall found himself in a deep Dungeon under the earth, bound hands and feet;
and there they gave unto him a Glister of Snow-water and Sand, which brought
him almost to the end of his life; And were it not that he was succored in
that great distress, by a wise man his very great friend, it had gone ill with
the poor Knight. So that I may very well pass among so many worthy persons;
for the dangers and disgraces they suffered were greater then those which we
do now endure. For, Sancho, I would have thee to understand, That these wounds
which are given to one, with those instruments that are in ones hand, by
chance, do not disgrace a man: And it is written in the Laws of single combat,
in express terms, That if the Shoemaker strike another with the Last which he
has in his hand, although it be certainly of wood; yet cannot it be said, That
he who was stricken, had the Bastanado. I say this, to the end thou may not
think, although we remain bruised in this last conflict, that therefore we be
disgraced; for the arms which those men bore, and wherewithal they labored
us, were none other then their pack-staves, and as far as I can remember, never
a one of them had a tuck, sword or dagger. They gave me no leisure, answered
Sancho, to look to them so nearly, for scarce had I laid hand on my
Trunchant, when they blist my shoulders with their Pines, in such sort as they
wholly deprived me of my sight and the force of my feet together, striking me
down on the place where I yet lie straught, and where the pain of the disgrace
received by our Cudgeling does not so much pinch me, as the grief of the
blows, which shall remain as deeply imprinted in my memory as they do in my
back. For all this thou shall understand brother Panca, replied Don-Quixote,
that there is no remembrance which time will not end, nor grief which death
will not consume. What greater misfortune quoth Sancho can there be then that
which only expects time and death to end and consume it? If this our disgrace
were of that kind which might be cured by a pair or two of Playsters, it
would not be so evil; but I begin to perceive that all the salves of an
Hospital will not suffice to bring them to any good terms. Leave off Sancho,
and gather strength out of weakness, said Don-Quixote, for so will I likewise
do, and let us see how does Rozinante; for me thinks that the lest part of
this mishap has not fallen to his lot: You ought not to marvel at that, quoth
Sancho, seeing he is likewise a Knight errant; that whereat I wonder is that
mine Ass remains there without payment, where we are come away without Ribs.
Fortune leaves always one door open in disasters, quoth Don-Quixote, whereby
to remedy them. I say it, because that little beast may supply Rozinanties
want, by carrying of me from hence unto some Castle, wherein I may be cured
of my wounds. Nor do I hold this kind of riding dishonorable; for I remember
to have read that the good old Silenus tutor of the merry God of laughter, when
he entered into the City of the hundred gates, rode very fairly mounted on a
goodly Ass. It is like, quoth Sancho, that he rode as you say upon an Ass;
but there is great difference betwixt riding and being cast athwart upon one
like a Sack of rubbish. To this Don-Quixote answered, The wounds that are
received in Battle, do rather give honor then deprive men of it. Wherefore
friend Panca do not reply any more unto me, but as I have said, arise as well
as thou can, and lay me as thou please upon thy beast, and let us depart
from hence before the night overtake us in these Deserts. Yet I have heard you
say, quoth Panca, that it was an ordinary custom of Knights errant to sleep
in Downs and Deserts the most of the year, and that so to do they hold for
very good hap. That is, said Don-Quixote, when they have none other shift, or
when they are in Love; and this is so true as that there has been a Knight
that has dwelt on a Rock, exposed to the Sun, and the Shadow, and other
annoyances of Heaven, for the space of two years, without his Ladies
knowledge, and Amadis was one of that kind, when calling himself Beltinebros
he dwelt in the Poor Rock^ nor do I know punctually eight years or eight
months, for I do not remember the History well; let it suffice that there he
dwelt doing of penance, for some disgust which I know not, that his Lady Oriana
did him. But leaving that apart Sancho, dispatch and away before some other
disgrace happen, like that of Rozinante to the Ass. Even there lurks the
Devil, quoth Sancho, and so breathing thirty sobs, and threescore sighs, and
a hundred and twenty discontents and execrations against him that had brought
him there, he arose, remaining bended in the midst of the way, like unto a
Turkish bow, without being able to address himself; and notwithstanding all
this difficulty, he harnessed his Ass (who had been also somewhat distracted
by the overmuch liberty of that day) and after he hoysted up Rozinante, who
were he endowed with a tongue to complain, would certainly have borne his Lord
and Sancho company. In the end Sancho laid Don-Quixote on the Ass, and tied
Rozinante unto him, and leading the Ass by the halter, traveled that way
which he deemed might conduct him soonest toward the high way. And fortune
which guided his affairs from good to better, after he had traveled a little
league, discovered it unto him, near unto which he saw an Inn, which in
despite of him, and for Don-Quixotes pleasure must needs be a Castle, Sancho
contended that it was an Inn, and his Lord that it was not; and their
controversy endured so long, as they had leisure before they could decide it
to arive at the lodging; into which Sancho without farther verifying of the
dispute, entered with all his loading.

CHAP. II.
Of that which happened unto the ingenuous Knight, within the Inn, which he
supposed to be a Castle.
THe Innkeeper seeing Don-Quixote laid overthwart upon the Ass, demanded of
Sancho what disease he had? Sancho answered, that it was nothing but a fall
down from a Rock, and that his Ribs were thereby somewhat bruised. This
Innkeeper had a wife, not of the condition that those of that trade are wont
to be; for she was of a charitable nature, and would grieve at the calamities
of her neighbors, and did therefore presently occur to cure Don-Quixote,
causing her daughter, a very comely young maiden, to assist her to cure her
Guest. There likewise served in the Inn an Asturian wench, who was broad-faced,
flat-pated, sadlenosed, blind of one eye, and the other almost out, true it
is, that the comeliness of her body supplied all the other defects: She was
not seven palms long from her feet unto her head; and her shoulders, which did
somewhat burden her, made her look oftener to the ground then she would
willingly. This beautiful piece did assist the young maiden and both of them
made a very bad bed for Don-Quixote in an old wide chamber, which gave manifest
tokens of it self, that it had sometimes served many years only to keep chopped
straw for horses: in which was also lodged a Carrier, whose bed was made a
little way off from Don-Quixotes, which though it was made of Canvasse, and
coverings of his Mules, was much better then the Knights, that only contained
four boards roughly plained, placed on two unequal tressels; A flock-Bed,
which in the thinnest seemed rather a Quilt, full of pellets; and had not they
shown that they were wool, through certain breaches made by antiquity on the
Tick, a man would by the hardness rather take them to be stones; a pair of
sheets made of the skins of Targets; a coverlet, whose threads if a man would
number, he should not lose one only of the account.

In this ungracious bed did Don-Quixote lie, and presently the Hostess and her
daughter anoint him all over, and Maritornes (for so the Asturian wench was
called) did hold the candle. The Hostess at the plaistring of him, perceiving
him to be so bruised in Sundry places, she said unto him, that those signs
rather seemed to proceed of blows then of a fall. They were not blows, replied
Sancho, but the Rock had many sharp ends and knobs on it, whereof every one
left behind it a token; And I desire you good Mistrisse, quoth he, to leave
some flax behind, and there shall not want one that needs the use of them;
for I assure you my back does likewise ache. If that be so, quoth the Hostess,
it is likely that thou did also fall. I did not fall, quoth Sancho Panca,
but with the sudden affright that I took at my Masters fall, my body does so
grieve me, as me thinks I have been handsomely belabored. It may well happen
as thou say, quoth the Hostesses daughter; for it has befaln me sundry
times to dream, that I fell down from some high Tower, and could never come to
the ground; and when I awaked, I did find my self so troubled and broken, as
if I had verify fallen. There is the point Masters, quoth Sancho Panca, that I
without dreaming at all; but being more awake then I am at this hour, found my
self to have very few less tokens and marks then my Lord Don-Quixote has. How
is this Gentleman called? quoth Maritornes the Asturian. Don-Quixote of the
Mancha, replied Sancho Panca, and he is a Knight Errant, and one of the best
and strongest that have been seen in the world these many ages. What is that, a
Knight Errant? quoth the wench. Art thou so young in the world, that thou
know it not? answered Sancho Panca. Know then sister mine, that a Knight
Errant is a thing, which in two words you see well cudgelled, and after becomes
an Emperor. To day he is the most unfortunate creature of the world, and the
most needy; and to morrow he will have two or three Crowns of Kingdoms to
bestow upon his Squire. If it be so, quoth the Hostess; why then have not thou
gotten at least an Earldome, seeing thou art this good Knight his Squire? It is
yet too soon, replied Sancho; for it is but a month sithence we began first to
seek Adventures; and we have not yet encountered any worthy of the name. And
sometimes it befalls, that searching for one thing we encounter another. True
it is, that if my Lord Don-Quixote recover of this wound or fall, and that I be
not changed by it, I would not make an exchange of my hopes for the best title
of Spain. Don-Quixote did very attentively listen unto all these discourses,
and siting up in his Bed, as well as he could, taking his Hostess by the hand;
he said unto her: Believe me, beautiful Lady, that you may count your self
fortunate, for having harbored my person in this your Castle, which is such,
that if I do not praise it; it is because men say, that proper praise stinks;
but my Squire will inform you what I am: only this I will say my self, That I
will keep eternally written in my memory the service that you have done unto
me, to be grateful unto you for it whilst I live. And I would it might please
the highest Heavens that Love held me not so enthralled and subject to his Laws
as he does, and to the eyes of that ungrateful fair, whose name I secretly
mutter, then should those of this beautiful Damzell presently signiorize my
Liberty. The Hostess, her daughter, and the good Maritornes remained
confounded, hearing the Speech of our Knight Errant, which they understood as
well as if he spoken Greek unto them; but yet they conceived that they were
words of complements and Love, and as people unused to hear the like language,
they beheld and admired him, and he seemed unto them a man of the other world;
and so returning him thanks with Tavernly phrase for his large offers, they
departed. And the Asturian Maritornes cured Sancho, who needed her help no
less then his Master.

The Carrier and she had agreed to pass the night together, and she had given
unto him her word, that when the Guests were quiet and her Master sleeping, she
would come unto him and satisfy his desire, as much as he pleased. And it is
said of this good wench, that she never passed the like promise, but that she
performed it, although it were given in the midst of a wood, and without any
witness; for she presumed to be of gentle blood; and yet she held it no
disgrace to serve in an Inn; for she was wont to affirm, that disgraces and
misfortunes brought her to that state. The hard, narrow, niggard, and
counterfeit Bed, whereon Don-Quixote lay, was the first of the four, and next
unto it was his Squires, that only contained a Mat and a Coverlet, and rather
seemed to be of shorn Canvasse then Wool: After these two Beds followed that
of the Carrier, made, as we have said, of the Pannels and Furniture of two of
his best Mules, although they were twelve all in number, fair, fat, and goodly
beasts; for he was one of the richest Carriers of Arevalo, as the Author of
this History affirms, who makes particular mention of him, because he knew
him very well, [Here the Author taxes some one cunningly to be descended of a
Moorish race] and besides some men say, that he was somewhat a kinn unto him.
Omitting that Cid Mahamat Benengeli was a very exact Historiographer, and most
curious in all things, as may be gathered very well, seeing that those which
are related being so minute and trivial, he would not overslip them in silence.

By which those grave Historiographers may take example, which recount unto us
matters so short and succinctly, as they do scarce arrive to our knowledge,
leaving the most substantial part of the works drowned in the Inkhorne, either
through negligence, malice, or ignorance. Many good fortunes beside the Author
of Tablante de Ricam^nte, and him that wrote the book wherein are rehearsed
the Acts of the Count Tomillas, Lord with what preciseness do they describe
every circumstance? to conclude, I say, that after the Carrier had visited his
Mules, and given unto them their second refreshing, he stretched himself in
his Coverlets, and expected the coming of the most exquisite Maritornes. Sancho
was also, by this, plaistred and laid down in his bed, and though he desired
to sleep, yet would not the grief of his ribs permit him. And Don-Quixote with
the pain of his sides, lay with both his eyes open, like a Hare. All the Inn
was drowned in silence, and there was no other light in it then that of a
Lamp, which hung lighted in the midst of the entry. This marvailous quietness
and the thoughts which always represented to our Knight the memory of the
successes which at every pace are recounted in books of Knighthood (the
principal Authors of this mishap) called to his imagination one of the
strangest follies that easily may be conjectured; which was, he imagined that
he arived to a famous Castle (for as we have said, all the Innes wherein he
lodged seemed unto him to be such) and that the Inkeepers daughter (daughter
to the Lord of the Castle) who, overcome by his comeliness and valor, was
enamoured of him, and had promised that she would come to solace with him for
a good space, after her Father and Mother had gone to bed. And holding all this
chymera and fiction, which he himself had built in his brain, for most firm
and certain, he began to be vexed in mind, and to think on the dangerous
trance, wherein his honesty was like to fall, and did firmly purpose in heart
not to commit any disloyalty against his Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, although very
Queen Genever, with her Lady Queintanonina, should come to solicit him.
Whilst thus he lay thinking of these follies, the hour approached (that was
unluckie for him) wherein the Austurian wench should come, who entered into the
chamber in search of her Carrier, in her smock, barefooted, and her hair trust
up in a coif of sustain, with soft and wairy steps. But she was scarce come to
the door, when Don-Quixote felt her, and arising and siting up in his bed, in
despite of his plasters, [Bismas] and with great grief of his ribs, he
stretched forth his arms to receive his beautiful Damzell, the Austurian, who
crouching, and silently went groping with her hands to find out her sweet
heart, and incountred with Don-Quixote's arms, who presently seized very
strongly upon one of her wrists, and drawing her toward him (she daring not
to speak a word) he caused her to sit upon his beds side, and presently groped
her smock, and although it was of [Harpiller] the strongest Canvase, he
thought it was most subtle and fine Holland. She wore on her wrists certain
bracelets of glass, which he esteemed to be precious, orientall-pearles. Her
hair which was almost as rough as a horse tail, he held to be wires of the
glistringest gold of Arabia, whose brightness did obscure that of the Sun.
And her breath which certainly smelled like to stale salt fish, reserved from
over night, seemed unto him to have a most redolent, aromaticall and sweet
smell; and finally he painted her in his fantasy of the same very form and
manner as he had read in his books of Knighthood; of a certain Princess
which came to visit a Knight who was grievously wounded, being overcome by his
love, embellished with all the ornaments that here we have recounted; and the
blindness of this poor Gallant was such, as neither the touching, savor or
other things that accompanied the good Damzell could undeceive him, being such
as were able to make any other, save a Carrier, vomet up his bowels; but rather
he made full acount that he held the Goddess of Love between his arms, and
holding her still very fast, he began to court her with a low and amorous
voice in this manner. I could wish to find my self in terms, most high, and
beautiful Lady, to be able to recompense so great a favor, as that which with
the presence of your matchless feature you have shown unto me: but fortune
(who is never weary of persecuting the good) has pleased to lay me in this
bed, wherein I lie so broken and bruised, that although I were desirous to
satisfy your will, yet is it impossible; especially seeing to that
impossibility may be added a greater, to wit, the promised Faith which I have
given to the unmatchable Dulcinea of Toboso, the only Lady of my most hidden
thoughts; for did not this let me, do not hold me to be so senseless and
mad a Knight as to overslip so fortunate an occasion as this, which your
bounty has offered to me, Maritornes remained sweating through anxiety, to
see her self held so fast by Don-Quixote, and without either understanding, or
giving attention to his words, she labored all that she could to free her
self from him without speaking a word. The Carrier, whose bad intention kept
him still waking, did fear his Lady from the time that she first entered into
the room, and did attentively give ear to all Don-Quixotes discourses, and
jealous that the Asturian should break promise with him, for any other, he
drew nearer unto Don-Quixotes bed, and stood quiet to see whereunto those words
which he could not understand tended; But viewing that the wench strived to
depart, and Don-Quixote labored to withold her, the jest seeming evil unto
him, he up with his arm, and discharged so terrible a blow on the enamoured
Knights jaws, as he bathed all his mouth in blood, and not content here
withal, he mounted upon the Knight, and did tread on his ribs, and passed
them all over with more then a trot.

The Bed which was somewhat [Endeble] weak, and not very firm of foundation,
being unable to suffer the addition of the Carrier, fell down to the ground,
with so great a noise, as it waked the Inkeeper; who presently suspecting that
it was one of Maritornes conflicts, because she answered him not, having
called her lowdly, he forthwith arose and, lighting of a Lamp, he went
toward the place where he heard the noise. The Wench, perceiving that her
Master came, and that he was extreme choleric, did, all ashamed and
troubled, run into Sancho Pancaes bed, who slept all this while very soundly,
and there crouched, and made her self as little as an Eg.

Her Master entered, crying, Whore where art thou? I dare warrant that these are
some of thy doings. By this Sancho awaked, and feeling that bulk lying almost
wholly upon him, he thought it was the night Mare, and began to lay with his
fists here and there about him very swiftly and among others wraught Maritornes
I know not how many blows; who grieved for the pain she endured there, casting
all honesty aside, gave Sancho the exchange of his blows so trimly, as she made
him to awake in despite of his sluggishnesse. And finding himself to be so
abused of an uncouth person, whom he could not behold, he arose and caught hold
of Maritornes as well as he could, and they both began the best fight and
pleasantest skirmish of the world.

The Carrier perceiving by the light which the Innkeeper brought in with him,
the lamentable state of his Mistrisse, abandoning Don-Quixote, he instantly
repaired to give her the succor that was requisite, which likewise the
Innkeeper did, but with another meaning; for he approached with intention to
punish the wench, believing that she was infallibly the cause of all that
harmony: And so as men say, the Cat to the Rat, the Rat to the Cord, the Cord
to the Post: So the Carrier struck Sancho, Sancho the wench, she returned him
again his liberality with interest, and the In-keeper laid load upon his maid
also: And all of them did mince it with such expedition, as there was no
leisure at all allowed to any one of them for breathing. And the best of all
was, that the Innkeepers lamp went out, and then finding themselves in
darkness they belabored one another so without compassion, and at once, as
wheresoever the blow fell, it bruised the place pitifully.

There lodged by chance that night in the Inn one of the Squadron of these,
which are called of the old Holy Brotherhood of Toledo [The Holy Brotherhood,
or the Sancta Hermandad, are a certain number of men, whose chief office is to
free the Highway from Robbers] he likewise hearing the wonderful noise of the
fight, laid hand on his Rod of Office, and the tinn box of his Titles, and
entered into the chamber without light, saying, Stand still to the Officer of
Justice, and to the Holy Brotherhood. And saying so, the first whom he met, was
the poor battered Don-Quixote, who lay overthrown in his Bed, stretched, with
his face upward without any felling, and taking hold of his beard, he cried out
incessantly, Help the Justice. But seeing that he whom he held fast, bowed
neither hand or foot, he presently thought that he was dead, and that those
battaillants that fought so eagerly in the Room, had slain him; wherefore he
lifted his voice and cried out loudly, saying, Shut the Inn door, and see that
none escape; for here they have killed a man. This word Astonished all the
Combattants so much, as every one left the Battle in the very terms, wherein
this voice had overtaken them. The Innkeeper retired himself to his Chamber,
the Carrier to his Coverlets, the Wench to her Couch, and only the unfortunate
Don-Quixote and Sancho were not able to move themselves from the place wherein
they lay. The Officer of the Holy Brotherhood in this space letting slip poor
Don-Quixotes beard, went out for light, to search and apprehend the
Delinquents; but he could not find any: For the Innkeeper had purposely
quenched the Lamp, as he retired to his Bed, wherefore the Officer was
constrained to repair to the chimney, where with great difficulty, after he had
spent a long while doing of it, he at last lighted a Candle.

CHAP. III.
Wherein are rehearsed the innumerable Misfortunes which Don-Quixote and his
good Squire Sancho suffered in the Inn, which he, to his harm, thought to be a
Castle.
BY this time Don-Quixote was come to himself again, out of his Trance, and
with the like lamentable note, as that wherewithal he had called his Squire
the day before, when he was overthrown in the vale of the Pack-staves, he
called to him, saying, Friend Sancho, art thou a sleep? sleep thou friend
Sancho? What, I a sleep? I renounce my self, quoth Sancho, full of grief and
despite, if I think not all the Devils in Hell have been visiting of me here
this night ^ Thou may certainly believe it, replied Don-Quixote; for either
I know very little, or else this Castle is Enchanted. For I let thee to wit;
but thou must first swear to keep secret that which I mean to tell thee now,
until after my death. So I swear, quoth Sancho. I say it, quoth Don-Quixote,
because I cannot abide to take away any bodies honor. Why, quoth Sancho again,
I swear that I will conceal it until after your Worships days; and I pray
God that I may discover it to morrow. Have I wrought thee such harm Sancho,
replied the Knight, as thou would desire to see me end so soon? It is not
for that Sir, quoth Sancho; but because I cannot abide to keep things long,
lest they should rott in my custody. Let it be for what thou please, said
Don-Quixote; for I do trust greater matters then that to thy love and
courtesy. And that I may rehearse it unto thee briefly, know, that a little
while since, the Lord of this Castles daughter came unto me, who is the most
fair and beautiful Damzell that can be found in a great part of the earth;
what could I say unto thee of the ornaments of her person? what of her
excellent wit? what of other secret things? which that I may preserve the faith
due unto my Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, I pass over in silence. I will only tell
thee, that Heaven envious of the inestimable good that fortune had put in my
hands: Or perhaps (and that is most probable) this Castle, as I have said, is
Enchanted; just at the time when we were in most sweet and amorous speech, I
being not able to see or know from whence it came, there arrived a hand joined
to the arm of some mighty Giant, and gave me such a blow on the jaws, as they
remain all bathed in blood; and did after so thump and bruise me, as I feel my
self worse now, then yesterday, when the Carriers, through Rozinantes madness,
did use us thou know how! By which I conjecture, that the treasure of this
Damzels beauty is kept by some Enchanted Moor, and is not reserved for me. Nor
for me, quoth Sancho; for I have been bumbasted by more then four hundred
Moors, which have hammer need in such sort, as the bruising of the Pack-staves
was gilded bread and spice cakes in comparison of it: But Sir, I pray you tell
me; How can you call this a good and rare Adventure, seeing we remain so
pitifully used after it? And yet your harms may be accounted less, in respect
you have held, as you said, that incomparable beauty between your arms: But I,
what have I had other then the greatest blows that I shall ever have in my
life? Unfortunate that I am, and the Mother that bare me, that neither am a
errant Knight, nor ever means to be any, and yet the greatest part of our
mishaps still falls to my lot! It seems that thou wast likewise beaten, replied
Don-Quixote. Evil befall my lineage, quoth Sancho; have not I told you I was?
Be not grieved Friend, replied the Knight; for I will now compound the precious
Balsamum, which will cure us in the twinkling of an eye.

The Officer having by this time alighted his Lamp, entered into the Room to see
him whom he accounted to be dead; and as soon as Sancho saw him, seeing him
come in in his shirt, his head lapt up in a kerchiff, the lamp in his hand,
having withal a very evill-favoured countenance, he demanded of his Lord: Sir,
is this by chance the Enchanted Moor, that turns anew to torment us, for
somewhat that is yet unpunished? He cannot be the Moor, answered Don-Quixote;
for Nigromancers suffer not themselves to be seen by any. If they suffer not
themselves to be seen, quoth Sancho, they suffer themselves at least to be
felt; if not, let my shoulders bear witness. So might mine also, said
Don-Quixote; but notwithstanding this is no sufficient argument to prove him,
whom we see to be the enchanted Moor: As thus they discoursed the Officer
arrived, and finding them to commune in so peaceable and quiet manner, he
rested admired. Yet Don-Quixote lay with his face upward as he had left him,
and was not able to stir himself, he was so beaten and beplaistered. The
Officer approaching, demanded of him; Well how do thou good fellow? I would
speak more mannerly, quoth Don-Quixote, if I were but such a one as thou art:
Is it the custom of this Country, you Bottle-head, to talk after so rude a
manner to Knights Errant? The other impatient to see one of so vile presence,
use him with that bad language, could not endure it; but lifting up the Lamp,
oil and all, gave Don-Quixote such a blow on the pate with it, as he broak his
head in one or two places, and leaving all in darkness behind him, departed
presently out of the chamber. Without doubt (quoth Sancho, seeing this
accident) Sir that was the enchanted Moor; and I think he keeps the treasure
for others, and reserveth only for us fists and Lamp-blows. It is as thou
say, quoth Don-Quixote; and therefore we are not to make account of these
enchantments, or be worth and angry at them; for in respect they are invisible
and fantastical, we shall not find him on whom we may take revenge, though
we labor ever so much to do it. Arise therefore, Sancho, if thou be able,
and call to the Constable of this Fortress, and procure me some Oil, Wine,
Salt, and Vinegar, that I make the wholesome Balsamum; for verily I believe that
I do need it very much at this time, the blood runs so fast out of the
wound which the Spirit gave me even now. Sancho then got up with grief enough
of his bones, and went without light toward the Innkeepers, and encountered on
the way the Officer of the Holy Brotherhood who stood harkening what did become
of his enemy; to whom he said; Sir, whosoever thou be, I desire thee, do us
the favor and benefit to give me a little Rosemary, Oil, Wine, and Salt, to
cure one of the best Knights Errant that is in the earth, who lies now in that
Bed, sorely wounded by the hands of an enchanted Moor that is in this Inn. When
the Officer heard him speak in that manner, he held him to be out of his wits;
and because the dawning began, he opened the Inn door, and told unto the Host
that which Sancho demanded. The Innkeeper presently provided all that he
wanted, and Sancho carried it to his Master, who h^ld his head between both his
hands, and complained much of the grief that the blow of his head caused, which
did him no other hurt then to raise up two blisters somewhat great, and that
which he supposed to be blood, was only the humor which the anxiety and labor
of mind he past in this last dark Adventure, had made him to sweat.

In resolution Don-Quixote took his Simples, of which he made a compound,
mixing them all together, and then boiling of them a good while, until they
came (as he thought) to their perfection; he asked for a Violl wherein he might
lay this precious liquor, but the Inn being unable to afford him any such, he
resolved at last to put it into [Hosa de lata] a tin oyle-pot, which the Host
did freely give him, and forthwith he said over the pot eighty pater nosters,
and as many Aves, Salves and Creeds, and accompanied every word with a Cross,
in form of Benediction, at all which Ceremonies Sancho, the Inne-keeper, and
the Officer of the holy-Brotherhood were present, for the Carrier went very
soberly to dress and make ready his Mules.

The liquor being made, he himself would presently make experience of the
virtue of that precious Balsamum, as he did imagine it to be, and so did
drink a good draught of the overplus that could not enter into his pot, being
a quart or thereabouts; and scarce had he done it when he began to vomit so
extremly, as he left nothing uncast up in his stomach, and through the pain
and agitation caused by his vomits, he fell into a very abundant and great
sweat, and therefore commanded himself to be well covered, and left alone to
take his case. Which was done forthwith, and he slept three hours, and then
awaking found himself so wonderfully eased, and free from all bruising and
pain, as he doubted not but that he was throughtly whole; and therefore did
verily persuade himself, that he had happened on the right manner of compounding
the Balsamum of Fierabras: and that having that Medicine, he might boldly from
thenceforth, undertake any ruins, battles, conflicts or adventures, how
dangerous soever.

Sancho Panca, who likewise attributed the sudden cure of his Master to
Miracle, requested that it would please him to give him leave to sup up the
remainder of the Balsamum which rested in the kettle, and was no small
quantity; which Don-Quixote granted, and he lifting it up between both hands,
did with a good faith, and better talent, quaff it off all, being little less
then his Master had drank. The success then of the History is, that poor
Sanchoes stomach was not so delicate as his Lords, wherefore before he could
cast he was tormented with so many cruel pangs, loathings, sweats and
dismayes, as he did verily persuade himself that his last hour was come; and
perceiving himself to be so afflicted and troubled, he cursed the Balsamum,
and the thief which had given it to him. Don-Quixote seeing of him in that
pitiful taking, said, I believe Sancho, all this evil befalls thee because
thou art not dubbed Knight; for I persuade my self, that this liquor cannot
help any one that is not. If your worship knew that, quoth Sancho, (evil
befall me and all my lineage) why did you therefore consent that I should taste
it?

In this time the drench had made his operation, and the poor Squire did so
swift and vehemently discharge himself by both channels; as neither his man, or
canvase covering could serve after to any use. He sweat and sweat again, with
such excessive swoonings, as not only himself, but likewise all the beholders
did verily deem that his life was ending. This storm and mishap endured about
some two hours, after which he remained not cured as his Master, but so weary
and indisposed, as he was not able to stand.

But Don-Quixote, who as we have said, felt himself eased and cured, would
presently depart to seek Adventures, it seeming unto him that all the time
which he abode there was no other then a depriving both of the world and
needful People of his favor and assistance: and more through the security and
confidence that he had in his Balsamum; and carried thus away by this desire,
he himself sadled his Horse Rozinante, and did empannell his Squires beast,
whom he likewise help to apparel himself, and to mount upon his Ass. And
presently getting a horseback, he rode over to a corner of the Inn, and laid
hand on a Javelin that was there, to make it serve him instead of a Lance. All
the People that were in the Inn stood beholding him, which were about twenty in
number.

The In-keepers daughter did also look upon him, and he did never withdraw
his eye from her, and would ever and anon breathe forth so doleful a sigh, as
if he had plucked it out of the bottom of his heart, which all the beholders
took to proceed from the grief of his Ribs, but especially such as had seen
him playstered the night before. And being both mounted thus a Horseback, he
called the Inn keeper and said unto him with a grave and staid voice. Many and
great are the favors, Sir Constable which I have received in this your Castle,
and do remain most obliged to gratify you for them, all the days of my
life. And if I may pay or recompense them by revenging of you upon any proud
Miscreant that has done you any wrongs; know that it is mine Office to help
the weak, to revenge the wronged, and to chastise Traitors. Call therefore to
memory, and if you find any thing of this kind to commend to my correction,
you need not but once to say it; for I do promise you by the order of
Knighthood, which I have received to satisfy and appay you according to your
own desire.

The Innkeeper answered him again with like gravity and staidness, saying;
Sir Knight, I shall not need your assistance when any wrong is done to me; for
I know very well my self, how to take the revenge that I shall think good, when
the injury is offered. That only which I require is, That you defray the
charges whereat you have been here in the Inn this night, as well for the straw
and barley given to your two horses, as also for both your beds. This then is
an Inn, quoth Don-Quixote. That it is, and an honorable one too, replied the
Innkeeper. Then have I hitherto lived in an error, quoth Don-Quixote; for in
very good sooth I took it till now to be a Castle, and that no mean one
neither. But since that it is no Castle, but an Inn, that which you may do for
the present time is, to forgive me those expenses; for I cannot do ought
against the custom of Knights Errant; of all which I most certainly know
(without ever having read until this present any thing to the contrary) that
they never paid for their lodging, or other thing, in any Inn wheresoever they
lay. For, by all Law and right, any good entertainment that is given unto them,
is their due, in recompense of the insupportable travells they endure, seeking
of Adventures both day and night, in Summer and Winter, a foot and a
horseback, with thirst and hunger, in heat and cold, being subject to all the
distemperatures of Heaven, and all the discommodities of the earth. All that
concerns me nothing, replied the Innkeeper; pay unto me my due, and leave these
tales and Knighthoods apart; for I care for nothing else, but how I may come by
mine own. Thou art a mad and a bad Host, quoth Don-Quixote: And saying so, he
spurred Rozinante, and flourishing with his Javelin, he issued out of the Inn in
despite of them all, and without looking behind him to see once whether his
Squire followed, he road a good way off from it.

The Innkeeper seeing he departed without satisfying him, came to Sancho Panca
to get his money of him, who answered; That since his Lord would not pay, he
would likewise give nothing; forbeing, as he was, Squire to a Knight Errant,
the very same rule and reason that exempted his Master from payments in Inns
and Taverns ought also to serve and be understood as well of him. The
Innkeeper grew wroth at these words and threatened him, That if he did not pay
him speedily, he would recover it in manner that would grieve him. Sancho
replied, swearing by the Order of Knighthood, which his Lord had received, that
he would not pay one Denier, though it cost him his life; for the good and
anncient Customs of Knights Errant should never through his default be
infringed; nor should their Squires which are yet to come into the world ever
complain on him, or upbraid him for transgressing or breaking so just a duty.
But his bad fortune ordained that there were at the very time in the same Inn
four Clothiers of Segovia, and three Poynt-makers of the Stews of Cordova, and
two neighbors of the Market of Sivill, all pleasant folk, well minded,
malicious, and playsome; all which pricked, and in a manner moved all at one
time, and by the very same spirit came near to Sancho, and pulling him down off
his Ass, one of them ran in for the Innkeepers Coverlet, and casting him into
it, they looked up, and seeing the house was somewhat too low for their
intended business, they determined to go into the base Court, which was over
head, only limited by Heaven; and then Sancho being laid in the midest of the
Blanket, they began to toss him aloft, and sport themselves with him, in the
manner they were wont to use Dogs at Shrovetide.

The outcries of the miserable betossed Squire, were so many and so loud, as
they arived at last to his Lords hearing, who standing a while to listen
attentively what it was, beleved that some new Adventure did approach, until
he perceived, at last, that he which cried was his Squire, wherefore turning
the Reigns, he made toward the Inn with a loathsome gallop, and finding it
shut, he rode all about it to see whether he might enter into it, But scarce
was he arived at the walls of the base Court. which were not very high, when
he perceived the foul play that was used toward his Squire, for he saw him
descend and ascend into the air again with such grace and agilitie, that did
his choler permit, I certainly persuade my self he would have burst for
laughter. He assayed (...) mount the wall from his Horse, but he was so
bruised and broken, as he could not do so much as alight from his back.
Wherefore from his back he used such reproachful and vile language to those
which tossed Sancho, as it is impossible to lay them down in writing. And
notwithstanding all his scornful speech, yet did not they cease from their
laughter and labor; nor the flying Sancho from his complaints, now and then
meddled with threats, now and then with entreaties, but availed very little, nor
could prevail, until they were constrained by weariness to give him over.
Then did they bring him his Ass again, and helping him up upon it, they lapt
him in his [Gavay] mantle; and the compassionate Maritornes beholding him so
afflicted and orelaboured, thought it needful to help him to a draught of
water, and so brought it him from the well, because the water thereof was
coolest. Sancho took the pot, and laying it to his lips, he abstained from
drinking by his Lords persuasion, who cried to him alowd, saying, Son Sancho
drink not water, drink it not Son, for it will kill thee. Behold I have
here with me the most holy Balsamum (and showed him the oyle-pot of the
drenches he had compounded) for with only two drops that thou drinkest, thou
shall without all doubt remain whole and sound. At those words Sancho looking
behind him, answered his Master with a louder voice, have you forgotten so
soon how that I am so Knight, or do you desire that I vomit the remnant of
the poor bowels that remain in me since yester night, keep your liquor for
your self in the Devils name, and permit me to live in Peace; and the
conclusion of this speech and his beginning to drink, was done all in one
instant, but finding at the first draught that it was water, he would not
taste it any more but requested Maritornes that she would give him some Wine,
which she did straight with a very good will, and likewise paid for it out of
her own purse; for in effect it is written of her, that though she followed
that trade, yet had she some shadows and lineaments in her of Christianity.
As soon as Sancho had drunken he visited his As^eribs with his heels twice
or thrice; and the Inn being opened he issued out of it, very glad that he
had paid nothing, and gotten his desire, although it were to the cost of his
ordinary sureties, to wit, his shoulders. Yet did the Inne-keeper remain
possessed of his Wallets, as a payment for that he ought him ^ but Sancho was
so distracted when he departed as he never missed them. After he departed,
the Inne-keeper thought to have shut up the Inn door again, but the
Gentlemen-tossers would not permit, being such folk that if Don-Quixote were
verily one of the Knights of the round Table, yet would not they esteem him two
chips.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein are rehearsed the Discourses passed between Sancho Panca, and his
Lord Don-Quixote, with other Adventures worthy the recital.
SANCHO arived to his Master all wanne and dismayed, in so much as he was
scarce able to spur on his beast. When Don-Quixote beheld him in that case, he
said to him, now do I wholly persuade my self friend Sancho, that that Castle
or Inn, is doubtless enchanted. For those which made pastime with thee in so
cruel manner, what else could they be but Spirits, or People of another
world: which I do the rather believe, because I saw, that whilst I stood at
the Barrier of the yeard, beholding the acts of thy sad Tragedy; I was not in
any ways able either to mount it, or alight from Rozinante, for as I say, I
think they held me then enchanted. For I vow to thee by mine honor, that if
I could have either mounted or alighted, I would have taken such vengeance on
those lewd and treacherous Caitiffs, as they should remember the jest for ever,
though I had therefore adventured to transgress the laws of Knighthood. Which
as I have often times said unto thee, permits not any Knight to lay hands on
one that is not Knighted, if it be not in defense of his proper life and
person, and that in case of great and urgent necessity. So would I also have
revenged my self, quoth Sancho, if I might, were they Knights or no Knights,
but I could not; and yet I do infallibly believe, that those which took their
pleasure with me, were neither ghosts nor enchanted men as you say, but men of
flesh and bones as we are, and all of them, as I heard them called whilst
they tossed me, had proper names, for one was termed P^t^r Martinez, and
another Tenorio Herriander, and I heard also the In-keeper called John
Palameque the deaf, so that for your inabilitie of not leaping over the
barriers of the yeard, or alighting off your Horse was only enchantments in
you. Whereby I do clearly collect thus much; That these Adventures which we
go in search of, will bring us at last to so many disventures, as we shall
not be able to know which is our right foot. And that which we might do
best, according to my little understanding, were to return us again to our
Village, now that it is reaping time, and look to our goods, omitting to leap
thus, as they say, out of the drying pan into the fire.

How little do thou know Sancho, replied Don-Quixote, what appertains to
Chivalry? Peace, and have patience, for a day will come wherein thou shall see
with thine own eyes, how honorable it is to follow this exercise. If not,
tell me what greater content may there be in this world, or what pleasure can
equal that of winning a battle, and of triumphing over ones enemy? None
without doubt. I think it be so, quoth Sancho, although I do not know it;
only this I know, that since we became Knights errant, or that you are one
(for there is no reason why I should count my self in so honorable a number)
we never overcame any Battle, if it was not that of the Bi^caine, and you
came even out of the very same with half your care and Beaver less. And ever
after that time we have had nothing but cudgels, and more cudgels, blows and
more blows. I carrying with me besides of overplus, the t^ssing in the
blanket, and that, by reason it was done to me by enchanted Persons, I cannot
be revenged, and by consequence shall not know that true gust and delight that
is taken by vanquishing mine Enemy, whereof you spoke even now. That is it
which grieves me, as it should thee also Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote: But I will
procure hereafter to get a Sword made with such art, that whosoever shall wear
it, no kind of enchantment shall hurt him. And perhaps fortune will present me
the very same which belonged to Amadis, when he called himself, The Knight of
the burning Sword, which was one of the best that ever Knight had in this
world; for besides the virtue that I told, it did also cut like a Razor; and no
Armor, were it ever so strong or enchanted, could stand before it. I am so
fortunate, quoth Sancho, that when this befell, and that you found such a
sword, it would only serve and be beneficial, and stand instead such as are
dubed Knights, as does your Balsamum, whilst the poor Squires are crammed full
with sorrows. Fear not that Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote; for fortune will deal
with thee more liberally then so.

In these discourses Don-Quixote and his Squire road, when Don-Quixote
perceiving a great and thick dust to arise in the way, wherein he traveled,
turning to Sancho said, this is (Sancho) the day, wherein shall be manifest the
good which Fortune has reserved for me. This is the day, wherein the force of
mine arm must be shown as much as in any other whatsoever; and in it I will
do such fears, as shall for ever remain recorded in the books of fame: Do
thou see, Sancho, the dust which arises there? know that it is caused by a
mighty Army, and sundry and innumerable Nations, which come martching there. If
that be so, quoth Sancho, then must there be two Armies; for on this other side
is raised as great a dust. Don-Quixote turned back to behold it, and seeing it
was so indeed, he was mavelous glad, thinking that they were doubtlesly two
Armies, which came to fight one with another, in the midest of that spacious
Plain: For he had his fantasy ever replenished with these battails,
enchantments, successes, ravings, loves, and challenges, which are reheased in
books of Knighthood: And all that ever he spoak, thought, or did, was addressed
and applied to the like things: And the dust which he had seen, was raised by
two great Flocks of Sheep, that came through the same Field by two different
ways, and could not be discerned by reason of the dust, until they were very
near. Don-Quixote did affirm that they were two Armies, with so very good
earnest as Sancho believed it, and demanded of him, Sir what then shall we two
do? What shall we do (quoth Don-Quixote) but assist the needful and weeker
side: For thou shall know Sancho, that (...) who comes toward us is the great
Emperor Alifamfaron, Lord of the great Island of Trapobana. The other who
martcheth at our back, is his enemy, the King of the Garamantes, Pantopoline of
the naked Arm, so called, because he still enters in battle with his right
Arm naked. I pray you good Sir, quoth Sancho, to tell me why these two Princes
hate one another so much? They are enemies, replied Don-Quixote, because that
this Alifamfaron is a furious Pagan, and is enamoured of Pent^polin's Daughter,
who is a very beautiful and gracious Princess, and moreover a Christian; and
her Father refuses to give her to the Pagan King, until first he abandon
Mahomet's false Sect, and become one of his Religion. By my beard, quoth
Sancho, Pentapolin has reason, and I will help him all that I may. By doing
so, quoth Don-Quixote, thou performe^^ thy Duty; for it is not requisite that
one be a Knight, to the end he may enter into such battails. I do apprehend
that my self, quoth Sancho, very well; But where shall we leave this Asle in
the mean time, that we may be (...) to find him again after the Conflict? for
I think it is not the custom to enter into battle mounted on such a Beast. It
is true, quoth Don-Quixote, that which thou may do is, to leave him to his
Adventures, and care not whether he be lost or found; for we shall have so many
horses, after coming out of this Battle Victors, that very Rozinante himself
is in danger to be changed for another. But be attentive; for I mean to
describe unto thee the principal Knights of both the Armies. And to the end
thou may the better see and note all things, let us retire our selves there
to that little hillock, from whence both Armies may easily be discryed.

They did so; and standing on the top of a hill, from whence they might have
seen both the Flocks, which Don-Quixote called an Army, very well, if the
clouds of dust had not hindered it and blinded their sight; yet notwithstanding
our Knight seeing in conceit, that which really he did not see at all, began to
say with a loud voice:

That Knight which thou ^eest there with the yellow Armor, who bears in his
Shield a Lion crowned, crouching at a Damzells feet, is the valorous Laurcalio,
Lord of the Silver Bridge: The other, whose Arms are powdered with flowers of
gold, and bears in an Azure Field three Crowns of silver, is the dreaded
Micocolembo, great Duke of Quirocia: The other limbed like a Giant, that
stands at his right hand, is the undaunted Brandabarbaray of Boliche, Lord of
the three Arabias; and comes Armed with a Serpents skin, bearing for his
Shield, as is reported, one of the Gates of the Temple which Sampson at his
death overthrew, to be revenged of his enemies. But turn thine eyes to this
other side, and thou shall see first of all, and in the Front of this other
Army, the ever Victor and never Vanquished Timone^ of Carcaiona, Prince of new
Biskaye, who comes Armed with Arms parted into blew, green, white, and yellow
quarters, and bears in his Shield in a Field of tawney, a Cat of gold, with a
letter that says Miau, [Cat] which is the beginning of his Ladies name, which
is as the report runs, the pee^^esse Miaulina, Daughter to Duke. Alfeniquen of
Algarue. The other that burdens and oppresses the back of that mighty [Alfana]
Courser, whose Armor is as white as Snow, and also his Shield without any
devise, is a new Knight of France, called Pierres Papin, Lord of the Barony of
V^^ique. The other that beats his hors^ sides with his Armed heels, and bears
the the Arms of pure Az^^e, is the mighty Duke of Ner^ia Espar^asilard^ of the
Wood, who bears for his devise a [Esparraguera] Harrow, with a Motto that
says, So trail^ my Fortune.

And thus he proceeded forward, naming may Knights of the one and the other
Squadron, even as he had imagined them, and attributed to each one his Arms,
his Colors, Impre^^e, and Mottoes, suddenly (...) away by the imagination of
his wonderful distraction; and without stammering he proceeded saying:

This first Squadron conte^eth folk of many Nations, (...) are those which
taste the sweet waters of famous (...); the Mountainous men that tread the
Mafilical fields; those that do sift the most pure and rare gold (...). Those
that possessed the famous and delightful banks of clear (...) blood many and
sundry ways the golden (...); The Numides unsteadfast ^n their promise; The
Persian^ famous for Archers; The ^arthes and Medes tha^ fight flying^ The Arabs
inconstant in their dwellings; The (...) as cruel as white. The Aethiops of
boared lips, and other infinite Na^ions whose faces I know and behold, although
I have forgotten their denominations. In that other Army come those that taste
the Christalins streams of the Olive-braring (...); Those that dip and polish
their faces with the liquor of the ever-rich and (...) Tag^^^. Those that
possess the profitable fluent of divine Genile: Those that trample the (...)
fields so abundant in pasture: Those that recreate themselves in the (...)
fields, of (...): The rich Manch^gans crowned with ruddy (...) of corn. Those
apparrelled with iron, the ancient relics of the ^spans^: Those th^^ bathe
themselves in Pesverga, renowned for the smoothness of his current: Those that
feed their Flocks in the vast Fields of the wr^athing (...) so celebrated for
his hidden course. Those that tremble through the ^^ld of the bushy Pirens, and
the lofty [or white crested] Apenine^. Finally, all those that Europe in it
self contrinet^.

Good God I how many Provinces repeated he, at that time? and how many Nations
did he name? giving to every one of them, with (...) and briefnesse, their
proper attributes, being swallo^d up and ingu^^ed in those things which he had
read in his lying books! Sancho Pancia (...) suspended at his speech, and spoak
not a word, but only would now and then turn his head to see whether he could
mark those Knights and Giants which his Lord had named; and by reason he could
not discover any, he said: Sir I give to the Devil any Man; Giant, or Knight,
of all those you said, that appears; at least I cannot discern them: Perhaps
all (...) but enchantment like that of the Ghosts of yester night. How? say
thou so, quoth Don-Quixote? Do not thou hear the Horses neigh, the Trumpets
sound, and the noise of the Drumms? I hear nothing else, said Sancho, but the
great bleating of many Sheep. And so it was indeed; for by this time the two
Flocks did approach them very near. The fear that thou conceivest Sancho, quoth
Don-Quixote, makes thee that thou can neither hear nor see aright; for one
of the effects of fear, is to trouble the Senses, and make things appear
otherwise then they are; and seeing thou fear so much, retire thy self out
of the way; for I alone am sufficient to give the Victory to that Part which I
shall assist. And having ended his Speech, he se^ spurs to Rozinante, and
setting his Lance in the rest he flung down from the hillock like a
thunderbolt. Sancho cried to him as loud as he could, saying, Return good Sir^
Don-Quixote; for I vow unto God, that all those which you go to charge, are
but Sheep and Muttons. Return I say; alas that ever: I was born! what madness
is this? Look; for there is neither Giant, nor Knight, nor Cats, nor Arms, nor
Shields parted, nor whole, nor pure Azures, nor Divellis^^ What is it you do,
Wretch that I am? For all this Don-Quixote did not return, but rather road,
saying with a loud voice; On on Knights, all you that serve and martch under
the Banners of the valorous Emperor Pentapolin of the naked Arm; follow me
all of you, and you shall see how easily I will revenge him on his enemy
Alifamfaron of Trapobana: And saying so, he entered into the midest of the Flock
of Sheep, and began to Lance them with such courage and fury, as if he did in
good earnest encounter his mortal enemies.

The Sheep-heards that came with the flock, cried to him to leave off, but
seeing their words took no effect, they unlosed their slings and began to
salute his pate with stones as great as ones fist. But Don-Quixote made no
account of their stones, and did ^ling up and down among the Sheep, saying,
where art thou proud Alifamfaron, where art thou? come to me, for I am but one
Knight alone, who desire to prove my force with thee man to man, and deprive
thee of thy life, in pain of the wrong thou do to the valiant Pentapolin
the Garamiante. At that instant a stone gave him such a blow on one of his
sides, as did bury two of his (...) in his body. He beholding himself so ill
dight, did presently believe that he was either sl^ine or sorely wounded; and
remembering himself of his liquor, he took out his oyle-pot, and set it to his
mouth to drink, but ere he could take as much as he thought was requisite to
cure his hurts, there comes another Almond which stroke him so full upon the
hand and oyle-pot, as it broke it into pieces, and carried away with it
besides, three or four of his cheek teeth, and did moreover bruise very
sorely two of his fingers. Such was the first and the second blow, as the poor
Knight was constrained to fall down off his horse. And the Sheepheards ariving
did verily believe they had slain him^ and therefore gathering their flock
together with all speed, and carrying away their dead Mu^tons, which were more
then seven, they went away without verifying the matter any further.

Sancho remained all this while on the height, beholding his Masters follies,
pulling the hairs off his beard for very despair, and cursed the hour and
moment wherein he first knew him; but seeing him overthrown to the earth, and
the Sheepheards (...) away, he came down to him, and found him in very bad
taking, yet had ^ee not quite lost the use of his senses, to whom he said. Did
not I (...) you Sir Knight return, and told you that you went not to invade an
Army of men, bu^ ^ flock of Sheep. That these the wise man who is mine.
Adversary, quoth Don-Quixote, can counterfeit, and (...) men to seem such, or
vanish away as ^ee pleases, for Sancho thou ought to know, that in is a
very easy thing for those kind of men, to make us seem what they please, and
this M^ligne that persecuteth me, envying the glory which be saw I was like
to acquire in this Battle, has converted the Enemies (...) into Sheep: and
if thou will not believe me Sancho, yet do one thing for my (...), that thou
may remove thine error, and perceive the truth which I affirm, get up on
thine As^e and follow them (...) and softly aloo^, and thou shall see that as
soon as they are parted any distance from ^ence, they will turn to their first
form, and leaving to be sheep, will become men, as right and straight as I
painted them to the at the first, but go not now for I have need of thy help
and assistance, draw nearer to me and see, how many cheek teeth and others I
want; for me thinks there is not one left in my mouth. With that Sancho
approached so near, that he laid almost his eyes on his Masters mouth, and it
was just at the time that the Balsamum had now wrought his effect in
Don-Quixote his stomach, and at the very season that Sancho went about to look
into his mouth, he disgorged all that he had in his stomach, with as great
violence as it had been shot out of a Musket, just in his compassive Squires
beard. O holy Mother Mary, quoth Sancho! what is this that has befaln me? the
poor man is mortally wounded without doubt; for he vomiteth up blood at his
mouth. But looking a little nearer to it, he perceived in the color and smell
that it was not blood, but the Balsamum of his Masters oyl-bottle, whereat he
instantly took such a loathing, that his stomach likewise turned, and he
vomited out his very bowels almost, all in his Masters face: and so they both
remained like Pearls. Soon after Sancho ran to his Ass to take somewhat to
clear himself, and to cure his Lord out of his wallet, which when he found
wanting [ Having left it behind him in the Inn when he rann away and paid
nothing for his lodging.] he was ready to runn out of his wits: there he begann
a new to curse himself, and made a firm resolution in mind, that he would
leave his Master and turn to his Country again, although he were sure both to
lose his wages, and the hope of Government of the promised Island.

By this Don-Quixote arose, and setting his left hand to his mouth, that the
rest of his teeth might not fall out, he caught hold on the Raines of
Rozinantes bridle with the other, who had never stirred from his Master (such
was his loyalty and good nature) he went toward his Squire, that leaned upon
his Ass, with his hand under his cheek, like one pensative and malecontent.
And Don-Quixote seeing of him in that guise, with such signs of sadness, said
unto him: Know Sancho, that one man is not more then another, if he do not
more then another. All these storms that fall on us are arguments that the time
will wax calm very soon, and that things will have better success hereafter;
for it is not possible that either good or ill be dureable. And hence we may
collect that our misfortunes having lasted so long, our fortune and weal must
be likewise near: And therefore thou ought not thus to afflict thy self for
the disgraces that befall me, seeing no part of them fall to thy lot. How not,
quoth Sancho? Was he whom they tossed yester day in the Coverlet by fortune,
any other man's son then my Fathers? and the Wallet that I want to day, with
all my Provision, was it any others then mine own? What do thou want thy
Wallet Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote? I that I do, quoth he. In that manner
replied Don-Quixote, We have nothing left us to eat to day. That would be so,
quoth Sancho, if we could not find among these Fields the herbs which I have
heard you say you know, wherewithal such unluckie Knights Errant as you are
wont to supply like needs. For all that, quoth Don-Quixote, I would rather have
now a quarter of a loaf, or a cake and two Pilchers heads, then all the herbs
that Diascoridles describes, although they came glosed by Doctor Laguna
himself: But yet for all that, get upon thy beast, Sancho the good, and follow
me; for God, who is the provider for all Creatures, will not fail us; and
principally seeing we do a work so greatly to his service as we do, seeing he
does not abandon the little Flies of the Air, nor the Wormlings of the Earth,
nor the Spawnlings of the Water: And he is so merciful that he makes his
Sun shine on the good and the evil, and Rains on sinners and just men. You
were much fitter, quoth Sancho, to be a Preacher, then a Knight Errant. Knights
Errant knew, and ought to know somewhat of all things, quoth Don-Quixote: For
there has been a Knight Errant, in times past, who would make a Sermon or
discourse in the midest of a Camp royal, with as good grace as if he were
graduated in the University of Paris: by which we may gather, that the Lance
never dulled the Pen; nor the Pen the Lance. Well then, quoth Sancho, let it
be as you have said, and let us depart hence, and procure to find a lodging
for this night, where, I pray God, may be no Coverlets, and Tossors, nor
Spirits, nor enchanted Moors; for if there be, I Will bestow the Flock and the
Book on the Devil. Demand that of God Son Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, and
lead me where thou please; for I will leave the election of our lodging to
thy choice for this time: yet I pray thee give me thy hand, and feel how many
cheek teeth or others, I want in this right side of the upper jaw; for there I
feel most pain. Sancho put in his finger, and whilst he felt him, demanded;
how many cheek teeth were you accustomed to have on this side? Four, quoth he,
besides the hindermost; all of them very whole and sound. See well what you say
Sir, quoth Sancho. I say four, quoth Don-Quixote, if they were not five; for I
never in my life drew, or lost any tooth; nor has any fallen or been worm-eaten,
or mard by any rhume. Well then, quoth Sancho, you have in this nether part but
two cheek teeth and a half; and in the upper neither a half, nor any; for all
there is as plain as the palm of my hand. Unfortunate I (quoth Don-Quixote,
hearing the sorrowful news that his Squire told unto him) for I had rather
lose one of my arms, so it were not that of my Sword: For Sancho, thou must
wit, that a mouth without cheek-teeth, is like a Mill without a Millstone; and
a tooth is much more to be esteemed then a Diamond.

But we which profess the rigorous Laws of Arms, are subject to all these
disasters, wherefore mount gentle friend and give the way, for I will follow
thee what pace thou please, Sancho obeyed, and rode the way where he thought
he might find lodging, without leaving the high way, which was there very much
beaten. And going thus by little and little (for Don-Quixote his pain of his
jaws did not suffer him rest, or make overmuch haste) Sancho to entertain him
and divert his thought by saying some things, began to aboard him in the form
we mean to rehearse in the Chapter ensuing.

CHAP. V.
Of the discreet discourses passed between Sancho and his Lord: With the
Adventure succeeding of a dead Body: And other notable Occurrences.
ME thinks, good Sir, that all the mishaps that befell us these days past,
are without any doubt, in punishment of the sin you committed against the
order of Knighthood, by not performing the Oath you swore, not to eat bread on
table clothes, nor to sport with the Queen with all the rest which ensues, and
you vowed to accomplish until you had won the Helmet of Malandrino, or I
know not how the Moore is called, for I have forgotten his name. Thou say
right Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, but to tell the truth indeed, I did wholly
forget it; and thou may likewise think certainly, that because thou did not
remember it to me in time, that of the Coverlet was inflicted as a punishment
on thee. But I will make amends, for we have also manners of reconciliation for
all things in the Order of Knighthood. Why did I by chance swear any thing,
quoth Sancho? it little imports, quoth Don-Quixote, that thou have not sworn,
let it suffice that I know thou art not very clear from the fault of an
accessory. And therefore at all Adventures it will not be ill to provide a
remedy. If it be so quoth Sancho beware you do not forget this again, as you
did that of the Oath, for if you should, perhaps those spirits will take again
a fancy to solace themselves with me, and peradventure with you your self,
if they see you obstinate.

Being in these and other such discourses, the night overtook them in the way,
before they could discover any lodging, and that which was worst of all, they
were almost famisht with hunger, for by the loss of their wallets, they lost
at once both their provision and warder-house. And to accomplish wholly this
disgrace, there succeeded a certain Adventure, which certainly happened as we lay
it down, without any addition in the world, and was this; The night did shut up
with some darkness, yet notwithstanding they traveled on still, Sancho
believing, that since that was the highway, there must be within a league or
two in all reason some Inn. Travailing therefore, as I have said, in a dark
night, the Squire being hungry, and the Master having a good stomach, they saw
coming toward them in the very way they travailed, a great multitude of
lights, resembling nothing so well as wandering stars. Sancho beholding them,
was struck into a wonderful amazement, and his Lord was not much better: The
one drew his Ass halter, the other held his horse; and both of them stood
still, beholding attentively what that might be; and they perceived that the
lights drew still nearer unto them; and the more they approached, they appeared
the greater; at the sight Sancho did tremble, like one infected by the favor
of Quicksilver; and Don-Quixotes hair stood up like bristles, who animating
himself a little, said; Sancho, this must be questionless a great and most
dangerous Adventure, wherein it is requisite that I show all my valor and
strength. Unfortunate I, quoth Sancho, if by chance this Adventure were of
Ghosts! as it seems to me that it is; where will there be ribs to suffer it?
Be they never so great Ghosts, said Don-Quixote, I will not consent that they
touch one hair of thy Garmens: For if they jested with thee the other time, it
was because I could not leap over the walls of the yard; but now we are in
plain Field, where I may brandish my Sword as I please. And if they inchant and
benum you, as they did the other time, quoth Sancho; what will it then avail us
to be in open Field or no? For all that, replied Don-Quixote, I pray thee
Sancho be of good courage; for experience shall show thee how great my valor
is. I will and please God, quoth Sancho: And so departing somewhat out of the
way, they began again to view earnestly what that of the travailling lights
might be; and after a very little space they espied many white things, whose
dreadful visions did in that very instant abate Sancho Panca his courage, and
now began to chatter with his teeth like one that had the cold of a Quartan;
and when they did distinctly perceive what it was, then did his beating and
chattering of teeth increase; for they discovered about some twenty, all
covered with white a horseback, with Tapers lighted in their hands; after
which followed a Litter covered over with black, and then ensued other six a
horseback attired in mourning, and likewise their Mules, even to the very
ground; for they perceived that they were not horses by the quietness of their
pace. The white folk road murmuring somewhat among themselves with a low and
compassive voice: Which strange vision, at such an hour, and in places not
inhabited, was very sufficient to strike fear into Sancho's heart, and even in
his Masters. If it had been any other then Don-Quixote; but Sancho tumbled here
and there, being quite overthrown with terror. The contrary happened to his
Lord, to whom in that same hour his imagination represented (...) him most
lively, the Adventure wherein he was to be such a one, as he often times had read
in his books of Chivalry. For it is figured unto him, that the litter was a
Beer, wherein was carried some grievously wounded or dead Knight, whose revenge
was only reserved for him. And without making any other discourse he set his
Lance in the rest, seated himself surely in his Saddle, and put himself in the
midst of the way by which the white folk must forcibly pass, with great spirit
and courage. And when he saw them draw near, he said with a loud voice; Stand
Sir Knight, whosoever you be, and render me account what you are? from whence
you come? where you go? and what that is which you carry in that Beer? For
according as you show either you have done to others, or others to you some
injury: And it is convenient and needful that I know it, either to chastise
you, for the ill you have committed; or else to revenge you of the wrong which
you have suffered. We are in haste, quoth one of the white men, and the Inn is
far off; and therefore cannot expect to give so full a relation as you request;
and with that spurring his Mule, passed forward. Don-Quixote highly disdaining
at the answer, took by the bridle and held him, saying, Stay proud Knight, and
be better mannered another time, and give me account of that which I demanded;
if not, I desie you all to mortal battle. The Mule whereon the white man
road, was somewhat fearful and skittish; and being taken thus rudely by the
bridle, she took such a fright, that rising up on her hinder legs, she
unhorsed her Rider; one of the Lacquies that came with them, seeing him fallen,
began to revile Don-Quixote, who being by this thoroughly enraged, without any
more ado, putting his Lance in the rest, rann upon one of the Mourners, and
threw him to the ground very ^ore wounded: And turning upon the rest (it was a
thing worthy the noting) with what dexterity, he did assault, break upon them,
and put them all to flight; and it seemed none other, but that Rozinante had
gotten then wings, he bestirred himself so nimbly and courageously.

All those white men were fearful people, and unarmed; and therefore fled away
from the Skirmish in a trice, and began to traverse that field with their
Tapers burning, that they seemed to be Maskers that use to runn up and down in
nights of jove and recreation. The Mourners likewise were so laped up and
muffled, by their mourning weeds as they could scarce stir them; so that
Don-Quixote did, without any danger of his person, give them all the Bastanado;
and caused them to forsake their rooms whether they would or no: For all of
them did verily think that he was ^o man, but a Devil of Hell, that met them
to take away the dead body, which they carried in the Litter. All this did
Sancho behold, marveilously admiring at his Master boldness, which made him
say to himself, my Master is infallibly as strong and valiant as he said!

There lay on the ground by him whom his Mule had overthrown, a wax Taper still
burning, by whose light Don-Quixote perceived him, and coming over to him, he
laid the point of his Lance upon his face, saying, that he should render
himself, or else he would slay him. To which the other answered; I am already
rendered more then enough, seeing I cannot stir me out of the place, for one of
my legs is broken. And if you be a Christian I desire you not to kill me; for
therein you would commit a great sacrilege, I being a Licenciate, and have
received the first Orders. Well then, quoth Don-Quixote; what Divill brought
thee hither being a Churchman? Who Sir, replied the overthrown, but my
misfortune? Yet does a greater threaten thee, said Don-Quixote, if thou do
not satisfy me in all that which I first demanded of thee. You shall easily be
satisfied, quoth the Licenciate; and therefore you shall wit, that although
first of all I said I was a Licentiate, I am none, but a Batcheler, and am
called Alonso Lopez, born at Alcovendas, and I came from the City of Baeca,
with eleven other Priests, which are those that fled away with the Tapers; we
travailed toward Segovia, accompanying the dead body, that lies in that
Litter, of a certain Gentleman who dyed in Baeca, and was there deposited for a
while, and now as I say, we carty his bones to his place of burial, which is
in Segovia, the place of his birth. And who killed him, quoth Don-Quixote? God,
quoth the Batcheler, with certain pestilentiall fevers that he took. In that
manner, quoth Don-Quixote, our Lord has delivered me from the pains I would
have taken to revenge his death, if any other had slain him; He having killed
him that did, there is no other remedy but silence, and to lift up the
shoulders; for the same I must my self have done, if he were likewise pleased
to slay me. And I would have your reverence to understand, that I am a Knight
of the Mancha, called Don-Quixote; and mine Office and Exercise is, to go
throughout the World righting of wrongs, and undoing of injuries. I cannot
understand how that can be of righting wrongs, quoth the Batcheler, seeing you
have made me who was right before, now very crooked by breaking of my leg,
which can never be righted again, as long as I live; and the injury which you
have undone in me, is none other but to leave me so injured, as I shall remain
injured for ever. And it was very great disventure to have encountered with you
that go about to seek Adventures. All things, quoth Don-Quixote, succeed not
of one fashion: The hurt was Master Batcheler Alonso Lopez, that you traveled
thus by night covered with those Surplices, with burning Tapers, and covered
with weeds of dole, so that you appeared most properly some bad thing, and of
the other world; and so I could not omit to fulfill my duty, by assaulting you,
which I would have done, although I verily knew you to be the Satan's
themselves of Hell. For, for such I judged and accounted you ever till now.

Then since my bad fortune has so disposed it, quoth the Batcheler, I desire
you good Sir Knight errant (who has given me so evil an errant) that you
will help me to get up from under this Mule, who holds still my leg betwixt
the stirrup and saddle. I would have staid talking until to morrow morning,
quoth Don-Quixote, and why did you expect so long to declare your grief to
me? he presently called for Sanch^ Panca to come over, but he had little
mind to do; for he was otherwise employed, ransacking of a sumpter-Mule
which those good folk brought with them, well furnished with belly-ware.
Sancho made a bag of his Casack, and catching all that he might or could
contain, he laid it on his beast, and then presently after repaired to his
Master, and help to deliver the good Batcheler from the oppression of his
Mule. And mounting him again on it, he gave him his Taper, and Don-Quixote bad
him to follow his fellows, of whom he should desire Pardon in his name for
the wrong he had done them. For it lay not in his hands to have done the
contrary. Sancho said to him also, if those Gentlemen would by chance know, who
the valorous Knight is that has used them th^s, you may say unto them that he
is the famous Don-Quixote of Mancha, otherwise called the Knight of the
Illfavored face.

With this the Batcheler departed, and Don-Quixote demanded of Sancho, what had
moved him to call him the Knight of the illfavored face, more at that time then
at any other? I will tell you that quoth Sancho; I stood beholding of you a
pretty while by the Taper light which that unluckie man carries, and truly you
have one of the evill-favoredst countenances, of late, that ever I saw; Which
either proceeds of your being tired after this Battle, or else through the
loss of your teeth. That is not the reason, said Don-Quixote: But rather, it
has seemed fit to the wise man, to whose charge is left the writing of my
History that I take some appellative name, as all the other Knights of yore
have done: for one called himself, The Knight of the burning Sword; another
that of the Unicorn; this, him of the Phoenix; the other, that of the
Damzells; another the Knight of the Griphen; and some other the Knight of
Death; and by these names and devices they were known throughout the compass
of the earth. And so I say, that the wise man whom I mentioned set in thy mind
and tongue the thought to call me the Knight of the illfavored face, as I
mean to call my self from henceforth, and that the name may become me
better, I will upon the first occasion cause to be painted in my shield, a
most illfavoured countenance. You need not quoth Sancho, spend so much time
and money in having the like countenance painted; but that which you may more
easily do is, to discover your own, and look directly on those that behold
you, and I will warrant you, that without any more ado, or new painting in
your Shield, they will call you him of the illfavored face; And let this be
said in jest, that hunger and the want of your teeth, have given you, as I have
said, so evillfavoured a face, as you may well excuse all other heavy
portraitures. Don-Quixote laughed at his Squires conceit, and yet nevertheless
he purposed to call himself by that name, as soon as ever he should have
commodity to paint his Shield or Buckler.

And after a pause he said to Sancho; I believe I am Excommunicated, for having
laid violent hands upon a consecrated thing. [Canon. 72. Distinct. 134.] Iuxta
illud: si quis suadente diabolo, etc. Although I am certain I laid not my hands
upon him, but only this Javelin; and besides, I did not any way suspect that I
offended Priests or Churchmen, which I do respect and honor as a Catholic
and faithful Christian; but rather that they were shadows and spirits of the
other world. And if the worst happened, I remember well that which befell the Cid
Ruy Diaz, when he broke that other Kings Ambassadors chair before the Popes
holiness, for which he excommunicated him, and yet for all that the good
Roderick Vivar behaved himself that day like an honorable and valiant Knight.

About this time the Batcheler departed, as is said, without speaking a word,
and Don-Quixote would feign have seen whether the corpse that came in the
Litter was bones or no, but Sancho would not permit him, saying, Sir you have
finished this perilous Adventure, most with your safety of any one of those I
have seen. This People, although overcome and scattered, might perhaps fall in
the consideration that he who has overcome them is but one person alone, and
growing ashamed thereof, would perhaps join and unite themselves and turn
upon us and give us enough business to do. The Ass is in good plight
according to my desire, and the mountain at hand, and hunger oppresses us,
therefore we have nothing else to do at this time but retire our selves with
a good pace, and as it is said, to the grave with the Dead, and let them live
to the Bread. And pricking on his Ass, he requested his Master to follow him,
who seeing that Sancho spoke not without reason, he spurred after him without
replying; and having travailed a little way, between two small Mountains they
found a large and hidden Valley, where they alighted; and Sancho lightning his
beast, and lying both along upon the green grass, helped by the sauce of
hunger, they broke their fasts, dined, eat their Beaver and Supper all at one
time; satisfying their apetites with more then one dish of cold meat, which
the dead Gentleman's Chaplains (which knew how to make much of themselves) had
brought for their provision: But here succeeded another discommodity which
Sancho accounted not as the least, and was, that they had no wine to drink; no,
nor as much as a dropp of water to rinse their mouths, and being scorched with
drought, Sancho perceiving the field where they were full of thick and green
grass, said that which shall ensue in the Chapter following.

CHAP. VI.
Of a wonderful Adventure, achieved with less hazard then ever any other
Knight did any, by the valorous Don-Quixote of the Mancha.
IT is not possible my Lord, but that these green herbs do argue, that near
unto this place must be some Fountain or stream that waters them, and
therefore I pray you let us go a little farther, and we shall meet that
which may mitigate the terrible thirst that afflicts us, which sets us
questionless in more pain then did our hunger. This counsel was allowed by
Don-Quixote, and therefore leading Rozinante by the Bridle, and Sancho his Ass
by the halter, after laying up the reversion of their Supper, they set on
through the plain, only guided by their guess, for the night was so dark as
they could not see a jot. And scarce had they travailed two hundred paces when
they heard a great noise of water, as if it fell headlong from some great and
steep Rock. The noise did cheer them very much, and standing to hear from
whence it sounded, they heard unawares another noise, which watered all the
continent; they conceived before, specially in Sancho, who as I have noted was
naturally very fearful and of little spirit. They heard I say certain blows
stricken with proportion, with a kind of rattling of irons and chains, which
accompanied by the furious sound of the water, might strike terror into any
other heart but Don-Quixotes.

The night, as we said, was dark, and they happened to enter in among certain
tall and lofty trees, whose leaves moved by a soft gale of wind, made a
fearful and still noise; so that the solitude, situation, darkness and the
noise of the water, and trembling of the leaves concurring, did breed horror
and affright. But specially seeing that the blows never ceased, the wind
slept not, nor the morning approached, whereunto may be added that they knew
not the place where they were. But Don-Quixote accompanied with his valiant
heart, leaped on Rozinante, and embracing his Buckler, brandished his Lance,
and said: Friend Sancho, I would have thee know, that I was born by the
disposition of Heaven, in this our Age of iron, to resuscitate in it that of
Gold, or the Golden world as it is called. I am he for whom are reserved all
dangerous, great, and volorus feats. I say again, that I am he which shall set
up again those of the Round Table, the twelve Peers of France, and the nine
Worthies. I am he who shall cause the Acts to be forgotten of those Platires,
Tablantes, Olivantes, and Tirantes. The Phebuse^, Bel^amses, with all the crew
of the famous Knights Errant of times past, doing in this wherein I live such
great and wonderful fea^s of Arms, as shall obscure the bravest that ever
they achieved. Thou notest well faithful and loyal Squire, the darkness of
this night, the strange silence, the deaf and confused trembling of these
Trees, the dreadful noise of that water in whose search we come, which seems
to throw it self headlong down from the steep Mountains of the Moon, the
inceslable blows which does still wound our ears; all which together, and every
one apart, are able to strike terror, fear, and amazement into the very mind
of Mars; how much more in his that is not accus^omed to the like chances and
Adventures? Yet all this which I have depainted to thee, are inciters and
^owsers of my mind, which now causes my heart almost to burst in my breast,
with the desire it has to try this Adventure, how difficult soever it shows
it self: Wherefore ^ye my horse gyrts a little straighter, and farewell. Here
in this place thou may expect me three days and no more. And if I shall
(...) return in that space; thou may go back to our Village, and from
thence (for my sake) to Toboso, where thou shall say to my incomparable Lady
Dulcinea, that her captive Knight dyed, by attempting things that might make
him worthy to be called hers.

When Sancho heard his Lord speak these words, he began to weep with the
greatest compassion of the World, and say unto him; Sir, I see no reason why
you should undertake this fearful Adventure: it is now night, and no body can
perceive us; we may very well cross the way, and apart our selves from danger,
although we should therefore want drink these three days. And seeing none
behold us, there will be much less any one to take notice of our cowardice;
the rather because I heard often times the Curate of our Village, whom you know
very well, preach, That he which seeks the ^^^ger perishes therein; so that it
is not good to ^empt God, undertaking such a huge Affair, out of which you
cannot escape, but by miracle; and let those which Heaven has already wrought
for you suffice, in delivering you from being costed in a Coverlet, as I was,
and bringing you away a Victor, free, and safe, from among so many enemies as
accompanied the dead man. And when all this shall not move or soften your hard
heart, let this move it, to think and certainly believe, that scarce shall you
depart from this place, when through very fear I shall give up my Soul to him
that pleases to take it. I left my Country, Wife, and Children to come and
serve you, hoping thereby to be worth more, and not less: But as cove^^^nesse
breaks the Sack, so has it also torn my Hopes, seeing when they were most
pregnant and lively to obt^in that unluckle and accursed Island, which you
promised me so often: I see that in exchange and pay thereof, you mean to
forsake me here in a Desert, out of all frequentation. For Gods sake do not me
such a wrong my Lord; and if you will not wholly desist from your purpose, yet
de^er it at least till the morning; for as my little skill that I learned when
I was a Shepherd, tells me, the dawning is not three hours off, [Porque la
bocade la bozinaist alucina de l^ cabeo^. p. 168.] for the mouth of the Fish is
over the head, and makes midnight in the line of the left arm. How can
thou Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, see where is the line, or that mouth, or that
talle of which thou speak, seeing the night is so dark that one star alone
appears not? That is true, quoth Sancho, but fear has eyes which can see
things under the ground, and much more in the skies. And besides, we may gather
by good discourse, that the day is not far off. Let it be as little off as it
lists, quoth Don-Quixote; it shall never be recorded of me, that either tears,
or prayers could ever dissuade me from performing the duty of a Knight; and
therefore good Sancho hold thy peace, for God who has inspired me to attempt
this unseen and fearful Adventure, will have an eye to my weal, and also to
comfort thy sorrow. And that thou have therefore to do, is to make straigh my
gyrts, and remain here; for I will return shortly either alive or dead.

Sancho perceiving his Lords last resolution, and how little his tears,
counsels or prayers could avail, resolved to profit himself a little of his
wit, and make him if he could to expect until day, and so when he did fasten
the gyrts, he softly, without being felt, tied his Asses halter to both
Rozinantes legs so falt, that when Don-Quixote thought to depart he could not,
for that his Horse could not go a step, but ^^aping. Sancho seeing the good
success of his guile, said, behold Sir how Heaven, moved by my tears and
prayers, has ordained that Rozinante should not go a step; and if you will
be still contending and spurring, and striking him, you will do nothing but
inrage fortune, and as the Proverb says, But spurn against the pri^k.
Don-Quixote grew wood at this, and yet the more he spurred him, he was the
less able to go; wherefore without perceiving the cause of his Horses stay,
he resolved at last to be quiet, and expect either till the morning, or else
till Rozinante would please to depart, believing verily that the impediment
came of some other cause, and not from Sancho; and therefore said unto him:
Since it is so Sancho, that Rozinante cannot stir him, I am content to tarry
till the dawning, although her tardines^e cost me some tears. You shall have no
cause to weep, replied Sancho; for I will entertain you telling of Histories
until it be day if you will not alight and take a nap upon these green herbs,
as Knights Errant are wont, that you may be the fresher, and better able to
morrow, to attempt that monstrous Adventure which you expect. What do thou
call alighting, or sleeping, quoth Don-Quixote? Am I peradventure one of those
Knights that repose in time of danger? Sleep thou who wast borne to sleep, or
do what thou please; for I will do that which I shall see fittest for my
pretense. Good Sir be not angry, quoth Sancho, for I did not speak with that
intention: And so drawing near unto him, he set one of his hands on the pomell
of the saddle, and the other hinder in such sort, that he rested embracing his
Lords left thigh, not daring to depart from thence the breadth of a finger, such
was the fear he had of those blows, which all the while did sound without
ceasing.

Then Don Quixote commanded him to tell some tale to pass away the time, as
he had promised, and Sancho said he would, if the fear of that which he
heard would suffer him. Yet, quoth he, for all this I will encourage my self
to tell you one, whereon if I can hit aright, and that I be not interrupted,
is the best History that ever you heard, and be you attentive for now I begin.
It was, that it was, the good that shall befall, be for us all, and the ^arme
for him that searches it. And you must be advertised good Sir, that the
beginning that ancient men gave to their tales, was not of ordinary things, and
it was a sentence of Cato the Roman (...): Which says, and the harm be for
him that searches it: Which is as fit for this place as a ring for a finger, to
the end that you may be quiet, and not to go seek your own harm to any
place, but that we turn us another way, for no body compels us to follow
this, where so many fears do surprise us. Prosecute this tale Sancho, said
Don-Quixote, and leave the charge of the way we must go to me. I say then
quoth Sancho, that in a village of Estremadura, there was a Shepherd, I would
say a Goateheard. And as I say of my tale, this Goatheard was called Lope R^yz,
and this Lope R^yz was enamoured on a Sheepheardesse who was called Torralua,
the which Sheepheardesse called Torralua was daughter to a rich Heard-man, and
this rich heard-man. If thou tellest thy tale Sancho after that manner, quoth
Don-Quixote, repeating every thing twice that thou say, thou will not end it
these two days; tell it succin^tly, and like one of judgment, or else say
nothing. Of the very same fashion that I tell, are all tales told in my
Country and I know not how to tell it any other way, nor is it reason that you
should ask of me to make new customs. Tell it as thou please, quoth
Don-Quixote for since fortune will not otherwise, but that I must hear thee,
go forward. So that my dear Sir of my Soul, quoth Sancho, that as I have
said already, this Sheep heard was in love with Torralua the Shepherd esse,
who was a round wench, scornful, and drew somewhat near to a man, for she
had Mochachoes, for me thinks I see her now before my face. Belike then, quoth
Don Quixote thou knew her? I did not know her quoth Sancho, but he that
told me the tale, said it was so certain and true, that I might when I told
it to any other, very well swear and affirm that I had seen it all my self.
So that days passing and days coming, the Devil who sleeps not, and that
troubles all [Yque tod^lo annasca. page 172,] wrought in such sort, as the love
that the Shepherd bore to the Sheepheardesse turned into manslaughter and
ill will, and the cause was according to bad tongues; a certain quantity of
little jealousies that she gave him, such as they past the line, and came to
the forbidden [A Spanish Proverb touching their jealousy.] And the Shepherd
did hate her so much afterward that he was content to leave all that Country
because he would not see her, and go where his eyes should never look upon
her. Torralua that saw her self disdayned by Lope, did presently love him
better then ever she did before; that is a natural condition of women, quoth
Don-Quixote, to disdain those that love them, and to affect those which hate
them. Pass forward Sancho. It happened quoth Sancho, that the Shepherd set his
purpose in execution, and gathering up his Goats, he traveled through the
fields of Estremadura, to pass into the Kingdom of Portugal. Torralua, which
knew it well, followed him a foot and bare legged, a far off, with a
Pilgrims staff in her hand, and a Wallet hanging at her neck, where they say
that she carried a piece of a looking-glass, and another of a comb, and I
know not what little bottle of changes for her face. But let her carry what
she carries, for I will not put my self now to verify that: Only I Will say
that they say, that the Shepherd arived with his Goats to pass over the
River Guadiana, which in that season was swollen very much, and overflowed the
banks, and at the side where he came there was neither boat nor bark, nor
any to pass himself or his Goats over the River, for which he was very much
grieved, because he saw that Torralua came very near, and she would trouble
him very much with her prayers and tears. But he went so long looking up and
down, that he spyed a fisher, who had so little a boat, as it could only
hold one man and a Goat at once, and for all that he spoke and agreed with
him to pass himself and three hundred Goats that he had over the River. The
fisherman entered into the boat, and carried over one Goat, he returned and
past over another, and turned back again and past over another. Keep you Sir
good account of the Goats, that the fisherman ferries over, for if one only
be forgotten, the tale will end, and it will not be possible to tell one word
more of it. Follow on then, and I say, that the landing place on the other side
was very dirty and slippery, which made the fisherman spend much time coming
too and fro. Yet for all that he turned for another Goat, and another, and
another.

Make account quoth Don-Quixote, that thou have past them all over, for
otherwise thou will not make an end of passing them in a whole years space. How
many said Sancho are already past over? What a Devil know I, said Don-Quixote?
See there that which I said quoth Sancho, that you should keep good account.
By Jove the tale is ended therefore, for there is no passing forward. How can
that be, said Don-Quixote, is it so greatly of the essence of this History to
know the Goats that are past so exactly and distinctly, that if one of the
number be missed thou can not follow on with thy tale? No Sir, in no sort,
said Sancho, for as soon as I demanded of you to tell me how many Goats past
over, and that you answered me you knew not, in that very instant it went from
me out of my memory all that was to be told, and in faith it was of great
virtue and content. So then quoth Don-Quixote, the tale is ended; it is as
certainly ended as is my Mother quoth Sancho. Surely, replied Don-Quixote, thou
have recounted one of the rarest tales or Histories that any one of the world
could think upon, and that such a manner of telling or finishing a tale, was
never yet seen, or shall be seen again, although I never expected any other
thing from thy good discourse. But I do not greatly marvel, for perhaps
those senseless strokes, have troubled thine understanding. All that may be
said Sancho, but I know in the discourse of my tale there is no more to be
said, but that there is ends, where the error of counting the Goats that were
wafted over the River begins. Let it end in a good hour where it lists,
answered Don-Quixote, and let us try whether Rozinante can yet stir himself;
then did he turn again to give him the spurs, and he to leap as he did at the
first and rest anew, being unable to do other, he was so well shackled.

It happened about this time, that either through the cold of the morning, or
that Sancho had eaten at supper some lenative meats, or that it was a thing
natural (and that is most credible) he had a desire to do that which others
could not do for him; but such was the fear that entered into his heart, as he
dared not depart from his Lord the breadth of a straw; and to think to leave
that which he had desired undone, was also impossible; therefore his resolution
in that perplexed exigent (be it spoken with pardon) was this; he loosed his
right hand, wherewithal he held fast the hinder part of the saddle, and
therewithal very softly, and without any noise, he untied the Codpiece point
wherewithal his breeches were only supported, which, that being let slip, did
presently fall down about his legs like a pair of bolts: After this lifting up
his shirt the best he could, he exposed his buttocks to the air, which were
not the least: This being done, which as he thought was the chiefest thing
requisite to issue out of that terrible anguish and plunge; he was suddenly
troubled with a greater, to wit, That he knew not how to disburden himself
without making a noise: which to avoid first he shut his teeth close, lifted up
his shoulders, and gathered up his breath as much as he might: yet
notwithstanding all these diligences, he was so unfortunate, that he made a
little noise at the end, much different from that which made him so fearful.
Don-Quixote heard it, and said, What noise is that Sancho? I know it not Sir,
quoth he; I think it be some new thing for Adventures, or rather disventures
never begin with a little. Then turned' he once again to try his hap, and it
succeeded so well, that without making any rumor or noise, but that which he
did at the first, he found himself free of the loading the troubled him so much.

But Don-Quixote having the sense of smelling, as perfect as that of his
hearing; and Sancho stood so near, or rather joined to him, as the vapors did
ascend upward, almost by a direct line, he could not excuse himself but that
some of them must needs touch his nose. And scarce had they arrived, but that
he occurd to the usual remedy, and stopped it very well between his fingers,
and then said with a snaffling voice: Me thinks Sancho that thou art much
afraid. I am indeed, replied Sancho; but wherein I pray you, do you perceive
it now more then ever? In that thou smellest now more then ever, quoth
Don-Quixote, and that not of Amber. It may be so, quoth Sancho; yet the fault
is not mine, but yours, which bring me at such unseasonable hours, through so
desolate and fearful places. I pray thee friend retire thy self two or three
steps back, quoth Don-Quixote, holding his fingers still upon his nose; and
from henceforth have more care of thy person, and of the respect thou owe to
mine; for I see the overmuch familiarity that I use with thee, has engendered
this contempt. I dare wager, quoth Sancho, that you think I have done somewhat
with my person that I ought not. Friend Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, it is the
worse to stir it thus. And thus in these and such like conversation the Master
and the Man passed over the night. And Sancho seeing that the morning
approached, he loosed Rozinante very warily, and tied up his hose, Rozinante
feelling himself (although he was not naturally very courageous) he seemed to
rejoice, and began to beat the ground with his hoofs; for by his leave he could
never yet curvet. Don-Quixote seeing that Rozinante could now stir, accounted
it to be a good sign, and an encouragement of him to attempt that timorous
Adventure.

By this Aurora did display her purple mantle over the face of Heaven, and
every thing appeared distinctly, which made Don-Quixote perceive that he was
among a number of tall Chesnut-trees, which commonly make a great shadow: He
heard likewise those incessable strokes, but could not epsy the cause of them;
wherefore giving Rozinante presently the spur, and turning back again to
Sancho, to bid him farewell, he commanded him to stay for him there three days
at the longest, and that if he returned not after that space, he should make
full account that Jove was pleased he should end his days in that dangerous
Adventure.

After this charge given by Don-Quixote to Sancho, he repeated to him again
the embassage and errant he should carry in his behalf to his Lady Dulcinea,
and that touching the reward of his services he should not fear any thing,
for he had left his Testament, made before he departed from his Village,
where he should find himself gratif^ed touching all that which pertained to
his hyre, according to the rate of the time he had served. But if God would
bring him off from that Adventure safe and sound, and without danger, he might
fully account to receive the promised Island. Here Sancho began anew to weep,
hearing again the pitiful discourses of his good Lord, and determined not to
abandon him until the last trance and end of that affair, and out of these
tears and honorable resolution of Sancho, the author of this History
collects, that it is like he was well borne, or at the very least an old
Christian, whose grief did move his Master a little, but not so much as he
should show the least argument of weakness, but rather dissembling it the best
he could, he followed on his way toward the way of the water, and that where
the strokes were heard. Sancho followed him a foot, leading as he was wont
his Ass by the halter, who was the inseparable fellow of his prosperous or
adverse fortunes.

And having traveled a good space among these Chestnut and shady trees, they
came out into a little plain that stood at the foot of certain steep Rocks,
from whose tops did precipitate it self a great fall of water. There were at
the foot of those rocks certain houses, so ill made, as they rather seemed
ruins of buildings then houses; from whence as they perceived, did issue the
fearful rumor and noise of the strokes, which yet continued. Rozinante at
this dreadful noise did start, and being made quiet by his Lord Don-Quixote,
did by little and little draw near to the houses, recommending himself on the
way most devoutly to his Lady Dulcinea, and also to Jove, desiring him that
he would not forget him. Sancho never departed from his Lords side, and
stretched out his neck and eyes as far as he might through Rozinante his
legg^, to see if he could perceive that which held him so fearful and
suspended. And after they had traveled about a hundred paces, more at the
dubling of a point of a Mountain they saw the very cause patent and open (for
there could be none other) of that so hideous and fearful a noise that had
kept them all the night so doubtful and affrighted, and was (O Reader if thou will not take it in bad part) six iron Maces that fulled cloth, which with
their interchangeable blows, did form that marvelous noise.

When Don-Quixote saw what it was, he waxed mute and all ashamed. Sancho
beheld him, and saw that he hanged his head on his breast with tokens that he
was somewhat ashamed. Don-Quixote looked also on his Squire, and saw his cheeks
swollen with laughter, giving withal evident signs that he was in danger to
burst, if he vented not that passion, whereat all Don-Quixotes melancholy
little prevayling, he could not, beholding Sancho, but laugh also himself. And
when Sancho saw his Master begin the play, he let slip the prisoner, in such
violent manner pressing his sides with both his hands, to save himself from
bursting. Four times he ended, and other four he renewed his laughter, with
as great impulse and force as at the first, whereat Don-Quixote was wonderfully
enraged, but chiefly hearing him say, in jibing manner; I would have thee know
friend Sancho, that I was borne by the disposition of Heaven in this our age of
Iron, to renew in it that of gold, or the golden world. I am he for whom are
reserved all dangerous, great and valorous feats. And in this sort he went
repeating all or the greatest part of the words Don-Quixote had said the first
time that they heard the timorous blows, Don-Quixote perceiving that Sancho
mocked him, grew so ashamed and angry withal, that lifting up the end of his
lance, he gave him two such blows on the back, as if he had received them on
his pate, would have freed his Master from paying him any wages, if it were not
to his Heirs. Sancho, seeing that he gained so ill earnest by his jests,
fearing that his Master should go onward with it, he said unto him with very
great submission; Pacify your self good Sir, for by Jove I did but jest. But
why do thou jest? I tell thee I do not jest, quoth Don-Quixote. Come here
Master Merriman, think thou that as those are iron Maces to full Cloth, if
they were some other dangerous Adventure, that I have not shown resolution
enough to undertake and finish it? Am I by chance obliged, being, as I am, a
Knight, to know and distinguish noyses, and perceive which are of a
Fulling-Mill, or no? And more it might (as it is true) that I never saw any
before as thou have done, base Villain that thou art, born and braught up among
the like: if not, make thou that these six Maces be converted into Giants, and
cast them in my beard one by one, or all together; and when I do not turn all
their heels up, then mock me as much as thou please.

No more good Sir, quoth Sancho, for I confess I have been somewhat too
laughsome; but tell me I pray you, now that we are in peace, as God shall
deliver you out of all Adventures that may befall you as whole and sound, as he
has done out of this: Has not the great fear we were in, been a good subject
of laughter, and a thing worthy the telling? At least I, for of you, I am
certain that you do not yet know what fear or terror is. I do not deny,
quoth Don-Quixote, but that which befell us is worthy of laughter; yet ought it
not to be recounted, for as much as all persons are not so discreet, as to know
how to discern one thing from another, and set every thing in his right point.
You know at least wise, quoth Sancho, how to set your Javelin in his point,
when poynting at my pate you hit me on the shoulders, thanks be to God, and to
the diligence I put in going aside. But farewell it, for all will away in the
bucking; and I have heard old folk say, That man loves thee well who makes thee
to weep: And besides great Lords are wont after a bad word which they say to
one of their Servingmen, to bestow on him presently a pair of hose. But I know
not yet what they are wont to give them after blows, if it be not that Knights
Errant give after the Bastanado Islands, or Kingdoms on the continent. The Die
might run so favorably; quoth Don-Quixote, as all thou have said might come to
pass; and therefore pardon what is done since thou art discreet, and know
that a man's first motions are not in his hand. And be advertised of one thing
from hence forward to the end to abstain, and carry thy self more respectively
in thy overmuch liberty of speech with me) that in as many books of Chivalry
as I have read, which are infinite, I never found that any Squire spoak so much
with his Lord, as thou do with thine: which in good sooth I do attribute to
thy great indiscretion and mine; thine in respecting me so little; mine in not
making my self to be more regarded. Was not Gandalin, Amadis du Gauls Squire
Earl of the firm Island? and yet it is read of him, that he spoak to his Lord
with his Cap in his hand, his head bowed, and his body bended (more Turcesco.)
What then shall we say of Gasabel, Don Gataors Squire, who was so silent, as to
declare us the excellency thereof, his name is but once repeated in all that
so great and authentical a History? Of all which my words Sancho, thou must
infer, that thou must make difference between the Master and the man; the Lord
and his Serving-man; the Knight and his Squire. So that from this day forward
we must proceed with more respect, not letting the clew run so much; for after
what way soever I grow angry with thee, it will be bad for the Pitcher. The
rewards and benefits that I have promised thee will come in their time; and if
they do not, thy wages cannot be lost (as I have already said to thee).

You say very well, quoth Sancho, but fain would I learn (in case that the time
of rewards came not, and that I must of necessity trust to my wages) how much a
Knight Errants Squire did gain in times past? Or if they did agree for months,
or by days as Masons men. I do not think, quoth Don-Quixote, that they went
by the hire, but only trusted to their Lords courtesy. And if I have assigned
wages to thee in my sealed Testament, which I left at home, it was to prevent
the worst; because I know not yet what success Chivalry may have in these our
so miserable times; and I would not have my Soul suffer in the other world for
such a minuity as is thy wages. For thou must understand, that in this world
there is no state so dangerous as that of Knights Errant. That is most true,
replied Sancho, seeing the only sound of the Maces of a Fulling-Mill could
trouble and disquiet the heart of so valiant a Knight as you are. But you may
be sure, that I will not hereafter once unfold my lips to jest at your doings,
but only to honor you as my Master and natural Lord. By doing so, replied
Don-Quixote, thou shall live on the face of the earth; for next to our parents,
we are bound to respect our Masters, as if they were our Fathers.

CHAP. VII.
Of the high Adventure and rich winning of the Helmet of Mambrino, with other
Successes which befell the invincible Knight.
IT began about this time to rain and, Sancho, would fain have entered into the
fulling-Mills, but Don-Quixote had conceived such hate against them for the
jest recounted, as he would in no wise come near them; but turning his way on
she right hand, he fell into a high^ way, as much (...) as that wherein they
rode the day before: within a while after Don-Quixote espied one a horseback,
that bore on his head somewhat that glistered like gold; and scarce had he seen
him, when he turned to Sancho, and said, Me thinks Sancho that there is no
proveb that is not true; for they are all sentences taken out of experience it
self, which is the universal mother of Sciences; and specially that proverb
that says, Where one door is shut another is opened. I say this, because if
fortune did shut yester night the door that we searched deceiving us in the
Adventure of the iron Maces, it lays us how wide open the door that may
address us to a better and more certain Adventure, whereon if I cannot make a
good entry, the fall shall be mine, without being able to attribute it to the
little knowledge of the Fulling Maces, or the darkness of the night; which I
affirm, because, if I be not deceived, there comes one toward us, that wears
on his head the helmet of Mambrino, for which I made the Oath. See well what
you say Sir, and better what you do quoth Sancho; for I would not with that
this were new Maces to batter us and our understanding. The Devil take thee
for a man, replied Don-Quixote; what difference is there betwixt a Helmet and
fulling Maces? I know not, quoth Sancho; but if I could speak as much now as I
was wont, perhaps I would give you such reasons, as you your self should see
how much you are deceived in that you speak. How may I be deceived in that I
say, scrupulous traitor, quoth Don-Quixote? Tell me; see thou not that Knight
which comes riding toward us on a dapple gray horse, with a Helmet of gold on
his head? That which I see and find out to be so, answered Sancho, is none
other then a man on a gray Ass like mine own, and brings on his head somewhat
that shines. Why that is Mambrino's Helmet, quoth Don-Quixote: stand aside and
leave me alone with him; thou shall see how without speech, to cut off delays,
I will conclude this Adventure, and remain with the Helmet as mine own, which I
have so much desired: I will have care to stand off: but I turn again to say,
that I pray God, that it be a purchase of gold, and not Fulling-Mills: I have
already said unto thee, that thou do not make any more mention, no not in
thought of those Maces: For if thou do, said Don-Quixote, I vow, I say no
more, that I will batter thy soul. Here Sancho fearing lest his Master would
accomplish the vow which he had thrown out as round as a bowl, held his peace.

This therefore is the truth of the History of the Helmet^ Horse and Knight,
which Don-Quixote saw: There was in that Commarke two villages, the one so
little as it had neither shop nor Barber, but the greater that was near unto
it, was furnished of one; and he therefore did serve the little village when
they had any occasion, as now it befell that therein lay one sick and must be
let blood, and another that desired to trim his Beard; for which purpose the
Barber came, bringing with him a brazen Basin: and as he traveled, it ^y
chance began to rain, and therefore clapped his Basin on his head to save his
hat from stayning, because it belike was a new one. And the Basin being clean
scowred, glistered half a league off. He rode on a gray Ass, as Sancho said;
and that was the reason why Don-Quixote took him to be a dapple gray Steed:
He likewise took the Barber for a Knight, and his glistering Basin for a
Helmet of gold; for he did with all facility apply every thing which he saw
to his raving Chivalrie and ill-errant thoughts. And when he saw that the poor
Knight drew near, without settling himself to commune with him, he inrested
his [Sancon] Javelin low on the thigh, and ran with all the force Rozinante
might, thinking to strike him through and through; and drawing near unto him,
without stoping his Horse, he cried defend thy self Caytif, or else render
unto me willingly that which is my due by all reason.

The Barber who so without fearing or surmising any such thing, saw that
Fantasy and Spirit came upon him, had no other remedy to avoid the blow of the
Lance but to fall off of his Ass to the ground: and scarce had he touched
the earth, when rissing up again as light as a Deer, he runn away so swiftly
through the plane, as the wind could scarce overtake him; leaving behind him
on the ground his Basin, wherewithal Don-Quixote rested content, and said,
that Pagan which lost it was discreet, and did imitate the Castor, who seeing
himself hotly pursued by the hunters, which tears and cuts away that with his
teeth, for which he knows by natural instinct he was followed. Then he
commanded Sancho to take up the Helmet, who lifting it said, the Basin is a
good one by God, and is as well worth a Riall of eight as a marmedie; and
giving it to his Lord, he presently set it on his head, turning about every
way, to see whether he could get the Beaver, and seeing he could not find
it, he said. The Pagan for whom this famous Helmet was first forged, had
doubtlesly a very great Head; and that which grieves me principally is, that
this Helmet wants the one half.

When Sancho haard him call the Basin a Helmet, he could not contain his
laughter, but presently remembering of his Masters choler, he chek't it in the
midst. Why do thou laugh Sancho, quoth Don-Quixotes.? I laugh said he, to
think on the great head the Pagan, owner of this Helmet, had; for it is for
all the world like a Barbers Basin. Know Sancho that I imagine, quoth Don
Quixote, that this famous piece of this enchanted Helmet did fall by some
strange accident into some ones hands that knew not the worth thereof, and
seeing it was of pure gold, without knowing what he did, I think he has
molten the half, to profit himself therewithal, and made of the oso there
half this, which seems a Barbers Basin, as thou say: But be what it list,
to me who knows well what it is, his transmutation makes no matter; for I will
dress it in the first town where I shall find a Smith, as that which the God
of forges made for the God of War shall not surpass, no nor come near it;
and in the mean while I will wear it as I may; for something is better then
nothing: and more, seeing it may very well defend me from the blow of a stone.
That Is true, quoth Sancho, if it be not thrown out of a sling, such as that
of the battle of the two Armies, when they blessed your Worships cheek teeth,
and broke the bottle wherein you carried the most blessed drench which made me
vomit up my guts. I do not much care for the loss of it Sancho, quoth
Don-Quixote, for as thou know I have the receite in memory; so have I
likewise quoth Sancho, but if ever I make it or taste it again in my life, I
pray God that here may be mine end. How much more I never mean to thrust my
self, into any occasion wherein I should have need of it; for I mean with
all my five senses to keep my self from hurting any, or being hurt. Of being
once again tossed in a Coverlet I say nothing, for such disgraces can hardly be
prevented, and if they befall, there is no other remedy but patience, and to
lift up the shoulders, keep in the breath, shut the eyes, and suffer our
selves to be borne where Fortune and the Coverlet pleases.

Thou art a bad Christian Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, hearing him say so; for
thou never forgetest the injuries that are once done to thee: know that it is
the duty of noble and generous minds, not to make any account of toys. What
leg have thou brought away lame? what rib broken? or what head hurt, that thou
can not yet forget that jest? for the thing being well examined, it was none
other then a jest or pastime; for if I did not take it to be such, I had
returned by this to that place, and done more harm in thy revenge, then that
which the Greeks did for the rape of Helen: who if she were in these times, or
my Dulcinea in hers, she might be sure she should never have gained so much
fame for beauty as she did: And saying so, he pierced the sky with a sigh.
Then said Sancho, let it pass for a jest, since the revenge cannot pass in
earnest. But I know well the quality both of the jest and earnest, and also
that they shall never fall out of my memory, as they will never out of my
shoulders. But leaving this apart, what shall we do with this dapple gray
stead, that looks so like a gray Ass, which that Martin left behind, whom you
overthrew, who according as he laid feet on the dust and made haste, he minds
not to come back for him again; and by my beard the gray beast is a good one. I
am not accustomed, quoth Don-Quixote, to ransack and spoil those whom I
overcome; nor is it the practice of Chivalry to take their horses and let them
go a foot: if that it befall the Victor to lose in the conflict his own; for
in such a case it is lawful to take that of the Vanquished as won in fair
war. So that Sancho leave that Horse, or Ass, or what else thou please to
call it; for when his owner sees us departed, he will return again for it. God
knows, quoth Sancho, whether it will be good or no for me to take him, or at
least change for mine own, which me thinks is not so good. Truly the Laws of
Knighthood are straight, since they extend not themselves to license the
exchange of one Ass for another: And I would know whether they permit at least
to exchange the one harness for another. In that I am not very sure, quoth
Don-Quixote; and as a case of doubt (until I be better informed) I say that
thou exchange them, if by chance thy need be extreme. So extreme, quoth
Sancho, that If they were for mine own very person, I could not need them
more. And presently, enabled by the License, he made mutatio Caparum, and set
forth his beast like a hundred holidays.

This being done they broak their fast with the relics of the spoils they
had made in the Camp of Sumpter horse, and drunk of the Mills streams, without
once turning to look on them (so much they abhorred them for the marveilous
terror they had stricken them in) and having by their repast cut away all
choleric and melancholic humors, they followed on the way which Rozinante
pleased to lead them (who was the depository of his Masters will, and also of
the Asses; who followed him always wheresoever he went, in good amity and
company. For all this they returned to the highway, wherein they traveled at
random, without any certain deliberation which way to go. And as they thus
travailed, Sancho said to his Lord, Sir, will you give me leave to commune a
little with you; for since you have imposed upon me that sharp commandment of
silence, more then four things have rotted in my stomach; and one thing that I
have now upon the tip of my tongue, I would not wish for any thing that it
should miscarrie. Say it, quoth Don-Quixote, and be brief in thy reasons; for
none is delightful if it be prolix. I say then, quoth Sancho, that I have
been these later days, considering how little is gained by following these
Adventures, that you do through these Deserts and cross ways, where though
you overcome and finish the most dangerous; yet no man sees or knows them, and
so they shall remain in perpetual silence, both to your prejudice, and that
of the fame which they deserve. And therefore me thinks it were better (still
excepting your better judgment herein) that we went to serve some Emperor,
or other great Prince that makes war, in whose service you might show the
valor of your Person, your marvelous force, and wonderful Judgment: which
being perceived by the Lord whom we shall serve, he must perforce reward us,
every one according to his deserts; and in such a place will not want one to
record your noble acts for a perpetual memory: of mine I say nothing, seeing
they must not transgress the Squire-like limits; although I dare avouch that
if any notice be taken in Chivalry of the feats of Squires, mine shall not
fall away betwixt the lines.

Sancho thou say not ill, quoth Don-Quixote; but before such a thing come to
pass, it is requisite to spend some time up and down the World, as in
probation, seeking of Adventures; to the end, that by atchieving some, a man
may acquire such fame and renown, as when he goes to the Court of any great
Monarch, he be there already known by his works, and that he shall scarcely
be perceived to enter at the gates by the boys of that City, when they all
will follow and inviron him, crying out aloud, That is the Knight of the Sun,
or the Serpent, or of some other device, under which he has achieved strange
Adventures. This is he (will they say) who overcame in single sight the huge
Giant Brocabruno of the invincible strength. He that disinchanted the great
Sophie of Persia, of the large enchantment wherein he had lien almost nine
hundred years. So that they will thus go proclaiming his acts from hand to
hand; and presently the King of that Kingdom, moved by the great bruit of the
boys and other people, will stand at the Windows of his Palace, to see what
it is; And as soon as he shall eye the Knight, knowing him by his Arms, or by
the Impresa of his Shield, he must necessarily say, Up, go all of you my
Knights, as many of you as are in Court, forth, to receive the flower of
Chivalry, which comes there. At whose commandment they all will salley, and
he himself will come down to the midest of the stairs, and will embrace him
most straightly, and will give him the peace, kissing him on the cheek; and
presently will carry him by the hand to the Queens Chamber, where the Knight
shall find her accompanied by the Princess her daughter, which must be one
of the fairest and debonair Damzels that can be found throughout the vast
compass of the earth: After this will presently and in a trice succeed, that
she will cast her eye on the Knight, and he on her, and each of them shall
seem to the other no humane creature, but an Angel; and then without knowing
how, or how not, they shall remain captive and entangled in the intricable
amorous Net, and with great care in their minds, because they know not how
they shall speak to discover their anguish and feeling. From thence the King
will carry him without doubt, to some quarter of his Palace richly hanged;
where, having taken off his Arms, they will bring him a rich Mantle of
Scarlet, furred with Ermines, to wear; and if he seemed well before, being
Armed; he shall now look as well, or better, out of them. The night being
come, he shall Sup with the King, Queen, and Princess, where he shall never
take his eye off her, beholding unawares of those that stand present, and she
will do the like with as much discretion: for, as I have said, she is a very
discreet Damzell. The Tables shall be taken up; there shall enter unexpectedly
in at the hall, an ill-favored little Dwarff, with a fair Lady that comes
behind the Dwarff between two Giants, with a certain Adventure wrought by a
most ancient wise man; and that he who shall end it, shall be held for the
best Knight of the World. Presently the King will command all those that are
present to prove it, which they do, but none of them can finish it, but only
the new come Knight to the great proof of his fame. Whereat the Princess will
remain very glad, and will be very joyful and well apaid, because she has
settled her thoughts in so high a place. And the best of it is. That this King,
or Prince^ or what else he is, has a very great War with another as mighty
as he; and the Knight his guest does ask him (after he has been in the Court
a few days) license to go and serve him in that War. The King will give it
with a very good will, and the Knight will kiss his hands courteously for the
favor he does him therein: And that night he will take leave of his Lady the
Princess by some window of a Garden that looks into her Bedchamber, by the
which he has spoaken to her often times before, being a great means and help
thereto, a certain Damzell which the Princess trusts very much. He sighs, and
she will fall in a swond, and the Damzell will bring water, to bring her to her
self again. She will be also full of care because the morning draws near, and
she would not have them discovered for any her Ladies honor. Finally, the
Princess will return to her self, and will give out her beautiful hands at
the window to the Knight, who will kiss them a thousand and a thousand times,
and will bathe them all in tears. There it will remain agreed between them two,
the means that they will use to acquaint one another with their good or bad
successes; and the Princess will pray him to stay away as little time as he
may, which he shall promise unto her, with many Oaths and Protestations. Then
will he turn again to kiss her hands, and take his leave of her with such
feeling, that there will want but little to end his life in the place: he goes
from thence to his Chamber, and casts himself upon his Bed; but he shall not be
able to sleep a nap for sorrow of his departure: He will after get up very
early, and will go to take leave of the King, the Queen and Princess. They
tell him (having taken leave of the first two) that the Princess is ill at
ease and that she cannot be visited: the Knight thinks that it is for grief
of his departure, and the which ti^^ngs launceth him a new to the bottom of his
heart. whereby he will be almost constrained to give manifest tokens of his
grief: the damzel that is privy to their loves will be present, and must note
all that passes, and go after to tell it to her Mistrisse, who receives her
with tears, and says, unto her that one of the greatest afflictions she has
is, that she does not know who is her Knight, or whether he be of blood
royal or no: Her Damzell will assure her again, that so great bounty, beauty
and valor as is in her Knight, could not find place but in a great and royal
subject. The careful Princess will comfort her self with this hope, and
labor to be cheerful left she should give occasion to her Parents to
suspect any sinister thing of her; and within two days again she will come
out in public. By this the Knight is departed, he fights in the war, and
overcomes the Kings enemy, he winnes many Cities, and triumphs for many
Battles, he returns to the Court, he visits his Lady, and speaks to her at
the accustomed place, he agrees with her to demand her of the King for his
wife, in reward of his services, whereunto the King will not consent, because
he knows not what he is: but for all this, either by carrying her away, or by
some other manner, the Princess becomes his wife, and he accounts himself
therefore very fortunate, because it was after known that the same Knight is
son to a very valorous King, of I know not what Country; for I believe it is
not in all the Map. The Father dies, and the Princess does inherit the
Kingdom, and thus in two words our Knight is become a King, Here in this place
enters presently the commodity to reward his Squire, and all those that help
him to ascend to so high an estate. He marries his Squire with one of the
Princesses Damzels, which shall doubtlesly be the very same that was acquainted
with his love, who is some principal Dukes daughter.

That Is it I seek for, quoth Sancho, and all will go right; therefore I will
leave to that; for every whit of it which you said will happen to your self,
without missing a jot, calling your self, The Knight of the ill-favored ^ace.
Never doubt it Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote; for even in the very same manner, and
by the same steps that I have recounted here, Knights Errant do ascend, and
have ascended to be Kings and Emperors. This only is expedient, That we
enquire what King among the Christians or Heathens makes war and has a fair
daughter: but we shall have time enough to bethink that, since as I have said
we must first acquire fame in other places, before we go to the Court. Also I
want another thing, that put case that we find a Christian or Pagan King, that
has wars and a fair daughter, and that I have gained incredible fame
throughout the wide-world, yet cannot I tell how I might find that I am
descended from Kings, or that I am at the least Cosen Germain removed of an
Emperor? for the King will not give me his daughter until this be first
very well proved, though my works deserve it never so much; so that I fear to
lose through this defect, that which mine own has merited so well. True it is
that I am a Gentleman of a known house of propriety and possession; and perhaps
the wise man that shall write my History will so beautify my kindred and
descent, that he will find me to be the fifth or six descent from a King;
for thou must understand Sancho, that there are two manners of lineages in the
world. Some that derive their Pedigree from Princes and Monarchs, whom time
has by little and little diminished and consumed, and ended in a point like
Pyramydes. Others that took their beginning from base people, and ascend from
degree unto degree, until they become at last great Lords. So that all the
difference is, That some were that which they are not now; and others are that
which they were not; and it might be that I am of those, and after good
examination my beginning might be found to have been famous and glorious,
wherewithal the King, my father in law ought to be content, whosoever he
were: and when he were not, yet shall the Princess love me in such sort,
that she shall in despite of her Fathers teeth admit me for her Lord and
Spouse, although she knew me to be the son of a water-bearer. And if not,
here in this place may quader well the carrying of her away perforce, and
carrying of her where best I liked; for either time or death must needs end her
fathers displeasure.

Here comes well to pass that, Sancho, which some damned fellows are wont to
say; Seek not to get that with a good will, which thou may take perforce,
although it were better said, The leaps of a shrub is more worth then good men's
entreaties. I say it to this purpose, that if the King your father in law will
not condescend to give unto you the Princess my Mistress, then there is no
more to be done, but as you say to her, steal away and carry her to another
place: but all the harm is, that in the mean while that composition is unmade,
and you possess not quietly your Kingdom, the poor Squire may whistle for any
benefit or pleasure you are able to do him, if it be not that the damzel of
whom you spoke even now, run away with her Lady, and that he pass away his
misfortunes now and then with her, until heaven ordain some other thing: for
I do think that his Lord may give her unto him presently, if she please to be
his lawful Spouse. There Is none that can deprive thee of that, quoth
Don-Quixote. Why, so that this may befall, quoth Sancho, there is no more but to
commend our selves to God and let Fortune run where it may best address us.
God bring it so to pass, quoth Don-Quixote, as I desire, and thou have need of
Sancho; and let him be a wretch that accouts himself one. Let him be so, quoth
Sancho, for I am an old Christian; and to be an Earl, there is no more
requisite. I, and it is more then enough, quoth Don-Quixote, for that purpose;
and though thou werest not, it made not much matter; for I being a King, may
give thee nobility, without either buying of it, or serving me with nothing:
For in creating thee an Earl, lo thereby thou art a Gentleman. And let men
say what they please; they must in good faith, call thee Right Honorable,
although it grieve them never so much. And think you, quoth Sancho, that I
would not authorize my Litado. Thou must say Dictado or dignity, quoth
Don-Quixote, and not Litado, for that is barbarous word. Let it be so, quoth
Sancho Panca; I say that I would accommodate all very well; for I was once the
Warner of a Confratriety, and the Warners gown became me so well, that every
one said I had a presence sit for the Provest of the same. Then how much more
when I shall set on my shoulders the Royal Robe of a Duke, or be apparrelled
with gold and pearls after the custom of strange Earls? I do verify believe
that men will come a hundred leagues to see me. Thou will seem very well, quoth
Don-Quixote; but thou must shave that beard very often; for as thou have it now
so bushie, knit, and unhandsome: if thou shavest it not with a Razor at the
least every other day, men will know that thou art as far from Gentilitie as
a Musket can carry. What more is there to be done, quoth Sancho, then to take
a Barber and keep him hired in my house? yea, and if it be necessary, he shall
ride after me, as if he were a Master of Horse to some Noble man. How know
thou, quoth Don-Quixote, that Noble men have their Masters of Horses riding
after them? Some few years ago I was a month in the Court, and there I saw
that a young little Lord rode by for his pleasure, they said he was a great
Grandee: there followed him still a horseback a certain man turning every way
that he went, so as he verily seemed to be his horse tail. I then demanded
the cause, why that man did not ride by the others side, but still did follow
him so? They answered me that he was Master of his horses, and that the
Grandees were accustomed to carry such men after them. Thou say true, quoth
Don-Quixote, and thou may carry thy Barber in that manner after thee; for
customs came not all together, nor were not invented at once: And thou may
be the first Earl that carried his Barber after him. And I do assure thee
that it is an Office of more trust to trim a man's beard then to saddle a horse.
Let that of the Barber rest to my charge, quoth Sancho; and that of procuring
to be a King, and of creating me an Earl, to yours. It shall be so, quoth
Don-Quixote: And thus lifting up his eyes, he saw that which shall be
recounted in the chapter following.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Liberty Don-Quixote gave to many Wretches, who were a carrying perforce
to a place they desired not.
CIde Hamete Benengeli, an Arabicall and Machegan Author recounts in this most
grave, lofty, divine, sweet, conceited History, That after these discourses
past between Don-Quixote and his Squire Sancho Panca, which we have laid down
in the last Chapter, Don-Quixote lifting up his eyes, saw that there came in
the very same way wherein they rode, about some twelve men in a company on
foot, inserted like Bead-stones in a great chain of iron, that was tied about
their necks, and every one of them had manacles besides on their hands. There
came to conduct them two on horseback and two others a foot: The horsemen had
fire-lock pieces; Those that came a foot, darts and swords. And as soon as
Sancho saw them, he said; This is a chain of Gally-slaves, people forced by
the King to go to the Galleys. How? people forced, demanded Don-Quixote: is it
possible that the King will force any body? I say not so, answered Sancho, but
that it is people which are condemned for their offenses to serve the King in
the Galleys perforce. In resolution, replied Don-Quixote, (howsoever it be)
this folk, although they be conducted, go perforce, and not willingly. That Is
so, quoth Sancho. Then if that be so, here falls in justly the execution of my
Function, to wit, the dissolving of violences and outrages, and the succouring
of the afflicted and needful. I pray you Sir, quoth Sancho, to consider that
the Justice, who represents the King himself, does wrong or violence to nobody;
but only does chastise them for their committed crimes.

By this the chain of slaves arrived, and Don-Quixote with very courteous
terms requested those that went in their guard, that they would please to
inform him of the cause wherefore they carried that people away in that
manner? One of the guardians a Horseback answered, that they were slaves
condemned by his Majesty to the Galleys, and there was no more to be said,
neither ought he to desire any farther knowledge. For all that, replied
Don-Quixote, I would feign learn of every one of them in particular the cause
of his disgrace: and to this did add other such and so courteous words, to move
them to tell him what he desired, as the other guardian a Horseback said.
Although we carry here the Register and testimony of the condemnations of every
one of these wretches, yet this is no time to hold them here long, or take out
the Processes to read; draw you nearer and demand it of themselves, for they
may tell it and they please, and I know they will; for they are men that take
delight both in acting and relating knaveries.

With this license, which Don-Quixote himself would have taken, although they
had not given it him, he came to the chain, and demanded of the first for what
offense he went in so ill a guise? He answered that his offense was no other
then for being in love; for which cause only he went in that manner. For that
and no more, replied Don-Quixote? Well, if enamoured folk be cast into the
Galleys, I might have been rowing there a good many days ago. My love was not
such as you conjecture, quoth the slave, for mine was that I loved so much a
basket well heaped with fine linen, as I did embrace it so straightly, that if
the Justice had not taken it away from me by force, I would not have forsaken
it to this hour by my good will. All was done in Flagrante, there was no
leisure to give me torment, the cause was concluded, my shoulders accommodated
with a hundred, and for a supplement three prices of Garrupes, and the work
was ended. What are Garrupes, quoth Don-Quixote? Garrupes are Galleys, replied
the slave, who was a young man of some four and twenty years old, and said he
was borne in Piedrahita.

Don-Quixote demanded of the second his cause of offense, who would answer
nothing he went so sad and melancholy. But the first answered for him, and
said, Sir this man goes for a Canary-bird, I mean for a Musician and Singer.
Is it possible, quoth Don-Quixote, that Musicians and Singers are likewise sent
to the Galleys? Yes Sir, quoth the slave, for there is nothing worse then to
sing in anguish. Rather, quoth Don-Quixote, I have heard say that he which
sings does affright and chase away his harms. Here it is quite contrary, quoth
the slave, for He that sings once, weeps all his life after. I do not
understand it, said Don-Quixote: But one of the Gardians said to him, Sir
Knight, to sing in anguish, is said among this people non Sancta, to confess
upon the rack. They gave this poor wretch the torture, and he confessed his
delight, that he was a Quartrezo, that is a stealer of Beasts: And because he
has confessed, he is likewise condemned to the Galleys for six years, with an
Amen of two hundred blows, which he bears already with him on his shoulders:
And he goes always thus sad and pensative, because the other thieves that
remain behind, and also those which go here do abuse, despise, and scorn him
for confessing, and not having a courage to say Non: For they say a N^^ has as
many letters as a Yea; and that a Delinquent is very fortunate, when his life
or his death only depends of his own tongue, and not of witnesses or proofs:
And in mine opinion they have very great reason. I likewise think the same,
quoth Don-Quixote.

And passing to the third, he demanded that which he had done of the rest,
who answered him out of hand, and that pleasantly: I go to the Lady Garrupes
for five years, because I wantted ten Duccats. I will give twenty with all my
heart to free thee from that misfortune, quoth Don-Quixote. That, quoth the
Slave, would be like one that has money in the midest of the Gulf, and yet
dies for hunger, because he can get no meat to buy for it. I say this because
if I had those twenty Duccats which your Worships liberality offers me, in due
season, I would have so anointed with them the Notaries pen, and whetted my
Lawyers wit so well, that I might to day see my self in the midest of the
Market of Cocodover of Toledo, and not in this way trayled thus like a
Gray-hound: but God is great. Patience, and this is enough.

Don-Quixote went after to the fourth, who was a man of a venerable presence,
with a long white beard which reached to his bosom. Who hearing himself
demanded the cause why he came there, began to weep, and answered not a word.
But the fifth Slave lent him a tongue, and said, This honest man goes to the
Galleys for four years, after he had walked the Ordinary apparrelled in pomp,
and a horseback. That is, quoth Sancho Panca, as I take, after he was carried
about to the shame and public view of the People. You are in the right, quoth
the Slave; and the crime for which he is condemned to this pain, was, for
being a Broker of the ear, I, and of all the body too; for in effect I mean
that this Gentleman goes for a Baud, and likewise for having a little smack
and entrance in witchcraft. If that smack and insight in witchcraft were not
added, quoth Don-Quixote, he merrited not to go and row in the Galleys for
being a pure Baud, but rather deserved to govern and be their General. For the
Office of a Baud^ is not like every other ordinary Office, but rather of great
discretion and most necessary in any Commonwealth well governed, and should
not be practiced but by people well borne; and ought besides to have a Veedor,
[Veedor is an Office in Spain of great trust, set by the King to examine and
search the dealing of other Underofficers; an Overseer or Controuler.] and
Examinator of them, as are of all other trades, and a certain appointed number
of men known, as are of the other Brokers of the Exchange. And in this manner
many harms that are done might be excused, because this Trade and Office is
practiced by indiscreet people of little understanding; such as are women of
little more or less; young Pages and Jesters of few years standing, and of
less experience; which in the most urgent occasions, and when they should
contrive a thing artificially, the crumms freeze in their mouths and fists;
and they know not which is their right hand. Fain would I pass forward, and
give reasons why it is convenient to make choice of those which ought in the
Commonwealth to practice this so necessary an Office: but the place and season
is not sit for it. One day I will say it to those which may provide and remedy
it: only I say now, that the assumpt or addition of a Witch, has deprived me
of the compassion I should otherwise have, to see those gray hairs and
venerable face in such distress for being a Baud. Although I know very well
that no Sorcery in the world can move or force the will as some ignorant
persons think (for our will is a free power, and there is no Herb nor Charm can
constrain it.) That which certain simple women, or cousening companions make,
are some mixtures and poisons, wherewithal they cause men run madd, and in
the mean while persuade us that they have force to make one love well, being
(as I have said) a thing most impossible to constrain the Will. That is true,
quoth the old man, and I protest Sir, that I am wholly innocent of the
imputation of Witchcraft. As for being a Baud I could not deny it: but yet I
never thought that I did ill therein; for all mine intention was, that all the
world should disport them, and live together in concord and quietness without
griefs or quarrels: but this my good desire availed me but little to hinder my
going there; from whence I have no hope ever to return, my years do so burden
me, and also the stone, which lets me not rest an inst^nt. And saying this, he
turned again to his lamentations as at the first; and Sancho took such
compassion on him, as setting his hand into his bosom, he drew out a couple
of shillings and gave it him as an alms.

From him Don-Quixote past to another, and demanded his fault, who answered
with no less, but with much more pleasantness then the former: I go here
because I have jested somewhat too much with two Cosen Germains of mine own,
and with two other sisters which were none of mine own: Finally, I jested so
much with them all that thence resulted the increase of my Kindred so
intricately, as there is no Casuist that can well resolve it. All was proved by
me, I wanted favor, I had no money, and was in danger to lose my head:
Finally, I was condemned for six years to the Galleys. I consented it, as a
punishment of my fault; I am young, and let my life but hold out a while longer
and all will go well. And if you Sir Knight, carry any thing to succor us
poor folk, God will reward you it in heaven, and we will have care here on
earth to desire God in our daily prayers for your life and health, that it be
as long and as good as your good countenance deserves. He that said this went
in the habit of a Student, and one of the Guard told him that he was a great
talker, and a very good Latinist.

After all these came a man of some thirty years old, of very comely personage,
save only that when he looked, he seemed to thrust the one eye into the
other: He was differently tied from the rest; for he carried about his leg
so long a chain, that it tired all the rest of his body: And he had besides
two iron rings about his neck, the one of the chain, and the other of that
kind which are called A keep friend, or the foot of a friend; from whence
descended two irons unto his middle, out of which did stick two manacles,
wherein his hand^ were lock up with a great hanging lock; so as he could
neither set his hands to his mouth, nor bend down his head toward his hands.
Don-Quixote demanded why he was so laden with iron more then the rest? The
guard answered, because he alone has committed more (...) then all together,
and was a more desperate knave; and that although they carried him tied in that
sort, yet went they not sure of him, but feared he would make an escape. What
falts can he have so grievous, quoth Don-Quixote, since he has only deserved
to be sent to the Galleys? he goes, replied the guard to them for ten years,
which is equivalent to a civil death; never strive to know more but that this
man is the notorious Gines of Passamonte, who is otherwise called Ginesilio of
Parapilla. Master Commissary, quoth the slave, hearing him say so, go fair
and softly, and run not thus dilating of names and sirnames, I am called
Gines, and not Ginesilio; and Passamonte is my surname, and not Parapilla as
you say, and let every one turn about him, and he shall not do little. Speak
with less swelling, quoth the Commissary, Sir Thief of more then the Mark
[Marke is a certain length appointed in Spain for Swords, which if any
transgress he is punished, and the Sword Forfeited.] If you will not have me
to make you hold your peace maugre your teeth. It seems well (quoth the slave)
that a man is carried as pleases God; but one day sombodie shall know whether
I be called Ginesilio of Parapilla. Why do not they call thee so couzener;
quoth the Guard? They do said Gines, but I will make that they shall not call
me so, or I will fleece them, there where I mutter under my teeth. Sir Knight,
if you have any thing to bestow on us, give it us now, and be gone in the name
of God; for you do tire us with your too curious search of knowing other men's
lives; and if you would know mine, you shall understand that I am Gines of
Passamonte, whose life is written (showing his hand) by these two fingers. He
says true, quoth the Commiss^ry, for he himself has penned his own History
so well as there is nothing more to be desired: and leaves the book pawned in
the Prison for two hundred Rials: and likewise mean to redeem it, quoth
Gines, though it were in for as many Ducats.

Is it so good a work, said Don-Quixote? It is so good replied Gines, that it
quite puts down Lazarillo de Tormes, and as many others as are written or shall
be written of that kind: for that which I dare affirm to you is, that it
treats of true accidents, and those so delightful that no like invention can
be compared to them. And how is the book entitled, quoth Don-Quixote? It is
called, said he, The life of Gines of Passamonte. And is it yet ended said the
Knight? How can it be finished replied he, my life being not yet ended? Since
all that is written is from the hour of my birth until that instant that I was
sent this last time to the Galleys. Why then belike you were there once before
(quoth Don-Quixote) to serve God and the King, I have been in there another
time four years, and I know already how the biscuit and provant agree with my
stomach (quoth Gines) nor does it grieve me very much to return unto them;
for there I shall have leisure to finish my Book, and I have many things yet
to say: and in the Galleys of Spain, there is more resting time then is
requisite for that business, although I shall not need much time to pen what
is yet unwritten; for I can, if need were, say it all by roate. Thou seem
to be ingenuous, quoth Don-Quixote, and unfortunate withal, quoth Gines; for
mishaps do still persecute the best w^ts. They persecute knaves, quoth the
Commissary. I have already spoken to Master Commissary, quoth Passamonte, to
go fair aod softly; for the Lords did not give you that rod, to the end you
should abuse us wretches that go here, but rather to guide and carry us where
his Majesty has commanded, if not, by the life of -- it is enough that perhaps
one day may come to light, the spots that were made in the Inn. And let all
the world peace and live well, and speak better, for this is now too great a
digression. The Commissary held up his rod to strike Passamonte in answer of
his Threats, but Don-Quixote put himself between them, and entreated him not
to use him hardly, seeing it was not much that one who carried his hands so
tied, should have his tongue somewhat free, and then turning himself toward the
slaves he said:

I have gathered out of all that which you have said, dear brethren, that
although they punish you for your faults, yet that the pains you go to suffer
do not very well please you, and that you march toward them with a very ill
will, and wholly constrained, and that perhaps the little courage this fellow
had on the Rack, the want of money that the other had, the small favor that a
third enjoyed, and finally the wrested Sentence of the Judge, and the not
executing that Justice that was on your sides, have been cause of your
misery. All which does present it self to my memory in such sort, as it
persuades, yea and inforceth me to effect that for you, for which heaven sent
me into the world, and made me profess that Order of Knighthood which I
follow, and that vow which I made therein to favor and assist the needful,
and those that are oppressed by others more potent. But for as much as I know
that it is one of the parts of prudence, not to do that by foul means which
may be accomplished by fair; I will entreat those Gentlemen your Guardians and
Commissary they will please to loose and let you depart peaceably; for there
will not want others to serve the King in better occasions; for it seems to me
a rigorous manner of proceeding, to make Slaves of them whom God and nature
created free. How much more good Sits of the guard (added Don-Quixote) seeing
these poor men have never committed any offense against you? let them answer
for their sins in the other world: there is a God in heaven, who is not
negligent in punishing the evil, nor rewarding the good: And it is no wise
decent, that honorable men should be the executioners of other men, seeing
they cannot gain or lose much thereby. I demand this of you in this peaceable
quiet manner, to the end that if you accomplish my request, I may have occasion
to yield you thanks; and if you will not do it willingly, then shall this
Lance and this Sword, guided by the invincible valor of mine arm force you
to it.

This is a pleasant doting, answered the Commissary, and an excellent jest
wherewithal you have finished your large reasoning. Would you (good Sir
Knight) have us leave unto you those the King forces, as if we had authority
to let them go, or you to command us to do it. Go on your way in a good hour
gentle Sir, and settle the Basin you bear on your head somewhat righter, and
search not thus whether the Cat has three feet. Thou art a Cat, and a Rat, and
a Knave, quoth Don-Quixote: And so with word and deed at once, he assaulted
him so suddenly, as without giving him leisure to defend himself, he struck
him down to the earth very sore wounded with a blow of his Lance; and as
fortune would, this was he that had the fire-lock piece: the rest of the guard
remained astonished at the unexpected accident: but at last returning to
themselves, the horsemen set hand to their swords, and the footmen to their
darts, and all of them set upon Don-Quixote, who expected them very quietly:
And doubtlesly he would have been in great danger, if the Slaves perceiving
the occasion offered to be so fit to recover liberty, had not procured it by
breaking the chain wherein they were linked. The Hurliburly was such as the
guards now began to run to hinder the Slaves from untying themselves, now to
offend Don-Quixote who assaulted them; so that they could do nothing available
to keep their Prisoners. Sancho for his part holp to lose Gines of Passamonte,
who was the first that leaped free into the field without clog, and setting
upon the overthrown Commissary, he disarmed him of his sword and piece, and now
aiming at the one and then at the other with it, without discharging, made all
the guards to abandon the field, as well for fear of Passamontes piece, as
also to shun the mavelous shower of stones that the Slaves, now delivered,
poured on them. Sancho grew marveilous sad at this success; for he suspected
that those which fled away, would go and give notice of the violence committed
to the Holy Brotherhood, which would presently issue in troops to search the
Delinquents: And said as much to his Lord, requesting him to depart presently
from thence, and imbosk himself in the Mountain, which was very near. All is
well, quoth Don-Quixote, I know now what is fit to be done: And so calling
together all the Slaves that were in a tumult, and had stripped the Commissary
naked, they came all about him, to hear what he commanded, to whom he said:

It is the part of people well borne to gratify and acknowledge the benefits
they receive, ingratitude being one of the sins that most offends the
highest. I say it Sirs, to this end, because you have by manifest trial seen
that which you have received at my hand, in reward whereof I desire, and it is
my will, that all of you laden with that chain from which I even now freed
your necks, go presently to the City of Toboso, and there present your selves
before the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, and recount unto her, that her Knight of
the ill-favored face sends you there to remember his service to her; and
relate unto her at large the manner of your freedom, all you that have had
such noble fortune, and this being done you may after go where you please.

Gines de Passamonte answered for all the rest, saying; that which you demand,
good Sir (our Releaser) is most impossible to be performrd, by reason that we
cannot go altogether through these ways, but alone and divided, procuring
each of us to hid himself in the bowels of the earth, to the end we may not
be found by the Holy-brotherhood, which will doubtlesly set out to search for
us: that therefore which you may and ought to do in this exigent is, to change
this service and homage of the Lady Dulnea of Toboso, into a certain number of
Ave Mary's and Creedes, which we will say for you^ ^^tention, and this is a
thing that may be accomplished by night or by day, running or resting, in
peace or in war; but to think that we will return again to take up our
chains, or set our selves in the way of Toboso, is as hard as to make us
believe, that it is now night, it being yet scarce ten of the clock in the
morning, and to demand such a thing of us, is as likely as to seek for Pears
of the Elme-tree. I swear by such a one (quoth Don-Quixote thoroughly enraged)
Sir son of a whore, Don Ginesilio of Paropilli^, or howsoever you are called,
that thou shall go thy self alone with thy tail between thy legs, and bear
all the chain in thy neck. Passamonte who was by nature very chollerick,
knowing assuredly that Don-Quixote was not very wise (seeing he had attempted
such a desperate Act, as to seek to give them liberty) seeing himself thus
abused, winked on his Companions, and going a little aside, they sent such a
shower of stones on Don-Quixote, as he had no leisure to cover himself with
his Buckler, and poor Rozinante made no more account of the spur, then if
his sides were made of Brass. Sancho, ran behind his Ass, and by his
means sheltred himself from the clowd and shower of stones, that rained upon
both. And Don-Quixote could not cover himself so well, but that a number of
stones struck him in the body with so great force, as they overthrew him at
last to the ground, and scarce was he fallen when the Student leapt upon him
and took the Basin off his head, and gave him three or four blows with it on
the shoulders, and after struck it so often about the ground as he almost broke
it in pieces. They took from him likewise a Cassock which he wore upon his
Armor, and thought also to take away his stockins but that they were hindered
by his Greaves. From Sancho they took away his Cassocke, and left him in his
hair, and dividing all the spoils of the Battle among themselves, they
departed every one by the way he pleased, troubled with greater care how to
escape from the Holy brotherhood which they feared, then to lade themselves
with the iron chain, and go and present themselves before the Lady Dulcinea
of Toboso. The Ass and Rozinante; Sancho and Don-Quixote remained alone. The
Ass stood pensative, with his head hanging downwards, shaking now and then
his ears, thinking that the storm of stones was not yet past, but that they
still buzzed by his head, Rozinante lay overthrown by his Master, who was
likewise struck down by another blow of a stone; Sancho in fear of the
bullets of the Holy Brotherhood, and Don-Quixote most discontent to see
himself so misused by those very same to whom he had done so much good.

CHAP. IX.
Of that which befell the famous Don-Quixote in Siera Monare, which was one of
the most rare Adventures that in this or any other so authentical a History is
recounted.
Don-Quixote seeing himself in so ill plight, said to his Squire Sancho, I have
heard say oft-times, that to do good to men unthankful, is to cast water into
the Sea. If I had believed what thou said to me, I might well have prevented
all this grief: but now that is past, patience, and be wiser another time. You
will take warning as much by this, quoth Sancho, as I am a Turk. But since you
say, that if you had believed me, you had avoided this grief, believe me now
and you shall eschew a greater: for you must wit, that no Knighthood nor
Chival^y is of any authority with the Holy Brotherhood; for it cares not two
farthings for all the Knights Errant in the world; and know, that me thinks I
hear their arrows buz about mine ears already. Sancho, thou art a natural
coward, quoth Don-Quixote; but because thou may not say that I am obstinate,
and that I never follow thine advice, I will take thy counsel this time, and
convey my self from that fury which now thou fear so much: but it shall be
on a condition, that thou never tell alive nor dying to any mortal Creature,
that I retired or withdrew my self out of this danger for fear; but only to
satisfy thy requests: For if thou say any other thing, thou shall belie me
most falsely: and even from this very time till that, and from thence until now
I give thee the lie herein; and I say thou lie, and shall lie as often times as
thou say or do think the contrary; and do not reply to me: For in only
thinking that I withdraw my self out of, any peril, but principally this,
which seems to carry with it some shadow of fear: I am about to remain and
expect here alone, not only for the Holy Brotherhood, which thou namest and
fear; but also for the Brethren of the twelve Tribes, for the seven
Macchabees, for Castor and Pollux, and for all the other Brothers and
Brotherhoods in the world. Sir, answered Sancho, to retire is not to fly; and
to expect is wisdom, when the danger exceepeth all hope: and it is the part of
a wise men to keep himself safe to day for to morrow; and not to adventure
himself wholly in one day. And know, that although I be but a rude Clown, yet
do I for all that understand somewhat of that which men call good government:
and therefore do not repent your self for following mine advice, but mount on
Rozinante if you be able; if not, I will help you, and come after me; for my
mind gives me that we shall now have more use of legs then hands.

Don-Quixote leaped on his horse, without replying a word, and Sancho guiding
him on his Ass, they both entered into that part of Sierra Morena [A great and
large Mountain of Spain] that was near unto them: Sancho had a secret design
to cross over it all, and issue at Viso or Amadovar of Campo, and in the mean
time to hide themselves for some days among those craggie and intricate Rocks,
to the end they might not be found by the Holy Bortherhood, if it did make
after them. And he was the more encouraged to do this, because he saw their
Provision which he carried on his Ass had escaped safely out of the skirmish
of the Gally-slaves; a thing which he accounted to be a miracle, considering
the diligence that the Slaves had used to search and carry away all things
with them. They arrived that night into the very midst and bowels of the
Mountain, and there Sancho thought it fittest to spend that night, yea and some
other few days also, at least as long as their Victuales endured, and with
this resolution they took up their lodging among a number of Cork-Trees that
grew between two Rocks. But fatal chance, which according to the opinion of
those that have not the light of faith, guides, directs, and compounde^h all
as it likes, ordained, that that famous Cousener and Thief Gines de
Passamonte, who was before delivered out of chains by Don-Quixotes force and
folly, persuaded through fear he conceived of the Holy Brotherhood (whom he
had just cause to fear) resolved to hide himself likewise in that Mountain, and
his fortune and fears led him just to the place where it had first addressed
Don-Quixote and his Squire, just at such time as he might perceive them, and
they both at that instant fallen asleep: And as evill-men are evermore
ungrateful, and that necessity forces a man to attempt that which it urges,
and likewise that the present redress prevents the expectation of a future,
Gines, who was neither grateful nor gracious, resolved to steal away Sancho
his Ass, making no account of Rozinante, as a thing neither saleable nor
pawnable: Sancho slept soundly, and so he stole his beast, and was before
morning so far off from thence, as he feared not to be found.

Aurora sallied forth at last to refresh the earth, and affright Sancho with a
most sorrowful accident, for he presently missed his Ass; and so seeing
himself deprived of him, he began the most sad and do^efull lamentation of the
world; in such sort as he awaked Don-Quixote with his outcries, who heard
that he said thus. O child of my howels; borne in mine own house; the sport of
my children; the comfort of my wife; and the envy of my neighbors; the ease
of my burdens; and finally, the susteiner of half of my person: for with six
and twenty Marvidiis, that I gained daily by thee, I did defray half of mine
expenses! Don-Quixote who heard the plaint, and knew also the cause, did
comfort Sancho with the best words he could devise, and desired him to have
patience, promising to give a letter of exchange, to the end that they of his
house might deliver him three Asses of five, which he had left at home.

Sancho comforted himself again with this promise, and dried up his tears,
moderated his sighs, and gave his Lord thanks for so great a favor: And as
they entered in farther among those Mountains we cannot recount the joy of our
Knight, to whom those places seemed most accommodate to atchieve the Adventures
he searched for. They reduced to his memory the mavelous accidents that had
befaln Knights Errant in like Solitudes and Deserts: And he rode so
overwhelmed and transported by these thoughts, as he remembered nothing else;
nor Sancho had any other care (after he was out of fear to be taken) but how
to fill his belly with some of the r^licks which yet remained of the Clericall
spoils; and so he followed his Lord, taking now and then out of a basket
(which Rozinante carried for want of the Ass) some meat, lining there-withall
his paunch: and whilst he went thus employed, he would not have given a
(...) to encounter any other Adventure, how honorable soever.

But whilst he was thus busied, he espied his Master laboring to take up with
the point of his Javeline, some bulk or other that lay on the ground, and went
toward him to see whether he needed his help just at the season that he
lifted up a saddle Cushion and a Portmantue fast to it, which were half (...)
or rather wholly roited by the weather, yet they weighed so much that Sanchoes
assistance was requisite to take them up: and straight his Lord commanded him
to see what was in the Wallet. Sancho obeyed with expedition. And although it
was shut with a chain and hanging lock, yet by the parts which were torn he
saw what was within, to wit four fine Holland shirts, and other (...) both
curious and clean: and moreover a handkercher, wherein was a good quantity of
Gold: which he perceiving said, Blessed be Heaven which has once presented to
us a beneficial Adventure: And searching for more, he found a Tablet very
costly bound. This Don-Quixote took of him, commanding him to keep the gold
with himself; for which rich favor Sancho did presently kiss his hands: and
after taking all the linen, he clapped it up in the bag of their Virtuals.
Don-Quixote having stored all these things, said; Me thinks Sancho (and it
cannot be possible any other) that some trav^^ler having left his way, past
through this Mountain, and being encountered by thieves, they slew him, and
buried him in this secret place. It cannot be so, answered Sancho; for if they
were Thieves, they would not have left this money behind them. Thou say
true, quoth Don-Quixote, and therefore I cannot conjecture what it might be:
but stay a while, we will see whether there be any thing written in these
Tablets, by which we may vent and find out that which I desire. Then he opened
it, and the first thing that he found written in it, as it were a first
draught, but done with a very fair Character, was a Sonnet which he read
aloud, that Sancho might also hear it, and was this which ensues. OR love of
understanding quite is void:
Or he abounds in cruelty, or my pain
The Occasion equals not; for which I bide
The torments dir^, he makes me sustain.
But if love be a God, I dare maintain
He naught ignores: and reason aye decides
Gods should not cruel be: then who ordaines
This pain I worship, which my heart devides?
Filis! I err, if thou I say it is:
For so great ill and good cannot consist.
Nor does this wrack from Heaven befall, but yet,
That shortly I must die can no way miss:
For th'evill whose cause is hardly well expressed
By miracle alone, true cure may get.


Nothing can be learned by that Verse, quoth Sancho, if by that Hilo or thread
[An allusion to the Spanish word Hilo, signifying a thread.] which is said
there, you gather not where lies the rest of the clue. What Hilo is here, quoth
Don-Quixote? Me thought, quoth Sancho, that you read Hilo there. I did not, but
Fili, said Don-Quixote, which is without doubt the name of the Lady, on whom
the Author of this Sonnet complains, who in good truth seems to be a
reasonable good Poet, or else I know but little of that Art.

Why then, quoth Sancho, belike you do also understand Poetry. That I do, and
more then thou think, quoth Don-Quixote, as thou shall see when thou shall
carry a Letter from me to my Lady Dulcinea de^ Toboso, written in verse from
the one end to the other: For I would thou should know, Sancho, that all or
the greater number of Knights Errant, in times past, were great Versifiers and
Musicians: For these two qualities, or graces as I may better term them, are
annexed to amorous Knights Adventures. True it is, that the Verses of the
ancient Knights are not so adorned with words as they are rich in conceits.

I pray you read more, quoth Sancho; for perhaps you may find somewhat that
may satisfy. Then Don-Quixote turned the leaf, and said, This is prose and
seems to be a Letter. What Sir, a missive Letter, quoth Sancho? No, but rather
of Love, according to the beginning, quoth Don-Quixote. I pray you therefore,
quoth Sancho, read it loud enough; for I take great delight in these things of
Love. I am content, quoth Don-Quixote: And reading it loudly, as Sancho had
requested, it said as ensues.

Thy false promise and my certain misfortune, do carry me to such a place, as
from thence thou shall sooner receive news of my death, then reasons of my just
complaints. Thou have disdained me (O ingrate) for one that has more, but not
for one that is worth more then I am: But if virtue were a treasure of
estimation, I would not Emulate other men's fortunes, nor weep thus for mine own
misfortunes. That which thy beauty erected thy works have overthrown: by it I
deemed thee to be an Angel, and by these I certainly know thee to be but a
woman. Rest in peace (O causer of my War) and let Heaven work so, that thy
Spouses deceits remain still concealed, to the end thou may not repent what
thou did, and I be constrained to take revenge of that I desire not.

Having read the Letter, Don-Quixote said, We can collect less by this then
by the Verses, what the Author is, other then that he is some disdained
Lover. And so passing over all the book, he found other Verses and Letters, of
which he could read some, others not at all. But the sum of them all were,
Accusations, Plaints, and Mistrusts, Pleasures, Griefs, Favors, and Disdains,
some Solemnized, others Deplored. And whilst Don-Quixote past over the Book,
Sancho past over the Malet, without leaving a corner of it or the Cushion
unsearched, or a seam unript, nor a lock of wool uncarded, to the end that
nothing might remain behind for want of diligence or carelessenesse. The
found gold which past a hundred crowns, had stirred in him such a greediness to
have more. And though he got no more then that which he found at the first,
yet did he account his flights in the Coverlet, his vomitting of the Drench,
the benedictions of the Pack-staves, the blows of the Carrier, the loss of his
Wallet, the robbing of his Cas^ock, and all the hunger thirst and weariness
that he had past in the service of his good Lord and Master, for well
employed; accounting himself to be more then well paid by the gifts received
of the money they found. The Knight of the Ill-favored face was the while
possessed with a mavelous desire to know who was the owner of the malet,
conjecturing by the Sonnet and Letter, the gold and Linen, that the enamoured
was some man of worth, whom the disdain and rigor of his Lady had conducted to
some desperate terms. But by reason that no body appeared, through that
inhabitable and Desert place, by whom he might be informed, he thought on it
no more, but only rode on, without choosing any other way then that which
pleased Rozinante to travail, who took the plainest and easiest to pass through
having still an imagination that there could not want some strange Adventure
amid'st that Forest.

And as he rode on with this conceit, he saw a man on the top of a little
Mountain that stood just before his face, leap from Rock to Rock, and Tuff to
Tuff, with wonde^full dexterity. And as he thought was naked, had a black and
thick beard; the hairs many and confusedly mingled; his feet and legs bare;
his thighs were covered with a pair of hose, which seemed to be of murry
Velvet, but were so torn, that they discovered his flesh in many places: His
head was likewise bare; and although he past by with the haste we have
recounted, yet did The Knight of the ill-favored face note all these
particulars; and although he endeavored, yet could not he follow him; for it
was not in Rozinantes power, in that weak state wherein he was, to travail so
swiftly among those Rocks chiefly being naturally very slow and phlegmatic.

Don-Quixote after espying him, did instantly imagine him to be the owner of
the Cushion and Malet; and therefore resolved to go on in his search, although
he should spend a whole year therein among those Mountains; and commanded
Sancho to go about the one side of the Mountain, and he would go the other,
and, quoth he, it may befall, that by using this diligence, we may encounter
with that man which vanished so suddenly out of our sight.

I cannot do so, quoth Sancho; for that in parting one step from you, fear
presently so assalts me with a thousand visions and affrightments. And let this
serve you hereafter for a warning to the end you may not henceforth part me the
black of a nail from your presence. It shall be so, answered The Knight of the
ill-favored face: and I am very glad that thou do thus build upon my
valor, the which shall never fail thee, although thou did want thy very
^oul; and therefore follow me by little and little or as thou may, and make
of thine eyes two Lant-hornes; for we will give a turn about this little
Rock, and perhaps we may meet with this man whom we saw even now, who
doublesly can be none other then the owner of our booty.

To which Sancho, replied, It were much better not to find him: for if we
should meet him, and were by chance the owner of this money, it is most evident
that I must restore it to him; and therefore it is better without using this
unprofitable diligence, to let me possess it bona fide, until the true Lord
shall appear by some way less curious and dilligent: which perhaps may fall at
such a time as it shall be all spent; and in that case I am free from all
Processes by privilege of the King.

Thou deceivest thy self, Sancho, therein, quoth Don-Quixote: for seeing we
are fallen already into suspicion of the owner, we are bound to search and
restore it to him: and when we would not seek him out, yet the vehement
presumption that we have of it, has made us possessors mala-fide, and renders
us as culpable as if he whom we surmise were verily the true Lord. So that,
friend Sancho, be not grieved to seek him, in respect of the grief whereof thou
shall free me if he be found. And saying so spurred Rozinante, and Sancho
followed after a foot, animated by the hope of the young Asses his Master had
promised unto him: And having compassed a part of the Mountain, they found a
little stream, wherein lay dead, and half devoured by Dogs and Crows, a Mule
saddled and bridled, all which confirmed more in them the suspicion, that he
which fled away was owner of the Mule and Cushion. And as they looked on it,
they heard a whistle, much like unto that which Sheepheards use as they keep
their Flocks, and presently appeared at their left hand a great number of
Goats, after whom the Goatheard that kept them, who was an aged man followed on
the top of the Mountain; and Don-Quixote cried to him, requesting him to come
down to them: who answered them again as loudly; demanding of them, who had
brought them to those Deserts rarely trodden by any other then Goats, Wolves,
or other Savage Beasts which frequented those Mountains? Sancho answered him,
That if he would descend where they were, they would give him account thereof.

With that the Shepherd came down, and arriving to the place where
Don-Quixote was, he said; I dare wager that you look on the hired Mule which
lies dead there in that bottom; well, in good faith, he has lien in that very
place these six months. Say, I pray you, have not you met in the way with the
Master thereof? We have encountered no body but a Cushion and a little Malet,
which we found not very far off from hence. I did likewise find the same,
replied the Goat-heard, but I would never take it up nor approach to it,
fearful of some misdemeanor, or that I should be hereafter demanded for it as
for a stealth. For the Devil is crafty, and now and then something arises,
even from under a man's feet, whereat he stumbles and falls, without knowing how
or how not.

That is the very same, I say, quoth Sancho: for I likewise found it, but would
not approach it the cast of a stone: There I have left it; and there it remains
as it was; for I would not have a Dog with a Bell. Tell me good fellow, quoth
Don-Quixote, do thou know who is the owner of all these things?

That which I can say, answered the Goat-heard, is, that about some six months
past, little more or less, there arrived at a certain Sheep fold some three
leagues off, a young Gentleman of comely personage, and presence, mounted on
that very Mule which lies dead there, and with the same Cushion and Malet which
you say you met, but touched not. He demanded of us, which was the most hidden
and inaccessable part of the Mountain? And we told him that this wherein we are
now: And it is true; for if you did enter but half a league farther, perhaps
you would not find the way out again so readily: and I do greatly marvel how
you could find the way hither it self; for there is neither high way nor path
that may address any to this place. I say then, that the young man, as soon as
he heard our answer, he turned the bridle, and traveled toward the place we
showed to him, leaving us all with very great liking of his comeliness, and
marvelled at his demand and speed, wherewith he departed and made toward the
Mountain: and after that time, we did not see him a good many of days, until
by chance one of our Sheepheards came by with our provision of victuals, to
whom he drew nee^, without speaking a word, and spurned and bea^ him
welfavour'dly, and after went to the Ass which carried our victuals, and
taking away all the Bread and Cheese that was there, he fled into the Mountain
with wonderful speed.

When we heard of this, some of us Goat-heards, we went to search for him, and
spent therein almost two days in the most solitary places of this Mountain,
and in the end found him lurking in the hollow part of a very tall and great
Corke-tree; who as soon as he perceived us, came forth to meet us with great
staidness; His apparel was all torn; his visage disfigured, and toasted with
the Sun in such manner, as we could scarce know him, if it were not that his
attire, although rent, by the notice we had of it, did give us to understand
that he was the man for whom we sought. He saluted us courteously, and in brief
and very good reasons he said, that we ought not to marvel, seeing him go in
that manner; for that it behoved to do so, that he might accomplish a certain
penance enjoined to him, for the many sins he had committed. We prayed him to
tell us what he was; but we could never persuade him to it. We requested him
likewise, that whenever he had any need of meat (without which he could not
live) he should tell us where we might find him, and we would bring it to
him with great love and diligence; and that if he also did not like of this
motion, that he would at least wise come and ask it, and not take it violently,
as he had done before from our Sheepheards. He thanked us very much for our
offer, and entreated pardon of the assults passed, and promised to ask it from
thence forward for Gods sake, without giving annoyance to any one. And touching
his dwelling or place of abode, he said, That he had none other then that where
the night overtook him, and ended his Discourse with so feelling laments, that
we might well be accounted stones which heard him, if therein we had not kept
him company, considering the state wherein we had seen him first; and that
wherein now he was. For as I said, he was a very comely and gracious young man,
and showed by his courteous and orderly speech, that he was well borne, and a
Court-like person: For though we were all Clowns, such as did hear him, his
Gentility was such as could make it self known, even to rudeness it self: And
being in the best of his Discourse, he stopped and grew silent, fixing his eyes
on the ground a good while, wherein we likewise stood still suspended,
expecting in what that distraction would end, with no little compassion to
behold it; for we easily perceived that some accident of madness had surprised
him, by his staring and beholding the earth so fixedly, without once moving the
eyelid; And other times by the shutting of them, the biting of his lips, and
bending of his brows. But very speedily after, he made us certain thereof
himself: for rising from the ground (whereon he had thrown himself a little
before) with great fury, he set upon him that sat next unto him, with such
courage and rage, that if we had not taken him away, he would have slain him
with blows and bites; and he did all this, saying, O treacherous Fernando,
here, here thou shall pay me the injury that thou did me; these hands shall
rent out the heart, in which do harbor and are heaped all evils together,
but principally fraud and deceit: And to these he added other words, all
addressed to the dispraise of that Fernando, and to attach him of treason and
untruth.

We took from him at last, not without difficulty, our fellow, and he
without saying a word departed from us, embushing himself presently among the
bushes and brambles, leaving us wholly disabled to follow him in those rough
and unhaunted places. By this we gathered that his madness comes to him at
times, and that some one called Fernando, had done some ill work of such
weight, as the terms show, to which it has brought him. All which has after
been yet confirmed as often (which were many times) as he came out to the
fields, sometimes to demand meat of the Sheepheards, and other times to take it
of them perforce; for when he is taken with this fit of madness, although the
Sheepheards do offer him meat willingly, yet will not he receive, unless he
take it with buffets: and when he is in his right sense, he asks it for Gods
sake, with courtesy and humanity, and renders many thanks, and that not
without tears. And in very truth, Sir, I say unto you, quoth the Goat-heard,
that I and four others, whereof two are my men, other two my friends, resolved
yesterday to search until we found him, and being found, either by force or
fair means, we will carry him to the town of Almodaver, which is but eight
leagues from hence, and there will we have him cured, if his disease may be
helped, or at least we shall learn what he is, when he turns to his wits,
and whether he has any friends to whom notice of his misfortune may be
given. This is, Sirs, all that I can say concerning that which you demand of
me; and you shall understand that the owner of those things which you saw in
the way, is the very same, whom you saw pass by you so naked and nimble: for
Don-Quixote had told him by this, that he had seen that man go by, leaping
among the Rocks.

Don-Quixote rested marvailously admired at the Goatheards tale, and with
greater desire to know who that unfortunate madman was, purposed with
himself, as he had already resolved, to search him throughout the Mountains,
without leaving a corner or Cave of it unsought, until he had gotten him. But
Fortune disposed the matter better then he expected; for he appeared in that
very instant in a clift of a Rock, that answered to the place where they stood
speaking, who came toward them, murmuring somewhat to himself, which could not
be understood near at hand, and much less a far off: His aparrell was such
as we have delivered, only differing in this, as Don-Quixote perceived when
he drew nearer, that he wore on him, although torn, a leather Jerkin,
perfumed with Amber; by which he thoroughly collected, that the person which
wore such attire was not of the least quality.

When the young man came to the place where they discoursed, he saluted them
with a hoarce voice, but with great courtesy: and Don-Quixote returned him his
greetings with no less complement; and alighting from Rozinante, he advanced
to embrace him with very good carriage and countenance, and held him a good
while straightly between his arms, as if he had known him of long time. The
other, whom we may call The unfortunate Knight of the Kock, as well as
Don-Quixote the Knight of the illfavored face; after he had permitted himself
to be embraced a while, did step a little off from our Knight, and laying his
hand on his shoulders, began to behold him earnestly, as one desirous to call
to mind whether he had ever seen him before; being perhaps no less admired
to see Don-Quixotes figure, proportion and Arms, then Don-Quixote was to view
him. In resolution, the first that spoke after the embracing, was the ragged
Knight, and said what we will presently recount.

CHAP. X.
Wherein is prosecuted the Adventure of Sierra Morena.
THE History affirms, that great was the attention wherewithal Don-Quixote
listened to the unfortunate Knight of the Rock, who began his speech on this
manner: Truly, good Sir, whatsoever you be (for I know you not) I do with all
my heart gratify the signs of affection and courtesy which you have used
toward me, and wish heartily that I were in terms to serve with more then my
will, the good will you bear toward me, as your courteous entertainment
denotes; but my fate is so niggardly, as it affords me no other means to
repay good works done to me, then only to lend me a good desire sometime to
satisfy them.

So great is mine affection, replied Don-Quixote, to serve you, as I was fully
resolved never to depart out of these Mountains until I had found you, and
known of your self whether there might be any kind of remedy found for the
grief that this your so unusual a kind of life argues does possess your
soul; and if it were requisite, to search it out with all possible diligence:
and when your disasters were known of those which clap their doors in the
face of comfort, I intended in that case to bear a part in your lamentations,
and plain it with the doleful note; for it is a consolation in afflictions,
to have one that condoles in them. And if this my good intention may merit any
acceptance, or be gratified by any courtesy, let me entreat you Sir, by the
excess thereof, which I see accumulated in your bosom; and jointly I conjure
you by that thing which you have, or do presently most affect; that you will
please to disclose unto me who you are, and what the cause has been that
persuaded you to come to live and die in these Deserts, like a brute beast,
seeing you live among such, so alienated from your self, as both your attire
and countenance demonstrate. And I do vow (quoth Don-Quixote) by the high
order of Chivalry, which I (although unworthy and a sinner) have received; and
by the profession of Knighes Errant, that if you do pleasure me herein, to
assist you with as good earnest as my profession does bind me, either by
remedying your disaster, if it can be helped; or else by assisting you to
lament it, if it be so desperate.

The Knight of the Rock, who heard him of the Illfavored face speak in that
manner, did nothing else for a great while, but behold him again and again, and
re-behold him from top to toe, And after viewing him well he said, If you have
any thing to eat, I pray you give it me for Gods sake, and after I have eaten
I will satisfy your demand thoroughly, to gratify the many courtesies and
undeserved proffers you have made unto me. Sancho, and the Goatheard presents
the one out of his Wallet, the other out of his Scrip, took some meat and
gave it to the Knight of the Rock to allay his hunger, and he did eat so
fast, like a distracted man, as he left no intermission between bit and bit,
but clapped them up so swiftly, as he rather seemed to swallow then to chew
them; and whilst he did eat, neither he or any of the rest spoke a word;
and having ended his dinner, he made them signs to follow him, as at last
they did, unto a little Meadow seated hard by that place, at the fold of a
Mountain, where being arived, he stretched himself on the grass, which the
rest did likewise in his imitation, without speaking a word, until that he
after settling himself in his place, began in this manner; If Sirs, you please
to hear the exceeding greatness of my disasters briefly rehearsed, you must
promise me, that you will not interrupt the file of my doleful narration,
with either demand or other thing; for in the very instant that you shall do
it, there also must remain that which I say depending. These words of our
ragged Knights, called to Don-Quixotes remembrance the tale which his Squire
had told unto him, where he erred in the account of his Goats which had
passed the River, for which that History remained suspended. But returning to
our ragged man, he said; This prevention which now I give, is to the end that
I may compendiously pass over the discourse of my mishaps; for the revoking of
them to remembrance, only serves me to none other stead, then to increase the
old, by adding of new misfortunes; and by how much the fewer your questions
are, by so much the more speedily shall I have finished my pitiful discourse;
and yet I mean not to omit the essential point of my woes untouched, that
your desires may be herein sufficiently satisfied. Don-Quixote in his own,
and his other companions name, promised to perform his request, whereupon he
began his relation on this manner.

My name is Cardenic, the place of my birth, one of the best Cities in
Andaluzia, my lineage noble, my parents rich, and my misfortunes so great, as I
think my parents have ere this deplored, and my kinsfolk condoled them; being
very little able with their wealth to redress them; for the goods of fortune
are but of small virtue to remedy the disasters of Heaven. There dwelt in the
same City a Heaven, wherein love had placed all the glory that I could
desire: so great is the beauty of Luscinda, a damzel as noble and rich as I,
but more fortunate, and less constant then my honorable desires expected. I
loved, honored and adored this Luscinda, almost from my very infancy, and she
affected me likewise, with all the integrity and good will which with her so
young years did accord. Our parents knew our mutual amity, for which they
were nothing agrieved, perceiving very well, that although we continued it,
yet could it have none other end but that of Matrimony; a thing which the
equality of our blood and substance, did of it self almost invite us to. Our
age and affection increased in such sort, as it seemed fit for Luscinda's
father, for certain good respects, to deny me the entrance of his house any
longer; imitating in a manner therein Tisbi, so much solemnized by the Poets,
her parents, which hindrance served only to add flame to flame, and desire to
desire: for although it set silence to our tongues, yet would they not impose
it to our Pens, which are wont to express to whom it pleased, the most hidden
secrecies of our souls, with more liberty then the tongue; for the presence of
the beloved does often distract, trouble, and strike dumb the boldest tongue
and firmest resolution. O Heavens! how many Letters have I written unto her?
What cheerful and honest answers have I received? How many Ditties and amorous
Verses have I composed, wherein my soul declared and published her passions,
declined her inflamed desires, entertained her remembrance, and recreated her
will? In effect, perceiving my self to be forced, and that my soul consumed
with a perpetual desire to behold her, I resolved to put my desires in
execution, and finish in an instant that which I deemed most expedient for the
better atchieving of my desired, and deserved reward; which was (as I did
indeed) to demand her of her father for my lawful Spouse.

To which he made answer, That he 'did gratify the good will which I showed by
honoring him, and desire to honor my self with pawns that were his: But
seeing my Father yet lived, the motion of that matter properly most concerned
him: For if it were not done with his good liking and pleasure, Luscinda was
not a woman to be taken or given by stealth. I rendered him thanks for his good
will, his words seeming unto me very reasonable, as that my father should agree
unto them, as soon as I should explain the matter; and therefore departed
presently to acquaint him with my desires; who at the time which I entered into
a chamber, wherein he was, stood with a letter open in his hand; and espying
me, e're I could break my mind unto him, gave it me, saying; By that Letter,
Cardenio, you may gather the desire that Duke Ricardo bears, to do you any
pleasure or favor.

This Duke Ricardo, as I think you know Sirs already, is a Grandee of Spain,
whose Dukedom is seated in the best part of all Andaluzia. I took the Letter
and read it, which appeared so urgent, as I my self accounted it would be ill
done, if my father did not accomplish the contents thereof, which were indeed,
that he should presently address me to his Court, to the end I might be
companion (and not servant) to his eldest son; and that he would incharge
himself with the advancing of me to such preferments as might be answerable
unto the value and estimation he made of my person. I past over the whole
Letter, and was stricken dumb at the reading thereof; but chiefly hearing my
Father to say, Cardenio, thou must depart within two days, to accomplish the
Dukes desire; and omit not to render Almighty God thanks, which does thus open
the way, by which thou may attain in fine to that which I know thou do
merit: And to these words added certain others of Fatherly counsel and
direction. The term of my departure arrived, and I spoke to my Luscinda on a
certain night, and recounted unto her all that passed, and likewise to her
father, entreating him to overslip a few days, and defer the bestowing of his
daughter elsewhere, until I went to understand Duke Ricardo his will; which
he promised me, and she confirmed it with a thousand oaths and promises.

Finally, I came to Duke Ricardo's Court, and was so friendly received and
entertained by him, as even very then envy began to exercise her accustomed
Function, being forthwith emulated by the ancient Servitors; persuading
themselves, that the tokens the Duke showed to do me favors could not but
turn to their prejudice. But he that rejoiced most at mine arrival was a
second son of the Dukes, called Fernando, who was young, gallant, very
comely, liberal and amorous; who within a while after my coming, held me so
deerly, as every one wondered thereat: And though the elder loved me well, and
did me favor; yet was it in no respect comparable to that wherewithal Don
Fernando loved and treated me. It therefore befell, that as there is no
secrecy amongst friends so great, but they will communicate it the one to the
other; and the familiarity which I had with Don Fernando was now past the
limits of favor, and turned into dearest amity: He revealed unto me all his
thoughts; but chiefly one of his Love, which did not a little molest him: For
he was enamoured on a Farmers daughter that was his Fathers Vassal, whose
parents were mavelous rich, and she her self so bautifull, wary, discret,
and honest, as never a one that knew her could absolutely determine wherein, or
in which of all her perfections she did most excel, or was most accomplished.
And those good parts of the beautiful Countreymaide, reduced Don-Fernando his
desires to such an exigent, as he resolved that he might the better gain her
good will, and conquer her integrity, to pass her a promise of marriage; for
otherwise he should labor to effect that which was impossible, and but strive
against the stream. I, as one bound thereunto by our friendship, did thwart
and dissuade him from his purpose with the best reasons, and most efficacious
words I might: and seeing all could not prevail, I determined to acquaint the
Duke Ricardo his father therewithal; But Don Fernando being very crafty and
discreet, suspected and feared as much, because he considered that in the law
of a faithful servant, I was bound not to conceal a thing that would turn so
much to the prejudice of the Duke my Lord, and therefore both to divert and
deceive me at once, that he could find no means so good, to deface the
remembrance of that beauty out of his mind, which held his heart in such
subjection, then to absent himself for certain months; and he would
likewise have that absence to be this, That both of us should depart together,
and come to my fathers house, under prettence (as he would inform the Duke)
that he went to see and cheap^n certain great horses that were in the City
wherein I was borne; a place of breeding the best horses in the world.

Scarce had I heard him say this (when borne away by the natural propension
each one has to his Country, and my love joined) although his designment had
not been so good, yet would I have ratified it, as one of the most expedient
that could be imagined, because I saw occasion and opportunity so fairly
offered, to return and see again my Luscinda. And thereof set on by this
thought and desire, I approved his opinion, and did quicken his purpose,
persuading him to prosecute it with all possible speed; for absence would in
the end work her effect in despite of the most forcible and urgent thoughts;
And when he said this to me, he had already, under the title of a husband (as
it was afterward known) reaped the fruits of his longed desires, from his
beautiful Countr^y-Maid, and did only await an opportunity to reveal it without
his own detriment, fearful of the Duke his fathers indignation, when he should
understand his erro^r.

It afterward happened, that as love in young men is not for the most part Love,
but last, the which (as it ever proposes to it self as his last end and
period, is delight) so as soon as it obteineth the same, it likewise decays
and makes forcibly to retire that which was termed Love; for it cannot
transgress the limits which Nature has assigned it which boundings are
meares, Nature has in no wise allotted to true and sincere affection. I would
say, that as soon as Don Fernando had enjoyed his Countrey-Lasse, his desires
weakened, and his importunities waxed cold; and if at the first he ^eigned an
excuse to absent himself, that he might with more facility compass them, he
did now in very good earnest procure to depart, to the end he might not put
them in execution. The Duke gave him license to depart, and commanded me to
accompany him. We came to my City, where my Father entertained him according
(...) talling. I saw Luscinda, and then again were revived (although indeed
they were neither dead nor mortified) my desires, and acquainted Don Fernando
(alas, to my total ruin) with them, because I thought it was not lawful by
the law of amity to keep any thing concealed from him: There I dilated to him,
on the Beauty, Wit, and Discretion of Luscinda, in so ample manner, as my
praises stirred in him a desire to view a Damzell so greatly adorned, and
enriched with so rare endowments: And this his desire I (through my misfortune)
satisfied, showing her unto him by the light of a candle, at a window where we
two were wont to pa^le together; where he beheld her to be such as was
sufficient to blot out of his memory all the beauties which ever he had viewed
before. He stood mute, beside himself, and ravished; and moreover rested so
greatly enamoured, as you may perceive in the discourse of this my do^efull
narration: And to inflame his desires the more (a thing which I fearfully
avoided, and only discovered to heaven) fortune so disposed; that he found
after me one of her Letters, wherein she requested that I would demand her of
her father for wife, which was so discreet, honest and amorously penned, as he
said after reading it, that in Luscinda alone were included all the graces of
Beauty and Understanding jointly, which were divided and separate in all the
other women of the world.

Yet in good sooth I will here confess the truth, that although I saw clearly
how deservedly Luscinda was thus extold by Don Fernando, yet did not her
praises please me so much pronounced by him; and therefore began to fear and
suspect him, because he let no moment overslip us, without making some mention
of Luscinda, and would still himself begin the Discourse, were the occasion
ever so far fetched, a thing which rowsed in me I cannot tell what jealousy;
not that I did fear any traverse in Luscindaes loyalty, but yet for all my
Fates made me the very thing which they most assured me: and Don Fernando
procured to read all the papers I sent to Luscinda, or she to me, under
pretext that he took extraordinary delight to note the witty conceits of us
both. It therefore fell out, that Luscinda having demanded of me a book of
Chivalry to read, wherein she took marveilous delight, and was that of Amadis
du Gaul.

Scarce had Don-Quixote well heard him make mention of books of Knighthood,
when he replied to him. If you had, good sir, but once told me at the
beginning of your historical narration, that your Lady Luscinda was affected
to the reading of Knightly Adventures, you needed not to have used any
amplification to indeer or make plain unto me the eminency of her wit, which
certainly could not in any wise be so excellent and perspicuous as you have
figured it, if she wanted the propension and feeling you have rehearsed, to
the perusing of so pleasing discourses; so that henceforth, with me, you need
not spend any more words to explane and manifest the height of her beauty,
worths and understanding, for by this only notice I have received of her
devotion to books of Knighthood, I do confirm her for the most fair and
accomplished woman for all perfections in the world; and I would to God, good
Sir, that you had also sent her together with Amadis, the Histories of the good
Don Rugel of Grecia, for I am certain, the Lady Luscinda would have taken
great delight in Darayda and Garaya, and in the witty conceits of the
Shepherd Darinel, and in those admirable verses of his Bucolicks, sung and
rehearsed by him with such grace, discretion and liberty. But a time may come,
wherein this fault may be recompensed, if it shall please you to come with me
to my Village; for there I may give you three hundred Books, which are my
Souls greatest contentment, and the entertainment of my life; although I do
now verily believe that none of them are left, thanks be to the malice of
evil and envious Enchanters. And I beseech you to pardon me this transgression
of our agreement at the first, promised not to interrupt your Discourses; for
when I hear any motion made of Chivalry or Knights Errant, it is no more in my
power to omit to speak of them, then in the Sunne-beames to leave off warming,
or in the Moons to render things humid. And therefore I entreat pardon, and
that you will prosecute your History, as that which most imports us.

Whilst Don-Quixotes spoke those words, Cardenio hanged his head on his
breast, giving manifest tokens that he was exceeding sad. And although
Don-Quixote requested him twice to follow on with his Discourse, yet neither
did he lift up his head, or answer a word, till at last, after he had stood a
good while musing, he held up his head and said; It cannot be taken out of my
mind, nor is there any one in the world can deprive me of the conceit, or make
me believe the contrary; and he were a bottle-head, that would think or
believe otherwise then that the great villain Mr. Elisabat the Barbar kept
Queen Madasima as his Lemman.

That is not so, I vow by such and such, quoth Don-Quixote in great choler (and
as he was wont, rapt out three or four round oaths) It is great malice, or
rather villainy to say such a thing. For Queen Madasima was a very noble Lady,
and it ought not to be presumed that so high a Princess would fall in love
with a Quack-salver, and whosoever thinks the contrary, lies like an arrant
Villain, as I will make him understand a horseback or a foot, armed or
disarmed, by night or by day, or as he best likes. Cardenio stood beholding
him very earnestly as he spoke these words, whom the accident of his madness
had by this possessed, and was not in plight to prosecute his History, nor
would Don-Quixote give ear to it, he was so mightily disgusted to hear Queen
Madasima detracted.

A mavelous accident! for he took her defense as earnestly, as if she were
verily his true and natural Princess, his wicked books had so much distracted
him. And Cardenio being by this furiously madd, hearing himself answered with
the lie, and the denomination of a Villain, with other the like outrages, he
took the rest in ill part; and lifting up a stone that was near unto him, gave
Don-Quixote such a blow therewithal, as he overthrew him to the ground on his
back. Sancho Panca seeing his Master so roughly handled, set upon the fool with
his fist shut; and the ragged man received his assault in such manner, as he
likewise overthrew him at his feet with one fist, and mounting afterward upon
him, did work him with his feet like a piece of dough: And the Goat-heard who
thought to succor him, was like to incur the same danger. And after he had
overthrown and beaten them all very well, he departed from them and entered into
the wood very quietly. Sancho arose, and with rage to see himself so belabored
without desert, he ran upon the Goat-heard to be revenged on him, saying that
he was in the fault, who had not premonished them, how that man's raving fits
did take him so at times; for had they been advertised thereof, they might have
stood all the while on their guard.

The Goat-heard answered, that he had already advised them thereof; and if he
had not been attentive thereunto, yet he was therefore nothing the more
culpable.

Sancho Panca replied, and the Goat-heard made a rejoinder thereunto; but their
disputation ended at last in the catching hold of one another beards, and
be-fisting themselves so uncompassionately, as if Don-Quixote had not pacified
them, they would have torn one another to pieces. Sancho holding still the
Goat-heard fast, said unto his Lord, Let me alone, Sir Knight of the
Ill-favored face; for on this man who is a Clown as I am my self, and no dubed
Knight, I may safely satisfy my self of the wrong he has done me, by
fighting with him hand to hand like an honorable man. It is true, quoth
Don-Quixote, but I know well, that he is in no wise culpable of that which
has happened. And saying so, appeased them, and turned again to demand of the
Goat-heard, whether it were possible to meet again with Cardenio; for he
remained possessed with an exceeding desire to know the end of his History.

The Goat-heard turned again to repeat what he had said at the first, to wit,
that he knew not any certain place of his abode; but if he haunted that
Commark any while, he would some time meet with him, either in his madd or
modest humor.

CHAP. XI.
Which treates of the strange Adventures that happened to the Knight of the
Mancha, in Sierra Morena; and of the penance he did there, in imitation of
Beltinebros.
DOn-Quixote took leave of the Goatheard, and mounting once again on
Rozinante, he commanded Sancho to follow him, who obeyed but with a very ill
will; and thus they traveled by little and little, entering into the thickest
and roughest part of all the Mountain, and Sancho went almost burst with a
desire to reason with his Master, and therefore wished in mind that he would
once begin, that he might not transgress his commandment of silence imposed
on him, but growing at last wholly impotent to contain himself speechless
any longer: Good Sir Don-Quixote. I pray you give me your blessing, and
license; for I mean to dedart from this place, and return to my house, my
wife and children, with whom I shall be, at least, admitted to reason and
speak my pleasure; for that you would desire to have me keep you company
through these Deserts, night and day, and that I may not speak when I please,
is but to bury me alive. Yet if Fortune had so happily disposed our affairs,
as that beasts could speak as they did in Guisopetes time, the harm had been
less, for then would I discourse a while with Rozinante (seeing my ^iggardly
fortune has not consented I might do it with mine Ass) what I thought good,
and in this sort would I weave my mishaps; for it is a stubborn thing, and
that cannot be borne with patience, to travel all the days of our life, and
not to encounter any other thing then tramplings under feet, tossings in
Coverlets, blows of stones and buffets, and be besides all this forced to sow
up our Mouths, a man daring not to break his mind, but to stand mute like a
post. Sancho, I understand thee now, quoth Don-Quixote, thou die with
longing to speak that which I have forbidden thee to speak; account therefore
that commandment revoked, and say what thou please, on condition that this
revocation be only available and of force whilst we dewll in these Mountains,
and no longer.

So be it, quoth Sancho, let me speak now, for what may ^^^er befall God
only knows, and then beginning to take the benefit of his license, he said, I
pray you tell me, what benefit could you reap by taking Queen Magimasaes
part? Or what was it to the purpose that that Abbat was her friend or no? For
if you had let it slip, seeing you were not his Judge, I verily believe that
the fool had prosecuted his tale, and we should have escaped the blow of the
stone, the trampling under feet and spurnings; yea, and more then five or six
good buffets. In Faith Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, if thou know as well as I
did, how honorable and principal a Lady was Queen Madasima, thou would
rather say that I had great patience, seeing I did not strike him on the mouth,
out of which such blasphemies issued; for it is a very great dishonor to aver
or think that any Queen would fall in love with a Barber. For the truth of
the History is, that Master Elisabat, of whom the mad man spoke, was very
prudent, and a man of a sound judgment, and (...) the Queen as her Tutor and
Physician; but to think that she was his Lemman, is a madness worthy the
severest punishment: and to the end thou may see that Cardenio knew not what
he said, thou must understand that when he spoke it, he then was wholly beside
himself.

That Is it which I say, quoth Sancho, that you ought not to make recount of
words spoken by a Fool; for if fortune had not assisted you, but addressed the
stone to your head, as it did to your breast, we should have remained in good
plight, for having turned so earnestly in that my Ladies defense, whom God
confound: and think you that Cardenio would not escape the dangers of the Law,
by reason of his madness? Any Knight Errant, answered Don-Quixote, is bound to
turn for the honor of women, of what quality soever, against^ mad or unmad
men: How much more for Queens of so high degree and worth, as was Queen
Madesina, to whom I bear particular affections for her good parts? For besides
her being mavelous beautiful, she was moreover very prudent and patient in
her calamities, which were very many, and the company and counsels of Master
Elisabat proved very beneficial and necessary, to induce her to bear her
mishaps with prudence and patience: and hence the ignorant and ill-meaning
Vulgar took occasion to suspect and affirm, that she was his friend: but I say
again they lie, and all those that do either think or say it, do lie a
thousand times.

Why, quoth Sancho, I neither say it nor think it; let those affirm any such
thing, eat that ^ye and swallow it with their bread^ and if they of whom you
spoak lived lightly, they have given account to God thereof by this: I come
from my Vineyard; I know nothing: I am not afraid to know other men's lives: For
he that buys and lies, shall feel it in his purse: How much more seeing I was
borne naked, and am now naked, I can neither win nor lose? A man is but a man,
though he have a hose on his head; but howsoever, what is that to me? And many
think there is a Sheep where there is no Fleece. But who shall bridle a man's
understanding when men are profane? Good God, quoth Don-Quixote! how many
follies have thou inserted here? and how wide from our purpose are those
proverbs which thou have recited? Honest Sancho, hold thy peace, and from
henceforth endeavor to serve thy Master, and do not meddle with things which
concern thee nothing; and understand with all thy five Senses, that whatsoever
I have done, do, or shall do, is wholly guided by reason, and conformable to
the rules of Knighthood, which I know better then all the other Knights that
ever professed them in the world. Sir, quoth Sancho, and it is a good rule of
Chivalry, that we go wandering and lost among these Mountains in this sort,
without path or way, in the search of a madman, to whom peradventure after he
is found, will return a desire to finish what he began, not of his tale, but
of your head and my ribs, by endeavoring to break them soundly and thoroughly.

Peace I say Sancho, once again, quoth Don-Quixote; for thou must wit, that the
desire of finding the madman alone brings me not into these parts so much, as
that which I have in my mind to atchieve a certain Adventure, by which I shall
acquire eternal renown and fame, throughout the universal face of the earth;
and I shall therewithal seal all that which may render a Knight Errant
complete and famous. And is the Adventure very dangerous, quoth Sancho Panca?
No, answered the Knight of the Ill-favored face, although the Die might run
in such sort, as we might cast a hazard instead of an encounter; but all
consists in thy diligence. In mine, quoth Sancho? Yes (quoth Don-Quixote) for
if thou returnest speedily from the place whereunto I mean to send thee, my
pain will also end shortly, and my glory commence very soon after: and because
I will not hold thee long suspended, awaiting to hear the effect of my words, I
would have thee to know, that the famous Amadis du Gaul was one of the most
accomplished Knights Errant. I do not say well, saying he was one; for he was
the only, the first, and prime Lord of as many as lived in his age. An evil
year and a worse month for Don Belianis, or any other that shall dare presume
to compare with him; for I swear, that they all are questionless deceived. I
also say, that when a Painter would become rare and excellent in his Art, he
procures to imitate the patterns of the most singular Masters of his Science:
And this very rule runns current throughout all other Trades and Exercises of
account, which serve to adorn a well disposed Commonwealth; and so ought and
does he that means to obtain the name of a prudent and patient man, by
imitating Ulysses, in whole person and dangers does Homer delineate unto us the
true pourtraiture of patience and sufferance; as likewise Virgil demonstrates
under the person of Eneas, the duty and valor of a pious son, and the
Sagacity of a hardy and expert Captain, not showing them such as indeed they
were, but as they should be, to remain as an example of Virtue, to ensuing
Posterities. And in this very manner was Amadis the Noth-star and Sun of
valourous and amorous^ Knights, whom all we ought to imitate which march under
the ensigns of Love and Chivalry. And this being so manifest as it is, I
find, friend Sancho, that the Knight Errant who shall imitate him most, shall
likewise be nearest to attain the perfection of Arms: And that wherein this
Knight bewrayed most his Prudence, Valor, Courage, Patience, Constancy and
Love, was when he retired himself to do penance, being disdained by his Lady
Oriana, to the Poor Rock, changing his name unto that of Beltenebros, a name
certainly most significative and proper for the life which he had at that time
willingly chosen. And I may more easily imitate him herein, then in cleaving of
Giants, beheading of Serpents, killing of Monsters, over-throwing of Armies,
putting^ Navies to flight, and finishing of Enchantments. And seeing that this
Mountain is so fit for that purpose, there is no reason why I should overslip
the occasion, which does so commodiously proffer me her Locks.

In effect, quoth Sancho, what is it you mean to do in these remote places?
Have not I told thee already, said Don-Quixote, that I mean to follow Amadis,
by playing here the despayred, wood, and furious man? To imitate likewise the
valiant Orlando, where he found the tokens by a Fountain that Angelica the
fair had abused he^ self with Medozo, for grief whereof he ran mad, and
plucked up Trees by their roots, troubled the water of clear Fountains, slew
Sheepheards, destroyed their Flocks, fired the sheep-^olds, overthrew houses,
trayled Mares after him, and committed a hundred thousand other insolences
worthy of eternal fame and memory? And although I mean not to imitate
Roldan, or Orlands, or Rowland (for he had all these names) exactly in every
mad pranke that he played: Yet will I do it the best I can, in those things
which shall seem unto me most essential. And perhaps I may rest contented
with the only imitation of Amadis, who without indammaging any by his ravings,
and only using these of feeling laments, ariving to as great fame thereby as
any one whatsoever.

I believe, replied Sancho, that the Knights which performed the like penances,
were moved by some reasons to do the like austerities and follies; but good
Sir, what occasion has been offered unto you to become madd? What Lady has
disdayned you? Or what arguments have you found, that the Lady Dulcinea of
Toboso has ever dallied with Moore or Christian? There is the point, answered
our Knight, and therein consists the perfection of mine affairs; for that a
Knight Errant do run madd upon any just occasion, deserves neither praise
nor thanks; the wit is in waxing madd without cause, whereby my Mistress may
understand, that if dry I could do this, what would I have done being
watered? How much more seeing I have a just motive through the proli^e absence
that I have made from my ever supremest Lady Dulcinea of Toboso? For as thou
might have heard read in Marias Ambrosio his Shepherd, To him that absent
is,
All things succeed amiss.
So that friend Sancho, I would not have thee lavish time longer in advising,
to let slip so rare, so happy and singular an imitation. I am madd, and will
be madd, until thou return again with answer upon a Letter, which I mean
to send with thee to my Lady Dulcinea; and if it be such as my loyalty
deserves, my madness and penance shall end; but if the contrary, I shall run
madd in good earnest, and be in that state that I shall apprehend nor feel
any thing. So that howsoever I be answered, I shall issue out of the conflict
and pain wherein thou leavest me by joying the good thou shall bring me, as
wise, or not feeling the evil thou shall denounce, as mad. But tell me
Sancho, keep thou charily yet the helmet of Mambrino, which I saw thee take
up from the ground the other day, when that ungrateful fellow thought to have
broken it into pieces, but could not; by which may be collected the excellent
temper thereof?

Sancho answered to this demand, saying, I cannot suffer or bear longer, Sir
Knight of the Ill-favored face, nor take patiently many things which you say;
and I begin to suspect by your words, that all that which you have said to
me of Chivalry, and of gaining Kingdoms and Empires, of bestowing Islands and
other gifts and great things, as Knights Errant are wont, are all matters of
air and lies, all couzenage or couzening, or how else you please to term it:
for he that shall hear you name a Barbers Basin, Mambrino's Helmet, and that
you will not abandon that error in more then four days; what other can he
think, but that he who affirms such a thing does want wit and discretion? I
carry the Basin in my Bag all battered and boared, and will have it mended,
and dress my beard in it at home, if God shall do me the favor that I may
one day see my Wife and Barnes.

Behold, Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, I do likewise swear, that thou haste the
shallowest pate that ever any Squire had or has in the World: is it possible,
that in all the time thou have gone with me, thou could not perceive, that
all the Adventers of Knights Errant do appear Chimera's, follies, and
desperate things, being quite contrary? Not that they are indeed such; but
rather by reason that we are still haunted by a crew of Inchanters, which
change and transform our acts making them seem what they please, according as
they like to favor or annoy us. And so this which seems to thee a Barbers
Basin, is in my conceit Mambrino his Helmet, and to another will appear in some
other shape. And it is doubtlesly done by the profound Science of the wise man
my friend, to make that seem a Basin, which really and truly is Mambrino's
Helmet; because that it being so precious a Jewel, all the world would pursue
me to deprive me of it; but now seeing that it is to like a Barbers Basin, they
endeavor not to gain it, as was clearly showed in him that thought to break it
the other day, and would not carry it with him, but left it lying behind him
on the ground; for in faith he had never left it, did he know the worthiness
thereof. Keep it friend, for I need it not at this present, wherein I must
rather di^arme my self of the Arms I wear, and remain as naked as I was at
the hour of my birth, if I shall take the humor rather to imitate Orlando in
doing of my penance, then Amadis.

Whilst thus he discoursed, he arived to the foot of a lofty Mountain,
which stood like a hewn Rock, divided from all the rest, by the skyrt whereof
glyded a smooth River, hemmed in on every side by a green and flourishing
Meadow, whose verdure did marveilously delight the greedy beholding eye. There
were in it also many wild Trees, and some plants and flowers, which rendered
the place much more pleasing. The Knight of the illfavored face made choice of
this place to accomplish therein his penance, and therefore as soon as he had
viewed it, he began to say with a loud voice, like a distracted man, these
words ensuing. This is the place where the humor of mine eyes shall increase
the liquid veins of this Crystal Current, and my continual and deep sighs
shall give perpetual motion to the leaves of these mountanie Trees, in
testimony of the pain which my oppressed heart does suffer. O you, whosoever
ye be, Rusticall Gods, which have your Mansion in this inhabitable place, give
care to the plaints of this unfortunate Lover, whom a long absence, and a few
imagined suspicions have conducted to deplore his state among these Deserts,
and make him exclame on the rough condition of that Ingrate and Fair, who is
the top, the su^^^, the period, term and end of all humane beauty. O ye Napeas
and Driades, which do wontedly inhabit the Thickets and Groves, so may the
nimble and lascyvious Satyrs, by whom (although in vain) you are beloved,
never have power to interrupt your sweet rest, as you shall assist me to
lament my disasters, or at least attend them, whilst I dolefully breathe them.
O Dulcinea of Toboso, the day of my night, the glory of my pain, North of my
travells, and star of my Fortunes; so heaven enrich thee with the highest,
whenever thou shall demand it, as thou will consider the place and pass,
unto which thine absence has conducted me, and answer my faith and desires
in compassionate and gracious manner. O solitary Trees (which shall from
henceforward keep company with my solitude) give tokens with the soft motion
of your boughs, that my presence does not dislike you. O thou my Squire, and
grateful companion in all prosperous and adverse successes, bear well away
what thou shall see me do here, to the end that thou may after promptly
recount it as the total cause of my ruin. And saying so, he alighted from
Rozinante, and taking off in a trice his bridle and saddle, he struck him on
the buttock, saying, He gives thee Liberty that wants it himself; O horse! as
famous for thy works as thou art unfortunate by thy Fates: Go where thou
please; for thou bear written in thy forehead, how that neither the
Hippogriphon of Astolpho, nor the renowned Frontino, which cost Bradamant so
deerly, could compare with thee for swiftness.

When Sancho had viewed and heard his Lord speak thus, he likewise said, Good
be^ide him that freed us from the pains of unpannelling the gray Ass; for if
he were here in faith he should also have two or three claps on the buttocks, and
a short Oration in his praise: yet if he were here, I would not permit any
other to unpannell him, seeing there was no occasion why; for he good Beast was
nothing subject to the passions of Love, or despair, no more then I, who was
his Master when it pleased God: And in good sooth, Sir Knight of the
Ill-favored face, if my departure and your madnesle be in good earnest, it
will be needful to saddle Rozinante again, that he may supply the want of
mine Ass; for it will shorten the time of my departure and return again: And
if I make my voyage afoot, I know not when I shall arrive there, or return here
back unto you; for in good earnest I am a very ill footman.

Let it be as thou likest, quoth Don-Quixote, for thy design displeases me
nothing; and therefore I resolve that thou shall depart from hence after three
days; for in the mean space thou shall behold what I will do and say for my
Ladies sake, to the end thou may tell it to her. Why, quoth Sancho, what
more can I view then that which I have seen already? Thou art altogether wide
of the matter, answered Don-Quixote, for I must yet tear mine apparel, throw
away mine Armor, and beat my head about these Rocks, with many other things of
that kind that will strike thee into admiration. Let me beseech you, quoth
Sancho, see well how you give your self those knocks about the Rocks; for you
might happen upon some one so ungracious a Rock, as at the first rap would
dissove all the whole Machina of your Adventures and Penance; and therefore I
would be of opinion, seeing that you do hold it necessary that some knocks be
given with the head, and that this enterprise cannot be accomplished without
them, that you content your self, seeing that all is but seigned,
counterfeited, and a Jest, that you should, I say, content your self with
striking it on the water, or on some other soft thing, as Cotton, or Wool, and
leave to my charge the exaggeration thereof; for I will tell to my Lady, that
you strike^ your head against the point of a Rock which was harder then a
Diamond.

I thank thee, Sancho, for thy good will, quoth Don-Quixote; but I can assure
thee that all these things which I do, are no Jests, but very serious
Earnests; for otherwise we should transgress the Statutes of Chivalry, which
command us not to avouch any untruth, on pain of relapse, and to do one thing
for another, is as much as to lie. So that my head-knocks must be true, firm,
and sound ones, without any sophistical or fantastical shadow: and it will
be requisite that thou leave me some lint to cure me, seeing that Fortune has
deprived us of the Balsamum which we lost. It was worse to have lost the Ass,
quoth Sancho, seeing that at once with him we have lost our Lint, and all our
other provision: and I entreat you most earnestly not to name again that
accursed drink; for in only hearing it mentioned, you not only turn my guts in
me, but also my soul. And I request you moreover, to make account that the
term of three days is already expired, wherein you would have me take notice
of your follies; for I declare them already for seen, and will tell wonders to
my Lady; wherefore go write your Letter, and dispatch me with all haste; for I
long already to return, and take you out of this Purgatory wherein I leave you.

Do thou call it a Purgatory, Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote? Thou had done
better, had thou called it Hell; or rather worse, if there be any thing
worse then that. I call it so (quoth Sancho) Quia in inferno nulla est
retentio, as I have heard say.

I unddrstand not, said Don-Quixote, what retentio means. Retentio (quoth
Sancho) is that, whosoever is in Hell, never comes, nor can come out of it.
Which shall fall out contrary in your person, or my feet shall go ill, if I
may carry spurs to quicken Rozinante: and that I may safely arrive before my
Lady Dulcinea in Toboso, for I will recount unto her such strange things of
your follies and madness (for they be all one) that you have, and do daily,
as I will make her as soft as a Glove, although I found her at the first harder
then a Cork tree: with whose sweet and honey answer, I will return in the air
as speedily as a Witch, and take you out of this Purgatory, which is no Hell,
although it seems one, seeing there is hope to escap from it; which as I have
said, they want which are in hell: and I believe you will not contradict me
herein.

Thou have reason, answered The Knight of the illfavoured face, but how shall I
write the Letter, and the warrant for the receipt of the Colts also? added
Sancho. All shall be inserted together, quoth Don-Quixote; and seeing we have
no paper, we may do well, imitating the ancient men of times past, to write
our mind in the leaves of Trees or wax, yet wax is as hard to be found here
as paper. But now that I remember my selse, I know where we may write our
mind well, and more then well, to wit, in Cardinio's Tablets, and thou shall
have care to cause the letters to be written out again fairly, in the first
Village wherein thou shall find a School master; or if such a one be
wanting, by the Cleark of the Church; and beware in any sort that thou give it
not to a Notary or Court-Clearke to be copied, for they write such an
intangling-confounding process Letter, as Satan himself would scarce be able
to read it. And how shall we do for want of your name and subscription,
quoth Sancho? Why answered Don-Quixote, Amadis was never wont to subscribe to
his Letters. I, but the warrant to receive the three Asses must forcibly be
subsigned; and if it should afterward be copied, they would say the former is
false, and so I shall rest without my Colts, The Warrant shall be written and
firmed with my hand in the Tablets, which as soon as my Niece shall see, she
shall make no difficulty to deliver thee them. And as concerning the
love-letter, thou shall put this subscription to it; Yours until death, The
Knight of the ill-favored face; and it makes no matter though it be written by
any stranger; for as much as I can remember, Dulcinea can neither write nor
read, nor has she seen any Letter, no, not so much as a Character of my
writing all the days of her life: For my love and hers have been ever
Platonicall, never extending themselves farther then to an honest regard and
view the one of the other, and even this same so rarely, as I dare boldly
swear, that in these dozen years which I love her more dearly then the light
of these mine eyes, which the earth shall one day devour. I have not seen her
four times, and perhaps of those same four times she has scarce perceived
once that I beheld her. Such is the case and closeness wherewithal her
parents Lorenco Corcuelo and her Mother Aldonca Nogales, have brought her up.
Ta, ta, quoth Sancho, that the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso is Lorenco Corcuelo his
Daughter, called by another name Aldonca Loreno? The same is she, quoth
Don-Quixote, and it is she that merits to be Empress of the vast Universe. I
know her very well, replied Sancho, and I dare say, that she can throw an Iron
bar as well as any the strongest Lad in our Parish. I vow by the giver, that
it is a Wench of the mark, tall and stout, and so sturdy withal, that she will
bring her chinn out of the mire, in despite of any Knight Errant, or that shall
err, that shall honor her as his Lady. Out upon her, what a strength and voice
she has? I saw her on a day stand on the topp of the Church steeple, to call
certain servants of her Fathers, that labored in a fallow field; and although
they were half a league from thence, they heard her as well as if they were at
the foot of the Steeple: And the best that is in her is, that she is nothing
coy; for she has a very great smack of Courtship, and plays with every one,
and Jibes and Jests at them all. And now I affirm, Sir Knight of the Ill^
favored face, that not only you may, and ought to commit raving follies for
her sake; but eke you may with just title also despair and hang your self: For
none shall hear thereof, but will say you did very well, although the Devil
carried you away. And fain would I be gone, if it were for nothing else but to
see her: for it is many a day since I saw her, and I am sure she is changed by
this; for women's beauty is much impaired by going always to the field, exposed
to the Sun and weather.

And I will now, Sir Don-Quixote, confess a truth unto you, that I have lived
until now in a mavelous error, thinking well and faithfully that the Lady
Dulcinea was some great Princess, on whom you were enamoured, or such a person
as merited those rich presents which you bestowed on her, as well of the
Biscaines, as of the Slaves, and many others that ought to be, as I suppose,
correspondent to the many victories which you have gained, both now and in the
time that I was not your Squire. But pondering well the matter, I cannot
conceive why the Lady Aldonea Lorenco; I mean the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, of
these should care whether these vanquished men which you send or shall send,
do go and kneel before her. For it may befall, that she at the very time of
their arrival be combing of Flax or threshing in the Barn, whereat they would
be ashamed, and she likewise laugh, and be somewhat displeased at the present.

I have often told thee, Sancho, many times that thou art too great a prattler,
quoth Don-Quixote, and although thou have but a gross wit, yet now and then
thy frumps nip^: But to the end thou may perceive the faultiness of thy
brain, and my discretion, I will tell thee a short History, which is this:
There was once a widow fair, young, free, rich, and withal very pleasant and
jocund, that fell in Love with a certain round and well-set servent of a
College: his Regent came to understand it; and therefore said on a day to the
Widow, by the way of fraternall correction, Mistress, I do greatly marvel,
and not without occasion, that a woman so principal, so beautiful, so rich,
and specially so witty, could make so ill a choice, as to wax enamoured on so
foul, so base, and foolish a man as such a one, we having in this house so many
Masters of Art, Graduates and Divines, amongst whom you might have made choice
as among Peers, saying. I will take this, and I will not have that. But she
answered him thus, with a very pleasant and good grace: You are, Sir, greatly
deceived, if you deem that I have made an ill choice in such a one, let him
seem never so great a fool: for to the purpose that I mean to use him, he
knows as much or rather more Philosophy then Aristotle. And so, Sancho, is
likewise Dulcinea of Toboso as much worth as the highest Princess of the
World, for the effect I mean to use her: For all the Poets which celebrate
certain Ladies at pleasure, think thou that they all had Mistrisses? No:
Do thou believe that the Amarillis, the Files, Silvias, Dianas, Galateas,
Alcidas, and others such like, wherewithal the Books, Ditties, Barbers Shops,
and Theaters are filled, were truly Ladies of flesh and bones, and their
Mistrisses which have and do celebrate them thus? No certainly, but were for
the greater part ^eigned, to serve as a subject of their Verses, to the end the
Authors might be accounted amorous, and men of courage enough to be such. And
thus it is also sufficient for me to believe and think that the good Aldonca
Lorenco is fair and honest: As for her Parentage it matters but little; for
none will send to take information thereof, to give to her an habit; and I make
account of her as of the greatest Princess in the World: For thou ought to
know, Sancho, if thou know it not already, that two things alone incite men
to love more then all things else, and those be surpassing beauty, and a good
name: And both these things are found in Dulcinea in their prime; For none can
equal her in fairness, and few come near her for a good report. And for a
final conclusion, I imagine, that all that which I say, is really so, without
adding or taking ought away. And I do imagine her in my fantasy to be such,
as I could with her, as well in beauty as principality: And neither can Helen
approach, nor Lucrece come near her; no, nor any of those other famous women,
Greek, Barbarous, or Latin, of foregoing ages. And let every one say what he
pleases; For though I should be reprehended for this by the ignorant, yet
shall I not therefore be chastised by the more observant and rigorous sort of
men.

I avouch, quoth Sancho, that you have great reason in all that you say, and
that I am my self a very Ass, But alas! why do I name an Ass with my mouth,
seeing one should not mention a Rope in ones house that was hanged? but give me
the Letter, and farewell, for I will change. With that Don-Quixote drew out his
Tablets, and going aside, began to indite his Letter with great gravity; which
ended, he called Sancho to read it to him, to the end he might bear it away in
memory, left by chance he did lose the Tablets on the way, for such were his
cross fortunes, as made him fear every event. To which Sancho answered,
saying, Write it there twice or thrice in the book, and give me it after; for I
will carry it safely by Gods grace. For to think that I will be able ever to
take it by rote, is a great folly; for my memory is so short, as I do many
times forget mine own name: But yet for all that read it to me, good Sir; for I
would be glad to hear it, as a thing which I suppose to be as excellent, as if
it were cast in a mould. Hear it then, said Don-Quixote, for thus it says.

The Letter of DON-QUIXOTE to DULCINEA of Toboso.
Sovereign Lady,
THE wounded by the point of absence, and the hurt by the Darts of thy heart,
sweetest Dulcinea of Toboso, does send thee that health which he wants
himself. If thy beauty disdain me; if thy valor turn not to my benefit; if thy
disdains convert themselves to my harm, maugre all my patience, I shall be ill
able to sustein this care; which, besides that it is violent, is also too
durable. My good Squire, Sancho, will give thee certain relation, O beautiful,
ingrate, and my dearest beloved enemy of the State wherein I remain for thy
sake: If thou please to favor me, I am thine; and if not, do what thou
likest: For by ending of my life, I shall both satisfy thy Cruelty and my
Desires.

Thine until death, The Knight of the Illfavored face.


By my fathers life, quoth Sancho, when he heard the Letter, it is the highest
thing that ever I heard. Good God ^ how well do you say every thing in it? and
how excellently have you applied the subscription of The Knight of the
Ill-favored face? I say again in good earnest that you are the Devil himself,
and there is nothing but you know it. All is necessary, answered Don-Quixote,
for the Office that I profess. Put then (quoth Sancho) in the other side of
that leaf, the Warrant of the three Colts, and firm it with a legible Letter,
that they may know it at the first sight. I am pleased, said Don-Quixote; and
so writing it, he read it after to Sancho, and it said thus.

YOU shall please, good Niece, for this first of Colts, to deliver unto my
Squire Sancho Panca, three of the five that I left at home, and are in your
charge; the which three Colts I command to be delivered to him, for as many
others counted and received here: for with this, and his acquittance, they
shall be justly delivered. Given in the bowels of Sierra Morena, the two and
twentieth of August, of this present year.

It goes very well (quoth Sancho;) subsign it therefore, I pray you. It needs
no seal (quoth Don-Quixote) but only my Rubric, which is as valible as if it
were subscribed; not only for three Asses, but also for three hundred. My trust
is in you, answered Sancho, permit me, for I will go saddle Rozinante, and
prepare your self to give me your blessing; for I purpose presently to depart
before I see any madd prank of yours; for I will say that I saw you play so
many, as no more can be desired. I will have thee stay, Sancho (and that
because it is requisite) at least to see me stark naked, playing a dozen or two
of raving tricks; for I will dispatch them in less then half an hour; because
that thou having viewed them with thine own eyes, may safely swear all the
rest that thou please to add; and I assure thee, that thou can not tell so
many as I mean to perform. Let me entreat you, good Sir, that I may not see you
naked, for it will turn my stomach, and I shall not be able to keep my self
from weeping; and my head is yet so sore since yester night through my
lamentations, for the loss of the gray beast, as I am not strong enough yet to
endure new plaints; but if your pleasure be such, as I must necessarily see
some follies, do them in Jove's name in your clothes briefly, and such as are
most necessary; chiefly, seeing none of these things are requisite for me: And
as I have said, we might excuse time (that shall now be lavished in these
trifles) to return speedily with the news you desire and deserve so much. And
if not, let the ^ady Dulcinea provide her self well; for if she answer not
according to reason, I make a solemn vow to him that I may, that I Will make her
disgorge out of her stomach a good answer, with very kicks and fists: For how
can it be suffered that so famous a Knight Errant as your self should thus
runn out of his wits, without, nor for what, for one? Let not the Gentlewomen
constrain me to say the rest; for I will out with it, and venture all upon
twelve, although it never were sold.

In good faith, Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) I think thou art grown as mad as my
self. I am not so mad, replied Sancho, but I am more choleric. But setting
that aside, say, What will you eat until my return? Do you mean to do as
Cardenio, and take by the highways side perforce from the Sheepheards? Care
thou not for that, replied Don-Quixote; for although I had it, yet would I not
eat any other thing then the Herbs and Fruits that this Field and Trees do
yield; for the perfection of mine affair consists in fasting, and the exercise
of other castigations. To this Sancho replied, Do you know what I fear? that I
shall not find the way to you again here where I leave you, it is so difficult
and obscure. Take well the marks, and I will endeavor to keep here-about, quoth
Don-Quixote, until thou come back again; and will moreover about the time of
thy return mount to the tops of these high Rocks, to see whether thou
appearest: but thou should do best of all, to the end thou may not stay
and miss me, to cut down here and there certain boughs, and strew them on the
way as thou go, until thou be out in the Plains, and those may after
serve thee as bounds and marks, by which thou may again find me when thou
returnest, in imitation of the clue of Theses Labyrinth.

I will do so, quoth Sancho, and then cutting down certain boughs, he
demanded his Lords blessing, and departed not without tears on both sides. And
mounting upon Rozinante, whom Don-Quixote commended very seriously to his care,
that he should tender him as he would his own person, he made on toward
the Plains, strewing here and there on the way his branches, as his Master had
advised him; and with that departed, although his Lord importuned him to behold
two or three follies ere he went away: But scarce had he gone a hundred
paces, when he returned and said, I say Sir, that you said well, that to the
end I might swear with a safe Conscience that I have seen you play these mad
tricks, it were necessary that at least I see you do one, although that of
your abode here, is one great enough.

Did not I tell thee so, quoth Don-Quixote? Stay Sancho, for I will do it in
the space of a Creed; and taking off with all haste his ho^e, he remained the
half of him maked, and did instantly give two or three jerks in the air, and
two tumbles ove^ and over on the ground, with his head downward, and his legs
aloft, where he discovered such things, as Sancho, because he would not see
them again, turned the bridle and rode away, resting contented and satisfied
that he might swear that his Lord was madd. And so we will leave him
traveling on his way, until his return, which was very soon after.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein are prosecuted the prankes played by Don-Quixote in his amorous
humors, in the Mountains of Sierra Morena.
AND turning to recount what The Knight of the ill-favored face did when he
was all alone, the History says, that after Don-Quixote had ended his friskes
and leapes, naked from the gyrdle downward, and from that upward aparelled;
seeing that his Squire Sancho was gone, and would behold no more of his mad
pranks; he ascended to the top of a high Rock, and began there to think on
that whereon he had thought often times before, without ever making a full
resolution therein, to wit, whether were it better to imitate Orlando in his
unmeasurable furies, then Amadis in his melancholy moodes; and speaking to
himself would say, If Orlando was so valorous and good a Knight, as men say,
what wonder seeing in fine he was enchanted and could not be slain, if it
were not by clapping a pin to the soale of his foot; and therefore did wear
shoes still that had seven folds of iron in the soales? although these his
draughts stood him in no stead at Roncesuales against Bernardo del Carpio,
which understanding them, pressed him to death between his arms. But leaving
his valor apart, let us come to the losing of his wits, which it is certain
he lost through the signs he found in the Forest, and by the news that the
Sheep-heard gave unto him, that Angelica had slept more then two noone-tydes
with the little Moore Medoro of the curled locks, him that was Page to King
Argamante: and if he understood this, and knew his Lady had played beside the
cushion, what wonder was it that he should run madd? But how can I imitate
him in his furies, if I cannot imitate him in their occasion? for I dare swear
for my Dulcinea of Toboso, that all the days of her life she has not seen
one Moore, even in his own attire as he is, and she is now right as her
mother bore her: and I should do her a manifest wrong, if upon any false
suspicion I should turn madd, of that kind of folly that did distract furious
Orlando.

On the otherside, I see that Amadis du Gaul, without losing his wits, or
using any other raving trick, gained as great fame of being amorous, as any
one else whatsoever. For that which his History recites was none other, then
that seeing himself disdained by his Lady Oriana, who had commanded him to
withdraw himself from her presence, and not appear again in it until she
pleased: he retired himself in the company of a certain Hermit, to the
poore-Rock, and there crammed himself with weeping, until that heaven
assisted him in the midst of his greatest cares and necessity. And this being
true, as it is, why should I take now the pains to stripe my self all naked,
and offend these Trees, which never yet did me any harm? Nor have I any
reason to trouble the clear waters of these brooks, which must give me
drink when I am thirsty. Let the remembrance of Amadis live, and be imitated
in every thing as much as may be, by Don-Quixote of the Mancha: of whom may
be said what was said of the other, that though he achieved not great
things, yet did he die in their pursuit. And though I am not contemned or
disdained by my Dulcinea, yet it is sufficient as I have said already, that I
be absent from her; therefore hands to your take, and ye famous actions of
Amadis, occur to my remembrance, and instruct me where I may best begin to
imitate you. Yet I know already, that the greatest thing he did use was
Prayer, and so will I. And saying so, he made him a pair of Beads of great
Gauls, and was very much vexed in mind for want of an Eremite, who might
hear his confession, and comfort him in his afflictions; and therefore did
entertain himself walking up and down the little green field, writing and
graving in the rindes of Trees, and on the smoothe sands many verses, all
accommodated to his sadness, and some of them in the praise of Dulcinea, But
those that were found thoroughly finished, and were legible after his own
finding again in that place, were only these ensuing. OYe Plants, ye Herbs,
and ye Trees,
That flourish in this pleasant site;
In lofty and verdant degrees,
If my harms do you not delight,
Hea^e my holy Plaints, which are these.
And let not my grief you molest,
Though it ever so feelingly went,
Since here for to pay your rest,
Don-Quixote his tears has addressed,
Dulcineaes want to lament of Toboso.
In this very place was first spied
The loyallest Lover and true,
Who himself from his Lady did ^ide:
But yet felt his sorrows anew,
Not knowing whence they might (...)
Love does him cruelly wrest;
With a passion of evil descent;
Which robbed Don-Quixote of rest,
Till a pipe with tears was full pressed,
Dulcineaes want to lament of Toboso.
He searching Adventures blind,
Among these dearne Woods and Rocks,
Still curses an pi^ttilesse mind;
For a Wretch amidst bushie lo^ks,
And Crags may misfortunes find.
Love, with his whip, wounded his breast,
And not with soft hands him pent,
And when he his Noddle had pressed,
Don-Quixote his tears did forth wrest,
Dulcineaes want to lament of Toboso.
The addition of Toboso to the name of Dulcinea, did not cause small laughter
in those which found the Verses recited, because they imagined that Don-Quixote
conceived, that if in the naming of Dulcinea he did not also add that Of
Toboso, the time could not be understood; and in truth it was so, as he
himself did afterward confess. He composed many others; but as we have
related, none could be well copied or found entire but these three Stanza's. In
this, and in sighing, and invoking the Fa^nes and Silvanes of these woods, and
the Nymphs of the adjoining streams, with the doloro^s and hollow Ecch^, that
it would answer, and they consort and listen unto him; and in the search of
some herbs to sustein his languishing forces, he entertained himself all the
time of Sancho his absence; who had he staid three weeks away as he did but
three days, The Knight of the Ill-favored face should have remained so
disfigured, as the very mother that bore him would not have known him.

But now it is congruent, that leaving him swallowed in the gulfs of sorrow and
verifying, we turn and recount what happened to Sancho Panca in his Embassage;
which was, that issuing out to the highway, he presently took that which led
toward Toboso, and arrived the next day following to the Inn where the
disgrace of the Coverlet befell him; and scarce had he well espied it, but
presently he imagined that he was once again flying in the air; and therefore
would not enter into it, although his arrival was at such an hour as he both
might and ought to have stayed, being dinner time, and he himself likewise
possessed with a marvelous longing to taste some warm meat; for many days past
he had fed altogether on cold Viands. This desire enforced him to approach to
the Inn, remaining still doubtful, notwithstanding, whether he should enter
into it or no. And as he stood thus suspended, there issued out of the Inn two
persons which presently knew him, and the one said to the other, Tell me,
Master Licentiate, is not that horseman that rides there Sancho Panca, he whom
our Adventurers old woman said departed with her Master for his Squire? It is,
quoth the Licentiat, and that is our Don-Quixote his horse: And they knew him
so well, as those that were the Curate and Barber of his own Village, and were
those that made the search and formal process against the Books of Chivalry:
and therefore as soon as they had taken full notice of Sancho Panca and
Rozinante, desirous to learn news of Don-Quixote, they drew near unto him; and
the Curate called him by his name, saying, Friend Sancho Panca, where is your
Master? Sancho Panca knew them instantly, and desirous to conceal the place and
manner wherein his Lord remained, did answer them, that his Master was in a
certain place withheld by affairs for a few days, that were of great
consequence and concerned him very much, and that he durst not for both his
eyes discover the place to them. No, no (quoth the Barber) Sancho Panca, if
thou do not tell us where he sojourneth, we must imagine (as we do
already) that thou have robbed and slain him, specially seeing thou come thus
on his horse; and therefore thou must in good faith get us the horses owner, or
else stand to thine answer. Your threats fear me nothing, quoth Sancho, for I
am not a man that Robs or Murders any one: every man is slain by his destiny,
or by God that made him. My Lord remains doing of penance in the midest of this
Mountain ^with very great pleasure. And then he presently recounted unto them,
from the beginning to the end, the fashion wherein he had left him, the
Adventures which had befaln, and how he carried a Letter to the Lady Dulcinea
of Toboso, who was Larenco Corcuelo his daughter, of whom his Lord was
enamoured up to the Livers.

Both of them stood greatly admired at Sancho's relation, and although they
knew Don-Quixote's madness already, and the kind thereof, yet as often as
they heard speak thereof, they rested newly amazed. They requested Sancho to
show them the Letter that he carried to the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso. He told
them that it was written in Tablets, and that he had express order from his
Lord to have it fairly copied out in paper, at the first Village whereunto he
should arrive. To which the Curate answered, bidding show it unto him, and he
would write out the copy very fairly.

Then Sancho thrust his hand into his bosom, and searched the little book, but
could not find it, nor should not, though he had searched till Doomsday; for
it was in Don-Quixote's power, who gave it not to him, nor did he ever
remember to demand it. When Sancho perceived that the book was lost, he waxed
as wan and pale as a dead man, and turning again very speedily to feel all the
parts of his body, he saw clearly that it could not be found; and therefore
without making any more ado, he laid hold on his own beard with both his
fists, and drew almost the one half of the hair away, and afterward bestowed on
his face and nose in a momento half a dozen such cuffs, as he bathed them all
in blood: which the Curate and Barber beholding, they asked him what had
befalne him, that he entreated himself so ill? What should befall me, answered
swered Sancho, but that I have lost at one hand, and in an instant three Colts,
whereof the least was like a Castle? How so, quoth the Barber? Marry, said
Sancho, I have lost the Tablets wherein were written Dulcineas Letter, and a
schedule of my Lords, addressed to his Niece, wherein he commanded her to
deliver unto me three Colts, of four or five that remained in his house: And
saying so, he recounted the loss of his gray Ass: The Curate comforted him,
and said, that as soon as his Lord were found, he would deal with him to renew
his grant, and write it in Paper, according to the common use and practice; for
as much as those which were written in Tablets, were of no value, and would
never be accepted nor accomplished.

With this Sancho took courage, and said, if that was so, he cared not much for
the loss of Dulcineas Letter; for he knew it almost all by rote. Say it then,
Sancho, quoth the Barber, and we will after write it. Then Sancho stood still
and began to scratch his head, to call the Letter to memory, and now would he
stand upon one leg, and now upon another. Sometimes he looked on the earth,
other whiles upon Heaven, and after he had gnawn off almost the half of one of
his nails, and held them all the while suspended, expecting his recital
thereof, he said after a long pause; On my soul, Master Licentiate, I give to
the Devil any thing that I can remember of that Letter, although the beginning
was thus; High and un^avorie Lady. I warrant you, quoth the Barber, he said
not, but super-humane or Sovereigne Lady.

It is so, quoth Sancho, and presently followed, if I well remember. He that is
wounded and wants sleep, and the hurt man does kiss your worships hands,
ingrate and very scornful fair. And thus he went roving until he ended in
Yours until death, The Knight of the ill-favored face. Both of them took
great delight to see Sancho's good memory, and praised it to him very much,
and requested him to repeat the Letter once or twice more to them, that they
might also bear it in memory, to write it at the due season. Sancho turned to
recite it again and again, and at every repetition said other three thousand
Errors. And after this he told other things of his Lord, but spoke not a word
of his own tossing in a Coverlet, which had befaln him in that Inn, into
which he refused to enter. He added besides, how his Lord, in bringing him a
good dispatch from his Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, would forthwith set out to
endeavor how he might become an Emperor, or at the least a Monarch; for they
had so agreed between themselves both, and it was a very easy matter for him
to become one, such was the valor of his Person and strength of his arm. And
that when he were one, he would procure him a good marriage; for by that time
he should be a widower at the least; and he would give him one of the
Emperors Ladies to wife, that were an Inheritrix of some great and rich state
on the firm land, for now he would have no more Islands. And all this was
related so seriously by Sancho, and so in his perfect sense, he scratching his
nose ever and anon as he spoke, so as the two were stricken into a new
amazement, pondering the vehemency of Don-Quixotes frenzy, which carried
quite away with it, in that sort, the judgment of that poor man, but would
not labor to dispossess him of that Error, because it seemed to them, that
since it did not hurt his Conscience, it was better to leave him in it; that
the recital of his follies might turn to great recreation, and therefore
exhorted him to pray for the health of his Lord; for it was a very possible and
contingent thing to arive in the process of time to the dignity of an Emperor,
as he said, or at least, to that of an Archbishop, or other calling equivalent
to it.

Then Sancho demanded of them, Sirs, if fortune should turn our affairs to
another course, in such sort as my Lord abandoning the purpose to purchase an
Empire, would take in his head that of becoming a Cardinal, I would feign
learn of you here, what Cardinalls-Errant are wont to give to their Squires?
They are wont to give them (quoth the Curate) some simple Benefice, or some
Parsonage, or to make them Clerks or Sextons, or Vergers of some Church, whose
living amount to a good penny rent, beside the profit of the Altar, which is
oft-times as much more. For that it is requisite (quoth Sancho) that the Squire
be not married, and that he know how to help Mass at least: and if that be
so unfortunate I, that both am married, and knows not besides the first letter
of the A, B, C. what will then become of me, if my Master take-the humor to
be an Archbishop, and not an Emperor, as is the Custom and use of Knights
Errant? Do not afflict thy mind for that, friend Sancho (quoth the Barber)
for we will deal with thy Lord here, and we will counsel him, yea we will
urge it to him as a matter of conscience, that he become an Emperor, and not
an Archbishop; for it will be more easy for him to be such a one, by reason
that he is more valorous then learned.

So me thinks (quoth Sancho) although I know he has ability enough for all.
That which I mean to do for my part is, I will pray unto our Lord to conduct
him to that place wherein he may serve him best, and give me greatest rewards.
Thou speak like a discreet man (quoth the Curate) and thou shall do therein
the duty of a good Christian. But that which we must endeavor now, is to
devise how we may winn thy Lord from prosecuting that unprofitable penance he
has in hand, as thou say: And to the end we may think on the manner how,
and eat our dinner withal, seeing it is time, let us all enter into the Inn.
Sancho bade them go in, and he would stay for them at the door, and that he
would after tell them the reason why he had no mind to enter, neither was it
in any sort convenient that he should; but he entreated them to bring him
somewhat forth to eat that were warm, and some Provand for Rozinante. With that
they departed into the lodging, and within a while after the Barber brought
forth unto him some meat: And the Curate and the Barber, after having pondered
well with themselves what course they were to take to attain their design; the
Curate fell on a device very fit both for Don-Quixotes humor, and also to
bring their purpose to pass; and was, as he told the Barber, that he had
bethought him, to apparel himself like a Lady Adventurous, and that he
therefore should do the best that he could to fit himself like a Squire, and
that they would go in that habit to the place where Don-Quixote sojourned,
feigning that she was an afflicted and distressed Damzell, and would demand a
boon of him, which he as a valorous Knight Errant would in no wise deny her;
and that the gift which he meaned to desire, was to entreat her to follow her
where she would carry him, to right a wrong which a naughty Knight had done
unto her; and that she would besides pray him not to command her to unmask her
self, or inquire any thing of her estate, until he had done her that right^
against that bad Knight. And by this means he certainly hoped that Don-Quixote
would grant all that he requested in this manner: And in this sort they would
fetch him from thence and bring him to his Village, where they would labor
with all their power, to see whether his extravagant frenzy could be
recovered by any remedy.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Curate and the Barber put their Design in practice, with many other
things, worthy to be recorded in this famous History.
THE Curates invention disliked not the Barber, but rather pleased him so well
as they presently put it in execution. They borrowed therefore of the
Innkeepers wife a Gown and a Kerchief, leaving her in pawn thereof a fair new
Cassock of the Curates. The Barber made him a great beard of a pyed Oxes tail,
wherein the Innkeeper was wont to hang his Horse-combe. The Hostess demanded
of them the occasion why they would use these things? The Curate recounted in
brief reasons of Don-Quixotes madness, and how that disguisement was
requisite, to bring him away from the Mountain, wherein at that present he made
his abode.

Presently the Innkeeper and his wife remembered themselves how he had been
their guest, and of his Balsamum, and was the tossed Squires Lord; and then
they rehearsed again to the Curate all that had passed between him and them in
that Inn, without omitting the accident that had befallen Sancho himself; and
in conclusion the Hostess tricked up the Curate so handsomely, as there could
be no more de^ired; for she attired him in a Gown of broad-cloth, laid over
with guards of black Velvet, each being a span breadth, full of gashes and cuts;
the bodies and sleeves of green Velvet, welted with white satin; which gown
and doublet, as I suspect, were both made in the time of of King Bamba. The
Curate would not permit them to veil and be kerchif him, but set on his head a
white-quilted-linnen-night-cap, which he carried for the night, and girded his
forehead with a black Taffata garter, and with the other he masked his face
wherewithal he covered his beard and visage very neatly; then did he incask
his pate in his hat, which was so broad, as it might serve him excellently for
a Quitasoll; and lapping himself up handsomely in his long cloak, he went to
horse, and rode as women use. Then mounted the Barber likewise on his Mule,
with his beard hanging down to the girdle, half red and half white, as that
which as we have said was made of the tail of a pyed colored Ox: then
taking leave of them all, and of the good Maritornes, who promised (although a
sinner) to say a Rosary to their intention, to the end that God might give them
good success, in so Christian and difficult an adventure, as that which they
undertook. But scarce were they gone out of the Inn, when the Curate begann
to dread a little that he had done ill, in apparrelling himself in that wise,
accounting it a very indecent thing, that a Priest should dight himself so,
although the matter concerned him never so much. And acquainting the Barber
with his surmise, he entreated him that they might change attires, seeing it
was much more just that he, because a Layman, should feign the oppressed
Lady, and himself would become his Squire; for so his dignity would be less
profaned; to which if he would not condescend, he resolved to pass on no
farther, although the Devil should carry therefore Don-Quixote away. Sancho
came over to them about this season; and seeing them in that habit he could
not contain his laughter. The Barber (to be brief) did all that which the
Curate pleased, and making thus an exchange of inventions, the Curate
instructed him how he should behave himself, and what words he should use to
Don-Quixote to press and move him to come away with him and forsake the
propension and love of that place which he had chosen to perform his vain
penance.

The Barber answered, that he would set every thing in his due point and
perfection, though he had never lessoned him; but would not set on the array,
until they came near to the place where Don-Quixote abode; and therefore
folded up his clothes, and Master Parson his beard, and forthwith went on their
way, Sancho Panca playing the guide, who recounted at large to them all that
had happened with the madman whom they found in the Mountain; concealing
notwithstanding the booty of the Malet, with the other things found therein:
for although otherwise most simple, yet was our young man an ordinary vice of
fools, and had a spice of covetousness.

They arrived the next day following to the place where Sancho had left the
tokens of boughs, to find that wherein his Master sojourned: and having taken
notice thereof, he said unto them that that was the entry; and therefore they
might do well to apparel themselves, if by change that might be a mean to
procure his Lords liberty; for they had told him already, that on their going
and apparrelling in that manner consisted wholly the hope of freeing his Lord,
out-of that wretched life he had chosen; and therefore did charge him on his
life, not to reveal to his Lord in any case what they were, nor seem in any
sort to know them: and that if he demanded (as they were sure he would)
whether he had delivered his Letter to Dulcinea, he should say he did, and
that by reason she could not read, she answered him by word of mouth, saying,
that she commanded, under pain of her indignation, that presently abandoning
so austere a life, he would come and see her; for this was most requisite, to
the end that moved therewithal, and by what they meant likewise to say unto
him, they made certain account to reduce him to a better life; and would
besides persuade him to that course instantly, which might set him in the way
to become an Emperor or Monarch; for as concerning the being an Archbishop
he needed not to fear it at all.

Sancho listened to all the talk and instruction, and bore them away well in
memory, and gave them great thanks for the intention they had to counsel his
Lord to become an Emperor, and not an Archbishop; for as he said, he
imagined in his simple judgment, that an Emperor was of more ability to
reward his Squire then an Archbishop Errant. He likewise added, that he
thought it were necessary he went somewhat before them to search him, and
deliver his Ladies answer; for perhaps it alone would be sufficient to fetch
him out of that place, without putting them to any farther pains. They liked of
Sancho Pancaes device, and therefore determined to expect him until his return
with the news of finding his Master. With that Sancho entered in by the Clifts
of the Rocks (leaving them both behind together) by which ran a little smoothe
stream, to which other Rocks, and some trees that grew near unto it, made a
fresh and pleasing shadow. The heats, and the day wherein they arived there,
was one of those of the month of August, when in those places the heat is
intolerable: the hour, about three in the afternoon. All which did render the
place more grateful, and invited them to remain therein until Sancho's
return. Both therefore resting there quietly under the shadow, there arrived to
their hearing the sound of a voice, which without being accompanied by any
instrument, did resound so sweet and melodiously, as they remained greatly
admired, because they esteemed not that to be a place wherein any so good a
Musician might make his abode. For although it is usually said, that in the
Woods and Fields are found Shepherds of excellent voices, yet is this rather a
Poetical indeerment, then an approved truth; and most of all when they
perceived that the verses they heard him singing were not of rustic
composition, but rather of delicate and Courtly invention. The truth whereof is
confirmed by the verses, which were these: WHo does my Weal diminish thus and
stain?
Disdain.
And say by whom, my woes augmented be?
By Jealousy.
And who my patience does by trial wrong?
An absence long.
If that be so then for my grievous wrong,
No remedy at all I may obtain^
Since my best hopes I cruelly find slain
By Disdain, Jealousy, and Absence long.
Who in my mind, those dolours still does move?
Dire Love.
And who my glories ebb does most importune?
Fortune.
And to my Plaints, by whom increase is given?
By Heaven.
If that be so, then my mistrust jumps even,
That of my wondrous evil I must die;
Since in my harm joined and united be,
Love, wavering Fortune, and a rig'rous Heaven.
Who better hap can unto me bequeath?
Death.
From whom his favors does not Love estrange?
From change.
And his too serious harms, who cures wholly?
Folly.
If that be so, it is no wisdom truly,
To think by humane means to cure that care,
Where the only Antidotes, and Medicines are,
Desired Death, light Change, and endless Folly.


The hour, the time, the solitariness of the place, voice, and art of him that
sung, struck wonder and delight in the Hearers minds, which remained still
quiet, listening whether they might hear any thing else: But perceiving that the
silence continued a pretty while, they agreed to issue and seek out the
Musician, that sung so harmoniously. And being ready to put their resolution in
practice, they were again arrested by the same voice, the which touched their
ears anew with this Sonnet. A SONNET.
HOly Amity! which with nimble wings
Thy semblance leaving here on earth behind,
Among the blessed Souls of Heaven, up-flings,
To those Imperial rooms to cheer thy mind:
And thence to us is (when thou like) assigned
Just Peace, whom shadie vail so covered brings;
As often, instead of her, Deceit we find
Clad in the weeds of good and virtuous things.
Leave Heaven, O Amity! do not permit
Foul Fraud, thus openly, thy Robes t'invest;
With which, sincere intents destroy does it:
For if thy likeness from't thou do not wrest,
The World will turn to the first conflict soon,
Of Discord, Cha^^, and Confusion.


The Song was concluded with a profound sigh; and both the others lent
attentive ear to hear if he would sing any more; but perceiving that the
Music was converted into throbs and doleful plaints, they resolved to go and
learn who was the wretch, as excellent for his voice, as dolorous in his sighs:
and after they had gone a little at the doubling of the point of a cragg, they
perceived one of the very same form and fashion that Sancho had painted unto
them, when he told them the History of Cardenio; which man espying them
likewise, showed no semblance of fear but stood still with his head hanging on
his breast like a malcontent, not once lifting up his eyes to behold them
from the first time, when they unexpectedly arrived.

The Curate who was a man very well spoken (as one that had already
intelligence of his misfortune; for he knew him by his signs) drew nearer to
him, and prayed and persuaded him with short, but very forcible reasons, to
forsake that miserable life, left he should there eternally lose it, which of
all miseries would prove the most miserable. Cardenio at this season was in his
right sense, free from the furious accident that distracted him so often; and
therefore viewing them both attyred in so strange and unusual a fashion from
that which was used among those Deserts, he rested somewhat admired; but
chiefly hearing them speak in his affair, as in a matter known (for so much he
gathered out of the Curates speeches:) and therefore answered in this manner. I
perceive well, good Sirs (whosoever you be) that Heaven which has always care
to succor good men; yea even and the wicked many times, has without any
desert, addressed unto me by these Deserts and places so remote from vulgar
haunt; persons, which laying before mine eyes with quick and pregnant reasons,
the little I have to lead this kind of life, do labor to remove me from this
place to a better: And by reason they know not as much as I do, and that after
escaping this harm, I shall fall into a far greater, they account me perhaps
for a man of weak discourse; and what is worse for one wholly devoid of
judgment? And were it so, yet is it no marvel; for it seems to me that the
force of the imagination of my disasters is so bent and powerful in my
destruction, that I, without being able to make it any resistance, do become
like a stone, void of all good feeling and knowledge: and I come to know the
certainty of this truth, when some men do recount and show unto me tokens of
the things I have done whilst this terrible accident overrules me; and after
I can do no more, then be grieved, though in vain, and curse, without benefit,
my too froward fortune; and render as an excuse of my madness the relation of
the cause thereof, to as many as please to hear it: for wise men perceiving the
cause, will not wonder at the effects. And though they give me no remedy, yet
at least will not condemn me; for it will convert the anger they conceive at my
mis-rules, into compassion of my disgraces: And Sirs, if by chance it be so,
that you come with the same intention that others did, I request you, e're you
enlarge farther your discreet persuasions, that you will give ear a while to
the relation of my mis-haps; for perhaps when you have understood it, you may
save the labor that you would take, comforting an evil wholly incapable of
consolation.

Both of them, which desired nothing so much as to understand from his own
mouth the occasion of his harms, did entreat him to relate it, promising to
do nothing else in his remedy or comfort, but what himself pleased. And with
this the sorrowful Gentleman began his doleful History, with the very same
words almost that he had rehearsed it to Don-Quixote and the Goat-heard a few
days past, when by occasion of Master Elisabat and Don-Quixotes curiosity in
observing the Decorum of Chivalrie, the tale remained imperfect, as our
History left it above. But now good fortune so disposed things, that his
foolish fit came not upon him, but gave him leisure to continue his Story to
the end; and so ariving to the passage that spoke of the Letter Don Ferdinando
found in the book of Amadis du Gaul, Cardenio said that he had it very well
in memory; and the sense was this.

LUSCINDA to CARDENIO.
I Discover daily in thee worths that obliege and inforces me to hold thee
dear: and therefore if thou desire to have me discharge this Debt, without
serving a Writ on my Honor, thou may easily do it. I have a Father that
knows thee and loves me likewise well; who without forcing my Will, will
accomplish that which justly thou ought to have: if it be so, that thou
esteemest me as much as thou say, and I do believe.


This Letter moved me to demand Luscinda of her father for my wife, as I have
already recounted; and by it also Luscinda remained in Don Ferdinandoes opinion
crowned, for one of the most discreet women of her time. And this billet
Letter was that which first put him in mind to destroy me ere I could effect
my desires. I told to Don Ferdinando wherein consisted all the difficulty of
her fathers protracting of the marriage, to wit, in that my father should first
demand her; the which I dared not to mention unto him, fearing lest he would
not willingly consent thereunto; not for that the quality, bounty, virtue and
beauty of Luscinda were to him unknown, or that she had not parts in her
able to ennoblish and adorn any other lineage of Spain whatsoever: But because
I understood by him, that he desired not to marry me, until he had seen what
Duke Ricardo would do for me. Finally, I told him that I dared not reveal it
to my father, as well for that inconvenience, as for many others that made me
so afraid, without knowing what they were, as me thought my desires would never
take effect.

To all this Don Ferdinando made me answer, that he would take upon him to
speak to my father, and persuade him to treat of that affair also with
Luscindaes. O ambitious Marius! O cruel Cataline! O facinorous Quila! O
treacherous Galalon! O traiterous Vellido! O revengefull Julian! [one, who for
the Rape of his daughter, committed by Roderick King of Spain, brought in the
Moors, and destroyed all the Country.] O covetous Judas! Traitor, cruel,
revengefull and couzening, what indeserts did this wench commit, who with such
plains discovered to thee the secrets and delights of her heart? What offense
committed I against thee? What words did I speak, or council did I give, that
were not all addressed to the increasing of thine honor and profit? But on what
do I (the worst of all Wretches) complain! seeing that when the current of the
Stars does bring with it mishaps, by reason they come down precipitately
from above, there is no earthly force can withhold, or humane industry prevent
or evacuate them. Who would have imagined that Don Ferdinando, a noble
Gentleman, discreet, obliged by my deserts, and powerful to obtain
whatsoever the amorous desire would exact of him, where and whenever it
seized on his heart, would (as they say) become so corrupt, as to deprive me
of one only sheep, which yet I did not possess? But let these considerations
be laid apart as unprofitable, that we may knit up again the broken thread of
my unfortunate History. And therefore I say that Don Ferdinando believing, that
my presence was a hindrance to put his treacherous and wicked design in
execution, he resolved to send me to his eldest brother, under pretext to get
some money of him, for to buy six great Horses, that he had of purpose, and
only to the end I might absent my self, bought the very same day that he
offered to speak himself to my father, and would have me go for the money
(because he might bring his treacherous intent the better to pass) could I
prevent this Treason? Or could I perhaps but once imagine it? No truly; but
rather glad for the good Merchandise he had made, did make preffer of my self
to depart for the money very willingly. I spoke that night to Luscinda, and
acquainted her with the Agreement past between me and Don Ferdinando, biding
her to hope firmly, that our good just desires would sort a wished and happy
end. She answered me again (as little suspecting Don Ferdinandoes treason as
my self) biding me to return with all speed, because she believed that the
conclusion of our affections should be no longer deferred, then my father
deferred to speak unto hers. And what was the cause I know not, but as soon
as she had said this unto me, her eyes were filled with tears, and somewhat
thwarting her throat, hindered her from saying many other things, which me
thought she strived to speak.

I rested admired at this new accident, until that time never seen in her,
for always as many times as my good fortune and diligence granted it, we
conversed with all sport and delight, without ever intermedling in our
discourses any tears, sighs, complaints, suspicions or fears. All my speech
was to advance my fortune; for having received her from Heaven as my Lady and
Mistress, then would I amplify her beauty, admire her worth, and praise her
discretion. She on the other side would return me the exchange, extolling in
me, what she, as one enamoured, accounted worthy of laud and commendation.
After this we would recount a hundred thousand toys and chances befaln our
neighbors and acquaintance, and that to which my presumption dared farthest to
extend it self, was sometimes to take her beautiful and Ivorie hands perforce
and kiss them as well as I might, through the rigorous strictness of a
nigardly iron grate which divided us. But the precedent night to the day of my
sad departure, she wept, sob'd and sighed, and departed, leaving me full of
confusion and inward assaults, amazed to behold such new and doleful tokens of
sorrow and feeling in Luscinda. But because I would not murder my hopes, I did
attribute all these things to the force of her affection toward me, and to
the grief which absence is wont to stir in those that love one another deerly,
To be brief, I departed from thence sorrowful and pensive, my Soul being
full of imaginations and suspicions, and yet know not what I suspected or
imagined: Clear tokens, foretelling the sad success and misfortune which
attended me. I arived to the palce where I was sent, and delivered my Letter
to Don Ferdinandoes brother, and was well entertained, but not well dispatched;
for he commanded me to expect (a thing to me most displeasing) eight days,
and that out of the Duke his fathers presence; because his brother had written
unto him to send him certain moneys unknown to his father. And all this was
but false Don Ferdinandoes invention, for his brother wanted not money
wherewithal to have dispatched me presently, had not he written the contrary.

This was so displeasing a commandment and order, as almost it brought me to
terms of disobeying it, because it seemed to me a thing most impossible to
sustein my life so many days in the absence of my Luscinda; and specially
having left her so sorrowful as I have recounted; yet notwithstanding I did
obey like a good servant, although I knew it would be with the cost of my
health. But on the fourth day after I had arrived, there came a man in my
search with a Letter, which he delivered unto me, and by the indorsement I knew
it to be Luscinda's; for the hand was like hers: I opened it (not without fear
and assailment of my senses) knowing that it must have been some serious
occasion which could move her to write unto me, being absent, seeing she did
it so rarely even when I was present. I demanded of the Bearer, before I read,
who had delivered it to him? and what time he had spent in the way? He
answered me, That passing by chance at midday through a street of the City, a
very beautiful Lady did call him from a certain window: Her eyes were all
be-blubbered with tears, and said unto him very hastily; Brother, if thou be
a Christian, as thou appearest to be one, I pray thee for Gods sake, that thou
do forthwith address this Letter to the place and person that the
superscription assigns (for they be well known;) and therein thou shall do
our Lord great service.

And because thou may not want means to do it, take what thou shall find
wraped in that handcerchif: And saying so, she threw out of the window a
handcerchif, wherein were laped up a hundred Rialls, this Ring of gold which I
carry here, and that Letter which I delivered unto you; and presently, without
expecting mine answer, she departed, but first saw me take up the handkerchif
and Letter; and then I made her signs that I would accomplish herein her
command: and after perceiving the pains I might take in bringing you it, so
well considered, and seeing by the indorsement, that you were the man to whom
it was addressed: for, Sir, I know you very well, and also obliged to do it by
the tears of that beautiful Lady, I determined not to trust any other with it,
but to come and bring it you my self in person; and in sixteen hours since it
was given unto me, I have traveled the journey you know, which is at least
eighteen leagues long. Whilst the thankful new Messenger spoke thus unto me I
remained in a manner hanging on his words, and my thighs did tremble in such
manner, as I could very hardly sustein my self on foot: yet taking courage, at
last I opened the Letter, whereof these were the Contents

THe word that Don Ferdinando has past unto you to speak to your father, that
he might speak to mine, he has accomplished more to his own pleasure then to
your profit. For, Sir, you shall understand that he has demanded me for his
wife; and my father (borne away by the advantage of worths which he supposes
to be in Don Ferdinando more then in you) has agreed to his demand in so good
earnest, as the espousals shall be celebrated within these two days, and that
so secretly and alone, as only the Heavens and some folk of the house shall be
witnesses. How I remain, imagine, and whether it be convenient you should
return, you may consider; And the success of this affair shall let you to
perceive, whether I love you well or no. I beseech Almighty God, that this may
arrive unto your hands, before mine shall be in danger to join it self with
his, which keeps his promised faith so ill.


These were, in sum, the contents of the Letter, and the motives that
persuaded me presently to depart, without attending any other answer, or other
moneys: for then I conceived clearly, that it was not the buy-all of the
horses, but that of his delights, which had moved Don Ferdinando to send me to
his brother. The rage which I conceived against him, joined with the fear to
lose the Jewel which I had gained by so many years service, and desires, did
set wings on me, for I arrived as I had flyen next day at mine own City, in
the hour and moment fit to go speak to Luscinda. I entered secretly, and left
my Mule whereon I rode in the honest man's House that had brought me the
Letter, and my fortune purposing then to be favorable to me, disposed so
mine affairs, that I found Luscinda siting at that yron-grate, which was the
sole witness of our Loves. Luscinda knew me straight and I her, but not as
we ought to know one another: But who is he in the world that can truly
vaunt that he has penetrated, and thoroughly exhausted the confused thoughts
and mutable nature of women? Truly none. I say then, to proceed with my tale,
that as soon as Luscinda perceived me, she said, Cardenio, I am attyred with
my wedding Garments, and in the Hall does wait for me the Traitor Don
Ferdinando, and my covetous father with other witnesses, which shall rather be
such of my death, then of mine espousals; be not troubled deer friend, but
procure to be present at this sacrifice, the which if I cannot hinder by my
persuasions and reasons, I carry hidden about me a Poniard secretly, which may
hinder more resolute forces by giving end to my life, and a beginning to thee,
to know certain the affection which I have ever borne, and do bear unto thee.
I answered her troubled and hastily, fearing I should not have the leisure to
reply unto her, saying, Sweet Lady, let thy works verify thy words; for if
thou carriest a Poniard to defend thy credit, I do here likewise bear a Sword
wherewithal I will defend thee, or kill my self, if fortune prove adverse and
contrary. I believe that she could not hear all my words, by reason she was
called hastily away, as I perceived, for that the Bridegroom expected her
coming. By this the night of my forrows did thoroughly fall, and the Sun of
my gladness was set; and I remained without light in mine eyes, or discourse
in my understanding. I could not find the way into her house, nor could I
moove my self to any part: yet considering at last how important my presence
was, for that which might befall in that adventure, I animated my self the best
I could, and entered into the house; and as one that knew very well all the
entries and passages thereof, and specially by reason of the trouble and
business that was then in hand, I went in unperceived of any: And thus without
being seen, I had the opportunity to place my self in the hollow room of a
window of the same Hall, which was covered by the ends of two encountering
pieces of Tapestry, from whence I could see all that was done in the Hall,
remaining my self unviewed of any. Who could now describe the assaults and
surprizals of my heart while I there abode? the thoughts which incountred my
mind? the considerations which I had? which were so many and such, as they can
neither be said, nor is it reason they should. Let it suffice you to know,
that the Bridegroom entered into the Hall without any ornament, wearing the
ordinary array he was wont, and was accompanied by a Cousin Germane of
Luscinda's, and in all the Hall there was no stranger present, nor any other
then the household Servants: Within a while after, Luscinda came out of the
Parlour, accompanied by her mother and two waiting maids of her own, as richly
attired and decked as her calling and beauty deserved, and the perfection of
Courtly pomp and bravery could afford: my distraction and trouble of mind lent
me no time to note particularly the apparel she wore, and therefore did only
mark the colors, which were Carnation and White; and the splendor which the
precious Stones and Jewels of her Tires, and all the rest of her Garments
yielded: yet did the singular beauty of her fair and golden tresses surpass
them so much, as being in competencie with the precious Stones, and flame of
four Links that lighted in the Hall, yet did the splendor thereof seem far
more bright and glorious to mine eyes. O memory! the mortal enemy of mine
case, to what end serves it now to represent unto me the uncomparable beauty of
that my adored enemy? Were it not better, cruel memory! to remember and
represent that which she did then, that being moved by so manifest a wrong, I
may at least endeavor to lose my life, since I cannot procure a revenge? Tire
not, good Sirs, to hear the digressions I make; for my grief is not of that
kind that may be rehearsed succinctly and speedily, seeing that in mine
opinion every passage of it is worthy of a large discourse.

To this the Curate answered, that not only they were not tired or wearied,
hearing of him; but rather they received mavelous delight to hear him recount
each minuity and circumstance, because they were such as deserved not to be
past over in silence, but rather merited as much attention as the principal
parts of the History. You shall then wit (quoth Cardenio) that as they thus
stood in the Hall the Curate of the Parish entered, and taking them both by the
hand to do that which in such an act is required at the saying of, Will you
Lady Luscinda take the Lord Don Ferdinando, who is here present, for your
lawful Spouse, according as our holy mother the Church commands? I thrust out
all my head and neck out of the Tapestry, and with most attentive ears and a
troubled mind settled my self to hear what Luscinda answered, expecting by it
the sentence of my death, or the confirmation of my life. O! if one had dared
to sally out at that time, and cried with a loud voice; O Luscinda, Luscinda!
see well what thou do; consider withal what thou owe me! Behold how thou
art mine, and that thou can not be any others; note that thy saying of yea,
and the end of my life shall be both in one instant. O Traitor Don Ferdinando!
Robber of my Glory! Death of my Life! what is this thou pretendest? what will thou do? Consider that thou can not Christian-like atchieve thine intention,
seeing Luscinda is my Spouse, and I am her husband. O foolish man now that I am
absent, and far from the danger, I say what I should have done, and not what
I did. Now after that I have permitted my deer J^well to be robbed, I exclaim
on the These, on whom I might have revenged my self, had I had as much heart
to do it as I have to complain. In fine, since I was then a coward and a fool,
it is no matter though I now dye ashamed, sorry and frantic^. The Curate stood
expecting Luscindaes answer a good while (...) she gave it; and in the end,
when I hoped that she would take out the Poniard to stab her self, or would
unloose her tongue to say some truth, or use some reason or persuasion that
might redound to my benefit, I heard her in stead thereof answer with a
dismayed and languishing voice the word, I will: And then Don Fernando said the
same; and giving her the Ring, they remained tied with an indissoluble knot.
Then the Bridegroom coming to kiss his Spouse, she set her hand upon her
heart, and fell in a trance between her Mothers arms.

Now only remains untold the case wherein I was, seeing in that ye^ which I had
heard my hopes deluded, Luscindaes words and promises Falsisied, and my self
wholly disabled to recover in any time the good which I lost in that instant; I
rested void of counsel, abandoned (in mine opinion) by heaven, proclaimed an
enemy to the earth which up-held me the air denying breath enough for my
sighs, and the water humor sufficient to mine eyes; only the fire increased in
such manner, as I burned thoroughly with rage and jealousy. All the house was
in a tumult for this sudden amazement of Luscinda; and as her Mother unclasped
her bosom to give her the air there appeared in it a paper folded up, which
Don Fernando presently seized on, and went aside to read it by the light of a
torch; and after he had read it, her sat down in a chair, laying his hands on
his cheek, with manifest signs of Melancholy discontent, without bethinking
himself of the remedies that were applied to his Spouse to bring her again to
her self. I seeing all the folk of the house thus in an uproar, did adventure
my self to issue, not weighing much whether I were seen or no, bearing withal
a resolution (if I were perceived) to play such a rash part, as all the World
should understand the just indignation of my breast, by the revenge I would take
on false Don Fernando, and the mutable and dismayed Traytresse: But my destiny
which has reserved me for greater evils (if possibly there be any greater
then mine own) ordained that instant my wit should abound, whereof ever since
I have so great want; and therefore without will to take revenge of my greatest
enemies (of whom I might have taken it with all facility, by reason they
suspected so little my being there) I determined to take it on my self, and
execute in my self the pain which they deserved, and that perhaps with more
rigor then I would have used toward them if I had slain them at that time,
seeing that the sudden death finisheth presently the pain; but that which does
lingringly torment kills always, without ending the life.

To be short, I went out of the house, and came to the other where I had left
my Mule, which I caused to be sadled, and without biding mine Host adieu, I
mounted on her and rode out of the City, without daring, like another Lot, to
turn back and behold it; and then seeing my self alone in the Fields, and
that the darkness of the night did cover me, and the silence thereof invite
me to complain, without respect or fear to be heard or known; I did let
slip my voice, and untyed my tongue with so many curses of Luscinda and Don
Ferdinando, as if thereby I might satisfy the wrong they had done me. I gave
her the title of Cruel, Ungrateful, False and Scornful, but specially of
Covetous, seeing the riches of mine Enemy had shut up the Eyes of her
affection, to deprive me thereof, and render it to him with whom fortune had
dealt more frankly and liberally; and in the midst of this tune of maledictions
and scorns, I did excuse her saying; That it was no marvel that a Maiden kept
close in her parents house, made and accustomed always to obey them, should at
last condescend to their Will, specially, seeing they bestowed upon her for
husband, so noble, so rich and proper a Gentleman, as to refuse him, would be
reputed in her, to proceed either from want of judgment, or from having
bestowed her affections elsewhere, which things must of force greatly
prejudice her good opinion and renown. Presently would I turn again to say,
that though she had told them that I was her spouse, they might easily
perceive that in choosing me, she had not made so ill an election that she
might not be excused, seeing that before Don Ferdinando offered himself, they
themselves could not happen to desire, if their wishes were guided by reason,
so fit a match for their daughter as my self; and she might easily have said,
before she put her self in that last and forcible pass of giving her hand,
that I had already given her mine, which I would come out to consesse, and
confirm all that she could any way feign in this Case; and concluded in the
end, that little Love, less Judgment, much Ambition and desire of greatness
caused her to forget the Words wherewithal she had deceived, entertained and
sustained me in my firm hopes and honest desires.

Using these words, and feeling this unquietness in my breast, I traveled all
the rest of the night, and struck about dawning into one of the entries of
these Mountains, through which I traveled three days at random, without
following or finding any path or way, until I arived at last to certain
Meadows and Fields, that lie, I know not in which part of these Mountains; and
finding there certain Herds, I demanded of them which way lay the most craggy
and inaccessible places of these Rocks, and they directed me hither; and
presently I traveled toward it, with purpose here to end my life: and entering
in among those Deserts, my Mule, through weariness and hunger, fell dead under
me, or rather as I may better suppose, to disburden himself of so vile and
unprofitable a burden as he carried of me. I remained a foot, overcome by
nature, and pierced through and through by hunger, without having any help, or
knowing who might succor me; and remained after that manner, I know not how
long, prostrate on the ground, and then I rose again without any hunger, and I
found near unto me certain Goat-heards, who were those doubtlesly that fed
me in my hunger: for they told me in what manner they found me, and how I
spoke so many foolish and mad words, as gave certain argument that I was devoid
of Judgment: and I have felt in my self since that time that I enjoy not my
wits perfectly, but rather perceive them to be so weakened and impaired, as I
commit a hundred follies, tearing mine apparel, crying lowdly through these
Deserts, cursing my fates, and idly repeating the beloved name of mine
enemy, without having any other intent or discourse at that time then to
endeavor to finish my life e're long; and when I turn to my self, I am so
broken and tired, as I am scarce able to stir me. My most ordinary Mansionplace
is in the hollownesse of a Cork-Tree, sufficiently able to cover this wretched
Carcass. The Cow-heards and the Goat-heards that feed their Cattle here in
these Mountains, moved by charity, gave me sustenance, leaving meat for me by
the ways and on the Rocks which they suppose I frequent, and where they think
I may find it; and so, although I do then want the use of reason, yet does
natural necessity induce me to know my meat, and stirs my apppetite to
covet, and my will to take it: They tell me when they meet me in my wits, that
I do other times come out to the highways and take it from them violently,
even when they themselves do offer it unto me willingly. After this manner do
I pass my miserable life, until Heaven shall be pleased to conduct it to the
last period, or so change my memory, as I may no more remember the beauty and
treachery of Luscinda, or the injury done by Don Ferdinando; for if it do me
this favor, without depriving my life, then will I convert my thoughts to
better discourses: if not, there is no other remedy but to pray God to receive
my soul into his mercy; for I neither find valor nor strength in my self to
rid my body out of the straights, wherein for my pleasure I did at first
willingly intrude it.

This is, Sirs, the bitter relation of my disasters; wherefore judge if it be
such as may be celebrated with less feeling and compassion then that, which
you may by this time have perceived in my self: And do not in vain labor to
persuade or counsel me that which reason should afford you may be good for my
remedy; for it will work no other effect in me then a medicine prescribed by a
skillful Physician, to a Patient that will in no sort receive it. I will have
no health without Luscinda; And since she pleases to alienate her self, being
or seeing she ought to be mine; so do I also take delight to be of the
retinue of mis-hap, although I might be a retainer to good fortune. She has
ordained that her changing shall establish my perdition: And I will labor by
procuring mine own loss, to please and satisfy her will: And it shall be an
example to ensuing ages, that I alone wanted that wherewith all other wretches
abounded, to whom the impossibility of receiving comfort prooved sometimes a
cure; but in me it is an occasion of greater feeling and harm, because I am
persuaded that my harms cannot end even with very death it self, Here Cardenio
finished his large Discourse, and unfortunate and amourous History; and just
about the time that the Curate was bethinking himself of some comfortable
reasons to answer and persuade, him he was suspended by a voice arrived to his
hearing, which with pitiful accents said what shall be recounted in the
fourth Part of this Narration: For in this very point the wise and most
absolute Historiographer Cid Hamete Benengeli finished the third Part of this
History.

THE Delightful History of the most Witty Knight DON-QUIXOTE of the Mancha.
The fourth Part.
CHAP. I.
Wherein is discoursed the new and pleasant Adventure that happened to the Curate
and the Barber, in Sierra Morena.
MOST happy and fortunate were those times wherein the thriceaudacious and bold
Knight, Don-Quixote of the Mancha, was bestowed on the World; by whose most
Honorable resolution to ruin and renew in it the already worn out, and
well-nigh diseased Exercise of Arms we joy in this our so niggard and scant
an age of all Pastimes, not only the sweetness of his true History, but also
of the other Tales and digressions contained therein, which are in some
respects less pleasing, artificial and true then the very History it self:
The which prosecuting the carded, spun, and self-twined thread of the relation
says, that as the Curate began to bethink himself upon some answer that might
both comfort and animate Cardenio, he was hindered by a voice which came to his
hearing, said very dolefully the words ensuing.

O God! is it possible that I have yet found out the place which may serve for
a hidden Sup^lchre^ to the load of this loathsome body that I unwillingly bear
so long? Yes it may be, if the solitariness of these Rocks do not illude me
an^ unfortunate that I am. How much more grateful companions will these Craggs
and Thickets prove to my designs, by affording me leisure to communicate my
mis-haps to Heaven with Plaints, then that if any mortal man living, since
there is none upon earth from whom may be expected counsel in doubts, ease in
complaints, or in harms remedy? The Curate and his companions heard and
understood all the words clearly: and for as much as they conjectured (as
indeed it was) that those Plaints were delivered very near unto them, they did
all arise to search out the Plaintiff; and having gone some twenty steps
thence, they beheld a young Youth behind a Rock, sitting under an Ash-Tree,
and attyred like a Country Swain, whom by reason his face was inclined, as he
sat washing of his feet in the clear stream that glided that way, they could
not perfectly discern; and therefore approached toward him with so great
silence, as they were not discryed by him, who only attended to the washing of
his feet, which were to white, as they properly resembled two pieces of clear
Crystal, that grew among the other stones of the stream: The whiteness and
beauty of the feet amazed them, being not made as they well conjectured, to
tread clodds, or measure the steps of lazy Oxen, and holding the Plough, as
the youths apparel would persuade them; and therefore the Curate, who went
before the rest, seeing they were not yet espied, made signs to the other two
that they should divert a little out of the way, or hide themselves behind
some broken cliffts that were near the place, which they did all of them,
nothing what the Youth did with very great attention. He wore a little brown
Capouch, gyrt very near to his body with a white Towell, also a pair of
Breeches and Gamashoes of the same colored cloth, and on his head a
clay-coloured Cap: his Gamashoes were lifted up half the leg, which verily
seemed to be white Alablaster. Finally having washed his feet, taking out a
linen Kerchif from under his Cap, he dried them therewithal, and at the
taking out of the Kerchif he held up his face, and then those which stood
gazing on him had leizure to discern an unmatchable beauty, so surpassing
great, as Cardenio rounding the Curate in the ear, said, This body, since it
is not Luscinda, can be no humane creature, but a divine. The Youth took off
his Cap at last, and shaking his head to the one and other part, did dis^evell
and discover such beautiful hairs, as those of Phoebus might justly emulate
them; and thereby they knew the supposed Swain to be a delicate woman, yea,
and the fairest that ever the first two had seen in their lives, or Cardenio
himself, the lovely Luscinda excepted; for, as he after affirmed, no feature
save Luscinda's could contend with hers. The long and golden hairs did not only
cover her shoulders, but did also hide her round about in such sort, as (her
feet exceped) no other part of her body appeared, they were so near and long.
At this time her hands served her for a Comb, which as her feet seemed pieces
of Crystal in the water, so did they appear among her hair^ like pieces of
driven Snow. All which circumstances did possess the three which stood gazing
at her with great admiration and desire to know what she was; and therefore
resolved to show themselves; and with the noise which they made when they arose
the beautiful Maiden held up her head, and removeing her hair^ from before her
eyes with both hands, she espied those that had made it, and presently arising
full of fear and trouble, she laid hand on a p^cket that (...) by her, which
seemed to be of apparel, and thought to (...) away without ^^^ying to pul^ on
her shoes, or to gather up her hair: But scarce had she gone ^span delicate
and tender feet, unable to abide the rough encounter of the stones made her to
fall to the earth; which the three perceiving, they came out to her, and the
curate arriving first of all, said to her, Lady, whatsoever you be stay and
fear nothing; for we which you behold here come only with intention to do you
service, and therefore you need not pretend so impertinent a flight, which
neither your feet can endure, nor would we permit.

The poor Gyrl remained so amazed and confounded, as she answered not a word:
wherefore the Curate and the rest drawing nearer, they took her by the hand,
and then he prosecuted his Speech saying, What your habit concealed from us,
Lady, your hairs have bewrayed, being manifest arguments that the causes were
of no small moment which have thus bemasked your singular beauty, under so
unworthy array, and conducted you to this all-abandoned Desert, wherein it was
a wonderful chance to have m^^, you, if not to remedy your harms, yet at
least to give you some comfort, seeing no evil can afflict and ve^e one so
much, and plunge him in so deep extream^ (whilst it deprives not the life)
that will wholly abhor from listening to the advice that is offered with a good
and sincere intention; so that fair Lady, or Lord, or what else you shall
please to be tea^med, shake off your affrightment, and rehearse unto us your
good or ill fortune; for you shall find in us jointly, or in every one part,
companions to help you to deplore your disasters.

Whilst the Curate made this Speech, the disguised woman stood as one half
asleep, now beholding the one, now the other, without once moving her lip or
saying a word; just like a rusticall Clown, when rare and unseen things to him
before, are unexpectedly presented to his view.

But the Curate insisting and using other persuasive reasons, addressed to that
effect, won her at last to make a breach on her tedions silence, and with a
profound sigh blow open her corral gates, saying somewhat to this effect: Since
the solitariness of these Rocks has not been potent to conceal me, nor the
disheveling of my disordered hairs, licensed my tongue to belie my sex, it
were in vain for me to feign that a new, which if you believed it, would be
more for courtesies sake then any other respect. Which presupposed, I say good
Sirs, that I do gratify you highly, for the liberal offers you have made me,
which are such as have bound me to satisfy your demand as near as I may;
although I fear the relation which I must make to you of my mishaps, will
breed sorrow, at once, with compassion in you, by reason you shall not be able
to find any salve that may cure, comfort or begui^e them: yet notwithstanding,
to the end my reputation may not hover longer suspended in your opinions,
seeing you know me to be a woman, and view me young, alone, and thus
attyred, being things all of them able, either joined or parted, to overthrow
the best credit; I must be enforced to unfold what I could otherwise most
willingly conceal. All this, she that appeared so comely, spoke without stop
or staggering, with so ready delivery, and so sweet a voice, as her discretion
admired them no less then her beauty. And renewing again their complements
and entreaties to her, to accomplish speedily her promise, she setting all
coyness apart, drawing on her shoes very modestly, and winding up her hair,
late her down on a stone, and the other three about her, where she used no
little violence to smother certain rebellious tears that strove to break
forth without her permission, and then with a reposed and clear voice she
began the History of her life in this manner.

In this Province of Audaluzia there is a certain town from whence a Duke
derives his denomination, which makes him one of those in Spain are called
Grandees: He has two sons, the elder is Heir of his States, and likewise,
as may be presumed, of his virtues, the younger is Heir I know not of what,
if he be not of V^llido [one that murdered Sancho King of Castil^, as he was
easing himself as the siege of Cam^ra.] his treacheries of (...) frauds. My
parents are this noblemans vassals, of humble and low calling, but so rich, as
if the goods of nature had equalled those of their fortunes: then should they
have had nothing else to desire, nor I feared to see my self in the
misfortunes wherein I now am plunged. For perhaps my mis-haps proceed from
that of theirs, in not being nobly descended. True it is, that they are not so
base, as they should therefore shame their calling, nor so high as may check my
conceit, which persuades me that my disasters preceede from their lowness. In
conclusion, They are but Farmers and plain People but without any touch or
spot of bad blood, and as we usually say, Old rustie Christians, yet so
rustie and ancient, as yet their riches and magnificent port, gained them, by
little and little, the title of Gentilltie; yea and of worship also; although
the Treasure and Nobility, whereof they made most price and account, was to
have had me for their daughter; and therefore, as well by reason that they had
none other He^^ then my self, as also because as affectionate Parents, they
held me most dear; I was one of the most made of and cherished daughters that
ever father brought (...) I was the mirror wherein they beheld themselves, the
staff of their old age, and the subject to which they addressed all their
desires. From which because they were most virtuous, mine did not stray an
inch, and even in the same manner that I was Lady of their minds, so was I
also of their goods. By me were Servants admitted or dismissed; the notice and
account of what was sowed or reaped, past through my hands, of the Oyle-mills,
the Wine-presses, the number of great and little Cattle, the Bee-hives: In
fine, of all that which so rich a Farmer as my father was, had (...) could
have, I kept the account, and was the Steward thereof and Mistrisse, with such
care of my side, and pleasure of theirs, as I cannot possibly indeere it
enough. The times of leisure that I had in the day, after I had given what was
necessary to the head Servants, and other laborers, I did entertain in those
exercises which were both commendable and requisite for Maidens, to wit, in
Sowing, making of Bone lace, and many times handling the Distasse: and if
sometimes I left those exercises to recreate my mind a little, I would then
take some godly book in hand, or play on the Harp; for experience had taught
me that Music orders disordered minds, and does lighten the passions that
afflict the Spirit.

This was the life which I led in my fathers house, the recounting whereof so
particularly, has not been done for ostentation, nor to give you to
understand that I am rich, but to the end you may note how much, without mine
own fault, have I fallen from that happy state I have said, unto the unhappy
plight into which I am now reduced. The History therefore is this, that
passing my life in so many occupations, and that with such recollection as
might be compared to a religious life, unseen as I thought by any other person
then those of our house; for when I went to Mass, it was commonly so early,
and so accompanied by my Mother and other Mayd-servants, and I my self so
covered and watchful, as mine eyes did scarce see the earth whereon I trod:
and yet notwithstanding those of love, or as I may better term them, of
idleness, to which Lynxes eyes may not be compared, did represent me to Don
Ferdinandoes affection and care, for this is the name of the Dukes younger
son, of whom I spoke before. Scarce had she named Don Ferdinando, when
Cardenio changed color, and began to sweat, with such alteration of Body and
Countenance, as the Curate and Barber which beheld it, feared that the accident
of frenzy did assault him, which was wont (as they had heard) to possess him
at times. But Cardenio did nothing else then sweat, and stood still beholding
now and then the country gyrle, imagining straight what she was, who without
taking notice of his alteration, followed on her discourse in this manner: And
scarce had^ he seen me, when (as he himself after confessed) he abode
greatly surprised by my love, as his actions did after give evident
demonst^ation.

But to conclude, soon the relation of those misfortunes which have no
conclusion, I will over-slip in silence the diligences and practices of Don
Ferdinando, used to declare unto me his affection: he suborned all the folk of
the house. He bestowed gifts and favors on my parents: every day was a
holy day, and a day of sports in the streets where I dwelled; At night no man
could sleep for Music; The Letters were innumerable that came to my hands,
without knowing who brought them, farsed too full of amorous conceits and
offers, and containing more promises and protestations then characters: All
which not only could not molifie my mind, but rather hardened it as much if
he were my mortal enemy, and therefore did construe all the endeavors he
used to gain my good will to be practiced to a contrary end; which I did not
as accounting Don Fernando ungentle, or that I esteemed him too importan^^; for
I took a kind of delight to see my self so highly esteemed and beloved so
Noble a Gentleman; nor was I any thing offended to see his papers written in my
praise; for, if I be not deceived in this point, be women ever so foul, we
love to hear men call us beautiful. But mine honesty was that which opposed it
self unto all these things, and the continual admonishions of my Parents,
which had by this plainly perceived Don Fernando's pretense, as one that cared
not all the World should know^t: They would often say unto me, that they had
deposited their honors and reputation in my virtue alone and discretion, and
bade me consider the inequality that was between Don Fernando and me, and that
I might collect by it how his thoug^^ (did he ever so much affirm the contrary)
were more addressed to compass his pleasure^ the^ my profit: And that if I
feared any inconveniencie might befall, to the end they might cross it, and
cause him to abandon his so unjust a pursuit, they would match me where I most
liked either to the best of that Town or any other Town adjoining, saying, they
might easily compass it, both by reason of their great wealth and my good
report. I fortified my resolution and integrity with these certain promises and
the known truth which they told me; and therefore would never answer to Don
Fernando any word that might ever so far off argue the least hope of
condiscending to his desires: All which ca^tion^ of mine which I think he
deemed to be disdains, did inflame more his lascivious appetite (for this is
the name wherewithal I entitle his affection toward me) which had it been
such as it ought, you had not known it now, for then the cause of revealing it
had not befaln me. Finally, Don Fernando understanding how my parents meant to
marry me, to the end they might make void his hope of ever possessing me: or
at least set more guards to preserve mine honor, and this news or surmize was
an occasion that he did what you shall presently hear.

For one night as I sat in my Chamber, only attended by a young Maiden that
served me, I having shut the doors very safe, for fear left through any
negligence my honesty might incur any danger, without knowing or imagining how
it might happen^ notwithstanding all my dilligences used and preventions, and
amid'st the solitude of this silence and recollection he stood before me in my
Chamber: At his presence I was so troubled, as I lost both sight and speech;
and by reason thereof could not cry, nor I think he would not, though I had
attempted it, permit me: For he presently ran over to me, and taking me
between his arms (for, as I have said, I was so amazed, as I had no power to
defend my self) he spoke such things to me, as I know not how it is possible
that so many lies should have ability to fain things resembling in show so much
the truth; and the Traitor caused tears, to give credit to his words; and
sighs, to give countenance to his intention.

I, poor soul, being alone amid'st my friends and weakly practiced in such
affairs, began, I know not how, to account his leasings for verities, but not
in such sort as his tears or sighs might any wise move me to any compassion
that were not commendable. And so the first trouble and amazement of mind
being past, I began again to recover my defective Spirits, and then said to him
with more courage then I thought I should have had; if, as I am my Lord,
between your arms, I were between the paws of a fierce Lion, and that I were
made certain of my Liberty, on condition to do or say any thing prejudicial
to mine honor, it would prove as impossible for me to accept it, as for that
which once has been to leave off his essence and being: Wherefore even as you
have in-gyrt my middle with your arms, so likewise have I tied fast my mind
with virtuous and forcible desires that are wholly different from yours, as you
shall perceive, if seeking to force me, you presume to pass further with your
inordinate design: I am your Vassal, but not your Slave; nor has the
nobility of your blood power, nor ought it to harden, to dishonor, stain, or
hold in little account the humility of mine; and I do esteem my self, though
a Countrey-Wench and Farmers Daughter, as much as you can your self, though a
Nobleman and a Lord; With me your violence shall not prevail, your riches gain
any grace, your words have power to deceive, or your fighs and tears be able
to move; yet if I shall find any of these properties mentioned in him whom my
Parent shall please to be^^ow on me for my Spouse, I will presently subject my
will to his, nor shall it ever vary from his mind a jot; So that if I might
remain with honor, although I rested void of delights, yet would I willingly
bestow on you that which you presently labor so much to obtain; all which I
do say, to divert your straying thought from ever thinking that any one may
obtain of me ought, who is not my lawful Spouse. If the let only consists
therein, most beautiful Dorotea (for so I am called) answered the disloyal
Lord; behold, I give thee here my hand to be thine alone; and let the Heavens,
from which nothing is concealed, and this Image of our Lady, which thou have
here present, be witnesses of this truth.

When Cardenio heard her say that she was called Dorotea he fell again into
his former suspicion, and in the end confirmed his first opinion to be true;
but would not interrupt her speech, being desirous to know the success, which
he knew wholly almost before, and therefore said only, Lady, is it possible
that you are named Dorotea? I have heard report of another of that name, which
perhaps has run the like course of your misfortunes; but I request you to
continue your Relation, for a time may come wherein I may recount unto you
things of the same kind, which will breed no small admiration. Dorotea noted
Cardenioes words, and his uncouth and disastrous attire, and then entreated him
very instantly, if he knew any thing of her affairs, he would acquaint her
therewithal, For if fortune had left her any good, it was only the courage
which she had to bear patiently any disaster that might befall her, being
certain in her opinion, that no new one could arive, which might increase a
whit those she had already.

Lady, I would not let slip the occasion (quoth Cardenio) to tell you what I
think, if that which I imagine were true: and yet there is no commodity l^ft
to do it, nor can it avail you much to know it: Let it be what it list, said
Dorotea, but that which after befell of my relation was this: That Don Fernando
took an Image that was in my Chamber for witness of our Contract, and added
withal most forcible words and unusual oaths, promising unto me to become
my husband: Although I warned him before he had ended his speech, to see well^
what he did, and to weigh the wrath of his father, when he should see him
married to one so base, and his Vassal, and that therefore he should take
heed that my beauty (such as it was) should not blind him, seeing he should
not find therein a sufficient excuse for his error, and that if he meant to
do me any good, I conjured him by the love that he bore unto me, to license
my fortunes to roll in their own spheere, according as my quality reached:
For such unequal matches do never please long, nor persevere with that
delight wherewithal they begun.

All the reasons here rehearsed I said unto him, and many more which now are
fallen out of mind, but yet proved of no efficacy to weane him from his
obstinate purpose; even like unto one that goes to buy, with intention never
to pay for what he takes, and therefore never considers the price, worth, or
defect of the stuff he takes co credit. I at this season made a brief
discourse, and said thus to my self, I may do this, for I am not the first
which by Matrimony has ascended from a low degree to a high estate: not shall
Don Fernando be the first whom beauty or blind affection (for that is the
most certain) has induced to make choice of a Consort equal to his
Greatness. Then since herein I create no new world, nor custom, what error can
be committed by embracing the honor wherewithal fortune crowns me:
Although it so befell, that his affection to me endured no longer then till he
accomplished his will: for before God, I certes shall still remain his wife.
And if I should disdainfully give him the repulse, I see him now in such
terms, as perhaps forgetting the duty of a Nobleman, he may use violence,
and then shall I remain for ever dishonored, and also without excuse of the
imputations of the ignorant, which knew not how much without any fault I have
fallen into this inevitable danger. For, what reasons may be sufficiently
forcible to persuade my father and other, that this Nobleman did enter into my
Chamber without my consent? All these demands and Answers did I in an instant
revolve in mine imagination, and found my self chiefly forced (how I cannot
tell) to assent to his Petition, by the witnesses he invoked, the tears he
shed, and finally by his sweet disposition and comely feature, which
accompanied with so many arguments of unfeigned affection, were able to conquer
and enthrall any other heart, though it were as free and wary as mine own. Then
called I for my waiting-maid, that she might on earth accompany the
celestial witnesses.

And then Don Fernando turned again to reiterate and confirm his oaths, and
added to his former, other new Saints as witnesses, and wished a thousand
succeeding maledictions to light on him, if he did not accomplish his promise
to me. His eyes again waxed moist, his sighs increased, and himself
inwreathed me more straightly between his arms, from which he had never once
loosed me: and with this, and my Maidens departure, I left to be a Maiden,
and he began to be a Traitor and a disloyal man. The day that succeeded to
the night of my mishaps came not (I think) so soon as Don Fernando desired it;
for after a man has satisfied that which the appetite covets, the greatest
delight it can take after, is to apart it self from the place where the desire
was accomplished. I say this because Don Fernando did hasten his departure from
me, by my maids industry, who was the very same that had brought him into my
Chamber, he was got in the street before dawning. And at his departure from
me he said (although) not with so great show of affection and vehemence as
he had used at his coming) that I might be secure of his faith, and that his
oaths were firm and most true; and for a more confirmation of his word, he
took a rich Ring off his finger and put it on mine. In fine he departed, and
I remained behind, I cannot well say whether joyful or sad; but this much I
know, that I rested confused and pensive, and almost beside my self for the
late mischance; yet either I had not the heart, or else I forgot to chide my
Maid for her treachery committed by shutting up Don Fernando in my Chamber;
for as yet I could not determine, whether that which had befaln me, was a good
or an evil.

I said to Don Fernando at his departure, that he might see me other nights
when he pleased, by the same means he had come that night, seeing I was his
own, and would rest so, until it pleased him to let the world know that I was
his wife. But he never returned again, but the next night following could I
see him after, for the space of a month either in the street or Church, so as
I did but spend time in vain to expect him; although I understood that he was
still in Town and rode every other day a hunting, an Exercise to which he was
much addicted.

Those days were, I know, unfortunate and accursed to me, and those hours
sorrowful; for in them I began to doubt, nay rather wholly to discredit Don
Fernando's faith; and my maid did then hear loudly the checks I gave unto her
for her presumption, ever until then dissembled: And I was moreover
constrained to watch and keep guard on my tears and countenance, lest I should
give occasion to my Parents to demand of me the cause of my discontents, and
thereby engage me to use ambages or untruths to cover them. But all this ended
in an instant, one moment ariving whereon all these respects stumbled, all
honorable discourses ended, patience was lost, and my most hidden secrets
issued in public; which was when there was spread a certain rumor throughout
the Town within a few days after, that Don Fernando had married in a City
near adjoining a Damzell of surpassing beauty, and of very Noble birth,
although not so rich as could deserve, by her preferment or dowry, so worthy
a husband: it was also said that she was named Luscinda, with many other
things that happened at their Spousals worthy of admiration. Cardenio hearing
Luscinda named did nothing else but lift up his shoulders, bite his lip, bend
his brows, and after a little while shed from his eyes two floods of tears. But
yet for all that Dorotea did not interrupt the file of her History, saying,
This doleful news came to my hearing, and my heart, instead of freezing
thereat, was so inflamed with choler and rage, as I had well-nigh run out to
the streets, and with outcries published the Deceit and Treason that was done
to me; but my fury was presently assuaged by the resolution which I made to
do what I put in execution the very same night, and then I put on this habit
which you see, being given unto me by one of those that among us Country-folk
are called Swains, who was my fathers servant; to whom I disclosed all my
misfortunes, and requested him to accompany me to the City where I understood
my enemy sojourned, He, after he had reprehended my boldness, perceiving me
to have an inflexible resolution, made offer to attend on me, as he said, unto
the end of the world: And presently after I trussed up in a pillow-bear a
woman's attire, some Money and Jewels, to prevent necessities that might befall;
and in the silence of night, without acquainting my treacherous maid with my
purpose, I issued out of my house, accompanied by my servant and many
imaginations: and in that manner set on toward the City, and though I went on
foot, was yet born away flying by my desires, to come, if not time enough to
hinder that which was past, yet at least to demand of Don Fernando that he
would tell me with what conscience or soul he had done it. I arrived where I
wished within two days and a half; and at the entry of the City I demanded
where Luscinda her father dwelled? and he of whom I first demanded the question
answered me more then I desired to hear; he showed me the house, and recounted
to me all that befell at the daughters marriage, being a thing so public and
known in the City, as men made meetings of purpose to discourse thereof.

He said to me, that the very night wherein Don Fernando was espoused to
Luscinda, after she had given her consent to be his wife, she was instantly
assailed by a terrible accident that struck her into a Trance; and her Spouse
approaching to unclapse her bosom that she might take the air, found a paper
folded in it, written with Luscinda's own hand, wherein she said and declared,
that she could not be Don Fernando's wife, because she was already Cardenio's,
who was, as the man told me, a very principal Gentleman man of the same City;
and that if she had given her consent to Don Fernando, it was only done,
because she would not disobey her Parents; in conclusion he told me, that
the paper made also mention, how she had a resolution to kill her self
presently after the marriage, and did also lay down therein the motives she
had to do it; all which, as they say, was confirmed by a Poniard that was
found hidden about her, in her apparel. Which Don Fernando perceiving,
presuming that Luscinda did flout him, and hold him in little account, he set
upon her ere she was come to her self, and attempted to kill her with the
very same Poniard; and had done it, if her father and other friends which were
present, had not opposed themselves and hindered his determination. Moreover,
they reported that presently after Don Fernando absented himself from the
City, and that Luscinda turned not out of her agony until the next day, and
then recounted to her parents how she was verily Spouse to that Cardenio of
whom we spoke even now. I learned besides, that Cardenio, as it is rumor'd,
was present at the marriage, and that as soon as he saw her married, being a
thing he would never have credited, departed out of the City in a desperate
mood, but first left behind him a letter, wherein he showed at large the
wrong Luscinda had done to him, and that he himself meant to go to some place
where people should never after hear of him. All this was notorious, and
publicly bruited thorowout the City, and every one spoke thereof, but most
of all having very soon after understood that Luscinda was missing from her
Parents house and the City, for she could not be found in neither of both,
for which her parents were almost beside themselves, not knowing what means to
use to find her.

These news reduced my hopes again to their ranks, and I esteemed it better to
find Don Fernando unmarried then married, persuming that yet the gates of my
remedy were not wholly shut, I giving my self to understand that heaven had
peradventure set that impediment on the second marriage, to make him understand
what he ought to the first; and to remember how he was a Christian, and that
he was more obliged to his Soul then to humane respects. I revolved all
these things in my mind, and comfortless did yet comfort my self, by fayning
large, yet languishing, hopes, to sustain that life which I now do so much
abhor. And whilst I stayed thus in the City, ignorant what I might do,
seeing I found not Don Fernando, I heard a Crier go about publicly,
promising great rewards to any one that could find me out, giving signs of
the very age and apparel I wore: And I likewise heard it was bruited abroad,
that the Youth which came with me, had carried me away from my fathers house.
A thing that touched my soul very nearly, to view my credit so greatly
wrak't, seeing that it was not sufficient to have lost it by my coming away,
without the addition of him with whom I departed, being a subject so base and
unworthy of my loftier thoughts. Having heard this cry, I departed out of the
City with my servant; who even then began to give tokens that he faultred in
the fidelity he had promised to me; and both of us together entered the very
same night into the most hidden parts of this Mountain, fearing lest we might
be found. But as it is commonly said, That one evil calls on another, and that
the end of one disaster is the beginning of a greater, so proved it with me;
for my good servant, until then faithful and trusty, rather incited by his
own Villainy then my Beauty, thought to have taken the benefit of the
opportunity which these inhabitable places offered, and solicited me of Love,
with little shame and less fear of God, or respect of my self: And now seeing
that I answered his impudencies with severe and reprehensive words, leaving the
entreaties aside wherewithal he thought first to have compast his will, he
began to use his force: But just Heaven, which seldom or never neglects the
just man's assistance, did so favor my proceedings, as with my weak forces and
very little labor I threw him down a ^^eep Rock, and there I left him, I know
not whether alive or dead: And presently I entered in among these Mountains,
with more swiftness then my fear and weariness required, having therein no
other project or design then to hide my self in them, and (...) my father and
others, which by his entreaty and means sought for me every where.

Some months are past since my first coming here, where I found a Heard-man,
who carried me to a Village seated in the midest of these Rocks, wherein he
dwelled, and entertained me, whom I have served as a Shepherd ever since,
procuring as much as lay in me, to abide still in the field, to cover these
hairs which have now so unexpectedly betrayed me: Yet all my care and industry
aviled not, seeing my Master came at last to the notice that I was no man, but
a woman, which was an occasion that the like evil thought sprung in him, as
before in my servant: And as fortune gives not alwais remedy for the
difficulties which occur, I found neither Rock nor downfall to cool and cure my
Masters infirmity, as I had done for my man; and therefore I accounted it a
less inconvenience to depart thence, and hide my self again among these
Deserts, then to adventure the trial of my strength or reason with him:
Therefore, as I say, I turned to imbosk my self, and search out some place,
where, without any encumbrance, I might entreat Heaven with my sighs and tears,
to have compassion on my mis-hap, and lend me industry and favor, either to
issue fortunately out of it, or else to die amid'st these solitudes, not
leaving any memory of a wretch, who has ministered matter, although not through
her own default, that men may speak and murmur of her, both in her own and in
other Countries.

CHAP. II.
Which treats of the Discretion of the Beautiful Dorotea, and the artificial
manner used to dissuade the amorous Knight from continuing his penance; And how
he was gotten away; with many other delightful Occurrences.
THis is, Sirs, the true relation of my Tragedy; see therefore now and judge,
whether the sighs you heard, the words to which you listened, and the tears
that gushed out at mine eyes, have not had sufficient occasion to appear in
greater abundance: and having considered the quality of my disgrace, you shall
perceive all comfort to be vain, seeing the remedy thereof is impossible: Only
I will request at your hands one favor, which you ought and may easily grant,
and is, That you will address me unto some place, where I may live secure from
the fear and suspicion I have to be found by those which I know do daily
travel in my pursuit: for although I am sure that my Parents great affection
toward me does warrant me to be kindly received and entertained by them; yet
the shame is so great that possesses me, only to think that I shall not return
to their presence in that state which they expect, as I account it far better
to banish my self from their sight for ever, then once to behold their face
with the least suspicion that they again would behold mine, divorced from that
honesty which whilom my modest behavior promised. Here she ended, and her
face suddenly overrun by a lovely scarlet, perspicuously denoted the feeling
and bashfullnesse of her soul.

The audients of her sad story, felt great motions both of pity and
admiration, for her misfortunes: and although the Curate thought to comfort and
counsel her forthwith, yet was he prevented by Cardenio, who taking her first
by the hand, said at last; Lady, thou art the beautiful Dorotea, daughter
unto rich Cleonardo. Dorotea rested admired when she heard her fathers name,
and saw of how little value he seemed who had named him; for we have already
recounted how raggedly Cardenio was clothed; and therefore she said unto him,
And who art thou, friend, that know so well my fathers name; for until this
hour (if I have not forgotten my self) I did not once name him throughout the
whole discourse of my unfortunate Tale? I am (answered Cardenio the unluckie
Knight, whom Luscinda (as thou said) affirmed to be her husband. I am the
disastrous Cardenio, whom the wicked proceeding of him that has also brought
thee to those terms wherein thou art, has conducted me to the state in which
I am, and thou may behold ragged, naked, abandoned by all humane comfort; and
what is worse, void of sense; seeing I only enjoy it but at some few short
times, and that, when heaven pleases to lend it me. I am he Dorotea, that
was present at Don Fernandoes unreasonable wedding, and that heard the consent
which Luscinda gave him to be his wife. I was he that had not the courage to
stay and see the end of her trance, or what became of the paper found in her
bosom; for my soul had not power or sufferance to behold so many misfortunes
at once, and therefore abandoned the place and my patience together, and only
left a Letter with mine Host, whom I entreated to deliver it into Luscinda her
own hands, and then came into these Deserts, with resolution to end in them my
miserable life, which since that hour I have hated as my most mortal Enemy:
But Fortune has not pleased to deprive me of it, thinking it sufficient to
have impaired my wit, perhaps reserving me for the good success befaln me now
in finding of your self; for that being true (as I believe it is) which you
have here discoursed, peradventure it may have reserved yet better hap for us
both in our disasters then we expect.

For presupposing that Luscinda cannot marry with Don Fernando, because she is
mine, nor Don Fernando with her because yours; and that she has declared so
manifestly the same, we may well hope that heaven has means to restore to
every one that which is his own, seeing it yet consists in being not made away
or annihilated. And seeing this comfor remains, not sprung from any very
remote hope, nor founded on idle surmises, I request thee fair Lady, to take
another resolution in thine honorable thought, seeing I mean to do it in
mine, and let us accomodate our selves to expect better success: For I do vow
unto thee by the faith of a Gentleman and Christian, not to forsake thee,
until I see thee in Don Fernandoes possession, and when I shall not by reasons
be able to induce him to acknowledge how far he rests indebted to thee then
will I use the liberty granted to me as a Gentleman, and with just title
challenge him to the field, in respect of the wrong he has done unto thee;
forgetting wholly mine own injuries, whose revenge I will leave to Heaven,
that I may be able to right yours on earth.

Dorotea rested wonderfully admired, having known and heard Cardenio, and
ignoring what competent thanks she might return him in satisfaction of his
large offers, she cast her self down at his feet to have kissed them, which
Cardenio would not permit; and the Licentiat answered for both, praising
greatly Cardenioes discourse; and chiefly entreated, prayed and counseled
them, that they would go with him to his Village, where they might fit
themselves with such things as they wanted, and also take order how to search
out Don Fernando, or carry Dorotea to her fathers house, or do else what they
deemed most convenient. Cardenio and Dorotea gratified his courtesies, and
accepted the favor he profferred. The Barbar also, who had stood all the
while silent and suspended, made them a pretty discourse, with as friendly an
offer of himself, and his service as Master Curate; and likewise did briefly
relate the occasion of their coming thither, with the extravagant kind of
madness which Don-Quixote had, and how they expected now his Squires return,
whom they had sent to search for him. Cardenio having heard him named,
remembered presently, as in a dream, the conflict past between them both, and
recounted it unto them, but could not in any wise call to mind the occasion
thereof.

By this time they heard one call for them, and knew by the voice, that it was
Sancho Panchaes, who because he found them not in the place where he had left
them, cried out for them as lowdly as he might. They went to meet him, and
demanding for Don-Quixote, he answered, that he found him all naked to his
shyrt, lean, yellow, almost dead for hunger, and sighing for his Lady
Dulcinea; and although he had told him, how she commanded him to repair
presently to Toboso, where she expected him, yet notwithstanding he answered,
That he was determined never to appear before her Beauty, until he had
done Feats that should make him worthy of her gracious favor. And then the
Squire affirmed if that humor passed on any farther, he feared his Lord would
be in danger never to become an Emperor, as he was bound in honor, no, nor
a Cardinal, which was the least that could be expected of him.

The Licentiat bid him be of good cheer, for they would bring him from thence
whether he would or no; and recounted to Cardenio and Dorotea, what they had
bethought for Don-Quixotes remedy, or at least for the carrying him home to
his house. To that Dorotea answered, that she would counterfeit the distressed
Lady better then the Barber, and chiefly seeing she had apparel wherewithal
to act it most naturally: And therefore desired them to leave to her charge the
representing of all that which should be needful for the atchieving of their
Design; for she had read many books of Knighthood, and knew well the style
that distressed Damzels used, when they requested any favor of Knights
Adventurous. And then need we nothing else, quoth the Curate, but only to put
our purpose presently in execution: For questionless good success turns on
our side, seeing it has so unexpectedly begun already to open the gates of
your remedy, and has also facilitated for us that whereof we had most
necessity in this exigent. Dorotea took forthwith out of her Pillow-bear a
whole Gown of very rich stuff, and a short Mantle of another green stuff, and a
Collar and many other rich Jewels out of a Box, wherewithal she adorned her
self in a trice so gorgeously, as she seemed a very rich and goodly Lady: All
which, and much more, she had brought with her, as she said, from her house,
to prevent what might happen, but never had any use of them until then. Her
grace, gesture, and beauty liked them all extremely, and made them account Don
Fernando to be a man of little understanding, seeing he contemned such
feature. But he which was most of all admired was Sancho Panca, because, as
he thought (and it was so indeed) that he had not in all the days of his
life before seen so fair a creature; and he requested the Curate very
seriously, to tell him who that beautiful Lady was? and what she sought
among those thorowfares? This fair Lady, friend Sancho, answered the Curate, is
(as if a man said nothing she is so great) Heir apparent by direct line of the
mighty Kingdom of Micomicon, and comes in the search of your Lord, to demand a
boon of him, which is, that he will destroy and undo a great wrong done unto
her by a wicked Giant; and through the great fame which is spread over all
Guinea of your Lords prowess, this Princess is come to find him out. A happy
searcher, and a fortunate finding, quoth Sancho! and chiefly, if my Master be
so happy as to right that injury and redress that wrong by killing that, o the
mighty Lubber of a Giant, whom you say! yes, he will kill him, I am very
certain, if he can once but meet him, and if he be not a Spirit; for my
Master has no kind of power over Spirits. But I must request one favor of
you, among others most earnestly, good Master Licentiat, and it is, That to the
end my Lord may not take an humbur of becoming a Cardinal, which is the thing
I fear most in this world) that you will give him counsel to marry this
Princess presently, and by that means he shall remain incapable of the dignity
of a Cardinal, and will come very easily by his Empire, and I to the end of my
desires; for I have thought well of the matter, and have found, that it is in
no wise expedient that my Lord should become a Cardinal; for I am wholly unfit
for any Ecclesiastical dignity, seeing I am a married man: And therefore to
trouble my self now with seeking of dispensations to enjoy Church livings,
having, as I have, both wife and children, were never to end: So that all my
good consists, in that my Lord do marry this Princess instantly, whose name
yet I know not; and therefore I have not said it. She is hight (quoth the
Curate) the Princess Micomicona: for her Kingdom being called Micomicon, it
is evident she must be termed so.

That is questionless, quoth Sancho; for I have known many to take their
denomination and surname from the place of their birth, calling themselves
Peter of Alcala, John of Vbeda, and James of Valedolid; and perhaps in Guinea
Princes and Queens use the same custom, and call themselves by the names of
their Provinces.

So I think quoth the Curate; and as touching your Masters marriage with her,
I will labor therein as much as lies in my power. Wherewithal Sancho remained
as well satisfied, as the Curate admired at his simplicity, and to see how
firmly he had fixed in his fantasy the very ravings of his Master, seeing he
did believe without doubt that his Lord should become an Emperor. Dorotea in
this space had gotten upon the Curates Mule, and the Barber had somewhat better
fitted the beard which he made of the Oxes tail on his face, and did after
entreat Sancho to guide them to the place where Don-Quixote was, and advertised
him withal, that he should in no wise take any notice of the Curate or
Barber, or confess in any sort that he knew them, for therein consisted all
the means of bringing Don-Quixote to the mind to become an Emperor. Yet
Cardenio would not go with them, fearing lest thereby Don-Quixote might call
to mind their contention; and the Curate thinking also that his presence was
not expedient^ remained with him, letting the others go before, and these
followed a far off fair and softly on foot, and ere they departed, the
Curate instructed Dorotea anew, what she should say, who bid him to fear
nothing for she would discharge her part to his satisfaction, and as Books of
Chivalrie required and laid down.

They traveled about three quarters of a league, as they espied the Knight,
and at last they discovered him among a number of intricate Rocks, all
apparelled, but not armed, and as soon as Dorotea beheld him, she struck her
Palfrey, her well-bearded Barber following her; and as they approached
Don-Quixote, the Barber leaped lightly down from his Mule and ran toward
Dorotea to take her down between his arms, who alighting went with a very
good grace toward Don-Quixote, and kneeled before him. And although he
strived to make her arise, yet she remaining still on her knees, spoke to him
in this manner: I will not arise from hence, thrice valorous and approved
Knight, until your bounty and courtesy shall grant unto me one Boon, which
shall much redound unto your honor and prize of your Person, and to the profit
of the most disconsolate and wronged Damzell that the Sun has ever seen.
And if it be so, that the valor of your invincible Arm be correspondent to
the brute of your immortal same, you are obliged to succor this comfortless
Wight, that comes from lands so remote, to the sound of your famous name,
searching you for to remedy her mis-haps.

I will not answer you a word, fair Lady, quoth Don-Quixote, nor hear a jot
of your affair, until you arise from the ground. I will not get up from
hence, my Lord, quoth the afflicted Lady, if first, of your wonted bounty, you
do not grant to my request. I do give and grant it, said Don-Quixote, so that
it be not a thing that may turn to the damage or hindrance of my King, my
Country, or of her that keeps the key of my Heart and Liberty. It shall not
turn to the damage or hindrance of those you have said, good Sir, replied the
dolorous Damzel: and as she was saying this Sancho Panca rounded his Lord in
the ear, saying softly to him, Sir, you may very well grant the request she
asks, for it is a matter of nothing, it is only to kill a monstrous Giant,
and she that demands it is the mighty Princess Micomicona Queen of the great
Kingdom of Micomicon in Ethiopia. Let her be what she will, quoth
Don-Quixote, for I will accomplish what I am bound, and my conscience shall
inform me comformable to the State I have professed. And then turning to the
Damzell, he said, Let your great beauty arise; for I grant to you any boon
which you shall please to ask of me. Why then, quoth the Damzell, that which I
demand is, That your magnanimous person come presently away with me, to the
place where I shall carry you; and do likewise make me a promise, not to
undertake any other Adventure or demand, until you revenge me upon a Traitor,
who has, against all Laws both Divine and Humane, usurped my Kingdom. I say
that I grant you all that, quoth Don-Quixote; and therefore, Lady, you may cast
away from this day forward all the Melancholy that troubles you, and labor
that your languishing and dismayed hopes may recover again new strength and
courage; for by the help of God, and that of mine arm, you shall see your self
shortly restored to your Kingdom, and enthronized in the Chair of your ancient
and great Estate, in despite and maugre the Traitors that shall dare gainsay
it: and therefore hands to the work; for they say that danger always follows
delay. The distressed Damzell strove with much ado to kiss his hand. But
Don-Quixote, who was a most accomplished Knight for courtesy, would never
condescend thereunto; but making her arise, he embraced her with great
kindness and respect; and commanded Sancho to saddle Rozinante, and help him
to Arm himself.

Sancho took down the Arms forthwith, which hung on a Tree like Trophies, and
searching the Gyrts, armed his Lord in a moment; who seeing himself Armed,
said, Let us in Gods name, depart from hence to assist this great Lady. The
Barber kneeled all this while, and could with much ado dissemble his laughter,
or keep on his Beard that threatened still to fall off; with whose fall perhaps,
they should all have remained without bringing their good purpose to pass: And
seeing the boon was granted, and noted the diligence wherewithal Don-Quixote
made himself ready to depart and accomplish the same: he arose and took his
Lady by the hand; and both of them together holp her upon her Mule; and
presently after Don-Quixote leaped on Rozinante, and the Barber got on his
Beast, Sancho only remaining a foot; where he afresh renewed the memory of the
loss of his gray Ass, with the want procured to him thereby. But all this he
bore with very great patience, because he supposed that his Lord was now in
the way, and next degree to be an Emperor; for he made an infallible account
that he would marry that Princess, and at least be King of Micomicon: But
yet it grieved him to think how that Kingdom was in the Country of black
Moors; and that therefore the Nation which should be given to him for his
Vassals should be all black: For which difficulty his imagination coined
presently a good remedy; and he discoursed with himself in this manner. Why
should I care though my Subjects be all black Moors? is there any more to be
done then to load them in a Ship and bring them into Spain, where I may sell
them, and receive the price of them in ready money? and with that money may I
buy some Title or Office, wherein I may after live at mine ease all the days
of my life. No! but sleep, and have no wit nor ability to dispose of things;
and to sell thirty or ten thousand Vassals in the space that one would say,
give me those straws. I will dispatch them all; they shall ^lie the little with
the great, or as I can best contrive the matter: And be they ever so black, I
will transform them into white or yellow ones: come near and see whether I
cannot suck well my fingers ends. And thus he travailed so solicitous and
glad, as he quite forgot his pain of travailing a foot. Cardenio and the
Curate stood in the mean timebeholding all that passed from behind some
Brambles, where they lay lu^king, and were in doubt what means to use to issue
and join in company with them. But the Curate, who was an ingenious and prompt
plotter, devised instantly what was to be done, that they might attain their
desire: Thus he took out of his case a pair of Shears, and cut off Cardenio's
Beard therewithal in a trice, and then gave unto him to wear a riding Capouch
which he himself had on, and a black Cloak; and himself walked in a Doublet
and Hose: Cardenio, thus attired, looked so unlik that he was before, as he
would not have known himself in a Looking-glass. This being finished, and the
others gone on before whilst they disguised themselves, they sallied out with
facility to the high way before Don-Quixote or his company; for the Rocks and
many other bad passages did not permit those that were a horseback to make so
speedy an end of their Journey, as they: and having thoroughly past the
Mountain, they expected at the foot ^hereof for the Knight and his company, who
when he appeared, the Curate looked on him very earnestly for a great space,
with inkling that he began to know him: And after he had a good while beheld
him, he ran toward him with his arms spread abroad, saying, In a good hour
be the mirror of all Knighthood found, and my noble country man Don-Quixote
of the Mancha; the flower and cream of Gentility; the shadow and remedy of the
afflicted; and the Quintescence of Knights Errant^ and saying this, he held
Don-Quixote his left thigh embraced. Who, admiring at that which he heard that
man to say and do, did also review him with attention, and finally knew him;
and all amazed to see him, made much ado to alight; but the Curate would not
permit him; wherefore Don-Quixote said, Good Master Licentiat permit me to
alight; for it is in no sort decent that I be a horseback, and so reverend a
person as you go on foot. I will never consent thereunto, quoth the Curate,
your highness must needs stay on horseback, seeing that thereon you are
accustomed to archieve the greatest feats of Chivalry and Adventures which were
ever seen in our age. For it shall suffice me, who am an unworthy Priest, to
get up behind some one of these other Gentlemen that ride in your company, if
they will not take it in bad part; yes, and I will make account that I ride on
Pegasas, or the Zebra [A strange Beast of Affirick that travails very swiftly]
of the famous Moor Muzaraque, who lies yet enchanted in the steep Rock of
Culema, near unto Alcala of Henares.

Truly I did not think upon it, good Master Licentiat, answered Don-Quixote;
yet I presume my Lady the Princess will be well appaid for my sake to command
her Squire to lend you the use of his saddle, and to get up himself on the
crupper, if so it be that the Beast will bear double. Yes that it will, said
the Princess, for ought I know; and likewise I am sure it will not be
necessary to command my Squire to alight, for he is of himself so courteous
and courtly, as he will in no wise condescend that an Ecclesiastical man
should go on foot, when he may help him to a horse.

That is most certain, quoth the Barber: and saying so he alighted, and
entreated the Curate to take the saddle; to which courtesy he did easily
condescend. But by evil fortune, as the Barber thought to leap up behind him,
the Mule which was in effect a hired one (and that is sufficient to say it was
unhappy) did lift a little her hinder quarters, and bestowed two or three
flings on the air, which had they hit on Master Nicholas his breast or p^te,
he would have bequeathed the quest of Don-Quixote upon the Devil: But
notwithstanding the Barber was so affrighted, as he fell on the ground with so
little heed of his beard, as it fell quite off, and lay spread upon the ground;
and perceiving himself without it, he ehad no other shift, but to cover his
face with both his hands, and complain, that all his cheek-teeth were stricken
out. Don-Quixote beholding such a great sheaf of a beard fallen away, without jaw
or blood, from the face, he said; I vow this is one of the greatest miracles
that ever I saw in my life; it has taken and plucked away his beard as smoothly
as if it were done of purpose. The Curate beholding the danger which their
invention was like to incur, if it were detected, went forthwith, and taking up
the beard, came to Master Nicholas that lay still playing, and with one push
bringing his head toward his own breast, he set it on again, murmuring the
while over him certain words, which he said were a certain prayer appropriated
to the setting on of fallen beards, as they should soon perceive: And so having
set it on handsomely, the Squire remained as well bearded and whole as ever he
was in his life: Whereat Don-Quixote rested marvellously admired, and requested
the Curate to teach him that prayer when they were at leisure: For he supposed
that the virtue thereof extended it self farther then to the fastening on of
beards, since it was manifest that the place whence the beard was torn must
have remained without flesh, wounded and ill dight; and seeing it cured all, it
must of force serve for more then the beard. It is true, replied Master Curate;
and then promised to instruct him with the secret, with the first opportunity
that was presented.

Then they agreed that the Curate should ride first on the Mule, and after him
the other two, each one by turns, until they arived to the Inn, which was
about some two leagues thence. Three being thus mounted, to wit, Don-Quixote,
the Princess, and Curate; and the other three on foot, Cardenio, the Barber,
and Sancho Panca. Don-Quixote said to the Damzell; Madam! let me entreat your
Highness to lead me the way that most pleases you. And before she could
answer, the Licenciat said, Toward what Kingdom would you travail? is it by
fortune toward that of Micomicon? I suppose it should be thitherwards, or else
I know but little of Kingdoms. She, who knew very well the Curates meaning, and
was her self no Babe, answered, saying, Yes Sir, my way lies toward that
Kingdom. If it be so, quoth the Curate, you must pass through the Village
where I dwell, and from thence direct your course twards Cartagena, where you
may luckily embarke your selves. And if you have a prosperous wind, and a
quiet and calm Sea, you may come within the space of nine years to the sight
of the Lake Meona, I mean Meolidas, which stands on this side of your
highness Kingdom some hundred days journey or more. I take you to be
deceived good Sir quoth she, for it is not yet fully two years since I
departed from thence, and truly I never almost had any fair weather, and yet
notwithstanding I have arived and come to see that which I so much longed for,
to wit, the presence of the worthy Don-Quixote of the Mancha, whose renown
came to my notice as soon as I touched the earth of Spain with my foot, and
moved me to search for him, to commend my self to his courtesy, and commit
the Justice of my cause to the valor of his invincible Arm.

No more quoth Don-Quixote, I cannot abide to hear my self praised; for I am
a sworn enemy of all adulation: And although this be not such, yet
notwithstanding the like Discourses do offend my chaste ears. What I can say
to you fair Princess is; that whether I have valor or not, that which I have
or have not shall be employed in your service, even to the very loss of my
life. And so omitting that till this time, let me entreat good Master Licentiat
to tell me the occasion which has brought him here to these quarters so
alone, without attendants, and so slightly attyred, as it strikes me in no
little admiration? To this I will answer with brevitic quoth the Curate; You
shall understand that Master Nicolas the Barber, our very good friend, and my
self, traveled toward Sivill, to recover certain sums of money which a
kinsman of mine, who has dwelt these many years in the Indies has sent unto
me; the sum is not a little one, for it surmounted seventy thousand Rials of
eight, all of good weight, see if it was not a rich gift; and passing yesterday
through this way, we were set upon by four Robbers which dispoyled us of all,
even to our very beards, and that in such sort, as the Barber was forced to set
on a counterfeit one, and this young man that goes here with us (meaning
Cardenio) was transformed by them anew: and the best of it is, that it is
publicly bruited about all this commark, that those which surprised us were
Gally-slaves who were set at liberty, as is reported, much about this same
place, by so valiant a Knight as in despite of the Commissary and the guard
he freed them all. And questionless he either was wood, or else as great a
knave as themselves, or some one that wanted both Soul and Conscience, seeing
he let slip the Wolves amidst the Sheep, the Fox among the Hens, and Files
hard by Honey, and did frustrate Justice, rebel against his natural Lord and
King; for he did so by oppugning his just commandments, and has deprived the
Galleys of their feet, and set all the Holy brotherhood in an uproare, which
has reposed these many years past. And finally would do an Act, by which he
should lose his Soul, and yet not gain his Body. Sancho had rehearsed to the
Curate and Barbar the Adventure of the Slaves, which his Lord had accomplished
with such glory; and therefore the Curate did use this vehemency as he
repeated it, to see what Don-Quixote would say or do, whose color changed at
every word, and durst not confess that he was himself the deliverer of that
good People: and these quoth the Curate, were they that have robbed us: And God
of his infinite Mercy pardon him who hindered their going to receive the
punishment they had so well deserved.

CHAP. III.
Of many pleasant Discourses passed between Don-Quixote and those of his
Company, after he had abandoned the rigorous place of his Penance.
SCARCE had the Curate finished his speech thoroughly, when Sancho said, By my
faith, Master Licentiate, he that did that feate, was my Lord, and that not
for want of warning, for I told him beforehand, and advised him that he should
see well what he did, and that it was a sin to deliver them, because they
were all sent to the Galleys for very great Villainies they had played.

You Bottlehead, replied Don-Quixote, hearing him speak, it concerns not
Knights Errant to examine whether the afflicted, the inchained, and oppressed,
which they encounter by the way, be carried in that fashion, or are plunged in
that distress, through their own default or disgrace, but only are obliged
to assist them as need^e and oppressed, setting their eyes upon their pains,
and not on their crimes. I met with a Rosarie or beads of inserted People,
sorrowful and unfortunate, and I did for them that which my Religion exacts:
as for the rest, let them verify it elsewhere, and to whosoever else, the holy
dignity and honorable Person of Master Licentiat excepted, it shall seem
evil: I say he knows but slightly what belongs to Chivalry; and he lies
like a Whores-son and a Villain borne, and this will I make him know with the
broad side of my Sword. These words he said, settling himself in his Stirrops,
and addressing his Murrion (for the Barbers-Bason, which he accounted to be
Mambrin^es Helmet, he carried hanging at the pummell of his saddle, until he
might have it repaired of the crazings the Gally-slave had wrought in it.)
Dorotea, who was very discreet and pleasant, and that was by this well
acquainted with Don-Quixotes faulty humor, and saw all the rest make a jest of
him, Sancho Panca excepted, would also show her conceit to be as good as some
others, and therefore said unto him, Sir Knight remember you self of the Boon
you have promised unto me, whereunto conforming your self, you cannot
intermeddle in any other Adventure, be it ever so urgent. Therefore assuage
your stomach, for if Master Licentiate had known that the Gallyslaves were
delivered by your invincible Arm, he would rather have given unto himself
three blows on the mouth, and also bit his tongue thrice then have spoken any
word whence might result your indignation. That I dare swear, quoth the
Curate, yea and besides torn away one of my Mustachoes.

Maddame said Don-Quixote, I will hold my peace, and suppress the just Choler
already inkindled in my breast, and will ride quietly and peaceably, until I
have accomplished the thing I have promised; and I request you in recompense of
this my good desire, if it be not displeasing to you, to tell me your
grievance, and how many, which, and what the Persons be, of whom I must take
due, sufficient, and entyre revenge? I will promptly perform your Will herein,
answered Dorotea, if it will not be irksome to you to listen to disasters. In
no sort good Maddam said Don-Quixote. To which Dorotea answered thus, Be then
attentive to my Relation. Scarce had she said so, when Cardenio and the Barbar
came by her side, desirous to hear how the discreet Dorotea would feign her
tale: and the same did Sancho, which was as much deceived in her person as his
Lord Don-Quixote; and she after dressing her self well in the Saddle,
bethought and provided her self whilst she coughed and used other gestures,
and then began to speak on this manner.

First of all, good Sirs, I would have you note that I am called; And here she
stood uspended a while by reason she had forgotten the name that the Curate
had given unto her; but he presently occurred to her succor, understanding the
cause, and said; it is no wonder great Lady, that you be troubled and stagger
whilst you recount your misfortunes, seeing it is the ordinary custom of
Disasters to deprive those whom they torment, and distract their memory in
such sort, as they cannot remember themselves even of their own very names; as
now it proves done in your Highness, which forgets it self, that you are
called the Princess Micomicona, lawful inheretrix of the great Kingdom of
Micomicon: And with this Note, you may easily reduce into your doleful Memory
all that which you shall please to rehearse.

It is very true (quoth the Damzell) and from henceforth I think it will not
be needful to prompt me any more, for I will arive into a safe Port, with
the Narration of my authentic History: which is, that my father, who was
called the wise Imacrio, was very expert in that which was called art Magic,
and he knew by his Science, that my Mother who was called Queen Xaramilla,
should die before he deceased, and that he should also pass from this life
within a while after, and leave me an Orphan: but he was wont to say, how
that did not afflict his mind so much, as that he was very certain, that a
huge Giant, Lord of a great Island near unto my Kingdom, called Pandafilando
of the duskie sight; because, although his Eyes stood in their right places,
yet do they still look a squint, which he does to terrify the beholders: I
say that my Father knew that this Giant, when he should hear of his death,
would pass with a maine power into my Land and deprive me thereof, not
leaving me the least Village wherein I might hide my head. Yet might all this
be excused, it I would marry with him; but as he found out by his Science,
he knew I would never condescend thereunto, or incline mine affection to so
unequal a Marriage. And herein he said nothing but truth: for it never past
once my thought to espouse that Giant, nor with any other, were he ever so
unreasonable, and great and mighty. My Father likewise added then, that after
his death, I should see Land^filando usurp my Kingdom, and that I should in
no wise stand to my defense, for that would prove my destruction: but leaving
to him the Kingdom freely without troubles, if I meant to excuse mine own
death, and the total ruin of my good and loyal Subjects: for it would be
impossible to defend my self from the divellish force of the Giant; I should
presently direct my course toward Spain, where I should find a redress of my
harms, by incountring with a Knight Errant, whose fame should extend it self
much about that time thorowout that Kingdom, and his name should be, if I
forget not my self, Don Acote or Don Gigote.

Lady, you would say Don-Quixote, quoth Sancho Panca, or as he is called by
another name, The Knight of the Ill-favored face. You have reason, replied
Dorotea: he said moreover, that he should be high of stature, have a withered
face; and that on the right side, a little under the left shoulder or
thereabouts, he should have a tawny spot with certain hairs like to bristles.
Don-Quixote hearing this said to his Squire, Hold my horse here Son Sancho,
and help me to take off mine apparel; for I will see whether I be the Knight
of whom the wise King has prophesied. Why would you now put off your clothes,
quoth Dorotea? To see whether I have that spot which your father mentioned,
answered Don-Quixote. You need not undo your apparel for that purpose, said
Sancho, for I know already that you have a spot with the tokens she named, on
the very ridges of your back, and argues you to be a very strong man. That is
sufficient, quoth Dorotea: for we must not look too near, or be overcurious in
our friends affairs; and whether it be on the shoulder or ridge of the back, it
imports but little; for the substance consists only in having such a mark, and
not, wheresoever it shall be, seeing all is one and the self-same flesh; and
doubtlesly my good father did aim well at all; and I likewise in commending my
self to Don-Quixote: for surely he is the man of whom my father spoke, seeing
the signs of his face agree with those of the great renown that is spread
abroad of this Knight, not only in Spain, but also in Aethiopia: for I had no
sooner landed in Osuna, when I heard so many of his prowesses recounted, as my
mind gave me presently that he was the man in whose search I travailed. But
how did you land in Osuna, good Madam, quoth Don-Quixote, seeing it is no Sea
Town? Marry, Sir, quoth the Curate, anticipating Dorotea's answer; the
Princess would say that after she had landed in Malaga, but the first place
wherein she heard tidings of you was at Osuna. So I would have said, quoth
Dorotea. And it may be very well, quoth the Curate; and I desire your Majesty
to continue your discourse. There needs no farther continuation, quoth Dorotea,
but that finally my Fortune has been so favorable in finding of Don-Quixote,
as I do already hold and account my self for Queen and Lady of all mine
Estate, seeing that he, of his wonted bounty and mignificence, has promised
me the boon, to accompany me wheresoever I shall guide him, which shall be to
none other place, then to set him before Pandafilando of the duskie fight, to
the end you may slay him, and restore me to that which he has so wrongfully
usurped; for all will succeed in the twinkling of an eye, as the wise Tinacrio
my good father has already foretold; who said moreover, and also left it
written in Chaldaicall or Greek charactars (for I cannot read them) that if the
Knight of the Prophecy, after having beheaded the Giant, would take me to
wife, that I should in no sort refuse him, but instantly admit him for my
Spouse, make him at once possessor of my self and my Kingdom.

What think thou of this, friend Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, then, when he
heard her say so? How likest thou this point? Did not I tell thee thus much
before? See now, whether we have not a Kingdom to command, and a Queen whom we
may marry, I swear as much, quoth Sancho, a pox on the knave that will not
marry as soon as Master Pundahilado his winde-pipes are cut. Mount then, and
see whether the Queen be ill or no: I would to God all the Fleas of my bed were
turned to be such. And saying so, he gave two or three friskles in the air,
with very great signs of contentment, and presently went to Dorotea; and
taking her Mule by the bridle, he withheld it, and laying himself down on his
knees before her, requested her very submissively to give him her hands to
kiss them, in sign that he received her for his Queen and Lady. Which of the
beholders could abstain from laughter, perceiving the Masters madness and the
Servants simplicity? To be brief, Dorotea must needs give them unto him, and
promised to make him a great Lord in her Kingdom, when Heaven became so
propitious to her, as to let her once recover and possess it peaceably. And
Sancho returned her thanks, with such words as made them all laugh anew.

This is my History, noble Sirs, quoth Dorotea, whereof only rests untold,
That none of all the Train which I brought out of my Kingdom to attend on me,
is now extant but this well-bearded Squire; for all of them were drowned in a
great storm that over-took us in the very sight of Harbor, whence he and I
escaped and came to land by the help of two planks, on which we laid hold
almost by miracle, as also the whole discourse and mystery of my life seems
none other then a miracle, as you might have noted: And if in any part of the
relation I have exceeded, or not observed a due decorum, you must impute it to
that which Master Licentiat said to the first of my History, that continual
pains and afflictions of mind deprives them that suffer the like of their
memory. That shall not hinder me (O high and valourous Lady) quoth
Don-Quixote, from enduring as many as I shall suffer in your service, be they
never so great or difficult: And therefore I do now ratify and confirm the
promise I have made, and do swear to go with you to the end of the world,
until I find out your fierce enemy, whose proud head I mean to slice off by
the help of God and my valorous arm, with the edge of this (I will not say a
good) Sword; thanks be to Gines of Passamonte which took away mine own: this he
said murmuring to himself, and then prosecuted saying, And after I have cut it
off, and left you peaceably in the possession of your state, it shall rest in
your own will to dispose of your person as you like best. For as long as I
shall have my memory possessed, and my will captived, and my understanding
yielded to her, I will say no more; it is not possible that ever I may induce
my self to marry any other although she were a Phoenix.

That which Don-Quixote had said last of all, of not marrying, disliked Sancho
so much, as lifting his voice with great anger, he said; I vow and swear by my
self, that you are not in your right wits, Sir Don-Quixote; for how is it
possible that you can call the matter, of contracting so high a Princess as
this is, in doubt? Do you think that Fortune will offer you at every corners
end the like hap of this which is now proffered? is my Lady Dulcinea perhaps
more beautiful? No certainly! nor half so fair: nay I am rather about to say,
that she comes not to her shoe that is here present.

In an ill hour shall I arrive to possess that unfortunate Earldome which I
expect, if you go thus seeking for Mushrubs at the bottom of the Sea: Marry,
marry your self presently; the Devil take you for me, and take that Kingdom
comes into your hands, and being a King, make me presently a Marquess or
Admiral, and instantly after let the Devil take all if he pleases.
Don-Quixote, who heard such blasphemies spoken against his Lady Dulcinea, could
not bear them any longer: and therefore lifting up his Javeling without
speaking any word to Sancho, gave him therewithal two such blows, as he
over-threw him to the earth: and had not Dorotea cried to him, to hold his
hand, he had doubtlesly slain him in the place.

Think thou (quoth he after a while) base Peasant, that I shall have always
leisure and disposition to thrust my hand into my pouch, and that there be
nothing else but thou erring, and I pardoning? And do not thou think of it
(excommunicated Rascal) for certainly thou art excommunicated, seeing thou
have talked so broadly of the peerlesse Dulcinea? And do not thou know, base
Slave, Vagabond, that if it were not for the valor she infuseth into mine
arm, that I should not have sufficient forces to kill a Flea? Say, scoffer
with the Vipers tongue, who do thou think has gained this Kingdom, and cut
the head of this Giant, and made thee a Marquess (for I give all this for done
already, and for a matter ended and judged) but the worths and valor of
Dulcinea, using mine arm as the instrument of her act? She fights under my
person, and overcomes in me: And I live and breath in her, and from her I hold
my life and being. O whoreson Villain, how ungrateful art thou, that see thy
self exalted out from the dust of the earth, to be a Nobleman; and yet do
repay so great a benefit with detracting the person that bestowed it on thee?

Sancho was not so sore hurt, but that he could hear all his Masters reasons
very well: wherefore arising somewhat hastily, he ran behind Doretea her
Palfray, and from thence said to his Lord, Tell me Sir, if you be not
determined to marry with this Princess, it is most clear that the Kingdom
shall not be yours: and if it be not, what favors can you be able to do to
me? it is of this that I complain me: Marry your self one for one with this
Princess, now that we have her here, as it were rained to us down from Heaven,
and you may after turn to my Lady Dulcinea; for I think there be Kings in the
World that keep Lemmans. As for beauty, I will not intermeddle; for if I must
say the truth, each of both is very fair, although I have never seen the Lady
Dulcinea. How! have thou not seen her blasphemous Traitor, quoth Don-Quixote,
as if thou did but even now bring me a message from her? I say, quoth
Sancho, I have not seen her so leisurely, as I might particularly note her
beauty and good parts one by one, but yet in a clap as I saw them, they liked
me very well. I do excuse thee now, said Don-Quixote, and pardon me the
displeasure which I have given unto thee, for the first motions are not in our
hands. I see that well, quoth Sancho, and that is the reason why talk is in me
of one of those first motions: And I cannot omit to speak once at least, that
which comes to my tongue. For all that Sancho, replied Don-Quixote, see well
what thou speak; for, the earthen Pitcher goes so often to the water. I will
say no more.

Well then, answered Sancho, God is in heaven, who sees all these guiles, and
shall be one day Judge of him that sins most; of me in not speaking well, or
of you by not doing well. Let there be no more, quoth Dorotea, but run Sancho,
and kiss your Lords hand, and ask him forgiveness, and from henceforth take
more heed how you praise or dispraise any body, and speak no ill of that Lady
Toboso, whom I do not know otherwise then to do her service; and have
confidence in God, for thou shall not want a Lordship wherein thou may live
like a King. Sancho went with his head hanging downward, and demanded his
Lords hand, which he gave unto him with a grave countenance, and after he head
kissed it, he gave him his blessing and said to him, that he had somewhat to
say unto him, and therefore bad him to come somewhat forward that he might
speak unto him. Sancho obeyed, and both of them going a little aside,
Don-Quixote said unto him, I have not had leisure after thy coming, to demand
of thee in particular, concerning the Embassage that thou carriedst, and the
answer that thou broughtest back; and therefore now Fortune lends us some
opportunity and leisure, do not deny me the happiness which thou may give
me by thy good news.

Demand what you please quoth Sancho, and I will answer you, and I request you
good my Lord, that you be not from henceforth so wrathful. Why do thou say
so Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote? I say it replied Sancho, because that these
blows which you bestowed now, were rather given in revenge of the dissension
which the Devil stirred between us two the other night, then for any thing I
said against my Lady Dulcinea, whom I do honor and reverence as a relike,
although she be none, only because she is yours. I pray thee good Sancho, said
Don-Quixote, fall not again into those discourses for they offend me. I did
pardon thee then, and thou know that a new offense must have a new penance.

As they talked thus, they espied a Gallant coming toward them, riding on an
Ass, and when he drew near, he seemed to be an Egyptian; but Sancho
Panca, who whenever he met any Asses, followed them with his eyes and his
heart, as one that thought still on his own; he had scarce eyed him, when he
knew that it was Gines of Passamonte, and by the look of the Egyptian, found
out the fleece of his Ass, as in truth it was; for Gines came riding on his
gray Ass, who to the end he might not be known, and also have commodity to
sell his beast, attyred himself like an Egyptian, whose language and many
others he could speak as well as if they were his mother tongue. Sancho saw
him and knew him; and scarce had he seen and taken notice of him, when he
cried out aloud. Ah these Ginesillo, leave my goods behind thee, set my life
loose, and do not intermeddle with my ease. Leave mine Ass, leave my comfort;
fly Villane, absent thy self thee^e, and abandon that which is none of thine.
He needed not to have used so many words and frumps, for Gines leaped down at
the very first, and beginning a Trot that seemed rather to be a Gallop, he
absented himself and fled far enough from them, in a moment. Sancho went
then to his Ass, and embracing him said, How have thou done hitherto, my
Darling and Treasure, gray Ass of mine Eyes, and my dearest Companion? and
with that stroked and kissed him as if it were a reasonable creature. The Ass
held his peace, and permitted Sancho to kiss and cherish him without answering
a Word. All the rest arived, and congratulated with Sancho for the finding of
his Ass, but chiefly Don-Quixote, who said unto him, that notwithstanding
that he found his Ass, yet would not he therefore annull his Warrant for the
three Colts, for which Sancho returned him very great thanks.

Whilst they two traveled together discoursing thus, the Curate said to
Dorotea, that she had very discreetly discharged her self, as well in the
History, as in her brevitie and immitation thereof, to the phrase and conceits
of Books of Knighthood: She answered, That she did often times read books of
that subject, but that she knew not where the Provinces lay, nor Seaports,
and therefore did only say at random that she had landed in Osuna. I knew it
was so quoth the Curate, and therefore I said what you heard, wherewithal the
matter was souldered. But is it not a marveilous thing to see with what
facility the unfortunate Gentleman believes all these inventions and lies,
only because they bear the style and manner of the follies laid down in his
books? It is quoth Cardenio, and that so rare and beyond all conceit, as I
believe, if the like were to be invented, scarce could the sharpest wits
devise such another.

There is yet quoth the Curate, as mavelous a matter as that: for leaving
apart the simplicities which this good Gentleman speaks concerning his
frenzy, if you will commune with him of any other subject whatsoever, he will
discourse on it with an excellent method, and show himself to have a clear and
pleasing understanding: So that if he be not touched by matters of Chivalry,
there is no man but will deem him to be of a sound and excellent Judgment.

Don-Quixote on the other side prosecuted his conversing with his Squire
whilst the others talked together; and said to Sancho; Let us two, friend
Pancha, forget old injuries, and say unto me now, without any rancour or anger,
Where? how? and when did thou find my Lady Dulcinea? What did she when
thou came? What said thou to her? What answered she? What countenance
showed she as she read my Letter? And who writ it out fairly for thee? And
every other thing that thou shall think worthy of notice in this affair to be
demanded or answered, without either addition or lying, or soothing adulation:
and on the other side do not abbreviate it, lest thou should defraud me
thereby of expected delight. Sir, answered Sancho, if I must say the truth,
none copied out the Letter for me; for I carried no Letter at all.

Thou say true, quoth Don-Quixote; for I found the Tablets wherein it was
written, with my self, two days after thy departure, which did grieve me
exceedingly, because I knew not what thou would do, when thou did
perceive the want of the Letter; and I always made full account, that thou
would return again from the place where thou should first miss it. I had
done so, quoth Sancho, if I had not borne it away in memory, when you read it
to me, in such sort, as I said it to a Cleark of a Verstrie, who did copy it
out of my understanding, so point by point, as he said that he never in all the
days of his life, although he had read many a Letter of excommunication, read
or seen so fine a Letter as it was. And do thou hold it yet in memory
Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote?

No Sir, said Sancho, for after I gave it, seeing it served for none other
purpose, I did willingly forget it: And if I remember any thing, it is that of
the moldy, I would say Sovereign Lady; and the end, Yours until death, The
Knight of the Ill-favored face: and I put between these two things in the
Letter three hundred Souls, and Lives, and Sweet-eyes.

CHAP. IV.
Of the pleasant discourses continued between Don-Quixote and his Squire Sancho
Panca, with other Adventures.
AL^ this likes me well, said Don-Quixote; therefore say on; thou arrived'st;
and what was that Queen of Beauty doing then? I dare say that thou foundest her
threading of Pearls, or imbroydering some curious Device, with Venice gold, for
me her captive Knight. No that I did not, quoth Sancho, but winnowing two
bushels of Wheat in the yard of her house.

Why then, said Don-Quixote, thou may make account that each corn of that
wheat was a grain of Pearl, seeing they were touched by her delicate hand. And
friend, did thou note well what the Wheat was, whether of the best or
ordinary? It was not but red, said Sancho. Well then, I assure thee, answered
Don-Quixote, that being sifted by her hands, it must needs make very fair
bread, and white. But pass forward: When thou did deliver my Letter, did
she kiss it? Did she set it on her head? Did she use any ceremony worthy of
such a Letter? Or what did she? When I went to give it unto her, said Sancho,
she was holding up of her arms with a good quantity of Wheat that she had in
her Sieve; and therefore said unto me; Friend, lay down that Letter there on
the Sack; for I cannot read it until I have winnowed all that is here. O
discreet Lady, quoth Don-Quixote; she surely did that, because she might read
it at leisure, and recreate her self therewithal. Forward, Sancho: And as long
as she was thus busied, what discourses passed she with thee? What did she
demand of thee concerning me? And thou, what did thou answer? Say all, good
Sancho, say all; recount to me every particularity, and let not the least
immunity remain in the Ink-horn.

She demanded nothing of me quoth Sancho, but I recounted unto her the state
I had left you in for her sake, doing of penance, all naked from the gyrdle
upward among these Rocks, like a bruit Beast, sleeping on the ground, and
eating your bread without Table-cloathes, and that you never combed your Beard,
but was weeping and cursing your fortune. There thou said ill (quoth
Don-Quixote) for I do not curse my fortune, but rather bless it, and will
bless it as long as I shall live, seeing it has made me worthy to merit the
love of so high a Lady as Dulcinea of Toboso. She is in good faith so high
answered Sancho, as she surpasses me almost by a whole cubit. Why how now
Sancho said the Knight, have thou measured thy self with her? I did measure my
self with her in this manner replied Sancho; that coming over to help her to
lift up a sack of Wheat on an Ass, we joined so near, as I well perceived
that she was more then a great spanne higher then my self. That is true quoth
Don-Quixote: but think thou not that the talenesse of her extended stature
is adorned with a thousand millions of graces and indowments of the soul? But
Sancho, thou can not deny me one thing, when thou did thus approach her,
did thou not feel a most odoriferous smell, an aromaticall flagrancy, an --
I cannot tell what, so pleasing, as I know not how to term it? I say such a
sent, as if thou were in some curious Persumers shop? That which I know,
quoth Sancho is, that I felt a little unfavorie sent, somewhat ramish and
man-like, and I think the reason was, because she had sweat a little, doing
of that exercise. It was not so (quoth Don-Quixote) but either thou had the
mur, or else did smell thy self; for I know very well how that Rose among
Thorns does sent, that Lilly of the Field, and that chosen Amber. It may well
be, said Sancho, as you have said; for I have had many times such a smell, as
me thought the Lady Dulcinea had then: and though she smel'd too, it were no
marvel; for one Devil is like another.

And well (quoth Don-Quixote) see here, she has sifted her corn, and sent it
to the Mill. What did she after she had read the Letter? The Letter, said
Sancho: she read it not; for she said she could neither read nor write; and
therefore she tore it into small pieces, and would have no man to read it,
lest those of the Village should know her secrets, and said, that what I had
told her by word of mouth of your love and extraordinary penance, which you
remained doing for her sake, was sufficient. And finally, she concluded,
commanding me to say unto you, that she had her commended unto you, and that
she remained with greater desire to see you then to write unto you: and
therefore she requested and willed you, as you tendered her affection, that
presently upon sight hereof you should abandon these shrubbie Groves, leave off
your Frenzy, and take presently the way of Toboso, if some matter of greater
importance did not occur; for she had very great desire to see and talk with
you. She laughed heartily when I told her that you named your self The Knigh of
the Ill-favored face. I demanded for her, whether the beaten Biscaine came
there? and she answered, that he did, and affirmed withal, that he was a very
honest man. I asked also for the Gally-Slaves; but she told me, that she had
seen none of them as yet.

All goes well till this, said Don-Quixote: But tell me, I pray thee, What
Jewel did she bestow on thee at thy departure, for reward of the news thou
carried'st unto her of me? For it is an usual and ancient custom among
Knights and Ladies Errant, to bestow on Squires, Damzels, or Dwafs, which bring
them any good tidings of their Ladies, or Servants, some rich Jewel as a
reward and thanks of their welcome news.

It may well be, quoth Sancho, and I hold it for a very laudible custom; but I
think it was only used in times past; for I think the manner of this our age is
only to give a piece of bread and cheese; for this was all that my Lady
Dulcinea bestowed on me, and that over the Yard walls when I took my leave with
her: And in sign thereof (well fare all good tokens) the cheese was made of
Sheeps Milk. She is mavelous liberal, quoth Don-Quixote; and if she gave
thee not a Jewel of gold, it was, without doubt, because she had none then
about her; But it is not lost that comes at last. I will see her, and then all
things shall be amended. Know thou, Sancho, whereat I wonder? it is at this
sudden return: for it seems to me thou wast gone, and have come back again in
the air; for thou have been away but a little more then three days, Toboso
being more then thirty leagues from hence: And therefore I do believe that the
wise Inchanter who takes care of mine Affairs, and is my friend (for there is
such a one of force, and there must be, under pain that I else should not be a
good Knight Errant) I say, I verily think that wise man holp thee to trample
unawares of thy self: for there are wise men of that condition which will take
a Knight Errant sleeping in his bed; and without knowing how or in what manner,
he will wake the next day a thousand leagues from that place where he fell
asleep: And were it not for this, Knights Errant could not succor one another
in their most dangerous exigents, as they do now at every step. For it
oft-times befalls, that a Knight is fighting in the Mountains of Armenia, with
some divellish Fau^o, some dreadful shadow, or fierce Knight, where he is
like to have the worst; and in this point of death, when he least expects it,
there appears there on the top of a Cloud, or riding in a Chariot of fire,
another Knight his friend, who was but even then in England, and helps him, and
delivers him from death, and returns again that night to his own lodging, where
he Sups with a very good appetite; and yet for all that, is there wont to be
two or three thousand leagues from the one to the other Country. All which is
compassed by the industry and wisdom of those skillfull Inchanters that take
care of the said valorous Knights.

So that, friend Sancho, I am not hard of belief in giving thee credit, that
thou have gone and returned in so short a time from this place to Toboso,
seeing, as I have said, some wise man my friend has (belike) transported thee
thither by stealth, and unaware of thy self. I easily think it, replied Sancho;
for Rozinante travailed, in good faith, as lustily as if he were an Egyptians
Ass, with Quicksilver in his ears. And think thou not, quoth Don-Quixote,
that he had not Quicksilver in his ears? yes, and a legion of Devils also to
help it, who are folk that do travail and make others go as much as they list
without any weariness.

But leaving all this apart, what is thine opinion that I should do now,
concerning my Ladies commandment, to go and see her? for although I know that
I am bound to obey her behests; yet do I find my self disabled at this time
to accomplish them, by reason of the grant I have made to the Princess that
comes with us, and the Law of Arms does compel me to accomplish my word
rather then my will: on the one side I am assaulted and urged by a desire to
go and see my Lady; on the other, my promised faith, and the glory I shall
win in this enterprise, do incite and call me away. But that which I resolve
to do, is to travaill with all speed that I may quickly arive to the place
where that Giant is, and will cut off his head at my coming: and when I have
peaceably installed the Princess in her Kingdom, will presently return to see
the light that does lighten my senses; to whom I will yield such forcible
reasons of my so long absence, as she shall easily condescend to excuse my
stay, seeing all does redound to her glory and fame: For all that I have
gained, do win, or shall hereafter atchieve by force of Arms in this life,
proceeds wholly from the gracious favor she pleases to bestow upon me, and my
being hers.

O God! quoth Sancho, I perceive that you are greatly diseased in the pate. I
pray you Sir, tell me whether you mean to go this long voyage for naught, and
let slip and lose so rich and so noble a preferment as this; where the dowry
is a Kingdom, which is in good faith, as I have heard say, twenty thousand
leagues in compass, and most plentifully stored with all things necessary for
the susteining of humane life; and that it is greater then Portugal and
Castile joined together? Peace, for Gods love, and blush at your own words,
and take my council, and marry presently in the first village that has a
Parish Priest: and if you will not do it there, can you wish a better
commodity then to have our own Master Licentiat, who will do it most
excellently; And note that I am old enough to give counsel, and that this
which I now deliver, is as fit for you, as if it were expressly cast for you in
a mould. For a Sparrow in the fist, is worth more then a flying Bittor. For he
that can have good, and evil does choose,
For ill that betides him, must not Patience loose.


Why Sancho quoth Don-Quixote, if thou give me council to marry, to the end
I may become a King after I have slain the Giant, and have commodity thereby
to promote thee, and give thee what I have promised; I let thee to understand
that I may do all that most easily, without marrying my self. For before I
enter into the battle, I will make this condition, that when I come away
victor, although I marry not the Princess, yet shall a part of the Kingdom
be at my disposition, to bestow upon whom I please; and when I receive it,
upon whom would thou have me bestow it but on thy self? That is manifest
said Sancho; but I pray you Sir, have care to choose that part you would
reserve toward the Sea side, to the end that if the living do not please me,
I may imbarque my black vassails, and make the benefit of them which I have
said. And likewise I pray you not to trouble your mind, thinking to go and see
my Lady Dulcinea at this time, but travail toward the place where the Giant
is, and kill him, and conclude that business first; for I swear unto you,
that I am of opinion it will prove an Adventure of very great honor and profit.
I assure thee Sancho quoth Don-Quixote,, thou art in the ^ight, and I will
follow thy counsel in rather going first with the Princess, then to visit
Dulcinea, And I warn thee not to speak a word to any body, no, not to those
that ride with us, of that which we have here spoken and discoursed together;
for since Dulcineae is so wary and secret, as she would not have her thoughts
discovered, it is no reason, that I either by my self or any other should
detect them.

If that be so quoth Sancho, why then do you send all those which you
vanquish by virtue of your arm, to present themselves to my Lady Dulcinea,
seeing this is as good as subsignation of your hands-writing, that you wish her
well, and are enamoured on her? And seeing that those which go to her, must
forcibly lay them down on their knees before her presence, and say that they
come from you to do her homage, how then can the thoughts of you both be
hidden and concealed? O! how great a fool art thou, and how simple quoth
Don-Quixote? Do not thou perceive Sancho, how all this results to her greater
glory? For thou ought to wit, that in our Knightly proceedings, it is great
honor, that one Lady alone have many Knights Errant for her Servitors, without
extending their thoughts any farther then to serve her, only for her high
worths, without attending any other reward of their many and good desires, then
that she will deigne to accept them as her Servants and Knights. I have heard
preach, said Sancho, that men should love our Savior with that kind of love,
only for his own sake, without being moved thereunto either by the hope of
Glory, or the fear of Pain; although for my part I would love and serve him,
for what he is able to do. The Devil take thee for a Clown, quoth
Don-Quixote, how sharp and pertinently do thou speak now and then, able to
make a man imagine that thou have studied? Now by mine honesty, quoth Sancho. I
can neither read nor write.

Master Nicholas perceiving them drowned thus in their Discourses, cried out to
them to stay and drink of a little Fountain that was by the way. Don-Quixote,
rested to Sanchoes very great contentment, who was already tired with telling
him so many lies, and was afraid his Master would entrap him in his own words.
For although he knew Dulcinea to be of Toboso, yet had he never seen her in
his life. And Cardenio had by this time put, on the apparel Doroten wore when
they found her in the Mountains, which though they were not very good, yet
exceeded with great advantage those which he had himself before; And
alighting hard by the Fountain, they satisfied with the provision the Curate
had brought with him from the Inn, although it were but little, the great
hunger that pressed them. And whilst they took their ease there, a certain
young stripling that traveled, passed by, who looking very earnestly on all
those which sat about the Fountain, he ran presently after to Don-Quixote,
and embracing his Legs, he said, weeping downright: O my Lord, do not you
know me? Look well upon me, for I am the youth Andrew, whom you unloosed
from the Oak whereunto I was tied. Don-Quixote presently knew him, and taking
him by the hands, he turned to those that were present and said, Because you
may see of how great importance it is, that there be Knights Errant in the
World, to undo wrongs and injuries that are committed in it by the insolent
and bad men which live therein, you shall wit that a few days past, as I rode
through a Wood, I heard certain lamentable screetches and cries, as of some
needful and afflicted person: I forthwith occurred, borne away by my
profession toward the place from whence the lamentable voice founded, and I
found tied to an Oaken tree, this boy whom you see here in our presence, for
which I am marvelous glad, because if I shall not say the truth, he may check
me. I say that he was tied to the Oak stark naked form the middle upward,
and a certain Clown was opening his flesh with cruel blows that he gave
him with the reins of a bridle; which Clown, as I after understood, was his
Master. And so soon as I saw him, I demanded the cause of those cruel
stripes. The rude fellow answered, that he beat him because he was his
servant, and that certain negligences of his proceeded rather from being a
thief, then of simplicity. To which this child answered; Sir, he whips me
for no other cause, but by reason that I demand my wages of him. His Master
replied, I know not now what speeches and excuses, the which although I heard,
yet were they not by me admitted. In resolution, I caused him to be loosed,
and took the Clownes Oath, that he would take him home, and pay him there his
wages, one Riall upon another; I, and those also perfumed. Is it not true son
Andrew? Did not thou note with what a domaniering countenance I commanded it,
and with what humility he promised to accomplish all that I imposed,
Commanded and Desired? Answer me, be not ashamed, nor stagger at all, but
tell what passed to these Gentlemen, to the end it may be manifestly seen how
necessary it is, as I have said, to have Knights Errant up and down the
highways.

All that which you have said, quoth the boy, is very true; but the end of the
matter succeeded altogether contrary to that which you imagined. How contrary,
quoth Don-Quixote? Why has not the Peasant paid thee? He not only has not
paid me, answered the boy, but rather as soon as you were passed the wood, and
that we remained both alone, he turned again and tied me to the same tree, and
gave me afresh so many blows, as I remained another S. Bartholomew all flayed;
and at every blow he said some jest or other in derision of you: So that if I
had not felt the pain of the stripes so much as I did, I could have found in my
heart to have laughed very heartily. In fine, he left me in such pitiful
case, as I have been ever since curing my self in an Hospital, of the evil
which the wicked Peasant did then unto me. And you are in the fault of all
this; for if you had ridden on your way, and not come to the place where you
were not sought for, nor intermedled your self in other men's affairs, perhaps
my Master had contented himself with giving me a dozen or two of strokes, and
would presently after have loosed, and paid me my wages: But by reason you
dishonored him so much without cause, and said to him so many Villains, his
choler was inflamed; and seeing he could not revenge it on you, finding himself
alone, he disburdened the shower on me so heavily, as I greatly fear that I
shall never again be mine own man. The hurt consisted in my departure (quoth
Don-Quixote) for I should not have gone from thence, until I had seen thee
paid: For I might have very well known by many experiences, that there is no
Clown that will keep his word, if he see the keeping of it can turn any way to
his damage: But yet, Andrew, thou do remember member how I swoar, that if he
paid thee not, I would return and seek him out, and likewise find him,
although he conveyed himself into a Whales belly. That Is true, quoth Andrew;
but all avails not. Thou shall see whether it avails or no presently, quoth
Don-Quixote: and saying so, got up very hastily, and commanded Sancho to bridle
Rozinante, who was feeding whilst they did eat. Dorotea demanded of him, what
he meant to do? He answered, that he would go and find out the Villain, and
punish him for using such bad proceedings, and cause Andrew to be paid the last
denier, in despite of as many Peasants as lived in the world. To which she
answered, entreating him to remember that he could not deal with any other
Adventure, according to his promise, until hers were achieved; and seeing
that he himself knew it to be true, better then any other, that he should
pacify himself, until his return from her Kingdom.

You have reason, said Don-Quixote; and therefore Andrew must have patience
perforce, until my return (as you have said, Madame) and when I shall turn
again I do swear unto him, and likewise renew my promise, never to rest,
until he be satisfied and paid. I believe not in such Oaths, quoth Andrew;
but would have as much money as might carry me to Sivill, rather then all the
revenges in the world: Give me some meat to eat, and carry away with me, and
God be with you and all other Knights Errant, and I pray God that they may
prove as erring to themselves as they have been to me.

Sancho took out of his Bagg a piece of bread and cheese, and giving it to the
Youth, said, Hold brother Andrew, for every one has his part of your
misfortune. I pray you what part thereof have you, said Andrew? This piece of
bread and cheese that I bestow on thee, quoth Sancho; for God only knows
whether I shall have need of it again, or no: for thou must wit, friend, that
we the Squires of Kinghts Errant are very subject to great hunger and evil
luck, yea, and to other things which are better felt then told. Andrew laid
hold on his bread and cheese; and seeing that no body gave him any other thing,
he bowed his head and went on his way: True it is, that he said to
Don-Quixote, at his departure: For Gods love, good Sir Knight Errant, if you
shall ever meet me again in the plight you have done, although you should see
me ^orne in pieces, yet do not succor or help me, but leave me in my
disgrace; for it cannot be so great, but that a greater will result from your
help, upon whom, and all the other Knights Errant that are borne in the world,
I pray God his curse may alight. Don-Quixote thought to arise to chastise him;
but he ran away so swiftly, as no man durst follow him; and our Knight remained
marvellously ashamed at Andrews tale; wherefore the rest with much ado
suppressed their desire to laugh, lest they should thoroughly confound him.

CHAP. V.
Treating of that which befell all Don-Quixote his Train in the Inn.
THe Dinner being ended, they sadled and went to horse presently, and travailed
all that day, and the next, without incountring any Adventure venture of price,
until they arived at the only bugg and scar-crow of Sancho Panca; and though
he would full fain have excused his entry into it, yet could he in no wise
avoid it: The Innkeeper, the Hostess, her Daughter, and Maritornes seeing
Don-Quixote and Sancho return, went out to receive them with tokens of great
love and joy, and he entertained them with grave countenance and applause, and
bade them to make him ready a better Bed then the other which they had given
unto him the time before. Sir, quoth the Hostess, if you would pay us better
then the last time, we would give you one for a Prince, Don-Quixote answered,
that he would: They prepared a reasonable good bed for him in the same wide
room where he lay before; and he went presently to bed, by reason that he
arived much tired, and void of wit. And scarce was he gotten into his chamber,
when the Hostess leaping suddenly on the Barber, and taking him by the beard,
said, Now by my self blessed, thou shall use my tail no more for a beard, and
thou shall turn me my tail; for my husbands comb goes thrown up and down the
floor, that it is a shame to see it: I mean the comb that I was wont to hang
up in my good tail. The Barber would not give it unto her for all her drawing,
until the Licentiat bade him to restore it, that they had now no more use
thereof, but that he might now very well discover himself, and appear in his
own shape, and say to Don-Quixote, that after the Gally-slaves had robbed him,
he fled to that Inn: And if Don-Quixote demanded by chance for the Princess
her Squire, that they should tell him, how she had sent him before to her
Kingdom, to give intelligence to her Subjects, that she returned, bringing
with her him that should free and give them all liberty. With this the Barber
surrendered the tail willingly to the Hostess, and likewise all the other
borrowed wares which she had lent for Don-Quixotes deliverie. All those of the
Inn rested wonderful amazed at Doroteas beauty, and also at the comeliness
of the Shepherd Cardenio. Then the Curate gave order to make ready for them
such meat as the Inn could afford: and the Innkeeper, in hope of better
payment, did dress very speedily for them, a reasonable good Dinner.
Don-Quixote slept all this while, and they were of opinion to let him take his
rest, seeing sleep was more requisite for his disease then meat. At the Table
they discoursed (the Innkeeper, his Wife, Daughter, and Marito^nes, and all
the other Travailers being present) of Don-Quixotes strange Frenzy, and of the
manner wherein they found him. The Hostess eftsoons recounted what had happened
there between him and the Carrier; and looking to see whether Sancho were
present, preceiving that he was away, she told likewise all the story of his
canvasing, whereat they conceived no little content and pastime: And, as the
Curate said, that the original cause of Don-Quixotes madness proceeded from
the reading of Books of Knighthood. The Innkeeper answered;

I cannot conceive how that can be, for (as I believe) there is no reading so
delightful in this world, and I my self have two or three books of that
kind with other papers, which do verily keep me alive, and not only me but
many other. For in the reaping times, many of the Reapers repair to this place
in the heates of mid day, and there is evermore some one or other among them
that can read, who takes one of these books in hand, and then some thirty or
more of us do compass him about, and do listen to him with such pleasure, as
it hinders a thousand hoary hairs; for I dare say at least of my self, that
when I heard tell of those furious and terrible blows that Knights Errant
give, it inflames me with a desire to become such a one my self, and could
find in my heart to be hearing of them day and night. I am just of the same
mind, no more, nor no less, said the Hostess, for I never have any quiet
hour in my house, but when thou art hearing those books whereon thou art so
besotted, as then thou do only forget to chide, which is thy ordinary
exercise at other times. That is very true said Maritornes. And I in good sooth
do take great delight to hear those things, for they are very fine, and
especially when they tell how such a Lady lies embraced by her Knight under an
Orange tree, and that a certain Damzell keeps Watch all the while, ready to
burst for envy that she has not likewise her sweete-heart; and very much
afraid. I say that all those things are as sweet as honey to me. And you,
quoth the Curate to the Innkeepers daughter, what do you think? I know not
in good sooth, Sir quoth she, but I do likewise give ear, and in truth
although I understand it not, yet do I take some pleasure to hear them, but I
mislike greatly those blows which please my father so much, and only delight in
the lamentations that Knights make being absent from their Ladies; which in
sooth do now and then make me weep, through the compassion I take of them.
Well then quoth Dorotea, belike, fair maiden you would remedy them, if such
plaints were breathed for your own sake? I know not what I would do, answered
the Gyrle, only this I know, that there are some of those Ladies so cruel, as
their Knights call them Tigers and Lions, and a thousand other wilde-Beasts.
And good Jesus, I know not what un-Souled folk they be, and so without
Conscience, that because they will not once behold an honorable man, they
suffer him either to die or run mad. And I know not to what end serves all that
coyness. For if they do it for honesties sake, let them marry with them, for
the Knights desire nothing more. Peace child, quoth the Hostess; for it seems
that thou know too much of those matters, and it is not decent that Maidens
should know or speak so much. I speak, quoth she, by reason that this good Sir
made me the demand; and I could not in courtesy omit to answer him. Well, said
the Curate, let me entreat you, good mine Host, to bring us here those Books;
for I would fain see them.

I am pleased, said the Innkeeper: And then entering into his Chamber, he
brought forth a little old Malet shut up with a chain; and opening thereof, he
took out three great Books and certain Papers written with a very fair Letter.
The first Book he opened was that of Don Cirongilio of Thracia: The other
Felixmarte of Hircania: And the third, The History of the great Captain,
Goncalo Hernandez of Cordova, with the life of Diego Garcia of Paredes
adjoined. As soon as the Curate had read the Titles of the two Books, he said
to the Barber, We have now great want of our friends, the old woman and Niece.
Not so much as you think, quoth the Barber; for I know also the way to the yard
or the chimney, and in good sooth, there is a fire in it good enough for that
purpose. Would you then, quoth the Host, burn my Books? No more of them, quoth
the Curate, but these first two of Don Cirongilio and Felixmarte, are my Books.
Perhaps, quoth the Innkeeper, Heretical or Flegmaticall, that you would thus
roughly handle them. Schismatic thou wo^ldest have said, quoth the Barber,
and not Flegmaticall. It is so, said the Innkeeper; but if you will needs burn
any, I pray you, rather let it be that of the great Captain, and of that Diego
Garcia; for I would rather suffer one of my Sons to be burned then any one
of those other two. Good friend, these two Books are lying, and full of follies
and vanities; but that of the great Captain is true, and contains the arts of
Goncalo Hernandez of Cordova, who for his sundry and noble acts merited to be
termed by all the world The great Captain, a name famous, illustrious, and
only deserved by himself and this other Diego Garcia of Paredes was a noble
Gentleman, born in the City of Truxillo in Estremadura, and was a most
valourous Soldier; and of so surpassing force, as he would detain a Millwheele
with one hand from turning in the midest of the speediest motion: And standing
once at the end of a Bridge with a two-handed Sword, defended the passage
against a mighty Army that attempted to pass over it; and did so many other
things, that if another who were a stranger and unpassionate had written them,
as he did himself who was the relater and Historiographer of his own Acts, and
therefore recounted them with the modesty of a Gentleman and proper
Chronicler, they would have drowned all the Hectors, Achillises and Rollands in
oblivion.

There is a Jest, quoth the Innkeeper, deal with my father, I pray you see at
what you wonder: A wise tale at the withholding of the wheel of a Mill. I
swear you ought to read that which is read in Felixmarte of Hircania, who with
one thwart blow cut five mighty Giants in halfes, as if they were of Beans,
like to the little Friars that Children make of Bean-cods: And set another time
upon a great and most powerful Army of more then a Million and six hundred
thousand Soldiers, and overthrew and scattered them all like a Flock of Sheep.
What then can you say to me of the good Don Cirongilio of Thracia, who was so
animous and valiant as may be seen in his Book; wherein is laid down, That as
he sailed along a River, there issued out of the midest of the water a Serpent
of fire, and he, as soon as he perceived it, leaped upon her, and hanging by
her scaly shoulders, he wrung her throat so straightly between both his arms,
that the Serpent perceiving her self to be well-nigh strangled, had no other
way to save her self but by diving down into the deeps, carrying the Knight
away with her, who would never let go his gripe, and when they came to the
bottom, he found himself by a Palace in such fair and pleasant gardens, as it
was a wonder; and presently the Serpent turned into an old man, which said to
him such things as there is no more to be desired. Two figs for the Great
Captain, and that Diego Garcia, of whom you speak.

Dorotea hearing him speak thus, said to Cardenio, Me thinks our Host wants
but little to make up a second part of Don-Quixote. So it seems to me
likewise, replied Cardenio, for as we may conjecture by his words, he
certainly believes that every thing written in those books, passed just as it
is laid down, and barefooted-Friers would be scarce able to persuade him the
contary. Know friend (quoth the Curate to the In-keeper) that there was never
any such man as Felixmarte of Hircania, or Don-Chirongilio of Thracia, nor
other such Knights as books of Chivalry recount; for all is but a device and
fiction of idle wits that composed them, to the end that thou say, to pass
over the time, as your readers do in reading of them: For I sinceerely swear
unto thee, that there were never such Knights in the world, nor such Adventures
and ravings happened in it. Cast that bone to another dog quoth the In-keeper, as
though I knew not how many numbers are five, and where the shoe wrests me
now. I pray you Sir, go not about to give me pap, for by the Lord I am not so
white. Is it not a good sport that you labor to persuade me, that all that
which these good books say are but ravings and fables, they being printed by
Grace and Favor of the Lords of the Privy Council; as if they were folk
that would permit so many lies to be printed at once, and so many Battles and
Enchantments, as are able to make a man run out of his wits: I have told thee
already friend (said the Curate) that this is done for the recreation of our
idle thoughts, and so even as in well governed Comonwealths, the plays at
Chesse, Tennis and Trucks are tolerated for the pastime of some men which have
none other occupation, and either ought not or cannot work, even so such books
are permitted to be printed; presuming (as in truth they ought) that no man
would be found so simple and ignorant, as to hold any of these books for a
true History. And if my leisure permitted, and that it were a thing requisite
for this Auditory, I could say many things concerning the subject of books of
Knighthood, to the end that they should be well contrived, and also be
pleasant and profitable to the Readers; but I hope sometime to have the
commodity to communicate my conceit with those that may redress it. And in the
mean while you may believe good mine Host, what I have said, and take to you
your books, and agree with their truths or leasings as you please, and much
good may it do you; and I pray God that you halt not in time on the foot that
your guest Don-Quixote halteth. Not so quoth the In-keeper, for I will never
be so wood as to become a Knight Errant, for I see well, that what was used in
the times of these famous Knights is now in no use nor request.

Sancho came in about the midst of this discourse, and rested much confounded
and Pensative of that which he heard them say, that Knights Errant were now in
no request, and that the books of Chivalry only contained follies and lies,
and purposed with himself to see the end of that voyage of his Lords, and that
if it sorted not the wished success which he expected, he resolved to leave
him and return home to his wife and children and accustomed labor. The
Innkeeper thought to take away his books and budget, but the Curate withheld
him saying. Stay a while, for I would see what papers are those which are
written in so fair a Character. The Host took them out and gave them to him
to read, being in number some eight sheets with a title written in text
letters, which said, The History of the curious Impertinent. The Curate read
two or three lines softly to himself, and said after, Truly the title of this
History does not mislike me, and therefore I am about to read it through. The
Innkeeper hearing him said, Your reverence may very well do it, for I (...)
you that some guests which have read it here, as they traveled, dis^ommend it
exceedingly, and have begged it of me as earnestly, but I would never bestow
it, hoping some day to restore it to the owner of this Malet, who forgot it
here behind him with those books and papers, for it may be that he will
sometime return, and although I know that I shall have great want of the books,
yet will I make to him restitution, for although I am an In-keeper, yet God be
thanked I am a Christian therewithal. You have great reason my friend, quoth
the Curate, but yet notwithstanding if the taste like me, thou must give me
leave to take a copy thereof. With all my heart replied the Host. And as they
two talked, Cardenio taking the book, began to read a little of it, and it
pleasing him as much as it had done the Curate, he requested him to read it in
such sort as they might all hear him. That I would willingly do said the
Curate, if the time were not now more fit for sleeping then reading. It were
sufficient repose for me, said Dorotea, to pass away the time listening to
some tale or other, for my spirit is not yet so well quieted as to aford me
license to sleep, even then when nature exacteth it. If that be so, quoth the
Curate, I will read it, if it were but for curiosity, perhaps it contains
some delightful matter. Master Nicholas and Sancho entreated the same. The
Curate seeing and knowing that he should therein do them all a pleasure, and
he himself likewise receive as great, said, Seeing you will needs hear it,
be all of you attentive, for the History begineth in this manner.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein is rehearsed the History of the Curious-Impertinent.
IN Florence, a rich and famous City of Italy, in the Province called
Tuscane, there dwelled two rich and principal Gentlemen called Anselmo and
Lothario, which two were so great friends, as they were named for excellency,
and by Antonomasta, by all those that knew them, the Two friends: They were
both Batchelers, and much of one age and manners; all which was of force to
make them answer one another with reciprocal amity. True it is that Anselmo
was somewhat more inclined to amorous dalliance then Lothario, who was
altogether addicted to hunting: But when occasion exacted it Anselmo would omit
his own pleasures, to satisfy his friends; and Lothario likewise his, to
please Anselmo: And by this means both their wills were so correspondent, as no
clock could be better ordered then were their desires. Anselmo being at last
deeply enamoured of a principal and beautiful young Lady of the same City,
called Camila, being so worthily descended, and she her self of such merit
therewithal, as he resolved (by the consent of his friend Lothario, without
whom he did nothing) to demand her of her Parents for wife; and did put his
purpose in execution; and Lothario himself was the messenger, and concluded the
matter so to his friends satisfaction, as he was shortly after put in
possession of his desires; and Camila so contented to have gotten Anselmo, as
she ceased not to render Heaven and Lothario thanks, by whose means she had
obtained so great a match. The first days, as all marriage days are wont to
be merry, Lothario frequented, according to the custom, his frind Anselmo's
house, endeavoring to honor, feast, and recreate him all the ways he might
possible: But after the Nuptials were finished, and the concourse of Strangers,
Visitations, and Congratulations somewhat ceased, Lothario, also began to be
somewhat more slack then he wor^ted in going to Anselmo his house, deeming it
(as it is reason that all discreet men should) not so convenient to visit or
haunt so often the house of his friend after marriage as he would, had he still
remained a Batcheler. For although true amity neither should, nor ought to
admit the least suspicion: yet notwithstanding a married man's honor is so
delicate and tender a thing, as it seems it may be sometimes impaired, even by
very Brethren; and how much more by Friends? Anselmo noted the remission of
Lothario, and did grievously complain thereof, saying; That if he had wist by
marriage he should thus be deprived of his deered conversation, he would never
have married; and that since through the uniform correspondencie of them both
being free, they had deserved the sweet title of the two friends, that he
should not now permit (because he would be noted circumspect without any other
occasion) that so famous and pleasing a name should be lost: and therefore he
requested him (if it were lawful to use such a term between them two) to
return and be Master of his house, and come and go as he had done before his
marriage, assuring him that his Spouse Camila had no other pleasure and will,
then that which himself pleased she should have: and that she, after having
known how great was both their frindships, was not a little amazed to see him
become so strange.

To all these and many other reasons alleged by Anselmo, to persuade Lothario
to frequent his house, he answered with so great prudence, discretion and
wariness, as Anselmo remained satisfied of his friends good intention herein:
and they made an agreement between them two, that Lothario should dine at his
house twice a week, and the Holy Days besides: And although this agreement had
passed between them, yet Lothario purposed to do that only which he should
find most expedient for his friends honor, whose reputation he tendered much
more deerly then he did his own; and was wont to say very discreetly, that the
married man, unto whom heaven had given a beautiful wife, ought to have as
much heed of the friends which he brought to his house, as he should of the
women friends that visited his wife; for that which is not done nor agreed upon
in the Church or Market, nor in public Feasts or Stations (being places that
a man cannot lawfully hinder his wife from frequenting sometimes at least) are
oft-times facilitated and contrived in a friends or kins-womans house, whom
perhaps we never suspected. Anselmo on the other side affirmed, That therefore
married men ought every one of them to have some friend who might advertise
them of the faults escaped in their manner of proceeding; for it befalls many
times, that through the great love which the Husband bears to his Wife, either
he does not take notice, or else he does not advertise her, because he would
not offend her to do or omit to do certain things, the doing or omitting
whereof might turn to his honor or obloquie; to which things, being advertised
by his friend, he might easily apply some remedy: But where might a man find
a friend so discreet, loyal and trusty as Anselmo demands? I know not truly,
if not Lothario; for he it was that with all solicitude and care regarded the
honor of his friend: and therefore endeavored to clip and diminish the number
of the days promised, lest he should give occasion to the idle vulgar, or to
the eyes of vagabonds and malicious men to judge any sinister thing, viewing so
rich, comely, noble, and qualified a young man as he was, to have so free
access into the house of a woman so beautiful as Camila. For though his
virtues and modest carriage were sufficiently able to set a bridle to any
malignant tongue, yet notwithstanding he would not have his credit, nor that of
his friends called into any question; and therefore would spend most of the
days that he had agreed to visit his friend, in other places and exercises;
yet feigning excuses so plausible, as his friend admitted them for very
reasonable. And thus the time passed on in challenges of unkindnesse of the one
side, and lawful excuses of the other.

It so fell out, that as both the friends walked on a day together in a field
without the City, Anselmo said to Lothario these words ensuing, I know very
well, friend Lothario, that among all the favors which God of his bounty has
bestowed upon me by making me the Son of such Parents, and giving to me with
so liberal a hand, both the goods of Nature and Fortune: yet as I cannot
answer him with sufficient gratitude for the benefits already received, so do
I find my self most highly bound unto him above all others, for having given
me such a friend as thou art, and so beautiful a wife as Camila, being both of
you such pawns, as if I esteem you not in the degree which I ought, yet do I
hold you as deer as I may: And yet possessing all those things which are wont
to be the all and sum that are wont and may make a man happy, I live
notwithstanding the most sullen and discontented life of the World; being
troubled, I know not since when, and inwardly wrested with so strange a desire,
and extravagant from the common use of others, as I marvel at my self, and do
condemn and rebuke my self when I am alone, and do labor to conceal and
cover mine own desires; all which has served me to as little effect, as if I
had proclaimed mine own errors purposely to the World: And seeing that it must
finally break out, my will is, that it be only communicated to the treasury of
thy secret; hoping by it and mine own industry, which (as my true friend) thou will use to help me, I shall be quickly freed from the anguish it causes, and
by thy means my joy and contentment shall arive to the pass that my
discontents have brought me through mine own folly.

Lothario stood suspended at Anselmo's Speech, as one that could not imagine to
what so prolixe a prevention and preamble tended: And although he revolved and
imagined sundry things in his mind which he deemed might afflict his friend,
yet did he ever shoot wide from the mark which in truth it was: and that he
might quickly escape that agony, wherein the suspention held him, he said,
That his friend did notable injury to their amity, in searching out wreathings
and ambages in the discovery of his most hidden thoughts to him, seeing be
might assure himself certainly, either to receive counsels of him how to
entertain, or else remedy and means how to accomplish them.

It is very true answered Anselmo, and with that confidence I let thee to
understand, friend Lothario, That the desire which vexes me, is a longing, to
know whether my wife Camila be as good and perfect as I do account her; and I
cannot wholly rest satisfied of this truth, but by making trial of her, in such
sort, as it may give manifest argument of the degree of her goodness, as the
fire does show the value of gold: For I am of opinion (O friend) that a woman
is of no more worth or virtue, then that which is in her, after she has been
solicited [ Casta est quam nemo rogavit:] and that she alone is strong who
cannot be bowed by the Promises, Gifts, Tears, and continual importunities of
importunate Lovers: For what thanks is it (quoth he) for a woman to be good, if
no body say or teach her ill? What wonder that she be retired and timorous, if
no occasion be ministered to her of dissolution, and chiefly she that knows she
has a husband ready to kill her for the least argument of lightness? So that
she which is only good for fear or want of occasion, will I never hold in that
estimation, that I would the other solicited and pursued, who notwithstanding
comes away crowned with the victory: And therefore being moved as well by these
reasons as by many other which I could tell you, which accredit and fortify
mine opinion, I desire that my wife Camila do also pass through the pikes of
those proofs and difficulties, and purify and refine her self in the fire of
being requested, solicited and pursued; and that by one whose worths and
valor may deserve acceptance in her opinion: and if she bear away the Palm of
the victory, as I believe she will, I shall account my fortune matchless, and
may brag that my desires are in their height; and will say that a strong woman
has fallen to my lot, of whom the Wise man faith, who shall find her? And when
it shall succeed contrary to mine expection, I shall, with the pleasure that I
will conceive to see how rightly it jumps with mine opinion, bear very
indifferent the grief which in all reason this so costly a trial must stir in
me: And presupposing that nothing which thou shall say to me shall be available
to hinder my design, or dissuade me from putting my purpose in execution; I
would have thy self, deer friend Lothario, to provide thee to be the
instrument that shall labor this work of my liking, and I will give thee
opportunity enough to perform the same, without omitting any thing that may
further thee in the solicitation of an Honest, Noble, Wary, Retired and
Passionlesse woman.

And I am chiefly moved to commit this so hard an enterprise to thy trust;
because I know that if Camila be vanquished by thee, yet shall not the victory
arive to the last push and upshot, but only to that of accounting a thing to
be done, which shall not be done for many good respects. So shall I remain
nothing offended, and mine injury concealed in the virtue of thy silence; for I
know thy care to be such in matters concerning me, as it shall be eternal,
like that of death. And therefore if thou desire that I may lead a life
deserving that name, thou must forthwith provide thy self to enter into this
amorous conflict, and that not languishing or slothfully, but with that courage
and diligence which my desire expects, and the confidence I have in our
amity assures me.

These were the reasons used by Anselmo to Lothario, to all which he was so
attentive, as until he ended, he did not once unfold his lips to speak a
word save those which we have above related, and seeing that he spoke no
more; after he had beheld him a good while, as a thing that he had never
before, and did therefore strike him into admiration and amazement he said,
Friend Anselmo, I cannot persuade my self, that the words you have spoken be
other then jests, for had I thought that thou were in earnest, I would not have
suffered thee to pass on so far, and by lending thee no ear would have
excused this tedious Oration. I do verily imagine that either thou do not
know me, or I thee: but not so, for I know thee to be Anselmo; and thou that
I am Lothario; the damage is, that I think thou art not the Anselma thou wast
wont to be, and perhaps thou deemest me not to be the accustomed Lothario
that I ought to be; for the things which thou have spoken, are not of that
Anselmo my friend, nor those which thou seek ought to be demanded of that
Lothario, of whom thou have notice; for true friends ought to prove and use
their friends, as the Poet said, Vsque ad Aras, that is, that they should in no
sort employ them or implore their assistance in things offensive unto God, and
if a Gentile was of this opinion in matters of friendship how much greater
reason is it that a Christian should have that feeling, specially knowing that
the celestial amity is not to be lost for any humane friendship whatsoever.
And when the friend should throw the bars so wide, as to set heavenly respects
apart, for to complement with his friend, it must not be done on light
grounds, or for things of small moment, but rather for those whereon his
friends life and honor wholly depends. Then tell me now Anselmo, in which of
these two things art thou in danger, that I may adventure my Person to do thee
a pleasure, and attempt so dete^lable a thing as thou do demand? None of
them truly, but rather do demand, as I may conjecture, that I do
industriously labor to deprive thee of thine honor and life together, and in
doing so, I likewise deprive my self of them both. For if I must labor to
take away thy credit, it is most evident that I dispoyle thee of life, for a
man without reputation, is worse then a dead man, and I being the instrument
(as thou desire that I should be) of so great harm unto thee, do not I
become, likewise thereby dishonored, and by the same consequence also without
life? Hear me friend Anselmo, and have patience not to answer me until I
have said all that I think, concerning that which thy mind exacteth of thee;
for we shall have after leisure enough, wherein thou may reply, and I have
patience to listen unto thy reasons.

I am pleased quoth Anselmo, say what thou likest. And Lothario prosecuted his
speech in this manner; Me thinks Anselmo, that thou art now of the Moors
humors, which can by no means be made to understand the error of their sect;
neither by Citations of the holy Scripture, nor by reasons which consist in
speculations of the understanding, or that are founded in the Articles of the
Faith, but must be won by palpable examples, and those easy, intelligible,
demonstrative and doubtless; by Mathematical demonstrations, which cannot be
denied. Even as when we say, If from two equal parts we take away two parts
equal, the parts that remain are also equal. And when they cannot understand
this, as in truth they do not, we must demonstrate it to them with our hands,
and lay it before their eyes, and yet for all this naught can avail to win
them in the end to give credit to the verities of our Religion, which very
terms and manner of proceeding I must use with thee, by reason that the desire
which is sprung in thee, does so wander and stray from all that which bears
the shadow only of Reason, as I doubt much that I shall spend my time in vain
which I shall bestow to make thee understand thine own simplicity, for I will
give it no other name at this present, and in good earnest I was almost
persuaded to leave thee in thine humor, in punishment of thine inordinate and
unreasonable desire, but that the love which I bear toward thee does not
consent, I use to thee such rigor, or leave thee in so manifest a danger of
thine own perdition. And that tho^ may clearly see it, tell me Anselmo;
have not thou said unto me that I must solicit one that stands upon her
reputation, persuade an honest woman, make proffers to one that is not
passionate or engaged, and serve a discreet woman? Yes, thou have said all
this. Well then, if thou know already that thou have a retired, honest,
unpassionate and prudent wife, what seek thou more? And if thou think
that she will rest victorious after all mine assaults, as doubtless she will,
what better titles would thou after bestow upon her then those she
possesses already? Either it proceeds because thou do not think of her as
thou say, or else because thou know not what thou demandest. If thou do
not account her such as thou praysest her; to what end would thou prove her?
But rather as an evil person use her as thou likest best; but if she be as
good as thou beleevest, it were an impertinent thing to make trial of truth it
self: For after it is made, yet it will still rest only with the same
reputation it had before. Wherefore it is a concluding reason; that to attempt
things, whence rather harm may after result unto us then good, is the part of
rash and discoursless brains, and principally when they deal with those
things whereunto they are not compelled or driven, and that they see even a far
off, how the attempting the like is manifest folly. Difficult things are
undertaken for God, or the world, or both. Those that are done for God, are the
works of the Saints, endevoring to lead Angels lives in frail and mortal
bodies. Those of the World, are the travells and toils of such as cross such
immense seas, travel through so adverse Regions, and converse with so many
Nations, to acquire that which we call the goods of Fortune. And the things
acted for God and the world together, are the worthy exploits of resolute and
valorous Martial men, which scarce perceive so great a breach in the
adversatie wall, as the common bullet is wont to make, when leaving all fear
apart, without making any discourse, or taking notice of the manifest danger
that threatens them, born away by the wings of desire and honor to serve God,
their Nation and Prince, do throw themselves boldly into the throat of a
thousand menacing deaths which expect them.

These are things wont to be practiced, and it is honor, glory and profit to
attempt them, be they never so full of inconveniences and danger; but that
which thou say thou will try and put in practice, shall never gain thee
Gods glory, the goods of fortune, or renoune among men; for suppose that thou
bring it to pass according to thine own fantasy, thou shall remain
nothing more contented, rich, or honorable then thou art already; and if thou
do not, then shall thou see thy self in the greatest misery of any wretch
living: for it will little avail thee then, to think that no man knows the
disgrace befaln thee, it being sufficient both to afflict and dissolve thee
that thou know it thy self; and for greater confirmation of this truth, I
will repeat unto thee a stanza of the famous Poet Lud^vice Tansil^ in the end
of his first part of saint Peter's tears, which is: THE grief increases, and
withal the shame,
In Peter when the day it self did show:
And though he no man sees, yet does he blame
Himself, because he had offended so,
For breasts, magnanimous not only, tam^
When (that of others they are se^^e) they know:
But of themselves ashamed they often be,
Though none but Heaven and Earth their error see.
So that thou can not excuse thy grief with secrecy, be it never so great,
but rather shall have continual occasion to weep, if not watery tears from
thine eyes, at least tears of blood from thy heart, such as that simple Doctor
wept, of whom our Poet makes mention, who made trial of the Vessel, which the
prudent Reynaldos upon maturer discourse refused to deal withal: and although
it be but a Poetical fixion, yet does it contain many hidden morals worthy
to be noted, understood and imitated: how much more, seeing that by what I
mean to say now, I hope thou shall begin to conceive the great error which thou
would wittingly commit.

Tell me, Anselmo, if Heaven or thy Fortunes had made thee Lord and lawful
possessor of a most precious Diamond, of whose goodness and quality all the
Lapidaries that had viewed the same would rest satisfied, and that all of them
would jointly and uniformly affirm that it arived in quality, goodness and
finenesse to all that, to which the nature of such a stone might extend it
self; and that thou thy self did believe the same without witting any thing
to the contrary; would it be just that thou should take an humor to set
that Diamond between an Anvile and a hammar and to try there by very force of
blows whether it be so hard and so fine as they say? And farther; when thou
did put thy design in execution, put the case that the stone made
resistance to thy foolish trial, yet would thou add thereby no new valor
or esteem to it: And if it did break, as it might befall; were not then all
lost? Yes certainly, and that leaving the Owner, in all men's opinion, for a
very poor ignorant person. Then friend Anselmo, make account that Camila is a
most precious Diamond as well in thine as in other men's estimation; and it is
no reason to put her in contingent danger of breaking, seeing that although
she remain in her integrity, she cannot mount to more worth then she has at
the present; and if she faltred, or did not resist, consider even at this
present, what state you would be in then and how justly thou might then
complain of thy self, for being cause of her perdition and thine own. See how
there is no Jewel in the world comparable to the modest and chaste Woman; and
that all Women's honor consists in the good opinion that is had of them: and
seeing that of thy Spouse is so great, as it arrives to that sum of perfection
which thou know; why would thou call this verity in question? Know,
friend, that a Woman is an imperfect Creature, and should therefore have
nothing cast in her way to make her stumble and fall, but rather to clear and
do all encumbrances away out of it, to the end she may without impeachment
run with a swift course to obtain the perfection she wants, which only
consists in being virtuous.

The Naturalists recount, that the Ermine is a little Beast that has a most
white skin; and that when the hunters would chase him, they use this art to
take him: As soon as they find out his haunt, and places where he has
recourse, they thwart them with mire and dirt, and after when they discrie the
little Beast, they pursue him toward those places which are defiled; and the
Ermine espying the mire, stands still, and permits himself to be taken and
captived in exchange of not passing through the mire, or staining of his
whiteness, which it esteems more then either liberty or life. The honest and
chaste Woman is an Ermine, and the virtue of chastity is whiter and purer then
Snow; and he that would not lose it, but rather desires to keep and preserve
it, must proceed with a different style from that of the Ermine: For they must
not propose and lay before her the mire of the passions, flatteries and
services of importunate Lovers; for perhaps she shall not have the natural
impulse and force which commonly through proper debility is wont to stumble, to
pass over those encumbrances safely: and therefore it is requisite to free the
passage and take them away, and lay before her the cleernesse of virtue, and
the beauty comprised in good fame. The good woman is also like unto a bright
and clear mirror of Crystal; and therefore is subject to be stained and
dimmed by every breath that touches it. The honest woman is to be used as
relics of Saints, to wit, she must be honored but not touched. The good
woman is to be kept and prized like a fair Garden full of sweet Flowers and
Roses, that is held in estimation, whose owner permits no man to enter and
trample or touch his Flowers, but holds it to be sufficient, that they
standing a far off, without the rails, may joy at the delightful sight and
fragrancie thereof. Finally I will repeat certain Verses unto thee that have
now come to my memory, the which were repeated of late in a new Play, and seem
to me very fit for the purpose of which we treat. A prudent old man did give a
neighbor of his that had a daughter counsel to keep and shut her up; and
among many other reasons he used these. Truly Woman is of Glass;
Therefore no man ought to try,
If she broke or not might be,
Seeing all might come to pass.
Yet to break her it is more easy;
And it is no wit to venture
A thing of so brittle temper,
That to Soulder is so queafie.
And I would have all men dwell
In this truth and reasons ground,
That if Danaes may be found,
Golden showers are found as well.


All that which I have said to thee, Anselmo, until this instant, has been
for that which may touch thy self: and it is now high time that somewhat be
heard concerning me: And if by chance I shall be somewhat prolixe, I pray thee
to pardon me; for the Labyrinth wherein thou have entered, and out of which thou
would have me to free thee, requires no less. Thou hold me to be thy
friend, and yet go about to dispoile me of mine honor, being a thing
contrary to all amity; and do not only pretend this, but do likewise
endeavor that I should rob thee of the same, that thou would deprive me of
mine is evident; for when Camila shall perceive that I solicit her as thou
demandest, it is certain that she will esteem of me as of one quite devoid of
wit, and indiscreet, seeing I intend and do a thing so repugnant to that,
which the being that him I am and thine amity do bind me unto; that thou
would have me rob thee thereof is as manifest; for Camila seeing me thus to
court her, must imagine that I have noted some lightness in her which ^ent me
boldness thus to discover unto her my depraved desires, and she holding her
self to be thereby injured and dishonored, her disgrace must also concern
thee as a principal part of her. And hence springs that which is commonly
said, That the Husband of the Adulterous Wife, although he know nothing of her
lewdness, nor has given any occasion to her to do what she ought not, nor
was able any way to hinder by diligence, care, or other means, his disgrace,
yet is entitled with a vituperious and vile name, and is in a manner beheld by
those that know his Wifes malice with the eyes of contempt; whereas they
should indeed regard him rather with those of compassion, seeing that he falls
into that misfortune not so much through his own default, as through the light
fantasy of his wicked Consort. But I will show thee the reason why a bad
Woman's Husband is justly dishonored and contemned, although he be ignorant
and guiltless thereof, and cannot prevent, nor has given to it any occasion:
And be not grieved to hear me, seeing the benefit of the discourse shall
redound unto thy self.

When God created our first Parent in the terrestrial Paradise, the holy
Scripture says, That God infused sleep into Adam, and that being asleep, he
took out a rib out of his left side, of which he formed our Mother Eve; and as
soon as Adam awaked and beheld her, he said, This is flesh of my flesh, and
bone of my bones: And God said, For this cause shall a man leave his Father and
his Mother, and they shall be two in one flesh: And then was the Divine
Ordinance of Matrimony first instituted, with such indissoluble knots, as only
may be by death dissolved: And this mavelous Ordinance is of such efficacy
and force, as it makes two different persons to be one very flesh; and yet
operates farther in good married folk; For although they have two Souls, yet it
makes them to have but one Will. And hence it proceeds, that by reason the
Wifes flesh is one and the very same with her Husbands, the blemishes or
defects that taint it; do also redound into the Husbands, although he (as we
have said) have ministered no occasion to receive that damage. For as all the
whole body feels any pain of the foot, head, or any other member, because it is
all one flesh, and the head smarts at the grief of the Ankle, although it has
not caused it: So is the Husband participant of his Wifes dishonor, because he
is one and the self-same with her. And by reason that all the Honors and
Dishonours of the world are, and spring from Flesh and Blood; and those of the
bad woman be of this kind, it is forcible, that part of them fall to the
Husbands share, and that he be accounted dishonorable, although he wholly
be ignorant of it. See then, Anselmo, to what peril thou do thrust they
self by seeking to disturb the quietness and repose wherein thy Wife lives,
and for how vain and impertinent curiosity thou would stir up the humors
which are now quiet in thy chaste Spouses breast; note how the things thou do
adventure to gain are of small moment; but that which thou shall lose so great,
that I must leave it in his point, having no words sufficiently able to indeer
it. But if all that I have said be not able to move thee from thy bad purpose;
thou may well seek out for some other instrument of thy dishonor and
mis-haps; for I mean not to be one, although I should therefore lose thine
amity, which is the greatest loss that might any way befall me.

Here the prudent Lothario held his peace, and Anselmo remained so confounded
and Melancholy, as he could not answer a word to him for a very great while.
But in the end he said; I have listened friend Lothario, to all that which thou
have said unto me, with the attention which thou have noted, and have
perceived in thy reasons, examples, and similitudes, the great discretion
wherewithal thou art endowed, and the perfection of amity that thou have
attained; and do also confess and see, that if I follow not thine advice, but
should lean unto mine own, I do but shun the good, and pursue the evil. Yet
ought thou likewise to consider, how herein I suffer the disease which some
women are wont to have, that long to eat earth, lime, coals, and other far
worse and loathsome things even to the very sight, and much more to the taste:
So that it is behoovefull to use some art by which I may be cured, and this
might be easily done by beginning only to sollic^te Camila although you did it
but weak and feignedly; for I know she will not be so soft and pliable, as
to dash her honesty about the ground, at the first encounters, and I will rest
satisfied with this commencement alone: and thou shall herein accomplish the
obligation thou owe to our friendship, by not only restoring me to life, but
also by persuading me not to dispoyle my self of mine honor. And thou art
bound to do this, for one reason that I shall allege, to wit, that I being
resolved, as indeed I am, to make this experience, thou ought not to permit,
being my friend, that I should bewray my defect herein to a stranger, whereby I
might very much endanger my reputation, which thou labourest so much to
preserve, and though thy credit may lose some degrees in Camilaes opinion,
whilst thou do solicit her, it matters not very much, or rather nothing;
for very shortly, when we shall epsy in her the integrity that we expect,
thou may open unto her sinceerly the drift of our practice, by which thou
shall again recover thine impaired reputation. Therefore seeing the Adventure
is little, and the pleasure thou shall do me by the enterprizing thereof so,
too great, I pray thee do it, though ever so many encumbrances represent
themselves to thee, for (as I have promised) with only thy beginning, I will
rest satisfied and account the cause concluded.

Lothario perceiving the firm resolution of Anselmo, and nothing else
occurring forcibly disswasive, nor knowing what other reasons to use that might
hinder this his precipitate resolution; and nothing withal, how he threatened
to break the matter of this his indiscreete desires to a stranger; he
determined to avoid greater inconveniences, to give him satisfaction, and
perform his demand, with purpose and resolution to guide the matter so
discreetly, as without troubling Camilaes thoughts, Anselmo should rest
contented, and therefore entreated him not to open his mind to any other, for
he himself would undertake that enterprise, and begin it whenever he
pleased. Anselmo embraced him very tender and lovingly, and gratified him as
much for that promise, as if he had done him some very great favor, and there
they accorded between them, that he should begin the work the very next day
ensuing; for he would give him place and leisure to speak alone with Camila,
and would likewise provide him of Money, Jewels, and other things to present
unto her. He did also admonish him to bring music under her windows by
night, and write verses in her praise, and if he would not take the pains to
make them, he himself would compose them for him. Lothario promised to
perform all himself, yet with an intention far wide from Anselmoes; and with
this agreement they returned to Anselmoes house, where they found Camila
somewhat sad and careful, expecting her husbands return, who had stayed longer
abroad that day then his custom. Lothario leaving him at his house returned to
his own, as pensive as he had left Anselmo contented, and knew not what plot
to lay, to issue out of that impertinent affair with prosperous success: But
that night he bethought himself of a manner how to deceive Anselmo without
offending Camila; and so the next day ensuing he came to his friends house to
dinner, where Camila knowing the great good will her husband bore toward him,
did receive and entertayne him very kindly with the like; dinner being ended,
and the table taken up, Anselmo requested Lothario to keep Camila company
until his return, for he must needs go about an affair that concerned him
greatly, but would return again within an hour and an half. Camila
entreated her husband to stay, and Lothario proffered to go and keep him
company, but nothing could prevail with Anselmo, but rather he importuned his
friend Lothario to remain and abide there till his return, because he must
go to treat of a matter of much consequence. He also commanded Camila not to
leave Lothario alone until he came back. And so he departed, leaving Camila
and Lothario together at the Table, by reason that all the attendants and
servants were gone to dinner.

Here Lothario saw that he was entered into the Lists which his friend so much
desired, with his Adversary before him, who was with her beauty able to
overcome a whole squadron of armed Knights; see then if Lothario had not reason
to fear himself? but that which he did at the first onset, was to lay his
elbow on the arm of his chair and his hand on his cheek, and desiring Camila
to bear with his respectlesnesse therein, he said he would repose a little
whilst he attended Anselmo's coming. Camila answered that she thought he
might take his ease better on the Cushions of State; and therefore prayed him
he would enter into the Parlour and lie on them: But he excused himself, and
so remained asleep in the same place, until Anselmo's return, who coming in,
and finding his Wife in her Chamber and Lothario asleep, made full account,
that by reason of his long stay, they had time enough both to talk and repose;
and therefore expected very greedily the hour wherein his friend should awake,
to go out with him and learn what success he had. All succeeded as he
wished; for Lothario arose, and both of them went abroad; and then he demanded
of him, what he desired: And Lothario answered that it seemed not to him so
good to discover all his meaning at the first; and therefore had done no other
thing at that time, then speak a little of her Beauty and Discretion; for it
seemed to him that this was the best preamble he could use to gain by little
and little some interest and possession in her acceptance, to dispose her
thereby the better to give ear again to his words more willingly, imitating
therein the Devils craft when he means to deceive any one that is vigilant
and careful; for then he translates himself into an Angel of light, being one
of darkness, and laying before him apparent good, discovers what he is in the
end, and brings his intention to pass, if his guiles be not at the beginning
detected. All this did greatly like Anselmo, who said that he would afford him
every day as much leisure, although he did not go abroad; for he would spend
the time so at home as Camila should never be able to suspect his drift.

It therefore befell that many days passed which Lothario did willingly
overslip, and said nothing to Camila; yet did he ever sooth Anselmo, and told
him, that he had spoken to her, but could never win her to give the least
argument of flexibilitie, or make way for the feeblest hope that might be; but
rather affirmed that she threatened him, that if he did not repel his
impertinent desires, she would detect his indirect proceedings to her husband.
It is well, quoth Anselmo: Hitherto Camila has resisted words; it is therefore
requisite to try what resistance she will make against works: I will give
thee to morrow four thousand Crowns in gold, to the end thou may offer, and
also bestow them on her; and thou shall have as many more to buy Jewels
wherewithal to bait her; for Women are naturally inclined, and specially if
they be fair (be they ever so chaste) to go brave and gorgeously attired;
and if she can overcome this temptation, I will remain pleased, and put thee
to no more trouble. Lothario answered, That seeing he had begun, he would
bear his enterprise on to an end, although he made full account that he
should depart from the conflict both tired and vanquished. He received the
four thousand crowns the next day, and at once with them four thousand
perplexities, for he knew not what to invent to lie anew; but concluded
finally to tell his friend, how Camila was as inflexible at Gifts and Promises
as at words; and therefore it would be in vain to travile any more in her
pursuit, seeing he should do nothing else but spend the time in vain.

But Forturne, which guided these affairs in another manner, so disposed, that
Anselmo having left Lothario and Camila alone, as he was wont, entered secretly
into a chamber, and through the cranies and chinks did listen and see what they
would do; where he perceived that Lothario, in the space of half an hour,
spoke not a word to Camila, not yet would he have spoken, though he had
remained there a whole age; and thereupon surmised straight that all that which
his friend had told him of Camila's answers and his own speech, were but
fictions and untruths; and that he might the more confirm himself and see
whether it were so, he came forth, and calling Lothario apart, he demanded of
him what Camila had said, and in what humor she was at the present? Lothario
answered, That he meant not ever any more to found her in that matter; for
she replied unto him so untowardly and sharply, as he durst not attempt any
more to speak unto her of such things.

Oh, quoth Anselmo, Lothario, Lothario! how evil do thou answer to the
affection thou owe me, or to the confidence I did repose in thee? I have
stood beholding thee all this while through the hole of that lock, and saw how
thou never spokest one word to her: Whereby I do also collect, that thou have
not yet once accosted her; and if it be so, as doubtlesly it is, say, why
do thou deceive me? or why go thou about fraudulently to deprive me of
those means whereby I may obtain my desires? Anselmo said no more, yet what he
said was sufficient to make Lothario confused and ashamed, who taking it to be
a blemish to his reputation to be found in a lie, swore to Anselmo, That he
would from thence forward so endeavor to please his mind and tell him no more
leasings, as he himself might perceive the success thereof, if he did again
curiously lie in watch for him; a thing which he might well excuse, because
him most serious labor to satisfy his desire should remove all shadow of
suspicion. Anselmo believed him, and that he might give him the greater
commodity, and less occasion of fear, he resolved to absent himself from his
house some eight days, and go to visit a friend of his that dwelled in a
Village not far from the City; and therefore dealt with his friend that he
should send a Messenger to call for him very earnestly, that under that
pretext, he might find an excuse to Camila for his departure.

O unfortunate and inconsiderate Anselmo! what is that which thou do? what
do thou contrive? or what is that thou go about? behold, thou workest
thine own ruin, laying plots of thine own dishonor, and giving order to thy
proper perdition. Thy wife Camila is good; thou do possess her in quiet and
peaceable manner; no man surpriseth thy delights; her thoughts transgress not
the limits of her house: Thou art her Heaven on earth, and the goal to which
her desires aspire: Thou art the accomplishment and sum of her delectation:
Thou art the Square by which she measures and directs her will, adjusting
wholly with thine and with that of Heaven. Since then the Mines of her Honor,
Beauty, Modesty and Recollection, bountifully afford thee, without any toil,
all the treasures contained in them, or thou can desire, why would thou
dig the earth and seek out new vains and new seen treasures, exposing thy self
to the danger, that thy labors may turn to wrack, seeing in fine, that they
are only sustained by the weak supporters of her frail nature? Remember how he
that seeks the impossible, may justly be refused of that which is possible,
according to that which the Poet says: IN Death for Life I seek,
Health in infirmity:
For issue in a Dung^on deep:
In Iayles for Liberty,
And in a Treachour Loyalty.
But envious-Fate, which still
Conspires to work mine ill,
With Heaven has thus decreed,
That easy things should be to me denied,
^Cause I crave th'impossible.


Anselmo departed the next day following to the Village, telling Camila at his
departure, that whilst he were absent, his friend Lothario would come and see
to the affairs of his house, and to eat with her, and desired her therefore
to make as much of him as she would do of his own person. Camila, like a
discreet and modest woman, was grieved at the order her husband did give to
her, and requested him to render how indecent it was that any one should
possess the chair of his Table, he being absent, and if he did it as
doubting her sufficiency to manage his household affairs, that at least he
should make trial of her that one time, and should clearly perceive how she
was able to discharge matters of far greater consequence. Anselmo replied, that
what he commanded was his pleasure, and therefore she had nothing else to do
but hold down her head and obey it. Camila answered that she would do so,
although it were very much against her will. In fine her husband departed, and
Lothario came the next day following to the house, where he was entertained by
Camila very friendly, but would never treat with Lothario alone, but evermore
was compassed by her servants and waiting Maidens, but chiefly by one called
Leonela, whom she loved deerly, as one that had been brought up with her in
her fathers house, even from their infancy, and when she did marry Anselmo,
she brought her from thence in her company.

The first three days Lothario spoke not a word, although he might, when the
Tables were taken up, and that the folk of the house went hastily to dinner,
for so Camila had commanded, and did give Leonela order besides to dine before
her self, and that she should still keep by her side; but the gyrle which
had her fancy otherwise employed in things more pleasing her humor, and needed
those hours and times for the accomplishing of them, did not always
accomplish so punctually her Ladies command, but now and then would leave her
alone, as if that were her Ladies behest. But the honest presence of Camila,
the gravitie of her face, and the modesty of her carriage was such, that it
served as a bridle to restrain Lotharioes tongue. But the benefit of Camilaes
many virtues, seting silence to Lotharioes speech, resulted afterward to both
their harms; for though the tongue spoke not, yet did his thoughts discourse,
and had leisure afforded them to contemplate part by part, all the extremes of
worth and beauty that were cumulated in Camila, potent to inflame a statue of
frozen Marble, how much more a heart of flesh. Lothario did only behold her in
the time and space he should speak unto her, and did then consider how worthy
she was to be loved, And this consideration did by little and little give
assaults to the respects which he ought to have borne toward his friend
Anselmo; a thousand times did he determine to absent himself from the City,
and go where Anselmo should never see him, nor he Camila; but the delight he
took in beholding her, did again withhold and hinder his resolutions. When he
was alone, he would condemn himself of his madd design, and term himself a
bad friend and worse Christian, he made discourses and comparisons between
himself and Anselmo, all which did finish in this point that Anselmoes
foole-hardinesse, an^ madness was greater, then his own infidelity, and that
if he might be as asily excused before God, for that he meant to do, as he
would be before men, he needed not to fear any punishment should be inflicted
on him forth crime. Finally Camilaes beauty and worths, assisted by the
occasion whih the ignorant Husband had thrust into his fists, did wholly runine
and overthrow Lot^ario his loyalty; and therefore without regarding any other
thing then that to whih his pleasure conducted him, about a three days after
Anselmo's departure (w^^ch time he had spent in a continual battle and
resistance of his contending tho^ghts) he began to solicit Camila with such
trouble of the Spirits and so amorous wo^ds, as she was stricken almost beside
her self with wonder, and made him no other ansver, but arising from the Table,
flung away in a fury into her chamber. But yet for ill this dryness, Lothario
his hope (which is wont evermore to be borne at once wi^ Love) was nothing
dismayed, but rather accounted the more of Camila, who per^eiving that in
Lothario which she never durst before to imagine, knew not what she^ might
do; but it seeming unto her to be a thing neither secure nor honest, to giv^
him occasion or leisure to speak unto him again, determined to send one unto
her Husband Anselmo the very same night, as indeed she did, with a Letter to
recall him home to her house: The subject of her Letter was this.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein is prosecuted the History of the Curious-Impertinent.
EVen, as it is commonly said, That an Army seems not well without a General;
or a Castle without a Constable: So do I affirm, That it is much more indecent
to see a young married Woman without her Husband, when he is not justly
detained away by necessary Affairs. I find my self so ill-disposed in your
absence, and so impatient and impotent to endure it longer, as, if you do not
speedily return, I shall be constrained to return back unto my Father,
although I should leave your house without any keeping: For the guard you
appointed for me, if it be so that he may deserve that title, looks more, I
believe to his own pleasure, then to that which concerns you; therefore seeing
you have wit enough, I will say no more; nor ought I to say more in reason.


Anselmo received the Letter, and by it understood that Lothario had begun the
enterprise, and that Camila had answered to him according as he had hoped: And
mavelous glad at the news, he answered his wife by word of mouth, That she
should not remove in any wise from her house; for he would return with all
speed. Camila was greatly admired at his answer, which struck her into a
greater perplexity then she was at the first, being afraid to stay at home,
and also to go to her Father. For by staying she indangers her honesty; by
going she should transgress her Husbands command: At last she resolved to
do that which was worst, which was to remain at home, and not to shun
Lothario's presence, lest she should give her Servants occa^ion of suspi^ion:
and now she was grieved to have written what she did to her Husb^nd, fearful
lest he should think that Lothario had noted in her some token of lightn^sse,
which might have moved him to lose the respect which otherwise was due unto
^er: But confident in her innocence, she cast her hopes in God and her good
thou^hts, wherewithal she thought to resist all Lothario's words, and by
holding her silent without making him any answer, without giving any further
account of the matter t^ her Husband, lest thereby she might plunge him in new
difficulties and contention ^ich his friend, and did therefore bethink her how
she might excuse Lothario to Anselmo, when he should demand the occasion that
moved her to write unto himthat Letter.

With these more honest then profitable or discreet resolutions, she gave ear
the second day to Lothario, who charged her with such resolution, as her
constancy began to stagger, and her honesty had enough to do recurring to her
eyes to contain them, lest they should give any demonstration of the amorous
compassion which Lotharioes words and tears had stirred in her breast. Lothario
noted all this, and it inflamed him the more. Finally, he thought that it was
requisite the time and leisure which Ansel^oes absence afforded him, to lay
closer siege to that Fortress; and so he assaulted her presumptuously, with
the praises of her beauty, for there is nothing which with such facility does
rend and raze to the ground the proudly-crested Turrets of women's vanity, then
the same vanity being dilated on by the tongue of adulation and flattery, To
be brief, he did with all diligence undermine the Rock of her integrity
with so warlike Engines, as although Camila were made of brass, yet would she
be overthrown, for Lothario wept, entreated, promised, flattered, persisted
and fained so feelingly, and with such tokens of truth, as traversing Cameliaes
care of her honor, he came in the end to triumph over that which was least
suspected, and he most desired; for she rendered her self, even Camelia
rendered her self. But what wonder if Lotharioes amity could not stand on
foot? A clear example, plainly demonstrating that the amorous passion is only
vanquished by shuning it, and that no body ought to adventure to wrestle with
so strong an Adversary; for heavenly forces are necessary for him that would
confront the violence of that passion, although humane. None but Leonela knew
the weakness of her Lady, for from her the two bad friends and new lovers
could not conceal the matter; nor yet would Lothario discover to Camila her
husbands pretense, or that he had given him wittingly the opportunity whereby he
arived to that pass, because she should not imagine that he had gotten her
lightly, and by chance, and did not purposely solicit her.

A few days after Anselmo arrived to his house, and did not perceive what
wanted therein, to wit, that which it had lost, and he most esteemed. From
thence he went to see his friend Lothario, whom he found at home, and embracing
one another, he demanded of him the news of his life or of his death, The news
which I can give thee, friend Anselmo, quoth Lothario, are, that thou have a
wife, who may deservedly be the example and garland of all good women. The
words that I spoke unto her, were spent on the air, my proffers contemned, and
my gifts repulsed, and besides, she has mocked me notably for certain fained
tears that I did shead. In resolution, even as Camila is the pattern of all
beauty, so is she a treasury wherein modesty resides, courtesy and wariness
dwell, and all the other virtues that may beautify an honorable woman, or
make her fortunate. Therefore friend, take back thy money, for here it is
ready, and I never had occasion to employ it: for Camila's integrity cannot be
subdued with so base things as are gifts and promises. And Anselmo content thy
self now with the proofs made already, without attempting to make any farther
trial. And seeing thou have past over the Sea of difficulties and suspicions
with a dry foot, which may and are wont to be had of women; do not eftsoons
enter into the profound depths of new inconveniences, nor take thou any other
Pilot to make experience of the goodness and strength of the Vessel that
Heaven has allotted to thee, to pass therein through the Seas of this world;
but make account that thou art harbored in a safe Haven, and there hold thy
self fast with the Anchor of good consideration, and so rest thee until death
come to demand his debt, from the payment whereof no Nobility or privilege
whatsoever can exempt us. Anselmo rested singularly satisfied at Lotharioes
discourse, and did believe it as firmly as if it were delivered by an Oracle:
but did entreat him notwithstanding to prosecute his attempt, although it were
only done for curiosity, and to pass away the time; yet not to use so
efficacious means as he thitherto practiced; and that he only desired him to
write some verses in her praise under the name of Clori, for he would make
Camila believe, that he was enamoured on a certain Lady, to whom he did
appropriate that name, that he might celebrate her praises with the respect
due to her honor, and that if he would not take the pains to invent them,
that he himself would willingly compose them. That is not needful quoth
Lothario, for the Muses are not so alienated from me, but that they visit me
sometimes in the year. Tell you unto Camila what you have devised of my loves,
and as for the verses, I will make them my self; if not so well as the subject
deserves, yet at the least as artificially as I may devise them: The
impertinent curious man and his treacherous friend having thus agreed, and
Anselmo returned to his house, he demanded of Camila that which she marvelled
he had not asked before, that she should tell unto him the occasion why she
sent unto him the Letter? Camila made answer, Because it seemed unto her, that
Lothario beheld her some what more immodest then when he was at home; but that
now she did again dissuade her self, and believed that it was but a light
surmise, without any ground, because that she perceived Lothario to loath her
presence, or be by any means alone with her. Anselmo told her that she might
very well live secure for him, for that he knew Lothario's affections were
bestowed elsewhere, and that upon one of the noblest Damzels of the City,
whose praises he solemnized under the name of Clori, and that although he
were not, yet was there no cause to doubt of Lothario's virtue, or the amity
that was between them both. Here if Camila had not been premonished by
Lothario, that the love of Clori was but fained, and that he himself had told
it to Anselmo to blind him, that he might with less difficulty celebrate
her own praises under the name of Clori, she had without doubt fallen into the
desperate toils of jealousy; but being already advertised she posted over
that assault lightly. The day following they three sitting together at dinner,
Anselmo requested Lothario to repeat some one of the Verses that he had made
to his beloved Clori; for seeing that Camila knew her not, he might boldly say
what he pleased. Although she knew her quoth Lothario, yet would I not
therefore suppress any part of her praises. For when any Lover praises his
Lady for her beauty, and does withal tax her of cruelty, her credit incurs
no danger. But befall what it list, I composed yesterday a Sonnet of the
ingratitude of Clori, and is this ensuing. A SONNET.
AMid'st the silence of the darkest night,
When sweetest sleep invadeth mortal eyes;
I poor account, to Heaven and Clori bright,
Give of the richest harms, which ever rise.
And at the time, we Phoebus may devise,
Shine through the roseal gates of th'Orient bright,
With deep accents and sighs, in Wonted guise,
I do my Plaints renew, with main and might.
And when the Sun, down from his Starry seat,
Directest rays toward the earth does send,
My sighs I double and my sad regret:
And night returns; but of my Woes no end:
For I find always, in my mortal strife,
Heaven without ears, and Clori likewise deaf.


Camila liked the Sonnet very well, but Anselmo best of all; for he praised
it, and said, that the Lady must be very cruel that would not answer such
perspicuous truths with reciprocal affection. But then Camila answered, Why
then (belike) all that which enamoured Poets say is true? In as much as Poets,
quoth Lothario, they say not truth; but as they are inamoured, they remain as
short as they are true. That is questionless, quoth Anselmo, all to underprop
and give Lothario more credit with Camila, who was as careless of the cause
(her Husband said so) as she was inamoured of Lothario; and therefore with the
delight she took in his compositions, but chiefly knowing that his desires and
labors were addressed to her self, who was the true Clori, she entreated him to
repeat some other Sonnet or Dittie, if he remembered any. Yes that I do, quoth
Lothario; but I believe that it is not so good as the first, as you may well
judge; for it is this. A SONNET.
I Die, and if I cannot be believed,
My death's more certain, as it is most sure
To see me, a^ thy feet, of life deprived;
Rather then grieve, this thraldom to endure.
Well may I (in oblivious shades obscure)
Of Glory, Life, and Favor be denied:
And yet even there, shall in my bosom pure,
The shape of thy fair face, iugrav'd, be eyed.
For that is a relic, which I do reserve
For the last Trances, my contentions threaten.
Which midst thy rigor does it self preserve.
O woe's the Wight, that is by tempests beaten
By night, in unknown Seas, in danger rife,
For want of North, or Hav'n to lose his life!


Anselmo commended also this second Sonnet as he had done the first, and added
by that means one link to another in the chain, wherewith he entangled
himself, and forged his own dishonor; seeing when Lothario dishonored him
most of all, he said unto him then that he honored him most. And herewithall
Camila made all the links, that verily served only to abase her down to the
Center of contempt, seem to mount her in her Husbands opinion up to the height
of virtue and good fame.

It befell soon after, that Camila finding her self alone with her Maiden, said
to her, I am ashamed, friend Leonela, to see how little I knew to value my
self, seeing that I made not Lothario spend some time at least in the
purchasing the whole possession of me, which I, with a prompt will, bestowed
upon him so speedily: I fear me that he will impute my hastiness to
lightness, without considering the force he used toward me, which wholly
hindered and disabled my resistance. Let not that afflict you Madam, quoth
Leonela; for it is no sufficient cause to diminish estimation, that that be
given quickly which is to be given, if that in effect be good that is given,
and be in it self worthy of estimation; for it is an old proverb, That he that
gives quickly, gives twice. It is also said as well, quoth Camila, That that
which costeth little, is less esteemed. That reason has no place in you,
quoth Leonela, for as much as Love, according as some have said of it, does
sometimes fly, other times it goes; it runs with this man, and goes leisurely
with the other; it makes some key-cold, and inflames others; some it wounds,
and some it kills; it begins the Career of his desires in an instant, and in
the very same concludes it likewise: It is wont to lay siedge to the Fortress
in the morning, and at night it makes it to yield, for there is no force able to
resist it: which being so, what do you wonder? or what is it that you fear, if
the same has befaln Lothario, seeing that Love made of my Lords absence an
instrument to vanquish us? And it was forcible, that in it we should conclude
on it which Love had before determined, without giving time it self any time to
lead Anselmo that he might return, and with his presence leave the work
imperfect: For Love has none so officious or better a minister to execute his
desires then is occasion: It serves it self of occasion in all his act, but
most of all at the beginning: And all this that I have said I know rather by
experience, then hearsay, as I will some day let you to understand: for,
Madam, I am likewise made of flesh and lusty young blood: And as for you,
Lady Camila, you did not give up and yield your self presently, but stayed
until you had first seen in Lothorio's eyes, his sighs in his discourses, in
his promises, and gifts all his soul, in which and in his perfections, you
might read how worthy he is to be loved. And seeing this is so, let not these
scruples and nice thoughts assault or further disturb your mind, but persuade
your self that Lothario esteems you as much as you do him, and lives with
content and satisfaction, seeing that it was your Fortune to fall into the
amorous Snare, that it was his good luck to catch you with his valor and
deserts; who not only has the four S. S. which they say every good Lover ought
to have, but also the whole A. A. C. which if you will not credit, do but
listen to me a while, and I will repeat it to you by roate. He is, as it seems,
and as far as I can judge, Amiable, Bountiful, Courteous, Dutiful, Enamoured,
Firm, Gallant, Honorable, Illustrious, Loyal, Mild, Noble, Honest, Prudent,
Quiet, Rich, and the S. S. which they say; and besides True, Valourous: the X.
does not quader well with him, because it sounds harshly: Y. he is Young; and
the Z. he is Zealous of thine honor. Camila laughed at her Maidens A. B. C.
and accounted her to be more practick in Love-matters then she her self had
confessed, as indeed she was; for then she revealed to her Mistrisse, how she
and a certain young man, well born, of the City, did treat of Love one with
another. Hereat her Mistrisse was not a little troubled in mind, fearing that
her honor might be greatly endangered by that means; she demanded whether
her affection had passed farther then words? And the Maid answered very
shamelesly and freely, that they did: for it is most certain, that this kind
of wretchlesse Mistrisses do also make their Maidens careless and impudent;
who when they perceive their Ladies to faulter, are commonly wont to hault
likewise themselves, and care not that the World do know it.

Camila seeing that error past remedy, could do no more but entreat
Leonela, not to reveal any thing of their affairs to him she said was her
sweet heart, and that she should handle her matters discreetly and secretly,
lest they might come to Anselmo or Lotharioes notice. Leonela promised to
perform her will; but did accomplish her promise in such sort, as she did
confirm Camilaes fears, that she should lose her credit by her means. For
the dishonest and bold Gyrle, after she had perceived that her Mistrisses
proceedings were not such as they were wont, grew so hardy, as she gave
entrance and brought her Lover into her Masters house, presuming that although
her Lady knew it, yet would she not dare to discover it. For this among other
harms follow the sins of Mistrisses, that it makes them slaves to their own
servants, and does oblige them to them to conceal their dishonest and base
proceedings, as it fell out in Camila, who, although she espied Leonela, not
once only, but sundry times together with her Lover in a certain chamber of the
house, she not only dared not to rebuke her for it, but rather gave her
opportunity to hide him, and would remoove all occasion out of her husbands
way, whereby he might suspect any such thing.

But all could not hinder Lothario from espying him once, as he departed out of
the house at the break of the day: who not knowing him, thought at the first it
was a spirit, but when he saw him post away, and cast his cloak over his face,
lest he should be known, he abandoning his simple surmise, fell into a new
suspicion which had overthrown them all, were it not that Camila did remedy
it. For Lothario though, that he whom he had seen issue out of Anselmo's house
at so unreasonable an hour, had not entered into it for Leonela's sake, nor did
he remember then that there was such a one as Leonela in the world, but only
thought, that as Camila was lightly gotten by him, so belike she was wonn by
some other. For the wickedness of a bad woman brings usually all these
additions, that she loses her reputation even with him, to whom prayed and
persuaded she yields her self: and he believes that she will as easily, or
with more facility consent to others, and does infallibly credit the least
suspicion which thereof may be offered.

And it seems that Lothario in this instant was wholly deprived of all
reasonable discourse, and quite dispoyled of his understanding; for without
pondering of the matter, impatient and kindled by the jealous rage that
inwardly gnawed his bowels, fretting with desire to be revenged on Camila, who
had never offended him, he came to Anselmo before he was up, and said to him,
Know, Anselmo, that I have had these many days a civil conflict within my
self whether I should speak or no, and I have used as much violence as I might,
to my self, not to discover a thing unto you, which now it is neither just nor
reasonable I should conceal. Know that Camila's fortress is rendered, and
subject to all that I please to command, and if I have been somewhat slow to
inform the this of truth: it was because I would first see, whether it
proceeded of some light appetite in her: or whether she did it to try me, and
see whether that love was still constantly continued, which I first began to
make unto her by thy order and license. I did also believe, that if she had
been such as she ought to be, and her that we both esteemed her, she would have
by this time acquainted you with my importunacy: but seeing that she lingers
therein, I presume that her promises made unto me are true, that when you did
again absent your self out of town, she would speak with me in the Wardrobe
(and it was true: for there Camila was accustomed to talk with him) yet would
not I have thee run rashly to take revenge, seeing the sin is not yet
otherwise committed then in thought, and perhaps between this and the
opportunity she might hope to put it in execution, her mind would be changed,
and she repent her self of her folly: And therefore seeing thou have ever
followed mine advice partly or wholly, follow and keep one counsel that I will
give unto thee now, to the end that thou may after, with careful assurance,
and without fraud, satisfy thine own will as thou likest best; feign thy self
to be absent two or three days as thou art wont, and then convey thy self
cunningly into the Wardrobe, where thou may very well hide thy self behind
the Tapestry, and then thou shall see with thine own eyes, and I with mine,
what Camila will do; and if it be that wickedness which rather ought to be
feared then hoped for, thou may with wisdom, silence, and discretion, be
the proper executioner of so injurious a wrong.

Anselmo remained amazed, and almost besides himself, hearing his friend
Lothario so unexpectedly to acquaint him with those things in a time whereing
he least expected them; for now he esteemed Camila to have escaped victresse
from the forged assaults of Lothario, and did himself triumph for glory of her
victory. Suspended thus and troubled, he stood silent a great while looking
on the earth, without once removing his eye from it; and finally, turning
toward his friend, he said; Lothario, thou have done all that which I could
expect from so entire amity, and I do therefore mean to follow thine advice
in all things precisely: Do therefore what thou please, and keep that secret
which is requisite in so weighty and unexpected an event. All that I do
promise, quoth Lothario: and so departed wholly repented for that he had told
to Anselmo, seeing how foolishly he had proceeded, since he might have
revenged himself on Camila very well, without taking a way so cruel and
dishonorable. There did he curse his little wit, and abased his light
resolution, and knew not what means to use to destroy what he had done, or
give it some reasonable and contrary issue. In the end he resolved to acquaint
Camila with the whole matter, and by reason that he never missed of opportunity
to speak unto her, he found her alone the very same day; and she seeing
likewise that she had fit time to speak unto him, said, Know, friend Lothario,
that a certain thing does pinch my heart in such manner, as it seems ready to
burst in my breast, as doublesly I fear me that in time it will, if we cannot
set a remedy to it: For such is the immodesty of Leonela, as she shuts up a
Lover of hers every night in this house and remains with him until daylight,
which so much concerns my credit, as it leaves open a spacious field to him
that sees the other go out of my house at so unseasonable times, to judge of
me what he pleases; and that which most grieves me is, that I dare not punish
or rebuke her for it: For she being privy to our proceedings, sets a bridle
on me, and constrains me to conceal hers; and hence I fear will bad success
befall us. Lothario at the first suspected that Camila did speak thus, to make
him believe that the man whom he had espied was Leonelaes friend, and none of
hers: but seeing her to weep indeed, and be greatly afflicted in mind, he
began at last to give credit unto the truth, and believing it, was greatly
confounded and grieved for that he had done: And yet notwithstand he answered
Camila, that she should not trouble or vex her self any more; for he would
take such order, as Leonelaes impudencies should be easily crossed and
suppressed: And then did recount unto her all that he had said to Anselmo,
spurred on by the furious rage of jealous indignation, and how her Husband had
agreed to hide himself behind the Tapestry of the Wardrobe, that he might
from thence clearly perceive the little Loyalty she kept toward him, and
demanded pardon of her for that folly and counsel to redress it, and come
safely out of the intricate Labyrinth whereinto his weake-eyed discourse had
conducted him.

Camila having heard Lothario's discourse, was afraid and amazed, and with
great anger and many and discrect reasons, did rebuke him, reviling the
baseness of his thoughts, and the simple and little consideration that he
had. But as women have naturally a sudden with for good or bad, much more
prompt then men; although when indeed they would make discourses, it proves
defective: So Camila found in an instant a remedy for an affair in appearance
so irremediable and helpless; and therefore bade Lothario to induce his friend
Anselmo to hide himself the next day ensuing, for she hoped to take commodity
out of his being there for them both to enjoy one another with more security
then ever they had before: and without wholly manifesting her proverb to him,
she only advertised him to have care, that after Anselmo were hidden he
should presently come when Leonela called for him, and that he should answer
her as directly to every question she proposed, as if Anselmo were not in
place. Lothario did urge her importunately to declare her design unto him, to
the end he might with more security and advice obscure all that was
necessary. I say, quoth Camila, there is no other observance to be had, then
only to answer me directly to what I shall demand: For she would not give him
account beforehand of her determination, fearful that he would not conform
himself to her opinion which she took to be so good; or else lest he would
follow or seek any other, that would not prove after so well. Thus departed
Lothario and Anselmo, under pretext that he would visit his friend, out of
Town departed, and returned convertly back again to hide himself, which he
could do the more commodiously, because Camila and Leonela did purposely
afford him opportunity. Anselmo having hidden himself with the grief that may
be imagined one would conceive, who did expect to see with his own eyes an
Anatomy made of the bowels of his honor, and was in danger to lose the
highest felicity that he accounted himself to possess in his beloved Camila.
Camila and Leonela being certain that he was hidden within the Wardrobe,
entered into it, wherein scarce had Camila set her foot, when breathing forth of
a deep sigh, she spoke in this manner.

Ah friend Leonela! were it not better, that before I put in execution, that
which I would not have thee to know, lest thou should endeavor to hinder
it, that thou take Anselmo's Poniard that I have sought of thee, and pass
this infamous breast of mine through and through? but do it not, for it is no
reason that I should suffer for other men's faults: I will know first of all,
what the bold and dishonest eyes of Lothario noted in me, that should stir in
him the presumption to discover unto me so unlawful a desire as that which he
has revealed, so much in contempt of his friend, and to my dishonor: Stand at
that Window Leonela, and call him to me; for I do infallibly believe, that he
stands in the street awaiting to effect his wicked purpose: But first my
cruel, yet honorable mind shall be performed. Alas, dear Madame (quoth the
wise and crafty Leonela) what is it you mean to do with that Poniard? Mean
you perhaps to deprive either your own or Lotherioes life therewithal? for
which soever of these things you do, shall redound to the loss of your credit
and fame. It is much better that you dissemble your wrong, and give no occasion
to the bad man now to enter into this house, and find us here in it alone:
Consider good Madame, how we are but weak women, and he is a Man, and one
resolute, and by reason that he comes blinded by his bad and passionate
intent, he may peradventure before you be able to put yours in execution, do
somewhat that would be worse for you, then to deprive you of your life. Evil
befall my master Anselmo, that ministers so great occasion to impudency, thus
to discover her visage in our house; and if you should kill him by chance
Madam, as I suspect you mean to do, what shall we do after with the dead
carcass? What said Camila? We would leave him here that Anselmo might bury
him. For he must in all equity esteem that labor for ease, which he shall
pass, in the interring of his own infamy. Make an end then and call him, for
mee^ thinks that all the time which I spend untakeing due revenge of my just
Disdain, turns into the prejudice of the Loyalty which I owe unto my Spouse.

Anselmo listened very attentively all the while, and at every word that Camila
said, his thoughts changed. But when he understood that she was resolved to
kill Lothario, he was about to come out and discover himself, to the end that
such a thing should not be done; but the desire that he had to see wherein so
brave and honest a resolution would end, withheld him, determining then to
sallie out, when his presence should be needful to hinder it. Camila about
this time began to be very weak and dismayed, and casting her self, as if
she had fallen into a trance upon a bed that was in the room, Leonela began to
lament very bitterly and to say, Alas, wretch that I am, how unfortunate should
I be, if the flower of the worlds honesty, the crown of good women, and the
pattern of chastity should die here between my hands? Those and such other
things she said so dolefully, as no one could hear her, that would not deem
her to be one of the most esteemed and loyal Damzels of the world; and take
her Lady for another new and persecuted Penelope. Soon after Camila returned
to her self, and said presently. Why go thou not Leonela, to call the most
disloyal friend of a friend that ever the Sun beheld, or the night concealed?
Make an end, run, make haste, and let not the fire of my choler be through
thy stay consumed and spent, nor the just revenge, which I hope to take, pass
over in threats or maledictions. I go to call him Madam, quoth Leonela, but
first of all you must give me that Poniard, lest you should do with it in
mine absence somewhat, that would minister occasion to us your friends to
deplore you all the days of our lives. Go away boldly, friend Leonela, said
Camela, for I shall do nothing in thine absence; for although I be in thine
opinion both simple and bold enough to turn for mine honor, yet mean I not
to be so much as the celebrated Lucretia, of whom it is recorded that she
slew her self, without having committed any error or slain him first who was
the principal cause of her disgrace: I will die if I must needs die; but I
will be satisfied and revenged on him that has given me occasion to come
into this place to lament his boldness, sprung without my default.

Leonela could scarcely be entreated to go and call Lothario, but at last she
went out, and in the mean time Camila remained, speaking to her self these
words: Good God, had not it been more discretion to have dissmised Lothario, as
I did many time before, then thus to possess him as I have done, with an
opinion that I am an evil and dishonest woman, at least all the while that
passes, until mine acts shall undeceive him, and teach him the contrary? It
had been doubtlesly better: but then should not I be revenged, nor my husbands
honor satisfied, if he were permitted to bear away so clearly his
malignitie, or escape out of the snare wherein his wicked thoughts involved
him. Let the Traitor pay with his life's defrayment, that which he attempted
with so lascivious a desire. Let the world know (if it by chance shall come to
know it) that Camila did not only conserve the loyalty due to her Lord, but
also took revenge of the intended spoil thereof: But yet I believe that it
were best to give Anselmo first notice thereof; but I did already touch it to
him in the Letter which I wrote to him to the Village; and I believe his not
concurring to take order in this so manifest an abuse proceeds of his too
sincere and good meaning, which would not, nor cannot believe that the like
kind of thought could ever find entertainment in the breast of so firm a
friend, tending so much to his dishonor: and what marvel if I my self could
not credit it for a great many days together? nor would I ever have thought it
if his insolency had not arived to that pass which the manifest Gifts, large
Promises, and continual tears he shed do give testimony. But why do I make
now these discourses? Has a gallant resolution perhaps any need of advice? No
verily; therefore avaunt treacherous thoughts, here we must use revenge: Let
the false man come in; arive; die and end, and let after befall what can
befall. I entered pure and untouched to his possession whom Heaven bestowd on
me for mine, and I will depart from him purely: And if the worst befall, I
shall only be defiled by mine own chaste blood, and the impure gore of the
falsest friend that ever amity saw in this World. And saying of this, she
pranced up and down the Room with the Poniard naked in her hand, with such long
and unmeasurable strides, and making withal such gestures, as she rather
seemed defective of wit, and a desperate Russian then a delicate woman.

All this Anselmo perceived very well from behind the Arras that covered him,
which did not a little admire him; and he thought that what he had seen and
heard was a sufficient satisfaction of far greater suspicions then he had,
and could have wished with all his heart that the trial of Lothario's coming
might be excused, fearing greatly some sudden bad success: and as he was
ready to manifest himself, and to come out and embrace and dissuade his wife,
he withdrew himself, because he saw Leonela return, bringing Lothario in by
the hand: And as soon as Camila beheld him, she drew a great stroke with the
point of the Poniard athwart the Wardrobe, saying; Lothario, note well what I
mean to say unto thee; for if by chance thou be so hardy as to pass over
this line which thou see, e're I come as far as it, I will in the very same
instant stab my self into the heart with this Poniard which I hold in my hand:
and before thou do speak or answer me any word, I would first have thee to
listen to a few of mine; for after thou may say what thou please.

First of all I would have thee, O Lothario! to say whether thou know my
Husband Anselmo, and what opinion thou have of him? And next I would have thee
to tell me if thou know my self? answer to this without delay, nor do not
stand long thinking on what thou art to answer, seeing they are no deep
questions which I propose unto thee. Lothario was not so ignorant, but that
from the very beginning when Camila requested him to persuade her Husband to
hide himself behind the Tapistrey, he had not fallen on the drift of her
invention; and therefore did answer her intention so aptly and discreetly as
they made that untruth pass between them for a more then manifest verity: and
so he answered to Camila in this form. I did never conjecture, Beautiful
Camila, that thou would have called me here to demand of me things so wide
from the purpose for which I come: if thou do it to defer yet the promised
favor, thou might have entertained it yet farther off, for the good desired
afflicts so much the more, by how much the hope to possess it is near. But
because thou may not accuse me for not answering to thy demands, I say that
I know thy Husband Anselmo, and both of us know one another even from our
tender infancy, and I will not omit to say that which thou also know of our
amity, to make me thereby a witness against my self of the wrong which Love
compells me to do unto him, yet Love is a sufficient excuse and excuse of
greater errous then are mine. Thee do I likewise know and hold in the same
possession that he does; for were it not so, I should never have been won by
less perfections then thine, to transgress so much that which I owe to my
self and to the holy Laws of true Amity, now broken and violated by the
tyranny of so powerful an Adversary as Love has proved. If thou do
acknowledge that, replied Camila, O mortal enemy of all that which justly
deserves Love! with what face dare thou then appear before that which thou
know to be the Mirror wherein he looks, in whom thou also ought to
behold thyselfe, to the end thou might perceive upon how little occasion
thou do wrong him? But unfortunate that I am, I fall now in the reason which
has moved thee to make so little account of thine own duty, which was perhaps
some negligent or light behavior of mine, which I will not call dishonesty,
seeing that as I presume, it has not proceeded from me deliberately, but
rather through the carelessnesse that women which think they are not noted,
do sometimes unwittingly commit. If not, say Traitor, when did I ever answer
thy Prayers with any world or token that might awake in thee the least shadow
of hope to accomplish thine infamous desires? When were not thine amorous
entreaties reprehended and dispersed by the roughness and rigor of mine
answers? When were thy many promises and lager gifts ever believed or
admitted? But for as much as I am persuaded that no man can persevere long time
in the amorous contention, who has not been sustained by some hope, I will
attribute the fault of thine impertinence to my self; for doubtlesly some
carelessness of mine has hitherto sustained thy care, and therefore I will
chastise and give to my self the punishment which thy fault deserves. And
because thou might see that I being so inhumane toward my self, could not
possibly be other then cruel to thee, I thought fit to call thee to be a
witness of the Sacrifice which I mean to make to the offended honor of my
most honorable husband, tainted by thee, with the blackest note that thy
malice could devise, and by me, through the negligence that I used, to shun the
occasion, if I gave thee any, thus to nourish and canonize thy wicked
intentions. I say again, that the suspicion I have, that my little regard has
engendered in thee these distracted thoughts, is that which afflicts me most,
and that which I mean to chastise most with mine own hands; for if another
executioner punished me, then should my crime become more notorious. but
before I do this, I dying, will kill, and carry him away with me, that shall
end and satisfy the greedy desire of revenge which I hope for, and I have;
seeing before mine eyes wheresoever I shall go, the punishment which
disingaged justice shall inflict, it still remaining unbowed or suborned by
him, which has brought me to so desperate terms.

And having said these words, she flew upon Lothario with incredible force and
lightness, and her Poniard naked, giving such arguments and tokens that she
meant to stab him, as he himself was in doubt whether her demonstrations were
false or true; wherefore he was driven to help himself by his wit and
strength, for to hinder Camila from striking of him, who did so lively act her
strange guile and fiction, as to give it color, she would give it a blush of
her own blood: for perceiving, or else feighning that she could not hurt
Lothario, she said, Seeing that adverse fortune will not satisfy thoroughly my
just desires, yet at least it shall not be potent wholly to cross my
designs: and then striving to free the dagger hand, which Lothario held fast,
she snatched it away, and directing the point to some place of her body, which
might hurt her, but not very grievously, she stabbed her self, and hid it in
her apparel near unto the left shoulder, and fell forthwith to the ground, as
if she were in a trance, Lothario and Leonela stood amazed at the unexpected
event, and still rested doubtful of the truth of the matter, seeing Camila to
lie on the ground bathed in her blood: Lothario ran all wanne and pale, very
hastily to her, to take out the Poniard, and seeing how little blood followed,
he lost the fear that he had conceived of her greater hurt, and began a new
to admire the cunning wit and discretion of the beautiful Camila; but yet that
he might play the part of a friend, he began a long and doleful lamentation
over Camila's body, even as she were dead, and began to breathe forth many
curses and execrations not only against himself, but also against him that had
employed him in that unfortunate affair. And knowing that his friend Anselmo
did listen unto him, he said such things as would move a man to take more
compassion of him then of Camila her self, although they accounted her dead.
Leonela took her up between her arms, and laid her on the Bed, and entreated
Lothario to go out, and find some one that would undertake to cure her
secretly. She also demanded of him his advice, touching the excuse they might
make to Anselmo concerning her Mistress her wound, if he came to town before
it were fully cured.

He answered, that they might say what they pleased, for he was not in an
humor of giving any counsel worth the following; and only said this, that
she should labor to stanch her Ladies blood; for he meant to go there whence
they should hear no news of him ever after: And so departed out of the house
with very great tokens of grief and feeling; and when he was alone in place
where no body perceived him, he blessed himself a thousand times to think of
Camilaes art, and the gestures so proper and accommodated to the purpose, used
by her Maid Leonela. He considered how assured Anselmo would remain that he
had a second Portia to wife, and desired to meet him, that they might celebrate
together the fiction, and the best dissembled truth that could be ever
imagined. Leonela, as is said, stanched her Ladies blood, which was just as
much as might serve to color her invention and no more; and washing the would
with some Wine, she tied it up the best that she could, saying such words
whilst she cured her as were able, though nothing had been done before, to
make Anselmo believe that he had an Image of honestly in Camila to the plants
of Leonela: Camila added others, terming her self a Coward of base Spirit since
she wanted time (being a thing so necessary) to deprive her life which she
hated so mortally; she demanded counsel of her Maiden, whether she would
tell or conceal all that success to her beloved Spouse: And she answered,
That it was best to conceal it, lest she should engage her Husband to be
revenged on Lothario, which would not be done without his very great peril,
and that every good Wife was bound, not to give occasion to her Husband of
quarrelling, but rather to remove from him as many as was possible. Camila
answered, That she allowed of her opinion, and would follow it; and that in
any sort they must study some device to cloak the occasion of her hurt from
Anselmo, who could not choose but espy it. To this Leonela answered, That she
her self knew not how to lie, no, not in very jest it self. Well friend, quoth
Camila, and I, what do I know? for I dare not to forge or report an untruth if
my life lay on it: And if we know not how to give it a better issue, it will
be better to report the naked truth then to be overtaken in a leasing. Do
not trouble your self Madame, quoth Leonela; for I will bethink my self of
somewhat between this and to morrow morning, and perhaps the wound may be
concealed from him^ by reason that it is in the place where it is; and Heaven
perhaps may be pleased to favor our so just and honorable thoughts. Be
quiet, good Madam, and labor to appease your alteration of mind, that my Lord
at his return may not find you perplexed; and leave all the rest to Gods and
my charge, who does allwaies assist the just.

With highest attention stood Anselmo listening and beholding the Tragedy of
his dying honors, which the personages thereof had acted with so strange and
forceable effects, as it verily seemed that they were transformed into the
opposite truth of their well contrived fiction: He longed greatly for the
night and leisure to get out of his house, that he might go and congratulate
with his good friend Lothario, for the precious Jewel that he had found in
this last trial of his Wife. The Mistrisse and Maiden had as great care to
give him the opportunity to depart; and he fearing to lose it, issued out in a
trice, and went presently to find Lothario, who being found, it is not
possible to recount the imbracements he gave unto him, the secrets of his
contentment that he revealed, or the attributes and praises that he gave to
Camila. All which Lothario heard, without giving the least argument of Love;
having represented to his mind at that very time, how greatly deceived his
friend lived, and how injustly he himself injuried him. And although that
Anselmo noted that Lothario took no delight at his relation, yet did he
believe that the cause of his sorrow proceeded from having left Camila wounded,
and he himself given the occasion thereof: And therefore among many other
words, said unto him, That there was no occasion to grieve at Camilaes hurt, it
doubtlesly being but light, seeing she and her Maid had agreed to hide it from
him; and that according unto this there was no great cause of fear, but that
from thence forward he should live merrily and contentedly with him, seeing
that by his industry and means, he found himself raised to the highest
felicity that might be desired; and therefore would from thenceforth spend
his idle times in writing of Verses in Camila's praise, that he might eternize
her name, and make it famous in ensuing ages. Lothario commended his resolution
therein, and said that he for his part would also help to raise up so noble an
edefice; and herewithall Anselmo rested the most soothingly and contentedly
deceived that could be found in the World: And then himself took by the hand to
his house (believing that he bore the instrument of his glory) the utter
perdition of his fame. Camila entertained him with a frowning countenance, but
a cheerful mind: the fraud rested unknown a while, until at the end of
certain months, Fortune turned the wheel, and the wickedness that was so
artificially cloaked, issued to the public notice of the World; and Anselmo
his impertinent-curiosity cost him his life.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein is ended the History of the Curious-Impertinent: And likewise
recounted the rough Encounter and Conflict passed between Don-Quixote and
certain baggs of red Wine.
A Little more of the novell did rest unread, when Sancho Panca all perplexed
ran out of the Chamber where his Lord reposed, crying as loud as he could,
Come, good Sirs, speedily, and assist my Lord, who is engaged in one of the
most terrible battails that ever mine eyes have seen: I swear that he has
given such a blow to the Giant, my Lady the Princess Micomicona her enemy, as
he has cut his head quite off as round as a Turnep.

What say thou friend, quoth the Curate (leaving off at that word to
prosecute the reading of his novell) art thou in thy wits Sancho? What a Divill
man, how can that be, seeing the Giant dwells at least two thousand leagues
from hence? By this they heard a mavelous great noise within the Chamber, and
that Don-Quixote cried out aloud, Stay false Thief, Robber, stay; for since
thou art here, thy Semiter shall but little avail thee: and therewithal it
seemed that he struck a number of mighty blows on the walls. And Sancho said,
There is no need tostand thus listening abroad, but rather that you go in and
part the fray, or else assist my Lord; although I think it be not very
necessary: for the Giant is questionless dead by this, and giving account for
the ill life he led: For I saw his blood run all about the house, and his
head cut off, which is as great as a great Wine-bagge. I am content to be hewn
in pieces, quoth the Innkeeper, hearing of this, if Don-Quixote or Don-Divell
have not given some blow to one of the Wine-baggs that stood filled at his
Beds-head, and the shed Wine must needs be that which seems blood to this good
man: And saying so, he entered into the Room, and all the rest followed him,
where they found Don-Quixote in the strangest guise that may be imagined: He
was in his Shirt, the which was not long enough before to cover his Thighs, and
it was six fingers shorter behind: His Legs were very long and lean, full of
hair, and horrible dirty: He wore on his Head a little red, but very greazie
night Cap, which belonged to the Innkeeper: He had wreathed on his left Arm
the Coverlet of his Bead; on which Sancho looked very often and angerly, as one
that knew well the cause of his own malice to it: and in his right hand he
griped his naked Sword, wherewithal he laid round about him many a thwack;
and withal spoke as if he were in battle with some Giant: And the best of
all was, that he held not his eyes open; for he was indeed asleep and
dreaming that he was in fight with the Giant: For the imagination of the
Adventure which he had undertaken to finish, was so bent upon it, as it made
him to dream that he was already arived at the kingdom of Micomicon, and that
he was then in combat with his enemy, and he had given so many blows on the
wine bags, supposing them to be Giants, as all the whole chamber flowed with
wine: Which being perceived by the Host, all inflamed with rage, he set upon
Don-Quixote with dry sists, and gave unto him so many blows, that if Cardenio
and the Curate had not taken him away, he would doubtlesly have finished the
war of the Giant, and yet with all this did not the poor Knight awake until
the Barber brought in a great kettle full of cold water from the Well, and
threw it all at a clap upon him, and therewithal Don-Quixote awaked, but not
in such sort as he perceived the manner wherein he was. Dorotea seeing how
short and how thin her Champion was arrayed, would not go in to see the
conflict of her combatant and his Adversary.

Sancho went up and down the floor searching for the Giants head, and seeing
that he could not find it he said, Now I do see very well, that all the
things of this house are enchantments, for the last time that I was here, in
this very same room, I got many blows and buffets, and knew not who did
strike me, nor could I see any body; and now the head appears not, which I
saw cut off with mine own eyes, and yet the blood ran as swiftly from the
body, as water would from a Fountain. What blood, or what Fountain do thou
tattle of here, thou enemy of God and his Saints? quoth the In-keeper, thou
Thief, do not thou see that the blood and the fountain is no other thing
then these wine-bags which are slashed here, and the wine red that swims up and
down this Chamber (and I wish that I may see his Soul swimming in hell which
did bore them. I know nothing replied Sancho but this, that if I cannot find
the Giants head, I shall become so unfortunate, as mine Earldom will dissolve
like Salt cast into water. And certes Sancho awake, was in worse case then his
Master sleeping, so much had his Lords promises distracted him. The In-keeper
on the other side was at his wits end, to see the humor of the Squire, and
unhappiness of his Lord, and swore that it should not succeed with them now
as it had done the other time, when they went away without payment: and that
now the privileges of Chivalrie should not any whit avail him, but he should
surely pay both the one and the other, yea even for the very patches that were
to be set on the bored Winebagges.

The Curate held fast Don-Quixote by the hands, who believing that he had
a^chieved the Adventure, and was after it come into the Princess Micomicona
her presence, he laid himself on his knees before the Curate saying, Well may
your greatness high and famous Lady, live from henceforth secure from any
danger, that this unfortunate wretch may do unto you; and I am also freed from
this day forward from the promise that I made unto you, seeing I have, by the
assistance of the heavens, and through her favor by whom I live and breathe,
so happily accomplished it. Did not I say so quoth Sancho, hearing of his
Master? yea, I was not drunk; see if my Master has not powdered the Giant by
this? the matter is questionless, and the Earldom is mine own. Who would
not laugh at these raving fits of the Master and man? all of them laughed save
the In-keeper, who gave himself for anger to the Devil more then a hundred
times. And the Barber, Cardenio and the Curate got Don-Quixote to bed again,
not without much ado, who presently fell a sleep with tokens of marveilous
weariness, They left him sleeping and went out to comfort Sancho Panca for the
grief he had, because he could not find the Giants head; but yet had more
ado to pacify the In-keeper, who was almost out of his wits for the
unexpected and sudden death of his wine-bags.

The Oast^sse on the other side went up and down whining and saying, in an ill
season and an unlucky hour did this Knight errant enter into my house, alas;
and I would that mine eyes had never seen him seeing he costs me so dear.
The last time that he was here, he went away scot-free for his Supper, Bed,
Straw and Barley, both for himself and his man, h^s Horse and his Ass, saying
that he was a Knight Adventurous (and God give to him ill venture, and to all
the other Adventurers of the world) and was not therefore bound to pay any
thing, for so it was written in the Statutes of Chivalry. And now for his cause
came the other Gentleman, and took away my good tail, and has returned it
me back, with two quarters of damage, for all the hair is falln off, and it
cannot stand my husband any more in stead for the purpose he had it; and for
an end and conclusion of all, to break my wine-bags and shed my wine; I wish I
may see as much of his blood shed: And do not think otherwise, for by my
fathers old bones, and the life of my mother, they shall pay me every doit,
one quart upon another, or else I will never be called as I am, nor be mine
own fathers daughter.

These and such like words spoke the Innkeepers Wife with very great fury,
and was seconded by her good Servant Maritornes. The Daughter held her peace,
and would now and then smile a little: But Master Parson did quiet and pacify
all, by promising to satisfy them for the damages as well as he might, as
well for the Wine as for the Baggs, but chiefly for her tail, the which was so
much accounted of and valued so highly. Dorotea did comfort Sancho, saying to
him, that whenever it should be verified that his Lord had slain the Giant,
and established her quietly in her Kingdom, she would bestow upon him the
best Earldome thereof. With this he took courage and assured the Princess,
that he himself had seen the Giants head cut off; and for a more certain token
thereof, he said, That he had a beard that reached him down to his girdle;
and that if the Head could not now be found, it was by reason that all the
Affairs of that house were guided by enchantment, as he had made experience to
his cost the last time that he was lodged therein. Dorotea replied, That she
was of the same opinion, and bade him to be of good cheer, for all would be
well ended to his hearts desire. All parties being quiet, the Curate resolved
to finish the end of his novell because he perceived that there rested but a
little unread thereof. Cardenio, Dorotea, and all the rest entreated him
earnestly to finish it. And he desiring to delight them all herein and
recreate himself, did prosecute the Tale in this manner.

It after befell, That Anselmo grew so satisfied of his Wifes Honesty, as he
led a most contented and secure life: And Camila did for the nonce look sowrely
upon Lothario, to the end Anselmo might construe her mind amiss: And for a
greater confirmation thereof Lothario requested Anselmo to excuse his coming
any more to his house, seeing that he clearly perceived how Camila could
neither brook his company nor presence. But the hood-winked Anselmo answered
him, That he would in no wise consent thereunto; and in this manner did weave
his own dishonor a thousand ways, thinking to work his contentment. In this
season such was the delight that Leonela took also in her affections, as she
suffered her self to be borne away by them headlongly, without any care or
regard confident because her Lady did cover it, yea, and sometimes instructed
her how she might put her desires in practice without any fear or danger. But
finally Anselmo heard on a night some body walk in Leonelaes Chamber, and being
desirous to know who it was, as he thought to enter, he felt the door to be
held fast against him, which gave him a greater desire to open it; and
therefore he strugled so long, and used such violence, as he threw open the
door and entered just at the time that another leaped out at the Window; and
therefore he ran out to overtake him, or see wherein he might know him; but
could neither compass the one or the other, by reason that Leonela embracing
him hardly, withheld him and said, Pacify your self, good Sir, and be not
troubled, nor follow him that was here; for he is one that belongs to me, and
that so much, as he is my Spouse. Anselmo would not believe her, but rather
blind with rage, he drew out his Poniard and would have wounded her, saying,
That she should presently tell him the truth, or else he would kill her. She
distracted with fear, said, without nothing her own words, Kill me not Sir, and
I will acquaint you with things which concern you more then you can imagine.
Say quickly then, quoth Anselmo, or else thou shall die. It will be
impossible, replied Leonela, for me to speak any thing now I am so affrighted;
but give respit till morning and I will recount unto you things that will
marvellously astonish you; and in the mean time rest secure, that he which
leaped out of the Window is a young man of this City, betwixt whom and me has
passed a promise of marriage. Anselmo was somewhat satisfied by these words;
and therefore resolved to expect the term which she had demanded to open her
mind; for he did not suspect that he should hear any thing of Camila, by
reason he was already so assured of her Virtue: and so departing out of the
Chamber, and shutting up Leonela therein, threatening her withal, That she
should never depart thence, until she had said all that she promised to
reveal unto him. He went presently to Camila, to tell unto her all that which
his Maiden had said and the promise she had passed, to disclose greater and
more important things. Whether Camila hearing this were perplexed or no, I
leave to the discreet Readers judgment: for such was the fear which she
conceived, believing certainly (as it was to be doubted) that Leonela would
tell to Anselmo all that she knew of her disloyalty, as she had not the
courage to expect and see whether her su^mise would become false or no: But the
very same night, as soon as she perceived Anselmo to be asleep, gathering
together her best Jewels and some Money, she departed out of her House
unperceived of any, and went to Lothario's lodging, to whom she recounted all
that had past, and requested him either to leave her in some safe place, or
both of them to depart to some place where they might live secure out of
Anselmo's reach. The confusion that Cimila struck into Lothario, was such as he
knew not what to say, and much less how to resolve himself what he might do.
But at last he determined to carry Camila to a Monastery wherein his sister was
Prioresse; to which she easily coudescended; and therefore Lothario departed
and left her there with all the speed that the case required, and did also
absent himself presently from the City, without acquainting any body with his
departure.

Anselmo, as soon as it was day, without heeding the absence of his Wife, arose
and went to the place where he had shut up Leonela, with desire to know of her
what she had promised to acquaint him withal: He opened the Chamber door and
entered, but could find no body therein but some certain sheets knit together
and tied to the window as a certain sign how Leonela had made an escape by
that way: Wherefore he returned very sad to tell to Camila the adventure; but
when he could neither find her at bed nor in the whole house, he remained
astonished, and demanded, for her of his Servants, but none of them could tell
him any thing. And as he searched for her, he happened to see her Coffers lie
open and most of her Jewels wanting; and herewithall fell into the true account
of his disgrace, and that Leonela was not the cause of his misfortune, and so
departed out of his house sad and pensive, even as he was, half ready and
unapparrelled, to his friend Lothario to recount unto him his disaster: but
when he found him to be likewise absented, and that the Servants told him how
their Master was departed the very same night and had borne away with him all
his Money, he was ready to run out of his wits. And to conclude, he
returned to his own house again, wherein he found no ceature, man or woman, for
all his folk were departed, and had left the house alone and desert: He knew
not what he might think, say, or do; and then his judgment began to fail
him. There he did contemplate and behold himself in an instant without a Wife,
a Friend, and Servants; abandoned (to his seeming) of Heaven that covered him,
and chiefly without honor; for he clearly noted his own perdition in Camilaes
crime. In the end he resolved, after he had bethought himself a great while,
to go to his friends Village wherein he had been all the while that he
afforded the leisure to contrive that disaster: And so shutting up his house
he mounted a horseback, and rode away in languishing and doleful wise: And
scarce had he ridden the half way when he was so fiercely assaulted by his
thoughts, as he was constrained to alight, and tying his Horse to a Tree, he
leaned himself to the trunck thereof and breathed out a thousand pitiful and
dolorous sighs; and there he abode until it was almost night, about which
hour espied a man to come from the City a Horseback by the same way, and
having saluted him, he demanded of him what news he brought from Florence?
The Citizen replied, The strangest that had happened there many a day: For it is
there reported publicly, That Lothario the great friend of the rich man, has
carried away the said Anselmo's Wife Camila this night; for she is also
missing: all which a Waiting-maid of Camilaes has confessed, whom the Governor
apprehended yesternight as she slipped down at a window by a pair of sheets out
of the said Anselmo's house. I know not particularly the truth of the Affair,
but well I wot that all the City is amazed at the accident; for such a fact
would not be as much as surmized from the great and familiar amity of them
two, which was so much as they were called The two friends. Is it perhaps yet
known, replied Anselmo, which way Lothario and Camila have taken? In no wise,
quoth the Citizen, although the Governor has used all possible diligence to
find them out. Farewell then, good Sir, said Anselmo. And with you Sir, said
the Traveller: And so departed.

With these so unfortunate news poor Anselmo arived, not only to terms of
losing his wits, but also well nigh of losing his life; and therefore arising
as well as he might, he came to his friends house, who had heard nothing yet
of his disgrace; but perceiving him to arive so wan, pined and dried up, he
presently conjectured that some grievous evil afflicted him. Anselmo requested
him presently that he might be carried to his Chamber, and provided of paper
and ink to write withal: all was done, and he left in bed, and alone, for so
he desired them; and also that the door should be fast locked: And being
alone, the imagination of his misfortune gave him such a terrible charge, as
he clearly perceived that his life would shortly fail him, and therefore
resolved to leave notice of the cause of his sudden and unexpected death; and
therefore he began to write it; but before he could set an end to his
discourse, his breath failed, and he yielded up his life into the hands of
sorrow, which his impertinent curiosity had stirred up in him. The Gentleman
of the house seeing that it grew late, and that Anselmo had not called,
determined to enter, and know whether his indisposition passed forward, and he
found him lying on his face, with half of his body in the bed, and the other
half leaning on the table whereon he lay, with a written paper unfolded, and
held the pen also yet in his hand. His Oast drew near unto him, and first of
all, having called him he took him by the hand; and seeing that he answered
not, and that it was cold, he knew that he was dead; and greatly perplexed and
grieved thereat, he called in his people, that they might also be witnesses of
the disastrous success of Anselmo, and after all he took the paper and read
it, which he knew to be written with his own hand the substance whereof was
this:

A Foolish and Impertinent Desire has dispoyled me of Life. If the news of my
Death shall arrive to Camila, let her also know that I do pardon her, for she
was not bound to work Miracles; nor had I any need to desire that she should
work them. And seeing I was the builder and contriver of mine own dishonor,
there is no reason --


Hitherto did Anselmo write, by which it appeared that his life ended in that
point, ere he could set an end to the Reason he was to give. The next day
ensuing, the Gentleman his friend acquainted Anselmoes kinsfolk with his
death; the which had already knowledge of his misfortune, and also of the
Monastery wherein Camila had retired her self, being almost in terms to
accompany her husband in that forcible voyage; not for the news of his death,
but for grief of others which she had received of her absent friend. It is
said, that although she was a widow, yet would she neither depart out of the
Monastery, nor become a Religious woman, until she had received within a few
days after, news how Lothario was slain in a battle given by Monsieur de
Lau^re^, to the great Captain Goncalo Fernandez of Cordova, in the kingdom of
Naples; and that was the end of the late repentant friend, the which being
known to Camila, she made a profession, and shortly after deceased between the
rigorous hands of sorrow and Melancholy: and this was the end of them all,
sprung from a rash and inconsiderate beginning.

This Novell quoth the Curate, having read it, is a pretty one; but yet I
cannot persuade my self that it is true, and if it be a fiction, the Author
erred therein; for it cannot be imagined that any husband would be so foolish,
as to make so costly an experience as did Anselmo: but if this accident had
been devised betwixt a Gentleman and his love, then were it possible; but being
between Man and Wife, it contains somewhat that is impossible and unlikely,
but yet I can take no exception against the manner of recounting thereof.

CHAP. IX.
Which treates of many rare Successes befaln in the Inn.
WHILST they discoursed thus, the In-keeper, who stood all the while at the
door, said, Here comes a fair troop of Guests, and if they will here alight,
we may sing Gaudeamus. What folk is it, quoth Cardenio? Four men on
Horseback quoth the Host, and ride Gennet-wise, with Lances and Targets, and
Maskes on their faces; and with them comes likewise a woman apparelled in
white, in a side-Saddle, and her face also masked, and two Lacquies that run
with them a foot. Are they near quoth the Curate? So near replied the
Innkeeper, as they do now arive. Dorotea hearing him say so, covered her face,
and Cardenio entered into Don-Quixotes chamber; and scarce had they leisure to
do it, when the others of whom the Oast spoke, entered into the Inn, and the
four Horsemen alighting, which were all of very comely and gallant
disposition; they went to help down the Lady that rode in the side-Saddle,
and one of them taking her down in his arms did seat her in a chair that
stood at the Chamber door, into which Cardenio had entered: and all this while
neither she nor they took off their Ma^ks, or spoke a word, only the
Gentlewoman at her sitting down in the chair breathed forth a very deep sigh,
and let fall her arms like a sick and dismayed person: The Lacquies carried
away their Horses to the Stable. Master Curate seeing and nothing all this, and
curious to know what they were that came to the Inn in so unwonted an attire,
and kept such profound silence therein, went to the Lacquies and demanded of
one of them that which he desired to know, Who answered, In good faith Sir, I
cannot tell you what folk this is; only this I know, that they seem to be very
Noble, but chiefly he that went and took down the Lady in his arms that you
see there; and this I say, because all the others do respect him very much,
and nothing is done but what he ordains and commands. And the Lady, what is
she quoth the Curate? I can as hardly inform you, quoth the Lacquie; for I
have not once seen her face in all this Journey; yet I have heard her often
groan and breath out so profound sighs, as it seems she would give up the
ghost at every one of them: And it is no marvel, that we should know no more
then we have said; for my Companion and my self have been in their company
but two days; for they incountred us on the way, and prayed and persuaded us
to go with them unto Andalusia, promising that they would recompense our pains
largely. And have thou heard them name one another, said the Curate? No truly,
answered the Lacquie; for they all travail with such silence, as it is a
wonder: for you shall not hear a word among, but the sighs and throbs of the
poor Lady, which do move in us very great compassion: And we do
questionless persuade our selves that she is forced wheresoever she goes:
and as it may be collected by her attire, she is a Nun, or, as is most
probable, goes to be one; and perhaps she goes so sorrowful as it seems,
because she has no desire to become Religious. It may very well be so, quoth
the Curate: And so leaving them, he returned to the place where he had left
Dorotea; who hearing the disguised Lady to sigh so often moved by the native
compassion of that Sex, drew near her and said, What ails you, good Madame? I
pray you think if it be any of those inconveniences to which Women be
subject, and whereof they may have use and experience to cure them: I do offer
unto you my Service, Assistance, and Good Will to help you, as much as lies in
my power. To all those complements the doleful Lady answered nothing; and
although Dorotea made her again larger offers of her Service, yet stood she
ever silent, until the bemasked Gentleman (whom the Lacquie said the rest did
obey) came over and said to Dorotea; Lady, do not trouble your self to offer
any thing to that woman, for she is of a most ungrateful nature, and is never
wont to gratify any courtesy, nor do you seek her to answer unto your
demands, if you would not hear some lie from her mouth. I never said any
(quoth the silent Lady) but rather because I am so true and sincere without
guiles; I am now drowned here in those misfortunes; and of this I would have
thy self bear witness, seeing my pure truth makes thee to be so false and
disloyal.

Cardenio overheard those words very clear and distinctly, as one that stood
so near unto her that said them, as only Don-Quixotes chamber door stood
between them: And instantly when he heard them, he said with a very loud
voice; Good God! what is this that I hear? What voice is this that has
touched mine ear? The Lady moved with a sudden passion, turned her head at
those outcries, and seeing she could not perceive him that gave them, she
got up, and would have entered into the Room, which the Gentleman espying
withheld her, and would not let her stir out of the place: and with the
alteration and sudden motion the Mask fell off her face, and she discovered an
incomparable beauty, and an Angellicall countenance, although it was somewhat
wan and pale, and turned here and ^here with her eyes to every place so
earnestly as she seemed to be distracted: which motions without knowing the
reason why they were made, struck Dorotea and the rest that beheld her into
very great compassion. The Gentleman holding her very strongly fast by the
shoulders, the Mask he wore on his own face was falling; and he being so busied
could not hold it up, but in the end fell wholly. Dorotea, who had likewise
embraced the Lady, lifting up her eyes by chance, saw that he, which did also
embrace the Lady, was her Spouse Don Fernando: and scarce had she known him,
when breathing out a long and most pitiful Alas from the bottom of her
heart, she fell backward in a Trance: And if the Barber had not been by good
hap at hand, she would have fallen on the ground with all the weight of her
body. The Curate presently repaired to take off the veil of her face and cast
water thereon: and as soon as he did discover it, Don Fernando, who was he
indeed that held fast the other, knew her, and looked like a dead man as soon
as he viewed her; but did not all this while let go Luscinda, who was the
other whom he held so fast, and that labored so much to escape out of his
hands. Cardenio likewise heard the Alas that Dorotea said when she fell into a
Trance, and believing that it was his Luscinda, issued out of the chamber
greatly altered, and the first he espied was Don Fernando which held Luscinda
fast, who forthwith knew him. And all the three, Luscinda, Cardenio, and
Dorotea, stood dumb and amazed, as folk that knew not what had befaln unto
them. All of them held their peace and beheld one another: Dorotea looked on
Don Fernando, Don Fernando on Cardenio, Cardenio on Luscinda, and Luscinda
again on Cardenio: but Luscinda was the first that broke silence, speaking to
Don Fernando in this manner; Leave me off, Lord Fernando, I conjure thee, by
that thou should be, for that which thou art: and if thou will not do it
for any other respect; Let me cleave to the wall whose Ivy I am; to the
supporter, from whom, neither thy importunity nor threats, promises or gifts,
could once deflect me. Note how Heaven, by unusual, unfrequented, and from us
concealed ways, has set my true Spouse before mine eyes: and thou do know
well by a thousand costly experiences, that only death is potent to blot forth
his remembrance out of my memory: Let then so manifest truths be of power (if
thou must do none other) to convert thine affliction into rage, and thy good
will into despite, and therewithal end my life: for if I may render up the
Ghost in the presence of my deer Spouse, I shall account it fortunately lost.
Perhaps by my death he will remain satisfied of the faith which I ever kept
sincere toward him, until the last period of my life. By this time Dorotea
was come to her self, and listened to most of Luscindaes reasons, and by them
came to the knowledge of her self: But seeing Don Fernando did not yet let ^er
depart from between his arms, nor answer any thing to her words, encouraging
her self the best that she might, she arose and kneeling at his feet, and
shedding a number of Cristall and penetrating T^ares, she spoke to him thus.

If it be not so my Lord, that the beams of that Sun which thou hold
eclypsed between thine arms, do darken and deprive those of thine eyes, thou
might have by this perceived, how she that is prostrated at thy feet, is
the unfortunate (until thou shall please) and the disastrous Dorotea. I am
that poor humble country-woman, whom thou either through thy bounty, or for
thy pleasure did daigne to raise to that height that she might call thee her
own. I am she which sometime immured within the limits of honesty, did lead
a most contented life, until it opened the gates of her recollection and
weariness to thine importunity, and seeming just, and amorous requests, and
rendered up to thee the keys of her liberty; a grief by thee so ill
recompensed, as the finding my self in so remote a place as this wherein you
have met with me, and I seen you, may clearly testify; but yet for all
this, I would not have you to imagine that I come here guided by dishonorable
steps, being only hitherto conducted by the tracts of dolor and feeling, to
see my self thus forgotten by thee. It was thy will that I should be thine
own, and thou did desire it in such a manner, as although now thou would
not have it so, yet can not thou possibly leave off to be mine. Know my dear
Lord, that the matchless affections that I do bear toward thee, may
recompense and be equivalent to her beauty and nobility for whom thou do
abandon me.

Thou can not be the beautiful L^scindaes because thou art mine; nor she
thine, for as much as she belongs to Cardenio, and it will be more easy, if
you will note it well, to reduce thy will to love her that adores thee, then to
address hers, that hates thee, to bear thee affection: Thou did solicit
my wretchlessenesse, thou prayedst to mine integrity, and wast not ignorant of
my quality; thou know also very well upon what terms I subjected my self
to thy will, so as there remains no place nor color to term it a fraud or
deceit; and all this being so, as in verity it is, and that thou be as
Christian as thou art noble, why do thou with these so many untoward
wreathings dilate the making of mine end happy, whose co^mencement thou did
illustrate so much? and if thou will not have me for what I am, who am thy
true and lawful Spouse; yet at least take and admit me for thy slave, for so
that I may be in thy possession, I will account my self happy and fortunate.
Do not permit that by leaving and abandoning me, meetings may be made to
discourse of my dishonor. Do not vex thus the declining years of my
Parents, seeing that the loyal services which they ever have done as Vassals
to thine, deserve not so dishonest a recompense: And if thou esteemest that thy
blood by meddling with mine shall be stained or embased, consider how few noble
houses, or rather none at all, are there in the world, which have not run the
same way; and that the woman's side is not essentially requisite for the
illustrating of noble discents: how much more, seeing that true Nobility
consists in virtue, which if it shall want in thee, by refusing that which thou
owe me so justly, I shall remain with many more degrees of Nobility then
thou shall. And in conclusion, that which I will lastly say is, that whether
thou will or no, I am thy wife; the witnesses are thine own words, which
neither should nor ought to lie, if thou do pri^e thy self of that for whose
want thou despisest me. Witness shall also be thine own hand writing.
Witness Heaven, which thou did invoke to bear witness of that which thou
did promise unto me; and when all this shall fail, thy very Conscience
shall never fail from using clamors, being silent in thy mirth and turning,
for this truth which I have said to thee now, shall trouble thy greatest
pleasure and delight.

These and many other like reasons did the sweetly grieved Dorotea use with
such feeling and abundance of tears, as all those that were present, as well
such as accompanied Don Fernando, as all the others that did accompany her. Don
Fernando listened unto her without replying a word, until she had ended her
speech, and given beginning to so many sighs and sobs, as the heart that could
endure to behold them without moving, were harder then brass. Luscinda did
also regard her, no less compassionate of her sorrow, then admired at her
discretion and beauty, and although she would have approached to her, and
used some consolatorie words, yet was she hindered by Don Fernandoes arms,
which held her still embraced; who full of confusion and marvel, after he had
stood very attentively beholding Dorotea a good while, opening his arms, and
leaving Luscynda free said, Thou have vanquished, O beautiful Dorotea, thou
have vanquished me; for it is not possible to resist or deny so many united
truths. Luscinda through her former trance and weakness, as Don Fernando left
her, was like to fall, if Cardenio who stood behind Don Fernando all the while
lest he should be known, shaking off all fear and in indangering his person,
had not started forward to stay her from falling; and clasping her sweetly
between his arms he said. If pitiful Heaven be pleased, and would have
thee now at last take some ease, my loyal, constant and beautiful Lady, I
presume that thou can not possess it more securely then between these arms
which do now receive thee, as whilom they did when fortune was pleased that I
might call thee mine own. And then Luscinda first severing her eye lids beheld
Cardenio, and having first taken notice of him by his voice, and confirmed it
again by her sight, like one quite distracted, without farther regarding
modest respects, she cast both her arms about his neck, and joining her face
to his said, Yea, thou indeed art my Lord; thou the true own of this poor
Captive, howsoever adverse fortune shall thwart it, or this life, which is only
sustained and lives by thine, be ever so much threatened. This was a marvelous
spectacle to Don Fernando, and all the rest of the beholders, which did
universally admire at this so unexpected an event: and Dorotea perceiving Don
Fernando to change color, as one resolving to take revenge on Cardenio, for
he had set hand to his Sword, which she conjecturing, did with marvelous
expedition kneel, and catching hold on his legs, kissing them, she strained
them with so loving embracements, as he could not stir out of the place, and
then with her eyes overflown with teeres, said unto him, What meanest thou to
do, my only refuge in this unexpected trance? Thou have here thine own Spouse
at thy feet, and her whom thou would feign possess is between her own
husbands arms: Judge then whether it become thee, or is a thing possible to
dissolve that which Heaven has knit, or whether it be any wise laudable to
endeavor to raise and equal to thy self her, who contemning all dangers and
inconveniences, and confirmed in faith and constancy, does in thy presence
bathe her eyes with amorous liquor of her true Loves face and bosom. I desire
thee for Gods sake, and by thine own worths; I request thee, that this so
notorious a verity may not only assuage thy choler, b^t also diminish it in
such sort, as thou may quietly and peaceably permit those two Lovers to
enjoy their desires without any encumbrance, all the time that Heaven shall
grant it to them; and herein thou shall show the generositie of thy magnanimous
and noble breast, and give the world to understand how reason prevails in
thee, and domaniereth over passion. All the time that Dorotea spoke thus to Don
Fernando, although Cardenio held Luscinda between his arms, yet did he never
take his eye off Don Fernando, with resolution, that if he did see him once
stir in his prejudice, he would labor both to defend himself and offend his
adversary and all those should join with him to do him any harm, as much as he
could, although it were with the rest of his life: but Don Fernandoes friends,
the Curat and Barber that were present and saw all that was past, repaired in
the mean season, without omitting the good Sancho Panca, and all of them
together compassed Don Fernando, entreating him to have regard of the
beautiful Doroteas tears, and it being true (as they believed it was) that
she had said, he should not permit her to remain defrauded of her so just and
lawful hopes, assuring him that it was not by chance, but rather by the
particular providence and disposition of the Heavens, that they had all met
together so unexpectedly: And that he should remember, as Master Curate said
very well, that only death could sever Luscinda from her Cardenio: And that
although the edge of a Sword might divide and part them asunder, yet in that
case they would account their death most happy, and that in irremedilesse
events, it was highest prudence, by straining and overcoming himself, to show a
generous mind, permitting that he might conquer his own will, they two should
joy that good which Heaven had already granted to them, and that he should
convert his eyes to behold the beauty of Dorotea, and he should see that few
or none could for feature paragon with her; and much less excel her; and that
he should confer her humility and extreme love which she bore to him with
her other indowments; and principally that if he gloried in the titles of
Nobility or Christianity, he could not do any other then accomplish the
promise that he had past to her; and that by fulfilling it he should please
God and satisfy discreet persons, which know very well how it is a special
prerogative of beauty though it be in an humble and mean subject, if it be
consorted with Modesty and Virtue, to exalt and equal it self to any
dignity, without disparagement of him which does help to raise or unite it to
himself. And when the strong laws of delight are accomplished (so that there
intercurre no sin in the acting thereof) he is not to be condemned which
does follow them. Finally, they added to these reasons others so many and
forcible, that the valorous breast of Don Fernando (as commonly all those that
are warmed and nourished by Noble Blood are wont) was mollified, and permitted
it self to be vanquished by that truth which he could not deny though he
would: And the token that he gave of his being overcome, was to stoop down and
embrace Dorotea, saying unto her, A^ise Lady; for it is not just that she be
prostrate at my feet, whose image I have erected in my mind: And if I have not
hitherto given demonstrations of what I now averr, it has perhaps befaln
through the disposition of Heaven, to the end I might by noting the constancy
and faith wherewithal thou do affect me, know after how to value and
esteem thee according unto thy merits: and that which in recompense thereof I
do entreat of thee is, that thou will excuse in me mine ill manner of
proceeding and exceeding carelessenesse in repaying thy good will: For the very
occasion and violent passions that made me to accept thee as mine, the very
same did also impell me again not to be thine: and for the more verifying of
mine assertion, do but once behold the eyes of the now contented Luscinda and
thou may read in them a thousand excuses for mine error: and seeing she
has found and obtained her hearts desire, and I have in thee also gotten what
is most convenient: for I wish she may live securely and joyfully many and
happy years with her Cardenio; for I will pray the same, that it will license
me to enjoy my beloved Dorotea: And saying so, he embraced her again, and
joined his face to hers with so lovely motion, as it constrained him to hold
watch over his Tears, lest violently bursting forth, they should give
doubtless arguments of his servent Love, and remorse.

Cardenio Luscinda and almost all the rest could not do so, for the greater
number of them shed so many tears, some for their private contentment, and
others for their friends, as it seemed that some grievous and heavy misfortune
had betided them all; even very Sancho Panca wept, although he excused it
afterward, saying, That he wept only because that he saw that Dorotea was not
the Queen Micomicona, as he had imagined, of whom he hoped to have received
so great gifts and favors. The admiration and tears joined, endured in them
all for a pretty space, and presently after Cardenio and Luscinda went and
kneeled to Don Fernando, yielding him thanks for the favor that he had done
to them, with so courteous complements, as he knew not what to answer, and
therefore lifted them up, and embraced them with very great afection and
kindness, and presently after he demanded of Dorotea how she came to that
place, so far from her own dwelling? and she recounted unto him all that she
had told to Cardenio; wherea^ Don Fernando and those which came with him took
so great delight, as they could have wished that her story had continued a
longer time in the telling then it did; so great was Doroteaes grace in setting
out her misfortunes. And as soon as she had ended, Don Fernando told all that
had befaln him in the City, after that he had found the scroule in Luscindaes
bosom, wherein she declared Cardenio to be her Husband; and that he
therefore could not marry her; And also how he attempted to kill her, and
would have done it, were it not that her Parents hindered him; And that he
therefore departed out of the house full of shame and despite, with resolution
to revenge himself more commodiously: And how he understood the next day
following, how Luscinda was secretly departed from her fathers house, and gone
no body knew where; but that he finally learned within a few months after,
that she had entered into a certain Monastery, with intention to remain there
all the days of her life, if she could not pass them with Cardenio: And that
as soon as he had learned that, choosing those three Gentlemen for his
Associates, he came to the place where she was, but would not speak to her,
fearing lest that as soon as they knew of his being there, they would increase
the guards of the Monastery; and therefore expected until he found on a day
the gates of the Monastery open, and leaving two of his fellows to keep the
door, he with the other entered into the Abbey in Luscindaes search, whom they
found talking with a Nun in the Cloister; and snatching her away e're she
could retire her self, they brought her to a certain Village, where they
disguised themselves in that sort they were; for so it was requisite for to
bring her away: All which they did with the more facility, that the Monastery
was seated abroad in the Fields, a good way from any Village. He likewise
told, That as soon as Luscinda saw her self in his power, she fell into a
Swone; and that after she had returned to her self, she never did any other
thing but weep and sigh, without speaking a word; And that in that manner,
accompanied with silence and tears, they had arrived to that Inn, which was to
him as grateful as an arrival to Heaven, wherein all earthly mis-haps are
concluded and finished.

CHAP. X.
Wherein is prosecuted the History of the famous Princess Micomicona, with
other delightful Adventures.
SANCHO gave ear to all this with no small grief of mind, seeing that all the
hopes of his Lordship vanished away like smoke, and that the fair Princess
Micomicona was turned into Dorotea, and the Giant into Don Fernando, and that
his Master slept so souldly and careless of all that had happened. Dorotea could
not yet assure her self whether the happiness that she possessed was a dream or
no. Cardenio was in the very same taking, and also Luscindaes thoughts run the
same race.

Don Fernando yielded many thanks to Heaven for having dealt with him so
propitiously and unwinding him out of the intricate Labyrinth, wherein
straying, he was at the point to have at once lost his soul and credit: and
finally as many as were in the Inn were very glad and joyful of the success
of so thwart, intricate, and desperate affairs. The Curate compounded and
ordered all things through his discetion, and congratulated every one of the
good he obtained: But she that kept greatest Jubilee and Joy was the
Hostess, for the promise that Cardenio and the Curate had made, to pay her the
damages and harms committed by Don-Quixote; only Sancho, as we have said, was
afflicted, unfortunate and sorrowful. And thus he entered with melancholy
semblance to his Lord, who did but then awake, and said unto him;

Well and securely may you sleep, Sir Knight of the heavy countenance, as long
as it shall please your self, without troubling your self with any care of
killing any Giant, or of restoring the Queen to her Kingdom; for all is
concluded and done already. I believe thee very easily, replied Don-Quixote;
for I have had the monstrousest and most terrible battle with that Giant that
ever I think to have all the days of my life with any; and yet with one thwart
blow-thwack, I overthrew his head to the ground; and there issued so much blood
as the streams thereof ran along the earth as if they were of water. As if
they were of red Wine you might better have said, replied Sancho Panca: for I
would let you to understand, if you know it not already, That the dead Giant is
a bored Wine-bagg; and the blood six and thirty gallons of red Wine, which it
contained in it is belly: the head that was slashed off so neatly, is the Whore
my Mother; and let the Devil take all away for me. And what is this thou
say, mad man (quoth Don-Quixote?) Art thou in thy right wits? Get up Sir
(quoth Sancho) and you your self shall see the fair stuff you have made, and
what we have to pay; and you shall behold the Queen transformed into a
particular Lady, called Dorotea, with other successes; which if you may once
conceive them aright, will strike you into admiration. I would marvel at
nothing, quoth Don-Quixote; for if thou be well remembered, I told thee the
other time that we were here, how all that succeeded in this place was done by
enchantment; And what wonder then if now the like should eftsoons befall? I
could easily be induced to believe all, replied Sancho, if my canvassing in
the Coverlet were of that nature: But indeed it was not, but most real and
certain: And I saw well how the Innkeeper that is here yet this very day
alive, held one end of the Coverlet, and did toss me up toward Heaven with
very good grace and strength, no less merrily then lightly: And where the
notice of parties intercurs, I do believe, although I am a simple man and a
sinner, that there is no kind of enchantment, but rather much trouble,
brusing, and misfortune. Well, God will remedy all, said Don-Quixote; and give
me mine apparel; for I will get up and go forth, and see those successes and
transformations which thou speak of. Sancho gave him his clothes; and
whilst he was a making of him ready, the Curate recounted to Don Fernando and
to the rest Don-Quixotes mad pranks, and the guile he had used to bring him
away out of the poor Rock, wherein he imagined that he lived exiled through
the disdain of his Lady. He told them moreover all the other Adventures which
Sancho had discovered, whereat they did not laugh a little and wonder withal,
because it seemed to them all to be one of the extravagantest kinds of madness
that ever befell a distracted brain. The Curate also added, That seeing the
good success of the Lady Dorotea did impeach the farther prosecuting of their
design, that it was requisite to invent and find some other way, how to
carry him home to his own Village. Cardenio offered himself to prosecute the
Adventure, and Luscinda should represent Doroteaes person. No, quoth Don
Fernando, it shall not be so; for I will have Dorotea to prosecute her own
invention: For so that the Village of this good Gentleman be not very far
off from hence, I will be very glad to procure his remedy. It is no more then
two days journey from hence, said the Curate. Well though it were more,
replied Don Fernando, I would be pleased to travail them, in exchange of doing
so good a work. Don-Quixote sallied out at this time completely armed with
Mambrino's Helmet (although with a great hole in it) on his head, his Target on
his arm, and leaned on his Trunk or Javelin. His strange countenance and gate
amazed Don Fernando and his Companions very much, seeing his ill-favored
visage so withered and yellow, the inequality and insutabilitie of his Arms,
and his grave manner of proceeding; and stood all silent to see what he would;
who casting his eyes on the Bautifull Dorotea, with very great gravity and
staidness said.

I am informed (beautiful Lady) by this my Squire, that your greatness is
annihilated, and your being destroyed: For of a Queen and mighty Princess
which you were wont to be, you are now become a particular Damzell: which if
it has been done by particular orde of the Magical King your Father, dreading
that I would not be able to give you the necessary and requisite help for
your restitution; I say that he neither knew nor does know the one half of the
enterprise, and that he was very little acquainted with Histories of
Chivalrie: For if he had read them, or passed them over with so great
attention and leisure as I have done, and read them, he should have found at
every other step, how other Knights of a great deal less fame then my
self, have ended more desperate Adventures; seeing it is not so great a matter
to kill a Giant, be he ever so arrogant; for it is not many hours since I my
self fought with one, and what insued I will not say, lest they should tell
me that I do lie; but time the detector of all things will disclose it, when
we do least think thereof.

Thou foughtest with two wine-bags and not with a Giant quoth the Oast at this
season: But Don Fernando commanded him to be silent and not interrupt
Don-Quixote in any wise, who prosecuted his speech saying. In fine I say, high
and disinherited Lady, that if your Father has made this M^tam^rphosis in your
person for the causes related, give him no credit; for there is no peril so
great on earth but my Sword shall open a way through it, wherewithal I
overthrowing your enemies head to the ground will set your Crown on your own
head within a few days. Here Don-Quixote held his peace, and awaited the
Princess her Answer, who knowing Don Fernandoes determination and will, that
she should continue the commenced guile until Don-Quixote were carried home
again, answered with a very good grace and countenance in this manner:
Whosoever informed you valorous Knight of the illfavoured face, that I have
altered and changed my being, has not told you the truth; for I am the very
same to day that I was yesterday; true it is, that some unexpected, yet
fortunate successes have wrought some alteration in me, by bestowing on me
better hap then I hoped for, or could wish my self; but yet for all that I have
not left off to be that which before, or to have the very same thoughts which I
ever had, to help my self by the valor of your most valorous and invincible
arm. And therefore I request you, good my Lord, of your accustomed bounty, to
return my father his honor again, and account of him as of a very discreet and
prudent man, seeing that he found by this skill, so easy and so infallible a
way to redress my disgraces; for I do certainly believe, that if it had not
been by your means, I should never have happened to attain to the good fortune
which now I possess, as all those Noblemen present may witness; what
therefore rests is, that to morrow morning we do set forward, for to day is
now already so overgone, as we should not be able to travel very far from
hence; as for the conclusion of the good success that I do hourly expect, I
refer that to God and the valor of your invincible Arm.

Thus much the discreet Dorotea said, and Don-Quixote having heard her, he
turned him to Sancho with very manifest tokens of indignation and said, Now I
say unto thee little Sancho, that thou art the veriest Rascal that is in all
Spain: tell me thief and vagabond, did not thou but even very now say unto
me that this Princess was turned into a Damzell, and that, called Dorotea?
and that the head which I thought I had slashed from a Giants shoulders, was
the whore that bore thee? with a thousand other follies, which did plunge me
into the greatest confusion that ever I was in in my life? I vow (and then he
looked upon heaven, and did crash his teeth together) that I am about to make
such a wrack on thee, as shall beat wit into the pates of all the lying
Squires that shall ever hereafter serve Knights errant in this world. I pray
you have patience good my Lord, answered Sancho, for it may very well befall
me to be deceived in that which touches the transmutation of the Lady and
Princess Micomicona; but in that which concerns the Giants head, or at least
the boring of the wine-bags, and that the blood was but red-wine, I am not
deceived I swear; for the bags lie yet wounded there within at your own beds
head; and the red-wine has made a Lake in the Chamber, and if it be not so,
it shall be perceived at the frying of the Eggs, I mean that you shall see
it when master In-keepers worship, who is here present, shall demand the loss
and damage. I say then Sancho quoth Don-Quixote, that thou art a mad cap;
pardon me, and so it is enough. It is enough indeed quoth Don Fernando, and
therefore let me entreat you to say no more of this, and seeing my Lady the
Princess says she will go away to morrow, seeing it is now too late to
depart to day, let it be so agreed on, and we will spend this night in
pleasant discourses, until the approach of the ensuing day, wherein we will
all accompany and attend on the worthy Knight Sir Don-Quixote, because we
would be eyewitnesses of the valorous and unmatchable feats of arms which he
shall do in the pursuit of this weighty enterprise which he has taken upon him.
I am he that will serve and accompany you, good my Lord, replied Don-Quixote,
and I do highly gratify the honor that is done me, and the goo^ opinion that
is held of me, the which I will endeavor to verify and approve, or it shall
cost me my life, or more, if more it might cost me.

Many other words of complement and gratification past between Don-Quixote and
Don Fernando, but a certain passenger imposed silence to them all, by his
arivall to the Inn in that very season, who by his attire showed that he was
a Christian newly returned from among the Moors, for he was apparelled with a
short skyrted Caslock of blue cloth, sleeves reaching down half the Arm, and
without a collar; his breeches were likewise of blue linen, and he wore a
bonnet of the same color, a pair of Date colored Buskins, and a Turkish
Semiter hanging at his neck in a Scarf, which went athwart his breast; there
entered after him, riding on an Asle, a woman clad like a Moore, and her face
covered with a piece of the Veil of her head, she wore on her head a little
cap of cloth of gold, and was covered with a little turkish Mantle from the
shoulders down to the feet; the man was of strong and comely making of the
age of forty years or thereabouts, his face was somewhat tanned, he had long
Mustachoes and a very handsome Beard; to conclude, his making was such, as if
he were well attyred, men would take him to be a person of quality and good
birth; he demanded a Chamber as soon as he had entered, and being answered
that there was no one vacant in the Inn, he seemed to be grieved, and
coming to her which in her attire denoted her self to be a Moore, he took
her down from her Asle. Luscinda, Dorotea, the Oastesse, her daughter and
Maritornes, allured to behold the new and strange attire of the Moore,
compassed her about; and Dorotea, who was always most gracious, courteous and
discreet, deeming that both she and he that had brought her, were
discontented for the want of a lodging she said Lady, be not grieved for the
trouble you are here like to endure for want of means to refresh your self,
seeing it is an universal vice of all Innes to be defective herein; yet
notwithstanding if it shall please you to pass away the time among us
(pointing to Luscinda) perhaps you have met in the discourse of your travells,
other worse places of entertainment then this shall prove. The disguised Lady
made none answer, nor other thing then arising from the place wherein she
sat, and setting both her arms a cross on her bosom, she inclined her head
and bowed her body, in sign that she rendered them thanks; by her silence
they doubtlesly conjectured her to be a Moore, and that she could not speak
the Castilian tongue. In this the captive arived, who was otherwise employed
until then, and seeing that they all had environed her that came with him, and
that she made no answer to their speech he said; Ladies, this Maiden scarce
understands my tongue yet, nor does she know any other then that of her own
Country, and therefore she has not, nor can make any answer to your demands.
We demand nothing of her quoth Luscinda, but only do make her an offer of our
companies for this night, and part of the Room where we our selves are shall
be accomodated, where she shall be cherished up as much as the commodity of
this place, and the Obligation wherein we be tied to show courtesies to
strangers that may want it do bind us; especially she being a woman to whom
we may do this service. Sweet Lady, I kiss your hands both for her and my
self, replied the captive, and I do highly prize, as it deserves, the favor
you have proffered, which in such an occasion, and offered by such Persons as
you seem to be, does very plainly show how great it is. Tell me good Sir,
quoth Dorotea, whether is this Lady a Christian or a Moore? for by her attire
and silence she makes us suspect that she is that we would not wish she
were. A Moore she is in attire and body, answered the captive; but in mind
she is a very fervent Christian, for she has very expressly desired to become
one. Then she is not yet baptized, said Luscinda? there has been no
opportunity offered to us, quoth the captive, to christen her, since she
departed from Argell, which is her Town and Country; and since that time she
was not in any so eminent a danger of death as might obliege her to be
baptized, before she were first instructed in all the Ceremonies which our
holy Mother the Church commands: but I hope shortly (if it shall please God)
to see her baptized with that decency which her quality and calling deserves,
which is greater then her attire or mine makes show of.

These words inflamed all the hearers with a great desire to know who the Moor
and and her Captive were; yet none of them would at that time entreat him to
satisfy their longing, because the season rather invited them to take some
order how they might rest after their travails, then to demand of them the
discourse of their lives. Dorotea then taking her by the hand, caused her to
sit down by her self, and prayed her to take off the veil from her face. She
instantly beheld the Captive, as if she demanded of him what they said; and
he in the Arabicall language told her, how they desired her to discover her
face, and bade her to do it; which presently she did, and discovered so
beautiful a visage, as Dorotea esteemed her to be fairer then Luscinda, and
Luscinda prized her to excel Dorotea: and all the beholders perceived that if
any one could surpass them both in Beauty, it was the Moor; and there were
some that thought she excelled them both in some respects, And as Beauty has
evermore the prerogative and grace to reconcile men's minds and attract their
wills to it; so all of them forthwith dedicated their desires to serve and make
much of the lovely Moor. Don Fernando demanded of the Captive how she was
called; and he answered that her name was Lela Zoraida: and as soon as she
heard him, and understood what they had demanded, she suddenly answered with
anguish, but yet with a very good grace, No, not Zoraida, but Maria, Maria;
giving them to understand that she was called Maria, and not Zoraida.

These words, and the great affect and vehemenci^ wherewithal the Moor
delivered them, extorted more then one tear from the hearers, especially from
the women who are naturally tenderhearted and compassive. Luscinda embraced
her then with great love, and said, I, I, Maria, Maria. To which she answered,
I, I, Maria; Zoraida ^ancanga; that is and not Zoraida. By this it was grown
some four of the clock in the afternoon; and by order of those which were Don
Fernando's Companions, the Innkeeper had provided for them as good a Beaver as
the Inn could in any wise afford unto them: Therefore it being the hour, they
sat down all together at a long Table (for there was never a square or round
one in all the house) and they gave the first and principal end (although he
refused it as much as he could) to Don-Quixote, who commanded that the Lady
Micomicona should sit at his elbow, seeing he was her Champion: Presently were
placed Luscinda, and Zoraida, and Don Fernando, and Cardenio right over against
them, and after the Captive and other Gentlemen, and on the other side the
Curate and Barber: And thus they made their drinking with very great
recreation, which was the more augmented to see Don-Quixote, leaving of his
meat, and moved by the like spirit of that which had made him once before talk
so much to the Goat-heards, begin to offer them an occasion of Speech in this
manner.

Truly, good Sirs, if it be well considered, those which profess the Order
of Knighthood, do see many great and unexpected things. If it be not so,
say, what mortal man alive is there, that entering in at this Castle gate, and
seeing of us all in the manner we be now present here, can judge or believe
that we are those which we be? Who is it that can say, that this Lady which
sits here at my sleeve, is the great Queen that we all know her to be; and
that I am that Knight of the Heavy Countenance, that am so much blab'd of
abroad by the mouth of Fame? therefore it cannot be now doubted, but that this
Art and Exercise excels all the others which ever human wit, the underminer
of Nature, invented; and it is the more to be prized, by how much it exposes
it self, more then other Trades, to dangers and inconveniences. Away with those
that shall affirm learning to surpass Arms; for I will say unto them, be
they what they list, that they know not what they say: For the reason which
such men do most urge, and to which they do most rely, is, That the travails
of the Spirit do far exceed those of the Body: And that the use of Arms are
only Exercised by the Body, as if it were an Office fit for Porters, for which
nothing were requisite but Bodily forces; or as if in that which we that
profess it do call Arms, were not included the acts of Fortitude which
require deep understanding to execute them; or as if the Warriors Mind did
not labor as well as his Body, who had a great Army to lead and command, or
the defense of a besiged City: If not, see if he can arrive by his corporal
strength to know or sound the intent of his Enemy, the Designs, Stratagems,
and Difficulties, how to prevent imminent Dangers, all these being operations
of the understanding, wherein the body has no meddling at all: It being
therefore so, that the Exercise of Arms require Spirit as well as those of
Learning; let us now examine which of the two Spirits, that of the Scholar or
Soldier, do take most pains: And this may be best understood by the end, to
which both of them are addressed; for that intention is most to be esteemed,
which has for object the most noble end. The end and conclusion of Learning
is; I speak not now of Divinity, whose scope is to lead and address souls to
Heaven; for to an end so much without end as this, no other may be compared; I
mean of humane Sciences or Arts to maintain distributive justice in his
perfection, and give to every one that which is is his own: to endeavor and
cause good Laws to be religiously observed; an end most certainly generous,
high and worthy of great praise: but not of so much as that, to which the
Exercise of Arms is annexed, which has for his object and end Peace; which is
the greatest good men can desire in this life: and therefore the first good
news that ever the World had or Men received, were those which the Angels
brought on that night which was our day, when they sung in the skies, Glory
be in the heights, and Peace on earth to men of good minds. And the Salvation
which the best Master that ever was on Earth or in Heaven taught to his
Disciples and Favorites was, That when they entrd into any house, they should
say, Peace be to this house: and many other times he said, I give unto you my
Peace; I leave my Peace unto you: Peace be amongst you. It is a good, as
precious as a Jewel, and a Gift given, and left by such a hand: a Jewel,
without which neither on Earth or in Heaven can there be any perfect good.
This Peace is the true end of War; for Arms and War are one and the self
same things. This truth being therefore presupposed, that the end of War is
Peace, and that herein it does excel the end of Learning: let us descend to
the corporal labors of the Scholar, and to those of him which professes
Arms, and consider which of them are more toylsome.

Don-Quixote did prosecute his discourse in such sort, and with so pleasing
terms, as he had almost induced his Audients to esteem him to he at that time
at least exempt from his frenzy: and thereforeby reason that the greater
number of them were Gentlemen, to whom the use of Arms is in a manner
essential and proper, they did willingly listen to him; and therefore he
continued on with his discourse in this manner.

I say then, that the pains of the Student are commonly these: Principally
poverty (not that I would maintain that all Students are poor, but that I may
put the case in greatest extreamitie it can have) and by saying that he may
be poor, me thinks there may be no greater aggravation of his misery: For he
that is poor has no perfection: and this poverty is suffered by him sundry
ways; sometimes by hunger, other times by cold or nakedness, and many times
by all of them together: Yet it is never so extreme but that he does eat,
although it be somewhat later then the custom, or of the Scraps and Reversion
of the rich man: and the greatest misery of the Student is that which they
term, to live by sops and pottage: and though they want fire of their own, yet
may they have recourse to their neighbors Chimney, which if it do not warm,
yet will it weaken the cold: And finally, they sleep at night under a Roof. I
will not descend to other trifles, to wit, the want of Shirts and Shoes, the
bareness of their clothes, or the over-loading of their stomachs with meat
when good fortune lends them as good a meal: For by this way which I have
decyphered so rough and difficult, stumbling here, falling there; getting up
again on the other side, and refalling on this; they attained the degree which
they have desired so much; which many having compassed as we have seen, which
having passed through these difficulties, and sailed by Scylla and Charibdis
(borne away flying in a manner by favorable fortune) they command and govern
all the World from a Chair, turning their hunger into sacietie, their
nakedness into pomp, and their sleeping on a Matt into a sweet repose among
Hollands and Damask; a reward justly merited by their Virtue: But their labors
confronted and compared to those of the militant Soldier, remain very far
behind as I will presently declare.

CHAP. XI.
Treating of the curious discourse made by Don-Quixote upon the Exercises of
Arms and Letters.
Don-Quixote continuing his discourse, said, Seeing we begin in the Student
with Poverty and her parts, let us examine whether the Soldier be Richer?
Certainly we shall find, that no man can exceed the Soldier in Poverty it
self: For he is tied to his wretched Pay which comes either late or never: Or
else to his own shifts with notable danger of his life and conscience; And his
nakedness is often times so much, as many times a leather Jerkin gashed, serves
him at once for a shirt and ornament: And in the midest of Winter he has
sundry times no other defense or help to resist the inclemencies of the air in
the midest of the open fields, then the breath of his mouth; which I verily
believe does against Nature come out cold, by reason it sallies from an empty
place; expect there till the night fall, that he may repair all these
discommodities by the easiness of his Bed, the which, if it be not through
his own default, shall never offend in narrowness; for he may measure out for
it on the earth as many foot as he pleases, and tumble himself up and down it
without indangering the wrinkling of his sheets. Let after all this the day and
hour arrive, wherein he is to receive the degree of his profession. Let, I
say, a day of Battle arrive; for there they will set on his head the Cap of
his dignity, made of lints to cure the wound of some bullet that has past
through and through his Temples, or has maimed an arm or a leg. And when this
does not befall, but that Heaven does piously keep and preserve him whole and
sound, he shall perhaps abide still in the same poverty wherein he was at
the first; and that it be requisite that one and another Battle do succeed,
and he come off ever a Victor, to the end that he may prosper and be at the
last advanced. But such miracles are but few times wrought; and say, good Sirs,
if you have noted it, how few are those which the Wars reward, in respect of
the others that it has destroyed? You must answer without question, that there
can be no comparison made between them, nor can the dead be reduced to any
number; but all the living, and such as are advanced, may be counted easily
with three Arithmeticall figures; all which falls out contrary in Learned men,
for all of them have wherewithal to entertain and maintain themselves by
skirts; I will say nothing of sleeves: So that although the Soldiers labor is
greater, yet is his reward much less. But to this may be answered, That it is
easier to reward two hundred thousand Learned men, then thirty thousand
Soldiers; for they may be advanced by giving unto them Offices, which must of
necessity be bestowed on men of their profession: But Soldiers cannot be
recompensed otherwise then by the Lords substance and wealth whom they serve:
and yet this objection and impossibility does fortify much more my assertion.

But leaving this apart which is a Labyrinth of very difficult issue, let us
return to the preeminencie of Arms over Learning, which is a matter hitherto
depending; so many are the reasons that every one alleges for himself: and
among those which I my self have repeated, then Learning does argue thus for it
self, That Arms without it cannot be long maintained, for as much as the
War has also Laws, and is subject to them, and that the Laws are contained
under the Title of Learning, and belong to Learned men.

To this objection Arms do make answer; That the Laws cannot be sustained
without them, for Commonwealths are defended by Arms, and Kingdoms preserved,
Cities fenced, Highways made safe, the Seas freed from Pirates; and to be
brief, if it were not for them, Commonwealths, Kingdoms, Monarchies, Cities,
and ways by Sea and Land, would be subject to the rigor and confusion which
attends on the war all the time that it endures, and is licensed to
practice his Prerogatives and violence; and it is a known truth, That it which
cost most, is or ought to be most accounted of; that one may become eminent in
Learning, it costs him time, watchings, hunger, nakedness, headaches,
rewnesse of Stomach, and other such inconveniences, as I have partly mentioned
already: But that one may arive by true terms to be a good Soldier, it costs
him all that it costs the Student, in so exceeding a degree, as admits no
comparison, for he is at every step in jeapordie to lose his life. And what
fear of necessity or poverty may befall or molest a Student so fiercely as
it does a Soldier, who seeing himself at the s^ege of some impregnable place,
and standing Sentinel in some Raveline or half Moon, feels the enemies
undermining near to the place where he is, and yet dares not to depart or
abandon his stand, upon any occasion whatsoever, or shun the danger which so
nearly threatens him? but that which he only may do, is to advise his Captain
of that which passes, to the end he may remedy it by some countermine,
whilst he must stand still fearing and expecting when he shall suddenly fly up
to the clouds without wings, and after descend to the depths against his will^
and if this appear to be but a small danger, let us weigh whether the grapling
of two Galleys, the one with the other in the midst of the spacious Maine, may
be compared, or do surpass it, the which nailed and grapled fast the one to
the other, the Soldier has no more room in them, then two footbroad of a
planke on the battellings and notwithstanding, although he clearly see laid
before him so many ministers of death, for all the Peaces of Artillery that are
planted on the adverse side, do threaten him, and are not distant from his
body the length of a Lance; and seeing that if he slipped ever so little aside,
he should fall into the deepes; does yet nevertheless with undaunted heart,
borne away on the wings of honor, which spurreth him onward, oppose himself as
a work to all their shot, and strives to pass by that so narrow a way into
the enemies vessel: And what is most to be admired, is to behold how scarce
is one fallen into that place; from whence he shall never after arise until
the worlds end, when another takes possession of the same place: and if he do
likewise tumble into the Sea, which gapes like an enemy for him also, another
and another will succeed unto him, without giving any respite to the times of
their death, valor, and boldness, which is the greatest that may be found
among all the trances of war-fare. Those blessed ages were fortunate, which
wanted the dreadful fury of the devilish and murdering Pieces of Ordnance,
to whose inventor I am verily persuaded that they render in hell an eternal
guerdon for his Diabolical invention; by which he has given power to an
infamous, base, vile and dastardly arm, to bereave the most valorous Knight of
life; and that without knowing how or from whence, in the midst of the stomach
and courage that inflames and animates valorous minds, there arives a wandering
bullet (shot off perhaps by him that was afraid, and fled at the very blaze of
the powder, as he discharged the accursed Engine) and cuts off and finisheth in
a moment the thoughts and life of him who merited to enjoy it many ages,

And whilst I consider this, I am about to say, That it grieves me to have
ever undertaken the exercise of a Knight Errant in this our detestable age; for
although no danger can affright me, yet notwithstanding I live in jealousy,
to think how powder and Lead might deprive me of the Power to make my self
famous and renowned by the strength of mine Arm and the edge of my Sword
throughout the face of the Earth, But let Heaven dispose as it pleases; for so
much the more shall I be esteemed, if I can compass my pretentions, by how
much the dangers were greater to which I opposed my self, then those a^chieved
in foregoing times by Knights Adventurous.

Don-Quixote made all this prolixe Speech whilst the rest of his Company did
eat, wholly forgetting to taste one bit, although Sancho Panca did now and
then put him in remembrance of his Victuales, saying, That he should have
leisure enough after to speak as much as he could desire. In those that heard
was again renewed a kind of compassion, to see a man of so good a wit as he
seemed to be, and of so good discourse in all the other matters which he took
in hand, to remain so clearly devoid of it, when any occasion of speech were
offered, treating of his accursed Chivalrie. The Curate applauded his
discourse, affirming that he produced very good reasons for all that he had
spoken in the favor of Arms; and that he himself (although he was learned
and Graduated) was likewise of his opinion.

The Beaver being ended, and the Table-clothes taken away, whilst Maritornes
did help her Mistris^e and her Daughter to make ready the Room where
Don-Quixote had slept, for the Gentlewomen, wherein they alone might retire
themselves that night. Don Fernando entreated the Captive to recount unto them
the History of his life, for as much as he suspected that it must have been
rare and delightful, as he gathered by the tokens he gave, by coming into the
lovely Zoraida's company. To which the Captive replied, That he would
accomplish his desire with a very good will, and that only he feared that the
discourse would not prove so savory as they expected: But yet for all that he
would tell it, because he would not disobey him. The Curate and all the rest
thanked him for his promise, and turned to request him again to begin his
discourse: and he perceiving so many to solicit him, said, That prayers were
not requisite when commandments were of force: and therefore I desire you,
quoth he, to be attentive, and you shall hear a true discourse, to which
perhaps no feigned invention may be compared for variety or delight. The rest
animated by these his words did accommodate themselves with very great silence,
and he beholding their silence and expectation of his History, with a modest
and pleasing voice, began in this manner.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein the Captive recounteth his Life, and other Accidents.
IN a certain Village of the Mountains of Lion my lineage had beginning,
wherewithal Nature dealt much more liberally then Fortune, although my Father
had the opinion amid'st the penury and poverty of that People, to be a rich
man, as indeed he might have been, had he but used as much care to hoord up
his wealth, as prodigality to spend it. And this his liberal disposition
proceeded from his being a Soldier in his youthful years; for War is the
School wherein the Miser is made Frank, and the Frank man Prodigal: and if
among Soldiers we find some Wretches and Niggards, they are accounted
Monsters which are seldom seen. My Father passed the bounds of Liberality,
and touched very nearly the confines of Prodigality; a thing nothing
profitable for a married man, who had children that should succeed him in his
name and being. My Father had three Sons, all men, and of years sufficient to
make an election of the state of life they meaned to lead: wherefore he
perceiving as he himself was wont to say, that he could not bridle his nature
in that condition of spending, he resolved to deprive himself of the instrument
and cause which made him such a spender and so liberal, to wit, of his Goods;
without which Alexander the great himself would be accounted a Miser; and
therefore calling us all three together on a day into his Chamber, he used
these or such like reasons to us.

Sons, to affirm that I love you well, may be presumed, seeing I term you
my Sons: and yet it may be suspected that I hate you seeing I do not govern
my self so well as I might in the Husbanding and increasing of your stock. But
to the end that you may hence forth perceive that I affect you with a Fatherly
love, and that I mean not to overthrow you like a step-Father, I will do one
thing to you which I have pondered, and with mature deliberation purposed these
many days: You are all of age to accept an estate, or at least to make choice
of some such exercise as may turn to your honor and profit at riper years: and
therefore that which I have thought upon, is to divide my goods into four
parts; the three I will bestow upon you, to every one that which appertains to
him, without exceeding a jot; and I my self will reserve the fourth to live and
maintain me with as long as it shall please Heaven to lend me breath. Yet I do
greatly desire that after every one of you is possessed of his portion, he would
take one of the courses which I mean to propose. There is an old proverb in
this our Spain, in mine own opinion very true (as ordinarily all proverbs are,
being certain brief sentences collected out of long and discreet experiences)
and it is this, The Church the Sea, or the Court: the meaning is, That
whosoever would become wealthy, or worthy, must either follow the Church, haunt
the Seas by exercising the Trade of Merchandises, or get him a place of Service
and entertainment in the Kings house; for men say, that A Kings Crumme is more
worth then a Lords Loaf. This I say because I desire, and it is my will, that
one of you do follow his Book, another Merchandise, and the third the War,
seeing that the service of his own house is a difficult thing to compass. And
although the War is not wont to enrich a man, yet it adds unto him great
worth and renown. Within these eight days I do mean to give you all your
portions in money without defrauding you of a mite, as you shall see in effect:
Therefore tell me now whether you mean to follow mine opinion and device in
this which I have proposed? And then he commanded me by reason that I was the
eldest, to make him an answer.

I, after I had entreated him not to make away his goods, but to spend and
dispose of them as he listed, seeing we were both young and able enough to
gain more; at last I concluded that I would accomplish his will, and that mine
was to follow the Wars, therein serving God and my King together. The second
brother made the same offer, and employing his portion in Commodities would
venture to the Indias. The youngest, and as I deem the discreetest, said, That
either he would follow the Church, or go at the least to Salamanca to finish
his already commenced Studies. And as soon as we had ended the agreement and
election of our vocations my Father embraced us all, and afterward performed
unto us, in as short a time as he had mentioned, all that he promised; giving
unto each of us a portion, amounting, if I do well remember, to three thousand
Ducats apeece in money; for an Uncle of ours bought all the goods and paid
ready money, because he would not have them made away from our own Family and
Lineage. We all took our leaves of our good Father in one day, and in that
instant it seeming to me a great inhumanity to leave my Father so old and with
so little means; I dealt so with him, as I constrained him to take back again
two thousand Ducats of the three he had given me, for as much as the rest was
sufficient to furnish me in very good sort with all things requisite for a
Soldier: My brothers, moved by mine example, did each of them give him a
thousand Crowns; so that my Father remained with four thousand Crowns in money,
and three in Goods, as they were valued, which Goods he would not sell, but
keep them still in Stock. Finally, we bade him (and our said Uncle) farewell,
not without much feeling and many Tears on both sides: and they charged us that
we would from time to time acquaint them with our successes, whether
prosperous or adverse. We promised to perform it: and then embraceing us, and
giving us his ^lessing, one departed toward Salamanca, another to Sivill, and
my self to Alicante.

I arrived prosperously at Genova, and from thence went to Milaine, where I did
accommodate my self with arms, and other braveries used by soldiers, and
departed from thence to settle my self in Piemonte, and being in my way
toward the City of Alexandria de la Paglia, I heard news that the great Duke
of Alva did pass toward Flanders. Wherefore changing my purpose, I went with
him, and served him in all the expeditions he made: I was present at the
beheading of the Earls of Egm^nt and Horns, and obtained at last to be
Ensign to a famous Captain of Guadalasara, called Diego de Vrbina. Within a
while after mine arrival to Flanders, the news were divulged of the league
that Pius Quintus the Pope, of famous memory, had made with the Venetians, and
the King of Spain, against our common enemy the Turk, who had gained by force
the famous Island of Cypres, much about the same time, which Island belonged to
the State of Venice, and was an unfortunate and lamentable loss. It was also
certainly known, that the most noble Don John of Austria, our good King Don
Philips natural Brother, did come down for general of this League, and the
great provision that was made for the war was published every where.

All this did incite and stir on my mind and desire to be present at the
expedition so much expected: and therefore although I had conjectures, and half
promises to be made a Captain in the first occasion that should be offerred,
yet I resolved to leave all those hopes, and to go into Italy, as in effect I
did. And my good fortune so disposed, as the Lord Don John of Austria arrived
just at the same time at Genova, and went toward Naples, to join himself with
the Venetian Navy, as he did after at Mess^na. In this most fortunate journey I
was present, being by this made a Captain of Foot: to which honorable charge,
I was mounted rather by my good fortune, then by my deserts. And that very day
which was so fortunate to all Christendom; for therein the whole world was
undeceived, and all the Nations thereof freed of all the error they held, and
belief they had, that the T^rk was invinciable at Sea: in that very day I say,
wherein the swelling Stomach, and Ottomanicall pride was broken among so many
happy men as were there (for the Christians that were slain were much more
happy then those which they left victorious alive) I alone was unfortunate,
seeing that in exchange of some Naval Crown, which I might expect, had I lived
in the times of the ancient Romans, I found my self the night ensuing that so
famous a day, with my legs chained, and my hands manacled, which befell in
this manner: Vchali King of Argiers, a bold and ventrous Pirate, hav^ng
invested and distressed the Admiral of Malta (for only three Knights remained
alive, and those very sore wounded) John Andrea's chief Gallie came to her
succor wherein I went with my company: and doing what was requisite in such an
occasion, I leapt into the enemies vessel, the which falling off from that
which had assaulted her, hindered my soldiers from following me; by which means
I saw my self alone amidst mine enemies, against whom I could make no long
resistance, they were so many. In fine, I was taken, full of wounds. Now as you
may have heard, Vchali saved himself and all his squadron, whereby I became
captive in his power, and only remained sorrowful among so many joyful, and
captive among so many freed: for that day fifteen thousand Christians, which
came slaves and inchained in the Turkish Galleys, recovered their desired
liberty. I was carried to Constantinople, where the great Turk Selim, made my
Lord General of the sea, by reason that he had so well performed his duty in
the battle, having brought away, for a witness of his valor, the Standard of
the Order of Malta, I was the year ensuing of 1572. in Navarino, rowing in the
Admiral of the three Lanth^rn^s, and saw and noted there the opportunity that
was lost, of taking all the Turkish Navy within the haven: for all the
Ienisaries and other soldiers that were in it, made full account, that they
should be set upon, even within the very Port, and therefore trussed up all
their baggage, and made ready their shoo's, to fly away presently to the land,
being in no wise minded to expect the assault, our Navy did strike such terror
into them. But God disposed otherwise of the matter, not through the fault or
negligence of the General that governed our men, but for the sins of
Christendom, and because God permits and wills that we have always some
executioners to chastise us. In sum, Vchali got into Modon, which is an
Island near to Navarino, and landing his Men there, he fortified the mouth of
the Haven, and there remained until Don John departed. In this Voyage was
taken the Gally called Presa, whereof the famous Pirate Barbarossas his son
was Captain; it was surprised by the head Gally of Naples called the
Shee-Wolfe, that was commanded by the Thunderbolt of War, the Father of
Soldiers, that fortunate and never overthrown Don Alvaro de Bacan the
Marquess of Sancta Cruez. And here I will not forget to recount what befell at
the taking of the Presa: this son of Barbarossas was so cruel, and used his
Slaves so ill, that as soon as they that were rowing perceived the Shee-Wolfe
to approach them, and that she had overtaken them, they cast away their Oars
all at one time, and laying hands on their Captain that stood on the Poop [
Estanderil. p 44^] crying to them to row with more speed, and passing him from
one bank to another, from the Poope to the Prow, they took so many bits out of
him, as he h^d scarce passed beyond the Mast, when his soul was already wasted
to Hell; such was the cruelty wherewithal he entreated them, and so great the
hate they also bore toward him. We returned the next year after to
Constantinople, being that of seventie three, and there we learned how Don
John had gained Tunez, and taking that Kingdom away from the Turks, had by
installing Muley Hamet therein, cut away all Muley Hameda's hopes to reign
again there, who was the most cruel and valiant Moor that ever lived.

The great Turk was very much grieved for this loss; and therefore using the
sagacitie wherewithal all his race were endued, he made Peace with the
Venetians which wished for it much more then he did himself: And the year
after of seventie and four he assaulted the Fortress of Goleta, and the other
Fortress that Don John had raised near unto Tunez: And in all these occasions
I was present, tied to the Oar, without any hope of liberty; at least wise by
ransom, being resolved never to signify by Letter my misfortunes to my
Father. The Goleta was lost in fine, and also the Fortress, before which two
places lay in siege seventy five thousand Turks, and more then four hundred
thousand Moors, and other Sarasins of all the other parts of Africa, being
furnished with such abundance of Munition and Warlike Engines, and so many
Pioneers as were able to cover Goleta and the Fortress if every one did cast
but his handful of earth upon them. Thus was Goleta accounted until then
impregnable, first lost, the which did not happen through default of valor in
the Defendants, who in defense thereof did all they could or ought to have
done; but because experience showed the facility wherewithal Trenches might
be raised in that desert sand; for though water had been found in it within
two spans depth, the Turks could not find it in the depth of two yards; and
therefore filling many Sacks full of Sand, they raised their Trenches so high
as they did surmount the walls of the Sconce, and did so gall the Defendants
from them with their shot, as no one could stand to make any defense: It was a
common report, that our men would not immure themselves within Goleta, but
expect the enemy in the champain at their disembarquing: but those that gave
this out spoke widely, as men very little acquainted with the like Affairs: For
if in Goleta and the Fortress there were scarce seven thousand Soldiers, how
could so few a number, were they ever so resolute, make a sallie, and remain in
the Forts against so great a number of enemies? or how is it possible that the
forces which are not seconded and supplied should not be overcome, specially
being besieged by many and obstinate enemies, and those in their own Country?
But many others esteemed, and so did I likewise among the rest, that almighty
God did a particular grace and favor unto Spain in that manner permitting to
be destroyed the stop and cloak of all wickedness, and the Spundge and Moth
of innumerable sums of money spent there unprofitably, without serving to any
other end, then to preserve the memory of being gained by the Emperor Charles
the fifth, as if it had been requisite for the keeping of it eternal (as it is
and shall be ever) that those stones should sustain it. The Fortress was also
won; but the Turks were constrained to gain it span by span; for the
Soldiers which defended it fought so manfully and resolutely, as the number of
the enemies slain in two and twenty general assaults which they gave unto it,
did pass five and twenty thousand. Never a one was taken Prisoner but three
hundred which survived their fellows; a certain and manifest token of their
valor and strength, and how well they had defended themselves and kept their
Fortresses with great magnanimity. A little Fort or Turret that stood in the
midst of the place, under the command of Don John Zonaguera a Valentian
Gentleman, and famous Soldier, was yielded upon composition, and Don Pedro de
Puerto carrero, General of Goleta, was taken Prisoner who omitted no diligence
possible to defend the place; but yet was so grieved to have lost it as he
dyed for very grief on the way toward Constantinople, whither they carried him
Captive. The General likewise of the Fort, called Gabriel Cerbellon, being a
Gentleman of Milan, and a great Engineer, and most resolute Soldier, was
taken; and there dyed; in both the places many persons of worth, among which
Pagan de Oria was one, a Knight of the Order of Saint John, of a most noble
disposition, as the exceeding liberality which he used toward his brother the
famous John Andrea de Oria clearly demonstrates, and that which rendered his
death more deplorable, was, that he was slain by certain Sarasins (which he
trusted, perceiving how the Fort was lost) who had offered to convey him thence
in the habit of a Moor to Tabarca, which is a little Haven or Creek possessed by
the Genevoses that fish for Corrall in that coast^ These Sarasins cut off his
head and brought it to the General of the Turkish Army, who did accomplish in
them the Spanish Proverd, That although the Treason pleases, yet is the
Traitor hated: and so it is reported, that he commanded those to be hanged
that had brought him the present, because they had not brought it alive.

Among the Christians that were lost in the Fort, there was one called Don
Pedro de Aguilar born in Andaluzia, in some Town whose name I have forgotten;
he had been ancient in the Fortress, and was a Soldier of great account, and
of a rare understanding, and specially had a particular grace in Poetry: This
I say, because his fortune brought him to be Slave to my Patron, even into the
very same Gally and and bench whereon I sat. This Gentleman made two Sonnets
in form of Epitaphs, the one for the Goleta, the other for the Fort; and I will
repeat them because I remember them very well, and do believe that they will
be rather grateful then any thing disgustfull to the Audients. As soon as
ever the Captive named Don Pedro de Aguilar, Don Fernando beheld his
Camarada's, and they all three did smile: And when he began to talk of the
Sonnets, one of them said, Before you pass further, I beseech you, good Sir,
let me entreat you to tell me what became of that Don Pedro de Auguilar whom
you have named. That which I know of that Affair, answered the Captive, is,
That after he had been two years in Constantinople, he fled away in the
attire of an Armenian with a Greek Spy, and I cannot tell whether he
recovered his liberty or no; although I suppose he did: for within a year
after I saw the Greek in Constantinople, but I had not the opportunity to
demand of him the success of that Voyage. He came then into Spain, quoth the
Gentleman; for that same Don Pedro is my brother, and dwells now at home in our
own Town, very well, rich married, and a Father of three Sons. God be
thanked, quoth the Captive, for the infinite favor he has showed unto him:
for in mine opinion there is not on earth any contentment able to be compared
to that of recovering a man's lost liberty. I do moreover, said the Gentleman,
know the Sonnets which my brother composed. I pray you then, good Sir, quoth
the Captive, repeat them; for perhaps you can say them better then I. With a
very good will, answered the Gentleman, and that of the Goleta is thus.

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein is prosecuted the History of the Captive.
A SONNET.
O Happy Souls, which from this mortal Veil
Freed and exempted, through the good you wrought,
Safe from the harms, that here did you assail;
By your deserts, to highest Heaven were brought,
Which here inflamed by Wrath, and noble Thought,
Showed how much your forces did avail:
When both your own and foreign Bloods you taught,
From sandy Shores, into the Deepes to traile.
Your lives before your valors end deceased,
In your tired arms; which though they were a dying
And vanquished; yet on Victory have seized.
And this your life from servile thraldom flying,
Ending, acquires, between the Sword and Wall,
Heavens glory there, Fame here on Earth, for all.
I have it even in the very same manner, quoth the Captive. Well then, said the
Gentleman that of the Fort is thus, if I do not forget it: A SONNET.
FRom midst the barron Earth, here overthrown,
In these sad Clods, which on the ground do lie,
Three thousand Soldiers holy Souls are flowne,
And to a happier Mansion gone on hie:
Here, when they did in vain the vigor try
Of their strong Arms, to cost of many a one,
After the most, through extreme t^ile did die:
The cruel Sword a few did light upon:
And this same plot eternally has been,
With thousand doleful memories repleate,
As well this age, as in foregoing time.
But from his cruel bosom Heaven never yes
Reciv'd sincerer souls, then were the last,
Nor earth so valiant bodies, aye possessed.
The Sonnets were not misliked: and the Captive was greatly recreated with the
news which he received of his companion, and prosecuting his History, he
said. The Goleta, and the Fort being rendered, the Turks gave order to
dismantell Goleta: for the Fort was left in such sort, as there remained
nothing up that might be overthrown: and to do it with more brevity and less
labor, they undermined it in three places, but that which seemed least strong,
could not be blown up by any of them, which was the old walls; but all that
which had remained a-foot of the new fortifications and works of Fratin, fell
down to the ground with great facility: and this being ended, the Navy
returned triumphant and victorious to Constantinople: where within a few
months afterward my Lord Vchali died whom they called Vchali Fertax, which
signifies in the Turkish language, the scald or scurvie runagate, for he was
such: and it is a custom among the Turks to give one another nicknames either
of the defects, or perfections and virtues which they have; and the reason
hereof is, that among them all they have but four linages that have sur-names,
and these do contend with that of Ottoman's, for Nobility of blood: And all
the rest, as I have said, do take denomination, sometime from the blemishes of
the body, and sometime from the virtues of the mind: And this scurvie fellow
did row fourteen years, being the great Turks Slave, and did renounce his
faith, being four and thirty years old, for despite, and because he might
be revenged on a Turk that gave him a cuff on the face as he rowed; and his
valor was so great, as without ascending by the dishonorable means and ways
usually taken by the greatest minions about the great Turk, he came first to be
King of Argiers, and after to be General of the Sea, which is the third most
noble charge and dignity of all the Turkish Empire: He was born in Calabria,
and was a good moral man, and used with great humanity his Slaves, whereof he
had above three thousand, which were after his death divided as he had left in
his Testament, between the great Turk (who is ever an inheritour to every dead
man, and has a portion among the deceased his children) and his Runagates. I
fell to the lot of a Venetian Runagate, who being a Ship-boy in a certain
Vessel, was taken by Vchali, who loved him so tenderly, as he was one of the
dearest youths he had, and he became after the most cruel Runnagate that
ever lived: He was called Azanaga, and came to be very rich, and King of
Argiers: With him I came from Constantinople somewhat contented in mind,
because I should be nearer unto Spain; not for that I meaned to write unto any
one of my unfortunate success, but only to see whether fortune would prove
more favorable to me in Argiers then at Constantinople; where I had attempted a
thousand ways to escape, but none of them sorted to any good effect: and I
thought to search out in Argiers some other means to comp^sse that which I so
greedily desired; for the hope of attaining liberty sometime had never
abandoned me; and when in the contriving I thought, or put my designs in
practice, and that the success did not answer mine expectation, presently
without forsaking me, it forged and sought out for another hope that might
sustain me, although it were debile and weak.

With this did I pass away my life, shut up in a Prison or House, which the
Turks call Bathes, wherein they do enclose the Captive Christians, as well
those that belong to the King, as other particular men's, and those which they
call of the Almazen, which is as much to say, as Slaves of the Counsel, who
are deputed to serve the City in the public works and other Affairs thereof;
and these of all other Captives do with most difficulty attain to liberty;
free by reason they belong to the Commonalty, and have no particular Master;
there is none with whom a man may treat of their Redemption, although they
should have the price of their Ransom. To these Bathes, as I have said, some
particular men carry their Captives to be kept, chiefly if they be to be
Ransomed; for there they have them at their ease and secure, until they be
redeemed. The Kings Captives of Ransom also, do not go forth to labor with
the other poor crew, if it be not when the paying of their Ransom is
deferred; for then, to the end they may make them write for money more
earnestly, they make them labor and go to fetch Wood with the rest, which is
no small toil and trouble. I then was one of those of Ransom; for as soon as
it was known how I was a Captain, notwithstanding that I told them of my little
possibility and want of means, all could not prevail to dissuade them from
consorting me with the multitude of Gentlemen, and those of Ransom: they put
on me then a chain, rather to be a token that I was there for my Ransom, then
to keep me the better with it: And so I passed away my time there with many
other Gentlemen, and men of mark, held and kept in there for their Ransom,
And although both hunger and nakedness did vex us now and then, or rather
evermore, yet nothing did afflict us so much, as to hear and see every moment
the cruelties that my Master used toward Christians. Every day he hanged up
one, he set this man on a stake, and would cut off the others ears, and that
for so little occasion or wholly without it, as the very Turks themselves
perceived, that he did it not for any other cause, but because he had a will
to do it, and that it was his natural inclination to be a homicide of all
humane kind. Only one Spanish Soldier called such a one of Saavedra, was in
his good grace, who although he did sundry things that will remain in the
memory of that Nation for many years, and all to the end to get his liberties;
yet he never struck him, nor commanded him to be stricken, nor said as much
as an evil word unto him: and yet we all feared that he should be broched on a
stake for the least of many things which he did, and himself did also dread it
more then once; and if it were not that time denies me leisure to do it, I
would recount unto you things done by this soldier, which might both entertain
and astonish you much more then the relation of my life.

There were over the square court of our prison certain windows that looked
into it, and belonged to a certain rich and principal Moor; the which windows
(as ordinarily are all the Moors windows) rather seemed to be holes then
windows: and even these were also very closely covered and shut fast with
linen coverings. It therefore befell that standing one day upon the
battlements of our prison with other three companions, trying which of us could
leap best in his shackles to pass away the time, and being alone (for all the
other Christians were gone abroad to labor) I lifted up by chance mine eyes,
and I saw thrust out at one of those so close-shut windows a cane, and a linen
tied at the end thereof, and the cane was moved and wagged up and down, as if
it had made signs, that we should come and take it: we looked upon it, and
one of my companions went under the cane, to see whether they would let it
fall, or what they would do else but as soon as he approached it, the cane
was lifted up, and did stir it to either side, as if they had said (with
wagging of the head) No, the Christian returned to us; and the cane being
eftsoons let fall, and beginning to moove as it had done before, another of my
fellows went, and the same succeeded unto him, that did to the first. Finally,
the third approached it, with no better success then the former two, which I
perceiving, would not omit to try my fortitude: and as soon as I came near to
stand under the cane, it was let slip and fell within the Bathes just at my
feet I forthwith went to untie the linen which was knotted, wherein I found
tenn Zianiys, which are certain pieces of base gold, used among the Moors, and
worth, each of them ten Rials of our money. I leave to your discretion to think
if I was not glad of my booty: certes my joy and admiration was much, to think
whence that good might come unto us, but specially to my self, since the
signs of refusal to let it fall to the other, did confirm clearly that the
favor was only addressed to my self. I took my welcome money, broke the cane,
and returned to the Battlements, and viewed the window earnestly, and perceived
a very ^eautifull hand issue out thereat, which did open and shut it again very
speedily. By which imagining and thinking that some woman that dwelled in that
house, had done us the charity and benefit, in token of our thankful minds, we
made our courtesies after the Moorish fashion, by inclining of our heads,
bending of the body, and pressing our hands to our breasts. Within a while
after, there appeared out of the same window a little cross made of canes,
which presently was taken in again: this sign did confirm us in the opinion,
that there was some Christian woman captive in that place, and that it was she
which did to us the courtesy: but the whiteness of her hand, and her rich
bracelets destroyed this presumption: although we did notwithstanding
conjecture that it was some runnagate Christian, whom their Masters there do
very ordinarily take to wives, yea and account very good hap to light on one of
them; for they are much more accounted of, then the women of the Nation it
self.

Yet in all these Discourses we strayed very far from the truth of the
accident; and so from thence-forward, all our passing of the time was employed
in beholding that Window as our North, wherein had appeared the Starr of the
cane: but fifteen days past over, or we could descrie either it, or the hand
again, or any other sign. And although in the mean time we endeavor all that
we might to know who dwelled in that house, or whether there were any Runagate
Christian therein, yet never a one could tell us any other things, but that it
belonged to a very rich and noble Moor, called Aguimorato, who had been
Constable of the Pata, a dignity among them of very great quality.

But when we thought least that it would rain any more Zianiys, by that way
we saw the Cain suddenly to appear, and another linen hanging on it, whose
bulk was much greater: and this befell when the Bath was freed of concourse,
and void, as the other time before. We made the accustomed trial, every one
approaching it before me, but without effect until I came; for presently as I
approached it, it was permited to fall. I untied the knot, and found inwreathed
in it forty Ducats of Spanish gold with a Letter written in the Arabian
tongue, and at the end thereof was drawn a very great cross. I kissed the
cross, took up the money, and returned again to the battlements, and we
altogether made our receivers: The hand also appeared: I made signs that I
would read the paper, and the window was shut incontinently. All of us were
marvellously astonished, yet joyful at that which had befaln us, and by reason
that none of us understood the Arabian tongue, the desire that we had to
understand the contents of the Letter was surpassing great, but greater the
difficulty to find out some trusty person that might read it. In the end I
resolved to trust in this affair a Runnagate of Murcia, who did profess
himself to be my very great friend, and having by my liberality and other
good turns, done secretly, obliged him to be secreet in the affair wherein I
would use him: for some runagates are accustomed when they have an intention to
return into the Christian Countries, to bring with the testimonies of the most
principal Captives, wherein they inform, and in the amplest manner they may,
how the Bearer is an honest man, and that he has ever done many good turns to
the Christians, and that he has himself a desire to escape by the first
commodity. Some Runnagates there are which procure those testimonies
sincerely, and with a good intention: Others take the benefit of them either by
chance or industry; who intending to go and rob into the Countries of
Christians, if by chance they be astray or taken, bring forth their
testimonies, and say, that by those papers may be collected the purpose
wherewithal they came, that is, to remain in Christian Countries; and that
therefore they came abroad a Pyrating with the other Turks: and by this means
they escape that first brunt, and are reconciled again to the Church, without
receiving any harm at all: and when they epsy their time, do return again
into Barbary, to be such as they were before. Others there are which procure
those writings with a pure intention, and do after stay in Christian
Countries. Well, this my friend was a Runnagate of this last kind; who had the
testimonies of all my Companions, wherein we did commend him as amply as we
could devise: And certainly if the Moors had found those Papers about him, they
would have burnt him for it. I understand how he could speak the Arabian
tongue very perfectly, and not only that alone, but also write it withal: yet
before I would wholly break my mind to him, I requested him to read me that
scrowle, which I had found by chance in a hole of my Cabine, he opened it, and
stood a good while beholding and construing thereof, murmuring somewhat
between his Teeth. I demanded therefore of him, whether he understood it? And
he answered that he did very well, and that if I desired to have it translated
verbatim, I should bring unto him Pen and Ink, to the end he might do it
more completely; we presently gave unto him that which he asked, and he did
translate it by little and little, and havi^g finished it, he said; All that
is here in Spanish, is punctually, without omitting a Letter, the contents of
the Moorish paper: And here you must note, that where it says Lela Marien, it
means our Lady the blessed Virgin Mary: We read the Paper whereof the
contents were these which ensue.

WHen I was a Child, my Father had a certain Christian Woman Captive, that
taught me in mine own tongue all the Christian Religion, and told me many
things of Lela Marien. The Christian dyed, and I know she went not to the
fire, but to Ala; for she appeared to me twice after her death, and bade me
go to the Christian Country to see Lela Marien, who loved me much: I know not
how I may go: I have seen many Christians through this Window, and none of them
has seemed to me a Gentleman but thy self: I am very beautiful and young, and
I have a great deal of Riches to carry with me. See thou whether thou can
contrive the way how we may depart, and thou shall there be my Husband, if
thou please; and if thou will not, I do not greatly care, for Lela Marien
will provide me of a Husband. I wrote my self this Billet; be therefore wary
whom thou trustest to read it: Do not trust any Moor; for they are all of them
deceitful Traitors. It is this that grieves me most of all; for I would not
have thee, if it were possible, to disclose the matter to any living body: for
if my Father did know it, he would throw me down into a Well and oppress me
in it with stones. I will hang a thread to the end of the Cane, and therein
thou may tie thine Answer. And if thou can not write the Arabian, tell me
thy mind by signs, for Lela Marien will make me to understand it. Who with
Ala preserve thee, and this Cross which I do many times kiss: for so the
Captive commanded me to do.


See, good Sir, if it was not great reason, that the reasons comprehended in
this Letter should recreate and astonish us. And certainly the one and the
other was so great, as the Runagate perceived well that the Paper was not found
by chance, but was really addressed unto some one of us; and therefore desired
us earnestly, that if that were true which he suspected, that we would trust
and tell it unto him, and he would adventure his life to procure our
Liberties: And saying this, he took out of his bosom a Crucifixe of mettle,
and protested with very many tears by the God which that Image represented, in
whom he, although a sinner and wicked man, did most firmly believe, that he
would be most loyal and secreet to us in all that which we would discover
unto him; for it seemed to him, and he almost divined, that both himself and
we all should recover our liberties by her means that did write the Letter;
and he should then also see himself in the State which he most desired, to
wit, in the bosom of his Mother the holy Catholic Church; from which,
through his ignorance and sin, he was departed and divided as an
unprofitable and corrupt member. The Runnagate said this with so many tears,
and such evident tokens of repentance, as all of us consented to open our
minds unto him, and declare the truth of the matter; and so we recounted unto
him the whole discourse, without concealing any circumstance, and showed unto
him the Window by which the Cane was wont to appear; and he marked the house
from thence, and rested with special charge to inform himself well of those
that dwelled therein. We thought also that it was requisite to answer the
Moorish Ladies Letter: and therefore having him present that could so well
perform that task, we caused the Runnagate to draw out an answer presently as
I did dilate it to him, which was punctually such as I will recount: for of all
the most substantial points that befell me in that Affair, no one is fallen out
of my memory, nor shall ever as long as I have breath. In effect that which I
answered to the Moor was this.

THE true Ala preserve you, deer Lady, and that blessed Marien who is the true
Mother of God, and is she that has put in your mind the desire to go into
the Christian Countries, because she does love you well: Pray unto her that
she will vouchsafe to instruct you how you may bring the matter to pass which
she commands you to do; for she is so good as she will easily condescend
to do it. As for my part I do promise, as well for my self as for these other
Christians that are with me, to do for you all that we are able to do until
death. Do not omit to write unto me, and acquaint me with your purposes, and I
will answer you every time; for great Ala has given us a Captive Christian
that can write and read your Language well, as you may perceive by this Paper;
So that you may securely, and without any dread, advise us of all that you
shall think good. And as concerning that which you say, that you will become my
Wife after we arive to the Christian Countries, I do promise you the same, as
I am a good Christian; and you shall understand that the Christians do
accomplish their words far better then do the Moors. Ala and Marien his Mother
preserve you, my dearest Lady.


The Letter being written and enclosed, I expected two days, that the Bathes
might be free of concourse, as it was wont, which as soon as it befell, I went
up to my accustomed place of the battlements, to see whether the cane appeared;
which was presently after thrust out at the window. And as soon as I perceived
it, although I could not note who it was that set it, I showed my paper, to
give them warning to set on the thread: but it was already hanging thereon. To
the which I tied the Letter, and within a while after began to appear our
Starr, with the white flagg of peace, and the knotted linen; which they let
fall, and I took up, and I found therein in diverse sorts of money and gold
more then fifty Ducats, which redoubled our joys more then fifty times, and
confirmed the hope we conceived of attayning Liberty. The very same night our
Runnagate returned to us, and told, how he had learned that the very same Moor
which we were informed of before called Aguimorata, dwelt there, and was
excessive rich, and had one only daughter, the Heir of all his goods; of whom
the common opinion throughout the City was, that she was the fairest woman of
all Barbary: and that many of the Vice-Royes that came there, had demanded her
to wife, but she would never condescend to any motion of marriage; and that he
likewise had understood that she had sometimes a Christian captive, which now
was deceased: all which agreed with the contents of the Letter. We presently
entered in Council with the Runnagate, about the means we were to use, to
fetch away the Moor, and come all of us to Christian Lands, and in the end we
concluded to attend for that time, the second advice of Zoraida (for so was
she then called, who now means to name her self Maria) for as much as we
clearly perceived that it was she, and none other, that could minister to us
the means to remove all these difficulties. After we had rested on this
resolution, the Runagate bid us be of good courage, for he would engage his
life, or set us at liberty. Four days after the Bathes were troubled with
People; which was an occasion that the Cane appeared not all that while: But
that impediment being removed, and the accustomed solitude returned, the Cane
did again appear with a linen hanging thereat so grossly impregned, as it
promised to be delivered of a most happy burden. Both Cane and Linen bent
themselves to me, and in them I found another Paper and a hundred Ducats in
Gold, besides other small money. The Runnagate was present, and we gave him
the Letter to read, the effect whereof was this:

I Know not good Sir, what order to give for our going into Spain, nor has
Lela Marien told me any thing concerning it, although I have demanded her
counsel. That which at present I conceive may be done is, that I will
through this window give unto you great store of money, wherewith you may
redeem your self and your friends: and let one of you go into the Christians
Country and buy a Bark, and after return for his fellows, and he shall
find me in my fathers Garden, which is at the gate of Babazon, near to the
Seacoast, where I mean to stay all the Summer, with my father and my
servants; from whence you may take me out boldly by night, and carry me to the
Bark. And see well that thou will be my Husband: For if thou will not, I will
demand of Marien to chastise thee; and if thou dare trust no body to go for
the Vessel, Redeem thy self and go, for I know thou will rather return
then another, seeing thou art a Gentleman and a Christian; learn out the
Garden, and when I see thee walk there where thou now art, I will make account
that the Bath is empty, and will give thee great store of money. Ala preserve
thee, my dear friend.


These were the contents of the second Letter, which being heard by us all,
every one offered to be himself the ransomed person, and promised to go and
return with all punctuality, and among the rest I also made a proffer of my
self; to all which resolutions the Runnagate opposed himself saying; That he
would consent in no wise that any one of us should be freed, until we were
all together delivered; for experience had taught him how evil Ransomed men
were wont to keep those promises which they passed in the times of their
thraldom; for many times certain principal captives had made that kind of
trial, redeeming of some one or other that should go to Valentia or Mallorca,
with money to freight a Bark or Friggot, and return for him that had ransomed
them, and did never return again; for the recovered liberty, and the fear of
adventuring to lose it again concurring, did blot out of their memory all the
other obligations of the world. And to confirm the truth which he averred,
he briefly recounted unto us an accident which befell much about the same
time, to certain Christian Gentlemen, the strangest as I suppose that ever
happened in those quarters, wherein do succeed every other day events full of
wonder and admiration; and and therefore concluded, that what ought and might
be done, was, that they would give unto him to buy a Bark, such money as they
meant to employ in the ransom of a Captive, and he would buy it there in
Argiers, under pretext of becoming a Merchant and Sayler in Tetuan and that
coast: and being once owner of a Bark, he would easily devise how to have them
out of the Baths and imbarque them all: how much more if the Moorish Lady did
as she promised, give them money enough to ransom them all was it a most
easy thing, they being free, to imbarque themselves at midday? But the
greatest difficulty in this Affair was, that the Moors use not to permit any
Runnagate to buy any Bark or other small Vessel, but only great Vessels of
War; for they suspect that he that buys a Bark, specially if he be a
Spainiard, does it for no other end but to run away to Christian Countries.
And yet he knew how to facilitate that inconvenience, by inducing a Tangerine
Moor to become his Partner of the Bark and the gains that should he gotten by
the commodities thereof, and with this shadow he would become Lord of it
himself, and therewithal accounted the matter ended. And although that my self
and my Camarada's held it the better course to send unto Mallorca for one, as
the Moorish Lady said, yet durst we not contradict him, fearful that if we
did not what he would have us to do, he would discover us and endanger our
lives, if he did once detect Zoraida's practices, for the safeguard of whose
life we would all of us most willingly adventure our own: and therefore we
determined to put our selves into Gods and the Runnagates hands: And so we
answered at the same instant to Zoraida, telling her that we would accomplish
all that she had admonished us, because she had advertised us as well as if
Lela Marien had told her what she should say, and that the dilating or
shortning of the Affair did consist only in her self. I did offer my self a
new to become her Husband; and with this the day ensuing, wherein the Bath was
also free, she sent me down at diverse times by the Cane two thousand Ducats
and a Letter, wherein she said that she would go to her Fathers Garden the
next Iumia, that is, the Friday following, and that before she: went away she
would give us more money; and that if it were not enough, we should advise
her, and she would give unto us as much as we would demand; for her Father
had so much treasure as he would never perceive it; how much more seeing she
had and kept the keys of all. We gave five hundred Crowns presently to the
Runnagate to buy a Bark, and with eight hundred I redeemed my self, giving the
money to a Valentian Merchant which was at that season in Argiers, who did
ransom me of the King, taking me forth on his word, which he passed to pay my
ransom at the arrival of the first Ship that should come from Valentia: For
if he had delivered the money instantly, it would have given occasion to the
King, to suspect that my ransom was many days before in Argiers, and that the
Merchant had kept it silently to make his benefit thereof. Finally, my Master
was so cavilous, as I durst not in any wise pay him presently.

The Thursday before the Friday of the beautiful Zoraida's departure toward
the garden, she gave unto us other two thousand Ducats, and did likewise advise
us of her going away, entreating me, that as soon as I had ransomed my self, I
should learn the way to the garden, and take occasion howsoever to go to it,
and see her. I answered her briefly, that I would do so, and prayed her that
she would carefully commend our proceedings to Lela Marien, with those prayers
which the captive had taught her. This being done, order was also given for the
ransoming of my three companions, to facilitate our issue out of the Bathes,
and also that they seeing me free, and them selves undelivered, might not be
troubled or persuaded by the Devil, to do any thing in prejudice of Zoraida:
For although that they, being the men of that quality they were, might assure
me from this fear, I would not, for all that, adventure the matter; and
therefore I caused them to be ransomed by the same means that I was redeemed
my self, giving all the money to the Merchant, that he might with the more
security pass his word for us: to whom yet we never did discover our practice
and secret, by reason of the eminent danger of the discovery thereof.

CHAP. XIV.
Wherein the Captive prosecuteth the pleasant narration of his Life.
FIFTEEN days were not fully expired, when the Runnagate had bought him a very
good Bark, able to hold thirty persons or more, and for the better color and
assurance of his business, he made a Voyage to a place called Sargel, which
is thirty leagues distant from Argiers toward the side of Oran, and is a great
place of traffic for dry figs. He made this Voyage twice or thrice in
company with the Tagarine, of whom we made mention; and the name of Tagarino
is in Barbary given to the Moors of Arragon, Granada and Mudesares. And in the
Kingdom of Fez those Mudesares are called Elehes, and are the Nation which
that King does most employ in warlike affairs. You shall therefore understand,
that every time he passed by with his Bark, he did cast Anchor in a little
Creek, twice the shot of a Cros-bow from the Garden wherein Zoraida attended;
and there the Runnagate would in very good earnest exercise himself with the
Moors that rowed, either to fly, or else to assault one another in jest, as
he meant to do after in good earnest, and would now and then go to Zoraidaes
Garden and demand fruits, which her father would bestow upon him, without
knowing what he was; and although he desired to have spoken with Zoraida, as
he told me afterward himself, and have informed her how it was he that was
to carry her away by my direction into the land of Christians, and that she
should therefore live cheerful and secure, yet was it never possible,
forasmuch as the women of that Nation do not suffer themselves to be viewed
by any Moore or Turk, if he be not their Husband, or that their Parents
command them, yet do they haunt and communicate themselves to Christian
captives freely, and that sometimes more then is convenient, and truly it would
have grieved me, that he should have spoken to her, for perhaps it would have
perplexed her extraordinarily, to see her affair committed to the trust of a
Runnagate; but God who did otherwise dispose it, did not concur with this good
desire of our Runagate, who seeing how safely he went and returned from
Sargel, and that he sounded when and where he pleased, and that the Tagarino
his Partner, did only what he liked, and that I was ransomed, and nothing else
wanting but to find out some Christian that would row; he bad me bethink my
self, what men I would bring away with me, beside those that I had ransomed,
and that I should warn them to be ready against the next Friday, wherein he
was resolved that we should depart.

Seeing this, I spoke to twelve Spaniards very lusty rowers, and those that
could with most liberty get out of the City: and it was not a little matter to
find so many there at that time, for there were twenty Galleys abroad a
robbing, which had carried all the other rowers with them, and these were left
behind, because their Master did keep at home that Summer to finish a Galley
that was on the Stocks a making. To these I said nothing else, but only
warned them that the Friday ensuing in the evening, they should closely steal
out by one and one, and go toward Aguimorates Garden, and there expect me
until I came unto them. I gave this advice to every one of them apart, with
order also, that although they saw any other Christians there, they should tell
them nothing else, but that I had commanded them to expect me in that place.

This diligence being used, yet wanted there another, which was the most
expedient of all, to wit, to advise Zoraida of the terms wherein our affairs
did stand, to the end she might be likewise ready and prepared, and not
afrighted, though we did assault her before the time that she could imagine the
Bark of the Christians to be come to fetch her, and therefore I resolved to
go my self into the Garden, and see whether I might speak with her, and
taking the occasion to go and gather some Herbs; I went unto it the day
before our departure, and the first person with whom I encountered, was her
father, who demanded of me in a language which in all Barbary and
Constantinople is usually spoken by the Moors to their Captives, and is
neither Arabian, Spanish, nor of any other Nation, but rather a mixture of all
languages, wherewith all of us understand one another: He, I say, in that
kind of speech demanded of me, what I sought for in that his Garden, and to
whom I did belong? I answered, that I was one Arnaute Mami his slave (and this,
because I was very certainly informed that he was his entire friend) and that
I came thither to gather of all sorts of herbs to make a Sallad: he
consequently asked of me whether I was a man of Ransom or no, and how much my
Master demanded for me? And being in those questions and demands, the
beautiful Zoraida descended from the house into the Garden, who had espied me
a good while before: And as the Moorish women do not greatly estrange
themselves from the sight of Christians, nor are in their behavior or
conversation, with them, any thing squeamish, as we have said already, she
did not greatly fear to approach the place where her Father talked with me,
but rather her Father perceiving that she came on slowly, did call, and
commanded her to draw near.

It were a thing impossible for me to recount the g^^at beauty and gallant
disposition, or the bravery and riches of attire, wherein my beloved Zoraida
then showed her self to mine eyes. I will only say this, that there hanged more
Pearls at her ears, superlative fair neck and hair, then she has hayres
on her head; about the wrests of her legs, which were naked, after the manner
of her Country, she wore two Carcaxes (for so the manicles or bracelets of
the feet are called in the Morisco tongue) of the finest Gold, wherein were
inchaced so many Diamonds, that as she told me after, her father valued them
at twenty thousand Crowns; and those about the wrests of her hands, were of
equal esteem, Her Pearls were many, and those most orient: for all the chief
bravery and ornament of the Moorish Ladies consists in the adorning of
themselves with Pearls and Pearle-seed, by reason whereof there is more
Pearls and Pearle-seed to be found among the Moors, then among all other
Nations of the World: And Zoraidaes father had the fame to have many, and those
the very best that were in Argiers; and also above two hundred thousand Ducats
of Spanish gold: of all which was she the Lady who now is mine. And if with
all this ornament she could then seem fair, by the relics that have
remained unto her among so many labors, may be easily guessed, what she
would have been in the time of prosperity. For all of us do know, that the
beauty of some women has limited days and seasons, and requires certain
accidents either to diminish or increase it, and it is a thing natural to the
passions of the mind, either to raise or abase it; but most commonly they
wholly destroy it. To be brief, I say, that she arived to the place where
we discoursed at that time most richly attyred, and beautiful beyond measure,
or I at least deemed her the fairest that I had ever heheld until then: and
herewithall remembering the Obligation wherein she had tied me, thought that
some Deity had presented it self to my view, being come from Heaven to the
Earth, for my recreation and Relief.

As soon as she was arived, her father told her in her own language, how I
was his friend Arnaute Mami his captive, and that I came there to gather a
Sallad: than she taking the speech, demanded in that medley of tongues of
which I have spoken, whether I was a Gentleman, and what the reason was why I
redeemed not my self? I made answer that I was already ransomed, and by the
Ransom might be conjectured, in how much my Master valued me, seeing he had
for my liberty a thousand and five hundred Coltamis. To this she answered. In
good sooth, if thou were my fathers, I would cause him not to give thee for
twice as much more; for you Christians are great Liars, and do make every one
of your selves poor men, to defraud the Moors of their due Ransom. It may
well be so, Maddam, quoth I: But I have, for my part used all truth in this
affayre with my Master, and do, and will use truth with as many persons as I
shall ever have occasion to treat with in this World.

And when do thou go away, quoth Zoraida? To morrow, as I believe, quoth I.
For there is a French Vessel here which sets forth to morrow, and I mean to
depart in her. Were it not better, replied Zoraida, to expect until Vessels
come out of Spain, and go away with them, then with those of France which are
not your friends? No, quoth I, although if it were true as the news run, that
there comes a Vessel from Spain, I would attend it; but yet it is more certain
that I shall depart to morrow: for the desire I have to see my self at home in
my Country, and with those persons whom I love, is so great, as it will not
permit me to expect any other commodity that fore-slowes it self, be it never
so good. Thou art doubtlesly married in thy Country, said Zoraida; and
therefore desir^st to go see thy Wife. I am not married, quoth I; but I have
passed my word to marry as soon as I am there safely arrived. And is she
beautiful to whom thou have past it, quoth Zoraida? So beautiful, said I, as
to indeer it and tell you the truth, she is very like unto your self. Hereat
her Father laughed very heartily, and said, In good earnest, Christian, she
must be very fair that may compare with my daughter, who is the most
beautiful of all this Kingdom; and if thou will not believe me, look on her
well, and thou shall see that I tell thee but the truth. He himself, as most
perfect in the tongue, did serve for the interpreter of most of our speeches;
for although she could speak that illegitimate language which is there in use,
yet did she manifest her mind more by signs then by words.

Whilst thus we reasoned of many matters, there came running toward us a
certain Moor, and told his Master how four Turks had leaped over the Garden
walls, and were gathering the fruits, although they were not yet ripe. The old
man and his daughter Zoraida started hereat; for it is an universal and
Natural defect in the Moors to fear the Turks, but specially the Soldiers of
that Nation, who are commonly so insolent, and have such command over the Moors
that are their subjects, as they do use them worse then if they were their
slaves. Therefore Zoraida's father said unto her; Daughter, retire thy self
into the house, and keep thy self in whilst I go speak to those Dogs; and
thou, Christian, go and seek out thine Herbs, and depart in a good hour, and
I pray Ala to conduct thee safely to thy Country. I inclined my self to him,
and he departed to search out the Turks, leaving me alone with Zoraida, who
began to make ado as if she went whither her father had commanded her. But
scarce was he covered among the Trees of the Garden, when she returned to me
with her eyes full of tears, said Amexi Christiano, Amexi? that is, Go thou
away Christian, go thou away? I answered, yes Lady, that I do; but I will
never depart without thee: expect me the next Friday, and be not affrighted
when thou shall see us; for we will go to the Christian Country then without
all doubt. This I said to her in such sort, as she understood all my words
very well; and casting her arm over my neck, she began to travel with
languishing steps toward the house; and fortune would (which might have been
very ill, if Heaven had not rectified it) that as we walked together in that
manner and form, her Father (who did by this return, after he had caused the
Turks to depart) espied us; and we saw also very well how he had perceived
us; wherefore Zoraida, who is very discreet would not take away her arm from
my neck, but rather drew nearer unto me, and laid her head on my breast, and
bowed her knees a little, with evident token that she swouned; and I likewise
made as though I did sustain her up by force. Her Father came running over
toward us, and seeing his Daughter in that state, demanded the cause of her;
but seeing she made no answer, he himself said, She doubtlesly is dismayed by
the sudden affright she took at the entrance of those Dogs: And taking her
away from me, he bowed her to his own breast; and she breathing out a sigh,
with her eyes yet full of tears, said again, Amexi Christiano, Amexi: Go away
Christian, go away. To which her Father, replied, There is no cause, Daughter,
why the Christian should go away, for he has done thee no harm, and the
Turks are already departed. Sir, they have affrighted her (quoth I) as you have
said; but yet since she has commanded me to go away, I will not offend her;
therefore rest in peace; for I will return, if it please you to give me leave,
for herbs to this garden when it is needful; for my Master says, none better
are to be found for Sallads in any garden then you have in this. Come as often as
thou will said Aguimorato, for my daughter says not this, in respect that thou
or any other Christian has offended her, but that, meaning to say, that the
Turks should go away, she bad thee to depart, or else she spoke it because it
is time for thee to gather thine Herbs.

With this I took leave of both, and she seemed at the instant of my departure
to have had her heart torn away from her as she departed with her Father; and
I under color of seeking Herbs, went about all the Garden at my leisure, and
viewed all the sallies, and the entrances thereof, the strength of the house,
and the commodities that might be offered to facilitate our enterprise. This
being done, I came home and made a relation to the Runnagate and my other
fellows of all that had passed, and did long infinitely to see the hour
wherein I might, without any af^right or danger, possess that happiness which
fortune in the fair and lovely Zoraida offered unto me. In fine, the time
passed over, and the so much desired day and term arived, and every one of us
following the order, which with mature consideration and long discourse we had
agreed on, we found the good success we desired: For the very Friday
following the day wherein I had spoken with Zoraida in the Garden, Morrenago
(for so was the Runnagate called) near night cast Anchor almost right before
the place wherein the beautiful Zoraida remained. The Christians also that
were to row were ready, and hidden in sundry places thereabouts. All were
suspended, and resolutly expected my coming, desirous to set upon the Bark
that was before their face; for they knew not of the agreement that was
between me and the Runnagate; but rather made full account that they were to
gain their liberty by force of Arms, and killing the Moors that came in that
Vessel.

It therefore befell, that as soon as I and my fellows appeared, all the rest
that were hidden, and espied us, made forthwith over toward us. This was at an
hour when the City Gates were shut, and never a body abroad among all those
Fields: And when we were all together, we were in doubt whether it would be
best first to go and fetch Zoraida, or to imprison and stone the Tagerine
Moors that rowed in the Frigate. And being in this doubt, the Runnagate came to
us, asking upon what we stayed, for it was now high time to be going away,
and all his Moors were wretchlesse and the greater number of them asleep. We
told him then the cause of our stay: And he answered, That it was of most
importance first to subject the Vessel, which might be done with very great
facility, and without any peril; and that we might go after for Zoraida. His
opinion liked us all very well; and therefore without lingering any longer, he
leading the way, we came to the Vessel, and he himself leaping in first of
all, set hand to his Falchion, and said in Morisco, Let none of you that is
here stir himself if he love his life. And saying so, all the rest of the
Christians entered. The Moors which were of little Spirit, hearing their Master
say so, were marvellously amazed, and without daring any one of them to set
hand to their Arms, which were but a few at all, they suffered themselves very
quietly to be taken and bound by the Christians, which did it very
dexteriously, threatening them, that if they did let slip the least outcry,
they should presently be all put to the Sword. This being finished, and the
half of our people remaining in their Guard, we that were left, conducted also
by the Runnagate, went toward Aquimoratus Garden; the door thereof did, by
very good hap, open with as little noise as if it had had no lock at all:
Whereupon we went with great quietness and silence toward the house, unseen
or espied of any.

The beautiful Zoraida was the while expecting us at a window, and as soon as
she saw people approach, demanded with a low voice whether we were Nizarans,
as if she would say or ask whether we were Christians? I answered that we
were, and willed her to come down. As soon as she knew me she stayed not a
Minute, but without answering any word came down in an instant; and opening the
door showed her self to us all, more beautiful and richly attyred then I am
able in any sort to express. As soon as I saw her I took her by the hand and
kissed it: the same did the Runnagate, and my two Camarada's; and all the rest
which knew not the matter, did as they had seen us do before them; for it
seemed that we did no more but give her thanks, and acknowledge her the
auctresse of all our liberties. The Runnagate demanded of her in her own
language, whether her Father were in the Garden, or no? She answered that he
was, and that he slept. Then will it be requisite, quoth the Runnagate, to
rouse him, and bear him and all the other things of worth in this Garden away
with us. That shall not be so (quoth she) for I will have no man to touch my
Father; and in this house there is nothing of value, but that which I mean to
carry away with my self, which is so much as will be sufficient to cheer and
enrich you all; as, if you will stay but a while, you shall perceive.

And saying so, she entered again in into the house, promising to return to us
speedily, and bade us stand still without making any noise. I demanded of the
Runnagate what speech had passed between them? And he told me all she had
said. And I answered him again, that I would not have Zoraida's will transgrest
in any sort. By this time she returned laden with a little Casket full of Gold,
so that she was scarceable to bear it. And her Father in the mean season, by
bad fortune, awaked, and heard the noise that was beneath in his Garden, and
looking out at a Window, he perceived that they were all Christians that were
in it; and therefore cried out in a loud and unmeasurable manner, in the
Arabian tongue, Christians, Christians, Thieves, Thieves; by which cries we
were all of us structen into very great fear and confusion: but the Runnagate
seeing the peril wherein we were, and how nearly it concerned him to come off
from that enterprise, before he were discovered, ran up very speedily to the
place where Aquimorato stood, and some of our fellows accompanied him (for I
durst not abandon Zoraida, who had fallen between mine arms all amazed:) and in
conclusion, those which had mounted behaved themselves so well, as they brought
Aquimorato down in a trice, having tied his hands and set a gagg in his mouth
which hind^ed his speech, threatening him that if he did speak but a word it
should cost him his life.

When his Daughter saw him she covered her eyes, because she would not behold
him: And he marvelled, wholly ignoring with how good a will she came away
with us: but then considering that nothing was so requisite as our legs, we
did with all velocitie and diligence get into the Frigate; for our Companions
did perplexedly expect our return, half afraid that some disgrace had befaln
us. Scarce were two hours of the night overrunne, when we were all embarked:
and then we unmanacled Zoraida's Fathers hands, and took the cloth out of his
mouth: But the Runnagate did again admonish him, that as he tendered his life,
he should not speak one word. He beholding his Daughter likewise there,
began to sigh very feelingly, but chiefly perceiving me to hold her so
straightly embraced, and that she made no resistance, nor did complain or seem
coy, but stood quiet: But yet for all that he kept silence, fearing lest they
should put the Runnagates menaces in execution. Zoraida seeing her self now
safe within the Bark, and that we were ready to row away, looking on her
Father and the other Moors that were tied therein, she entreated the Runagate
to tell me how she desired me to do her the favor to set those Moors and
her Father at liberty; for she would rather cast her self into the Sea then
see a Father who had loved her so dearly carried away captive before her eyes,
and that also by her occasion. The Runnagate told me her mind, and I answered
how I was very well pleased it should be so. But he replied, That it was in
no sort expedient, by reason that if they were landed there, they would
presently raise the Country and put the whole City into a tumult, and cause
certain light Frigots to be maned and sent out in our pursuit; and lay both
Sea and Land for us, in such sort as it would be impossible for us to escape;
but what was at the present possible to be done, was to give them liberty at
the first Christian Country whereat we happened to arive.

All of us agreed to this opinion, and Zeraida also (to whom reason was given
of the motives we had, not to free them forthwith, and accomplish her will
therein) remained satisfied; and therefore presently with joyful silence and
cheerful diligence every one of our lusty Rowers seizing upon his Oar, we
began, after we had commended our selves unto Almighty God, to lanch forth,
and address our course toward the ^sles of Mallorca, which is the nearest
Christian Country, but by reason that the wind blew somewhat from the
Mountains, and that the Sea began to be rough, it was not possible to continue
that course, and so we were forced to approach the shore, and go by little
and little toward Oran, not without great grief and anguish, for fear to be
espied by the town of Sargel, which is on that coast, and falls some seventie
leagues beyond Argiers: and we did likewise fear to meet in that passage
some Galliot, of those which come ordinarily with Merchandise from Tetuan,
although every one of us for himself, and for all together did presume, that
if we incountred a Galliot of Merchandise, so it were not a Pyrate, that not
only we would not be lost, but rather would take the Vessel, that therein
we might with more security finish our Voyage. Zoraida, whilst thus we
sailed, went with her head between my hands, because she would not look on
her Father; and I felt her, how she was still invoking of Lela Marien to
assist us; and having sailed about some thirty leagues the morning overtook us
about some three Musket shot from Land, in a place that seemed to be Desert,
and free from all access of those that might discover us; and yet for all
that, we got by might and maine, somewhat further into the Seas that now was
become a little calmer; and having entered some two leagues into the Maine,
order was given that they should row by turns, whilst they did refresh
themselves and take a little sustenance; for the Bark was very well furnished
with Victuals, although those which did row refused the offer, saying, that
then it was no time to repose, and that they should set those that did not row
to dinner; for they would not yet in any sort let go their Oars. It being
done as they had said, the wind did rise so much as it made us abandoning our
Oars, to set sail, and direct our Boat toward Oran, being unable to take any
other course: All was done with very great speed; and so we made by the sail
more then eight miles an hour, free from all other fear then that of
encountering some Vessel of war. We gave the Moors our Prisoners their
dinner, and the Runnagate comforted them, saying, That they went not as
Prisoners, for they should receive their Liberty upon the first commodity that
were proffered: The same was likewise said of Zoraida's Father, who returned
them this answer: I would easily expect and believe any other thing, O
Christians, of your liberality and honorable manner of proceeding: but do
not think that I am so simple, as once to imagine that you will give me my
Liberty; for you did never expose your self to the danger of despoyling me
thereof with intention to return it me so prodigally again, especially knowing,
as you do, who I am, and the profit you may reap by giving me it again, to
which profit if you will put a name, and tell me how much would you demand, I
do even from hence offer unto you all that which you will seek for me, and for
that unfortunate Daughter of mine: or if you will not deliver me, I will give
you it for her alone, who is the greatest and the best part of my Soul. And
saying so, he began to weep so bitterly, as he moved us all to compassion and
forced Zoraida to look upon him, who seeing him weep was so strangely moved, as
arising from my feet, she went and embraced her Father, and laying her face
upon his they began together so tender a lamentation as many of us that were in
the Bark were forced to keep them company; but when her Father noted her to
be so richly adorned, and with so many Jewels on he asked her in his own
language, How haps this, Daughter, that yesternight late, before this terrible
disaster befell us wherein we are plunged, I saw thee attyred in thine
ordinary household array, and that now, without having had any leisure to
apparel thy self, or having given thee any glad tidings, for whose solemnizing
thou ought to adorn and publish thy self, I do view thee thus clad in the
richest attire which I could bestow upon thee when our fortune was most
favorable? Answer me to this, for thou have suspended and astonished me more
then the very disgrace it self wherein I am.

All that the Moor said to his Daughter, the Runnagate declared unto us; and
she did not answer a word to him: But when he saw the little Coffers lie at
one side of the Bark wherein she was wont to keep her Jewels, and that he
knew very well she had left at Argiers, and not brought to the Garden, he was
much more amazed, and demanded of her how that Coffer was come into our
possession, and what things she had there within it? To which the Runnagate,
without attending that Zoraida should answer him, said, Sir, do not trouble
your self by demanding so many things of your Daughter Zoraida; for with one
that I will say, I shall satisfy them all: and therefore you shall understand
that she is a Christian, and has been the file that cut off our chains, and
is the Liberty it self of our Captivity; and she goes along with us of her
own free will, as content (if mine imagination do not wrong me) to see her
self in this State, as he is that comes out of darkness to the light, from
death unto life, and out of pain into glory. Is it true, Daughter, which this
man says, quoth the Moor? (It is, answered Zoraida:) That thou in effect art a
Christian, replied the old man, and she that has put her Father into his
enemies hands? To which Zoraida answered, I am she that is a Christian, but
not she that has brought thee to this pass: for my desire did never so
estrange it self from thee, as to abandon or harm thee, but only endeavored
to do my self good. And what good have thou done thy self, Daughter? Demand
that, said she, of Lela Marien, for she can therein inform thee better then I
can.

Scarce had the Moor heard her say so, when with incredible haste he threw
himself headlong into the Sea, wherein he had been questionlesly drowned, if
the long apparel he wore on had not kept him up a while above the water.
Zoraida cried out to us to save him: and so we all presently ran, and laying
hold on a part of his Turkish Robe, drew him up half drowned, and wholly devoid
of feeling: Whereat Zoraida was so grieved, that she lamented him as dolefully
as if he had been dead. There we laid him with his mouth downward, and he
avoided a great quantity of water, and after the space of two hours returned to
himself again: and in the mean time the wind also turning; it did drive us
toward the Coast; so that we were constrained to keep our selves by very
force of Arms from striking upon it; and our good fortune directing us, we
arrived to a little Creek at the side of a certain Cape or Promontorie, called
by the Moors, The Cape of the Cava Rumia, which in our Language signifies The
ill Christian Woman: and the Moors hold it for a tradition, that in the very
same place was the Cava buried, for whom Spain was lost, and conquered by the
Moors: For Cava in their language signifies an ill Woman, and Rumia a
Christian: yea, and they hold it for a sign of misfortune to arrive or cast
Anchor there, when mere necessity drives them thither; without which they never
approach it: yet did it not prove to us the shelter of an ill woman, but the
secure Heaven of our safety. We sent our Sentinels a shore, and never let the
Oars slip out of our hands: We did likewise eat of the Runnagates Provision,
and heartily besought Almighty God and our Lady to assist and favor us with a
happy end to so luckie a beginning: And we agreed upon Zoraida's entreaty, to
set her Father and the other Moors that we had tied a land in that place; for
she was of so tender and compassionate a mind as she could in no wise brook
to see her Father tied in her presence, or her contrymen borne away
Captives: wherefore we made her a promise, that we would at our departure let
them all go away, seeing we incurred no danger by leaving them in that
inhabitable Desert: Our Prayers were not so vain but that they found gentle
acceptance in Heaven which presently changed the Wind and appeased the Sea,
inviting us cheerfully to return to it again, and prosecute our commenced
Voyage.

Seeing that the weather was favorable we loosed the Moors and set them all a
land one by one; and coming to dis-imbarque Zoraida's Father, who was by that
time wholly come to himself, he said, For what do you conjecture, Christians,
that this bad woman is glad that you give me liberty? Do you think that she
does it for pity that she takes of me? No truly; but she does it only to
remove the hinderance my presence gave her when she would execute her
unlawful desires: Nor ought you to believe that she is moved to change
Religion, by reason that she understands yours to be better then her own; but
only because she knows licentiousness to be more publicly and freely
practiced in your Country then among us: And then turning to Zoraida, whom I
and another Christian held fast by both the arms lest she should do some
desperate act, he said, O infamous Gyrle, and ill-advised Maiden! where do
thou run thus blinded and distracted, in the power of those Dogs our
natural enemies? Cursed be the hour wherein I engendered thee, and cursed the
delights and pleasures wherein thou wast nousled. I perceiving that he was not
like to make an end of his execrations so soon as I could wish, had him set on
shore, and thence he prosecuted his Maledictions and Plaints, praying unto
Makomet that he would intercede with Ala, that we might be all destroyed,
confounded and cast away. And when we could hear his words no longer, by
reason that we set sail, we perceived his works, that were, to pluck his
Beard, tear his Hair, and cast himself on the ground; but once he did lift
up his voice so high, as that we heard him say, Return beloved Daughter,
return to the land, for I do pardon thee all that thou have done; and deliver
that money to those men, for it is now their own; and return thou to comfort
thy sad and desolate Father, who will forsake his life on these desolate sands,
if thou do abandon him.

Zoraida heard him say all this, and lamented thereat, but knew not how to
speak, or answer him any other thing but this: Father mine, I pray Ala, that
Lela Marien, who has been the cause of my becoming a Christian, may likewise
comfort thee in thy sorrow. Ala knows well, that I could do none other then I
did, and that these Christians do owe me nothing for my good will, seeing that
though I had not come away with them, but remained at my house, yet had it been
impossible (such was the haste wherewithal my soul pres^ed me) not to have
executed this my purpose; which seems to me to be as good, as thou, O
beloved Father, do account it wicked. She said this in a time that neither
her Father could hear her, nor we behold him: and therefore, after I had
comforted Zoraida, we did thenceforth only attend our Voyage, which was so
much helped by the favorable wind, as we made full account to be the next
day on the Coast of Spain: but, as good very seldom, or rather never betides
a man thoroughly and wholly, without being accompanied or followed by some evil
which troubles and assaults it, our fortune would, or rather the maledictions
of the Moore, powered on his Daughter: (for the Curses of any Father whatsoever
are to be feared) that being ingulfed three hours within night, and going
before the wind with a full Sail, and our Oars set up, because the
prosperous wind had rid us of the labor of rowing, we saw near unto us by
the light of the Moon that shined very clearly, a round vessel which with
all her Sails spread, did cross before us into the Sea, and that so nearly,
as we were feign to strike down her Sail, that we might avoid the shog
she was like to give us; and those that were in her, had on the other side
labored also what they might, to turn her out of our way, standing all of
them on the hatches to demand of us what we were, from whence we came, and
whether we did Sail? But by reason that they spoke French, the Runnagate bade
us not to speak a word, saying, Let none answer, for these are French Pirates
which make their booty of every body. For this cause none of us answered: and
being passed a little forward, and that the Ship remained in the Lee of us,
they suddenly shot off two Pieces of Artillery, and as I think, both of them
had chain Bullets, for with the one they cut our Mast asunder, and overthrew
it and the Sail into the sea, and instantly after they discharged another, the
Bullet alighting in our Bark, did pierce it through and through, without doing
any other hurt: but we, seeing that our vessel began to sink, began all to
cry out, and request them to succor us, and prayed them that they would take
us into their vessel, for we were a drowning. Then they came amain, and
casting out their Cock-boate, there entered into it as good as a doozen
Frenchmen, well appointed with their Harcabuzes and Matches lighted, and so
approached unto us; and perceiving how few we were, and that the Bark did
sink, they received us into their boat, saying, that because we had used the
discourtesie of not making them answer, that misfortune had befalne us. Our
Runnagate about this time took the coffer wherein Zoraida's treasures were
kept, and threw it into the Sea unperceived of any.

In conclusion, we went all of us into the great vessel with the Frenchmen
who after they had informed themselves of all that which they desired to know,
as if they were our Capital Enemies; they afterward dispoy^ed us of all that
ever we had about us, and of Zoraida they took all, even unto her very
bracelets, that she wore on the wrests of her feet. But the wrong they did to
Zoraida did not afflict me so much as the fear I conceived, that after they
had taken away from her, her most rich and precious Jewels, they would also
deprive her of the Jewel of most prize, and which she valued most. But the
desires of that nation extend themselves no farther, then to the gain of
money: and their avarice in this is never thoroughly satisfied; and at that time
was so great, as they would have taken from us the very habits of slaves, that
we brough from Barbary, if they had found them to have been worth any thing:
and some there were of opinion among them, that we should be all inwreathed in
a Sail, and thrown into the Sea, because they had intention to traffic into
some havens of Spain, under the name of Britains, and that if they carried us
alive, they should be punished, their robbery being detected: but the
Captain, who was he that had pilled my beloved Zoraida, said, that he was so
contented with his booty, as he meaned not to touch any part of Spain, but
would pas^e the streights of Gibraltar by night, or as he might, and so
return again to Rochel, from whence he was come: and thereupon they all
agreed to give us their Cock-boate, and all that was neces^ary for our short
voyage, as indeed they performed the day ensuing when we were in the view of
Spain, with the sight whereof all our griefs and poverties were as quite
forgotten, as if we never had felt any; so great is the delight a man takes to
recover his Liberty. It was about midday when they put us into the Cock,
giving unto us two Barrells of water and some Biscuit; and the Captain moved
with some compassion, as the beautiful Zoraida embarked her self, bestowed on
her about forty Crowns in gold; nor would he permit his Soldiers to dispoyle
her of these very Garments, which then and now she does wear.

We entered into the Cock-boate, and giving them thanks for the good they did,
and showing at our departure more tokens of thankfulness then of discontent,
they sailed presently away from us toward the Straights, and we without
looking on any other North or Star, then the land it self which appeared
before us, did row toward it so lustily, that at Sunset we were so near, as
we made full account to arive before the night were far spent. But by reason
that the Moon did not shine, and the night was very dark, and that we knew
not where we were, we did not hold it the best course to approach the shore
too near; yet others there were that thought it convenient and good, desiring
that we should make to it, although we ran the boat on the Rocks, and far
from any dwelling; for by doing so, we should free our selves from the fear
which we ought of reason to have, lest there should be up and down on that
coast any Friggots of the Pirates of Tituan, which are wont to leave Barbary
overnight, and be on the coast of Spain ere morning, and ordinarily make
their booty, and turn to their supper again to Barbary the night following;
but of the contrary opinions, that which was followed was, that we should draw
near the land by little and little, and that if the quietness of the Sea would
permit it we should take land where we might best and most commodiously do it.
This was done, and a little before midnight we arived to the foot of a high
and monstrous Mountain, which was not altogether so near to the Sea, but that
it did grant a little patch of ground, whereon we might commodiously
disimbarke. Wherefore we ran our selves on the Sands, and came all a-Land
and kissed the Earth, and with teeres of most joyful content and delight, gave
thanks unto our Lord God, for the incomparable favors which he had done us in
our Voyage: Then took we out our Victuals from the Boat, and drew it self
up on the Shore, and ascended a great part of the Mountain: for although we
were in that place, yet durst we not assure our selves, nor did thoroughly
believe that it was a Christian Country whereon we did tread.

The day breaking some what slower then I could have wished it; we ascended
the mountain wholly, to see whether we might discover any dwelling, or
sheepfolds from thence; but although we extended our sight unto every quarter,
yet could we neither descry dwelling, person, path, nor highway: yet did we
resolve notwithstanding to enter into the land, seeing that we could not
choose but discover ere long some body who might give us notice of the place
where we were: and that which afflicted me most of all, was, to see Zoraida
go afoot through those rugged places; for although I did sometimes carry her on
my shoulders, yet did the toil I took more weary her, then the repose she
got could ease her; and therefore would never after the first time suffer me
to take that pains again, and so she went ever after a foot with great
patience and tokens of joy, I holding her still by the hand, and having
traveled little less then a quarter of a league, we heard the noise of a
little bell, an infallible argument that near at hand there was some cattle;
whereupon all of us looking very wistly, to see whether any body appeared, we
might perceive under a Corke-tree a young Shepherd, who very quietly and
carelessly was carving of a stick with a knife: We called to him, and he
leaped up lightly on foot, and (as we afterward learned) the first that he
got sight of, were the Runnagate and Zoraida; whom he seeing apparelled in the
Morisco habit, thought that all the people of Barbary had been at his heels;
and therefore running very swiftly into the Wood, he cried all along with
marvelous lowdnesse, Moors, Moors are in the Land! Moors, Moors, arm,
arm! These outcries struck us anew into a great perplexity, and scarce did
we know what we should do: but considering how the Sheepheards alarm would
cause all the Country to rise up, and that the horsemen that kept the coast
would presently come to see what it was; we all agreed that the Runnagate
should put off his Turkish attire, and put on a captives cassocke, which one of
the company gave unto him forthwith, although the giver remained after in his
shirt: and thus committing the affair unto almighty God, we followed on by
the same way, which we saw the shepherd had taken, always expecting when
the horsemen of the coast would fall upon us: and we were not deceived in our
expectation, for within two hours after, having issued out of those woods into
a plane, we discovered about some fifty horsemen which came running toward us
as swiftly as their horses could drive, and having perceived them, we stood
still, and stayed until they came to us, and saw in stead of the Moors they
sought for, so many poor Christians, and remained somewhat ashamed thereat: and
one of them demanded whether we were the occasion that a Sheapheard had given
the alarm? Yes, quoth I, and as I was about to inform what I was, and of all
our Adventure, and from whence we came, one of the Christians that came with
us, did take notice of the horseman who had spoken unto us, and so interrupting
my speech he said, Sirs, let God be praised which has brought us to so good
a place as this is; for if I be not deceived, the earth which we tread, is of
Veley Malaga; and if the years of my captivity have not confounded my memory,
you likewise Sir, that demand what we be, are Peter of Bustamonte, mine
Uncle. As soon as ever the Christian captive had spoken those words, the
horseman leaping off his horse, ran and embraced him saying, O Nephew! as dear
to me as my soul and life now I do know thee very well, and many a day since
have I wept for thee, thinking thou wast dead, and so has my sister thy
Mother, and all the rest of thy friends which do live yet, and God has been
pleased to preserve their Lives, that they may enjoy the pleasure to behold
thee once again. We knew very well that thou were in Argieres, and by the
signs and tokens of thy clothes, and that of all the rest here of thy
Companions; I surmise that your escape has been miraculous. Indeed it was so
replied the Captive, and we shall have time I hope to recount unto you the
manner.

As soon as the horsemen had understood that we were Christian Captives, they
alighted off their horses, and every one of them invited us to mount upon his
own, to carry us to the City of Veley Malaga, which was yet a league and a
half from that place and some of them went to the place where we had left the
Boat, to bring it to the City; whom we informed first of the place where it
lay; others did mount us up on horseback behind themselves, and Zoraida rode
behind the captives uncle: all the people issued to receive us, being
premonished of our arivall by some one that had ridden before. They did not
wonder to see captives freed, nor Moors captived there, being an ordinary thing
in those parts, but that whereat they wondered was the surpassing beauty of
Zoraida, which at that season and instant was in her prime, as well through the
warmth she had gotten by her travel, as also through the joy she conceived to
see her self in Christian lands, secure from all fear of being surprised or
lost, and these things called out to her face such colors, as if it be not
that affection might then have deceived me, I durst aver, that a more
beautiful then she was, the world could not afford, at least among those which
I had ever beheld.

We went directly to the Church to give thanks unto Almighty God for the
benefit received: And as soon as Zoraida entered into it, she said there were
faces in it that resembled very much that of Lela Marien. We told her that
they were her images: And the Runnagate as well as the brevitie of the time
permitted, instructed her what they signified, to the end she should do them
reverence, as if every one of them were truly that same Lela Marien which had
spoken unto her. She who had a very good understanding, and an easy and clear
conceit, comprehended presently all that was told unto her concerning Images.
From thence they carried us and divided us among different houses of the City:
But the Christian that came with us carried the Runnagate, Zoraida, and me to
the house of his Parents, which were indifferently accommodated and stored with
the goods of Fortune, and did entertain me with as great love and kindness as
if I were their own son. We remained six days in Veley, in which time the
Runnagate having made an information of all that which might concern him, he
went to the City of Granado to be reconciled by the holy Inquisitions means,
to the bosom of our holy Mother the Church: The rest of the freed Captives
took every one the way that he pleased; and Zoraida and I remained behind
with those Ducats only which the Frenchmans courtesy was pleased to bestow on
Zoraida: and with part of that sum I bought her this beast whereon she
rides; I my self serving her hitherto as her Father and her Squire, and not as
her Spouse, we travail with intention to see if my Father be yet living, or
any of my Brothers have had more prosperous hap then my self, although seeing
Heaven has made me Zoraida's Consort, me thinks no other good Fortune could
arrive, were it never so great, that I would hold in so high estimation. The
patience wherewithal she bears the incommodities usually annexed unto
Poverty, and the desires she shows to become a Christian, is such and so
great, as it strikes me into an admiration, and does move me to serve her all
the days of my life; although that the delight which I take to see my self
hers, and she mine, is often times interrupted, and almost dissolved by the fear
which I have, that I shall not find in mine own Country some little Corner
wherein I may entertain her; and that Time and Death have wrought such
alteration in the Goods and Lives of my Father and Brothers, as I shall scarce
find any one at home that knows me. I have no more, good Sirs, to tell you of
my lives History, then which, whether it be pleasing and rare, or no, your
clear conceits are to judge: As for my self I dare say, that if it had been
possible, I would have told it with more brevity; fearing it might be tedious
unto you, I purposely omitted many delightful circumstances thereof.

CHAP. XV.
Which speaks of that which after befell in the Inn; and of sundry other
things worthy to be known.
THe Captive having said this, held his peace; and Don Fernando replied to him
thus; Truly Captain, the manner wherewithal you have recounted this
mavelous success, has been such, as it may be parragon'd to the noveltie
and strangeness of the event it self: And so great is the delight we have
taken in the hearing thereof, as I do believe, that although we had spent the
time from hence till to morrow, in listening to it, yet should we be glad to
hear it told over once again. And saying so, Cardenio and all the rest did
offer themselves and their means to his service, as much as lay in them with so
cordial and friendly words as the Captive remained thoroughly satisfied with
their good wits: but specially Don Fernando offered, that if he would return
with him, he would cause the Marquess his Brother to be Zoraida her
Godfather in Baptism; and that he for his part, would so accommodate him with
all things necessary, as he might enter into the Town with the decency and
authority due to his person. The Captive did gatifie his large offers very
courteously, but would not accept any of them at that time. By this the night
drew on, and about the fall thereof there arived at the Inn a Coach with some
men a Horseback and asked for lodging; to whom the Hostess answered, that in
all the Inn there was not a span free; the number of her Guests was already so
many. Well, although that be so, quoth one of the Horsemen that had entered,
yet must there be a place found for Master Justice who comes in this Coach. At
this name the Hostess was afraid, and said, Sir, the misfortune, is, that I
have no beds: but if Master Justice brings one with him, as it is probable he
does, let him enter in boldly, and I and my Husband will leave our own Chamber
to accommodate his Worship. So be it, quoth the Squire; and by this time
alighted out of the Coach a man whose attire did presently denote his Dignity
and Office; for his long Gown and his great and large Sleeves did show that he
was a Judge, as the Servingmen affirmed. He led a young Maiden by the hand of
about some sixteen years old, apparelled in riding attire; but she was
therewithal of so disposed, beautiful, and cheerful a countenance, as her
presence did strike them all into admiration; so as if they had not seen
Dorotea, Lusci^da and Zoraida which were then in the Inn, they would hardly
have believed that this Damzels beauty might any where have been matched.

Don-Quixote was present at the Judges and the Gentlewomans entry: and so, as
soon as he had seen him, he said, Sir, you may boldly enter and take your
ease in this Castle, which although it be but little and ill accommodated, yet
there is no narrowness nor discommodity in the world but makes place for Arms
and Learning, and specially if the Arms and Letters bring Beauty for their
guide and leader as your Learning does, conducted by this lovely Damzell, to
whom ought not only Castles to open and manifest themselves, but also Rocks to
part and divide their Cliffs and Mountains to bow their ambitious crests to
give and make her a lodging: Enter therefore, I say, Worshipful Sir, into this
Paradise, wherein you shall find Stars and Sunns to accompany this Sky
which you bring along with you: Here shall you find Arms in their height, and
beauty in her prime. The Judge marvailed greatly at Don Quixotes speech, whom
he began to behold very earnestly, and wondered no less at his shape then at
his words, and knowing not what answer he might return him, he was diverted
on the other side, by the sudden approach of the three Ladies Luscinda,
Dorotea and Zoraida which stood before him: for having heard of the arrival of
new Ghests, and also being informed, by the Oastesse, of the young Ladies
beauty, they were come forth to see and entertain her. But Don Fernando,
Cardenio and the Curate, did give him more complete and courtly Entertainment
then the rustie Knight. In effect, the Judge was marveilously amazed at that
which he saw and heard in that Inn: And the fair Guests thereof bade the
beautiful Maiden welcome. The Judge perceived very well, that the Guests of
the Inn were all men of account: but Don Quixotes feature, visage and
behavior, did set him out of all byas, being not able to conjecture what he
might be; and after some courtlike intercourses pas^ed, and the commodities of
the Inn examined, they all agreed again, as they had done before, that all
the women should enter into Don-Quixotes Room, and the men remain without in
their Guard. And so the Judge was content that the Damzell, who was his
Daughter, should also go with those Ladies, which she did with a very good
will: and with a part of the In-keepers narrow bed, and half of that which the
Judge had brought with him, they made shift to pass over that night the best
they could.

The Captive, who from the instant that he had first seen the Judge, did
greatly suspect that he was his Brother, and demanded of one of his servants
how he was called, and where he was borne? The other answered how he was
called the Licentia^ John Perez of Viedma, and as he had heard, he was borne
in a Village of the Mountains of Leon. With this relation and the rest that
he had noted, he finally confirmed his opinion that it was the brother, who
following his Father advice, had dedicated himself to his Studies; and full of
joy and contentment, calling aside Don Fernando, Cardenio and the Curate, he
certified them of all that passed, and that the Judge was his Brother. The
Servingman told him likewise how he went toward the Indies, where he had his
place and office in the Courts of Mexico; and also that the young Gentlewoman
was his Daughter, of whose birth her Mother had died, and he ever after
remained a widower, and very rich, by her Dowry and Portion that she had left
to her Daughter: He demanded of them advice how he might discover himself to
his Brother, or first know, whether after he had detected himself, he would
receive him with a good countenance and affection, and not be ashamed to
acknowledge him for his Brother, seeing him in so poor an estate. Leave the
trial of that experience to me, quoth the Curate, and the rather, because
there is no occasion why you, Sir Captain, should not be kindly entertained
by him: for the Prudence, Worths and good countenance of your Brother, give
manifest tokens that he is nothing arrogant. For all that, said the Captain,
I would not make my self known on the sudden, but would use some pretty
ambages to bring him acquainted with me. I say unto you, quoth the Curate,
that I will trace the matter in such sort, as we all will rest satisfied.

Supper was by this made ready, and all of them sat down to the table, the
captive excepted and Ladies, which supped together within the room; and about
the midst of supper the Curate said, Master Justice, I have had in times past a
comrade of your very surname in Constantinople, where I was sometime captive,
who was one of the most valiant Soldiers and Captains that might be found
among all the Spanish foot; but he was as unfortunate as he was valorous and
resolute. And how was that Captain called, good Sir quoth the Judge? His name
was replied Master Curate, Ruy Perez Viedma, and he was borne in a Village of
the Mountains of Leon; and he recounted unto me an occurrence happened
between his Father, him, and his other Brethren; which if I had not been told
by a man of such credit and reputation as he was, I would have esteemed for
one of these fables which old Wives are wont to rehearse by the fire side in
Winter; for he said to me, that his Father had divided his goods among his
three sons, and gave them withal certain Precepts, better then those of
Cato; and I know well, that the choice which he made to follow the War had
such happy success, as within a few years, through his forwardness and
valor, without the help of any other arm, he was advanced to a company of
Foot, and made a Captain, and was in the way and course of becoming one day
a Colonel; but Fortune was contrary to him, for even there where he was most
to expect her favor, he lost it, with the loss of his Liberty in that most
happy journey wherein so many recovered it, to wit, in the Battle of Lepanto.
I lost mine in Goleta, and after by different success we became companions in
Constantinople; from whence we went to Argiers, where did befall him one of
the most notable Adventures that ever happened in the World; and there the Curate
with succinct brevitie recounted all that had happened between the Captain and
Zoraida: to all which the Judge was so attentive, as in all his life he never
listened to any cause so attentively as then: And the Curate only arived to the
point wherein the Frenchmen spoiled the Christians that came in the Bark, and
the necessity wherein his Companion and the beautiful Zoraida remained; of
whom he had not learned any thing after, nor knew not what became of them, or
whether they came into Spain, or were carried away by the Frenchmen into
France.

The Captain stood listening somewhat aloof off to all the Curates words, and
noted the while the motions and gestures of his brother; who seeing that the
Curate had now made an end of his Speech, breathing forth a great sigh, and his
eyes being filled with tears, he said, O Sir, if you had known the news which
you have told me, and how nearly they touch me in some points, whereby I am
constrained to manifest these tears, which violently break forth in despite
of my discretion and calling, you would hold me excused for this excess. That
Captain of whom you spoke is my eldest Brother, who, as one stronger and of
more noble thoughts then I or my younger Brother, made election of the
honorable military calling, one of the three estates which our Father proposed
to us, even as your Comrade informed, when as you thought he related a Fable:
I followed my Book, by which God and my diligence raised me to the State you
see: My younger Brother is in Peru, and with that which he has sent to my
Father and my self, has bountifully recompensed the portion he carried, and
given to him sufficient to satisfy his liberal disposition, and to me
wherewithal to continue my Studies with the decency and authority needful to
advance me to the rank which now I possess. My Father lives yet, but dying
through desire to learn somewhat of his eldest Son, and does daily importune
God with inces^ant prayers, that death may not shut his eyes until he may
once again see him alive. I only marvel not a little, considering his
discreetion, that among all his labors, afflictions or prosperous successes
he has been so careless in giving his Father notice of his Proceedings: for
if either he, or any one of us had known of his Captivity, he should not have
needed to expect the miracle of the Cane for his Ransom. But that which
troubles me most of all, is, to think whether these Frenchmen have restored
him again to liberty or else slain him, that they might conceal their
robbery the better; all which will be an occasion to me to prosecute my
Voyage, not with the joy wherewithal I began it, but rather with Melancholy
and Sorrow. O dear Brother, I would I might know now where thou art, that I my
self might go and search thee out, and free thee from thy pains, although it
were with the hazard of mine own. O who is he that could carry news to our
old Father, that thou were but alive, although thou were hidden in the most
abstruse Dungeons of Barbary? for his Riches, my Brothers, and mine would
fetch thee from thence. O beautiful and bountiful Zoraida, who might be able
to recompense thee for the good thou have done to my Brother? How happy were
he that might be present at thy Spiritual Birth and Baptism, and at thy
nuptials which would be so grateful to us all? These and many other such
words did the Judge deliver, so full of compassion for the news that he had
received of his Brother, as all that heard him kept him company in showing
signs of compassion for his sorrow.

The Curate therefore perceiving the happy success whereto his design and
the Captains desire had sorted, would hold the company sad no longer; and
therefore arising from the Table, and entering into the Room wherein Zoraida
was, he took her by the hand, and after her followed Luscinda, Dorotea, and
the Judge his Daughter: the Captain stood still to see what the Curate would
do, who taking him fast by the other hand, martched over with them both
toward the Judge and the other Gentlemen and said, Suppress your tears,
Master Justice, and glut your desire with all that good which it may desire,
seeing you have here before you your good brother, and your loving sister in
law: this man whom you view here, is the Captain Viedma, and this the
beautiful Moore, which has done so much for him.

The Frenchmen which I told you of, have reduced them to the poverty you see,
to the end that you may show the liberality of your noble breast. Then did the
Captain draw near, to embrace his brother: but he held him off a while with
his arms to note whether it was he or no; but when he once knew him, he
embraced him so lovingly, and with such abundance of tears, as did attract the
like from all the beholders. The words that the brothers spoke one to another,
or the feeling affection which they showed, can hardly be conceived, and
therefore much less written by any one whatsoever. There they did briefly
recount the one to the other their successes: there did they show the true love
and affection of brothers in his prime: there did the Judge embrace Zoraida:
there he made her an of^er of all that was his: there did he also cause his
Daughter to embrace her: there the beautiful Christian, and the most
beautiful Moore renewed the tears of them all: There Don-Quixote was
attentive, without speaking a word, pondering of these rare occurrences, and
attributing them to the Chimeraes which he imagined to be incident to
Chivalrie: and there they agreed that the Captain and Zoraida should return
with their brother to Sivill, and thence advise their Father of his finding and
liberty, that he, as well as he might, should come to Sivill to the Baptism
and Marriage of Zoraida, because the Judge could not possibly return, or
discontinue his journey, in respect that the Indian Fleet was to depart within
a Month from Sivill toward new Spain.

Every one in conclusion was joyful and glad at the captives good success:
and two parts of the night being well nigh spent, they all agreed to repose
themselves a while. Don-Quixote offered himself to watch and gaurd the Castle
whilst they slept, lest they should be assaulted by some Giant or other
miscreant, desirous to rob the great Treasure of beauty that was therein
immured and kep^. Those that knew him rendered unto him infinite thanks: and
withal informed the Judge of his extravagant humor, whereat he was not a
little recreated: only Sancho Panca did fret, because they went so slowly to
sleep, and he alone was best accommodated of them all, by lying down on his
beasts furniture which cost him dearly, as shall be after recounted. The
Ladies being withdrawn into their Chamber, and every one laying himself down
where best he might, Don-Quixote sallied out of the Inn, to be Centinell of
the Castle as he had promised. And a little before day it happened, that so
sweet and tuneable a voice touched the Ladies ears, as it obliged them all to
listen unto it very attentively, but chiefly Dorotea, who first awaked, and by
whose side the young Gentlewoman Donna Clara of Viedma (for so the Judges
Daughter was called) slept. None of them could imagine who it was that sung so
well without the help of any instrument: sometimes it seemed that he sung in
the yard, others that it was in the Stable: and being thus in suspense,
Cardenio came to the Chamber-dore, and said, Whosoever is not asleep, let them
give ear, and they shall hear the voice of a Lackey that so chants, as it
likewise inchants. Sir, quoth Dorotea, we hear him very well. With this
Cardenio departed, and Dorotea using all the attention possible, heard that his
song was this following.

CHAP. XVI.
Wherein is recounted the History of the Lackie, with other strange Adventures
befaln in the Inn.
I Am a Mariner to love,
Which in his depths profound
Still sails, and yet no hope can prove
Of coming aye to the ground,
I following go a glistring Star,
Which I aloof descrie,
Much more resplendent then those are
That Palinure did spy.
I know not where my course to ^end,
And so confusedly,
To see it only I pretend
Careful and carelessly.
Her too impertinent regard,
And too much Modesty,
The Clouds are which mine eyes have ^ard
From their deserved fee.
O clear and soul-reviving Star,
Whose sight does try my trust,
If thou thy light from me debar,
Instantly dye I must.
The Singer arriving to this point of his song, Dorotea imagined that it would
not be amiss to let Donna Clara hear so excellent a voice, and therefore
she jogged her a little on the one and other side, until she had awaked her,
and then said, Pardon me, child, for thus interrupting your sweet repose,
seeing I do it to the end you may joy, by hearing one of the best voices that
perhaps you ever heard in your life. Clara awaked at the first drowsily, and
did not well understand what Dorotea said, and therefore demanding of her what
she said, she told it her again; whereupon Donna Clara was also attentive:
but scarce had she heard two verses repeated by the early Musician when a
mavelous trembling invaded her, even as if she had then suffered the
grievous fit of a Quartane Ague: Wherefore embracing Dorotea very straightly,
she said, Alas, deer Lady, why did you awake me, seeing the greatest happ that
Fortune could in this instant have given me, was, to have mine eyes and ears
so shut, as I might neither see nor hear that unfortunate Musician? What is
that you say child, quoth Dorotea? did you not hear one say that the Musician
is but a Horse-Boy? He is no Horse-Boy, quoth Clara, but a Lord of many Towns,
and he that has such firm possession of my Soul, as if he himself will not
reject it, he shall never be deprived of the dominion thereof. Dorotea
greatly wondered at the passionate words of the young Gyrle, whereby it seemed
to her that she far surpassed the discretion which so tender years did
promise: And therefore she replied to her, saying, You speak so obscurely,
Lady Clara, as I cannot understand you; expound your self more clearly, and
tell me what is that you say of Souls and Towns, and of this Musician whose
voice has altered you so much: but do not say any thing to me now; for I would
not lose by listening to your disgusts, the pleasure I take to hear him sing;
for me thinks he resumes his music with new Verses, and in another tune: In a
good hour, quoth Donna Clara; and then because she her self would not hear him,
she stopped her ears with her fingers; whereat Dorotea did also marvel: but
being attentive to the Music, she heard the Lacquie prosecute his Song in
this manner. O Sweet and constant hope,
That break'st Impossibilities and Briars,
And firmly run'st the scope
Which thou thy self do forge to thy desires:
Be not dismayed to see
At eve'ry step thy self nigh death to be.
Sluggards do not deserve
The glory of Triumphs or Victory,
Good hap does never serve
Those which resist not Fortune manfully,
But weakly fall to ground:
And in soft sloth their Senses all confound.
That Love his glories hold
At a high rate, it reason is and just:
No precious Stones nor gold
May be at all compared with Loves gust.
And it is a thing most clear;
Nothing is worth esteem that cost not dear.
An Amorous persistance
Obtains oft-times things impossible:
And so though I resistance
Find of my Souls desires, in her stern will;
I hope time shall be given,
When I from Earth may reach her glorious Heaven.


Here the voice ended, and Donna Clara's sighs began; all which inflamed
Dorotea's desire to know the cause of so sweet a Song and so sad a Plaint: And
therefore she eftsoons required her to tell her now what she was about to
have said before. Then Clara timorous lest Luscinda should over-hear her,
embracing Dorotea very nearly, laid her mouth so closely to Dorotea's ear, as
she might speak securely without being understood by any other, and said; He
that sings, is, dear Lady, a Gentleman's Son of the Kingdom of Aragon whose
Father is Lord of two Towns, and dwelled right before my Fathers house at the
Court, and although the Windows of our house were in Winter covered with
Sear-cloth, and in Summer with Lattice, I know not how it happened, but this
Gentleman, who went to the School, espied me; and whether it was at the Church,
or elsewhere, I am not certain. Finally, he fell in Love with me, and did
acquit me with his affection from his own Windows that were opposite to mine,
with so many tokens and such abundance of tears, as I most forceably believed,
and also affected him, without knowing how much he loved me. Among the signs
that he would make me, one was, to join the one hand to the other, giving me
thereby to understand that he would marry me: and although I would be very
glad that it might be so; yet as one alone, and without a Mother, I knew not
to whom I might communicate the affair, and did therefore let it rest without
affording him any other favor, unless it were when my Father and his were
gone abroad, by lifting up the Lattice or Sear-cloth only a little and
permitting him to behold me; for which favor he would show such signs of
joy, as a man would deem him to be reft of his wits.

The time of my fathers departure ariving, and he hearing of it, but not from
me (for I could never tell it to him) he fell sick, as far as I could
understand, for grief; and therefore I could never see him all the day of our
departure, to bid him farewell at least with mine eyes; but after we had
traveled two days, just as we entered into an Inn in a Village, a days
journey from hence, I saw him at the lodging door, appareled so properly like a
Lackey, as if I had not borne about me his Portraiture in my Soul, it had
been impossible to know him, I knew him, and wondered, and was glad withal;
and he beheld me unwitting my father, from whose presence he still hides
himself when he crosses the ways before me as I travel, or after we arive
at any Inn. And because that I know what he is, and do consider the pains
he takes by coming thus a foot for my sake, and that with so great toil, I
die for sorrow, and where he puts his feet, I also put mine eyes, I know not
with what intention he comes, nor how he could possibly thus escape from his
Father, who loves him beyond measure, both because he has none other Heir,
and because the young Gentleman also deserves it, as you will perceive when you
see him; and I dare affirm besides, that all that which he says, he
composes ex tempore, and without any study; for I have heard that he is a fine
Student, and a great Poet; and every time that I see him, or do hear him
sing, I start and tremble like an Aspen-leafe, for fear that my father should
know him, and thereby come to have notice of our mutual affections. I have
never spoken one word to him in my life, and yet I do nevertheless love him
so much, as without him I shall not be able to live. And this is all deer
Lady, that I am able to say unto you of the Musician whose voice has pleased
you so well, as by it alone you might conjecture that he is not a horse-boy as
you said, but rather a Lord of Souls, and towns as I affirmed.

Speak no more Lady Clara (quoth Dorotea, at that season, kissing her a
thousand times) speak no more I say? but have patience until it be day
light; for I hope in God so to direct your affairs, as that they shall have
the fortunate success that so honest beginning deserves. Alas Madam, quoth
Donna Clara, what end may be expected, seeing his father is so noble and rich
as he would scarce deem me worthy to be his sons servant, how much less
his spouse? and for me to marry my self unknown to my Father, I would not do
it for all the world; I desire no other thing, but that the young Gentleman
would return home again and leave me alone; perhaps by not seeing him, and
the great distance of the way which we are to travel, my pain which now so
much presses me, will be somewhat allayed, although I dare say, that this
remedy which now I have imagined, would avail me but little; for I know not
whence with the vengeance, or by what way this affection, which I bear him,
got into me, seeing both I and he are so young as we be, for I believe we
are much of an age, and I am not yet full sixteen, nor shall be, as my father
says, until Michaelmas next. Dorotea could not contain her laughter, hearing
how childishly Donna Clara spoke: to whom she said, Lady let us repose again,
and sleep that little part of the night which remains, and when God sends day
light, we will prosper, or my hands shall fail me. With this they held their
peace, and all the Inn was drowned in profound silence; only the Inne-keepers
Daughter and Maritorners were not asleep, but knowing very well Don-Quixotes
peccant humor, and that he was armed and on Horseback without the Inn,
keeping Guard, both of them consorted together, and agreed to be some way
merry with him, or at least to pass over some time, in hearing him speak
ravingly.

It is therefore to be understood, that there was not in all the Inn any
window which looked out into the field, but one hole in a Barn, out of which
they were wont to cast their straw; to this hole came the two demy-Demzells,
and saw Don-Quixote mounted and leaning on his Javelin, and breathing forth
ever and anon, so doleful and deep sighs, as it seemed his Soul was plucked
away by every one of them; and they noted besides, how he said with a soft and
amorous voice, O my Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, the Sun of all beauty, the end
and quintessence of discretion, the treasury of sweet countenance and
carriage, the storehouse of honesty; and finally, the Idea of all that which
is profitable, modest, or delightful in the World! and what might thy Ladyship
be doing at this present? Have thou perhaps thy mind now upon thy captive
Knight, that most wittingly exposes himself to so many dangers for thy sake?
Give unto me tidings of her, O thou Luminary of the three faces: peradventure
how do now with envy enough behold her, either walking through some Gallerie
of her sumptuous Palaces, or leaning on some Bay-window and thinking how
(saving her honor and greatness) she shall mittigate and assuage the torture
which this mine oppressed heart indures for her Love; what glory she shall
give for my pains; what quiet to my cares; what life to my death; and what
guerdon to my services. And thou Sun which art, as I believe, by this time
sadling of thy Horses to get away early and go out to see my Mistrisse, I
request thee, as soon as thou shall see her, to salute her in my behalf; but
beware that when thou look on her and do greet her, that thou do not
kiss her on the face; for if thou do, I become more jealous of thee, then
ever thou wast of the swift ingrate which made thee runn and sweat so much
through the Plains of Thessalia or the brinks of Peneo; for I have forgotten
through which of them thou rannest so jealous and inamoured.

To this point arrived Don-Quixote, when the Inne-keepers Daughter began to
call him softly unto her and say, Sir Knight, approach a little hitherward, if
you please: At which voice Don-Quixote turned his head, and saw by the light of
the Moon which shined then very clearly, that he was called too from the hole,
which he accounted to be a fair window full of iron bars, and those costly
gilded with gold, well befitting so rich a Castle, as he imagined that Inn to
be; and presently in a moment he forged to his own fancy, that once again,
as he had done before, the beautiful Damzell, daughter to the Lady of that
Castle, overcome by his Love, did return to solicit him: and with this
thought, because he would not show himself discourteous and ungrateful, he
turned Rozinante about and came over to the hole; and then having beheld the
two Wenches he said, I take pity on you, beautiful Lady, that you have
placed your amorous thoughts in a place whence it is not possible to have any
correspondence answerable to the desert of your high worth and beauty, whereof
you are in no sort to condemn this miserable Knight Errant, whom Love has
wholly disabled to surrender his will to be any other then to her, whom at the
first sight he made absolute Mistrisse of his soul: Pardon me therefore, good
Lady, and retire your self to your Chamber, and make me not, by any further
insinuation of your desires, more unthankful and discourteous then I would
be: and if through the love that you bear me, you find in me any other thing
wherewithal I may serve and pleasure you, so that it be not love it self,
demand it boldly; for I do swear unto you by mine absence yet, sweetest
enemy, to bestow it upon you incontinently, yea though it be a lock of
Medusas hairs, which are all of Snakes, or the very Sunne-beams enclosed in a
Vial of glass.

My Lady needs none of those things, Sir Knight, answered Maritornes. What does
she then want, discreet Matron, quoth Don-Quixote? Only one of your fair
hands, said Maritornes, that therewithal she may disburden her self of some
part of those violent desires, which compelled her to come to this window, with
so great danger of her honor: for if her Lord and Father knew of her coming,
the least slice he would take off her should be at the least an ear. I would
feign once see that, quoth Don-Quixote: but I am sure he will beware how he do
it, if he have no list to make the most disastrous end that ever father made in
this world, for having laid violent hands on the delicate limbs of his amorous
daughter. Maritornes verily persuaded her self, that Don-Quixote would give up
his hand as he was requested; and having already contrived in her mind what
she would do, descended with all haste from the hole, and going into the
Stable, fetched out Sancho Panca his Asses halter, and returned again with very
great speed, just as Don-Quixote (standing up on Rozinantes saddle, that he
might the better reach the barred windows, whereat he imagined the wounded
Damzell remained) did, stretching up his hand, say unto her, Hold, Lady, the
hand, or as I may better say, the executioner of earthly miscreants: hold, I
say, that hand, which no other woman ever touched before, not even she her
self that has intyre possession of my whole body, nor do I give it to you, to
the end you should kiss it; but that you may behold the contexture of the
sinnews, the knitting of the muscles, and the spaciositie and hredth of the
veins, whereby you may collect how great ought the force of that Arm to be
whereunto such a hand is knit. We shall see that presently, quoth Maritornes:
and then making a running knot on the halter, she cast it on the wrist of his
hand, and then descending from the hole, she tied the other end of the halter
very fast to the lock of the Barn door. Don-Quixote feeling the roughness of
the halter about his wrists, said, It rather seems that you grate my hand, then
that you cherish it; but yet I pray you not to handle it so roughly, seeing it
is in no fault of the evil which my will does unto you; nor is it comely that
you should revenge or disburden the whole bulk of your indignation on so small
a part: remember that those which love well do not take so cruel revenge. But
no body gave ear to these words of Don-Quixote; for as soon as Maritornes had
tied him, she and the other, almost burst for laughter, ran away, and left him
tied in such manner, as it was impossible for him to loose himself.

He stood, as we have recounted, on Rozinante his saddle, having all his arm
thrust in at the hole, and fastened by the wrist to the lock, and was in very
great doubt and fear, that if Rozinante budged never so little on any side he
should fall and hang by the arm; and therefore he durst not once use the
least motion of the world, although he might well have expected from
Rozinantes patience and mild spirit, that if he were suffered, he would
stand still a whole age without stirring himself. In fine Don-Quixote seeing
himself tied, and that the Ladies were departed, began straight to imagine that
all that had been done by way of enchantment, as the last time, when in the
very same Castle the enchanted Moor (the Carrier) had so fairly belabored him:
and then to himself did he execrate his own want of discretion and discourse,
seeing that having escaped out of that Castle so evil dight the first time, he
would after adventure to enter into it the second: for it was generally
observed by Knights Errant, that when they had once tried an Adventure, and
could not finish it, it was a token that it was not reserved for them, but for
some other; and therefore would never prove it again. Yet for all this he drew
forward his Arm to see if he might deliver himself; but he was so well
bound, as all his endeavors proved vain: It is true that he drew it very
warily, lest Rozinante should stir; and although he would fain have set and
settled himself in the saddle, yet could he do no other but stand, or leave
the Arm behind: There was many a wish for Amadis his Sword, against which no
enchantment whatsoever could prevail: there succeeded the malediction of his
fates: there the exaggerating of the want that the world should have of his
presence, all the while he abode enchanted (as he infallibly believed he
was) in that place: There he anew remembered his beloved Lady Dulcinea of
Toboso: There did he call often enough on his good Squire Sancho Panca, who
intombed in the bowels of sleep and stretched along on the Pannell of his Ass,
did dream at that instant, but little of the mother that bore him: There he
invoked the Wise men Lirgandeo and Aquife to help him: And finally, the morning
did also there overtake him so full of despair and confusion, as he roared
like a Bull; for he had no hope that by daylight any cure could be found for
his care, which he deemed would be everlasting, because he fully accounted
himself enchanted; and was the more induced to think so, because he saw that
Rozinante did not move little nor much; and therefore he supposed that both
he and his horse should abide in that state without eating, drinking, or
sleeping, until that either the malignant influence of the Stars were passed,
or some greater Inchanter had dis-inchanted him.

But he deceived himself much in his belief, for scarce did the day begin to
peep, when there arived four Horsemen to the Inn door, very well appointed,
and having snap-hances hanging at the pommell of their saddles, they called at
the Inn door (which yet stood shut) and knocked very hard which being perceived
by Don-Quixote, from the place where he stood Centinell, he said with a very
loud and arrogant voice, Knights, or Squires, or whatsoever else ye be, you
are not to knock any more at the gates of that Castle, seeing it is evident,
that at such hours as this, either they which are within do repose them, or
else are not wont to open Fortresses, until Phoebus has spread his Beams
over the Earth: therefore stand back, and expect till it be clear day, and
then we will see whether it be just or no, that they open their gates unto
you. What a Devil, what Castle or Fortress is this, quoth one of them, that
it should bind us to use all those circumstances? If thou be the In-keeper,
command that the door be opened, for we are travelers, that will tarry no
longer then to bait our Horses and away, for we ride in post haste. Does it
seem to you Gentlemen, quoth Don-Quixote, that I look like an In-keeper? I
know not what thou look like, answered the other, but well I know that thou
speak madly, in calling this Inn a Castle. It is a Castle, replied
Don-Quixote, yea, vnd that one of the best in this Province and it has People
within it which have had a Scepter in hand, and a crown on their head. It were
better said quite contrary, replied the Traveller, the Scepter on the head, and
the Crown in the hand, But perhaps (and so it may well be) there is some
company of Players within, who do very usually hold the Scepters, and wear
those crowns whereof thou talkest; for in such a paultry Inn as this is, and
where I hear so little^noyse, I cannot believe any one to be lodged, worthy
to wear a crown, or bear a Stepter. Thou know but little of the World,
replied Don-Quixote, seeing thou do so much ignore the chances that are wont
to befall in Chivalry. The fellows of him that entertained this prolixe
Dialogue with Don-Quixote, waxed weary to hear them speak idly so long
together, and therefore turned again to knock with great fury at the door, and
that in such sort, as they not only waked the Inne-keeper, but also all the
Guests, and so he arose to demand their pleasure.

In the mean while it happened, that one of the Horses whereon they rode, drew
near to smell Rozinante, that Melancholy, and sadly, with his ears cast
down, did sustain without moving his outstretched Lord; and he being
indeed of flesh and blood, although he resembled a block of wood, could not
choose but feel it, and turn to smell him again, who had thus come to cherish
and entertain him; and scarce had he stirred but a thought from thence, when
Don-Quixotes feet, that were joined, slipped asunder, and tumbling from the
Saddle, had doubtlesly fallen to the ground, had he not remained hanging by the
Arm; a thing that caused him to endure so much pain, as he verily believed
that either his wrist was a cutting, or his Arm a tearing off from his body;
and he hung so near to the ground as he touched it with the tops of his toes,
all which turned to his prejudice; for having felt the little which he wanted
to the setting of his feet wholly on the earth, he labored and drew all that
he might to reach it; much like unto those that get the Strappado, with the
condition to touch or not to touch, who are themselves a cause to increase
their own tor^ure, by the earnestness wherewith they stretch themselves,
deceived by the hope they have to touch the ground if they can stretch
themselves but a little further.

CHAP. XVII.
Wherein are prosecuted the wonderful Adventures of the Inn.
SO many were the outcries which Don-Quixote made, as the Innkeeper opened
the door very hastily and affrighted, to see who it was that so roared; and
those that stood without did also the same: Maritornes whom the cries had also
awaked, imagining straight what it might be, went into the Barn, and
unperceived of any, loosed the halter that sustained Don-Quixote, and forthwith
he fell to the ground in the presence of the Innkeeper and the Travelers,
who coming toward him, demanded the occassion why he did so unmeasurably
roar? He, without making any answer, took off the halter from his wrist, and
getting up, he leaped upon Rozinante, embraced his Target, set his Lance into
the Rest, and wheeling about a good part of the Field, returned with a half
gallop, saying, Whosoever shall dare to affirm that I have not been with just
title enchanted, if my Lady the Princess Micomicona will give me leave to do
it, I say that he lies, and I do presently challenge him to Combat. The new
Travelers were amazed at Don-Quixotes words; but the Host removed that wonder
by informing them what he was, and that they should make no account of his
words, for the man was bereft of his wits. Then they demanded of the
Innkeeper, if there had arived to his Inn a young Stripling of some fifteen
years old or thereabouts apparelled like a Horse-Boy, and having such and such
marks and tokens; and then gave the very signs of Donna Clara's Lover. The
Host made answer, That there were so many People in his Inn, as he had taken
no notice of him for whom they demanded: But one of them having seen the Coach
wherein the Judge came, said, Questionlesly he must be here; for this is the
Coach that they say he has followed: let therefore one of us remain at the
door, and the rest enter to seek him out: Yea, and it will not be from the
purpose, if one of us ride about without the Inn, lest he should make an
escape from us by the walls of the ya^d. We will do so, said another of them;
And thus two of them entered into the house, one staid at the door, and the
other did compass the Inn about. The Innkeeper beheld all, but could never
judge a right the reason why they used all this diligence, although he easily
believed that they sought for the Youth whose marks they had told unto him.

By this the day was grown clear, and as well by reason thereof, as through the
outcries of Don-Quixote, all the Strangers were awake and did get up,
especially both the Ladies, Clara and Dorotea: for the one through fear to have
her Lover so near, and the other with desire to see him, could sleep but very
little all that night. Don-Quixote perceiving that none of the four Travelers
made any account of him, or answered his challenge, was ready to burst with
wrath and despite: and if he could any wise have found that it was tolerated
by the Statutes of Chiva^ry, that a Knight Errant might have lawfully
undertaken any enterprise, having plight his word and faith, not to attempt any
until he had finished that which he had first promised, he would have
assailed them all and made them ma^gre their teeth to have answered him: But
because it seemed to him not so expedient nor honorable, to began any new
Adventure until he had installed Micomicona in her Kingdom, he was forced
to be quiet, expecting to see whereunto the endeavors and diligence of those
four Travelers tended: the one whereof found out the Youth, that he searched,
asleep by another Lacquie, little dreaming that any body did look for him; and
much less, would find him out thus. The man drew him by the arm, and said,
Truly Don Lewis, the habit that you wear, answers very well your calling; and
the Bed whereon you lie, the care and tenderness wherewith your Mother did
nurse you. The Youth hereat rubbed his drowsy eyes, and beheld very leisurely
him that did hold him fast, and knew him forthwith to be one of his Fathers
Servants, whereat he was so amazed as he could not speak a word for a great
while: And the Serving-man continuing his speech, said, Here is nothing else to
be done, Lord Lewis, but that you be patient and depart again with us toward
home, if you be not pleased to have your Father and my Lord depart out of this
World to the other; for no less may be expected from the Woe wherein he
rests for your absence. Why, how did my Father know, said Don Lewis, that I
came this way, and in this habit? A Student answered, The other to whom you
bewrayed your intention did discover it, moved through the compassion he took
to hear your Fathers lamentations when he found you missing: and so he
dispatched four of his men in your search; and we are all at your service more
joyful then may be imagined, for the good dispatch wherewithal we shall
return, and carry you to his sight which does love you so much. That shall be
as I please or Heaven will dispose, said Don Lewis. What would you please, or
what should Heaven dispose of, other then that you agree to return? For
certainly you shall not do the contrary, nor is it possible you should. All
these reasons that passed between them both, did the Lackey that lay by Don
Lewis hear; and arising from thence, he went and told all that passed to Don
Fernando, Cardenio, and all the rest that were gotten up: To whom he told how
the man gave the title of Don to the boy, and recounted the speech he used, and
how he would have him return to his fathers house, which the youth refused to
do. Whereupon, and knowing already what a good voice the heavens had given
him, they greatly desired to be more particularly informed what he was, and
intended also to help him, if any violence were offered unto him, and therefore
went unto the place where he was, and stood contending with his servant.

Dorotea issued by this out of her chamber, and in her company Donna Clara,
all perp^xed; Dorotea calling Cardenio aside, told unto him succinctly all the
History of the Musician, and Donna Clara: and he rehearsed to her again all
that passed of the Serving-mens arrival that came in his pursuit, which he did
not speak so low, but that Donna Clara overheard him, whereat she endured such
alteration, as she had fallen to the ground, if Dorotea running toward her, had
not held her up. Cardenio entreated Dorotea to return with the other to her
chamber, and he would endeavor to bring the matter to some good pass, which
they presently performed. The four that were come in Don Lewis his search, were
by this all of them entered into the Inn, and had compassed him about,
persuading him that he would, cutting off all delays, return to comfort his
father. He answered that he could not do it in any sort, until he had
finished an adventure, which imported him no less then his life, his honor,
and his soul. The servants urged him then, saying, that they would in no sort
go back without him, and therefore would carry him home, whether he would or
no. That shall not you do, quoth Don Lewis, if it be not that you carry me
home dead. And in this season all the other Gentlemen were come into the
contention, but chiefly Cardenio, Don Fernando and his Comarada's, the Judge
the Curate, and the Barber, and Don-Quixote; for now it seemed to him needless
to guard the Castle any more. Cardenio, who knew already the History of the
Youth, demanded of those that would carry him away, what reason did move them
to seek to take that Lad away against his will? We are moved unto it,
answered one of them, by this reason, that we shall thereby save his fathers
life, who for his absence is like to lose it. To this said Don Lewis, it is to
no end to make relation of mine affairs here. I am free, and will return if I
please, and if not no one shall constrain me to do it perforce. Reason shall
constrain you, good Sir, to do it, quoth the man, and when that cannot
prevail with you, it shall with us, to put that in execution for which we be
come and are bound to do. Let us know this affair from the beginning, said the
Judge to those men. Sir, quoth one of them, who knew him very well, as his
Masters next neighbor: Master Justice, does not your worship know this
Gentleman who is your Neighbors son, and has absented himself from his
fathers house, in an habit so undecent and discrepant from his calling, as you
may perceive? The Judge beheld him then somewhat more attentively, knew him,
and embracing of him said. What toys are these Don Lewis, or what cause has
been of efficacy sufficient to move you to come away in this manner and
attire, which answers your calling so ill? The tears stuck then in the young
Gentleman's eyes, and he could not answer a word to the Judge, who bad the
four servingmen app^a^e themselves, for all things should be done to their
satisfaction, and then taking Don Lewis apart, he entreated him to tell him
the occasion of that his departure.

And whilst he made this and other demands to the Gentleman, they heard a
great noise at the In door; the cause whereof was, that two Guests which had
lien there that night, seeing all the People busied to learn the cause of the
four Horse-mens coming, had thought to have made an escape scot-free, without
defraying their expenses; but the In-keeper who attended his own affairs with
more diligence then other men's, did stay them at their going forth, and
demanded his money, upbrayding their dishonest resolution with such words as
moved them to return him an answer with their fists, which they did so
roundly, as the poor Oast was compelled to raise the cry and demand succor.
The Oastesse and her daughter could see no man so free from occupation as
Don-Quixote; to whom the daughter said, I request you Sir Knight, by the virtue
that God has given you, to succor my poor Father, whom two bad men are
grinding like corn. To this Don-Quixote answered very leisurely, and with
great gravity; Beautiful Damzell, your Petition cannot prevail at this time,
for as much as I am hindered from undertaking any other Adventure, until I have
finished one wherein my promise has engaged me, and all that I can now do in
your service is, that which I shall say now unto you; Run unto your Father, and
bid him continue and maintain his conflict manfully, the best that he may,
until I demand license of the Princess Micomicona, to help him out of his
distress; for if she will give it unto me, you may make full account that
he is delivered. Sinner that I am (quoth Maritornes, wh^ was by and heard what
he said) before you shall be able to obtain that License, of which you
speak, my Master will be departed to the other World. Work you so Lady,
quoth Don-Quixote, that I may have the License; for so that I may have it, it
will make no great matter, whether he be in the other world or no, for even
from thence would I bring him back again, in despite of the other World it
self, if it durst contradict me, or at least wise I will take such a revenge
of those that do send him to the other World, as you shall remain more then
meanly contented; and so without replying any more, he went and fell on his
knees before Dorotea, demanding of her in Knightly and Errant phrases, that
she would daigne to license him to go and succor the Constable of that
Castle, who was then plunged in a deep distress. The Princess did grant him
leave very willingly, and he presently, buckling on his Target, and laying
hold on his Sword, ran to the Inn door, where yet the two Guests stood
handsomely tuging the Innkeeper: But as soon as he arived, he stopped and stood
still, although Maritornes and the Oastesse demanded of him twice or thrice the
cause of his restiffenesse: in not assisting her Lord and Husband. I stay quoth
Don-Quixote, because according to the Laws of Arms, it is not permitted to
me to lay hand to my Sword against Squire-like men that are not dubbed
Knights: But call to me here my Squire Sancho, for this defense and revenge
concerns him as his duty. This passed at the Inn door, where fists und
blows were interchangeably given, and taken in the best sort, although to the
Innkeepers cost, and to the rage and grief of Maritornes, the Oastesse, and
her daughter, who were like to run wood, beholding Don-Quixotes cowardice,
and the mischief their Master, Husband and Father endured, But here let us
leave them; for there shall not want one to succor him, or if not, let him
suffer, and all those that wittingly undertake things beyond their power and
force; and let us turn backward to hear that which Don Lewis answered the
Judge, whom we left somewhat apart with him, demanding the cause of his
coming a foot, and in so base array; to which the Youth, wringing him hard^ by
the hands, as an Argument that some extraordinary grief pinched his heart, and
sheding many tears, answered in this manner.

I know not what else I may tell you, dear Sir, but that from the instant that
heaven made us Neighbors, and that I saw Donna Clara, your Daughter and my
Lady, I made her Commandresse of my Will; and if yours, my true Lord and
Father, do not hinder it, she shall be my Spouse this very day. For her sake
have I abandoned my Fathers house, and for her I did on this attire, to follow
her wheresoever she went^ as the Arrow does the Mark, or the Mariner the
North-starre: She is as yet, no farther acquainted with my desires, then as
much as she might understand sometimes, by the tears which she saw mine eyes
distill a far off: Now Sir, you know the Riches and Nobility of my descent,
and how I am my Fathers sole Heir, and if it seem unto you that these be
conditions whereupon you may venture to make me thoroughly happy, accept of me
presently for your son in Law; for if my Father, borne away by other his
Designs, shall not like so well of this good which I have sought out for my
self, yet time has more force to undo and change the affairs, then men's
Will. Here the amorous Gentleman held his peace, and the Judge remained
astonished as well at the grace and discretion wherewith Don Lewis had discovered
his affections unto him, as also to see himself in such a pass, that as he
knew not what course he might best take in so sudden and unexpected a
matter; and therefore he answered no other thing at that time, but only bad
him to settle his mind, and entertayne the time with his Servants, and deal
with them to expect that day, because he might have leisure to consider what
might be most convenient for all. Don Lewis did kiss his hands perforce, and
did bathe them with tears, a thing able to move a heart of Marble, and much
more the Judges, who (as a wise man) did presently perceive how beneficial and
honorable was that preferment for his Daughter; although he could have
wished, if it had been possible, to effect it with the consent of Don Lewis his
Father, who he knew did purpose to have his Son made a Noble man of Title.

By this time the Innkeeper and his Ghests had agreed, having paid him all
that they ought, more by Don-Quixotes persuasion and good reasons, then by any
menaces: And Don Lewis his Servants expected the end of the Judge his discourse
and his resolution: When the Devil (who never sleeps) would have it, at that
very time entered into the Inn the Barber from whom Don-Quixote took away the
Helmet of Mambrino, and Sancho Panca the furniture of the Ass, whereof he
made an exchange for his own: which Barber, leading his Beast to the Stable,
saw Sancho Panca, who was mending some part of the Pannell; and as soon as he
had eyed him, he knew him, and presently set upon Sancho, saying. A Sir Thief,
have I found you here with all the Furniture whereof you robbed me? Sancho that
saw himself thus assaulted unexpectedly, and had heard the disgraceful terms
which the other used, laying fast hold on the Pannell with the one hand, gave
the Barber such a buffet with the other, as he bathed all his teeth in blood:
but yet for all that the Barber held fast his gripe of the Pannell, and
therewithal cried out so loud, as all those that were in the house came to the
noise and conflict: and he said, I call for the King and Justice; for this
Thief and Robber by the Highways goes about to kill me, because I seek to
recover mine own goods. Thou lie, quoth Sancho, for I am not a Robber by the
High ways; for my Lord Don-Quixote won those spoils in a good War. By
this time Don-Quixote himsel was come thither, not a little proud to see how
well his Squire defended himself, and offended his Adversary; and therefore
he accounted him from thenceforth to be a man of valor, and purposed in his
mind to dub him Knight on the first occasion that should be offered, because
he thought that the Order of Knighthood would be well employed by him.

Among oeher things that the Barber said in the discourse of his contention,
this was one: Sirs, this Pannell is as certainly mine, as the death which I owe
unto God, and I know it as well as if I had bred it, and there is my Ass in
the Stable who will not permit me to tell a lie; or otherwise do but try the
Pannell on him, and if it fit him not justly I am content to remain infamous:
And I can say more, that the very day wherein they took my Pannell from me,
they robbed me likewise of a new brazen Basin which was never used, and cost me
a crown. Here Don-Quixote could no longer contain himself from speaking; and so
thrusting himself between them two, and putting them asunder, and causing the
Pannell to be laid publicly on the ground until the truth were decided, he
said; To the end that you may perceive the clear and manifest error wherein
this good Squire lives; see how he calls that a Basin which (...) was, and
shall be the Helmet of Mambrino, which I took away perfor^e from him in fair
War, and made my self Lord thereof in a Lawful and Warlike manner: About the
Pannell I will not contend; for that which I can say therein is, that my Squire
Sancho demanded leave of me to take away the Furniture of this vanquished
Cowards Horse that he might adorn his own withal: I gave him author tie to
do it, and he took them: And for his converting thereof from a Horses
Furniture into a Pannell, I can give none other reason then the ordinary one,
to wi^ that such transformations are usually seen in the successes of
Chivalrie; for confirmation whereof friend Sancho run speedily and bring me
out the Helmet which this good man avoucheth to be a Basin. By my faith Sir,
quoth Sancho, if we have no better proof of our intention then that which you
say, I say that the Helmet of Mambrino is as arrant a Basin, as this good man's
Furniture is a Pannell. Do what I command, said Don-Quixote: I cannot believe
that all the things in this Castle will be guided by enchantment. Sancho went
for the Basin, and brought it: and as soon as Don-Quixote saw it, he took it
in his hands and said, See Sirs, with what face can this impudent Squire affirm
that this is a Basin, and not the Helmet that I have mentioned? and I swear to
you all by the Order of Knighthood which I profess, that this is the very
same Helmet which I won from him, without having added or taken any thing
from it. That it is questionless, quoth Sancho; for since the time that my
Lord won it until now, he never fought but one Battle with it, when he
delivered the unluckie chained men; and, but for this Bason-Helmet, he had not
escaped so free as he did, so thick a shower of stones rained all the time of
that conflict.

CHAP. XVIII.
Wherein are decided the controversies of the Helmet of Mambrino, and of the
Pannell, with other strange and most true Adventures.
GOod Sirs, quoth the Barber, what do you think of that which is affirmed by
these Gentlemen who yet contend that this is not a Basin, but a Helmet? He that
denies it, quoth Don Quixote, I will make him know that he lies, if he be a
Knight; and if he be but a Squire, that he lies and lies again a thousand
times. Our Barber who was also present, as one that knew Don-Quixotes humor
very well, would fortify his folly and make the Jest pass yet a little
farther, to the end that they all might laugh: and therefore speaking to the
other Barber, he said Sir Barber, or what else you please, know that I am also
of your occupation, and have had my writ of examination and approbation in that
Trade more then these thirty years, and am one that knows very well all the
instruments of Barberie whatsoever; and have been besides in my youthful days
a Soldier; and do therefore likewise know what is a Helmet, and what a
Morrion, and what a close Castle, and other things touching Warfare; I mean all
the kind of Arms that a Soldier ought to have: and therefore I say (still
submitting my self to the better opinion) that this piece which is laid here
before us, and which this good Knight holds in his hand, not only is not a
Barbers Basin, but also is so far from being one as is white from black, or
verity from untruth; yet do I withal affirm, that although it is an Helmet,
yet it is not a complete Helmet. No truly, quoth Don-Quixote, for it wants the
half, to wit, the nether part and the Bever. It is very true, quoth the Curate,
who very well understood his friend the Barber his intention; and the same did
Cardenio, Don Fernando, and the rest of his fellows confirm; yea, and even the
Judge himself, had not Don Lewis his affair perplexed his thoughts, would for
his part have helped the Jest well forward: But the earnestness of that affair
held his mind so busied, as he little or nothing attended the pastime. Lord
have mercy upon me, quoth the other Barber, then half beside himself, and is it
possible that so many honorable men should say that this is no Basin, but a
Helmet? This is a thing able to strike admiration into a whole Universitie, how
discreet soever it were: it is enough if this Basin must needs be a Helmet,
the Pannell must also be a Horses Furniture, as this Gentleman says. To me
it seems a Pannell, quoth Don-Quixote; but as I have said, I will not meddle
with it, nor determine whether it be a Pannell or the Capparison of a Horse.

Therein is nothing else to be done said the Curate, but that Sir Don-Quixote
say it once; for in these matters of Chivalrie, all these Noblemen, and my
self, do give unto him the prick and the prize; I sweat unto you by my Jove
good Sirs, quoth Don-Quixote, that so many and so strange are the things which
have befaln me in this Castle, these two times that I have lodged therein, as
I dare avouch nothing affirmatively of any thing that shall be demanded of me
concerning the things contained in it; for I do infallibly imagine, that all
the Adventures which pass in it, are guided by enchantment: the first time, I
was very much vexed by an enchanted Moore that was in (...) and Sancho himself
sped not very well with the Moors followers; and yesternight I stood hanging
almost two hours space by this arm, without knowing how, or how that disgrace
befell me; so that for me to meddle now in so confused and difficult a matter,
as to deliver mine opinion, were to pass a rash judgment: So that they which
say that this is a Basin and no Helmet, I have already made answer; but
whether this be a Pannell or furniture, I dare pronounce no difinitive
Sentence, but only remit it to your discreet opinions: perhaps because you are
not dubbed Knights as I am, the enchantments of this place will have no power
over you, and your understandings shall be free and able to judge of the things
in this Castle really and truly, and not as they seem unto me. Doubtless
quoth Don Fernando, Don-Quixote says very well, that the definition of this
case belongs unto us; and therefore, and because we may proceed in it upon
the the better and more solid grounds, I will secretly take the Suffrages of
all those Gentlemen, and afterward make a clear and full Relation of what
shall come of them.

To those that knew Don-Quixote his humor, this was a matter of marvailous
laughter, and sport; but to such as were not acquainted therewithal, it seemed
the greatest folly of the world, especially to Don Lewis, and his four
servants, and with other three Passengers that had arrived ^y chance to the
Inn, and seemed to be Troupers of the holy Brotherhood, as indeed they were:
but he that was most of all beside himself for wrath, was the Barber, whose
Basin they had transformed before his own, face into the Helmet of Mambrino,
and whose Pannell he made full account should likewise be turned into the rich
Furniture, and Equipage of a great, Horse. All of them laughed heartily, to see
Don Fernando go up and down, taking the Suffrages of this man and that, and
rounding every one of them in the ear that they might declare in secret
whether that was a pannell or a furniture, for which such deadly contention had
passed. After that he had taken the suffrages of so many as knew Don-Quixote,
he said very lowdly, The truth is, good fellow, that I grow weary of demanding
so many opinions; for I can no sooner demand of any man what I desire to know,
but they forthwith answer me, how it is mere madness to affirm, that this
is the pannell of an Ass, but rather the furniture of a Horse, yea and of a
chief Horse of service; and therefore you must have patience for in despite
both of you and of your Ass, and notwithstanding your weak allegations and
worse prooves it is, and will continue the furniture of a great Horse, Let me
never enjoy a place in Heaven (quoth the Barber) if you all be not deceived;
and so may my soul appear before God, as it appears to me, to be a pannell, and
no horse furniture: but the law carries it away, and so farewell it: and yet
surely I am not drunk; for unless it be by sinning, my fast has not been
broken this day.

The follies which the Barber uttered, stirred no less laughter among them,
then did the rorings of Don-Quixote, who then spoke in this manner: Here is now
no more to be done, but that every man take up his own goods, and to whom God
has given them, let S. Peter give his blessing. Then said one of the four
Servingmen, If this were not a jest premeditated, and made of purpose, I could
not persuade my self, that men of so good understanding as all these are, or
seem to be, should dare to say, and affirm, that this is not a Basin, nor that
a Pannell: but seeing that they averr it so constantly, I have cause to suspect
that it cannot be without a great deal of Mystery, to affirm a thing so
contrary to that which very truth it self, and experience demonstrates unto
us: for I do vow (and saying so he rapt out a round oath or two) that as many
as are in the world, should never make me believe that this is no basin, nor
that no pannell of a he-Asse. It might as well be of a she-Asse, quoth the
Curate. That comes all but to one, replied the other; for the question consists
not therein, but whether it be a pannell or not, as you do avouch? Then one of
the Troupers of the holy Brotherhood (who had listened to their disputation, and
was grown full of choler to hear such an error maintained, said, It is as very
a pannell, as my father is my father; and he that has said, or shall say the
contrary, is, I believe, turned into a grape. Thou lie like a clownish knave
(quoth. Don-Quixote:) and lifting up his Javelin, which he always held in his
hand, he discharged such a blow at the Troupers pate, as if he had not
avoided, it would have thrown him to the ground. The Javelin was broken by the
force of the fall into splinters; and the other Troupers, seeing their fellow
misused, cried out for help, and assistance for that holy Brotherhood. The
Inkeeper, who also was one of the same Fraternity, ran in for his rod of
Justice, and his sword, and then stood by his fellows. Don Lewis his four
Servants compassed him about lest he should attempt to escape whilst the
tumult endured. The Barbar seeing all the house turned upside down, laid hand
again upon his Pannell, and the same did Sancho.

Don-Quixote set hand to his Sword and assaulted the Troopers. Don Lewis cried
to his serving men that they should leave him, and go to help Don-Quixote,
Cardenio and Don Fernando; for all of them took Don-Quixotes part. The Curate
cried out, the Oastesse shrieked, her Daughter squeaked, Maritornos houled,
Dorotea stood confused, Luscinda amazed, and Donna Clara dismayed; the Barbar
battered Sancho, and Sancho pounded him again. Don Lewis, on whom one of his
Serving men had presumed to lay hands, and hold him by the arm, gave him such
a pash on the mouth, as he broke his Teeth, and then the Judge took him into
his own protection. Don Fernando had gotten one of the Troopers under his
feet, where he stood belabouring him at pleasure. The Innekeeper renewed his
outcry, and reinforced his voice, demanding aid for the holy. Brotherhood: So
that all the Inn seemed nothing else but Plaints, Cries, Screetches,
Confusions, Fears, Dreads, Disgraces, Slashes, Buffets, Blows, Spurnings, and
effusion of Blood.

In the midst of this Chaos and Labyrinth of things, Don-Quixote began to
imagine and fancy to himself, that he was at that very time plunged up to
the ears in the discord and conflict of King Agramante his Camp; and
therefore he said with a voice that made all the Inn to tremble: All of you,
hold your hands all of you, put up your Swords, all of you be quiet and listen
to me, if any of you desire to continue alive. That great and monstrous voice
made them all stand still; thereupon he thus proceeded. Did not I tell you
Sirs, that this Castle was enchanted, and that some Legion of Devils did
inhabit it? In confirmation whereof, I would have you but to note with your
own eyes, how the very discord of King Agramants Camp is transferred hither,
and passed ever among us. Look how there they fight for the Sword, here for
the Horse, yonder for the Eagle, beyond for the Helmet; and all of us fight,
and none of us know for what. Come therefore, you Master Justice, and you
Master Curate, and let the one represent King Agramant, and the other King
Sobrino, and make Peace and Atonement among us: for I swear by Almighty Jove,
that it is great wrong and pity, that so many Noblemen, as we are here,
should be slain for so slight causes.

The Troopers, which did not understand Don-Quixotes manner of speech, and saw
themselves very ill handled by Don Fernando and Cardenio, would in no wise be
pacified; But the Barber was content, by reason that in the conflict both his
beard and his Pannell had been torn in pieces. Sancho to his Masters voice
was quickly obedient, as became a dutiful Servant. Don Lewis his four serving
men stood also quiet, seeing how little was gained in being other; only the
Innekeeper persisted as before, affirming that punishment was due unto the
insolences of that mad man, who every foot confounded and disquieted his
Inn. Finally, the rumor was pacified for that time; the Pannell remained for a
Horse furniture until the day of judgment; the Basin for a Helmet, and the
Inn for a Castle in Don-Quixotes imagination. All the broils being now
appeased, and all men accorded by the Judges and Curates persuasions; then
began Don Lewis his servants again to urge him to depart with them, and whilst
he and they debated the matter, the Judge communicated the whole to Don
Fernando, Cardenio, and the Curate, desiring to know their opinions concerning
that affair, and telling them all that Don Lewis had said unto him; whereupon
they agreed that Don Fernando should tell the Serving-men what he himself was,
and how it was his pleasure that Don Lewis should go with him to Andaluzia,
where he should be cherished and accounted of by the Marquess his Brother,
according unto his calling and deserts; for he knew well Don Lewis his
resolution to be such, as he would not return into his Fathers presence at
that time, although they core him into pieces. Don Fernando his quality, and
Don Lewis his intention being understood by the four, they agreed among
themselves, that three of them should go back to bear the tidings of all that
had passed, to his Father, and the other should abide there to attend on him
and never to leave him until they returned to fetch him home, or knew what
else his Father would command: And in this sort was that monstrous bulk of
division and contention reduced to some form by the authority of Agramant and
the wisdom of King Sobrino.

But the Enemy of Concord, and the Adversary of Peace, finding his projects
to be thus illuded and condemned, and seeing the little fruit he had gotten
by setting them all by the ears, resolved once again to try his wits, and
stir up new discords and troubles, which befell in this manner: The Troupers
were quieted, having understood the calling of those with whom they had
contended, and retired themselves from the brawl, knowing that howsoever the
cause succeeded they themselves should have still the worst end of the staff:
But one of them, who was the very same whom Don Fernando had buffetted so well,
remembered how among many other Warrants that he had to apprehend Malefactors,
he had one for Don-Quixote, whom the Holy-Brotherhood had commanded to be
apprehended for freeing of the Gally-Slaves, a disaster which Sancho had
beforehand with very great reason feared:) As soon as he remembered it, he
would needs try whether the signs that were given him of Don-Quixote did
agree with his person; and so taking out of his bosom a scorll of Parchment
wherein they were written, he presently found out that which he looked for;
and reading it a while very leisurely, as one that was himself no great Clerk,
at every other word he looked on Don-Quixote, and confronted the marks of his
warrant with those of Don-Quixotes face, and found that he was infallibly the
man that was therein mentioned: And scarce was he persuaded that it was he,
when folding up his Parchment, and holding the Warrant in his left hand, he
laid hold on Don-Quixotes collar with the right so strongly as he could hardly
breath, and cried out aloud, saying, Aid for the Holy-Brotherhood: and that you
may perceive how I am in good earnest, read that Warrant, wherein you shall
find that this Robber by the Highway side is to be apprehended. The Curate
took the Warrant and perceived very well that the Trouper said true, and that
the marks agreed very near with Don-Quixotes; who seeing himself so abused by
that base Rascal, as he accounted him, his choler being mounted to her
height, and all the bones of his body crashing for wrath, he seized as well as
he could with both his hands on the Troupers throat, and that in such sort, as
if he had not been speedily succored by his fellows, he had there left his
life are Don-Quixote would have abandoned his gripe.

The Inne-keeper, who of force was to assist his fellow in Office, forthwith
repaired unto his aid. The Hostess seeing her Husband re-enter into
contentions and brables, raised a new cry, whose burden was borne by her
Daughter and Maritornes, asking succor of Heaven and those that were present.
Sancho seeing all that passed, said, By the Lord all that my Master has said
of the Enchantments of this Castle is true; for it is not possible for a man to
live quietly in it one hour together.

Don Fernando parted the Trouper and Don-Quixote, and with the good will of
both unfastened their holds: but yet the Troupers for all this desisted not to
require their Prisoner, and withal, that they should help to get him tied and
absolutely rendered unto their wills; for so it was requisite for the King and
the Holy Brotherhood, in whose name they did again demand their help and
assistance for the Arresting of that public Robber and Spoyler of People in
common Paths and Highways.

Don-Quixote laughed to hear them speak so idly, as he imagined, and said
with very great gravitie; Come hither, you filthy base extractions of the
dunghill, dare you term the losing of the inchayned, the freeing of Prisoners,
the assisting of the wretched, the raising of such as are fallen, and the
supplying of those that are in want? Dare you (I say) term these things
robbing on the Highway? O infamous brood, worthy for your base and vile
conceit, that Heaven should never communicate with you the valor included in
the exercise of Chivalrie, we give you to understand the sin and error
wherein you are, by not adoring the very shadow, how much more the assistance
of a Knight Errant? Come hither, O you that be no Troopers, but Thieves in
troop, and Robbers of highways by permission of the Holy Brotherhood: Come
hither I say, and tell me, who was that jolt-head that did subscribe or
ratify a Warrant for the attaching of such a Knight as I am? Who was he that
knows not how Knights errant are exempted from all Tribunals? and how that
their Sword is the Law, their Valor the Bench, and their Wills the Statutes of
their Courts? I say again, what mad man was he that knows not how that no
privilege of Gentry injoyes so many preemiencies, immunities, and exemptions,
as that which a Knight errant acquires the day wherein he is dubbed, and
undertakes the rigorous exercise of Arms? What Knight Errant did ever pay
tribute, subsidy, tallage, carriage, or passage over water? What Tailor ever
had money for making his clothes? What Constable ever lodged him in Castle,
that made him after to pay for the shot? What King has not placed him at his
own Table? What Damzell has not fallen in love with him, and permitted him to
use her as he liked? And finally, what Knight errant was there ever, is, or
ever shall be in the World, which has not the courage himself alone to give
four hundred blows with a cudgel to four hundred Troopers that shall
presume to stand before him in hostile manner?

CHAP. XIX.
In which is finished the notable Adventure of the Troopers, and the great
ferocitie of our Knight Don-Quixote, and how he was Enchanted.
WHILST Don-Quixote said this, the Curate labored to persuade the Troopers,
how the Knight was distracted, as they themselves might collect by his works
and words, and therefore it would be to no end to prosecute their Design any
farther, seeing that although they did apprehend and carry him away, he would
be presently delivered again as a madman. To this, he that had the Warrant
made answer, that it concerned him not to determine whether he was mad or no,
but only to obey and execute his superiors command; and that being once
Prisoner, they might deliver him three hundred times and if it were their good
pleasure. For all that (quoth the Curate) you may not carry him with you at
this time, nor (as I suppose) will he suffer himself to be taken. To be
brief, the Curate said so much, and Don-Quixote played so many mad pranks, as
the Troupers themselves would have proved greater fools then he, if they had
not manifestly discerned his defect of judgment: and therefore they held it to
be the best course to let him alone, yea and be compounders of Peace and
Amity between Sancho Panca and the Barber, which still continued their most
rancorous and deadly contention. Finally, they, as the Officers of Justice, did
mediate the cause, and were Arbiters thereof in such sort, as both the parties
remained, though not wholly contented, yet in some sort satisfied; for they
only made them exchange their Pannells, but not their Gyrts or Head-stalls.

As touching Mambrino's Helmet, the Curate did unawares to Don-Quixote, give to
the Barber eight ryals by it, and the Barber gave back unto him an acquittance
of the receipt thereof, and an everlasting release of all actions concerning it.
These two discords which were the most principal, and of most consequence,
being thus accorded, it only rested, that three of Don Lewis his Servingmen
would be content to return home, and leave the fourth to accompany his Master
whither Don Fernando pleased to carry him. And as good hap and better fortune
had already begun to break Lances, and facilitate difficulties, in the favor
of the Lovers, and worthy persons of the Inn, so did it resolve to proceed
forward, and give a prosperous success unto all: for the Servingmen were
content to do whatsoever their master would have them: whereat Donna Clara was
so cheerful, as no one beheld her face in that season, but might read therein
the inward contentment of her mind. Zoraida, although she did not very well
understand all the seccesses of the things she had seen, yet was she
interchangably grieved and cheered according to the shows made by the rest, but
chiefly by her Spaniard, on whom her eyes were always fixed, and all the
affects of her mind depended. The Inkeeper, who did not forget the recompense
made by the Curate to the Barber, demanded of him Don-Quixotes expenses, and
satisfaction for the damage he had done to his Wine-baggs, and the loss of his
Wine, swearing that neither Rozinante, nor Sancho his Ass should depart out of
the Inn, until he were paid the very last farthing. All was quietly ended by
the Curate, and Don Fernando paid the whole sum although the Judge had also
most liberally offered to do it; and all of them remained afterward in such
quietness and peace, as the Inn did no longer resemble the discorded Camp of
Agramante (as Don-Quixote termed it) but rather enjoyed the very peace and
tranquillity of the Emperor Octavians time; for all which the common opinion
was, that thanks were justly due to the sincere proceeding and great eloquence
of Master Curate, and to the incomparable liberality and goodness of Don
Fernando. Don-Quixote, perceiving himself free and delivered from so many
difficulties and brabbles (wherewithal as well he as his Esquire had been
perplexed) held it high time to prosecute his commenced voyage, and bring to an
end the great Adventure unto which he was called and chosen: Therefore with
resolute determination to depart, he went and cast himself on his knees before
Dorotea, who not permitting him to speak until he arose, he to obey her stood
up and said, It is a common Proverb, beautiful Lady, That Diligence is the
mother of Good-hap; and in many and grave Affairs experience has showed, that
the solicitude and sore of the suitor often brings a doubtful matter to a
certain and happy end: But this truth appears in nothing more clearly, then in
matters of War; wherein celeritie and expedition prevent the Enemies
Designs, and obtain the Victory before an Adversary can put himself in
defense: All this I say, high and worthy Lady, because it seems to me, that
our abode in this Castle is nothing profitable, and many therewithal turn so
far to our hindrance, as we may palpably feel it one day: For who knows but
that your enemy the Giant, has learned by Spies or other secret intelligence
and means how I mean to come and destroy him, and (opportunity favoring his
designs) that he may have fortified himself in some inexpugnable Castle or
Fortress, against the strength whereof neither mine industry nor the force of
mine invincible Arm can much prevail: wherefore, deer Lady, let us prevent
(as I have said) by our diligence, and let us presently depart unto the place
whereunto we are called by our good Fortune, which shall be deferred no
longer then I am absent from your Highness foe. Here he held his peace, and
did expect, with great gravitie, the beautiful Princesse's answer; who with
debonair countenance, and a style accommodated unto Don-Quixote, returned him
this answer: I do gratify and thank, Sir Knight, the desire you show to
assist me in this my great need, which denotes very clearly the great care you
have to favor Orphans and distressed Wights; and I beseech God, that your good
desires and mine may be accomplished, to the end that you may see how there
are some thankful women on earth; as touching my departure, let it be
forthwith; for I have none other will then that which is yours: therefore you
may dispose of me at your own pleasure; for she that has once committed the
defense of her person unto you, and has put into your hands the restitution of
her estate, ought not to seek to do any other thing then that which your
wisdom shall ordain. In the name of God (quoth Don-Quixote) seeing that your
Highness does so humble your self unto me, I will not lose the occasion of
exalting it, and installing it again in the throne of your inheritance. Let our
departure be incontinent; for my desires, and the way, and that which they
call the danger that is in delay, do spur me on: And seeing that Heaven never
created, nor Hell ever beheld any man that could affright me or make a Coward
of me, go therefore Sancho and saddle Rozinante, and empannell thine Ass, and
make ready the Queens Palfrey, and let us take leave of the Constable and those
other Lords and depart away from hence instantly.

Then Sancho (who was present at all this) waging of his head said, O my Lord,
my Lord, how much more knaverie (be it spoken with the pardon of all honest
kerchiefs) is there in the little Village then is talked of? What ill can there
be in any Village, or in all the Cities of the World, able to impair my
credit, thou Villain? If thou be angry, quoth Sancho, I will hold my tongue,
and omit to say that which by the duty of a good Squire and of an honest
servant I am bound to tell you. Say what thou will, quoth Don-Quixote, so thy
words be not addressed to make me afraid; for if thou be trighted, thou
do only like thy self; and if I be devoyd of terror, I also do that which
I ought. It is not that which I mean, quoth Sancho, but that I do hold for
most sure and certain, that this Lady which calls her self Queen of the
great Kingdom of Micomicon, is no more a Queen then my Mother; for if she
were what she says, she would not at every corner and at every turning of a
hand be billing as she is, with one that is in this good company. Dorotea
blushed at Sancho's words; for it was true indeed, that her Spouse Don
Fernando would now and then privately steal from her lips some part of the
reward which his desires did merit (which Sancho espying, it seemed to him,
that that kind of wanton familiarity was more proper to Curtezans, then
becoming the Queen of so great a Kingdom) and yet she neither could nor
would reply unto him, but let him continue his speech, as follows. This I do
say good my Lord, quoth he, to this end; That if after we have run many ways
and courses, and endured bad nights and worse days, he that is in this Inn,
sporting himself, shall come to gather the fruit of our labors; there is no
reason to hasten me thus to saddle Rozinante, or empannell the Ass, or make
ready the Palfrey seeing it would be better that we stayed still, and that
every whore spun, and we sell to our victuals.

O God, how great was the fury that inflamed Don-Quixote, when he heard his
Squire speak so respectlesly! I say it was so great, that with a shaking
voice, a faultering tongue, and the fire sparkling out of his eyes, he said, O
villainous peasant, rash, unmanerly, ignorant, rude, blasphemous, bold murmurer,
and detractor, have thou presumed to speak such words in my presence, and in
that of these noble Ladies? and have thou dared to entertain such rash and
dishonest surmises into thy confused imagination? Depart out of my sight, thou
monster of nature, storehouse of untruthes, armorie of falsehood, sink of
rogerie, inventour of Villainie, publisher of ravings, and the enemy of that
decency which is to be used toward royal persons. Away villain, and never
appear before me, under pain of mine indignation. And saying so he bended his
brows, filled up his cheeks, looked about him on every side, and struck a great
blow with his right foot on the ground; all manifest tokens of the rage which
inwardly fretted him. At which words and furious gestures poor Sancho remained
so greatly affrighted, as he could have wished in that instant, that the earth
opening under his feet, would swallow him up, and knew not what to do, but
turn his back, and get him out of his Lords most furious presence. But the
discreet Dorotea (who was now so well schooled in Don-Quixotes humor) to
mitigate his ire, said unto him; Be not offended, good Sir Knight of the sad
face, at the idle words which your good Squire has spoken: for perhaps he has
not said them without some ground, nor of his good understanding and Christian
mind can it be suspected, that he would wittingly slander or accuse any body
falsely: And therefore we must believe, without all doubt, that as in this
Castle, as you your self have said, Sir Knight, all things are represented,
and succeed by manner of enchantment; I say, it might befall, that Sancho may
have seen by Diabolical illusion, that which he says, he beheld so much to
the prejudice of my reputation.

I vow by the omnipotent Jove, quoth Don-Quixote, that your Highness has hit
the very prick, and that some wicked Vision appeared to this sinner my man
Sancho, that made him to see that which otherwise were impossible to be seen
by any other way then that of enchantment; for I know very well the great
goodness and simplicity of that poor wretch is such, as he knows not how to
invent a lie on any body living. It is even so, and so it shall be, quoth Don
Fernando: and therefore, good Sir Don-Quixote, you must pardon him, and reduce
him again to the bosom of your good grace: Sicut erat in Principio, and before
the like Visions did distract his sense. Don-Quixote answered, that he did
willingly pardon him: And therefore the Curate went for Sancho, who returned
very humbly; and kneeling down on his knees, demanded his Lords hand, which he
gave unto him; and after that he had permited him to kiss it, he gave him
his blissing, saying; Now thou shall finally know, Sancho, that which I have
told thee diverse times, how that all the things of this Castle are made by way
of enchantment. So do I verily believe, said Sancho, except that of the
canvassing in the Blanket, which really succeeded by an ordinary and natural
way. Do not believe that, said Don-Quixote; for if it were so, I would both
then, and also now have taken a dire revenge: but neither then, nor now could I
ever see any, on whom I might revenge that thine injury. All of them desired
greatly to know what that accident of the Blanket was: And then the Innkeeper
recounted it point by point, the flights that Sancho Panca made; whereat they
all did laugh not a little; and Sancho would have been ashamed no less, if his
Lord had not anew persuaded him that it was a mere enchantment: And yet
Sancho's madness was never so great, as to believe that it was not a real
truth verily befaln him, without any color or mixture of fraud or illusion;
but that he was tossed by persons of Flesh, Blood, and Bone, and not by
dreamed and imagined shadows or Spirits, as his Lord believed, and so
constantly affirmed.

Two days were now expired when all that Noble company had sojourned in the
Inn, and then it seeming unto them high time to depart: They devised how
(without putting Dorotea and Don Fernando to the pains to turn back with
Don-Quixote to his Village, under pretense of restoring the Queen Micomicona)
the Curate and Barber might carry him back as they desired, and endeavor to
have him cured of his folly in his own house. And their invention was this:
They agreed with one, who by chance passed by that way with a Teame of Oxen, to
carry him in this order following: They made a thing like a Cage of Timber, so
big as that Don-Quixote might sit or lie in it at his ease: and presently after
Don Fernando and his fellows, with Don Lewis his Servants, the Troupers, and
the Innkeeper, did all of them, by Master Curates direction, cover their faces
and disguise themselves, every one as he might best, so that they might seem
to Don-Quixote other people then such as he had seen in the Castle. And this
being done, they entered with very great silence into the place where he slept
and took his rest after the related conflicts: And approaching him who slept
securely, not fearing any such accident; and laying hold on him very strongly,
they tied his hands and his feet very strongly, so that when he started out of
his sleep, he could not stir himself, nor do any other thing then admire and
wonder at those strange shapes that he saw standing before him; and presently
he fell into the conceit which his continual and distracted imagination had
already suggested unto him, believing that all those strange figures were the
Spirits and shadows of that enchanted Castle, and that he himself was now
without doubt enchanted, seeing he could neither move nor defend himself. All
this succeeded just as the Curate (who plotted the jest) made full account it
would: Only Sancho, among all those that were present, was in his right sense
and shape; and although he wanted but little to be sick of his Lords disease,
yet for all that he knew all those counterfeit Ghosts; but he would not once
unfold his lips, until he might see the end of that surprizall and
imprisonment of his Master; who likewise spoke never a word, but only looked to
see what would be the period of his disgrace: Which was, that bringing him to
the Cage, they shut him within, and afterward nailed the Bars thereof so well
as they could not be easily broken: They presently mounted him upon their
shoulders; and as he issued out at the chamber door, they heard as dreadful a
voice as the Barber could devise (not he of the Pannell^ but the other) which
said, O Knight of the sad-Countenance! be not grieved at the imprisonment
whereinto thou art led; for so it must be, that thereby the Adventure, into
which thy great Force and Valor have thrust thee, may be the more spedily
ended; and ended it will be, when the furious Manchegall-Lyon, and the white
Tobosian-Dove shall be united in one; and after they have humbled their lofty
Crest unto the soft Yoke of Wedlock, from whose wonderful consort shall issue
to the light of the Orb, fierce Whelps which shall imitate the raunching paws
of their valourous Father: And this shall be before the pursuer of the
fugitive Nymph do with his swift and natural course make two turns in
visitation of the glistring Images: And thou, O the most noble and obedient
Squire that ever had Sword at a Gyrdle, Beard on a Face, or Dent in a Nose, let
it not dismay or discontent thee, to see carried away before thy eyes the
flower of all Chivalrie Errant. For very speedily, if it please the framer of
the World, thou shall see thy self so exalted and ennobled, as thou shall
scarce know thy self: Nor shall thou be defrauded of the promises made unto
thee by thy noble Lord: And I do assure thee from the wise Mentironiana, that
thy wages shall be paid thee, as thou shall quickly see in effect: And
therefore follow the steps of the valorous and enchanted Knight; for it is
necessary that thou go to the place where you both shall stay: And because I
am not permitted to say more, farewell; for I do return I well know whither.
Toward the end of this Prophecy he lifted up his voice, and afterward
lessened it, with so slender an accent, that even those which were acquainted
with the jest almost believed what they had heard.

Don-Quixote was very much comforted by the Prophecy; for he presently
apprehended the whole sense thereof, and perceived how he was promised in
marriage his beloved Dulcinea of Toboso, from whose happy womb should salley
the whelps (which were his Sons) to the eternal glory of the Mancha. And
believing all this most firmly, he elevated his voice, and breathing forth a
great sigh, thus said: O thou, whatsoever thou be, which have prognosticated
so great good to me, I desire thee to request in my name the Wise man who has
charge to record mine acts, that he permit me not to perish in this Prison (to
which they now do carry me) before the accomplishment of so joyful and
incomparable promises, as now have been made unto me: For, so that this may
befall, I will account the pains of my Prison a Glory, and the Chains that
inviron me, an ease; and will not esteem this Bed whereon I am laid a hard
Field of Battle, but a soft Tick and a most fortunate Lodging. And as
concerning the consolation of my Squire Sancho Panca, I trust in his goodness
and honest proceeding, that he will not abandon me in good or bad fortune: for
though it should fall out through his or my hard hap, that I shall not be able
to be slow on him an Island, or other equivalent thing, as I have promised, his
Wages at least cannot be lost; for in my Testament, which is made already, I
have set down what he is to have, though not conformably to his many good
Services, yet according to my possibility. Sancho Panca bowed his head with
great reverence, and kissed both his hands (for one alone he could not, by
reason they were bound together) and presently those Visions did lift up the
Cage and accommodate it on the Team of Oxen.

CHAP. XX.
Wherein is prosecuted the manner of Don-Quixotes enchantment, with other
famous occurrences.
WHen Don-Quixote saw himself to be incaged after that manner, and placed in
the Cart, he said, I have read many and very grave Histories of Knights Errant,
but I never read, saw, nor heard, that they were wont to carry Knights Errant
enchanted after this manner, and with the leisure that those slothful and
heavy beasts do threaten: for they were ever accustomed to be carried in the
air with wonderful speed, shut in some duskie and obscure cloud; or in some
fiery chariot; or on some Hippogriphus, or some other such like beast: but that
they carry me now on a Teame of Oxen, I protest it drives me into a great
amazment, but perhaps both Chivalry, and the enchantments of these our times,
do follow a course different from those of former ages: and peradventure it
may also be, that as I am a new Knight in the world, and the first that has
again revived the now-neglected, and forgotten exercise of arms, so have they
also newly invented other kinds of enchantments, and other manners of carrying
away enchanted Knights. What do thou think of this, son Sancho? I know
not, quoth Sancho, what to think, because I am not so well seen in Scriptures
Errant as you are; but for all this I durst affirm and swear, that these
visions which go up and down in this place, are not altogether Catholic.
Catholics, my father, quoth Don-Quixote, how can they be Catholics, when they
be all Devils, which have assumed fantastical bodies to come and put me into
this state? And if thou will prove the truth hereof, do but touch and feel
them, and thou shall find them to have no bodies, but of air, and that they
consist of nothing but an outward appearance. Now by my faith, Sir, quoth
Sancho, I have already touched them, and find this Devil that goes there so
busily up and done, both plump and soft-fleshed; and that he has besides
another property very different from that which I have heard say Devils have:
for it is said that they smell all of brimstone and other filthy things; but
one may feel at least half a league off, the Amber that this Devil smells
off. Sancho spoke this of Don Fernando, who belike (as Lords of his rank are
wont) had his attire perfumed with Amber.

Marvel not thereat, friend Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, for the Devils are very
crafty; and although they bring smells or perfumes about them, yet they
themselves smell nothing (because they are spirits) or if they do smell ought,
it is not good, but evil and stinking savors: the reason is, for that as they
do always bear wheresoever they be, their hell about them, and can receive no
kind of ease of their torments, and good smells be things that delight and
please; it is not possible that they can smell any good thing, and if it seem
to thee that that Devil whom thou do mention smells of Amber, either thou
art deceived, or he would deceive thee, by making thee to think that he is
no Devil. All these Discourses passed between the Master and the man, the
whilst Don Fernando and Cardenio (fearing lest Sancho should find out the
deceit whereto he was already come very here) resolved to hasten the Knights
departure; and therefore calling the Inne-keeper aside, they commanded him to
saddle Rozinante, and empannell Sanchoes beast; which he did with all
expedition: And the Curate agreed with the Troopers for so much a day to
accompany him unto his Village. Cardenio hanged at the pummell of Rozinantes
Saddle, the Target on the one side, and on the other the Basin, and by signs
he commanded Sancho to get up on his Ass, and to lead Rozinante along by the
Bridle; and afterward placed on either side of the Cart two Troopers with
their firelocks.

But before the Cart departed, the Oastesse, her Daughter, and Maritornes came
out to bid Don-Quixote farewell, fayning that they wept for sorrow of his
disaster; to whom Don-Quixote said, My good Ladies do not weep: for all these
mischances are incident to those as profess that which I do, and if these
calamities had not befaln me, I would never have accounted my self for a
famous Knight Errant; for the like chances never happen to Knights of little
name or renown, because there are none in the world that makes any mention of
them. But they often befall to the valorous, who have emulators of their Virtue
and Valor, both many Princes and many other Knights that strive by indirect
means to destroy them. But for all that, Virtue is so potent as by her self
alone (in despite of all the Negromancy that ever the first inventor thereof
Zoroastes knew) she will come off victorious from every danger, and will shine
in the world as the Sun does in Heaven. Pardon me fair Ladies, if by any
carelessness I have done you any displeasure, for with my will and knowledge I
never wronged any. And pray unto God for me, that he will please to deliver
me out of this prison, whereinto some ill meaning Inchanter has thrust me;
for if I once may see my self at liberty again, I will never forget the
favors which you have done me in this Castle, but greatly acknowledge and
recompense them as they deserve. Whilst the Ladies of the Castle were thus
intertayned by Don-Quixote, the Curate and Barber took leave of Don Fernando
and his Companions; of the Captain and his Brother, and of all the contented
Ladies, specially of Dorotea and Luscynda; all of them embraced and promised to
acquaint one another with their succeeding fortunes; Don Fernando entreating
the Curate to write unto him what became of Don-Quixote, assuring him that no
affair he could inform him of should please him better then that, and that
he would in lieu thereof acquaint him with all occurrences which he thought
would delight him, either concerning his own Marriage or Zoraidaes Baptism,
or the success of Don Lewis, and Luscyndaes return into her House.

The Curate offered willingly to accomplish to a hair all that he had commanded
him: and so they returned once again to embrace one another, and to renew their
mutual and complementall offers: The Inkeeper came also to the Curate, and
gave him certain papers, saying, that he had found them within one of the
linings of the wallet, wherein the Tale of the curious impertinent was had; and
that since the owner did not return to fetch it, he bade him take them all with
him; for feeing he could not read, he would keep them no longer. Master Curate
yielded him many thanks; and then opening them, found in the beginning thereof
these words: The Tale of Riconnette and Cortadillo; by which he understood that
it was some History, and collected that it must be a good one, seeing that of
the curious Impertinent, contrived perhaps by the same Author, had proved so
well, and therefore he laid it up, with an intention to read it as soon as he
had opportunity. Then he mounted on horseback with his friend the Barber; and
both of them putting on their maskes, that they might not quickly be known by
Don-Quixote, they traveled after the Team, which held on in this order; first
went the Cart, guided by the Carter: on both sides thereof the Troupers rode
with their firelocks: then followed Sancho upon his Ass, leading Rozinante by
the Bridle; and last of all came the Curate and Barbar upon their mighty Mules,
and with their faces covered; all in a grave posture, and with an Alderman like
pace, and traveling no faster then the slow steps of the heavy Oxen permitted
them. Don-Quixote, sat with his hands tied, his legs stretched out, and
leaning against the bar of the Cage, with such a silence, and patience, as
he rather seemed a Statue then a Man. In this quiet and leisurely manner, they
traveled for the space of two leagues, when ariving to a Valley, it seemed to
their Conductor a fit place to repose and bait his Oxen. And acquainting the
Curate with his purpose, the Barber was of opinion that they should yet go on
a little further, because he knew that there lay behind a little Mountain,
which was within their view, a certain Vale, much better furnished with grass
then that wherein he meant to abide. The Barbers opinion was allowed; and
therefore they continued on their Travel, when the Curate looking by chance
behind him, saw coming after them six or seven men on horseback, and very
well appointed, who quickly got ground of them; for they came not the lazy and
phlegmatic pace of Oxen, but as men that were mounted on Canons Mules, and
pricked forward with a desire to pass over the heat of the day in their Inn,
which was not much more then a league from thence. Finally, those dilligent
Travelers over-took our slothful ones, and saluted them courteously, and one
of them that was a Canon of Toledo, and Master of the rest, noting the orderly
procession of the Cart, Troupers, Sancho, Rozinante, the Curate and Barber, but
chiefly the incaged Don-Quixote he could not forbear to demand what meaned
the carriage of that man in so strange a manner, although he did already
conjecture, by observation of the Troupers, that he was some notable Robber or
other Delinquent, the punishment of whom belonged to the Holy-Brotherhood. One
of the Troupers, to whom the demand was made, did answer in this manner: Sir,
we know not wherefore this Knight is carried in this form; and therefore let
he himself, who best may, tell you the reason thereof.

Don-Quixote had over heard their discourse, and said, If, Gentlemen, you be
conversant and skillfull in matters of Chivalry, I will communicate my
misfortunes with you: but if you be not, I have no reason to trouble my self
to recount them. The Curate and Barber seeing the Travelers in talk with
Don-Quixote, drew near to make answer for him in such sort, that their
invention might not be discovered; the whilst the Canon replied to the
Knight, and said; Truly brother I am better acquainted with Books of
Knighthood, then with Villapanda's Logic: and therefore if all the
difficulty rest only in that, you may safely communicate whatsoever you will
with me. A Gods name be it, quoth Don-Quixote: You shall therefore nnderstand,
Sir Knight, that I am carried away enchanted in this Cage, through the envy
and fraud of wicked Magicians; For virtue is much more persecuted of the wicked
then honored of the good. I am a Knight Errant, but none of those whose names
are not recorded in the Books of fame; but one of those who in despite of envy
it self, and of all the Magicians of Persia, the Bracmanes of India, or of the
Gymnosophists of Aethiopia, shall hang his name in the Temple of Eternity,
that it may serve as a Model and Pattern to ensuing ages; wherein Knights
Errant may view the steps which they are to follow, if they mean to aspire to
the top and honorable height of Arms. The Knight, Sir Don-Quixote, says
true, quoth the Curate, speaking to the Travelers, that he is carried away in
this Chariot enchanted, not through his own default or sins, but through the
malignant Treachery of those to whom Virtue is loathsome and Valor odious:
This is, good Sir, the Knight of the sad-Countenance (if you have at any time
heard speak of him) whose valorous Acts shall remain insculped in stubborn
Brass, and time-surviving Marble, though Envy and Malice do labor never so
much to obscure them.

When the Canon heard the imprisoned man and the three speak thus in one
tenor, he was about to bless himself for wonder, and could not conjecture
what had befaln him; and into no less admiration were they brought that came
with him. But Sancho Panca having in the mean time approached to hear their
speech, to plaster up the matter, added; Now, Sirs, whether you will love me
well or ill for what I shall say, the very truth of the matter is, that my Lord
Don-Quixote is as much enchanted as my mother, and no more; for his judgment
is yet whole and sound; he eats and drinks, and does his necessities as other
men do, and as he himself did yesterday and other days before they incaged
him; all which being so, how can you make me believe that he goes enchanted?
for I have heard many persons avouch, that enchanted persons neither eat, nor
drink, nor speak: and yet my Lord, if he be not thwarted, will talk more then
twenty Barresters: And then turning toward the Curate, he said, O Master
Curate, Master Curate, do you think that I do not know you? And think you
that I do not suppose, yea, and presage whereto these new enchantments are
addressed? Well, know then that I know you well, although you cover your face
never so much, and that I understand your meaning, how deeply soever you
smother your drifts: But in fine, where Emulation and Envy raigns, Virtue
cannot live; where pinching swayes, liberality goes by. A pox take the Devil;
for, but for your Reverence, my Lord had e're this time been wedded to the
Princess Micomicona, and I my self had been created an Earl at least; for no
less might be expected either from the bounty of my Lord or the greatness
of my deserts: but now I perceive that to be true which is commonly said, That
the wheel of Fortune turns about more swiftly then that of a Mill; and that
they which were yesterday on the top thereof, lie to day all along on the
ground. I am chiefly grieved for my Wife and Children; for whereas they ought
and might hope to see their Father come in at his gates made a Governor or
Viceroy of some Isle or Kingdom, they shall now see him return unto them no
better then a poor Horse-Boy: All which I have urged so much, Master Curate,
only to intimate to your paternitie, how you ought to have remorse and make a
scruple of conscience, of treating my dear Lord as you do; and look to it
well, that God do not one day demand at your hands, in the other life, amends
for the prison whereinto you carry him, and that you be not answerable for
all the succors and good deeds which he would have afforded the World in this
time of his Captivity.

Snuff me those candles, quoth the Barber, hearing him speak so. What Sancho,
art thou also of thy Masters confraternity? I swear by the Lord, I begin to see
that thou art very like to keep him company in the Cage, and that thou shall be
as deeply enchanted as he, for the portion which thou have of humor, and
Chivalry. Thou wast in an ill hour begotten with child by his promises, and in
a worse did the Isle, which thou so greatly longest for sink into thy pate. I
am not with child by any body, said Sancho, nor am I a man of humor to let any
body get me with child, no, though it were the King himself: and although I be
poor, yet am I a Christian, and owe nothing to any one; and if I desire
Islands, others there are that desire worse things, and every one is the son
of his own works: and under the name of a man, I may become Pope, how much
more the Governor of an Island; and chiefly seeing my Lord may gain so many,
as he may want men to bestow them on? and therefore, Master Barber you should
take heed how you speak; for all consists not in trimming of beards: and there
is some difference between Peter and Peter. I say it, because all of us know
one another, and no man shall unperceived put a false Die upon me. As
concerning my Lords enchantment, God knows the truth, and therefore let it
rest as it is, seeing it is the worse for the stirring in. The Barber would not
reply unto Sancho, lest that with his simplicities, he should discover what the
Curate and himself did labor so much to conceal: and the Curate doubting the
same, had entreated the Canon to prick on a little forward, and he would unfold
to him the mystery of the encaged Knight, with other matters of delight. The
Canon did so, and taking his men along with them, was very attentive to all
that he rehearsed, of the condition, life, madness, and fashion of
Don-Quixote. There did he briefly acquaint him with the original cause of his
distraction, and all the progress of his adventures, until his shutting up in
that Cage: and their own design in carrying him home to his Country, to try
whether they might by any means find out a remedy for his frenzy. The Canon
and his men again admired to hear so strange a History as that of Don-Quixote,
and as soon as the Curate had ended his relation, the Canon said:

Verily Master Curate, I do find by experience, that those Books which are
instituted of Chivalry, or Knighthood, are very prejudicicall to wel-governed
Commonwealths: and although borne away by an idle and curious desire) I have
read the beginning of almost as many as are imprinted, of that subject, yet
could I never endure my self to finish and read any one of them through: for me
thinks that somewhat more or less, they all import one thing, and this has
no more then that, nor the other more then his fellow. And in mine opinion this
kind of writing and invention falls within the compass of the Fables called
Milesid, which are wandering and idle Tales, whose only scope is delight and not
instruction; quite contrary to the project of those called Fabulae Apologae,
which delight and instruct together: And though that the principal end of such
Books be recreation, yet cannot I perceive how they can yield it, seeing they
be forced with so many and so proportionlesse untruths: For the delight that
the mind conceives, must proceed from the beauty and conformity which it
sees or contemplates in such things as the sight or imagination represents unto
it; and all things that are deformed and discordant, must produce the contrary
effect. Now then, what beauty can there be; or what proportion between the
parts and the whole, or the whole and the parts, in a Book or Fable, wherein a
Youth of sixteen years of age gives a blow to a Giant as great as a Jews, and
with that blow divides him in two as easily as if he were a pellet of Sugar?
And when they describe a Battle, after that they have told us how there were
at least a million of men on the adverse side, yet if the Knight of the Book
be against them, we must of force, and whether we will or no, understand
that the said Knight obtained the Victory through the invincible strength of
his Arm. what then shall we say of the facility wherewithal the Inheritrix
of a Kingdom or Empire falls between the arms of those Errant and unknown
Knights? What understanding, if it be not altogether barren or barbarous, can
delight it self, reading how a great Tower full of Knights does pass through
the Sea, as fast as a Ship with the most prosperous wind? And that going to
Bed a man is in Lombardie, and the next morning finds himself in Prester
John's Country, among the Indians, or in some other Region which never was
discovered by Ptolomeus, nor seen by Marcus Polus? And if I should be
answered, that the inventers of such Books do write them as Fables: and
therefore are not bound unto any respect of circumstances or observation of
truth, I would reply, that an untruth is so much the more pleasing, by how much
the nearer it resembles a truth; and so much the more grateful, by how much
the more it is doubtful and possible: For lying Fables must be suited unto
the Readers understanding; and so written, as that facilitating impossible
things, levelling untrue things, and holding the mind in suspense, they may
ravish a more delight, and entertain such manners, as pleasure and wonder may
step by step walk together; all which things he that writes not likelihoods
shall never be able to perform. And as touching imitation (wherein consists
the perfection of that which is written) I have not seen in any Books of
Knighthood an entire bulk of a Fable, so proportioned in all the members
thereof, as that the middle may answer the beginning, and the end the beginning
and middle: But rather they have composed them of so many members, as it more
probably seems, that the Authors intended to frame Chimeraes or Monsters then
to deliver proportionate figures, most harsh in their style, incredible in
exploits, impudent in love matters, absurd in complements, prolixe in Battles,
fond in discourses, uncertain and senseless in voyages; and finally, devoid of
all discretion, art, and ingenious disposition: And therefore they deserve (as
most idle and frivolous things) to be banished out of all Christian
Commonwealths.

Master Curate did listen to the Canon with very great attention; and he
seemed unto him to be a man of good understanding, and that he had great
reason for what he had alleged: and therefore said, that in respect they did
concur in opinions, and that he had an old grudge to the vanity of such Books,
he had likewise fired all Don-Quixotes Library, consisting of many Books of
that subject: And then he recounted to him the search and inquisition he had
made of them; and which he had condemned, and which reserved: Whereat the
Canon laughed heartily, and said, that notwithstanding all the evil he had
spoken of such Books, yet did he find one good in them, to wit, the subject
they offered a good wit to work upon and show it self in them; for they
displayed a large and open plain, through which the Pen might run without let
or encumbrances, describing of Ship-wracks, Tempests, Incounters, and Battles;
delineating a valorous Captain with all the properties required in him; as
wisdom to frustrate the designs of his enemy; eloquence to persuade or
dissuade his Soldiers; ripeness in advice; promptness in execution; as much
valor in attending, as in assaulting of an enemy; deciphering now a
lamentable and tragical success, then a joyful and unexpected event; there a
most beautiful, honest, and discreet Lady, here a valiant courteous and
Christian Knight; there an unmeasurable barbarous Braggard, here a gentle,
valourous, and wise Prince: Representing the goodness and loyalty of
Subjects, the magnificence and bounty of Lords: Sometimes he may show himself
an Astrologian, sometimes a Cosmographer, sometimes a Musician, sometimes a
Statist, and sometimes, if he please, he may have occasion to show himself a
Nigromancer: There may he demonstrate the subtlety of Ulysses, the piety of
Encas, the valor of Achilles, the misfortune of Hector, the treachery of
Sinon, the amity of Eurialus, the liberallitie of Alexander, the resolution of
Caesar, the clemency and truth of Trajanus, the fidelity of Zopirus, the
prudence of Cato; and finally, all those parts that make a worthy man perfect:
one whiles by placing them all in one subject; another by distributing them
among many; and this being done, and set out in a pleasing style and a witty
fashion that approaches as near as is possible unto the truth, will
questionless remain a work of many fair draughts, which being accomplished,
will represent such beauty and perfection, as shall fully attain to the best
end aimed at in all writing, that is, as I have said, jointly to instruct and
delight: for the irregularity and liberality of those Books given to the
Author, the means to show himself an Epick, Lyrick, Tragedian, and Comedian;
with all other things which the most graceful and pleasant Sciences of Poetry
and Oratorie include in themselves: for Epicks may be as well written in Prose
as in Verse.

CHAP. XXI.
Wherein the Canon prosecutes his Discourse upon Books of Chivalrie, and many
other things worthy of his wit.
SIR, you say very true, quoth the Curate; and for this very reason are they
which have hitherto invented such Books the more worthy of reprehension,
because they neither heeded the good discourse, the art, nor the rules, by
which they might have guided themselves, and by that means have grown as famous
for their Prose as be the two Princes of the Greek and Latin Poetry for
their Verse. I have for my part, quoth the Canon, at least attempted to write a
Book of Chivalrie, observing therein all the points by me mentioned: and in
truth I have written above a hundred sheets thereof; and to the end that I
might try whether they were correspondent to my estimation, I did communicate
them both with certain skillfull and wise men that are marvellously affected to
that subject, and with some ignorant persons that only delight to hear
fanatic?^^ ^nventions; and I have found in them all a great approbation of my
labors; yet would I not for all that prosecute the work, as well because it
seemed unfit for my Profession, as also because I find the number of the
ignorant to excede that of the judicious: And though more good come to a man by
the praise of a few wise men, then hurt by the scoffs of a number of fools, yet
would I not willingly subject my self to the confused judgment of the
senseless vulgar, who commonly give themselves most unto the reading of such
Books. But that which most of all rid my hands, yea, and my memory, of all
desire to end it, was this argument, drawn from our modern Comedies, and thus
made to my self: If those (as well the Fictions, as Historical ones) are all
or the most part of them notorious Fopperies, and things without either head or
foot, and yet are by the vulgar heard with such delight, and held and approved
for good: and both the Authors that compose them, and Actors that represent
them say, that they must be such as they be for to please the Peoples humors,
and not more conformable to reason or truth, and that, because those wherein
Decorum is observed, and the fable followed according to the rules of Art,
serve only for three or four discreet men ( If so many may be found at a
Play) which do attend unto them, and all the rest of the Auditors remain
fasting, by reason they cannot conceive the artificial contexture thereof;
therefore is it better for them to gain good money and means by many, then
bare opinion or applause by a few. The very same would be the end of my Book,
after I had used all possible industry to observe the aforesaid precept; and I
should remain only for a need, and as the Taylour that dwells in a corner,
without trade or estimation.

And although I have sundry times endeavored to persuade the Players, that
their opinion was erroneous herein, and that they would attract more people,
and acquire greater fame by acting artificial Comedies, then those irregular,
and methodicall Plays then used: yet are they so wedded to their opinion, as
no reason can woo, nor demonstration winn them from it. I remember, how dealing
upon a day with one of those obstinate fellows, I said unto him, Do not you
remember, how a few years ago were represented in Spain three Tragedies,
written by a famous Poet of our Kingdom, which were such as delighted, yea and
amazed all the auditors, as well the learned as the simple, the exact as the
slight ones; and that the Players got more by those three alone, then by
thirty of the best that were penned, or acted since that time? You mean,
without question, quoth the Actor answering me, Issabella, Filis, and
Alexandra. The very same, quoth I; and note whether in them were not rightly
observed all the rules and precepts of Art: and yet thereby they neither wanted
any part of their dignity, nor the approbation of all the world. So that I
infer the fault not to be in the vulgar that covets idle toys, but rather in
those which know not how to penn or act any other thing: for no such fond
stuff was in the Comedy of Ingratitude revenged, nor found in Numantia, nor
perceived in that of the Amorous Merchant, and much less in the Favorable
enemy, nor in some others made by judicious Poets, which both redounded to
their infinite fame and renown, and yielded unto these Actors abundant gain.
To these I added other reasons, wherewith I left him, in mine opinion, somewhat
perplexed, but not satisfied, or desirous to forgo his erroneous opinion.

Truly, Master Canon, quoth the Curate, you have touched a matter that has
rowsed an ancient rancour and heart-burning of mine against the Comedies now in
request; the which is equal to the grudge that I bear to Books of
Knighthood. For seeing the Comedy, as Tully affirms, ought to be a mirror of
man's life, a pattern of manners, and an Image of truth: Those that are now
exhibited, are mirrours of vanity, patterns of folly, and Images of
voluptuousness. For what greater absurdity can be in such a subject; then to
see a Child come out, in the first Scene, of the first Act, in his swaddling
Clouts, and issue in the second already grown a man, yea, a bearded man? And
what greater vanity, then to present before us a valiant old man, and a young
coward? A Lay man become a Divine? a Page a Councellor? a King a Scoundrell?
and a Princess a Scowre-kettle? What should I say, of the little care had of
the due observation of time, for the succeeding of that they represent, other
then that I my self have seen Comedies, whose first Act began in Europe, the
second in Asia, and the third ended in Africa: and truly if there had been a
fourth, it would questionless have finished in America, and by consequence we
should have seen a round walk about the four parts of the World. And fayning
an exployt performed in the time of King Pepin, or of Charlemaine, they make
the principal Actours thereof, either Heraclius the Emperor that entered into
Jerusalem bearing of the holy Cross; or Godfrey of Bulloin that recovered the
Holy Land; Many years, yea and ages having occurred between the times of the
one and the other: yea and the Comedy being grounded on a fiction, to
attribute unto it the verities of a History, and mingle it and patch it up,
with pieces of others, having relation to different persons and times; and this
with no plausible invention, or draught resembling the truth, but rather with
palpable, gross, and inexcusable errors. And which is worse, some guls are
found to affirm, that all perfection consists herein, and that they are too
dainty that look for any other.

Now, if we would pass further, to examine the divine Comedies that treat of
God, or the lives of Saints, what a multitude of false miracles do the
composers devise? what a bulk of matters Apocryphal, and ill-understood?
attributing to one Saint the miracles done by another? yea and in humane
Comedies they presume to do miracles (without farther respect, or
consideration, but that such a miracle or show, as they term it, would do well
in such a place) to the end that the ignorant folk may admire them, and come
the more willingly to them: all which does prejudice truth, discredit
histories, and turn to the disgrace of our Spanish wits: for strangers, which
do with much punctualitie observe the method of Comedies, hold us to be rude
and ignorant, when they see such follies, and absurdities escape us: and it
will be no sufficient excuse for this error, to say, that the principal end
of well-governed Commonwealths, in the permitting of comedies, is only to
entertain the communaltie with some honest pastime, and thereby divert the
exorbitant and vicious humors which idleness is wont to engender: and seeing
that this end is attained to by whatsoever Comedies good or bad, it were to no
purpose to appoint any Laws or limits unto them, or to tie the Composers to
frame, or Actors to play them, as they should do: For hereunto I answer, that
this end would without all comparison be compassed better by good Comedies
then by evil ones: for the Auditour having heard an artificall and
well-ordered Comedy, would come away delighted with the Jests and instructed
by the truths thereof, wondering at the successes, grow discreeter by the
reasons, warned by the deceits, become wise by others example, incensed against
vice, and enamoured of virtue; all which affects a good Comedy should stir up
in the hearers mind, were he never so gross or clownish: And it is of all
impossibilities the most impossible, that a Comedy consisting of all these
parts should not entertain delight, satisfy and content the mind much more
then another that should be defective in any of them, as most of our now-a-day
Comedies be. Nor are the Poets that Pen them chiefly to be blamed for this
abuse; for some of them know very well where the error lurks, and know also as
well how to redress it. But because that Comedies are become a vendible
Merchandise, they affirm, and therein tell the plain truth, that the Players
would not buy them if they were of any other then the accustomed kind; and
therefore the Poet endeavors to accommodate himself to the humor of the
Player, who is to pay him for his labor: And that this is the truth, may be
gathered by an infinite number of Comedies, which a most happy wit of this
Kingdom has composed with such delicacie, so many good Jests, so elegant a
Verse, so excellent Reasons, so grave Sentences; and finally, with so much
eloquence and such a loftiness of style, as he has filled the World with his
fame; and yet by reason that he was forced to accommodate himself to the
Actors, all of them have not arrived to the height: of perfection which Art
requires. Others there are, that write without any judgment, and with so
little heed of what they do, as after their works have been once acted, the
Players are constrained to run away and hide themselves, fearing to be
punished, as often they have been for acting things obnoxious to the Prince, or
scandalous to some Families.

All which inconveniences might be redressed if there were some understanding
and discreet person ordained at the Court to examine all Comedies before they
were Acted, and that not only such as were played at the Court it self, but
also all others that were to be Acted throughout Spain, without whose
allowance, under his hand and seal, the Magistrate of no Town should permit any
Comedy to be played: By which means the Players would diligently send their
Plays to the Court, and might boldly afterward Act them, and the composers
would with more care and study examine their Labors, knowing that they should
pass the strict censure of him that could understand them: And by this means
would good Comedies be written, and the thing intended by them most easily
attained to, viz. entertainment of the People, the good opinion of Spanish
wits, the profit and security of the Players, and the saving of the care that
is now employed in chastising their rashness. And if the same charge were
given to this man, or to some other, to examine the Books of Knighthood which
should be made hereafter, some of them doubtless would be put forth, adorned
with that perfection whereof you spoke but now, enriching our language with the
pleasing and precious treasure of eloquence, and being an occasion that the old
Books would become obscure in the bright presence of those new ones published,
for the honest recreation, not only of the idler sort, but also of those that
have more serious occupations: For it is not possible for the bow to continue
still bent; nor can our humane and frail nature sustain it self long without
some help of lawful recreation.

The Canon and Curate had arrived to this point of their discourse, when the
Barber spurring on and overtaking them, said to the Curate, This is the place I
lately told you was fit to pass over the heat of the day in, while the Oxen
baited amidest the fresh and abundant Pastures. It likes me very well, quoth
the Curate: and telling the Canon what he meant to do, he also was pleased
to remain with them, as well invited by the prospect of a beautiful Valley
which offered it self to their view, as also to enjoy the Curates conversation,
toward whom he began to bear a mavelous affection: And lastly, with the
desires he had to be thoroughly acquainted with Don-Quixotes Adventures,
therefore he gave order to some of his men, that they should ride to the Inn,
which was hard by, and bring from thence what meat they could find, sufficient
to satisfy them all, because he meant likewise to pass the hot time of the
day in that place. To which one of his men did answer, that their sumpture Mule
was by that time, as he thought, in the Inn, so copiously furnished with
provision of meat, that, as he supposed, they needed not buy any thing there
but barley for their Mules. If it be so, quoth the Canon, let our Mules be
carried thither, and the sumpture one returned hither.

Whilst this passed, Sancho being free from the continual presence of the
Curate and Barber, whom he held as suspected persons, thought it a fit time to
speak with his Lord; and therefore drew near to the Cage wherein he sat, and
said to him in this manner: Sir, that I may discharge my conscience, I will
reveal unto you all that has past in this affair of your enchantment; which
briefly is, that those two which ride with their faces covered are the Curate
of our Village and the Barber, and as I imagine they both are the Plotters of
this your kind of carrying away, for mere emulation that they see you surpass
them both in atchieving of famous Acts: This truth being presupposed, it
follows that you are not Enchanted, but beguiled and made a fool: For the proof
whereof I will but demand of you one question; and if you do answer me
according to my expectation, as I believe you will, you shall feel the deceit
with your own hands and perceive how you are not enchanted, but rather have
your wits turned upside-down.

Son Sancho demand what thou will, quoth Don-Quixote, and I will satisfy
thee, and answer directly to thy desire: But as touching thy averment, that
those which go along with us, be the Curate and Barber, our Gossips, and old
acquaintance; it may well befall that they seem to be such; but that they are
so really, and in effect, I would not have thee believe in any manner: For that
which thou art to believe and should understand in this matter is, that if
they be like those our friends, as thou say, it must needs be that those
which have enchanted me, have assumed their semblance and likeness (for it is
an easy thing for Magicians to put on any shape they please) thereby to give
thee occasion to think that which thou do, to drive thee into such a
Labyrinth of imaginations as thou shall not afterward know how to sally out,
although thou had the assistance of Theseus clew; and withal to make me
waver in mine understanding, to the end I may not conjecture from whence this
charm is derived unto me: for if thou on the one side do affirm, that the
Barber and Curate of our Village do accompany me; and I on the other side
find my self incaged, and am so assured of mine own force, that no humane
strength, be it not supernatural, is able thus to incage me; what would
thou have me to say or think, but that the manner of mine enchantment exceeds
as many as ever I read throughout all the Histories entreating of Knights
Errant, which have been enchanted? Wherefore thou may very well appease,
and quiet thy self in that point of believing them to be those thou say,
for they are those, as much as I am a Turk: and as touching thy desire to
demand somewhat of me, speak, for I will answer thee, although, thou put
me questions until to morrow morning.

Our Lady assist me, quoth Sancho (as loud as he could) and is it possible that
you are so brain-sicke, and hard-headed, as you cannot perceive that I affirm
the very pure truth, and that malice has a greater stroke in this your
disgrace and employment then any enchantments? But seeing it is so, I will
prove evidently that you are not enchanted: if not, tell me, as God shall
deliver you out of this tempest, and as you shall see your self, when you least
think of it, in my Lady Dulcinea's arms. Make an end of conjuring me, said
Don-Quixote, and ask me what question thou will; for I have already told thee,
that I will answer with all punctuality. That is it I demand, quoth Sancho; and
the thing I would know, is, that you tell me without adding or diminishing
ought, but with all truth used or looked for of all those which profess the
exercise of arms as you do, under the title of Knights Errants. I say,
answered Don-Quixote, that I will not lie a jot: make therefore a beginning, or
an end of these demands, for in good sooth thou do weary me with so many
salutations, petitions and preventions. Sancho replied, I say that I am secure
of the bounty and truth of my Lord: and therefore, because it makes to the
purpose in our affair, I do with all respect demand, whether your Worship,
since your incagement, and as you imagine, enchantment in that coope, have not
had a desire to make greater or less water, as men are wont to say? I do not
understand, good Sancho, that phrase of making water: and therefore explicate
thy self, if thou would have me to answer thee directly. And is it
possible, replied he, that your Worship understands not what it is to make
great or little waters? then go to some school, and learn it of the boys,
and know that I would say, Have you had a desire to do that which cannot be
undone? O now, now, I understand thee, Sancho. Yes, very many times^ yea and
even now I have: wherefore, I pray thee, deliver me from the extremity thereof;
for I promise thee, I am not altogether so clean as I would be.

CHAP. XXII.
Wherein the discreet discourse that passed between Sancho Panca, and his
Lord Don-Quixote, is expressed.
HA, quoth Sancho, have I caught you at last? this is that which I desired to
know, as much as my soul or life, come now, Sir and tell me, can you deny that
which is wont to be said, when a body is ill disposed, I know not what ails
such a one; for he neither eats nor drinks, nor sleeps, nor answers directly
to that which is demanded him, so as it seems that he is enchanted? By which
may be collected, that such as neither eat, drink, sleep, nor do the other
natural things you wot of, are enchanted: but not those which have a desire
as you have, and eat meat, when they get it, and drink drink when it is given
them, and answer to all is propounded unto them. Thou say true, Sancho,
quoth Don-Quixote: but I have told the already, that there are diverse sorts of
enchantments, and perhaps they change with the times from one kind into
another; and that now the enchanted use to do all that which I do, although
they did not so in times past; and therefore there is no disputting, or drawing
of conclusions against the customs of the time. I know, and do verily
persuade my self, that I am enchanted, and that is sufficient for the discharge
of my conscience, which would be gratly burdened if I thought that I were not
enchanted, and yet permitted my self to be borne away in this Cage idly; and
like a Coward withholding the succor I might give to many distressed and
needy persons, which even at this hour be like enough to have extreme want of
mine aid and assistance. Yet say I, notwithstanding, replied Sancho, that for
more abundant satisfaction, your Worship might do well to attempt the getting
out of this prison, the which I do obliege my self with all my power to
facilitate, yea and to get out, and then you may recount eftsoons on the good
Rozinante, who also seems enchanted, so sad and melancholy he goes: And this
being done, we may again assay the fortune of seeking Adventures, which if it
have no good success we have time enough to return to our Cage; wherein I
promise, by the faith of a good and loyal Squire, to shut up my self together
with you, if you shall prove so unfortunate, or I so foolish, as not to bring
our Designs to a good issue. I am content to do what thou say, brother
Sancho, replied Don-Quixote, and when thou see opportunity offered to free
me, I will be ruled by thee in every thing; but yet thou shall see how far
thou art over-wrought in the knowledge thou will seem to have of my disgrace.

The Knight Errant and the ill errant Squire beguiled the time in these
discourses, until they arrived to the place where the Canon, Curate, and
Barber expected them: And then Sancho alighting, and helping to take down the
Cage, the Wayn-man unyoked his Oxen, permitting them to take the benefit of
pasture in that green and pleasant Valley, whose Verdure invited not such to
enjoy it as were enchanted like Don-Quixote, but rather such heedfull and
discreeet persons as was his man, who entreated the Curate to license his Lord
to come out but a little while; for otherwise the Prison would not be so
cleanly as the presence of so Worthy a Knight as his Lord was required. The
Curate understood his meaning, and answered that he would satisfy his requests
very willingly, but that he feared when he saw himself at liberty, he would
play then some prank or other, and go whither no body should ever set eye on
him after. I will be his surety that he shall not fly away, quoth Sancho.
And I also, quoth the Canon, if he will but promise me, as he is a Knight,
that he will not depart from us without our consent. I give my word that I
will not, quoth Don-Quixote (who heard all that they had said) and the rather,
because that enchanted bodies have not free will to dispose of themselves as
they list; for he that enchanted them, may make them unable to stir from one
place in three days; and if they make an escape, he can compel them to
return flying: and therefore, since it was so, they might securely set him at
liberty, especially seeing it would redound so much to all their benefits; for
if they did not free him, or get further off, he protested that he could not
forbear to offend their noses. The Canon took his hand (although it were bound)
and by his faith and word that he would not depart, and then they gave him
liberty; whereat he infinitely rejoiced, especially seeing himself out of the
Cage. The first thing that he did after, was to stretch all his body, and
then he went toward Rozinante, and striking him twice or thrice on the
buttocks, he said; I hope yet in God and his blessed Mother, O flower and
Mirror of Horses, that we two shall see our selves very soon in that state
which our hearts desire; thou with thy Lord on thy back, and I mounted on thee
and exercising the function for which God sent me into this World: And saying
so, Don-Quixote with his Squire Sancho retired himself somewhat from the
company, and came back soon after a little more lightened, but greatly desiring
to execute his Squires Designs.

The Canon beheld him very earnestly, and with admiration wondering to see the
strangeness of his fond humor, and how that he showed, in whatsoever he
uttered, a very good understanding, and only left the stirrops (as is said
before) when any mention was made of Chivalrie; and therefore moved to
compassion, after they were all laid down along upon the grass, expecting
their dinner, he said unto him, Gentleman, is it possible that the idle and
unsavourie Lecture of Books of Knighthood has so much distracted your wit, as
thus to believe that you are carried away enchanted, with other things of that
kind, as much wide from truth, as untruths can be from verity it self? or how
is it possible that any humane understanding can frame it self to believe, that
in this world there have been such an infinite of Amadises, such a crew of
famous Knights, so many Emperors of Trapisonda, such a number of Felixmartes
of Hyrcania; so many Palfrayes, Damzels Errant, Serpents, Robbers, Giants,
Battles, unheard of adventures, sundry kinds of enchantments, such
unmeasureable incounters, such braverie of apparel, such a multitude of
enamoured and valiant Princesses, so many Squires, Earls, witty Dwarfes,
Viragoes, Love Letters, amorous dalliances; and finally, so many, so
unreasonable, and impossible Adventures as are contained in the books of
Knighthood.

Thus much I dare avouch of my self, that when I read them, as long as I do
not think that they are all but toys and untruths, they delight me; but when
I ponder seriously what they are, I throw the very best of them against the
walls, yea, and would throw them into the fire if they were near me, or in my
hands, having well deserved that severitie, as false Impostors and Seducers of
common sense, as brochers of new Sects and of uncouth courses of life, as those
that give occasion to the ignorant vulgar, to believe in such exorbitant
untruths as are contained in them: Yea, and are withal so presumptuous, as to
dare to confound the wits of the most discreet and best descended Gentlemen;
as we may clearly perceive by that they have done to your self, whom they
have brought to such terms, as it is necessary to shut you up in a Cage and
carry you on a Team of Oxen, even as one carries a Lion or Tygre from place to
place, to gain a living by the showing of him. Therefore good Sir Don-Quixote,
take compassion of your self, and return into the bosom of discretion, and
learn to employ the most happy talent of understanding and abundance of wit,
wherewith bountiful heaven has enriched you, yet some other course of stud^e
which may redound to the profit of your Soul, and advancement of your credit
and estate. And if, borne away by your natural disposition, you will yet
persist in the reading of Warlike and Knightly discourses; Read in the holy
Scripture the Acts of Judges, for there you shall find surpassing feats and
deeds, as true, as valorous. Portugal had a Viriate; Rome a Caesar; Carthage a
Hanniball; Greece an Alexander; Castile an Earl; Fe^nun Goncalez; Valencia a
Cid; Andaluzia a Goncalo Fernandez; Estremaduza a Diego; Garcia de Paredes;
Xerez a Garcia Perez de Vargas; Toledo a Garcia Lasso; Si^ill a Do^ Manuel de
Leon. The discourses of whose valorous Acts, may Entertayne, Teach, Delight and
make Wonder the most sublime Wit that shall read them. Yea, this were indeed
a Study fit for your sharp understanding, my dear Sir Don-Quixote, for by
this you should become learned in Histories, enamoured of Virtue, instructed in
Goodness, bettered in Manners, Valiant without Rashness, Bold without
Cowardice: And all this to Gods Honor, your own Profit, and Renown of the
Mancha, from whence, as I have learned, you deduce your beginning and Progeny.

Don-Quixote listened with all attention unto the Canons admonition, and
perceiving that he was come to an end of them, after he had looked upon him a
good while he said; Me thinks Gentleman, that the scope of your discourse has
been addressed to persuade me, that there never were any Knights Errant in the
world, and that all the books of Chivalry are false, lying, hurtful, and
unprofitable to the Commonwealth, and that I have done ill to read them, worse
to believe in them, and worst of all to follow them, by having thus taken on
me the most austere profession of wandering Knighthood, whereof they entreat;
denying moreover that there were ever any Amadises, either of Gaul or Greece;
or any of all the other Knights, wherewith such books are stuffed: All is just
as you have said, quoth the Cannon; whereto Don-Quixote replied thus; You also
added, that such books had done me much hurt, seeing they had turned my
judgment, and immured me up in this Cage, and that it were better for me to
make some amendment, and alter my Study, reading other that are more
Authentical, and delight and instruct much better. It is very true, answered
the Canon.

Why then, quoth Don-Quixote, I find by mine accounts, that the enchanted and
senseless man is your self, seeing you have bent your self to speak so many
blasphemies against a thing so true, so current, and of such request in the
world, as he that should deny it, as you do, merits the same punishment,
which as you say you give to those books, when the reading thereof offends
you; for to go about to make men believe that Amadis never lived, nor any
other of those Knights wherewith Histories are fully replenished, would be
none other then to persuade them that the Sun lightens not, the Earth
sustaines not, nor the Ice makes any thing cold. See what wit is there in the
world so profound, that can induce another to believe that the History of Guy
of Burgundy, and the Princes Floripes was not true? Nor that of Fierabras,
with the Bridge of Mantible, which befell in Charlemaines time, and is I swear,
as true, as that it is day at this instant? And if it be a Lie, so must it be
also that ever there was an Hector, Achilles, or the War of Troy; The twelve
Peers of France, or King Arthur of Britain, who goes yet about the world in
the shape of a Crow, and is every foot expected in his Kingdom. And they will
as well presume to say, that the History of Guarino Mezquino, and of the quest
of the holy Sangriall be lies; and that for the love between Sir Tristram and
La Bella Ysonde, and between Queen Guenevor and Sir Lancelot Dulake, we have
no sufficient authority, and yet there be certain persons alive, which
almost remember that they have seen the Lady Quintaniona, who was one of the
best skinkers of Wine that ever Great Britain had; and this is so certain,
as I remember, that one of my Grand-mothers of my Fathers side, was wont to say
unto me, when she saw my Matrone, with a long and reverend Kerchief or Veil;
My Boy, that woman resembles very much Lady Quintaniona. From which I argue,
that either she knew her her self, or at the least, had seen some Portraiture
of hers. Who can moreover deny the certainty of the History of Peter of
Provance, and the beautiful Magolona, seeing that until this very day one may
behold in the Kings Armory, the Pin wherewith he guided and turned any way
he listed the horse of wood, whereupon he rode through the Air; which Pin
is a little bigger then the Thill of a Cart; and near unto it is also seen
Babieca his saddle; and in Roncesuals there yet hangs Rowlands horn, which is
as big as a very great joyst, whence is inferred, that there were twelve
Peers; that there was a Pierres of Provance; that also there were Cids, and
other such Knights as those which the world terms Adventurers: if not, let
them also tell me, that the valiant Lusitanian, John de Melo was no Knight
Errant, who went to Burgundy, and in the City of Ras fought with the famous
Lord of Charni, called Mosen Pierres, and after with Mosen Henry of Ramestan in
the City of Basilea, and bore away the Victory in both the conflicts, to his
eternal Fame: And that there were no such curres as the Adventures, and single
Combats begun and ended in Burgundy, by the valiant Spaniards Pedro Garba,
and Guttierre Quixad^ (from whom I my self am lineally descended) who overcame
the Earl of Saint Paul's sons. They may also aver unto me that Don
Fernando de Guevarra went not to seek Adventures in Germany, where he fought
with Micer George, a Knight of the Duke of Austria his House. Let them likewise
affirm, that Suero de Quinonnes of the passage, his Justs were but Jests; as
(...) the Enterprise of Mosen Lewis de falses, against Don Goncalo de Guzman, a
Gentleman of Castile, with many other renowned Acts, done as well by Christian
Knights of this Kingdom, as of other foreign Lands, which are all so
authentical and true, as that I am compelled to reiterate what I said before,
which is^^ That whosoever denies them is defective of Reason and good Discourse.

Full of admiration remained the good Canon, to hear the composition and
medley that Don-Quixote made of truths and fictions together; and at the great
notice he had of all things that might any way cocerne his Knighthood Errant;
and therefore he shaped him this answer; I cannot deny, Sir Don-Quixote, but
that some part of that which you have said is true, specially touching those
Spanish Adventurers of whom you have spoken, and will likewise grant you, that
there were twelve Peers of France, but I will not believe that they have
accomplished all that which the Archbishop Turpine pine has left written of
them; for the bare truth of the affair is, that they were certain Noble men
chosen out by the Kings of France, whom they called Peers, because they were
all equal in Valor, Quality and Worth; or if they were not, it was at least
presumed that they were; and they were not much unlike the Military orders of
Saint James or Calatrava, were in request, wherein is presupposed that such as
are of the Profession are, or ought to be valorous and well descended
Gentlemen: and as now they say a Knight of Saint John or Alcantara, so in those
times they said a Knight of the twelve Peers, because they were twelve equals
chosen to be of that Military Order. That there was a Cid and a Bernard of
Carpio is also doubtless; that they have done the Acts recounted of them, I
believe there is very great cause to doubt. As touching the pin of the good
Earl Pierres, and that it is by Babieca his saddle in the Kings Armorie, I
confess that my sin has made me so ignorant or blind, that although I have
viewed the Saddle very well, yet could I never get a sight of that Pin how
great soever you affirm it to be.

Well, it is there without question, quoth Don-Quixote; and for the greater
confirmation thereof, they say it is laid up in a case of Neats leather to keep
it from rusting. That may very well so be, said the Canon: yet by the orders
that I have received, I do not remember that ever I saw it: and although I
should grant it to be there, yet do I not therefore oblige my self to believe
the Histories of all the Amadises, nor those of the other rabblement of Knights
which Books do mention unto us; nor is it reason that so honorable a man,
adorned with so many good parts and endowed with such a wit, as you are, should
believe that so many and so strange follies as are written in the raving Books
of Chivalraie, can be true.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the discreet contention between Don-Quixote and the Canon, with other
accidents.
THat were a Jest indeed, quoth Don-Quixote, that Books which are printed with
the Kings license, and approbation of those to whom their examination was
committed, and that are read with universal delight and acceptance, and
celebrated by great and little, rich and poor, learned and ignorant, Plebeyans
and Gentlemen; and finally, by all kind of persons of what state or condition
soever, should be so lying and fabulous, specially seeing they have such
probability of truth; seeing they describe unto us the Father, Mother,
Country, Kinsfolk, Age, Town, and Acts of such a Knight or Knights, and that
so exactly, point by point, and day by day. Hold your peace, and never speak
again such a blasphemy, and believe me; for I do sincerely council you, what
you, as a discreet man, ought to do herein; and if not, read them but once,
and you shall see what delight you shall receive thereby: if not, tell me; what
greater pleasure can there be then to behold (as one would say) even here and
before our eyes a great Lake of Pitch boyling-hot, and many Serpents, Snakes,
Lizarts, and other kinds of cruel and dreadful Beasts swimming a thwart it
and in every part of it; and that there issues out of the Lake a most
lamentable voice, saying: O thou Knight, whatsoever thou art, which do
behold the fearful Lake; if thou desire to obtain the good concealed under
these horrid and black waters, show the valor of thy strong breast, and throw
thy self into the midest of this sable, and inflamed liquor: for if thou do
not so, thou shall not be worthy to discover the great wonders hidden in the
seven Castles of the seven Fates, which are seated under these gloomie waves:
And that scarce has the Knight heard the fearful voice, when without entering
into any new discourses, or once considering the danger whereinto he thrusts
himself, yea or easing himself of the weight of his ponderous Armor, but only
commending himself unto God, and his Lady Mistrisse, he plunges into the
midest of that burning puddle, and when he neither cares nor knows what may
befall him, he finds himself in the midest of flourishing Fields, with which
the very Elisean Plains can in no sort be compared; There it seems to him that
the element is more transparent, and that the Sun shines with a cleerer light
then in our Orb: There offers it self to his greedy and curious eye, a most
pleasing Forest replenished with so green and well-spread. Trees, as the
verdure thereof both joys and quickens the sight; whilst the ears are
entertained by the harmonious, though artlesse Songs of infinite and enamelled.
Birds, which traverse the intricate boughs of that shadie habitation: Here he
discovers a small stream whose fresh waters, resembling liquid Cristall, slides
over the small Sands and white little stones, resembling sifted Gold wherein
Oriental Pearls are inchaced: There he discerns an artificial Fountain
wrought of motly Jasper and smooth Marble; and hard by it another rudely and
negligently framed, wherein the sundry Cockle-shels with the wreathed white and
yellow houses of the Perwinkle and Snail intermingled, and placed after a
disorderly manner (having now and then pieces of clear Cristall and counterfeit
Emeralds mingled among them) do make a work of so graceful variety, as Art
imitating Nature, does herein seem to surpass her.

Suddenly he discovers a strong Castle or goodly Palace, whose walls are of
beaten gold, the pinacles of Diamonds, the gates of Iacinths; finally, it is of
so exquisite Workmanship, as although the materials whereof it is built, are
no worse then Diamonds, Carbuncles, Rubies, Emeralds, Pearls, and Gold, yet is
the Architecture thereof of more estimation and value then they, and is there
any more to be seen, after the seeing hereof, then to see sallie out at the
Castle gates, a goodly troup of lovely Damzels, whose brave and costly attire,
if I should attempt to describe, as it is laid down in Histories, we should
never make an end? and she that seems the chiefest of all, to take presently
our bold Knight, that threw himself into the boiling Lake, by the hand, and
carry him into the rich Castle or Palace without speaking a word, and cause him
to strip himself, as naked, as he was when his Mother bore him, and bathe him
in very temperate waters, and afterward anoint him all over with precious
ointments, and put on him a shirt of most fine, odoriferous, and perfumed
Sendall, and then another Damzell to come suddenly, and cast on his back a
rich mantle, which they say is wont to be worth, at the very least a rich
City, yea and more. Then what a sport it is, when they tell us after, that
after this he is carried into another Hall, where he finds the tables covered
so orderly as he rests amazed? what, to see cast on his hands water distilled
all of Amber, and most fragrant flowers? what, to see him seated in a chair of
Ivory? what, to see him served by all the Damzels with mavelous silence? what
the setting before him such variety of accares, and those so excellently
dressed, as his appetite knows not to which of them it shall first address
his hand? what to hear the Music which sounds whilst he is at dinner, without
knowing who makes it, or whence it comes? and after that dinner is ended, and
the tables taken away, the Knight to remain leaning on a chair, and perhaps
picking of his teeth, as the custom is, and on a sudden to enter at the
Hall-door another much more beautiful Damzell then any of the former, and to
sit by his side, and begin to recount unto him what Castle that is, and how she
is enchanted therein, with many other things that amazed the Knight and amazed
the Readers. I will not enlarge my self any more in this matter, seeing that
you may collect out of that which I have said, that any part that is read of
any book of a Knight Errant, will delight, and astonish him, that shall peruse
it with attention: and therefore I pray you believe me, and as I have said
already, read those kind of books, and you shall find, that they will exile
all the Melancholy that shall trouble you, and rectify your disposition, if by
fortune it be depraved: for I dare affirm of my self, that since I am become a
Knight Errant, I am valiant, courteous, liberal, well-manner'd, generous,
gentle, bold, mild, patient, and indurer of labors, imprisonments, and
enchantments: and although it be but so little a while since I was shut up in a
Cage like a mad man, yet do I hope by the valor of mine arm (heaven
concurring, and fortune not crossing me) to see my self within a few days, the
King of some Kingdoms, wherein I may show the bounty and liberality included
within my breast. For in good truth, Sir, a poor man is made unable to manifest
the virtue of liberality toward any other, although he virtually possess it
himself in a most eminent degree: and the will to gratify, which only
consists of will, is a dead thing, as Faith without Works. For which cause I
do wish, that fortune would quickly present me some occasion whereby I might
make my self an Emperor; that I may discover the desire I have to do good
unto my friends, but especially to this my poor Squire, Sancho Panca, who is
one of the honestest men in the world, on whom I would feign bestow the
Earldom which I promised him many days past, but that I fear me he will not
be able to govern his estate.

Sancho overhearing those last words of his Masters, said Labor you, Sir
Don-Quixote, to get me that Earldom as often promised by you, as much longed
for by me, and I promise you that I will not want sufficiency to govern it;
and though I should, yet have I heard say, that there are men in the world, who
take Lordships to farm paying the Lord so much by the year, and undertaking
the care of the government thereof, whilst the Lord himself with outstretched
legs does live at his ease; enjoying the rents they bring him, and caring for
nothing else: and so will I do, and will not stand wracking it to the utmost,
but presently desist from all administration and live merrily upon my Rent, like
a young Duke; and so let the World wag and go how it will. That, friend
Sancho, is to be understood, quoth the Canon, of enjoying the Revenues; but as
concerning the administration of Justice, the Lord of the Seigniory is bound to
look to it; in that is required a sufficiency and ability to govern, and
above all, a good intention to deal justly, and determine rightly; for if this
be wanting when we begin, our means and ends will always be subject to
error: And therefore is God wont as well to further the good Designs of the
simple, as to disfavour the bad ones of those that be wittily wicked.

I understand not those Philosophies, quoth Sancho Panca; but this I know well,
that I would I had as speedily the Earldome, as I could tell how to govern it;
for I have as much Soul as another, and as much Body as he that has most; and
I would be as absolute a King in my estate, as any one would be in his; and
being such, I would do what I liked; and doing what I liked, I would take my
pleasure; and taking my pleasure, I would be content; and when one is content,
he has no more to desire; and having no more to desire, the matter were
ended: and then come the state when it will, or farewell it, and let us behold
our selves, as one blind man said to another. They are no bad Philosophies
which thou come out with, kind Sancho, quoth the Canon; but yet for all that
there is much to be said concerning this matter of Earldomes. To that
Don-Quixote replied, I know not what more may be said, only I govern my self
by the example of Amadis de Gaul, who made his Squire Earl of the firm Island;
and therefore I may without scruple of conscience make Sancho Panca an Earl;
for he is one of the best Squires that ever Knight Errant had. The Canon abode
amazed at the well compacted and orderly ravings of Don-Quixote; at the manner
wherewith he had deciphred the Adventure of the Knight of the Lake; at the
impression which his lying Books had made into him: and finally he wondered at
the simplicity of Sancho Panca, who so earnestly desired to be made Earl of
the County his Lord had promised him.

By this time the Canons Serving-men, which had gone to the Inn for the
sumpture Mule, were returned, and making their Table of a Carpet and of the
green grass of that Meddow, they sat down under the shadow of the Trees and
did eat there, to the end that the Wain-man might not lose the commodity of
the Pasture, as we have said before; And as they sat at dinner, they
suddenly heard the sound of a little Bell issuing from among the Briars and
Brambles that were at hand; and instantly after they saw come out of the
Thicket a very fair shee-Goate, whose hide was powdered all over with black,
white and brown spots: after her followed a Goat-heard crying unto her, and in
his language, bidding her stay or return to the Fold; but the fugitive Goat,
all affrighted and fearful, ran toward the company, and as it were seeking
in her dumb manner to be protected, strayed near unto them: Then did the
Goat-heard arive; and laying hold of her horns (as if she had been capable of
his reprehension) said unto her; O ye wanton Ape, ye spotted Elfe; how come
ye to halt with me of late days? What Wolves do skarre your daughter? Will
you not tell me, fair, what the matter is? But what can it be other then that
you are a female, and therefore can never be quiet? A foul evil take your
conditions, and all theirs whom you so much resemble: Turn back, love, turn
back, and though you be not so content withal, yet shall you at least be
more safe in your own Fold, and among the rest of your fellows: for if you that
should guide and direct them, go thus distracted and wandering, what then must
they do? what will become of them?

The Goat-heards words did not a little delight the hearers, but principally
the Canon, who said unto him, I pray thee, good fellow, take thy rest here a
while, and do not hasten that Goat so much to her Fold for seeing she is a
female, as thou say, she will follow her natural instinct, how much soever
thou opposest thy self unto it: take therefore that bit, and drink a draught
wherewithal thou may temper thy choler, and the Goat will rest her the
whilst: and saying so, he gave him the hinder quarter of a cold Rabbet: which
he receiving, rendered him many thanks and drinking a draught of wine, did
pacify himself, and said presently after, I would not have you, my Masters,
account me simple, although I spoke to this beast in so earnest a fashion; for
in truth the words which I used unto her, were not without some mystery, I am
indeed rustic, and yet not so much, but that I know how to converse with men,
and with beasts. I believe that easily, quoth the Curate, for I know already by
experience, that the woods breed learned men, and sheep-coats contain
Philosophers. At the least, Sir, replied the Goat-heard, they have among them
experienced men: and that you may give the more credit to this truth, and as it
were, touch it with your own hands, (although till I be ^idden, I may seem to
invite my self) I will, if you please to hear me but a while, relate unto you a
very true accident, which shall make good what this Gentleman (pointing to the
Curate) and my self have affirmed. To this Don-Quixote answered, Because the
case does seem to have in it some shadow of Knightly adventures, I will for my
part listen unto thee with a very good will, and I presume that all these
Gentlemen will do the like, so great is their discretion, and desire to know
curious novelty which amaze, delight, and entertain the senses, as I do
certainly believe thy history will. Therefore begin it, friend, and all of us
will lend our ears unto it. I except mine, quoth Sancho; for I will go with
this Pastie unto that little stream, where I mean to fill my self for three
days; for I have heard my Lord Don-Quixote say, that a Knight Errants Squire
must eat when he can, and always as much as he can, because that oftentimes
they enter by chance into some, wood so intricate, as they cannot get out of it
again in five or six days: and if a man's panch be not then well stuffed, or
his wallet well stored, he may there remain, and be turned, as many times it
happens, into mummy. Thou art in the right of it, Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote:
go therefore where thou will, and eat what thou may; for I am already
satisfied, and only want refection for my mind, which now I will give it by
listening to this good fellow. The same will we also give unto ours, quoth the
Canon, who therewithal entreated the Goat-heard to keep promise, and begin
his ^ale. Then he stroking once or twice his pretty Goat, (which he yet held
fast by the horns) said thus, Lie down, pide fool, by me, for we shall have
time enough to return home again. It seemed that the Goat understood him; for
as soon as her Master sat, down, she quietly stretched her self along by
him, and looking him in the face, did give to understand, that she was
attentive to what he was saying; And then he began his history in this manner.

CHAP. XXIV.
Relating that which the Goat-heard told to those that carried away Don-Quixote.
THere is a Village distant some three leagues from this Valley, which albeit
it be little, is one of the richest of this Commark: Therein sometime did
dwell a wealthy Farmer of good respect, and so good, as although Reputation
and Riches are commonly joined together, yet that which he had was rather got
him by his Virtue, then by any Wealth he possessed: But that which did most
accumulate his happiness (as he himself was wont to say) was, that he had a
Daughter of so accomplished Beauty, so rare Discretion, Comeliness, and
Virtue, that as many as knew and beheld her, admired to see the passing
indowments wherewith Heaven and Nature had enriched her. Being a child she was
fair, and increasing daily in feature; she was at the age of sixteen most
beautiful: the fame whereof extended it self over all the bordering Villages:
But why say^ I the bordering Villages alone if it spread it self over the
farthest Cities yea, and entered into the Kings Palace, and into the cares of
all kind of People; so that they came from all parts to behold her as a rare
thing, and pattern of miracles? Her father did carefully keep her, and she
likewise heeded her self; for their is neither Guard, Lock nor Bolt able to
keep a Maiden better then is her own wariness and care: The Wealth of the
Father and Worth of the Daughter moved diverse, as well of his own Village as
Strangers, to demand her to wife; but he (as one whom the disposal of so rich
a Jewel most nearly concerned) was much perplexed, and unable to determine on
whom, among such an infinite number of importunate Wooers, he might bestow
her: Among others that bore this good will toward her, I my self was one to
whom they gave many and very great hopes of good success, the knowledge that
her Father had of me, my birth in the same village, my descent honest, and
blood untainted, flourishing in years, very rich in goods, and no less in
gifts of the mind. Another of the same Village and Qualities was also a Suitor
unto her; which was an occasion to hold her in suspense, and put his will in
the balance, deeming, as he did, that she might be bestowed on either of us
two: and that he might be rid of that doubt, he resolved to tell it to
Leandra (for so do they call the rich Maid which has brought me to extreme
misery) noting discreetly, that seeing we both were equall^, it would not be
amiss to leave in his dear Daughters power the making choice of whether she
liked-best; A thing worthy to be noted by all those Parents that would have
their Children marry: Wherein my meaning is not that they should permit them to
make a bad or base choice; but that they propound certain good ones, and refer
to their liking which of them they will take. I know not what was the liking of
Leandra, but only know this, That the Father posted us off, by alleging the
overgreen years of his Daughter, and using general terms which neither obliged
him nor discharged us. My rival was called Anselmo, and my self Eugenio: that
you may also have some justice of the persons which were Actors in this
Tragedy, whose conclusion is yet depending, but threatens much future disaster.

About the very same time there arrived to our Village one Vincente of the
Rose, son to a poor labourer of the same place, which Vincente returned as then
from I^^ly and diverse other Countries wherein he had been a Soldier; for
being of some twelve years of age a certain Captain, that with his Company
passed along by our Village, did carry him away with him, and the Youth, after
a doozen years more, came back again attired like a Soldier, and painted with
a hundred colors, full of a thousand devices of Cristall, five steel chains:
To day he would put on some gay thing, the next day some other, but all of them
slight painted, and of little weight, less worth. The clownish people which
are naturally malicious, and if they have but ever so little idleness or
leisure, become malice it self, did note and reckon up all his braveries and
Jewels, and found that he had but three suits of apparel of different colors,
with garters and stockings answerable to them; but he used so many
disguisements, varieties, transformations and inventions, which they, as if
they had not counted them all, some one would have sworn that he had made show
of more then ten suits of apparel, and more then twenty plumes of feathers:
and let not that which I tell you of the apparel be counted impertinent, or
from the matter; for it makes a principal part in the History. He would sit
on a bench that stood under a great Poplar Tree in the midst of the Market
place, and there would hold us all with gaping mouths, listening to the
gallant Adventures and resolute Acts he recounted unto us: There was no Land in
all the World whose soil he had not trodden on, no Battle wherein he had
not been present; he had slain more Moors then the Kingdoms of Morocco and
Tuney contained, and undertaken more single Combats, as he said, then ever did
either Gant, Luna, or Diego Garcia de Paredes, and a thousand others whom he
named; and yet he still came away with the victory, without having ever left
one drop of blood. On the other side he would show us signs of wounds, which
although they could not be discerned, yet would he persuade us that they were
the marks of bullets which he received in diverse Skermishes and Wars.
Finally, he would thou his equals, and those which knew him very well, with
mavelous arrogancy; and said that his Arm was his Father, his works his
Lineage, and that beside his being a Soldier he ought not a whit to the King:
To these his arrogancies was annexed some superficial skill in Music, for he
could scratch a little on a Gyttern, and some would say that he made it speak:
but his many graces made not a stop there; for he had likewise some shadows of
Poetry, and so would make a Ballad of a league and a half long upon every toy
that happened in the Village.

This Soldier therefore whom I have deciphred, this Vincente of the Rose, this
Braggard, this Musician, this Poet, eyed and beheld many times by Leandra from
a certain window of her house that looked into the Marketplace; and the golden
show of his Attire enamoured her, and his Ditties enchanted her; for he would
give twenty Copies of every one he composed: The report of his worthy acts,
beautified by himself, came also unto her ears; and finally (for so it is
likely the Divill had ordered the matter) she became in Love with him before
he presumed to think once of soliciting her. And, as in Love adventures, no
one is accomplished with more facility then that which is favored by the
woman's desire; Leandra and Vincente made a short and easy agreement: and e're
any one of her Suitors could once suspect her desires, she had fully satisfied
them, abandoned her deer and loving Fathers house (for her Mother lives not)
and running away from the Village with the Soldier, who departed with more
Triumph from that Enterprise then from all the others which he had arrogated
to himself. The accident amazed all the Town; yea, and all those to whom the
rumor thereof arrived were astonished, Anselmo amazed, her Father sorrowful,
her Kinsfolk ashamed. The ministers of Justice careful, and the Troupers ready
to make pursuit; all the ways were laid, and the Woods, and every other place
nearly searched; and at the end of three days they found the lustful Leandra
hidden in a Cave within a Wood, naked in her smock, and despoyled of a great
sum of Money, and many precious Jewels which she had brought away with her:
They returned her to her doleful Fathers presence, where asking how she
became so dispoyled, she presently confessed, that Vincent of the Rose had
deceived her: for having passed his word to make her his Wife, he persuaded
her to leave her Fathers house, and made her believe that he would carry her
to the richest and most delightful City of the World, which was Naples: And
that she through indiscretion and his fraud, had given credit to his words,
and robbing her Father, stole away with him the very same night that she was
missed; and that he carried her to a very rough Thicket, and shut her up in
that Cave wherein they found her: She also recounted how the Soldier, without
touching her honor, had robbed her of all that she carried, and leaving her in
that Cave, was fled away; which success struck us into greater admiration then
all the rest; for we could hardly be induced to believe the young gallants
continency; but she did so earnestly protest it, as it did not a little
comfort her comfortless Father, who made no reckoning of the Riches he had
lost, seeing his Daughter had yet reserved that Jewel, which being once gone,
could never again be recovered. The same day that Leandra appeared, she also
vanished out of our sights, being conveyed away by her Father, and shut up in
a Nunnerie at a certain Town not far off, hoping that time would obliterate
some part of the bad opinion already conceived of his Daughters facility.
Leandra her youth served to excuse her error, at least with those which gained
nothing by her being good or ill; but such as knew her discretion and great
wit, did not attribute her sin to ignorance, but rather to her too much
lightness, and the natural infirmity of that Sex, which for the most part
is inconsiderate and slipperie. Leandra being shut up, Anselmo's eyes lost
their light, or at least beheld not any thing that could delight them: and mine
remained in darkness without light that could address them to any pleasing
object in Leandra's absence. Our griefs increased; our patience diminished; we
cursed the Soldiers Ornaments; and abhord her Fathers want of looking to her:
To be brief, Anselmo and my self resolved to abandon the Village and come to
this Valley, where he feeding a great flock of Sheep of his own, and I as
copious a Heard of Goats of mine, we pass our lives among these Trees, giving
vent to our passions, either by singing together the beautiful Leandra's
praises or dispraises; or by sighing alone, and alone communicating our
quarrelsome complaints with Heaven. Many others of Leandra's Suitors have
since, by our example, come to these intricate Woods, where they use our very
exercise; and they are so many, as it seems that this place is converted into
the Pastoral Arcadia; it is full of Sheepheards and Sheep-Folds; and there is
no one part thereof wherein the name of the beautiful Leandra resoundeth not:
There one does curse her, and terms her humors, inconstant and dishonest:
another condemns her of being so facile and light: some one absolves and
pardons her: another condemns and despises her, and celebrates her beauty:
another execrates her disposition: and finally, all blame, but yet adore her;
and the raving distraction of them all does so far extend it self, as some
one complains of disdain that never spoke word unto her: and some one laments
and feels the enraged fits of jealousy, though she never ministered any
occasion thereof; for, as I have said, her sin was known before her desires:
There is no Clift of a Rock, no Bank of a Stream, nor Shadow of a Tree without
some Shepherd or other, that breaths out his misfortunes to the silent air.
The Echo repeats Leandra's name, wheresoever it can be formed: The Woods
resound Leandra: The Brooks do murmur Leandra: and Leandra holds us all
perplexed and enchanted, hoping without hope, and fearing without knowledge
what we fear.

And among all this Flock of frantic men, none shows more or less judgment
then my companion Anselmo, who having so many other Titles under which he
might plain him, only complains of absence, and does to the sound of a Rebeck
(which he handles admirably well) sing certain doleful Verses, which fully
discover the excellency of his conceit. I follow a more easy, and (in mine
opinion) a more certain way, to wit, I rail on the lightness of Women, on
their inconstancy, double dealing, dead promises, cracked trust, and the small
discretion they show in placing of their affections; and this, Sir, was the
occasion of the words and reasons I lately used to this Goat, whom I do esteem
but little, because she is a female, although she be otherwise the best of
all my Heard. And this is the History which I promised to tell you, wherein if
I have been prolixe, I will be altogether as large in doing you any service;
for I have here at hand my Cabine, and therein store of fresh Milk, and savory
Cheese, with many sorts of excellent Fruit, no less agreeable to the sight
then pleasing to the taste.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the falling out of Don-Quixote and the Goat-heard: with the adventure of
the disciplinants, to which the Knight gave end to his cost.
THe Goat-heards tale bred a general delight in all the hearers, but specially
in the Canon, who did very exactly note the manner wherewithal he delivered
it, as different from the style or discourse of a rude Goat-heard, as
approaching to the discretion of a perfect Courtier; and therefore he said,
that the Curate had spoken very judiciously, in affirming that the woods bred
Learned men: all of them made bountiful tenders of their friendship and
service to Engenio, but he that enlarged himself more then the rest, was
Don-Quixote, who said unto him, Certes, friend Goat-heard, if I were at this
time able to undertake any adventure, I would presently set forward, and fall
in hand with it to do you a good turn, and I would take Leandra out of the
Monastery (wherein without doubt she is restrained against her will) in
despite of the Lady Abbess, and all those that should take her part; and
would put her into your hands, to the end you might dispose of her at your
pleasure, yet still observing the Laws of Knighthood which command, that no
man do any wrong, and offer violence unto a Damzell: yet I hope in our Lord
God, that the skill of a malicious inchanter shall not be of such force, but
that the science of a better meaning wizard shall prevail against him; and
whenever that shall befall, I do promise you my help and favor, as I am
bound by my profession, which chiefly consists in asisting the weak and
distressed.

The Goat-heard beheld him, and seeing the Knight so ill arrayed, and of so
evil-favoured a countenance, he wondered, and questioned the Barber, who sat
near to him, thus: I pray you, Sir, who is this man, of so strange a figure,
and that speaks so odly? Who else should he be, answered ehe Barber, but the
famous Don-Quixote of the Mancha, the righter of wrongs, the redresser of
injuries, the protector of Damzels, the affrighter of Giants, and the
overcommer of battles? That which you say of this man, answered the Goat-heard,
is very like that which in Books of Chivalry is written of Knights Errant; who
did all those things which you apply to this man: and yet I believe that either
you jest, or else that this Gentleman's head is void of brains.

Thou art a great villain, said Don-Quixote, and thou art he whose pate wants
brains; for mine is fuller then the very, very whores that bore thee; and
saying so, and snatching up a loaf of bread that stood by him, he raught the
Goat-heard so furious a blow withal, as it beat his nose flat to his face: but
the other, who was not acquainted with such jests, and saw how ill he was
handled, without having respect to the Carpet, Napkins, or those that were
eating, he leaped upon Don-Quixote, and taking hold of his collar with both the
hands, would certainly have strangled him, if Sancho Panca had not arrived at
that very instant, and taking him fast behind, had not thrown him back on the
Table, crushing dishes, breaking glasses, and shedding, and overthrowing all
that did lie upon it. Don-Quixote seeing himself free, returned to get upon the
Goat-heard, who all besmeared with blood, and trampled to pieces under Sancho's
feet, groped here and there grovelling as he was for some knif or other, to take
a bloody revenge withal, but the Canon and Curate prevented his purpose; and
yet, by the Barbers assistance, he got under him Don-Quixote, on whom he rained
such a shower of buffets, as he powered as much blood from the poor Knights
face, as had done from his own. The Canon and Curate were ready to burst for
laughter: the Troupers danced for sport; every one hissed, as men use to do
when Dogs fall out, and quarrel together: only Sancho Panca was wood, because
he could not get from one of the Canons Serving-men, who withheld him from
going to help his Master. In conclusion, all being very merry, save the two
Buffetants, that tugged one another extremely, they heard the sound of a
Trumpet, so doleful, as it made them turn their faces toward that part from
whence it seemed to come. But he that was most troubled at the noise thereof,
was Don-Quixote, who although he was under the Goatheard full sore against his
Will, and by him exceedingly bruised and battered, yet said unto him; Brother
Devil (for it is impossible that thou can be any other, seeing that thou
have had valor and strength to subject my forces) I pray the let us make truce
for one only hour; for the dolorous sound of that Trumpet which touches our
Ears, does (me thinks) invite me to some new Adventure. The Goateheard, who
was weary of buffeting, and being beaten, left him off incontinently, and
Don-Quixote stood up, and turned himself toward the place from whence he
imagined the noise to proceed, and presently he espied descending from a
certain height many men apparelled in white like disciplinants. The matter
indeed was, that the clouds had that year denied to bestow their deaw on the
Earth, and therefore they did institute Rogations, Processions, and
Disciplines, throughout all that Country, to desire Almighty God to open the
hands of his Mercy, and to bestow some Rain upon them. And to this effect, the
People of a Village, near unto that place, came in Procession to a devout
Eremitage, builded upon one of the Hills that environed that Valley.

Don-Quixote noting the strange attire of the Disciplinants, without any
calling to memory how he had often seen the like before, did forthwith
imagine that it was some new Adventure, and that the trial thereof only
appertayned to him, as to a Knight Errant; and this his presumption was
fortified the more, by believing that an Image which they carried all covered
over with black, was some principal Lady whom those miscreants and
discourteous Knights did bear away perforce. And as soon as this fell into his
brain, he leaped lightly toward Rozinante, that went feeding up and down
the Plains, and dismounting from his pummell the bridle, and his Target that
hanged thereat, he bridled him in a trice; and taking his Sword from Sancho,
got instantly upon his horse, and then embracing his Target, said in a loud
voice to all those that were present: You shall now see, O valorous company;
how important a thing it is, to have in the world such Knights as profess the
order of Chivalrie errant. Now I say, you shall discern by the freeing of that
good Lady, who is there carried Captive away, whether Knights Adventurous are
to be held in prize; and saying so, he struck Rozinante with his heels (for
spurs he had none) and making him to gallop (for it is not read in any part
of this true History, that Rozinante did ever pass one formal or full
careere) he posted to encounter the Disciplinants, although the Curate, Canon
and Barber did what they might to withhold him, but all was not possible, and
much less could he be detained by these outcryes of Sancho, saying whither
do you go, Sir Don-Quixote? What Devils do you bear in your Breast, that
incite you to run thus against the Catholic Faith? See Sir, unfortunate that
I am, how that is a Procession of Disciplinants, and that the Lady whom they
bear, is the blessed Image of the immaculate Virgin: Look Sir what you do,
for at this time it may well be said, that you are not you know what. But
Sancho labored in vain; for his Lord rode with so greedy a desire to
encounter the white men, and deliver the moorning Lady, as he heard not a word,
and although he had, yet would he not then have returned back at the Kings
commandment. Being come at last, near to the Procession, and stopping
Rozinante (who had already a great desire to rest himself a while) he said
with a troubled and hoarse voice; O you that cover your faces, perhaps because
you are not good men, give ear and listen to what I shall say. The first that
stood at this alarm, were those which carried the Image; and one of the four
Priests which sung the Letanies, beholding the strange shape of Don-Quixote,
the leanenesse of Rozinante, and other circumstances worthy of laughter, which
he noted in our Knight, returned him quickly this answer; Good Sir, if you
would say any thing to us, say it instantly, for these honest men, as you see,
are toyled extremely, and therefore we cannot, nor is it reason we should
stand lingering to hear any thing, if it be not so brief as it may be
delivered in two words; I will say it in one, said Don-Quixote, and it is this;
That you do forthwith give liberty to that beautiful Lady, whose teeres and
pitiful semblanco clearly denote that you carry her away against her. Will,
and have done her some notable injury; and I, who was born to right such
wrongs, will not permit her to pass one step forward, until she be wholly
possessed of the freedom she does so much desire and deserve. All those that
overheard Don-Quixote, gathered by his words that he was some distracted man,
and therefore began to laugh very heartily, which laughing seemed to add
gunpowder to his choler; for laying his hand on his Sword, without any more
words, he presently assaulted the Image-carriers; one whereof, leaving the
charge of the burden to his fellows, came out to encounter the Knight with a
wooden forke (whereon he supported the Beer whenever they made a stand) and
receiving upon it a great blow which Don-Quixote discharged at him, it parted
the Forke in two; and yet he with the piece that remained in his hand,
returned the Knight such a thwack upon the shoulder, on the Sword side, as his
Target not being able to make resistance against that rusticall Force, poor
Don-Quixote was overthrown to the ground, and extremely bruised.

Sancho Panca (who had followed him puffing and blowing as fast as he could)
seeing him overthrown, cried to his adversary that he should strike no more;
for he was a poor enchanted Knight that had never all the days of his life
done any man harm; but that which detained the Swain was not Sancho's
outcries, but to see that Don-Quixote stirred neither hand nor foot; and
therefore believing that he had slain him, he tucked up his Coat to his
girdle as soon as he could, and fled away through the Fields like a Deer. In
the mean while Don-Quixotes Companions did hasten to the place where he lay,
when those of the Procession seeing them (but principally the Troopers of the
Holy-Brotherhood with their Cross-hows) run toward them, did fear some
disastrous success; and therefore they gathered together in a troop about the
Image, and lifting up their hoods, and laying fast hold on their Whips, and the
Priests on their Tapers, they attended the assault, with resolution both to
defend themselves, and offend the assaylants if they might: But Fortune
disposed the matter better then they expected; for Sancho did nothing else then
throw himself on his Lords Body, making over him the most dolorous and
ridiculous lamentation of the world, and believing that he was dead. The
Curate was known by the other Curate that came in the procession; and their
acquaintance appeased the conceived fear of the two squadrons: The first
Curate, in two words, told the other what Don-Quixote was; and therefore he,
and all the crew of the Disciplinants went over to see whether the poor Knight
were dead or alive; and then might hear Sancho Panca with the tears in his
eyes, bewayling him in this manner: O flower of Chivalrie who have with one
blow alone ended the Career of thy so well bestowed Peers! O renown of this
lineage, the honor and glory of all the Mancha! yea, and of all the world
beside! which seeing it wants thee, shall remain full of miscreants, secure
from being punished for their misdeeds! O liberal beyond all Alexanders,
seeing thou have given me only for eight months service, the best Island that
the Sea does compass or ingyrt! O humble to the proud, and stately to humbled,
undertaker of perils, indurer of affronts, enamoured without cause, imitater
of good men, whip of the evil, enemy of the wicked, and in conclusion Knight
Errant, then which no greater thing may be said!

Don-Quixote was called again to himself by Sancho his outcries, and then the
first word that ever he spoke was: He that lives absented from thee, most
sweet Dulcinea, is subject to greater miseries then this: Help me, friend
Sancho, to get up into the enchanted Chariot again; for I am not in plight to
oppress Rozinantes Saddle, having this shoulder broken all into pieces. That I
will do with a very good will, my deer Lord, replied the Squire; and let us
return to my Village, with those Gentlemen, which desire your welfare so much;
and there we will take order for some other voyage, which may be more
profitable and famous then this has been. Thou speak reasonable Sancho
quoth Don-Quixote; and it will be a great wisdom to let over pass the cross
aspect of those Planets that raig^e at this present. The Canon, Curate and
Barber commended his resolution: and so having taken delight enough in Sancho
Panca's simplicity, they planed Don-Quixote, as before, in the Team, The
Processioners returning into their former order, did prosecute their way: The
Goat-heard took leave of them all: The Troopers would not ride any farther; and
therefore the Curate satisfied them for the pains they had taken. The Canon
entreated the Curate to let him understand all that succeeded of Don-Quixote,
to wit, whether he amended of his frenzy or grew more distracted; and then
he took leave to continue his Journey. Lastly, all of them departed, the
Curate, Barber, Don-Quixote, Sancho Panca; and the good Rozinante only
remaining behind: Then the Wa^ man yoked his Oxen, and accommodated the Knight
on a Bottle of Hay^ and afterward followed on in his wonted slow manner, that
way which the Curate directed. At the end of two days they arrived to
Don-Quixotes Village, into which they entered about noon: this befell on a
Sunday, when all the People were in the Market stead, through the middle whereof
Don-Quixotes Cart did pass: all of them drew near to see what came in it, and
when they knew their Country man they were marvellously astonished: the
whilst a little Boy ran home before, to tell the old Wife and the Knights
Niece, that their Lord and Uncle was returned very lean, pale, disfigured, and
stretched all along on a bundle of Hay.

It would have moved one to compassion, to have heard the lamentations and
outcries then raised by the two good Women, the blows they gave themselves, and
the curses and exe^rations which they powered out against all Books of
Knighthood; all which was again renewed, when they saw Don-Quixote himself
entered in at their doors. At the news of this his arrival Sancho Panca's Wife
repaired also to get some tidings of her goodman; for she had learned that he
was gone away with the Knight, to serve him as his Squire, and as soon as ever
she saw her Husband, the question she asked him was, whether the Ass were in
health or no? Sancho, answered that he was come in better health then his
Master. God be thanked, quoth she, who has done me so great a favor: but tell
me now, friend, What profit have thou reaped by this thy Squireship? What
Peticoat have thou brought me home? What Shoos for thy little Boys? I bring
none of these things, good wife, quoth Sancho, although I bring other things of
more moment and estimation. I am very glad of that, quoth his Wife, show me
those things of more moment and estimation, good friend: for I would said see
them, to the end that this heart of mine may be cheered, which has been so
swollen and sorrowful, all the time of thine absence. Thou shall see them at
home, quoth Sancho, and therefore rest satisfied for this time; for and it
please God, that we travail once again to seek Adventures, thou shall see me
shortly after an Earl, or Governor of an Island, and that, not of every
ordinary one ^neither, but of one of the best in the World. I pray God,
Husband, it may be so, (replied she) for we have very great need of it. But
what means that Island? for I understand not the word. Honey is not made for
the Asses mouth, quoth Sancho: Wife thou shall know it in good time, yea, and
shall wonder, to hear the title of Ladyship given thee by all thy Vassals. What
is that thou speak, Sancho, of Lordships, Islands, and Vassalls? Answered
Ioane Panca (for so was she called, although her Husband and she were not
Knisfolk; but by reason that in the Mancha, the Wives are usually called after
their Husbands Surname) Do not busy thy self, Ioane, quoth Sancho, to know
these things on such a sudden; let it suffice that I tell thee the truth, and
therewithal sow up thy mouth. I will only say thus much unto thee, as it were
by the way, that there is nothing in the World so pleasant, as for an honest
man to be the Squire of a Knight Errant, that seeks Adventures. It is very
true, that the greatest number of Adventures found out succeeded not to a man's
satisfaction so much as he would desire: for of a hundred that are incountred,
the ninety and nine are wont to be cross and untoward ones; I know it by
experience, for I have come away my self out of some of them well canvassed,
and out of others well beaten. But yet for all that, it is a fine thing to
expect events, traverse Groves, search Woods, tread on Rocks, visit Castles,
and lodge in Innes at a man's pleasure, without paying the Devil a cross.

All these Discourses passed between Sancho Panca, and his wife Ioane Panca,
whilst the old woman and Don-Quixotes Niece did receive him, put off his
clothes, and lay him down in his ancient bed: he looked upon them very
earnestly, and could not conjecture where he was. The Curate charged the Niece
to cherish her Uncle very carefully, and that they should look well that he
made not the third escape; relating at large all the ado that they had to
bring him home. Here both the women renewed their exclamations: their
execreations of all Books of Knighthood here came to be reiterated: here they
besought Heaven to throw down into the very Center of the bottomless Pit, the
outcries of so many lies and ravings: Finally, they remained perplexed and
timorous, that they should lose again their Master and Uncle, as soon as he was
any thing recovered; and it befell just as they suspected: but the Author of
this History, although he have with all diligence and curiosity inquired after
the Acts atcheived by Don-Quixote in his third sally to seek Adventures, yet
could he never attain (at least by authentical Writings) to any notice of
them: Only Fame has left in the memories of the Mancha, that Don-Quixote after
his third escape, was at Saragosa; and present at certain famous Justs made in
that City; and that therein befell him events most worthy of his valor and
good wit: But of his end he could find nothing, nor ever should have known
ought, if good fortune had not offered to his view an old Phisician, who had in
his custody a leaden Box, which as he affirmed, was found in the ruins of an
old Eremitage, as it was a repayring; in which Box were certain scroles of
Parchment written with Gothicall Characters, but containing Castilian verses,
which comprehended many of his Acts, and specified Dulcinea of Toboso her
beauty; decyphered Rozinante, and entreated of Sancho Panca's fidelity; as
also of Don-Quixotes Sepulcher, with sundry Epitaphs and Elogies of his Life
and Manners, and those that could be read and copied out thoroughly, were those
that are here set down by the faithful Author of this new and unmatched
Relation: Which Author demands of the Readers no other guerdon, in regard of
his huge travail spent in the search of all the old Records of the Mancha, for
the bringing thereof unto light, but that they will daigne to afford it as much
credit as discreet men are wont to give unto Books of Knighthood, which are
of so great Reputation now a days in the World; for herewith he will rest
most fully contented, and satisfied; and withal encouraged to publish and
seek out for other Discourses, if not altogether so true as this, at least of
as great, both Invention and Recreation. The first words written in the Scrole
of Parchment, that was found in the leaden Box, were these. The Academicks of
Argamasilla, a Town of the Mancha, on the Life and Death of the valorous
DON-QUIXOTE of the Mancha; hoc scripserunt.
An Epitaph of Monicongo the Academick of Argamasilla, to DON-QUIXOTES Sepulcre.
THE clattring Thunderbolt that did adorn
The Mancha, with more spoils then Jason Creete:
The Wit, whose Wether-cock, was sharp was Thorn,
When somewhat flatter it to be was meet.
The Arm which did his power so much dilate,
As it Gaeta and Cathay did retch;
The dreadfull'st Muse, and eke discreetest, that
In brazen-sheets did praises ever stretch.
He that the Amadises left behind,
And held the Gataors but in small esteem,
Both for his braverie and his loving mind.
He dumb that made Don-Belianis to seem:
And he that far on Rozinante erred,
Under this frozen stone does lie interred.
Paniagando an Academick of Argamasilla, in praise of DULCINEA of Toboso.
SONNET.
SHE which you view with triple face and sheene,
High-breasted, and courageous, like a man;
Is tall Dulcinea of Toboso Queen;
Of great Quixote wellbeloved than.
He, for her sake, treads the one and the other side
Of the brown Mountain and the famous Fields
Of Montiel and Aran Ivez so wide,
On foot, all tired, laden with Speere and Shield.
(The fault was Rozinantes:) O hard star!
That this Manchegan Dame and worthy Knight,
In tender years when people strongest are,
She lost by death the glimpse of beauty bright;
And he, although in Marble richly done,
Yet Loves wrath and deceits she could not shun.
Caprichioso the most ingenious Academick of Argamasilla, in praise of
Rozinante DON-QUIXOTE his Steed.
SONNET.
INto the proud erected Diamond stock,
Which Mars with bloody plants so often bored,
Half wood with Valor, the Manchegan stuck
His wavering Standard; and his Arms restored:
For them thereon he hung, and his bright Sword,
Wherewith he hacks, rents, parts, and overthrows
(New prowesses) to which Art must afford
New styles on this new Palatine to gloze.
And if Gaul much her Amadis does prize
Whose brave descendants have illustred Greece,
And filled it full of Trophies and of Fame:
Much more Bellona's Court does solemnize
Quixote; whose like in Gaul nor Grecia is;
So honourd's none, as in Mancha, his name.
Let no oblivion his glory stain,
Seeing in swiftness Rozinant his Steed
Even Bayard does, and Briliador exceed.
Burlador Academick of Argamasilla to SANCHO PANCA.
SONNET.
THis Sancho Panca is of Body little;
But yet, O miracle! in Valor great,
The simplest Squire, and sooth to say, lest subtle
That in this World, I swear lived ever yet.
From being an Earl, he scarce was a threads breadth,
Had not at once conspired to cross his guerdon
The malice of the times, and men misled,
Which scarce, an Ass incountring, would him pardon.
Upon the like he rode; O give me leave
To tell how this meek Squire after the Horse
Mild Rozinante and his Lord did drive!
O! then vain hopes of men, what thing is worse?
Which proves us, desired case to lend,
Yet do at last in smoaks our glories end.
Chachidiablo, Academick of Argamasilla, on DON-QUIXOTE his Tomb.
AN EPITAPH.
THe worthy Knight lies there
Well bruised, but evil-andant,
Who born on Rozinant
Rode ways both far and near.
Sancho his faithful Squire,
Pansa ycleept also,
Lies besides him too;
In his Trade without Peer.
Tiquitoc, Academick of Argamasilla on DULCINEA of Toboso's Sepulcher.
AN EPITAPH.
DUlcinea here beneath
Lies, though of flesh so round,
To Dust and Ashes ground
By foul and ugly Death.
She was of gentle breath,
And somewhat like a Dame,
Being great Quixotes flame,
And her Towns glory, eath.


These were the Verses that could be read: As for the rest, in respect that
they were half consumed and eaten away by time, they were delivered to a
Scholar, that he might, by conjectures declare their meaning; and we have had
intelligence that he has done it, with the cost of many nights watching, and
other great pains, and that he means to publish them; and also gives hope of
a third Sallie made by Don-Quixote.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART, Of the HISTORY of the Valorous and Witty KNIGHT ERRANT;
DON-QUIXOTE, OF THE MANCHA.

Written in Spanish by MICHAEL CERVANTES: And now Translated into English.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Hodgkinsonne, for Andrew Crook: An. Dom. 1652.

The Epistle Dedicatorie. TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE Marquess Buckingham,
Viscount VILLIERS; Baron of Whaddon; Lord high Admiral of England; Justice in
Air of all his Majesty's Forests, Parks, and Chases beyond Trent; Master of
the Horse to his Majesty; and one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's
Bedchamber; Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter; and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel of England and Scotland.
RIGHT NOBLE LORD,
YOUR humble Servant has observed in the multitude of Books that have past his
hands, no small variety of Dedications; and those severally sorted to their
Presenters ends: Some for the mere ambition of great names; Others, for the
desire, or need of Protection; Many to win Friends, and so favor and opinion;
but Most, for the more sordid respect, Gain. This humbly offers into your Lo:
presence with none of these deformities: But as a bashful Stranger, newly
arrived in English, having originally had the fortune to be borne commended to
a Grandee of Spain; and, by the way of translation, the grace to kiss the
hands of a great Lady of France, could not despair of less courtesy in the
Court of Great Britain, then to be received of your Lo: delight; his study
being to sweeten those short starts of your retirement from public affairs,
which so many, so unseasonable, even to molestation trouble.

By him who most truly honors, and humbly professes all duties to your
Lordship. Ed.: Blount.

The Authors Prologue to the Reader.
NOw God defend, Reader, Noble or Plebeyan, what e're thou art: how earnestly
must thou needs by this time expect this Prologue, supposing that thou must
find in it nothing but Revenge, Brawling, and Railing upon the Author of the
second Don-Quixote, of whom I only say as others say, that he was begot in
Tordesillas, and borne in Tarragona? the truth is, herein I mean not to give
thee content. Let it be never so general a Rule, that injuries awaken and
rouse up choler in humble breasts, yet in mine must this Rule admit an
exception: Thou, it may be, would have me be-Asse him, be-Madman him, and
be-Fool him; but no such matter can enter into my thought; no, let his own Rod
whip him; as he has brewed, so let him bake; elsewhere he shall have it: and
yet there is somewhat which I cannot but resent, and that is, that he
exprobates unto me my age and my mayme [He lost one of his hands] as if it had
been in my power to hold Time back, that so it should not pass upon me, or if
my mayme had befaln me in a Tavern, and not upon the most famous occasion which
either the ages past or present have seen, [At the Battle of Lepanto] nor may
the times to come look for the like: If my Wounds shine not in the eyes of such
as behold them; yet shall they be esteemed at least in the judgment of such as
know how they were gotten. A Soldier had rather be dead in the Battle, then
free by running away: And so is it with me, that should men set before me and
facilitate an impossibility, I should rather have desired to have been in that
prodigious action, then now to be in a whole skin free from my skars for not
having been in it. The skars which a Soldier shows in his face and breast, are
stars which lead others to the Haven of Honor, and to the desire of just
Praise: and besides it may be noted, that it is not so much men's Pens which
write as their Judgments; and these use to be bettered with years. Nor am I
insensible of his calling me Envious, and describing me as an ignorant. What
Envy may be, I vow seriously, that of those two sorts that are, I skill not;
but of that Holy, Noble, and ingenious Envy, which being so, as it is, I have
no meaning to abuse any Priest; especially if he has annexed unto him the
title of FAMILIAR of the Inquisition: and if he said so, as it seems by this
second Author that he did, he is utterly deceived; For I adore his Wit,
admire his Works, and his continual virtuous employment; and yet in effect I
cannot but thank this sweet Senior Author, for saying that my Novells are more
Satyrick then Exemplar; and that yet they are good, which they could not be,
were they not so quite through. It seems thou tellest me that I write somewhat
limited and obscurely, and contain my self within the bounds of my modesty, as
knowing that a man ought not add misery to him that is afflicted, which
doubtless must needs be very great in this Senior, since he dares not appear
in open Field in the light, but conceals his Name, fains his Countey, as if he
had committed some Treason against his King. Well, if thou chance to light upon
him and know him, tell him from me, that I hold for my self no whit agrieved at
him; for I well know what the temptations of the Devil are; and one of the
greatest is, when he puts into a man's head, that he is able to compose and
print a Book, whereby he shall gain as much Fame as Money, and as much Money
as Fame: For confirmation hereof, I entreat thee, when thou art disposed to be
merry and pleasant, to tell him this Tale.

There was a Madman in Sevill which hit upon one of the prettiest absurd
tricks that ever Madman in this world lighted on; which was: He made him a
Cane sharp at one end, and then catching a Dog in the street, or elsewhere,
he held fast one of the Dogs Legs under his Foot, and the other he held up
with his hand. Then fitting his Cane as well as he could behind, he fell a
blowing till he made the Dog as round as a Ball: and then, holding him still
in the same manner, he gave him two claps with his hand on the Belly, and so
let him go, saying to those which stood by (which always were many) How think
you, my Masters? Is it a small matter to blow up a Dog like a Bladder? And
how think you is it a small matter to make a Book? If this Tale should not fit
him; then, good Reader, tell him this other; for this also is of a Madman and
a Dog. In Cordova was another Madman, which was wont to carry on his head a
huge piece of Marble, not of the lightest, who meeting a Masterlesse Dog,
would stalk up close to him; and on a sudden down with his burden upon him:
the Dog would presently yearn, and barking and yelling run away; three
streets could not hold him. It fell out afterward among other Dogs (upon whom
he let fall his load) there was a Cappers Dog, which his Master made great
account of, upon whom he let down his great stone and took him full on the
head: the poor battered Curre cries pitifully: his Master spies it; and
affected with it, gets a meat-yard, assaults the Madman, and leaves him not a
whole bone in his skin; and at every blow that he gave him he cries out, Thou
Dog, Thou Thief, my Spaniell! Saw thou not, thou cruel Villain, that my
Dog was a Spaniell? And ever and anon repeating still his Spaniell, he sent
away the Madman all black and blue. The Madman was terribly skared herewith,
but got away, and for more then a month after never came abroad: At last out
he comes with his invention again, and a bigger load then before; and coming
where the Dog stood, viewing him over and over again very heedily, he had no
mind, he durst not let go the stone, but only said, Take heed, this is a
Spaniel. In fine whatsoever Dogs he met, though they were Mastives or
Fysting-Hounds, he still said they were Spaniels. So that after that, he never
durst throw his great stone any more. And who knows but the same may befall
this our Historian, that he will no more let fall the prize of his wit in
Books? for in being naught, they are harder then Rocks: Tell him too, that for
his menacing, that with his Book he will take away all my gain, I care not a
straw for him; but betaking my self to the famous Interlude of Perendenga, I
answer him, Let the old man my Master live, and Christ be with us all. Long
live the great Conde de Lemos (whose Christianity and well known Liberallitie
against all the blows of my short Fortune keeps me on foot) And long live that
eminent Charity of the Cardinal of Toledo, Don Bernardo de Sandovaly Rojas.
Were there no printing in the World, or were there as many Books printed
against me, as there are letters in the Rimes of Mingo Revulgo, those two
Princes without any solicitation of flattery, or any other kind of applause,
of their sole bounty have taken upon them to do me good, and to favor me;
wherein I account my self more happy and rich, then if Fortune, by some other
ordinary way, had raised me to her highest Honor: a Poor man may have it, but
a Vicious man cannot: Poverty may cast a mist upon Nobleness, but cannot
altogether obscure it; but, as the glimmering of any light of it self, though
but through narrow chinks and cranies, comes to be esteemed by high and Noble
Spirits, and consequently favored. Say no more to him; nor will I say any more
to thee; but only advertise that thou consider that this second part of
Don-Quixote, which I offer thee, is framed by the same Art, and cut out of the
same Cloth that the first was: in it I present thee with Don-Quixote enlarged,
and at last dead and buried, that so no man presume to raise any farther
reports of him; those that are past are enough: and let it suffice that an honest
man may have given notice of these discreet follies, with purpose not to enter
into them any more. For plenty of any thing, though never so good, makes it
less esteemed; and scarcity (though of evil things) make them somewhat
accounted of, I forgot to tell thee that thou may expect Persiles, which I
am now about to finish; as also the second part of Galatea.

A SUMMARY TABLE OF THAT which this second Part of the famous History of the
valorous Don-Quixote de la Mancha does contain.
CHAPTER. I.
HOw the Vicar and the Barber passed their time with Don-Quixote touching his
infirmity,
CHAP: II.
Of the Notable fray that Sancho Panca had with the Niece and the old Woman,
and other delightful Passages.
CHAP: III.
The ridiculous discourse that passed betwixt Don-Quixote, Sancho, and the
Bachelor Samson Carrasco.
CHAP: IV.
How Sancho Panca satisfies the Bachelor Samson Carrasco's doubts and demands,
with other accidents worthy to be known and related.
CHAP: V.
Of the wise and pleasant Discourse that passed betwixt Sancho Panca and his
Wife Teresa Panca, and other accidents worthy of happy remembrance.
CHAP: VI.
What passed betwixt Don-Quixote, his Niece, and the old Woman: and it is one
of the most material Chapters in all the History.
CHAP: VII.
What passed betwixt Don-Quixote and his Squire, with other famous accidents.
CHAP: VIII.
What befell Don-Quixote going to see his Mistress Dulcinea del Toboso.
CHAP: IX.
Where is set down as follows.
CHAP: X.
How Sancho cunningly enchanted the Lady Dulcinea, and other successes as
ridiculous as true.
CHAP: XI.
Of the strange Adventure that befell Don-Quixote, with the Cart or Wagon of
the Parliament of Death.
CHAP: XII.
Of the rare Adventure that befell Don-Quixote, with the Knight of the
Looking-Glasses.
CHAP: XIII.
Where the Adventure of the Knight of the Wood is prosecuted, with the
discreet, rare, and sweet Colloquy that passed betwixt the two Squires.
CHAP: XIV.
How the Adventure of the Knight of the Wood is prosecuted.
CHAP: XV.
Who the Knight of the Looking-Glasses and his Squire were.
CHAP: XVI.
What befell Don-Quixote with a discreet Gentleman of Mancha.
CHAP: XVII.
Where is showed the last and extremest hazard to which the unheard of courage
of Don-Quixote did or could arive, with the prosperous accomplishment of the
Adventure of the Lions.
CHAP: XVIII.
What happened to Don-Quixote in the Castle, or Knight of the green Cassock his
House^ with other extravagant matters.
CHAP: XIX.
Of the Adventure of the enamoured Shepherd, with other, indeed pleasant
accidents.
CHAP: XX.
Of the Marriage of the rich Camacho, and the success of poor Basilius.
CHAP: XXI.
Of the prosecution of Camacho's Marriage with other delightful accidents.
CHAP: XXII.
Of the famous Adventure of Montesino's Cave, which is in the heart of Mancha,
which the valourous Don-Quixote happily accomplished.
CHAP: XXIII.
Of the admirable things that the unapparelled Don-Quixote recounted which he
had seen in Montesino's profound Cave, whose strangeness and impossibility
makes this Chapter to be held for Apocrypha.
CHAP: XXIV.
Where are reco^nted a thousand flim-flams, as impertinent as necessary to the
understanding of this famous History.
CHAP: XXV.
Of the Adventure of the Braying, and the merry one of the Puppet-man, with the
memorable soothsaying of the prophesying Ape.
CHAP: XXVI.
Of the delightful passage of the Puppet-play, and other pleasant matters.
CHAP: XXVII.
Who Master Peter and his Ape were, with the ill success that Don-Quixote had
in the Adventure of the Braying, which ended not so well, as he would, or
thought for.
CHAP: XXVIII.
Of the things that Benengeli relates, which he that reads shall know, if he
read them with attention.
CHAP: XXIX.
Of the famous Adventure of the Enchanted Bark.
CHAP: XXX.
What happened to Don-Quixote with the faire-Huntresse.
CHAP: XXXI.
That treats of many and great affairs.
CHAP: XXXII.
Of Don-Quixotes answer to his reprehender, with other successes as wise as
witty.
CHAP: XXXIII.
Of the wholesome discourse that passed betwixt the Duchess and her Damzels
with Sancho Panca, worthy to be read and noted.
CHAP: XXXIV.
How notice is given for the dis-inchanting of the peerlesse Dulcinea del
Toboso, which is one of the most famous Adventures in all this Book.
CHAP: XXXV.
Where is prosecuted the notice that Don-Quixote had of dis-inchanting
Dulcinea, with other admirable accidents.
CHAP: XXXVI.
Of the strange and unimagined Adventure of the afflicted Matron, alias, the
Countess Trifaldi, with a Letter that Sancho Panca wrote to his Wife Teresa
Panca.
CHAP: XXXVII.
Of the prosecution of the famo^ Adventure of the afflicted Matron.
CHAP: XXXVIII.
The afflicted Matron recounts her ill Errantry.
CHAP: XXXIX.
Where the Trifaldi prosecutes her stupendous (...) memorable History.
CHAP: XL.
Of matters that touch and pertain to this Adventure, and most memorable
History.
CHAP: XLI.
Of Clavilenos arrival, with the end of this dilated Adventure.
CHAP: XLII.
Of the advice that Don-Quixote gave Sancho Panca before he should go to
govern the Island with other matter well digested.
CHAP: XLIII.
Of the second advice that Don-Quixote gave Sancho Pancha.
CHAP: XLIV.
How Sancho Panca was carried to his Government, and of the strange Adventure
that befell Don-Quixote in the Castle.
CHAP: XLV.
How the grand Sancho Panca took possession of his Island, and began to
govern.
CHAP: XLVI.
Of the fearful Low-bell-Cally horror that Don-Quixote received in process of
his Love, by the enamoured Altisidora.
CHAP: XLVII.
How Sancho demeaned himself in his Government.
CHAP: XLVIII.
What happened to Don-Quixote with Donna Rodriguez, the Dutchesses waiting woman;
with other successes, worthy to be written and had in eternal remembrance.
CHAP: XLIX.
What happened to Sancho in walking the Round in his Island,
CHAP: L.
Where is declared who were the Enchanters and Executioners that whipped the
Matron, pincht and scratcht Don-Quixote, with the success the Page had that
carried the Letter to Teresa Panca, Sancho's wife.
CHAP: LI.
Of Sancho's proceeding in his government, with other successes as good as
Touch.
CHAP: LII.
The Adventure of the second Afflicted or straightned Matron, alias, Donna
Rodriguez.
CHAP: LIII.
Of the troublesome end and up-shot that Sancho Pancaes Government had.
CHAP: LIVE.
That treats of matters concerning this History, and no other.
CHAP: LV.
Of matters that befell Sancho by the way, and others the best in the World.
CHAP: LVI.
Of the unmercifull and never seen battle that passed between Don-Quixote
and the Lackie Tosilos, in defense of the Matron Donna Rodriguez Daughter.
CHAP: LVII.
How Don-Quixote took his leave of the Duke, and what befell him with the
witty wanton Altisidora, the Dutcheses Damozell.
CHAP: LVIII,
Of Adventures that came so thick and threefold on Don-Quixote, that they gave
no respite one to the other.
CHAP: LIX.
Of an extraordinary accident that befell Don-Quixote, which may be held for an
Adventure.
CHAP: LX.
What happened to Don-Quixote going to Barselona.
CHAP: LXI.
What happened to Don-Quixote at his entrance into Barselona, with other events
more true then witty.
CHAP: LXII.
The Adventure of the Enchanted head, with other flim flams that must be
recounted.
CHAP: LXIII.
Of the ill-chance that befell Sancho at his seeing the Galleys, with the
strange Adventure of the Morisca.
CHAP: LXIV.
Of an Adventure that most perplexed Don-Quixote, of any that hitherto befell
him.
CHAP: LXV.
Who the Knight of the white Moon was, with Don-Gregorioes liberty, and other
passages.
CHAP: LXVI.
That treats of what the Reader shall see, and he that hearkens hear.
CHAP: LXVII.
Of the resolution Don-Quixote had to turn Shepherd, and lead a Country life,
whilst the promise for his year was expired, with other accidents truly good
and savory.
CHAP: LXVIII.
Of the Bristled Adventure that befell Don-Quixote.
CHAP: LXIX.
Of the newest and strangest Adventure, that in all the course of this History
befell Don-Quixote.
CHAP: LXX.
Of diverse rare things which serve for the better illustration and clearing of
this History.
CHAP: LXXI.
Of what befell Don-Quixote and his Squire Sancho Panca in their travel
toward their Village.
CHAP: LXXII.
How Don-Quixote and Sancho arrived at their Village.
CHAP: LXXIII.
Of the presages and fore-boadings which happened to Don-Quixote at the entrance
into his Village, with other Adventures which serve for grace and ornament unto
this famous History, and which give credit unto it.
CHAP: LXXIV.
How Don-Quixote fell sick; of the Will he made, and of his death.
THE SECOND PART OF Don-Quixote.
CHAP. I.
How the Vicar and the Barber passed their time with Don-Quixote, touching his
infirmity.
CID Hamet Benengeli tells us in the second part of this History, and
Don-Quixote his third sally, that the Vicar and Barber were almost a whole
month without seeing him, because they would not renew and bring to his
remembrance things done and past. Notwithstanding, they forbore not to visit
his Niece and the old woman, charging them they should be careful to cherish
him, and to give him comforting meats to eat, good for his heart and brain,
from whence in likeli-hood all his ill proceeded. They answered, that they did
so, and would do it with all possible love and care: For they perceived that
their Master continually gave signs of being in his entire judgment; at which
the two received great joy, and thought they took the right course, when they
brought him enchanted in the Oxe-Waine (as has been declared in the first part
of this so famous, as punctual History.) So they determined to visit him, and
make some trial of his amendment, which they thought was impossible; and
agreed not to touch upon any point of Knight Errantry; because they would not
endanger the ripping up of a sore, whose stitches made it yet tender.

At length they visited him, whom they found set up in his bed, clad in a
Wastecoat of green bays, on his head a red Toledo bonet, so dried and withered
up, as if his flesh had been mommied. He welcomed them, and they asked him
touching his health: of it and himself he gave them good account, with much
judgment and elegant phrase, and in process of discourse, they fell into
State-matters, and manner of Government, correcting this abuse, and condemning
that; reforming one custom, and rejecting another; each of the three making
himself a new Lawmakers, a modern Lycurgus, and a spick and span new Salon; and
they so refined the Commonwealth, as if they had clapped it into a forge, and
drawn it out in another fashion then they had put it in. Don-Quixote in all was
so discreet, that the two Examiners undoubtedly believed, he was quite well,
and in his right mind. The Niece and the old woman were present at this
discourse, and could never give God thanks enough, when they saw their Master
with so good understanding: But the Vicar changing his first intent, which was,
not to meddle in matters of Cavallery, would now make a through trial of
Don-Quixotes perfect recovery; and so now and then tells him news from Court,
and amongst others, that it was given out for certain, that the Turk was come
down with a powerful Army, that his design was not known, nor where such a
clowd would discharge it self: and that all Christendom was affrighted with
this terror he puts us in with his yearly Alarm: Likewise, that his Majesty
had made strong the coasts of Naples, Sicily, and Malta. To this (said
Don-Quixote) his Majesty has done like a most politic Warrior, in looking to
his Dominions in time, lest the enemy might take him at unawares: but if my
counsel might prevail, I would advise him to use a prevention, which he is
far from thinking on at present. The Vicar scarce heard this, when he thought
with himself; God defend thee, poor Don-Quixote: for me thinks thou fallest
headlong from the high top of thy madness, into the profound bottom of thy
simplicity. But the Barber presently being of the Vicars mind, asks
Don-Quixote what advice it was he would give? for peradventure (said he) it is
such an one as may be put in the roll of those many idle ones that are usually
given to Princes. Mine, Good Man, Shaver (quoth Don-Quixote) is no such. I
spoke not to that intent (replied the Barber) but that it is commonly seen,
that all or the most of your projects that are given to his Majesty, are either
impossible, or frivolous, either in detriment of the King or Kingdom. Well,
mine (quoth Don-Qiuxote) is neither impossible, nor frivolous; but the
plainest, the justest, the most manageable and compendious, that may be
contained in the thought of any Projectour. Your are long a telling us it,
Master Don-Quixote, said the Vicar, I would not (replied he) tell it you here
now, that it should be early to morrow in the ears of some privy Counselor,
and that another should reap the praise and reward of my labor. For me (quoth
the Barber) I pass my word, here and before God, to tell neither King nor
Keisar, nor any earthly man what you say: an oath I learnt out of the Ballad of
the Vicar, in the Preface whereof he told the King of the thief that robbed him
of his two hundred double pistolets, and his gadding mule. I know not your
histories (said Don-Quixote) but I presume the oath is good, because Master
Barber is an honest man. If he were not (said the Vicar) I would make it good,
and undertake for him upon pain of excommunication. And who shall undertake
for you. Master Vicar, (quoth Don-Quixote?) My profession (answered he) which
is to keep counsel. Body of me (said Don-Quixote) is there any more to be
done then, but that the King cause proclamation to be made, that at a prefixed
day, all the Knights Errant that rove up and down Spain, repair to the Court?
and if there came but half a dozen, yet such an one there might be amongst
them, as would destroy all the Turks power. Harken to me, Hoe, and let me take
you with me: do you think it is strange, that one Knight Errant should conquer
an army of two hundred thousand fighting men, as if all together had but one
throat, or were made of sugar pellets? But tell me, how many stories are full
of those marvels? You should have brave Don Belianis alive now, with a pox to
me, for I Will curse no other; or some one of that invincible lineage of Amadis de
Gaul: for if any of these were living at this day, and should affront the
Turk, I faith I would not be in his coat: but God will provide for his people,
and send some one, if not so brave a Knight Errant as those formerly, yet at
least that shall not be inferior in courage; and God knows my meaning, and I
say no more Alas (quoth the Niece at this instant) hang me, if my master have
not a desire to turn Knight Errant again. Then cried Don-Quixote, I must die
so, march the Turk up and down when he will, and as powerfully as he can, I
say again, God knows my meaning. Then said the Barber, Good Sirs, give me
leave to tell you a brief tale of an accident in Sevill, which because it falls
out so pat, I must tell it. Don-Quixote was willing, the Vicar and the rest
gave their attention, and thus he began.

In the house of the madmen at Sevil, there was one put in there by his
kindred, to recover him of his lost wits, he was a Bachelour of Law, graduated
in the Canons at Osuna, and though he had been graduated at Salamanca, yet
(as many are of opinon) he would have been mad there too; this Bachelour
after some years imprisonment, made it appear that he was well and in his
right wits, and to this purpose writes to the Archbishop, desiring him
earnestly, and with forcible reasons, to deliver him from that misery in which
he lived, since by Gods mercy, he had now recovered his lost understanding:
and that his kindred, only to get his wealth, had kept him there, and so meant
to hold him still wrongfully till his death. The Archbishop, induced by many
sensible and discreet lines of his, commanded one of his Chaplains to inform
himself from the Rector of the house, of the truth; and to speak also with the
mad man, that if he perceived he was in his wits, he should give him his
liberty. The Chaplain did this; and the Rector said that the party was still
mad, that although he had sometimes fair intermissions, yet in the end he
would grow to such a raving, as might equal his former discretion (as he told
him) he might perceive by discoursing with him. The Chaplain would needs make
trial; and coming to him, talked with him an hour or more; and in all that
time the Madman never gave him a cros^e nor wild answer, but rather spoke
advisedly, that the Chaplain was forced to believe him to be sensible enough:
and amongst the rest he told him, the Rector had an inkling against him,
because he would not lose his Kindreds Presents, that he might say he was Mad
by fits: Withal he said, that his Wealth was the greatest wrong to him in his
evil Fortune, since to enjoy that, his enemies defrauded him, and would doubt
of Gods mercy to him that had turned him from a Beast to a Man. Lastly, he
spoke so well that he made the Rector to be suspected, and his Kindred
thought covetous and damnable persons, and himself so discreet, that the
Chaplain determined to have him with him, that the Archbishop might see him
and be satisfied of the truth of the business. With this good belief the
Chaplain required the Rector to give the Bachelor the clothes he brought with
him thither. Who replied, desiring him to consider what he did, for that the
party was still mad. But the Rectors advice prevailed nothing with the
Chaplain to make him leave him; so he was forced to give way to the
Archbishops Order, and to give him his apparel, which was new and handsome.
And when the Mad man saw himself civilly clad, and his Mad-mans weeds off; he
requested the Chaplain that in charity he would let him take his leave of the
Madmen his Companions. The Chaplain told him that he would likewise
accompany him, and see the Madmen that were in the house. So up they went,
and with them some others there present; and the Bachelor being come to a kind
of Cage, where an outrageous Madman lay (although as then still and quiet) he
said, Brother, if you will command me ought, I am going to my house; for now it
has pleased God of his infinite goodness and mercy, without my desert to
bring me to my right mind: I am now well and sensible; for unto Gods power
nothing is impossible: Be of good comfort; trust in him, that since he has
turned me to my former estate, he will do the like to you, if you trust in
him. I will be careful to send you some dainty to eat, and by any means eat
it; for let me tell you what I know by experience, that all our madness
proceeds from the emptiness of our Stomachs, that fills our Brains with air.
Take heart, take heart; for this dejecting in misery lessens the health, and
hastens death. Another Mad man in a Cage over against, heard all the Bachelors
discourse, and raising himself upon an old Matresse, upon which he lay stark
naked, asked aloud, who it was that was going away sound and in his wits. The
Bachelor replied; It is I, brother, that am going: for I have no need to stay
here any longer; for which I render infinite thanks to God that has done me so
great a favor. Take heed what you say, Bachelor, replied the Madman; let not
the Devil deceive you; keep still your foot, and be quiet here at home, and
so you may save a bringing back. I know (quoth the Bachelor) I am well; and
shall need to walk no more stations hither. You are well, said the Madman: the
event will try: God be with you; but I swear to thee by Jupiter, whose Majesty
I represent on earth, that for this days offense I will eat up all Sevill for
delivering thee from hence, and saving thou art in thy wits, I will take such a
punishment on this City as shall be remembered for ever and ever, Amen. Know
not thou, poor Rascal Bachelor, that I can do it, since (as I say) I am
thundering Jupiter, that carry in my hands the scorching bolts, with which I
can, and use to threaten and destroy the World? But in one thing only will I
chastise this ignorant Town; which is, That for three years together there
shall fall no rain about it, nor the Liberties thereof, counting from this time
and instant hence forward, that this threat has been made. Thou free? thou
sound? thou wise? and I mad, I sick, I bound? as sure will I rain as I mean to
hang my self. The standers by gave attention to the Madman: but our Bachelor
turning to the Chaplain, and taking him by the hand, said, Be not afraid Sir,
nor take any heed to this Mad man's words: for if he be Jupiter, and will not
rain; I that am Neptune, the Father and God of the Waters, will rain as often as
I list, and need shall require. To which (quoth the Chaplain) Nay, Master
Neptune, it were not good angring Master Jupiter: I pray stay you here still,
and some other time, at more leisure and opportunity we will return for you
again. The Rector and standers by began to laugh, and the Chaplain grew to be
half abashed: the Bachelor was unclothed, there remained; and there the Tale
ends.

Well; is this the Tale, Master Barber (quoth Don-Quixote) that because it fell
out so pat you could not but relate it? Ah, goodman Shavester, goodman
Shavester! I am not Neptune God of the Waters, neither care I who thinks me a
wise man (I being none) only I am troubled to let the world understand the
error it is in, in not renewing that most happy Age, in which the Order of
Knight Erranty did flourish: But our depraved times deserve not to enjoy so
great a happiness as former Ages, when Knights Errant undertook the defense of
Kingdoms, the protection of Damzels, the succouring of Orphans, the
chastising the Proud, the reward of the humble. Most of your Knights
now-a-daies are such as russle in their silks, their cloth of gold and silver,
and such rich stuffs as these they wear rather then Maile, with which they
should arm themselves: You have no Knight now that will lie upon the bare
ground subject to the rigor of the air armed Cap a pie: None now that upright
on his styrrops, and leaning on his Lance, strives to behead-sleep (as they
say your Knights Errant did:) You have none now, that coming out of this Wood,
enters into that Mountain, and from thence tramples over a barren and desert
shore of the Sea, most commonly stormy and unquiet; and finding at the brink
of it some little Cock-boat, without Oars, Sail, Mast, or any kind of
Tackling, casts himself into it with undaunted courage, yields himself to the
implacable waves of the deep Main that now toss him as high as heaven, and
then cast him as low as Hell, and he exposed to the inevitable tempest when
he least dreams of it, finds himself at least three thousand leagues distant
from the place where he embarked himself; and leaping on a remote and unknown
shore, lights upon successes worthy to be written in brass, and not
parchment: But now sloth triumphs upon industry, idleness on labor, vice on
virtue, persumption on valor, the Theorie on the Practice of Arms, which only
lived and shined in those golden Ages and in those Knights Errant: If not, tell
me, who was more virtuous, more valiant then the renowned Amadis de Gaul? more
discreet then Palmerin of England? more affable and free then Tirante the
White? more gallant then Lisuart of Greece? a greater hackster, or more hacked
then Don Belianis? more undaunted then Perian of Gaul? who a greater
undertaker of dangers then Felismarte of Hircania? who more sincere then
Esplandian? who more courteous then Don Cierongilio of Thracia? who more fierce
then Rodomant? who wiser then King Sobrinus? who more courageous then Renaldo?
who more invincible then Roldan? who more comely or more courteous then Rogero?
from whom the Dukes of Ferrara at this day are descended (according to Turpin
in his Cosmographie.) All these Knights and many more (Master Vicar) that I
could tell you, were Knights Errant, the very light and glory of Knighthood:
These, or such as these, are they I wish for, which if it could be, his
Majesty would be well served, and might save a great deal of expense, and the
Turk might go shake his ears: And therefore let me tell you, I scorn to keep
my house, since the Chaplain delivers me not, and his Jupiter (as goodman
Barber talks) raines not; here am I that will reign when I list: this I speak
that goodman Basin may know I understand him.

Truly Mr. Don-Quixote (said the Barber) I spoke it not to that end, and so
help me God, as I mean well, and you ought not to resent any thing. I know
well enough whether I ought or no Sir, replied Don-Quixote. Then (quoth the
Vicar) well, go to; I have not spoken a word hitherto, I would not willingly
remain with one scruple which does grate and gnaw upon my Conscience, sprung
from what Master Don-Quixote has here told us. For this and much more you have
full liberty, good Master Vicar (said Don-Quixote) and therefore tell your
scruple, for sure it is no pleasure to continue with a scrupulous conscience.
Under correction (quoth the Vicar) this it is, I can by no means be persuaded
that all that Troop of Knights Errant which you named, were ever true and
really persons of flesh and bone in this world: I rather imagine all is
fiction, tales and lies, or dreams set down by men waking, or to say trulyer,
by men half and lies, or dreams set down by men waking, or to say trulyer,
by men half a sleep: There Is another error (quoth Don-Quixote) into which
many have falln, who believe not that there have been such Knights in the
world: and I my self many times in diverse companies, and upon several
occasions, have labored to show this common mistake, but sometimes have failed
in my purpose, at others not; supporting it upon the shoulders of Truth, which
is so infallible, that I may say, that with these very eyes I have beheld
Amadis de Gaul, who was a goodly tall man, well complexioned, had a broad
Beard, and black, an equal countenance betwixt mild and stern, a man of
small discourse, slow to anger, and soon appeased; and just as I have
delineated Amadis, I might in my judgment paint and decipher out as many
Knights Errant, as are in all the Histories of the World; for by apprehending,
they were such as their Histories report them, by their exploits they did, and
their qualities, their features, colors and Statures, may in good Philosophy
be guessed at. How big dear Master Don-Quixote (quoth the Barber) might Giant
Morgante be? Touching Giants (quoth Don-Quixote) there be different opinions
whether there have been any or no in the world: but the holy Scripture, which
cannot err a jot in the truth, does show us plainly that there were, telling
us the story of that huge Philistine Golias, that was seven cubits and a half
high, which is an unmeasurable greatness. Besides, in the Isle of Sicillia,
there have been found shanke-bones and shoulder-bones so great, that their
bigness showed their owners to have been Giants, and as huge as high Towers,
which Geometry will make good. But for all this, I cannot easily tell you how
big Morgante was, though I suppose he was not very tall; to which opinion I
incline, because I find in his History, where there is particular mention made
of his Acts, that many times he lay under a Roof; and therefore, since he
found an House that would hold him, it is plain he could not be of
extraordinary bigness. It Is true (quoth the Vicar) who delighting to hear him
talk so wildly, asked him what he thought of the faces of Renaldo of
Mont-alban, Don Roldan and the rest of the twelve Peers of France, who were
all Knights Errant. For Renaldo (quoth Don-Quixote) I dare boldly say, he was
broad faced, his complexion high, quick and full eyed, very exceptious and
extremely choleric, a lover of thieves and debaucht company. Touching Rolando,
or Rotolando, or Orlando, for Histories afford him all these names, I am of
opinion, and affirm that he was of a mean stature, broad-shouldred, somewhat
bow legged, abourne Bearded, his body hayrie, and his looks threatening, dull
of discourse, but affable and well behaved. If Orlando (said the Vicar) was so
sweet a youth as you describe him, no marvel though the fair Angelica
disdained him, and left him, for the handsome, brisk and conceited
beard-budding Medor, and that she had rather have his softness then tothers
roughness. That Angelica (quoth Don-Quixote) was a light houswife, a gadder
and a wanton, and left the world as full of her fopperies, as the reports of
her beauty: she despised a thousand Knights, a thousand both valiant and
discreet, and contented her self with a poor beardlesse Page, without more
wealth or honor, then what her famous Singer Ariosto could give her, in token
of his thankfulness to his friends love, either because he durst not in this
respect, or because he would not chaunt what befell this Lady, after her base
prostitution, for sure her carriage was not very honest: So he left her when he
said, And how Catayaes Scepter she had at will,
Perhaps some one will write with better quill.


And undoubtedly this was a kind of Prophecy, for Poets are called Vates,
that is, Soothsayers: and this truth has been clearly seen, for since that
time, a famous Andaluzian Poet wept, ^and sung her tears: and another famous
and rare Poet of Castile her beauty. But tell me Master Don-Quixote (quoth
the Barber) was there ever any Poet that wrote a Satyr against this fair
Lady, amongst those many that have written in her praise? I am well persuaded
(quoth Don-Quixote) that if Sacripant or Orlando had been Poets, they had
trounced the Damozell: for it is an ordinary thing amongst Poets once
disdayned, or not admitted by their feigned Mistrisses (feigned indeed, because
they feign they love them) to revenge themselves with Satyrs and Lybells; a
revenge truly unworthy noble Spirits: But hitherto I have not heard of any
infamatory verse against the Lady Angelica, that has made any hurly burly in
the world. Strange quoth the Vicar! With that they might hear the Niece and
the Old woman (who were before gone from them) keep a noise without in the
Court: so they went to see what was the matter.

CHAP. II.
Of the notable fray that Sancho Panca had with the Niece and the old-Woman,
and other delightful passages.
THe Story says, that the noise which Don-Quixote, the Vicar and the Barber
heard, was of the Niece and the old woman, that were rating Sancho Panca, that
strove with them for entrance to see Don-Quixote, who kept door against him.
What will this blood-hound have here? said they, Get you home to your own
house, for you are he and none else, that does distract and ring-lead our
Master, and carry him astray. To which (quoth Sancho) Woman of Satan, I am he
that is distracted, ring-led, and carried astray, and not your Master: it was he
that led me up and down the world, and you deceive your selves and understand
by halves: he drew me from my house with his cony-catching, promising me an
Island, which I yet hope for. A plague of your Islands (replied the Niece)
cursed Sancho: and what be your Islands? is it any thing to eat, good man
glutton, you cormorant, as you are? It Is not to eat (quoth Sancho) but to rule
and govern, better then four Cities, or four of the Kings Judges. For all
that (said the old woman) you come not in here, you bundle of mischief and
sack of wickedness, get you home and govern there, and sow your grain, and
leave seeking after Islands or Dilands. The Vicar and the Barber took great
delight to hear this Dialogue between the three: But Don-Quixote, fearing
lest Sancho should out with all, and should blunder out a company of mallcious
fooleries, or should touch upon points that might not be for his reputation, he
called him to him, and commanded the women to be silent, and to let him in.
Sancho entered, and the Vicar and Barber took leave of Don-Quixote, of whose
recovery they dispaired, seeing how much he was bent upon his wild thoughts,
and how much he was besotted with his damned Knights Errant. So (quoth the
Vicar to the Barber) you shall quickly, Gossip, perceive, when we least think
of it, that our Gallant takes his flight again by the river. No doubt (said
the Barber) but I wonder not so much at the Knights madness, as the Squires
simplicity, that believes so in the Islands, and I think all the Art in the
world will not drive that out of his noddle. God mend them (said the Vicar) and
let us expect what issue the multitude of this Knight and Squires absurdities
will have: for it seems they were both framed out of one forge, as it were,
for the Masters madness without the Servants folly, is not worth a chip. It Is
true (said the Barber) and I should be glad to know their present discourse. I
warrant (said the Vicar) the Niece and old woman will tell us all when they
have done, for they are not so mannerly as not to harken. In the Interim,
Don-Quixote locked in Sancho, and thus discoursed with him: I am very sorry,
Sancho, you should affirm and make good, that I was he that drew you from
your dog-hole cottage, knowing that I willingly left mine, a Palace in
comparison; we went out jointly, so we marched on, and so we held our whole
peregrination; both of us having undergone the same lot, the same fortune; and
if once thou wast tossed in a Blanket, I have been hanged an hundred times, and
herein have I the advantage of thee. Why, it was very fit (answered Sancho) for
(as you hold) misfortunes are more annexed to Knights Errant then to their
Squires. Thou art deceived, Sancho, (quoth Don-Quixote: for according to the
saying, Quando caput dolet, etc. I understand no other language but mine own,
said Sancho. Why I mean (replied Don-Quixote) that when the head aches, all the
body is out of tune: so that I being thy Lord and Master, am thy head, and thou
a part of me, since thou art my servant, in which respect, the ill that
touches me, must concern and grieve thee, and so thine me. Indeed (quoth
Sancho) it ought to be so: but when I was tossed in the Blanket, my head stood
aloof, like a part, beholding me fly in the air, without any feeling my grief,
and since the members are bound to suffer for the head, the head in requital
should also suffer for them. You mean, Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) that I had no
feeling of your being tossed? And if you mean so, do not, neither imagine any
such thing: for at that time, I was more vexed in spirit, then thou could be
in body: but leave we this for the present: for we shall have leisure to
consider and rectify it: and tell me, friend Sancho, what say the common
people of me? In what estimation do the Gentlemen hold me? In what the Knights
and Gallants? What say they of my valor? What of my exployts? What of my
affability? What discourse they touching my plot in raising and restoring to
the world, the long forgotten order of Knight Errantry? To conclude, I would
have thee tell me all that thou have heard: and you must tell me, without
adding to my praise, or diminishing my dispraise, for it is the part of loyal
servants, to tell the naked truth to their Masters, in its native color,
without increasing it by flattery, or diminishing it for any other vain
respect; And I would have thee, Sancho, learn by the way, that if the naked
truth should come to the ears of Princes, without the apparel of flattery,
we should have another manner of world, and other ages would be called iron,
and not ours, and this would be the golden age. And let me advise thee, Sancho,
that well and discreetly thou tell me the truth of what thou know,
concerning my demand. I shall with a very good will, Sir, (quoth Sancho) upon
condition that you shall not be angry at what I shall tell you, since you will
have the naked truth, without any other clothing then what I have seen her
with. By no means will I be angry (answered Don-Quixote) thou may speak
freely, Sancho, and without any disguise. Why then, first of all I must tell
you, the common people hold you for a notable madman, and that I am no less
Cox-combe. The ordinary Gentlemen say, that not containing your self within
the limits of Gentry, you will needs be Don your self, and be a man of
honor, having but three or four acres of land, and a rag before, and another
behind. The Knights say, they would not have your poor Squires be ranked with
them, that clout their own shoes, and take up a stitch in their own black
stockings with green silk. That concerns not me (quoth Don-Quixote) for thou
see that I go always well clad, and never patcht: indeed a little torn
sometimes, but more with my armor, then by long wearing.

Concerning your valor (quoth Sancho) your affability, your exploits, and your
plot, there be different opinions: Some say you are a mad man but a merry one;
others that you are valiant but, withal, unfortunate; a third sort, that you
are affable but impertinent: and thus they descant upon us, that they leave
neither you nor me a sound bone. Why look thou Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote)
wheresoever virtue is eminent, it is persecuted; few or none of those brave
Hero's that have lived, have escaped malicious calumniation. Julius Caesar, that
most courageous, most wise, most valiant Captain, was noted to be ambitious,
and to be somewhat slovenly in his apparel and his conditions. Alexander, who
for his exploits obtained the title of Great, is said to have been given to
drunkenness: Hercules, he with his many labors, was said to have been
lascivious and a Striker. Don Galaor, brother to Amadis de Gaul, was grudged at
for being offensive; and his brother for a Sheep-biter. So that Sancho, since
so many worthy men have been calumniated, I may well suffer mine, if it have
been no more then thou tellest me. Why, there is the quiddity of the matter;
Body of my Father, quoth Sancho. Was there any more said then, quoth
Don-Quixote? There Is more behind yet, said, Sancho, all that was said
hitherto, is Cakes and whitebread to this: But if you will know all concerning
these calumnies, I Will bring you one hither by and by that shall tell um you all
without missing a scrap; for last night Bartholomew Carrascoes son arived,
that comes from study from Salamanca, and has proceeded Batchelour, and as I
went to bid him welcome home, he told me that your History was in print,
under the Title of the most ingenious Gentleman Don-Quixote de la Mancha; and
he tells me that I am mentioned too, by mine own name of Sancho Panca, and
Dulcinea del Toboso is in too, and other matters that passed betwixt us, at
which I was amazed, and blessed my self how the Historian that wrote them
could come to the knowledge of them. Assute thee Sancho (said Don-Quixote) the
Author of our History is some sage Enchanter: for such are not ignorant of
all secrets they write, Well (said Sancho) if he were wise and an Enchanter, I
will tell you according as Samstn Carrasco told me, for that is the man's name
that spoke with me, that the Authors name of this History is Cid Hamete
Beregena [it should be Benengeli, but Sancho simply mistakes, as follows in
the next note.] That is the name of a Moore, (said Don-Quixotes.) It is very
like (quoth Sancho) for your Moors are great lovers of Berengens, [Berengena is
a fruit in Spain which they boil with sod meat, as we do Carrats, and here
was Sanchoes simplicity in mistaking, and to think that name was given to the
Author for loving the fruit.] Sancho (said Don-Quixote) you are out in the
Moors Surname; which is Cid Hamete Benengeli: And Cid in the Arabicke
signifies Lord. It may be so (quoth Sancho) but if you will have the
Batchelour come to you, I Will bring him to you flying. Friend (quoth Don-Quixote)
thou shall do me a special pleasure, for I am in suspense with what thou
have told me, and will not eat a bit till I am informed of all. Well, I go
for him (said Sancho) And leaving his Master in that his suspense, went for the
Batchelour, with whom in a very short time after he returned, and the three
had a passing pleasant Dialogue.

CHAP. III.
The ridiculous Discourse that passed betwixt Don-Quixote, Sancho, and the
Bachelor Samson Carrasco.
DON-QVIXOTE was monstrous pensative, expecting the Bachelor Carrasco, from
whom he hoped to hear the news of himself in print (as Sancho had told him)
and he could not be persuaded that there was such a History, since yet the
blood of Enemies, killed by him, was scarce dry upon his Sword-blade, and would
they have his noble Acts of Chivalry already in the Press? Notwithstanding,
he thought that some wise man, or friend, or enemy, by way of Enchantment, had
committed them to the Press: If a friend, then to extol him for the most
remarkable of any Knight Errant: If an Enemy, to annihilate them, and clap um
beneath the basest and meanest that ever were mentioned of any inferior
Squire, although (thought he to himself) no Acts of Squire were ever
divulged: but if there were any History, being of a Knight Errant, it must
needs be lofty and stately, famous, magnificent and true. With this he
comforted himself somewhat, but began to be discomforted, to think that his
Author must be a Moore, by reason of that name of Cid: and from Moors there
could be no truth expected; for all of them are Cheaters Impostors and Chemists.

He feared likewise that he might treat of his Love with some indecencie, that
might redound to the lessening and prejudice of his Lady Dulcinea del Toboso's
honesty, he desired that he might declare his constancy and the decorum that
he had ever kept toward her, contemning Queens and Empresses, and Damsels of
all sorts, keeping distance with violencies of natural motions. Sancho and
Carrasco found him thus tossed and turmoyled in these and many such like
imaginations, whom Don-Quixote received with much courtesy.

This Bachelor, though his name was Samson, was not very tall, but a notable
Waghalter, lean-faced, but of a good understanding: he was about four and
twenty years of age, round-faced, flat-nosed, and wide-mouthed, all signs of a
malicious disposition, and a friend to conceits and merriment, as he showed it
when he saw Don-Quixote; for he fell upon his knees before him, saying, Good
Master Don-Quixote give me your Greatness his hand; for by the habit of St.
Peter, which I wear, you are, Sir, one of the most complete Knights Errant,
that has been or shall be upon the roundnesse of the earth. Well fare Cid
Hamete Benengeli, that left the stories of your Greatness to Posterity, and
more then well may that curious Author fare, that had the care to cause them
to be translated out of the Arabic into our vulgar Castilian, to the general
entertainment of all men.

Don-Quixote made him rise and said; Then it seems my History is extant, and
that he was a Moor and a wise man that made it. So true it is (quoth Samson)
that upon my knowledge, at this day there be printed above twelve thousand
copies of your History: if not, let Portugal, Barcelona, and Valencia speak,
where they have been printed; and the report goes that they are now printing at
Antwerp; and I have a kind of guess, that there is no Nation or Language
where they will not be translated. One of the things then (quoth Don-Quixote)
that ought to give a man virtuous and eminent content in, is, to see himself
living, and to have a good name from every bodies mouth, to be printed and in
the Press: I said with a good name; for otherwise no death could be equalled
to that life. If it be for good name (said the Bachelour) your Worship carries
the prize from all Knights Errant: For the Moor in his language, and the
Christian in his, were most curefull to paint to the life, your Gallantry, your
great Courage in attempting of Dangers, your Patience in Adversities. and your
Sufferance, as well in Misfortunes as in your Wounds, your Honesty and
Constancy in the so Platonic Loves of your self and my Lady Donna Dulcinea
del Toboso. I never (replied Sancho) heard my Lady styled Don before, only the
Lady Dulcinea del Toboso; and there the History erreth somewhat. This is no
objection of moment (said Carasco.) No truly (quoth Don-Quixote:) But tell me,
Signior Bachelor, which of the exploits of mine are most ponderous in this
History?

In this (said the Bachelor) there be different opinions, as there be different
tastes: Some delight in the Adventure of the Winde-Mills, that you took to be
Briareans and Giants: Others in that of the Fulling-hammers: This man in the
description of the two Armies, which afterward fell out to be two Flocks of
Sheep: That man does extol your Adventure of the dead man that was carried to
be buried at Segovia: One says that that of the freeing of the Gally-Slaves
goes beyond them all: Another, that none comes near that of the Benitian
Giants, with the combat of the valourous Biscayner. Tell me (said Sancho) Sir
Bachelor, comes not that in of the Yanguesian Carriers, when our precious
Rozinante longed for the forbidden fruit? The wise man (said Samson) left out
nothing, he sets down all most punctually, even to the very capers that Sancho
fetched in the blanket. Not in the blanket (replied Sancho) but in the air more
then I was willing.

According to my thought (said Don-Quixote) there is no humane History in the
World that has not his changes, especially those that treat of Cavallery,
which can never be full of prosperous successes. For all that (replied the
Bachelor) there be some that have read your History, that would be glad the
Authors had omitted some of those infinite bastings that in diverse incounters
were given to Sir Don-Quixote. I, there (quoth Sancho) comes in the truth of
the Story. They might likewise in equity silence them (said Don-Quixote) since
those actions that neither change nor alter the truth of the Story are best
left out, if they must redound to the misprizing of the chief person of the
History. Aeneas in faith was never so pitiful as Virgill paints him out; Nor
Ulysses so subtle as Homer describes him. True it is (said Samson) but it is
one thing to write like a Poet, and another like an Historian: the Poet may say
or sing things; not as they were, but as they ought to have been: And the
Historian must write things, not as they ought to be, but as they have been,
without adding or taking away ought from the truth.

Well, (said Sancho) if you go to telling of truths, we shall find that this
Signior Moor has all the bastings of my Master and me; for I am sure they
never took measure of his Worships shoulders, but they took it of all my body
too: but no marvel; for as my Master himself says, the rest of the parts must
participate of the heads grief. Sancho, you are a Crack-rope (quoth
Don-Quixote:) in faith you want no memory, when you list to have it. If I would
willingly forget those ^udgellings that I have had, the bunches yet fresh on my
ribs would not consent^ Peace Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) and interrupt not the
Bachelour, whom I request to proceed; and tell me, what is said of me in the
mentioned History. And of me too (said Sancho) for it is said that I am one of
the principal Parsonages of it. Personages, and not Parsonages, you would say
Sancho (quoth Samson.) More correcting of words (quoth Sancho?) Go to this,
and we shall not end in our life time. Hang me Sancho (said Samson) if you be
not the second person in the Story; and you have some that had as lieve hear
you speak as the best there; though others would not stick to say, you were
too credulous, to believe that your government of the Island offered by Sir
Don-Quixote, here present, might be true.

There is yet Sunshine upon the walls (quoth Don-Quixote) and when Sancho
comes to be^ of more years, with the experience of them he will be more able
and fit then now, to be a Governor. By the Mass (said Sancho) if I be not
fit to Govern an Island at these years, I shall never Govern, though I come to
be as old as Methusalem; the mischief is, that the said Island is delaid I
know not how, and not that I want brain to Govern it. Leave all to God Sancho
(said Don-Quixote) for all will be well, and perhaps better then you think for;
and the leaves in the Tree move not without the will of God.

It Is true indeed (said Samson) for if God will, Sancho shall not want a
thousand Islands, much less one: I have seen (said Sancho) of your Governors
in the world, that are not worthy to wipe my shoes, and for all this, they
give um titles, and are served in Plate. Those are not Governors of Islands
(replied Samson) but of other easier Governments; for they that govern
Islands, must be at least Grammarians. For your Gra, I care not, but your Mare
I could like well enough; but leaving this government to Gods hands, let him
place me where he pleases: I say, Sir Bachelour Samson Carrasco, that I am
infinitely glad that the Author of the History has spoken of me, in such sort
that the things he speaks of me, do not cloy the Reader, for by the faith of
a Christian, if he had spoken any thing of me not befitting an old Christian
as I am, [In Spanish Christiano vieio a name they desire to be distinguished
from the Moors by:] I should make deaf men hear on it. That were to work
miracles, said Samson. Miracles or not miracles (quoth Sancho) every man look
how he speaks or writes of men, and set not down each thing that comes into his
noddle in a mingle-mangle. One of the faults that they say (said Carrasco) is
in that History, is this; that his Author put in it a certain Novell or Tale,
entitled the Curious Impertinent, not that it was ill, or not well contrived,
but that it was unseasonable for that place, neither had it any thing to do
with the History of Don-Quixote.

I Will hold a wager (quoth Sancho) the Dog-bolt has made a Gallimawfry. Let me
tell you (said Don-Quixote) the Author of my story is not wise, but some
ignorant Prater, that at unawares and without judgment undertook it, hab-nab,
as Orbaneja the Painter of Vbeda, who being asked what he Painted? answered,
As it happens; sometimes he would paint ye a Cock, but so unlike that he was
forced to write underneth it in Gothish letters, This is a Cock: and thus I
believe it is with my History, that it has need of a Coment to make it
understood.

No surely (replied Samson) it is so conspicuous and so void of difficulty,
that Children may handle him, Youths may read him, Men may understand him, and
old men may celebrate him: To conclude, he is so gleaned, so read, and so
known to all sorts of People that they scarce see a lean horse pass by, when
they say, There goes Rozinante: And amongst these Pages are most given to read
him: You have no great man's withdrawing room that has not a Don-Quixote in
him; some take him, if others lay him down; these close with him; they demand
him: Lastly, the Story is the most pleasing, the least hurtful for
entertainment that has hitherto been seen; for all over it, there is not to be
seen a dishonest word, or one like one; nor an imagination less then
Catholic.

He that should write otherwise (quoth Don-Quixote) should write no truths,
but lies; and he that does so, ought to be burned, like them that coin false
money; and I know not what the Author meant to put in Novels and strange
Tales, my Story affording him matter enough; belike he holds himself to the
Proverb of Chaff and Hay, etc. Well, I Will tell you, out of mentioning only my
thoughts, my sighs, my tears, my honest wishes, and my on-sets, he might have
made a greater volume then all Tostatus Works. Indeed, Signior Bachelor, all
that I conceive, is, that to write a History or any other Work of what sort
soever, a man had need of a strong judgment and a ripe understanding: To speak
wittily and write conceits, belongs only to good wits: The cunningest part in a
Play is the Fools; because he must not be a Fool that would well counterfeit
to seem so. An History is as a sacred thing, which ought to be true and real;
and where truth is, there God is, in as much as concerns truth; howsoever,
you have some that do so compose and cast their Works from them, as if they
were Fritters.

There is no book so bad (said the Bachelour) that has not some good in it.
No doubt of that (said Don-Quixote:) but many times it falls out, that those
that have worthily hoorded up, and obtained great fame by their writings, when
they commit them to the Press, they either altogether lose it, or in something
lessen it. The reason of it (quoth Samson) is this, that as the printed works
are viewed by leisure, their faults are easily espied, and they are so much the
more pried into, by how much the greater the Authors fame is: Men famous for
their wits, great Poets, illustrious Historians, are always, or for the most
part envied by them that have a pleasure and particular pastime to judge of
other men's writings, without publishing their own. That Is not to be wondered at
(cries Don-Quixote?) for there be many Divines that are nothing worth in a
Pulpit, and are excellent in knowing the defect or excess of him that
preaches. All this (said Carrasco) Sir Done Qiuxote is right, but I could wish
such Censurers were more mild and less scrupulous, in looking on the moates
of the most clear sun of his works whom they bite; for if Aliquando bonus
dormitat Homerus, let them consider how much he watched to show the light of
his work, without the least shadow that might be; and it might be, that what
seems ill to them, were Moles, that sometimes increase the beauty of the Face
that has them; and thus, I say, that he that prints a Book, puts himself
into a manifest danger, being of all impossibilities the most impossible to
frame it so that it may content and satisfy all that read it.

The Book that treats of me (quoth Don-Quixote) will please very few: Rather
contrary (says Samson) for as Stultorum infinitus est numerus, an infinite
number have been delighted with this History, but some found fault, and
craftily taxed the Authors memory, in that he forgot to tell who was the
thief that stole Sanchoes dapple, for there is no mention there, only it is
inferred that he was stole, and not long after we see him mounted upon the same
Ass, without knowledge how he was found. They also say, that he forgot to tell
what Sancho did with those hundred pistolets which he found in the Maile in
Sierra Morena, for he never mentions them more, and there be many that desire
to know what became of them, and how he employed them, which is one of the
essential points in the work.

Master Samson (said Sancho) I am not now for your reckonings or relations, for
my stomach is fai^t, and if I fetch it not again with a sup or two of the old
Dog, it will make me as gaunt as Saint Lucia; I have it at home, and my
Pigs-nie stays for me, when I have dined I am for ye, and will satisfy you
and all the world in any thing you will ask me, as well touching the loss of
mine Ass, as the expense of the hundred pistolets: And so without expecting
any reply, or exchanging another word, home he goes. Don-Quixote entreated the
Bachelour to stay and take a pittance with him; The Bachelour accepted the
invitement, and so staid dinner: Beside their ordinary fare, they had a pair
of household Pigeons added; at table they discoursed of Cavallery, Carrasco
followed his humor, the banquet was ended, and they slept out the heat: Sancho
returned, and the former discourse was renewed.

CHAP. IV.
How Sancho Panca satisfies the Bachelor Samson Carrasco's doubts and demands,
with other Accidents worthy to be known and related.
SANCHO came back to Don-Quixotes house, and turning to his former discourse
said, Touching what Master Samson desired to know; who, how, and when mine Ass
was stolen: By way of answer, I say; that the very same night we fled from
the hue and cry, we entered Sierra Morena, after the unfortunate Adventure of
the Gally-slaves and the dead-man that was carrying to Segovia, my Master and I
got us into a thicket, where he leaning upon his Lance, and I upon my Dapple,
both of us well bruized and wearied with the former skermishes, we fell to
sleep as soundly, as if we had been upon some fether beds, especially I, that
slept so soundly, that he, whosoever he was, might easily come and put me upon
four Stakes, which he had fastened upon both sides of my pack-saddle, upon
which he left me thus mounted, and without perceiving it, got my Dapple from
under me.

This was easy to be done, and no strange accident; for we read that the
same happened to Sacripant, when being at the siege of Albraca, that famous
Thief Brunel^, with the self same slight got his horse from under his legs.
Sancho proceeds: It was light day (said he) when I had scarce stretched my
self, but the stakes failed, and I got a good squelch upon the ground: then I
looked for mine Ass, but not finding him, the tears came to mine eyes, and I
made such strange moan, that if the Author of our History omitted it, let him
be assured he forgot a worthy passage. I know not how long after, coming
with my Lady the Princess Micomicona, I knew mine Ass, and that he who rode
on him in the habit of a Gipson was that Gines de Passamonte, that Cheater,
that arrant Mischief-monger that my Master and I freed from the Chain.

The error was not in this (said Samson) but that before there was any news of
your Ass, the Author still said, you were mounted upon the self-same Dapple.
I know not what to say to that (quoth Sancho) but that either the Historian was
deceived, or else it was the carelessness of the Printer. Without doubt (says
Samson) 'twas like to be so: But what became of the Pistolets? Were they sp^nt?

I spent them upon my self (quoth Sancho) and on my Wife and Children, and they
have been the cause that she has endured my Journies and Careers, which I
have fetch in my Master Don-Quixotes service; for if I should have returned
empty, and without mine Ass, I should have been welcomed with a pox: And if
you will know any more of me, here I am that will answer the King himself in
person and let no body intermeddle to know whether I brought, or whether I
brought not; whether I spent or spent not; for if the blows that I have had in
these Voyages were to be paid in money, though every one of them were taxed
but at three farthings a piece, an hundred Pistolets more would not pay me the
half of them; and let every man look to himself, and not take white for black,
and black for white; for every man is as God has made him, and sometimes a
great deal worse:

Let me alone (quoth Carrasco) for accusing the Author of the History, that if
he Print it again, he shall not forget what Sancho has said, which shall
make it twice as good as it was. Is there ought else, Sir Bachelour (said
Don-Quixote) to be mended in this Legend? Yes marry is there (said he) but
nothing so important as what has been mentioned. Perhaps the Author promises
a second part (quoth Don-Quixote?) He does (said Samson) but says, he
neither finds nor knows who has it, so that it is doubtful whether it will
come out or no: so that partly for this, and partly because some hold that
Second Parts were never good; and others, That there is enough written of
Don-Quixote, it is doubted that there will be no Second Part, although some
more Ioviall then Saturnists, cry out; Let us have more Quixotisme: Let
Don-Quixote assault and Sancho speak, let the rest be what they will, this is
enough. And how is the Author inclined?

To which (said Samson) when he had found this History, that he searches after
with extraordinary diligence, he will straight commit it to the Press, rather
for his profit tho, then for any other respect. To this (said Sancho) What?
does the Author look after money and gain? it is a wonder if he be in the
right; rather he will be like your false stitching Tailors upon Christmas
Eeves; for your hasty work is never well performed; let that Mr. Moore have a
care of his business, for my Master and I will furnish him with Rubbish enough
at hand, in matter of Adventures, and with such different successes, that he
may not only make one second Part, but one hundredth: the poor fellow thinks
belike, that we sleep here in an Hay-mow; well, let it come to scanning, and
he shall see whether we be defective: This I know, that if my Master would
take my Counsel, he should now be abroad in the Champion, remedying
grievances, rectifying wrongs, as good Knights Errant are wont to do.

No sooner had Sancho ended this discourse, when the neighing of Rozinante came
to his ears, which Don-Quixote took to be most auspicious, and resolved
within three or four days after to make another sally, and manifesting his
mind to the Bachelor, asked his advice to know which way he should begin his
journey; whose opinion was, That he should go to the Kingdom of Aragon, and
to the City of Saragosa where, not long after, there were solemn Justs to be
held in honor of Saint George, wherein he might get more fame then all the
Knights of Aragon, which were above all other Knights. He praised his most
noble and valiant resolution, but withal desired him to be more wary in
attempting of dangers, since his life was not his own, but all theirs also,
who needed his protection and succor in their distress.

I renounce that, Master Samson, (said Sancho) for my Master will set upon an
hundred armed men, as a boy would upon half a dozen of young Melons; Body of
the world, Sir Bachelour, there is a time to attempt, a time to retire, all
must not be Saint Iacques, and upon um: [Santingo, y Cierra Espana. As we use
in England, Saint George and the Victory.] Besides, I have heard, and I believe
from my Master himself, (if I have not forgotten) that valor is a mean between
the two extremes of a Coward and a rash man: and if this be so, neither would
I have him fly, nor follow, without there be reason for it: but above all, I
wish that if my Master carry me with him, it be upon condition, that he fight
for us both, and that I be tied to nothing but waiting upon him, to look to his
clothes and his diet, for this I will do as nimbly, as bring him water; but to
think that I will lay hand to my sword, although it be but against base
fellows and poor rascals, is most impossible. I (Master Samson) strive not to
hoord up a fame of being valiant, but of the best and trustiest Squire that
ever served Knight Errant: And if Don-Quixote my Master, obliged thereunto by
my many services, will bestow any Island on me of those many his Worship says
we shall light upon, I shall be much bound to him: And if he give me none, I
was borne, and one man must not live to rely on another, but on God; and
perhaps I shall be as well with a piece of bread at mine ease, as to be a
Governor; and what do I know, whether in these kinds of Government, the
Divill has set any tripping-block before me where I may stumble and fall, and
dash out my Teeth? Sancho was I borne, Sancho must I die? but for all that, if
so and so, without any care or danger. Heaven should provide some Island for
me, or any such like thing; I am not so very an Ass as to refuse it,
according to the Proverb, Look not a given Horse in the Mouth.

Friend Sancho (quoth Carrasco) you have spoken like an Oracle:
Notwithstanding, trust in God and Master Don-Quixote, that he will give you
not only an Island, but a Kingdom too. I think one as well as the other (quoth
Sancho) and let me tell you, Master Samson (said Sancho) I think my Masters
Kingdom would not be bestowed on me in vain, for I have felt mine own
Pulse, and find my self healthy enough to rule Kingdoms and govern Islands,
and thus I have told my Master many times.

Look ye Sancho (quoth Samson) Honors change Manners, and perhaps when you
are once a Governor, you may scarce know your own Mother. That Is to be
understood (said Sancho) of them that are basely born, and not of those that
have on their Souls four singers fat of the old Christian, as I have [ To
express his not being borne a Jew or Moor:] No, but come to my condition which
will be ungrateful to no body. God grant it (quoth Don-Quixote) and we shall
see when the Government comes; for me thinks I have it before mine eyes. (Which
said) he asked the Bachelour whether he were a Poet, and that he would do
him the favor to make him some Verses, the subject of his farewell to his
Mistress Dulcinea del Toboso, and withal, that at the beginning of every Verse
he should put a letter of her name, that so joining all the first letters,
there might be read Dulcinea del Toboso. The Bachelor made answer, that though
he were none of the famous Poets of Spain, which they said were but three and
an half; yet he would not refuse to compose the said meeter, although he
found a great deal of difficulty in the composition, because there were
seventeen letters in the name; and if he made four staves, of each four
verses, that there would be a letter too much; and if he made them of five,
which they call Decimi, there would be three too little; but for all that he
would see if he could drown a Letter; so in four staves there might be read
Dulcinea del Toboso. By all means (quoth Don-Quixote) let it be so: for if the
name be not plain and conspicuous, there is no woman will believe the meeter
was composed for her.

Upon this they agreed, and that eight days after their departure should be.
Don-Quixote enjoined the Bachelour to keep it secret, especially from the Vicar
and Master Nicholas [The Barber] his Niece and the old woman, lest they should
disturb his noble and valiant resolution. Carrasco assured him, and so took
leave, charging Don-Quixote he should let him hear of all his good or bad
Fortune at his best leisure: So they took leave, and Sancho went to provide for
their Journey.

CHAP. V.
Of the wise and pleasant Discourse that passed betwixt Sancho Panca and his
Wife Teresa Panca, and other accidents worthy of happy remembrance.
THe Translator of this History, when he came to write this fifth Chapter,
says, that he holds it for Apocrypha, because Sancho speaks in it after
another manner then could be expected from his slender understanding, and
speaks things more acutely then was possible for him; yet he would Translate
it for the accomplishment of his promise; and so goes on as follows.

Sancho came home so jocund and so merry, that his Wife perceived it a
flight-shot off, insomuch that she needs would ask him; Friend Sancho, what is
the matter that you are so joyful? To which he answered: Wife, I would to God
I were not so glad as I make show for. I understand you not Husband (quoth
she;) and I understand not what you mean, that if it pleased God, you would
not be so contented; for though I be a Fool, yet I know not who would
willingly be sad.

Look ye Teresa (said Sancho) I am jolly, because I am determined to serve my
Master Don-Quixote once more, who will now this third time fallie in pursuit of
his Adventures, and I also with him, for my poverty will have it so, besides
my hope that rejoices me, to think that I may find another hundred Pistole^s
for those that are spent: Yet I am sad again to leave thee and my Children; and
if it pleased God that I might live quietly at home, without putting thy self
into those Deserts and cross wa^es, which he might easily grant if he
pleased and were willing, it is manifest that my content might be more firm
and wholesome, since the present joy I have is mingled with a sorrow to leave
thee: so that I said well, I should be glad if it pleased God I were not so
contented.

Fie Sancho (quoth Teresa) ever since thou have been a member of a Knight
Errant thou speak so round about the bush that no body can understand thee.
It is enough (quoth Sancho) that God understands me, who understands all
things; and so much for that: but mark Sister, I would have you for these three
days look well to my Dapple that he may be fit for Arms; double his
allowance, seek out his Pack-saddle and the rest of his Tackling; for we go
not to a Marriage, but to compass the World, and to give and take with Giants,
Sprights and Hobgoblins; to hear Hissing Roaring, Bellowing, and Bawling and
all this were sweet meat if we had not to do with Yangueses and enchanted
Moors: [The Carriers that beat the Master and Man. Vide 1. part. Don-Quixote.]

I believe indeed (quoth Teresa) that your Squires Errant gain not their bread
for nothing: I shall therefore pray to our Lord, that he deliver you speedily
from this misfortune. I Will tell you Wife (said Sancho) if I thought not e're
long to be Governor of an Island, I should dye suddenly. None of that
Husband (quoth Teresa) Let the Hen live, though it be with her Pip; Live you,
and the Devil take all the Governments in the World; without Government were
you borne, without Government have you lived hitherto, and without Government
must you go or be carried to your grave, when it shall please God. How many
be there in the World that live without Governments, yet they live well
enough, and well esteemed of? Hunger is the best sawee in the World, and when
the poor want not this, they eat contentedly. But hark Sancho, if you should
chance to see a Government, pray forget not me and your Children; little Sancho
is now just fifteen years old, and it is fit he go to school if his Uncle the
Abbot mean to make him a Churchman; And look ye too, Mary Sancha our Daughter
will not die if we marry her; for I suspect she desires marriage as much as
you your Government; and indeed a Daughter is better ill Married then well
Parramour'd.

In good Faith (quoth Sancho) if I have ought with my Government Wife, Mary
Sancha shall be so highly married, that she shall be called Lady at least.
Not so, Sancho (quoth Teresa) the best way is to marry her with her equal;
for, if in stead of her Pattins you give her [Chapines] high-shooes; if instead
of a course Petticoat, a Farthingale and silk Kertle; and from little Mal, my
Lady Whacham, the Gyrle will not know her self, and she will every foot fall
into a thousand errors, discovering the thread of her gross and course web.

Peace fool (said Sancho) all must be two or three years practice, and then
her greatness will become her, and her state fall out pat: howsoever, what
matter is it? Let her be your Ladyship, and come what come what will on it.
Measure your self by your Means (said Teresa) and seek not after greater,
keep your self to the Proverb; Let Neighbors children hold together: 'Twere
pretty in faith, to marry our Mary with a great Lord or Knight, that when the toy
takes him in the head, should new mold her, calling her Milk maid,
Boores-daughter, Roche-peeler: Not while I live Husband; for this forsooth have
I brought up my daughter? Get you money Sancho, and for marrying her let me
alone: Why there is Lope Tocho, John Tochoes son, a ^ound chopping Lad, we
know him well, and I know he casts a Sheepes-Eye upon the Wench, and it is
good marrying her with this her equal, and we shall have him always with us,
and we shall be all one: Parent, Sons, und Grand-sonnes, and son in Law,
and Gods Peace and Blessing will always be amongst us, and let not me have
her married into your Courts and grand Palaces, where they will neither understand
her, nor she them.

Come hither Beast (quoth Sancho) Woman of Barrabas, why will thou, without any
Reason, hinder me from marrying my Daughter where she may bring me
grand-Sonnes that may be styled Lordshippe? Behold Teresa, I have always
heard mine Elders say; That he that will not when he may, when he desires,
shall have nay: And it is not ^it that whilst good luck is knocking at our
door, we shut it: Let us therefore sail with this prosperous Wind; (For
this, and for that which follows, that Sancho spoke, the Author of the
History says, he held this Chapter for Apocrypha.) Do not you think,
B^uite-one (said Sancho) that it will be ^it to fall upon some beneficial
Government, that may bring us out of want: and to marry our Daughter Sancha to
whom I please, and you shall see how she shall be called Dona Teresa Panca,
and sit in the Church with your Carpet and your Cushions, and your
hung-Cloathes, in spite of the Gentlewomen of the Town? No, no, remain still
as you are, in one estate, without increasing or diminishing, like a picture in
hangings; go too, let us have no more, little Sancha must be a Countess, say
thou what thou will.

What a coil you keep (quoth Teresa) for all that, I fear this Earldom will
be my daughters undoing, yet do what ye will, make her Duchess or
Princess; it shall not be with my consent: I have always loved equality, and
I cannot abide to see folks take upon um without grounds, I was Christened
Teresa, without welt or guard, nor additions of Don or Dona, my fathers name was
Cascaio, and because I am your wife, they call me Teresa Panca, for indeed they
should have called me Teresa Cascaio: But great ones may do what they list,
and I am well enough content with this name, without putting any Don upon it,
to make it more troublesome, that I shall not be able to bear it, and I will
not have folk laugh at me, as they see me walk in my Countesses apparel, or
my Governesses, you shall have them cry straight Look how stately the
Hog-rubber goes, she that was but yesterday at her spindle, and went to Church
with the skirt of her coat over her head in stead of an Huke, to day she is in
her Varthingale and in her buttons, and so demure, as if we knew her not: God
keep me in my seven wits, or my five, or those that I have, and I Will not put
my self to such hazards; Get you, Brother, to be a Government or an Island,
and take state as you please, for by my mothers Holy-dam, neither I nor my
daughter will stir a foot from our village: better a broken joint then a lost
name, and keep home, the honest maid, to be doing is her trade, go you with
Don-Quixote to your adventures, and leave us to our ill fortunes; God will send
better, if we be good, and I know not who made him a ^Don, or a title which
neither his Father not his Grandfather ever had.

Now I say (quoth Sancho) thou have a Familiar in that body of thine: Lord
bless thee for a woman, and what a company of things have thou strung up
without head or feet? What has your Cascaio, your buttons, or your Proverbs,
or your State to do with what I have said? Come hither Coxcombe, Fool, (for
so I may call you, since you understand not my meaning, and neglect your
happiness) If I should say, my Daughter should cast her self down some
Tower, or she should rove up and down the World, as did the Princess Donna
Vrraca [An Infanta of Spayne] you had reason not to consent: But if in less
then two trap-blowes, or the opening and shutting of an Eye, I clap ye a Don
and Ladyship upon your shoulders, and bring it out of your stubble, and put it
under your barn cover, and set you in your State, with more Cushions then the
Almohada Moors had in all their lineage: Why will you not consent to that that
I will have you? Would you know why Husband (answered Teresa?) for the Proverb
that says he that covers thee discovers thee: Every one passes his eyes
slightly over the poor, and upon the rich man they fasten them; and if the said
rich man have at any time been poor, there is your grumbling and cursing, and
your back-biters never leave, who swarm as thick as hives of Bees through the
streets.

Mark Teresa (said Sancho) and give care to my speech, such as peradventure
you have not heard in all your life time, neither do I speak any thing of mine
own, for all I purpose to speak, is sentences of our Preacher that Preached
all last Lent in this Town, who (as I remember) said, that all things that we
see before our eyes present, do assist our Memories much better, and with much
more vehemence, then things past.

(All these reasons here dilivered by Sancho are the second, for which the
Translator of the History holds this Chapter for Apocrypha, as exceeding the
capacity of Sancho, who proceeded, saying:)

Whereupon it happens, that when we see some personage well clad in rich
apparel, and with many followers, it seems he moves and invites us perforce
to give him respect; although our memory at that very instant represents unto
us some kind of baseness which we have seen in that personage, the which
does vilify him, be it either for Poverty or Lineage; both passed over are
not: and that which we see present only is. And if this man (whom fortune
blotted out of his baseness, and to whom consequently his father left all
height of prosperity) be well behaved, liberal, and courteous toward all
men, and contends not with such as are most anciently noble, assure thy self
Teresa, all men will forget what he was, and reverence him for what he is,
except the envious, whom the greatest escape not. I understand you not Husband
(replied Teresa) do what you will, and do not trouble me with your long
Speeches and your Rhetoric: and if you be revolved to do what you say.
Resolved you must say Wife (quoth Sancho) and not revolved. I pray dispute not
with me, Husband (said Teresa) I speak as it pleases God, and strive not for
more eloquence: and I tell you, if you persist in having your Government, take
your Son Sancho with you, and teach him from henceforth to Govern; for it is
fit that the Sons do inherit and learn the Offices of their Fathers.

When I have my Government (quoth Sancho) I will send Post for him, and I will
send thee moneys, for I shall want none, and there never want some that will
lend Governors money when they have none; but clothe him so, that he shall not
appear what he is, and may seem what he must be. Send you money (quoth
Teresa) and I Will clad him like a Date-leafe. So that now (said Sancho) we are
agreed that our Daughter shall be a Countess.

The day that I shall see her a Countess (said Teresa) will be my deaths day:
But I tell you again, do what you will; for we women are borne with this
clog, to be obedient to our husbands, though they be no better then Leeks:
And here she began to weep so heartily, as if her little Diughter Sancha had
been dead and buried. Sancho comforted her, saying, that though she must be a
Countess, yet he would defer it as long as he could. Here their Dialogue
ended, and Sancho returned to see Don-Quixote, to give order for their
departure.

CHAP. VI.
What passed betwixt Don-Quixote, his Niece, and the old-woman; and it is one
of the most material Chapters in all the History.
WHILST Sancho and his Wife were in this impertinent aforesaid Discourse;
Don-Quixotes Niece and old-Woman were not idle, and by a thousand signs
guessed that her Uncle and their Master would a slashing the third time, and
return to the exercising of his (for them) ill Knight-Errantry; they sought by
all means possible to divert him from so bad a purpose: But all was to no
purpose; to preach in a Desert, or to beat cold iron: Notwithstanding, amongst
many other discourses that passed betwixt them, the old-Woman told him; Truly
Master, if you keep not your foot still, and rest quiet at home, and suffer
your self to be led through Mountains and Valleys, like a Soul in
Purgatory. seeking after those they call Adventures, which I call Misfortunes,
I shall complain on you, and cry out to God and the King, that they remedy
it. To which Don-Quixote answered; Woman, what God will answer to your
complaints I know not, nor what his Majesty will: Only I know, if I were a
King, I would save a labor in answering such an infinity of foolish Petitions
as are given him daily; for one of the greatest toils (amongst many other that
Kings have) is this; To be bound to hearken to all, to answer all; therefore
I would be loath, that ought concerning me should trouble him. Then (quoth the
old-Woman) tell us Sir, in his Majesty's Court be there not Knights? Yes
(answered he) and many, and good reason, for the adornment and greatness of
Princes, and for ostentation of the Royal Majesty. Why would not your worship
(replied she) be one of them that might quietly serve the King your Master at
Court?

Look ye, friend (answered Don-Quixote) All Knights cannot be Courtiers, nor
all Courtiers neither can, nor ought to be Knights Errant; in the world there
must be of all sorts and though we be all Knights, yet the one and the other
differ much: For your Courtiers, without stirring out of their chambers, or
over the Court thresholds, can travel all the world over, looking upon a Map,
without spending a mite, without suffering heat, cold, hunger or thirst. But
we, the true Knights Errant, with sun, with cold, with air, with all the
inclemencies of Heaven, night and day, a horse back and on foot, do trace the
whole world through: And we do not know our Enemies by supposition, as they
are painted, but in their real being; and at all times, and upon every
occasion we set upon them, without standing upon tri^^es, or on the laws of
Duello^ whether a Sword or Lance were longer or shorter, whether either of the
parties wore a charm, or some hidden deceit; if they shall fight after the
Suns going down or no, with other ceremonies of this nature which are used in
single Combats betwixt man and man, that thou know not of, but I do. Know
further that the good Knight Errant (although he see ten Giants that with
their heads, not only touch, but overtop the clouds, and that each of them has
legs as big as two great Towers, and arms like the Masts of mighty Ship, and
each eye as big as a Mill-wheel, and more fiery then a Glasse-oven) must not be
affrighted in any wise, rather with a staid pace and undaunted courage, he
must set on them, close with them, and if possible, overcome and make them turn
tail in an instant; yea, though they came armed with the shells of a certain
fish, which (they say) are harder then Diamonds; and though instead of Swords
they had cutting skeins of Damasco steel, or iron clubs with pikes of the same,
as I have seen them more then once or twice. All this have I said, woman mine,
that you may see the difference betwixt some Knights and others, and it is
reason that Princes should more esteem this second, or (to say fitter) this
first species of Knights Errant (for as we read in their Histories) such an
one there has been amongst them, that has been a Safeguard, not only of
one Kingdom, but many.

Ah Sir, then said his Niece, beware; for all is lies and fiction that you have
spoken, touching your Knights errant, whose stories, if they were not burnt,
they deserve each of them at least to have a penance inflicted upon them, or
some note by which they might be known to be infamous, and ruiners of good
Customs.

I assure thee certainly (quoth Don-Quixote) if thou were not lineally my
Niece, as daughter to mine own Sister, I would so punish thee for the
blasphemy thou have spoken, as should resound through all the world. Is it
possible that a Pisse-kitchin, that scarce knows how to make Bone-lace, dares
speak and censure the histories of Knights Errant? What would Sir Amadis, have
said if he should have heard this? But I warrant he would have forgiven thee,
for he was the humblest and most courteous Knight of his time; and moreover, a
great Protector of Damzels: but such an one might have heard thee, that thou
might have repented thee; for all are not courteous, or pitiful, some are
harsh and brutish. Neither are all that bear the name of Knights, so, truly;
for some are of gold, others of Alchy my, yet all seem to be Knights: but all
cannot brook the touchstone of truth: You have some base Knaves that burst
again to seem Knights, and some that are Knights, that kill themselves in post
have till they become Peasants: The one either raise themselves by their
ambition, or virtue; the others fall, either by their negligence, or vice; and
a man had need be wise to distinguish between these two sorts of Knights, so
near in their names, so distant in their actions.

Help me God (quoth the Niece) that you should know so much Uncle, as were it
in case of necessity, you might step into a pulpit, and preach in the streets,
[^An usual thing in Spain, that a Friar or Jesuit (when a fiery zeal takes
him) makes his pulpit in any part of the street, or market place:] and for all
that you go on so blindely and fall into so eminent a madness, that you would
have us think you valiant now you are old, that you are strong being so
sickly, that you are able to make crooked things straight, being crooked with
years; and that you are a Knight when you are none? for though Gentlemen may
be Knights, yet the poor cannot.

You say well Niece, in that (quoth Don-Quixote) and I could tell thee things
concerning linages that should admire thee, but because I will not mingle
Divinity with Humanity, I say nothing: Mark ye hoe, to four sorrs of linages
(hearken to me) may all in the world be reduced, and they are these. Some that
from base beginning^ have arived at the greatest honors. Others that had great
beginnings and so conserve them till the end. Others, that though they had
great beginnings, yet they end pointed like a Pyramid, having lessened and
annihilated their beginning, till it ends in nothing. Others there are (and
these the most) that neither had good beginning, nor reasonable middle, and so
they pass way without mention, as the lineage of the common and ordinary sort
of people. Let the House of the Othomans be an example to thee of the first,
who had an obscure beginning, but rose to the greatness they now preserve,
that from a base and poor Sheep-heard that gave them their first beginning
have come to this height in which now we see them. Many Princes may be an
instance of the second lineage, that began in greatness, and was so preserved
without augmentation or diminution, only kept their inheritance, containing
themselves within the limits of their own Kingdoms peacefully. Thousands of
examples there be of such, as began in greatness, and lessened toward
their end. For all your Pharaohs, your P^olomies of Egypt, your Caesar's of
Rome, with all the hurrie (if I may so term them) of your infinite Princes,
Monarchs, Lords, Medes, Assyrians, Persians, Grecians, and Barbarians, all
these linages, all these Lordships ended, pointed, and came to naught, as well
they, as those that gave them beginning, for it is not possible to find any of
their successors, and if it were, he must be in mean and base estate; with the
common sort I have nothing to do, since they only live and serve to increase
the number of men, without deserving more fame or elogie of their greatness.

Thus much (Fools) you may infer from all that has been said, that the
confusion of Linages is very great; and that those are the most great and
glorious that show it in the Virtue, Wealth, and Liberality of their owners.
Virtue, Wealth and Liberality (I say) for that great man that is Vicious, will
be the more so, by his greatness; And the rich man not liberal, is but a
covetious beggar; for he that possesses riches, is not happy in them but in
the spending them; not only in spending, but in well spending them. The poor
Knight has no way to show he is a Knight, but that he is Virtuous, Affable,
well-Fashioned, Courteous, and well-behaved, and Officious: Not Proud, not
Arrogant, not Backbiting; and above all, Charitable: For in a penny (that he
gives cheerfully to the poor) he shows himself as liberal as he that for
ostentation gives an Alms before a multitude: And there is no man that sees
him adorned with these Virtues, but although he know him not, he will judge
of him and think he is well descended: for if he were not, 'twere miraculous,
and the reward of Virtue has been always Praise, and the Virtuous must needs
be praised.

There be two courses for men to come to be wealthy and noble by, the one is
Arts, the other Arms. I have more Arms then Learning, and was borne (according
to my inclination that way) under the influence of the Planet Mars, so that I
must of force follow his steps, which I mean to do in spite of all the world,
and it is vain for you to strive to persuade me that I should nill what the
Heavens will me, Fortune ordains, and Reason requires, and above all my
affection desires. Well; in knowing (as I know) the innumerable troubles that
are annexed to Knight Errantrie; so I know the infinite goods that are obtained
with it. And I know that the path of Virtue is very narrow, and the way of Vice
large and spacious: And I know that their ends and resting places are
different; for that of Vice, large and spacious, ends in death; and that of
Virtue, narrow-and cumbersome, ends in life; and not in a life that has
ending, but that is endless: And I know what our great [Boscan] Castilian Poet
said;

To the high Seat of immortality,
Through crabbed paths, we must our Journey take;
Whence he that falls can never climb so high,
Woe is me (said the Niece) my Master too is a Poet, he knows every thing: I
hold a wager if he would be a Mason, he would build a house as easily as a
cage. I promise thee Niece (said Don-Quixote) if these Knightly cogitations did
not wrap my Senses there is nothing I could not do, nor no curiosity should
escape me, especially Cages, and Tooth-pickers. By this one knocked at the door;
and asking who was there, Sancho answered, It Is I. The old Woman, as soon as
she heard him, ran to hide her self, because she would not see him. The Niece
let him in; and his Master Don-Quixote went to receive him with open arms; and
they both locked themselves is, where they had another Dialogue as good as the
former.

CHAP. VII.
What passed betwixt Don-Quixote and his Squire, with other most famous
Accidents.
THe old woman, as soon as she saw her Master and Sancho locked together,
began to smell their drift, and imagining that his third sally would result
from that consultation, and taking her mantle, full of sorrow and trouble, she
went to seek the Bachelour Samson Carrasco, supposing, that as he was well
spoken, and a late acquaintance of Don-Quixotes, he might persuade him to leave
his doting purpose; she found him walking in the Court of his house, and seeing
him, she fell down in a cold sweat, (all troubled) at his feet. When Carrasco
saw her so sorrowful and affrighted, he asked her: What Is the matter? what
accident is this? Me thinks thy heart is at thy mouth. Nothing (said she)
Master Samson, but my Master is run out, doubtless, he is run out. And where
runs he, said he? has he broken a hole in any part of his body? He runs not
out (answered she) but out of the door of his madness: I mean, sweet Sir
Batchelour, he means to be a gadding again, and this is his third time he
has gone a hunting after those you call Adventures; I know not why they give
um this name. The first time they brought him us athwart upon an Ass, beaten
to pieces. The second time he came clapped up in an Oxe-waine, and locked in a
Cage, and he made us believe he was enchanted, and the poor Soul was so
changed, that his mother that brought him forth would not have known him; so
lean, so wan, his eyes so sunk in his head, that I spent above six hundred
eggs to recover him, as God ^is my witness and all the World, and my Henns
that will not let me lie. That I well believe (quoth the Bachelor) for they
are so good, and so fat, and so well nur^ured, that they will not say one thing
for another if they should burst for it. well, is there ought else? has there
any other ill luck happened more then this you fear, that your Master will
abroad? No Sir (said she) Take no care (quoth he) but get you home on Gods
name^ and get me some warm thing to breakfast, and by the way as you go, pray
me the Orison of St. Apolonia, if you know it, and I Will go thither presently,
and you shall see wonders.

Wretch that I am (quoth she) the Orison of St. Apolonia quoth you, that were,
if my Master had the Toothache, but his pain is in his head. I know what I say
(quoth he) and do not you dispute with me since you know I have proceeded
Bachelor at Salamancha: do you think there is no more then to take the
Degree (said he?) With that, away she goes: and he went presently to seek the
Vicar, and communicate with him, what shall be said hereafter.

At the time that Don-Quixote and Sancho were locked together, there passed a
discourse between them, which the history tells with much punctuality, and a
true relation.

Sancho said to his Master, I have now reluc't my wife to let me go with you
whither soever you please; reduct you would say, Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote.) I
have bid you more then once (if I have not forgotten) said Sancho, that you do
not correct my words, if so be you understand my meaning, and when you do not
understand them, cry, Sancho, or Devil, I understand thee not: and if I do
not express my self, then you may correct me, for I am so focible.

I understand thee not, Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) for I know not the meaning
of your focible. So focible is (said Sancho) I am so, so. Less and less do I
understand (said Don-Quixote.) Why if you do not understand (said Sancho) I
cannot do withal, I know no more, and God be with me. Thou meanest docible I
believe, and that thou art so pliant and so taking, that thou will apprehend
what I shall tell thee, and learn what I shall instruct thee in.

I Will lay a wager (said Sancho) you searched and understood me at first, but
that you would put me out, and hear me blunder out a hundred or two of follies.
It may be so (quoth Don-Quixote) but what says Teresa? Teresa bids me make
sure work with you, and that we may have less saying and more doing; for
great sayers are small doers: A Bird in the hand is worth two in the bush: And
I say a woman's advice is but slender, yet he that refuses it is a madman. I
say so too (quoth Don-Quixote:) But say friend Sancho, proceed; for to day thou
speak preciously.

The business is (quoth Sancho) that, as you better know then I, we are all
mortal here to day, and gone to morrow; as soon goes the young Lamb to the
roast as the old Sheep; and no man can promise himself more days then God has
given him; for death is deaf, and when she knocks at life's doors, she is in
haste, neither thrats, nor entreaties, nor Scepters, nor Miters can stay her,
as the common voice goes, and as they tell us in Pulpits.

All this is true (said Don-Quixote) but I know not where thou meanest to stop.
My stop is (quoth Sancho) that your Worship allow me some certain Wages by the
month, for the time that I shall serve you [The custom of Spain is to pay
their Servants Wages by the month;] and that the said Wages be paid me out of
your substance; for I Will trust no longer to good turns, which come either
slowly, or meanly, or never; God give me joy of mine own: In a word I must know
what I may gain, little or much: for the Hen lays as well upon one eg as many,
and many littles make a mickle; and whilst something is gotten nothing is
lost: Indeed if it should so happen (which I neither believe nor hope for) that
your Worship should give me the Island you promised me, I am not so
ungrateful, nor would carry things with such extremity, as not to have the
rent of that Island prized, and so to discount for the Wages I received,
cantitie for cantitie. Is not quantity as much worth as cantitie friend
Sancho, answered Don-Quixote? I understand you now, said Sancho, and dare lay
any thing that I should have said quantity, and not cantitie: but that is no
matter, seeing you have understood me. I understand you very well (answered
Don-Quixote) and have penetrated the utmost of your thoughts, and know very
well what mark you aim at, with the innumerable arrows of your Proverbs.

Look ye Sancho, I could willingly afford you Wages, if I had found in any
Histories of Knights Errant any example that might give me light through the
least chink, of any Wages given monthly or yearly: but I have read all or the
most part of their Histories, and do not remember that ever I have read, that
any Knight Errant has allowed any set Wages to his Squire: Only I know that
all lived upon countenance, and when they least dreamt of it, if their Masters
had good luck, they were rewarded, either with an Island or some such thing
equivalent, and at least they remained with Honor and Title.

If you Sancho, upon these hopes and additaments have a mind to return to my
service, a Gods name; but to think that I will pluck the old use of Knight
Errantry out of his bounds, and off the hinges, is a meet impossibility: So
that Sancho, you may go home and tell your Teresa mine intentention; and if
that she and you will rely upon my favor, been quidem; and if not, let us
part friends; for if my Pigeon-house have Comyns, it will want no Doves: And
take this by the way, A good expectation is better then a bad possession, and a
good demand better then an ill pay. I speak thus Sancho, that you may plainly
see I know as well as you to sprinkle Proverbs like rainshowres. Lastly, let me
tell you; if you will not trust to my reward, and run the same Fortune with
me, God keep you, and make you a Saint; for I shall not want more obedient
Squires, and more careful, and not so irksome, nor so talkative as you.

When Sancho heard his Masters firm resolution, he waxed clowdie, and the
wings of his heart began to stoop; for he thought verily his Master would not
go without him for all the treasure in the World. Thus being doubtful and
pensative, Samson Carrasco entered, and the Niece desirous to hear how he
persuaded her Master that he should not return to his Adventures.

In came Samson, a notable Crack-rope, and embracing him as at first, began in
his loud key: O flower of Chivalrie, bright light of Arms, honor and mirror of
our Spanish nation; may it please Almighty God of his infinite goodness, that
he, or they that hinder or disturb this thy third sally, that they never
find it in the Labyrinth of their desires, nor let the ill they wish for ever
be accomplished: And turning to the old woman he said: You need no longer
pray the Orison of Saint Apolonia, for I know the determination of the Spheres,
is, that Don-Quixote put in execution his lofty and new designs, and I should
much burden my Conscience, If I should not persuade and intimate unto this
Knight, that he do no longer withdraw and hold back the force of his valorous
arm, and the courage of his most valiant mind, for with his delaying he
defraudes the rectifying of wrongs, the protection of Orphans, the honor of
Damzels, the Bulwark of married women, and other matters of this quality,
which concern, apertain, depend and are annexed unto the Order of
Knight-Errantry. Go on then, my beautiful, my brave Don-Quixote, rather to day
then to morrow, let your Greatness be upon the way, and if any thing be
wanting to your journey, here am I to supply with my wealth, with my person,
and if need be, to be thy Magnificence his Squire, which I shall hold a most
happy fortune. Then (said Don-Quixote) turning to Sancho, Did not I tell thee
Sancho, that I should want no Squires? See who offers himself to me; the most
rare Bachelor Samson Carrasco, the perpetual darling and delighter of the
Salamancan schools, sound and active of body, silent, suffering of heates and
colds, hunger and thirst, with all the abilities that belong to the Squire of a
Knight errant: but heaven forbid, that for my pleasure I hox and break off the
Column of learning, the vessel of Sciences, and that I lop off the eminent
branch of the liberal Arts: Remain thou another Samsan in thy Country, honor
it, and those gray hayres of thine aged Parents, for I will content my self
with any Squire, since Sancho daignes not to attend me.

I do daign, said Sancho, (all tender) and the tears standing in his eyes, and
thus proceeds: It shall not be said Master for me, no longer pipe no longer
dance; nor am I made of hardest oak, for all the world knows, and especially
my town, who the Panchaes were, from whom I descend; besides I know and have
searched out, by many good works, and many good words, the desire that your
worship has to do me a kindness, and if I have been to blame to meddle in
reckonings concerning my wages, it was to please my wife, who when she once
falls into a vain of persuading, there is no hammer that does so fasten the hoops
of a Bucket as she does, till she obtain what she would have; but howsoever the
husband must be husband, and the wife wife; and since I am a man every where (I
cannot deny that) I will also be so at home in spite of any: so that there is no
more to be done, but that you make your will, and set to your Codicill, in such
sort, that it may not be revolked, and let us straight to our journey, that
Master. Samsons Soul may not suffer; for he says, his Conscience is unquiet,
till he have persuaded you to your third sally through the World, and I afresh
offer my service faithfully and loyally, as well, and better then any Squire
that ever served Knight errant in former times or in present:

The Bachelor wondered to hear Sanchoes manner and method of speaking: for
though in the first History he had read of his Master, he never thought
Sancho had been so witty as they there paint him out, yet hearing him now
mention Will and Codicill, revolking in stead of Revoking, he believed all
that he had read of him, and confirmed him to be one of the most solemnest
Coxcombes of our Age, and said to himself, that two such madmen, as Master
and Man, were not in all the world again.

Now Don-Quixote and Sancho embraced, and remained friends, and with the grand
Carrascoes approbation and good will (who was then their Oracle) it was
Decreed, That within three days they should depart, in which they might have
time to provide all things necessary for their Voyage, and to get an Helmet,
which Don-Quixote said, he must by all means carry. Samson offered him one,
for he knew a friend of his would not deny it him, although it were souler
with mold and rust, then bright with smoothe steel.

The Niece and old woman cursed the Bachelour unmercifully, they tore their
hair, scratcht their faces, and as your funeral mourners use, they howled at
their Masters departure, as if he had been a dead man. The design that Samson
had to persuade him to this third sally, was, to do what the History tells us
hereafter, all by the advice of the Vicar and the Barber, to whom he had before
communicated it. Well, in those three days, Don-Quixote and Sancho fitted
themselves with what they thought they needed, and Sancho having set down the
time to his wife and Don-Quixote to his Niece, and the old woman; toward night,
without taking leave of any body, but the Bachelor, who would needs bring them
half a league from the town, they took their way toward Toboso. Don-Quixote
upon his good Rozinante, and Sancho on his old Dapple, his wallets were stuffed
with provant, and his purse with money that Don-Quixote gave him for their
expenses. Samson embraced him and desired him that he might hear of his good
or ill fortune, to rejoice for the one, or be sorry for the other, as the law
of friendship did require; Don-Quixote made him a promise. Samson returned
home, and the two went on toward the famous City of Toboso.

CHAP. VIII.
What befell Don-Quixote, going to see his Mistress Dulcinea del Toboso.
BLessed be the powerful Ala (says Hamete Beneng^li) at the beginning of this
eighth Chapter: [Ala amongst the Moors, is as much as Mahomet amongst the
Turks:] Blessed be Ala, which he thrice repeated, and said, that he rendered
these benedictions, to see that now Don-Quixote and Sancho were upon their
march, and that the Readers of their delightful History may reckon, that from
this time the exployts and conceits of Don-Quixote and his Squire do begin: He
persuades them they should forget the former Chivalry of the noble Knight, and
fix their eyes upon his Acts to come, which begin now in his way toward
Toboso, as the former did in the fields of Montiel, and it is a small request,
for so much as he is to perform, so he proceeds, saying:

Don-Quixote and Sancho, were now all alone, and Samson was scarce gone from
them, when Rozinante began to neigh, and Dapple to sigh, which, both by Knight
and Squire were held for lucky signs, and an happy presaging, though if the
truth were told, Dapples sighs and brayings were more then the Horses
neighing: whereupon Sancho, collected, that his fortune should exceed and over
top of his Masters; building, I know not upon what judicial Astrology, that
sure he knew, although the History says nothing of it, only he would often
say, when he fell down or stumbled, he would have been glad, not to have gone
abroad: for of stumbling or falling came nothing, but tearing his shoes, or
breaking a rib, and though he were a fool, yet he was not out in this.

Don-Quixote said unto him; Friend Sancho, the night comes on us apace, and it
will grow too dark for us, to reach Toboso ere it be day, whither I am
determined to go, before I undertake any adventure, and there I mean to
receive a benediction, and take leave of the Peerless Dulcinea del Toboso,
after which I know and am assured, I shall end and close up every dangerous
adventure; for nothing makes Knights Errant more hardy, then to see themselves
favored by their Mistresses. I believe it (quoth Sancho:) but I doubt you will
not speak with her; at least, not see her where you may receive her blessing,
if she give you it not from the Mud-walls where I saw her the first time, when
I carried the Letter and news of your mad pranks which you were playing in the
heart of Sierra Morena.

Were those Mud-walls in thy fantasy Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) through which
thou saw that never enough-praised gentleness and beauty? They were not so,
but Galleries, Walks, or goodly stone Pavements, or how call ye them? of rich
and royal Palaces. All this might be (answered Sancho) but to me they seemed
no better, as I remember. Yet let us go thither (quoth Don-Quixote:) for so I
see her, let them be Mud-walls, or not, or Windows; all is one whether I see
her through chinks, or through Garden-Lattices; for each ray that comes from the
sun of her brightness to mine eyes, will lighten mine understanding, and
strengthen mine heart, and make me sole and rare in my wisdom and volour.

Truly Sir (said Sancho) when I saw that Sun, it was not so bright, that it
cast any rays from it; and belike 'twas, that as she was winnowing the Wheat
I told you of, the dust that came from it was like a cloud upon her face, and
dimmed it. Still do thou think Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) believe, and grow
obstinate, that my Mistress Dulcinea was winnowing, it being a labor so unfit
for persons of quality, that use other manners of exercises and recreation,
which show a flight-shot off their nobleness? Thou do ill remember those
Verses of our Poet, where he paints out unto us, the exercises which those
four Nymphs used in their cristall habitations, when they advanced their heads
above the loved Tagus [A River in Spain;] and sat in the green fields working
those rich embroyderies which the ingenious Poet there describes unto us, all
which were of Gold, of Purle, and woven with embossed Pearls: Such was the work
of my Mistress when thou saw her; but that the envy which some base
Inchanter bears to mine affairs, turns all that should give me delight into
different shapes; and this makes me fear that the History of my exploits which
is in print (if so be some Wizard my enemy were the Author) that he has
put one thing for another, mingling with one truth a hundred lies, diverting
himself to tell Tales, not fitting the continuing of a true History. Oh envy!
thou root of infinite evils, thou worm of Virtues.

All Vices Sancho, do bring a kind of pleasure with them; but envy has
nothing but distaste, rancour, and raving. I am of that mind too (said
Sancho;) and I think that in the History that Carrasco told us of, that he
had seen of us, that my credit is turned topsie turvy, and (as they say) goes a
begging. Well; as I am honest man I never spoke ill of any Inchanter; neither
am I so happy as to be envied: True it is, that I am somewhat malicious, and
have certain knavish glimpses: but all is covered and hid under the large cloak
of my simplicity, always natural to me, but never artificial: and if there
were nothing else in me but my belief (for I believe in God, and in all that
the Roman Church believes, and am sworn a mortal enemy to the Jews) the
Historians ought to pity me and use me well in their writings: But let um say
what they will, naked was I borne, naked I am; I neither win nor lose; and
though they put me in Books, and carry me up and down from hand to hand, I
care not a fig, let um say what they will.

'Twas just the same (quoth Don-Quixote) that happened to a famous Poet of our
times, who having made a malicious Satyr against all the Curtizans, he left
out one amongst them, as doubting whether she were one or no, who seeing she
was not in the scrowl among the rest, took it unkindely from the Poet, asking
him what he had seen in her, that he should not put her amongst the rest, and
desired him to enlarge his Satyr, and put her in the spare room; if not she
would scratch out his eyes: The Poet consented, and set her down with a
vengeance; and she was satisfied to see her self famous, although indeed
infamous. Besides, the Tale of the Sheapheard agrees with this, that set
Diana's Temple on fire, which was one of the seven wonders of the World,
because he would be talked of for it; and although there were an Edict, that
no man should either mention him by speaking or writing, that he might not
attain to his desire; yet his name was known to be Erostratus: the same
allusion may be had out of an Accident that befell the great Emperor Charles
the fifth with a Knight of Rome.

The Emperor was desirous to see the famous Temple of the Rotunda, which in
ancient times was called The Temple of all the Gods, and now by a better style,
Of all Saints, and it is the only entire edifice that has remained of all the
Gen^^^s in Rome, and that which does most conserve the Glory and Magnificence
of its Founders: it is made like an half Orange, exceeding large, and very
lightsome, having but one window that gives it light, or to say truer, but one
round Loover on the top of it. The Emperor looking on the edifice, there was a
Roman Knight with him that showed him the devices and contriving of that great
Work and memorable Architecture; and stepping from the Loover, said to the
Emperor: A thousand times, mighty Monarch, have I desired to see your
Majesty, and cast my self down from this Loover to leave an everlasting fame
behind me. I thank you (said the Emperor) that you have not performed it; and
henceforward I will give you no such occasion to show your Loyalty; and
therefore I command you, that you neither speak to me, nor come to my
presence; and for all these words he rewarded him.

I Will tell you Sancho, this desire of honor is an itching thing: What do
thou think cast Horatius from the Bridge all armed into deep Tyber? What egged
Curtius to launch himself into the Lake? What made Mutius burn his hand? What
forced Caesar against all the Soothsayers to pass the Rubicon? And to give
you more modern examples; What was it bored those Ships and left those valorous
Spaniards on ground, guided by the most courteous Cortez in the new world?

All these and other great and several exploits are, have been, and shall be
the works of Fame, which mortals desire as a reward and part of the
immortality which their famous Arts deserve; though we that be Christian
Catholic Knights Errant, must look more to the happiness of another World
(which is Eternal in the Etheriall and Celestial Regions) then to the vanity
of Fame, which is gotten in this present frail age, and which, let it last as
long as it will, it must have ending with this world which has its limited
time: so that, oh Sancho, our Actions must not pass the bounds that Christian
Religion (which we profess) has put us in.

In Giants we must kill Pride, Envy in generousnesse and noble Breasts; Anger
in a continent reposed and quiet Mind; Riot and Drowzinesse in Temperance and
Vigilance; Lasciviousness in the Loyalty we observe to those that we have
made the Mistrisses of our thoughts; and Sloth, by traveling up and down the
World, seeking occasions that may make us (besides Christians) famous Knights.
These Sancho, are the means by which the extremes of Glory are obtained, which
fame brings with it.

All that you have hithero spoken (quoth Sancho) I understand passing well: but
I would feign have you zolve me of one doubt, which even now comes into my
head. Resolve, thou would say Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) speak a Gods name,
for I 'le answer thee, as well as I can. Tell me Sir, said Sancho, these
Iulies or Augusts, and all these famous Knights you talk of, that are dead,
where are they now? The Gentiles, said he, undoubtedly are in Hell: the
Christians, if they were good Christians, either in Purgatory, [according to
the Romish opinion, erronious] or in Hell. It Is very well, but the Sepulchers
where the bodies of these great Lordings lie interred, have they silver Lamps
[Relicks that use to be hanged up in the Papists Churches] burning before
them, or are their Chapel walls decked with Crutches, winding-sheetes,
Periwigs, Legs, and wax-Eyes? and if not with these, with what? The Sepulchers
of the Gentiles (said Don-Quixote) were for the most part, sumptuous Temples,
the ashes of Julius Caesar's body were put upon a huge Pyramid of stone, which
at this day is called Saint Peter's Needle. The Emperor Adrians Sepulcher was a
great Castle as big as a pretty Village, it was called Moles Adriani, and at
this day, the Castle of Saint Angelo in Rome: Queen Artemisia buried her
husband Manseolus in a Sepulcher, which was held to be one of the seven wonders
of the World: but none of all these, nor many others the Gentiles had, were
decked with windingsheetes, nor any kind of Offerings or Signs that testified
they were Saints that were buried in them.

That Is it I come to (said Sancho) and tell me now, which is more, to raise a
dead man, or to kill a Giant? The answer is at hand (said Don-Quixote:) to
raise a dead man. There I caught you (quoth Sancho) then, the fame of him that
rayseth the dead, gives sight to the Blind, makes the Lame walk, restores
Sick-men, who has Lamps burning before his Sepulcher, whose Chapel is full
of Devout People, which upon their knees adore his Relics, this man has
greater renown, and in another world, then ever any of your Gentile Emperors,
or Knights Errant ever left behind them.

I grant you that (quoth Don-Quixote.) Well, answered Sancho, this fame, these
graces, these prerogatives, how call ye um? have the bodies and Relikes of
Saints, that, by the approbation and license of our holy Mother the Church,
have their lamps, their lights, their winding-sheets, their crutches, their
pictures, their heads of hair, their eyes, and legs, by which they increase
men's devotions, and endeere their Christian fame; Kings carry the Bodies of
Saints, or their Relics upon their shoulders, they kiss the pieces of their
bones, and do deck, and enrich their Chappells with them, and their most
precious Altars.

What will you have me infer from all this, Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote?) I mean
(said Sancho) that we endeavor to be Saints, and we shall the sooner obtain
the fame we look after: and let me tell you Sir, that yesterday or the other
day, (for so I may say, it being not long since) there were two poor barefoote
Friars canonized or beatified, and now many think themselves happy, to kiss
or touch, those iron chains with which they girt and tormented their bodies,
and they are more reverenced, then is (as I said) Roldans sword in the Armorie
of our Lord the King, (God save, him:) So that (Master mine) better it is, to
be a poor Friar of what order soever, then a valiant Knight Errant: a dozen or
two of lashes obtain more at Gods hands, then two thousand blows with the
lance, whether they be given to Giants, to Spirits or Hobgoblins.

All this is true (answered Don-Quixote) but all cannot be Friars, and God
Almighty has many ways, by which he carries his Elect to heaven: Cavallerie
is a religion, and you have many Knights Saints in heaven. That may be (said
Sancho) but I have heard, you have more Friars there, then Knights Errant. That
is (quoth Don-Quixote) because the Religious in number are more then the
Knights. But there are many Knights Errant (said Sancho.) Many indeed (quoth
Don-Quixote) but few that deserve the name.

In these and such like discourses they passed the whole night, and the next
day, without lighting upon any thing, worth relation, for which, Don-Quixote
was not a little sorry: at last, the next day toward night they discovered the
goodly City of Toboso, with which sight Don-Quixotes spirits were revived, but
Sancho's dulled, because he knew not Dulcineaes House, nor ever saw her in his
Life, no more then his Master, so that, the one to see her, and the other
because he had not seen her, were at their Wits end, and Sancho knew not how
to do, if his Master should send him to Toboso: But Don-Quixote resolved to
enter the City in the night, and till the time came they staid between
certain Oaks that were near Toboso; and the prefixed moment being come, they
entered the City, where they lighted upon things indeed.

CHAP. IX.
Where is set down as follows.
MIdnight was near spnn out when Don-Quixote and Sancho left the Mountain and
entered the City: the Town was all hushed, and the dwellers were asleep with
their legs stretched at length (as they say:) The night was brightsome, though
Sancho wished it had been darker, that he might not see his madness: the Dogs
in the Town did nothing but bark and thunder in Don-Quixotes ears, and
affrighted Sancho's heart: Now and then an Asle braied, Hoggs grunted, Cats
mewed, whose different howlings were augmented with the silent night; all which
the enamoured Knight held to be ominous; but yet he spoke to Sancho: Son
Sancho (said he) guide to Dulcinea's Palace; it may be we shall find her
waking. Body of the Sun (quoth Sancho) to what Palace shall I guide? for
where I saw her Highness it was a little house. Belike (quoth Don-Quixote)
she was retired into some corner of her Palace to solace her self in private
with her Damzels, as great Ladies and Princesses use to do. Sir (quoth Sancho)
since, whether I will or no, you will have my Mistress Dulcinea's house to be a
Palace; do you think nevertheless this to be a fit time of night to find
the door open in? Do you think it fit that we bounce that they may hear and
let us in, to disquiet the whole Town? are we going to a Bawdiehouse think
ye, like your Whore-Masters that come and call, and enter, at what hour they
list, how late soever it be? First of all, to make one thing sure, let us find
the Palace (replied Don-Quixote) and then Sancho I Will tell thee what is fit to
be done: and look, Sancho, either my sight fails me, or that great bulk and
shadow that we see is Dulcinea's Palace.

Well, guide on Sir (said Sancho) it may be it is so, though I Will first see it
with my eyes, and feel it with my hands, and believe it as much as it is now
day. Don-Quixote led on, and having walked about some two hundred paces he
lighted on the bulk that made the shadow, and saw a great Steeple, which he
perceived was not the Palace, but of the chief Church in the Town. Then said
he, Sancho, we are come to the Church. I see it very well (quoth Sancho) and
I pray God we come not to our Graves: for it is no good sign to haunt
Church-yeards so late, especially since I told you (as I remember) that this
Ladies house is in a little Ally without passage through. A pox on thee
Block-head (said Don-Quixote) where have thou ever found, that Kings Houses and
Palaces have been built in such Allies? Sir (quoth Sancho) every Country has
their several fashions: It may be here in Toboso they build their great
buildings thus, and therefore pray Sir give me leave to look up and down the
streets or lanes that lie in my way, and it may be that in some corner I may
light upon this Palace (the Devil take it) that thus mocks and misleads us.
Speak mannerly Sir (quoth Don-Quixote) of my Mistrisse things, and let us be
merry and wise, and cast not the rope after the bucket.

I will forbear (said Sancho) but how shall I endure, that you will needs have
me be thoroughly acquainted with a house I never saw but once, and to find it
at midnight being you cannot find it that have seen it a million of times?
Sirrah, I shall grow desperate (quoth Don-Quixote) come hither Heretic. Have
not I told thee a thousand times that I never saw the Peerlesse Dulcinea, nor
never crossed the thresholds of her Palace, and that I only am enamoured on her
by hearsay, and the great fame of her beauty and discretion? Why now I hear
you said Sancho, and since you say, you have never seen her; nor I neither.

That cannot be (said Don-Quixote) for you told me at least, that you had
seen her winnowing of Wheat, when you brought me the answer of the Letter I
sent by you. Never stand upon that (said Sancho) for let me tell you, that I
only saw her by hearsay too, and so was the Answer I brought: for I know her
as well as I can box the Moon. Sancho, Sancho, said (Don-Quixote) there is a
time to laugh, and a time to mourn. Now because I say, I have neither seen,
nor spoken to the Mistress of my Soul, should thou say thou have neither
seen nor spoken to her, it being otherwise (as thou know?) Being in this
discourse, they saw one passing by them with two Mules, and by the noise the
Plough made which they drew upon the ground, they might see it was some
Husbandman that rose by break of day, to go to his tillage, and so it was: as
he came, he went singing that Romante of the battle of Roncesualles with the
Frenchmen.

In hearing of which (quoth Don-Quixote) Sancho hang me if we have any good
fortune this night. Do not you hear what this Clown sings? Yes marry do I
(said Sancho) but what does the Chase of Roncesualles concern us? It Is no more
then if he had sung the Romante of Calamos [as if we should have said in
English Chevie-Case, or some such like.] and all one, for our good or ill luck
in this business.

By this the Plough-man came by them, and Don-Quixote questioned him: Can you
tell me friend (so God reward you) which is the Palace of the Peerles^
Dulcinea del Toboso? Sir, answered the young man, I am a stranger, and have
lived but a while in this town, and serve a rich husbandman, to till his
ground; here over against, the Vicar and the Sexton both live, any of them will
tell you of this Lady Princess, as having a List of all the inhabitants of
Toboso; although I think there is no such Princess here, but many Gentlefolke,
each of which may be a Princess in her own house. Why friend (quoth. Don-Quixote)
it may be that she I ask for is amongst these. It may be so said the fellow and
God speed you, for now it begins to be day peep; and switching his Mules, he
staid for no more questions.

Sancho, seeing his Master in a deep suspense and very Malecontent, told him,
Sir, The day comes on apace, and it will not be so fit that we Sun our
selves in the Street: It is better to go out of the City, and that you
shade your self in some Grove hereabouts, and I will come back anon, and not
leave a by place in all this Town, where I may search for the House, Castle,
or Palace of my Lady, and it were ill luck if I found her not: and if I do, I
will speak with her and let her know where, and how you do, expecting that
she give you Order and Direction, how you may see her, without any manner of
prejudice to her Honor and good name.

Sancho (said Don-Quixote) thou have spoken a thousand sentences, enclosed in
the circle of thy short discourse: The advice that thou have now given me I
hunger after, and most lovingly accept of: Come son, let us take shade, and
thou shall return (as thou say) to seek, to see, and to speak to my Mistress,
from whose discretion and courtesy I hope for a thousand miraculous favors.
Sancho stood upon Thorns till he had drawn his Master from the Town, lest he
should verify the lie of the answer that he had carried him from Dulcinea to
Sierra Morena. So he hastened him to be gone, which was presently done, some
two miles from the Town, where they found a Forest or Wood, where Don-Quixote
took shade; and Sancho returned to the City to speak with Dulcinea, in which
Embassy matters befell him that require a new attention, and a new belief.

CHAP. X.
How Sancho cunningly Enchanted the Lady Dulcinea, and other successes, as
ridiculous as true.
THe Author of this History coming to relate that which he does in this
Chapter, says; That he would willingly have passed it over in silence, as
fearing not to be believed; because here Don-Quixotes madness did exceed, and
was at least two flight-shots beyond his greatest that ever was: but for all
this fear and suspicion, he set it down as the other acted it, without adding or
diminishing the least jot of truth in the History, not caring for any thing
that might be objected against him for a liar: and he had^reason; for truth
is stretched, but never breaks, and tramples on the lie as oil does upon water;
and so prosecuting his History, he says; That as Don-Quixote had shaded
himself in the Forest or Oake-Wood near the grand Toboso: he willed Sancho to
return to the City, and not to come to his presence, without he had first
spoken to his Mistress from him, requesting her that she would please to be
seen by her captived Knight, and to daigne to bestow her blessing on him, that
by it he might hope for many most prosperous successes in all his onsets and
dangerous enterprises. Sancho took on him to fulfill his command, and to bring
him now as good an answer as the former.

Go Lad (said Don-Quixote) and be not daunted when thou come before the
beams of the Sun of Beauty, which thou go to discover: Oh happy thou above
all the Squires of the world! be mindful, and forget not how she entertains
thee; if she blush just at the instant when thou deliverest my Embassy; if
she be stirred and troubled when she hears my name; whether her cushion
cannot hold her; if she be set in the rich state of her Authority: And if
she stand up, mark her whether she clap sometimes one foot upon another; if
she repeat the answer she gives thee twice or thrice over; or change it from
mild to cursed, from cruel to amorous; whether she seem to order her hair,
though it be not disorderd: Lastly, observe all her actions and gestures; for
if thou relate them just as they were, I shall guess what is hidden in her
heart, touching my Love in matter of fact: for know Sancho, if thou know it
not, that the actions and outward motions that appear (when love is in treaty)
are the certain Messengers that bring news of what passes within. Go friend;
and better fortune guide thee then mine, and send thee better success then I
can expect 'twixt hope and fear in this uncouth solitude in which thou leavest
me.

I go (said Sancho) and will return quickly: Enlarge that little heart of
yours, no bigger then an Hasell-nur, and consider the saying, Faint heart
never, etc. Sweet meat must have sour sauce: And another, Where we least
think, there goes the Hare away, This I say, because that if to night we found
not the Castle or Palace of my Lady, now by day I doubt not but to find it,
when I least dream of it, and so to find her. Believe me Sancho (quoth
Don-Quixote) thou always bring thy Proverbs so to the hair of the
business we treat of, as God give me no worse Fortune then I desire.

This said, Sancho turned his back and switched his Dapple; and Don Quixote
stayed a horseback easing himself on his stirrops, and leaning on his Lance,
full of sorrowful and confused thoughts where we will leave him, and wend
with Sancho, who parted from his Master no less troubled and pensative then
he; insomuch that he was scarce out of the Wood, when turning his face, and
seeing that Don-Quixote was out of sight, he lighted from his Ass, and
resting at the foot of a Tree, he began to discourse thus to himself, and say;
Now brother Sancho, I pray let us know; whither is your Worship going? To seek
some Ass that you have lost? No forsooth. Well; what is it you seek for? I
seek (a matter of nothing) a Princess, and in her the Sun of Beauty, and all
Heaven withal. And where do you think to find this you speak of Sancho?
Where? Why in the grand City of Toboso. Well, and from whom do you seek her?
From the most famous Knight Don-Quixote de la Mancha, he that righteth wrongs,
gives the thirsty meat, and the hungry drink: [Mistakes of simplicity.] All
this is well: And do you know her house Sancho? My Master says, it is a
Royal Palace, or a lofty Tower. And have you ever seen her trow? Neither he
nor I, never. And do you think it were well, that the men of Toboso should
know, that you were here to entice their Princesses, and to trouble their
Wenches, and should come and grind your ribs with bangs, and leave you never a
sound bone? Indeed belike they should consider that you are commanded friend,
but as a Messenger, that you are in no fault, not you. Trust not to that
Sancho; for your Manchegan People are as choleric as honest, and do not love
to be jested with. In very deed if they smell you, you are sure to pay for it.
Ware Hawk, ware Hawk: No, no, let me for another pleasure seek better bread
then is made of Wheat; and I may as well find this Dulcinea as one Mary in
Robena, [As if we should say, one Jone in London,] or a Scholar in black in
Salamanca: The Devil, the Devil, and none else has clapped me into this
business. This Soliloquy passed Sancho with himself, and the upshot was this.

All things (said he) have a remedy but death, under whose yoke we must all
pass in spite of our teethes, when life ends. This Master of mine, by a
thousand signs that I have seen, is a Bedlam, fit to be bound, and I come not
a whit short of him, and am the greater Cox-combe of two, to serve him, if the
Proverb be true that says Like master, like man; and another; Thou art known
by him that does thee feed, not by him that does thee breed. He being thus mad
then, and subject, out of madness, to mistaking of one thing for another, to
judge black for white, and white for black, as appeared, when he said, the
winde-mils were Giants, and the Friars mules, Dromedaries, and the flocks of
sheep, armies of enemies, and much more to this tune; it will not be hard to
make him believe, that some husband-mans daughter, the first we meet with, is
the Lady Dulcinea: and if he believe it not, I Will swear; and if he swear, I Will
out-swear him; and if he be obstinate, I Will be so more: and so, that I will
stand to my tackling, come what will on it. Perhaps with mine obstinacy I shall
so prevail with him, that he will send me no more upon these kind of
Messages, seeing what bad dispatch I bring him; or perhaps he will think,
that some wicked Enchanter, one of those that he says persecute him, has
changed her shape, to vex him.

With this conceit Sancho's spirit was at rest, and he thought his business
was brought to a good pass; and so staying there till it grew to be toward
the Evening, that Don-Quixote might think he spent so much time in going and
coming from Toboso, all fell out happily for him; for when he got up to mount
upon Dapple, he might see three Country wenches coming toward him from
Toboso, upon three Asse-colts, whether male or female, the Author declares not,
though it be likely they were shee-Asses, they being the ordinary beasts that
those country people ride on: but because it is not very pertinent to the
story, we need not stand much upon deciding that. In fine, when Sancho saw the
three country-wenches, he turned back apace to find out his Master Don-Quixote,
and found him sighing, and uttering a thousand amorous lamentations.

As soon as Don-Quixote saw him, he said; how now Sancho, what is the matter?
May I mark this day with a white or a black stone? 'Twere fitter quoth Sancho,
you would mark it with red-Oker, as the Inscriptions are upon Professors
chaires, that they may plainly read that see them. Belike then (quoth
Don-Quixote) thou bring good news. So good said Sancho, that you need no
more but spur Rozinante, and straight discover the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso,
with two Damzells waiting on her, coming to see your worship. Blessed God!
friend Sancho, what say thou quoth Don-Quixote? See thou deceive me not with
thy false mirth to glad my true sorrow.

What should I get by deceiving you quoth Sancho, the rather your self being
so near to discover the truth? Spur Sir, ride on, and you shall see our Mistress
the Princess coming, clad indeed and adorned like her self: She and her
Damzels are a very spark of gold; they are all ropes of Pearl; all Diamonds;
all Rubies; all cloth of Gold ten stories high at least: Their hairs hung
loose over their shoulders, that were like so many Sunbeams playing with the
wind, and besides all this, they are mounted upon three flea-bitten Nackneys,
the finest sight that can be. Hackneyes thou would say Sancho. Hackney or
Nackney quoth Sancho, there is little difference; but let them come upon what
they will, they are the bravest Ladies that can be imagined, especially my Lady
the Princess Dulcinea that dazles the senses.

Let Us go son Sancho quoth Don-Quixote, and for a reward for this unlook't
for good news, I bequeathe thee the best spoil I get in our first Adventure
next, and if this content thee not, I give thee my this years Colts by my
three Mares thou know I have to foale in our town Common. The Colts I like
quoth Sancho, but for the goodness of the spoil of the first Adventure I have
no mind to that. By this they came out of the wood, and saw the three
Country-wenches near them. Don-Quixote stretched his eyes all over Toboso way,
and seeing none but the three wenches, he was somewhat troubled, and demanded of
Sancho, if he had left them coming out of the City. How, out of the City
quoth Sancho, are your eyes in your noddle, that you see them not coming here,
shining as bright as the Sun at noone? I see none said he, but three wenches
upon three Asses.

Now God keep me from the Devil (quoth Sancho:) and is it possible that three
Hackneyes, or how call ye um, as white as a flake of snow, should appear to
you to be Asses? As sure as may be, you shall pull of my beard if that be so.
Well, I tell you, friend Sancho, it is as sure that they are He, or She Asses,
as I am Don-Quixote de la Mancha, and thou Sancho Panca; at least to me they
seem so.

Peace, Sir (quoth Sancho) and say not so, but snuff your eyes, and reverence
the Mistress of your thoughts, for now she draws near: and so saying he
advanced to meet the three Country-wenches, and alighting from Dapple, took
one of their Asses by the halter, and fastening both his knees to the ground,
said, Queen, and Princess, and Duchess of beauty, let your Haughtiness and
Greatness be pleased, to receive into your grace and good liking, your
captived Knight that stands yonder turned into marble, all amazed and without
his pulse, to see himself before your Magnificent Presence. I am Sancho Panca
his Squire, and he is the Way-beaten Knight Don-Quixote de la Mancha, otherwise
called The Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance.

And now Don-Quixote was on his knees by Sancho, and beheld with unglad, but
troubled eyes, her that Sancho called Queen and Lady; but seeing he discovered
nothing in her but Country-wench, and not very well-favoured, for she was
blub-fac'd, and flat-nosed; he was in some suspense, and durst not once open
his lips. The wenches too were astonished, to see those two so different men
upon their knees, and that they would not let their companion go forward. But
she that was stayed, angry to hear her self misused, broke silence first,
saying; Get you out of the way with a mischief, and let us be gone, for we are
in haste.

To which quoth Sancho. Oh Princess and universal Lady of Toboso, why does
not your magnanimous heart relent, seeing the Pillar and Prop of Knight
Errantry prostrated before your sublimated presence? Which when one of the
other two heard, after she had cried out to her Ass, that was turning aside,
she said: Look how these Yonkers come to mock at poor Country-folke, as if
we knew not how to return their flouts upon them; get you gone your way and
leave us, you had best. Rise Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, at this instant, for I
perceive now, that mine ill fortune, not satisfied, has shut up all the
passages by which any content might come to this my wretched Soul within my
flesh. Oh thou! the extreme of all worth to be desired, the bound of all humane
gentleness, the only remedy of this mine afflicted Heart that adores thee, now
that the wicked Enchanter persecutes me, and has put Clouds and Cataracts in
mine eyes; and for them only, and none else, has transformed and changed thy
peerlesse beauty and face into the face of a poor Countrey-Wench; if so be now
he have not turned mine too into some Hobgoblin, to make it loathsome in thy
sight, look on me gently and amorously, perceiving by this submission and
kneeling which I use to thy counterfeit beauty, the humility with which my
Soul adores thee.

Marry muff (quoth the Countrey-Wench) I care much for your courtings: Get you
gone, and let us go, and we shall be beholding to you. Sancho let her pass
by him, most glad that he had sped so well with his device. The Countrey-Wench
that played Dulcinea's part was no sooner free, when spurring her Hackney with
a prickle she had at the end of her cudgel, she began to run apace; and the
Asle feeling the smart of it more then ordinary, began to wince so fast, that
down came my Lady Dulcinea; which when Don-Quixote saw, he came to help her
up, and Sancho went to order and gird her Pack-saddle, that hung at the Asses
belly; which being fitted, and Don-Quixote about to list his enchanted Mistress
in his arms to her Ass, she being now got upon her legs, saved him that
labor; for stepping a little back, she fetched a rise, and clapping both her
hands upon the Asses crupper, she lighted as swift as an Hawke upon the
Pack-saddle, and sat astride like a man.

Then said Sancho: By Saint R^que our Mistress is as light as a Robbin-ruddock,
and may teach the cunningest Cordovan or Mexicanian to ride on their Ginets: At
one spring she has leapt over the crupper, and without spurs makes the
Hackney run like a Musk-Cat, and her Damzels come not short of her; for they
fly like the wind. And he said true: for when Dulcinea was once on
horseback, they all made after her, and set a running for two miles without
looking behind them.

Don-Quixote still looked after them: but when they were out of sight, turning
to Sancho, he said; Sancho, how think thou? How much Inchanters do hate
me? And see how far their malice extends, and their aim at me, since they
have deprived me of the happiness I should have received to have seen my
Mistress in her true being. Indeed I was borne to be an example of unfortunate
men, to be the Mark and Butt, at which ill-Fortunes arrows should be sent:
And thou must note Sancho, that these Enchanters were not content to have
changed and transformed my Dulcinea; but they have done it into a shape so base
and ugly, as of a Countrey-Wench thou saw; and withal, they have taken from
her that which is so proper to her and great Ladies, to wit, her sweet sent of
flowers and Amber: for let me tell thee Sancho, that when I went to help
Dulcinea to her Hackney (which as thou say, seemed to me to be a shee-Asse)
she gave me such a breath of raw Garlic, as piere't and intoxicated my brain.

O base rowt, cried out Sancho instantly! Oh dismal and ill-minded Enchanters!
I would I might see you all strung up together like Galls, or like Pilchers in
shoals: cunning you are, much you can, and much you do: it had been enough for
you Rascals, to have turned the Pearls of my Ladies eyes into Corkie Galls, and
her most pure golden Hair into Bristles of a red Oxes tail; and finally, all
her feature from good to bad, without meddling with her Breath; for only by that
we might have ghessed what was concealed under that course rind; though, to
say true, I never saw her coursenesse, but her beauty, which was in^initely
increased by a Moale she had upon her lipp, like a Mostacho, with seven or
eight red hairs like threeds of gold, and above a handful long. To this Moale
(quoth Don-Quixote) according to the correspondencie that those of the face
have with those of the body; she has another in the table of her thigh that
corresponds to the side, where that of her face is: but hairs of that length
thou speak of, are very much for Moals. Well, I can tell you (quoth Sancho)
that there they appeared, as if they had been borne with her. I believe it
friend (replied Don-Quixote;) for nature could form nothing in Dulcinea that
was not perfect and complete; and so, though she had a hundredth Moales, as
well as that one thou saw in her, they were not Moals, but Moons and bright
Stars.

But tell me Sancho, that which thou did set on, which seemed to me to be a
packsaddle, was it a plane saddle or a saddle with a back? It was said Sancho a
Ginet saddle, with a field covering, worth half a Kingdom for the richness of
it. And could not I see all this? Well now I say again, and will say it a
thousand times, I am the unhappiest man alive. The crack-rope Sancho had enough
to do to hold laughter, hearing his Masters madness, that was so delicately
gulled.

Finally, after many other reasons that passed betwixt them both, they gate up
on their beasts, and held on the way to Saragosa, where they thought to be
fitly, to see the solemnities that are performed once every year in that famous
City. But before they came thither, things befell them, that because they are
many, famous and strange, they deserve to be written and read, as shall be seen
here following.

CHAP. XI.
Of the strange Adventure that befell Don-Quixote, with the Cart or Wagon of
the Parliament of Death.
DON-QVIXOTE went on, wonderful pensative to think what a shrewd trick the
Enchanters had played him, in changing his Mistress Dulcinea into the rustic
shape of a Country-wench, and could not imagine what means he might use to
bring her to her pristine being; and these thoughts so distracted him, that
carelessly he gave Rozinante the Reins, who perceiving the liberty he had,
stayed every stitch-while to feed upon the green grass, of which those
fields were full; but Sancho put him out of his Maze, saying Sir; sorrow was
not ordained for beasts, but men, yet if men do exceed in it, they become
beasts; pray Sir recollect and come to your self, and pluck up Rozinantes
Reins, revive and cheer your self, show the courage that befits a Knight
Errant. What a Devil's the matter? What faintness is this? are we dreaming on
a dry Summer? Now Satan take all the Dulcineaes in the world, since the
welfare of one only Knight Errant, is more worth then all the Enchantments and
transformations in the world.

Peace Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) with a voice now not very faint, Peace I say,
and speak no blasphemies against that Enchanted Lady; for I only am in fault
for her misfortune and unhappiness: Her ill-plight springs from the envy that
Enchanters bear me. So say I too (quoth Sancho) for what heart sees her now,
that saw her before, and does not deplore? Thou may well say so Sancho,
replied Don-Quixote, since thou saw her in her just entyre beauty, and the
Enchantment dimmed not thy sight nor concealed her fairness: Against me only,
only against mine eyes the force of its venom is directed.

But for all that Sancho, I have fallen upon one thing, which is, that thou did
ill describe her beauty to me; for if I forget not, thou said she had eyes of
Pearls: and such eyes are rather the eyes of a Sea-Breame then a fair Dames;
but as I think, Dulcineaes eyes are like two green-Emralds raled with two
Celestial Arkes, that serve them for eyebrows. And therefore for your Pearls,
take them from her eyes, and put them to her teeth: for doubtless Sancho, thou
mistook'st eyes for teeth. All this may be, said Sancho, for her beauty
troubled me, as much as her foulness since has done you; but leave we all to
God, who is the knower of all things that befalls us in this Vale of tears, in
this wicked world; where there is scarce any thing without mixture of mischief,
Impostorship, or villainy.

One thing (Master mine) troubles me more then all the rest; to think what
means there will be, when you overcome any Giant or other Knight, and command
him to present himself before the beauty of the Lady Dulcinea, where this poor
Giant, or miserable vanquished Knight shall find her? Me thinks I see um go
staring up and down Toboso, to find my Lady Dulcinea, and though they should
meet her in the middle of the street, yet they would no more know her then my
Father.

It may be Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) her Enchantment will not extend to take
from vanquish^d and presented Giants and Knights the knowledge of Dulcinea: and
therefore in one or two of the first I conquer and send, we will make trial
whether they see her or no, commanding them that they return to relate unto me
what has befaln them.

I say Sir (quoth Sancho) I like what you have said very well, and by this
device we shall know what we desire; and if so be she be only hidden to
you, your misfortune is beyond hers: but so my Lady Dulcinea have health and
content, we will bear and pass it over here as well as we may, seeking our
Adventures; and let time alone, who is the best Phisician for these and other
infirmities.

Don-Quixote would have answered Sancho Panca; but he was interrupted by a
Wagon that came cross the way, laden with the most different and strange
personages and shapes that might be imagined. He that guided the Mules, and
served for Waggoner, was an ugly Devil. The Wagons self was open without Tilt
or Boughs. The first shape that presented it self to Don-Quixotes eyes, was of
Death her self, with a humane face: And next her an Angel with large painted
wings. On one side stood an Emperor, with a crown upon his head, to see to, of
gold. At Deaths feet was the God called Cupid, not blind-folded, but with his
Bow, his Quiver, and Arrows. There was also a Knight completely Armed, only he
had no Murrion or Head-peece, but a Hat full of diverse colored plumes: With
these there were other personages of different fashions and faces.

All which seen on a sudden, in some sort troubled Don-Quixote, and affrighted
Sancho's heart; but straight Don-Quixote was jocund, believing that some rare
and dangerous Adventure was offered unto him; and with this thought, and a
mind, disposed to give the onset to any peril, he got himself before the
Wagon, and with a loud and threatening voice cried out: Carter, Coachman, or
Devil, or whatsoever thou art, be not slow to tell me who thou art? Whither
thou go? And what People these are thou carriest in thy Cart-Coach, rather
like Charons Boat, then Wagons now in use?

To which the Devil, staying the Cart, gently replied, Sir, we are Players of
Thomas Angulo's Company; we have played a Play called The Parliament of Death
against this Corpus Christi tide, in a Town behind the ridge of yonder
Mountain, and this afternoon we are to play it again at the Town you see
before us, which because it is so near, to save a labor of new attiring us,
we go in the same clothes in which we are to Act. That young man plays
Death: That other an Angel: That woman, our Authors wife, the Queen: A fourth
there, a Soldier: A fifth the Emperor: And I the Devil, which is one of the
chiefest Actors in the Play, for I have the best part. If you desire to know
any thing else of us, ask me, and I shall answer you most punctually; for as I
am a Devil, nothing is unknown to me.

By the faith of a Knight Errant (said Don-Quixote) as soon as ever I saw this
Wagon, I imagined some strange Adventure toward; and now I say it is fit to
be fully satisfied of these apparitions, by touching them with our hands. God
be with you honest people; Act your Play, and see whether you will command any
thing wherein I may be serviceable to you; for I will be so most cheerfully
and willingly: for since I was a boy, I have loved Mask-shews, and in my youth
I have been ravished with Stage Plays.

Whilst they were thus discoursing, it fell out, that one of the company came
toward them, clad for the Fool in the Play, with Morrice-bells, and at the end
of a stick he had three Cows bladders full-blown, who thus masked running
toward Don-Quixote, began to fence with his cudgel, and to thwack the bladders
upon the ground, and to frisk with his bells in the air; which dreadful sight
so troubled Rozinante that Don-Quixote not able to hold him in (for he had
gotten the bridle betwixt his teeth) he fell a running up and down the Field,
much swifter then his anatomized bones made show for.

Sancho that considered in what danger of being thrown down his Master might
be, leapt from Dapple, and with all speed ran to help him; but by that time
he came to him, he was upon the ground, and Rozinante by him; for they both
tumbled together. This was the common pass Rozinante's tricks and boldness
came to: But no sooner had Sancho left his horse-backship to come to
Don-Quixote, when the damning Devil with the bladders leapt on Dapple, and
clapping him with them, the fear and noise, more then the blows, made him fly
through the Field, toward the Place where they were to Play. Sancho beheld
Dapples career and his Masters fall, and knew not to which of the ill chances
he might first repair: But yet, like a good Squire and faithful Servant, his
Masters love prevailed more with him then the cockering of his Ass: though
every hoysting of the bladders, and falling on Dapples buttocks, were to him
trances and tidings of death, and rather had he those blows had lighted on his
eyeballs, then on the least hair on his Asses tail.

In this perplexity he came to Don-Quixote, who was in a great deal worse
plight then he was willing to see him; and helping him on Rozinante said; Sir,
the Devil has carried away Dapple. What Devil (quoth Don-Quixote?) He with
the bladders replied Sancho. Well, I will recover him (said Don-Quixote) though
he should lock him up with him in the darkest and deepest dungeons of Hell:
Follow me Sancho, for the wagon goes but slowly, and the Mules shall satisfy
Dapples loss. There is no need (said Sancho) temper your choler, for now I
see the Devil has left Dapple, and he returns to his home: and he said true,
for the Devil having fallen with Dapple, to imitate Don-Quixote and Rozinante,
he went on foot to the town, and the Ass came back to his Master.

For all that (said Don-Quixote) it were fit to take revenge of the Devil's
unmannerlynesse upon some of those in the Wagon, even of the Emperor
himself. Oh never think of any such matter (said Sancho) and take my
Conncell, that is, Never to meddle with Players, for they are a people mightily
beloved: I have known one of um in Prison for two murders, and yet escaped
Scot-free: Know this Sir, That as they are Merry Joviall Lads; all men Love,
Esteem and help them, especially if they be the Kings Players, and all of
them in their fashion and garb are Gentleman-like.

For all that (said Don-Quixote) the Devill-Player shall not escape from me and
brag of it, though all mankind help him: And so saying, he got to the
Wagon, that was now somewhat near the Town, and crying aloud, said; Hold,
stay, merry Greeks, for I Will make ye know what belongs to the Asses and
Furniture, belonging to the Squires of Knights Errant. Don-Quixotes noise was
such, that those of the Wagon heard it; and guessing at his intention by his
speeches, in an instant Mistrisse Death leapt out of the Wagon, and after her
the Emperor, the Devill-Waggoner, and the Angel, and the Queen too, with
little Cupid, all of them were straight loaded with stones, and put themselves
in Order, expecting Don-Quixote with their peeble points.

Don-Quixote, that saw them in so gallant a Squadron, ready to discharge
strongly their stones, held in Rozinantes Reins, and began to consider how he
should set upon them with least hazard of his Person. Whilst he thus stayed,
Sancho came to him, and seeing him ready to give the onset said; It Is a mere
madness Sir, to attempt this enterprise: I pray consider, that for your
River-sops [Meaning the stones] there are no defensive weapons in the world,
but to be shut up and inlay'd under a brazen Bell: And consider likewise, it is
rather Rashness then Valor, for one man alone to set upon an Army wherein
Death is, and where Emperors fight in Person, and where good and bad Angels
help: And if the consideration of this be not sufficient, may this move you
to know; That amongst all there (though they seem to be Kings, Princes and
Emperors, yet there is not so much as one Knight Errant.

Thou have hit upon the right Sancho (said Don-Quixote) the very point that may
alter my determination: I neither can nor must draw my Sword, as I have often
told thee, against any that be not Knights Errant. It concerns thee Sancho,
if thou meanest to be Revenged for the wrong done unto thine Ass, and I will
encourage thee, and from hence give thee wholesome instructions. There needs no
being Revenged of any body (said Sancho) for there is no Christianity in it;
besides, mine Ass shall be contented to put his Cause to me, and to my Will;
which is to live peaceable and quietly, as long as Heaven shall be pleased to
afford me Life.

Since this is thy determination (said Don-Quixote) honest, wise, disceet,
Christianlike, pure Sancho, let us leave these dreams, and seek other better
and more real Adventures; for I see this Country is like to afford us many
miraculous ones. So he turned Rozinantes reins, and Sancho took his Dapple,
Death with all the flying Squadron returned to the Wagon, and went on their
voyage: And this was the happy end of the Wagon of Deaths Adventure; thanks be
to the good advice that Sancho Panca gave his Master; to whom the day after
there happened another Adventure, no less pleasant, with an enamoured Knight
Errant as well as he.

CHAP. XII.
Of the rare Adventure that befell Don-Quixote with the Knight of the
Looking-Glasses.
DOn-Quixote and his Squire passed the ensuing night, after their Deaths
encounter, under certain high and shadie Trees, Don-Quixote having first (by
Sancho's entreaty) eaten somewhat of the Provision that came upon Dapple; and
as they were at Supper Sancho said to his Master; Sir, what an Ass had I been,
had I chosen for a reward, the spoils of the first Adventure which you might
end, rather then the breed of the three Mares? Indeed, indeed, a Bird in the
Hand is better then two in the Bush.

For all that (quoth Don-Quixote) if thou, Sancho, had let me give the onset
(as I desired) thou had had to thy share, at least, the Empresses golden
crown, and Cupid's painted wings, for I had taken um away against the hair,
and given them thee. Your Players Scepters and Emperors crowns (said Sancho)
are never of pure Gold, but Leaf and Tin.

It Is true (answered Don-Quixote) for it is very necessary that your
Play-ornaments be not fine, but counterfeit and seeming, as the Play it self
is, which I would have thee, Sancho, to esteem of, and consequently the Actors
too, and the Authors, because they are the Instruments of much good to a
Commonwealth, being like Looking-glasses, where the Actions of humane life
are lively represented; and there is no comparison that does more truly
present to us, what we are, or what we should be, then Comedy and
Comedians: If not, tell me; have not thou seen a Play acted, where Kings,
Emperors, Bishops, Knights, Dames, and other personages are introduced? One
plays a Russian, another the Cheater, this a Merchant, the other a Soldier; one
a crafty Fool, another a foolish Lover: And the Comedy ended, and the apparel
taken away, all the rehearsers are the same they were.

Yes marry have I (quoth Sancho.) Why, the same thing (said Don-Quixote)
happens in the Comedy and Theater of this World, where some play the Emperors,
other the Bishops; and lastly, all the parts that may be in a Comedy: but in
the end, that is, the end of our life, Death takes away all the robes that made
them differ, and at their burial they are equal. A brave comparison (quoth
Sancho;) but not so strange to me, that have heard it often, as that of the
Chesse-play, that while the game lasts every Peer has it is particular motion;
and the game ended, all are mingled and shuffled together, and cast into a
leathern bag, which is a kind of burial.

Every day Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) thou growest wiser and wiser. It must
needs be (said Sancho) that some of your wisdom must cleave to me; for
grounds that are dry and barren, by mucking and tilling them, give good fruit:
I mean your conversation has been the muck that has been cast upon the
sterill ground of my barren wit; and the time that I have served you, the
tillage, with which I hope to render happy fruit, and such as may not gainsay
or slide out of the paths of good manners, which you have made in my withered
understanding.

Don-Quixote laughed at Sancho's affected reasons, and it seemed true to him,
what he had said touching his reformation: for now and then his talk admired
him, although for the most part, when Sancho spoke by way of contradiction, or
like a Courtier, he ended his discourse with a downfall from the mount of his
simplicity, to the profunditie of his ignorance: but that wherein he showed
himself most elegant and memorable, was in urging of Proverbs, though they were
never so much against the hair of the present business, as has been seen and
noted in all this History.

A great part of the night they passed in these and such like discourses, but
Sancho had a great desire to let fall the Port-cullices (as he called them) of
his eyes, and sleep; and so undressing his Dapple, he turned him freely to
graze: with Rozinantes saddle he meddled not, for it was his Masters express
command, that whilst they were in field or slept not, within doors, he should
not unsaddle him; it being an ancient custom observed by Knights Errant, to
take the bridle and hang it at the saddle pummell; but beware taking away the
saddle, which Sancho observed, and gave him the same liberty as to his Dapple,
whose friendship and Rozinantes was so sole and united, that the report goes by
tradition from father to son, that the Author of this true History made
particular chapters of it, only to keep the decency and decorum due to so
Heroic a Story: he omitted it, although sometimes he forgets his purpose
herein, and writes, that as the two beasts were together, they would scratch
one anothee, and being wearied and satisfied, Rozinante would cross his throat
over Dapples neck at least half a yard over the other side; and both of them
looking wistly on the ground, they would stand thus three days together, at
least as long as they were let alone, or that hunger compelled them not to look
after their provinder.

It Is said (I say) that the Author in his Story, compared them, in their
friendship, to Nisus and Eurialus, to Pilades and Orestes, which if it were
so, it may be seen (to the general admiration) how firm and steadfast the
friendship was of these two pacifique beasts, to the shame of men, that so ill
know the rules of friendship one to another. For this it was said, No falling
out like to that of friends. And let no man think the Author was unreasonable,
in having compared the friendship of these beasts, to the friendship of men;
for men have received many items from Beasts, and learn many things of
importance, as the Storks dung, the Dogs vomit and faithfulness, the Cranes
watchfullnesse, the Ants providence, the Elephants honesty, and the Horses
loyalty.

At length Sancho fell fast a sleep at the foot of a Corke-tree, and
Don-Quixote reposed himself under an Oak: But not long after, a noise behind
wakened him, and rising suddenly, he looked and hearkened from whence the
noise came, and he saw two men on horseback, and the one tumbling from his
saddle, said to the other; Alight friend, and unbridle our horses, for me
thinks this place has pasture enough for them, and befits the silence and
solitude of my amorous thoughts: thus he spoke, and stretche himself upon the
stround in an instant, but casting himself down, his Armor wherewith he was
armed, made a noise; a manifest token that made Don-Quixote think he was some
Knight Errant, and coming to Sancho, who was fast asleep, he plucked him by
the Arm, and told him softly. Brother Sancho, we have an Adventure. God grant
it be good (quoth Sancho) and where is this Master-Adventures. Worship?
Where Sancho (replied Don-Quixote) look on one side, look, and there thou
shall see a Knight Errant stretched, who (as it appears to me) is not over
much joyed, for I saw him cast himself from his Horse, and stretch on the
ground, with some shows of grief, and as he fell, he crossed his Arms.
Why, in what do you perceive that this is an Adventure (quoth Sancho) I will
not say (answered Don-Quixote) that this is altogether an Adventure, but an
Introduction to it, for thus Adventures begin.

But hark, it seems he is tuning a Lute or Violl, and by his spitting and
clearing his breast, he prepares himself to sing. In good faith you say right
(quoth Sancho) and it is some enamoured Knight. There is no Knight Errant said
(Don-Quixote) that is not so: Let us give care, and by the circumstance, we
shall search the Labyrinth of his thoughts, if so be he sing; for out of the
abundance of the Heart, the Tongue speaks. Sancho would have replied to his
Master; But the Knight of the woods voice (which was but so so) hindered him,
and whilst the two were astonished, he sung as follows. SONNET.
PERMIT me, Mistress, that I follow may
The bound, cut out just to your Hearts desire:
The which, in mine I shall esteem for aye,
So that I never from it will retire.
If you he pleased, my grief (I silent) stay,
And, die, make reckning that I straight expire,
If I may tell it you, the unusual way,
I will, and make l^ves self be my supplyer.
Fashioned I am to proof of contraries,
As soft as wax, as hard as Diamond too,
And to Loves laws, my soul her self applies,
Or hard, or soft, my breast I offer you
Graven, imprint in it what your pleasure is,
I (secret) swear it never to forgo.


With a deep-fetcht, heigh-lo: even from the bottom of his heart, the Knight
of the wood ended his song: and after some pause, with a grieved and sorrowful
voice uttered these words: Oh the fairest and most ungrateful woman in the
world. And shall it be possible, most excellent Casildea de Vandalia, that thou
suffer this thy captive Knight to pine and perish, with continual
pereg^inations, with hard and painful labors? Suffices not, that I have
made all the Knights of Navarre, of Leon, all the Tartesi^ns, all the
Castilians confess thee to be the fairest Lady of the world? I, and all the
Knights of Mancha too? Not to, (quoth Don-Quixote straight) for I am of the
Mancha, but never yielded to that, for I neither could nor ought confess a
thing so prejudicial to the beauty of my Mistress: and thou see, Sancho, how
much this Knight is wide: but let us hear him, it may be, he will unfold
himself more. Marry will he (quoth Sancho) for he talks, as if he would
lament a month togethe'r But it fell out otherwise; for the Knight of the
wood, having overheard that they talked somewhat near him, ceasing his
complaints, he stood up, and with a clear, but familiar voice thus spoke, Who Is
there, who is it? Is it happily some of the number of the contented, or of the
afflicted? Of the afflicted (answered Don-Quixote.) Come to me then (said he
of the wood) and make account, you come to sadness it self, and to
afflictions self. Don-Quixote, when he saw himself answered so tenderly, and
so modestly, drew near, and Sancho likewise. The wailefull Knight laid hold on
Don-Quixotes arm, saying, Sit down, Sir Knight: for to know that you are so,
and one that professes Knight Errantrie, it is enough that I have found you in
this place, where solitarines, and the Serene bear you company, [Serene, the
nightdew that falls:] the natural beds, and proper beings for Knights Errant.

To which Don-Quixote replied, A Knight I am, and of the profession you speak
of, and though disgraces, misfortunes, and sorrows have their proper seat in
my mind: notwithstanding, the compassion I have to other men's griefs, has not
left it: by your complaints I guess you are enamoured, I mean, that you love
that ungrateful fair one, mentioned in your laments. Whilst they were thus
discoursing, they sat together lovingly upon the cold ground, as if by day
break, their heads also would not break.

The Knight of the wood demanded, Are you happily enamoured, Sir Knight?
Unhappily I am (quoth Don-Quixote) although the unhappiness that arises from
well-placed thoughts, ought rather to be esteemed a happiness then otherwise.
True it is (replied he of the wood) if disdaines did not vex our reason and
understanding, which being unmercifull, come nearer to revenge. I was never
(said Don-Quixote) disdained of my Mistress. No indeed (quoth Sancho) who was
near them: for my Lady is as gentle as a lamb, and as soft as butter. Is this
your Squire (said he of the wood?) He is (said Don-Quixote.) I never saw Squire
(replied he of the wood) that durst prate so boldly before his Master, at least
yonder is mine, as big as his father, and I can prove he never unfolded his
lips, whenever I spoke.

Well in faith (quoth Sancho) I have spoken, and may speak before, as, and
perhaps: but let it alone, the more it is stirred, the more it will stink. The
Squire of the wood took Sancho by the hand, saying: Let us go and talk what
we list Squire-like, and let us leave these our Masters, Let them fall from
their lances and tell of their Loves: for I warrant you, the morning will
overtake them, before they have done. A Gods name (quoth Sancho) and I Will tell
you who I am, that you may see whether I may be admitted into the number of
your talking Squires. So the two Squires went apart, between whom there passed
as witty a Dialogue, as their Master was serious.

CHAP. XIII.
Where the Adventure of the Knight of the Wood is prosecuted, with the
discreet, rare and sweet Coloquy that passed betwixt the two Squires.
THE Knights and their Squires were divided, these telling their lives, they
their loves: and thus say'th the Story, that the Squire of the wood said to
Sancho, It is a cumbersome life that we lead, Sir, we, I say, that are Squires
to Knights Errant: for truly we eat our bread with the sweat of our brows,
which is one of the curses, that God laid upon our first parents. You may say
also (added Sancho) that we eat it in the frost of our bodies: for who endure
more heats and colds, then your miserable Squires to Knights Errant? and yet
not so bad if we might eat at all, for good fare lessens care: but sometimes
it happens, that we are two days without eating, except it be the air that
blows on us. All this may be borne (quoth he of the wood) with the hope we
have of reward: for if the Knight Errant whom a Squire serves, be not two
unfortunate, he shall, with a little good hap, see himself rewarded with the
government of some Island, or with a reasonable Earldom.

I (said Sancho) have often told my Master, that I would content my self with
the government of any Island, and he is so Noble and Liberal, that he has
often promised it me. I (said he of the Wood) for my services would be
satisfied with some Canonrie which my Master too has promised me.

Your Master indeed (said Sancho) belike is an Ecclesiastical Knight, and may
do his good Squires these kindenesses; but my Master is merely Lay, though I
remember that some persons of good discretion (though out of bad intention)
counseled him, that he should be an Archbishop; which he would not be,
but an Emperor: and I was in a bodily fear, lest he might have a mind to the
Church, because I held my self incapable of benifits by it: for let me tell
you, though to you I seem a man, yet in Church matters I am a very beast.
Indeed Sir (said he of the Wood) you are in the wrong; for your
Island-Governments are not all so special, but that some are crabbed, some
poor, some distastefull; and lastly, the stateliest and best of all brings with
it a heavy burden of cares and inconveniences, which he (to whom it falls to
his lot) undergoes. Far better it were that we who profess this cursed
slavery, retire home, and there entertain our selves with more delightful
exercises, to wit, hunting and fishing; for what Squire is there in the World
so poor that wants his Nag, his brace of Gray-Hounds, or his Angle-rod, to
pass his time with at his Village?

I want none of this (said Sancho:) true it is, I have no Nag; but I have an
Ass worth two of my Masters Horse; An ill Christmas God send me (and let it
be the next ensuing) if I would change for him, though I had four bushels of
Barley to boot: you laugh at the price of my Dapple, for Dapple is the color
of mine Ass: Well, Gray-Hounds I shall not want neither, there being enough to
spare in our Town; besides, the sport is best at another man's charge.

Indeed, indeed, Sir Squire (said he of the Wood) I have proposed and
determined with my self to leave these bezelings of these Knights, and return
to my Village, and bring up my Children; for I have three like three Orient
pearls. Two have I (said Sancho) that may been presented to the Pope in person,
especially one, a W^nch, which I bring up to be a Count esse (God save her)
although it grieve her mother. And how old (asked he of the Wood) is this
Lady-Countesse that you bring up so?

Fifteen, somewhat under or over (said Sancho) but she is as long as a Lance,
and as fresh as an April- morning, and as sturdie as a Porter. These are parts
(said he of the Wood) not only for her to be a Countess, but a Nymph of the
Greeny Grove: Ah whoreson, whore, and what a sting the Queen has! To which
(quoth Sancho, somewhat musty) she is no Whore, neither was her Mother before
her; and none of them (God willing) shall be, as long as I live; and I pray
Sir speak more mannerly; for these speeches are not consonant from you that
have been brought up amongst Knights Errant, the flowers of courtesy: Oh (said
he of the Wood) Sir Squire, how you mistake, and how little you know what
belongs to praising: what? have you never observed, that when any Knight in the
Marketplace gives the Bull a sure thrust, with his Lance, or when any body
does a thing well, the common people use to say, Ah whoreson whoremaster, how
bravely he did it? so that that which seems to be a dispraise, in that sense
is a notable commendation; and renounce you those sons and daughters that do
not the works that may make their Parents deserve such like praises. I do
renounce (said Sancho) and if you meant no otherwise, I pray you clap a whole
Whore-house at once upon my Wife and Children; for all they do or say, are
extremes worthy of such praises, and so I may see them, God deliver me out of
this mortal sin, that is out of this dangerous profession of being a Squire,
into which this second time I have incurred, being enticed and deceived with
the Purse of the hundred Ducats which I found one day in the heart of Sierra
Morena, and the Devil cast that bag of Pistolets before mine eyes: me thinks
every foot I touch it, hugg it, and carry it to mine house, set Leas^s, and
Rents, and live like a Prince; and still when I think of this, all the toil
that I pass with this Block-head, my Master, seems easy and tolerable to
me, who, I know, is more Madman then Knight.

Hereupon (said he of the Wood) it is said; that, All covet, all lose: And now
you talk of madmen, I think, my Master is the greatest in the world, he is
one of them that cries, Hang s^rrow; and that another Knight may recover his
wits, he will make himself mad, and will seek after that, which perhaps once
found, will tumble him upon his snowt. And is he amorous happily? Yes (said he of
the Wood) he loves one Casildea de Vandalia, the most raw and most roasted Lady
in the world; but she halts not on that foot of her rawnesse, for other manner
of impostures do grunt in those entrails of hers, which ere long will be
known.

There is no way so plain (quoth Sancho) that has not some rub, or pit, or
as the Proverb goes; In some houses they seethe beans, and in mine whole
kettles full. So madness has more companions, and more needy ones then
wisdom. But if that which is commonly spoken be true, that to have companions
in misery is a lightner of it, you may comfort me, that serve as sottish a
Master as I do. Sottish but valiant, (answered he of the wood) but more knave
then fool or then valiant. It is not so with my Master, said Sancho: for he is
never a whit knave; rather he is as dull as a Beetle, hurts nobody, does good
to all, he has no malice, a child will make him believe it is night at noon
day: and for his simplicity, I love him as my heartstrings, and cannot find in
my heart to leave him for all his fopperies. For all that, Brother and friend,
(said he of the wood) if the blind guide the blind, both will be in danger to
fall into the pit.

It Is better to retire fair and softly, and return to our loved homes: for
they that hunt after Adventures, do not always light upon good Sancho spit
often, and as it seemed, a kind of glewy and dry matter: which noted by the
charitable woody Squire, he said, Me thinks with our talking our tongues
cleave to our roofes: but I have suppler hangs at the pummel of my horse as
good as touch: And rising up, he returned presently with a Borracha of Wine,
and a baked meat at least half a yard long; and it is no lie; for it was of a
perboyled Cony so large that Sancho, when he felt it, thought it had been of a
Goat, and not a Kid: which being seen by Sancho, he said, And had ye this
with you too Sir? Why, what did ye think (said the other?) Do you take me to
be some hungry Squire? I have better provision at my horses crupper then a
General carries with him upon a Martch. Sancho fell to without invitation, and
champed his bits in the dark, as if he had scraunched knotted cords, and said,
I marry Sir, you are a true legal Squire, round and sound, royal and liberal
(as appears by your feast) which if it came not hither by way of enchantment,
yet it seems so at least, not like me unfortune wretch, that only carry in my
Wallets a little Cheese, so hard that you may break a Giants head with it, and
only some dozens of Saint John's Weed leaves, and some few Wall-nuts and
Small-nuts (plenty in the strictness of my Master and the opinion he has)
and the method he observes, that Knights Errant must only be maintained and
sustained only with a little dry fruit and sallets. By my faith Brother
(replied he of the Wood) my stomach is not made to your thistles nor your
stalks, nor your mountain-roots: let our Masters deal with their opinions and
their Knightly Statutes, and eat what they will, I have my cold meats, and
this bottle hanging at the pommel of my saddle, will he or nill he; which I
reverence and love so much, that a minute passes not, in which I give it not a
thousand kisses and embraces: which said, he gave it to Sancho, who rearing it
on end at his mouth, looked a quarter of an hour together upon the stars; and
when he had ended his draught he held his neck on one side, and fetching a
great sigh, cries, Oh whoreson Rascal, how Catholic it is? I aw ye there
(said he of the wood, in hearing Sancho's whoreson) how you have praised the
wine in calling it whoreson. I say, quoth Sancho, that I confess I know it is
no dishonor to call any body whoreson, when their is a meaning to praise him.
But tell me Sir, by the remembrance of her you love best, is this wine of
Cinidad Real? [A place in Spain that has excellent Wines.] A brave taste,
said he of the wood; it is no less; and it is of some years standing too. Let
me alone, said Sancho, you could not but think I must know it to the height.
Do you think it strange, Sir Squire, that I should have so great and so
natural an instinct in distinguishing betwixt wines, that coming to smell any
wine, I hit upon the place, the grape, the savor, the lafting, the strength,
with all circumstances belonging to wine? But no marve^l, if in my lineage by my
fathers side, I had two of the most excellent tasters that were known in a long
time in Mancha: for proof of which you shall know what befell them.

They gave to these two some wine to taste out of a Hogs-head, asking their
opinions, of the state, quality, goodness or badnesse of the wine: the one of
them proved it with the tip of his tongue, the other only smelt to it. The
first said, that that wine savoured of iron. The second said, Rather of goats
leather. The owner protested the, Hogshead was clean, and that the wine had no
kind of mixture, by which it should receive any savor of iron or leather.
Notwithstanding, the two famous tasters stood to what they had said. Time ran
on, the wine was sold, and when the vessel was cleansed, there was found in it
a little key^ with a leatherne thong hanging at it. Now you may see, whether he
that comes from such a race, may give his opinion in these matters.

Therefore I say to you (quoth he of the wood) let us leave looking after these
Adventures, and since we have content, let us not seek after dainties, but
return to our cottages, for there God will find us, if it be his will. Till
my Master come to Saragosa, I mean (quoth Sancho) to serve him, and then we will
all take a new course. In fine, the two good Squires talked and drank so much,
that it was fit sleep should lay their tongues, and slake their thirst, but to
extinguish, it was impossible; so both of them fastened to the nigh empty
bottle, and their meat scarce out of their mouths, fell asleep: where for
the present we will leave them, and tell what passed between the two Knights.

CHAP. XIV.
How the Adventure of the Knight of the Wood is prosecuted.
AMongst many discourses that passed between Don-Quixote and the Knight of the
Wood, the History says that he of the Wood said to Don-Quixote, In brief,
Sir Knight, I would have you know that my destiny, or to say better my
election enamoured me upon the peerlesse Casildea de Vandalia; Peerlesse I call
her, as being so in the greatness of her Stature, and in the extreme of her
being and beauty: This Casildea I tell you of, repaid my good and virtuous
desires in employing me, as did the stepmother of Hercules, in many and
different perils, promising me at the accomplishing of each one, in performing
another, I should enjoy my wishes: but my labors have been so linked one upon
another that they are numberless, neither know I which may be the last to
give an accomplishment to my lawful desires.

Once she commanded me to give desiance to that famous Gyantesse of Sevill,
called the Giralda, who is so valiant and so strong (as being made of brasle
and without changing place) is the most moveable and turning woman in the
world. I came, I saw, and conquered her, and made her stand still and keep
distance; for a whole week together no winds blew but the North. Other whiles
she commanded me to lift up the ancient stones of the fierce Bulls of Guisando
[As if we should say, to remove the stones at Stonage in Wiltshire,] an
enterprise sitter for Porters then Knights. Another time she commanded me to
go down and dive in the Vault of Cabra (a fearful and unheard of attempt) and
to bring her relation of all that was enclosed in that dark profunditie. I
staid the motion of the Goralda, I waied the Bulls of Guisando, I cast my self
down the steep Cave, and brought to light the secrets of that bottom, but my
hopes were dead, how dead? her disdaines still living, how living? Lastly, she
has now commanded me, that I run over all the Provinces of Spain, and make
all the Knights Errant, that wander in them, confess; That she alone goes
beyond all other women in beauty, and that I am the valiantest, and most
enamoured Knight of the world: in which demand I have traveled the greatest
part of Spain, and have overcome many Knights, that durst contradict me. But
that which I prize and esteem most is. That I have conquered in single combat,
that so famous Knight Don-Quixote de la Mancha, and made him confess that my
Casildea is fayrer then his Dulcinea, and in this conquest only I make account,
that I have conquered all the Knights in the world, because the aforesaid
Don-Quixote has conquered them all, and I having overcome him, his fame, his
glory and his honor has been transferred and passed over to my person, and
the Conqueror is so much the more esteemed, by how much the conquered was
reputed, so that the innumerable exploits of Don-Quixote now mentioned, are
mine, and pass upon my account.

Don-Quixote, admired to hear the Knight of the Wood, and was a thousand times
about to have given him the lie, and had his Thou Lie, upon the point of his
tongue; but he deferred it as well as he could, to make him confess with his
own mouth that he lied, and so he told him calmly; That you may have overcome
(Sir Knight all the Knights Errant of Spain, and the whole world, I grant ye;
but that you have overcome Don-Quixote de la Mancha, I doubt it; it may be some
other like him, though few there be so like. Why not? replied he of the Wood:
I can assure you Sir, I fought with him, overcame and made him yield. He is a
tall fellow, withered faced, lanke and dry in his limbs, somewhat hory,
sharpe-nosed and crooked; his mustachoes long, black and fallen; he marches
under the name of The Knight of the sorrowful Countenance: he presses the
loine, and rules the bridle of a famous horse called Rozinante, and has for
the Mistrisse of his thoughts, one Dulcinea del Toboso, sometimes called Aldonsa
Lorenso, just as mine, that because her name was Casilda, and of Andaluzia, I
call her Casildea de Vandalia: And if all these tokens be not enough to
countenance the truth, here is my Sword that shall make incredulity it self
believe it. Have patience good Sir Knight (quoth Don-Quixote) and hear what I
shall say.

Know that this Don-Quixote you speak of, is the greatest friend I have in
this world and so much that I may tell you, I love him as well as my self, and
by the signs that you have given of him, so punctual and certain, I cannot
but think it is he whom you have overcome. On the other side, I see with mine
eyes, and feel with my hands, that it is not possible it should be he, if it
be not, that, as he has many Enchanters that be his Enemies, especially one
that does ordinarily persecute him, there be some one that has taken his shape
on him, and suffered himself to be overcome, to defraud him of the glory
which his noble Chivalry has gotten and laid up for him throughout the whole
earth. And for confirmation of this, I would have you know, that these
Enchanters mine Enemies (not two days since) transformed the shape and Person
of the fair Dulcinea del Toboso, into a foul and base country wench, and in
this sort belike they have transformed Don-Quixote, and if all this be not
sufficient to direct you in the truth, here is Don-Quixote himself, that will
maintain it with his Arms on foot or on horse back, or in what manner you
please; and he grasped his Sword, expecting what resolution the Knight of the
Wood would take; who with a stayed voice answered and said: A good Play Master
needs no surety; he that could once, Don-Quixote, overcome you when you were
transformed, may very well hope to restore you to your former being. But
because it becomes not Knights to do their feats in the dark, like highway
Robbers and Ruffians, let us stay for the day, that the Sun may behold our
actions; and the condition of our combat shall be, that he that is therein
overcome, shall stand to the mercy of the Conqueror; who by his Victory, shall
have power to do with him according to his will, so far as what he ordains
shall be fitting for a Knight.

I am over-joyed with this condition and agreement (quoth Don-Quixote.) And
(this said) they went where their Squires were, whom they found snorting, and
just as they were when sleep first stole upon them. They wakened them and
commanded they should make their Horses ready: For by Sunne-rising they meant
to have a bloody and unequal single combat: At which news Sancho, was
astonished and amazed, as fearing his Masters safety, by reason of the Knight
of the Wood's valor, which he had heard from his Squire: But without any
reply, the two Squires went to seek their Cattle, for by this the three horses
and Dapple had smelt out one another, and were together.

By the way, he of the Wood said to Sancho, You must understand Brother, that
your Combatants of Andaluzia use, when they are Sticklers in any quarrel, not
to stand idly with their hands in their Pockets, whilst their friends are
fighting. I tell you this, because you may know That whilst our Masters are at
it, we must skirmish too, and break our Lances to shivers. This custom Sir
Squire (answered Sancho) may be current there, and pass amongst your Ruffians
and Combatants you talk of: But with your Squires that belong to Knights
Errant, not so much as a thought of it; At least I have not heard my Master so
much as speak a word of any such custom, and he knows without book all the
Ordinances of Knight Errantry. But let me grant ye, that it is an express
Ordinance that the Squires sight, whilst their Masters do so; yet I will not
fulfill that, but pay the penalty that shall be imposed upon such peaceable
Squires; for I do not think it will be above two pound of Wax, [ alluding
to some penalties enjoined by Confessors, to pay to burn in Candles in the
Church] and I had rather pay them, for I know they will cost meo less then the
lint that I shall spend in making Tents to cure my Head, which already I make
account is cut and divided in two; besides, it is impossible I should fight,
having never a Sword, and I never wore any.

For that (quoth he of the Wood) I Will tell you a good remedy, I have here two
linen bags of one bigness, you shall have one, and I the other, and with
these equal weapons, we will fight at bag-blowes, Let us do so and you will
(said Sancho) for this kind of fight will rather serve to dust, then to wound
us. Not so said the other, for within the bags (that the wind may not carry
them too and from) we will put half a dozen of delicate smooth pibbles, of
equal weight, and so we may bag-baste one another, without doing any great
hurt. Look ye, body of my father (quoth Sancho) what Martins or sables-fur, or
what fine carded-wooll he puts in the bags, not to beat out our brains, or make
Privet of our bones; but know Sir, if they were silk balls, I would not fight;
let our Masters fight, and hear on it in another world, let us drink and live,
for time will be careful to take away our lives, without our striving to end
them before their time and season, and that they drop before they are ripe. For
all that (said he of the Wood) we must fight half an hour. No, no (said
Sancho) I will not be so discourteous and ungrateful, as to wrangle with whom
I have eaten and drunk, let the occasion be never so small, how much more I
being without choler or anger, who the Devil can barely without these fight?

For this (said he of the Wood) I Will give you a sufficient cause, which is, that
before we begin the combat, I will come me finely to you, and give you three or
four boxes, and strike you to my feet, with which I shall awake your choler,
although it sleep like a Dormouse. Against this cut I have another (quoth
Sancho) that comes not short of it; I will take me a good cudgel, and before
you waken my choler, I will make you sleep so soundly with bastinadoing you,
that you shall not wake but in another world, in which it shall be known, that
I am not he that will let any man handle my face; and every man look to the
shaft hee-shootes: And the best way were to let every man's choler sleep with
him, for no man knows what is in another, and many come for wool, that return
shorn; and God, in all times, blessed the Peacemakers, and ever cursed the
Quarreller; for if a Cat shut into a Room, much baited and straightned, turn
to be a Lion, God knows what I that am a man may turn to: Therefore, from
henceforward, Sir Squire, let me intimate to you, that all the evil and
mischefe that shall arise from our Quarrel, be upon your head. It Is well
(quoth he of the Wood) let it be day and we shall thrive by this.

And now a thousand sorts of painted Birds began to chirp in the Trees and in
their different delightful Tones, it seemed they bad good morrow, and saluted
the fresh Aurora that now discovered the beauty of her face, through the gates
and bay-windows of the East, shaking from her locks an infinite number of
liquid pearls, bathing the herbs in her sweet liquor, that it seemed they also
sprouted, and rained white and small pearls: the Willows did distill their
savory Manna; the Fountains laughed; the Brooks murmured; the Woods were
cheered; and the Fields were enriched with her coming.

But the brightness of the day scarce gave time to distinguish things, when
the first thing that offered it self to Sancho's sight, was the Squire of the
Woods nose, which was so huge that it did as it were shadow his whole body: It
is said indeed that it was of an extraordinary bigness, crooked in the
midst, and all full of warts of a darkish green color, like Berengene, and
hung some two fingers over his mouth: This hugeness, color, warts, and
crookedness, did so disfigure his face, that Sancho in seeing him, began to
lay about him backward and forward, like a young raw Ancient, and resolved with
himself to endure two hundred boxes, before his choler should waken to fight
with that Hobgoblin.

Don-Quixote beheld his opposite, and perceived that his Helmet was on and
drawn, so that he could not see his face; but he saw that he was well set in
his body, though not tall: upon his armor he wore an upper garment or
Cassock, to see to, of pure cloth of gold, with many Moons of shining
Looking-glasses spread about it, which made him appear very brave and gorgeous;
a great plume of green feathers waved about his Helmet, with others white and
yellow; his Lance which he had reared up against a Tree was very long and
thick, and with a steel pike above a handful long. Don-Quixote observed and
noted all, and by what he had seen and marked, judged that the said Knight
must needs be of great strength: But yet he was not afraid (like Sancho) and
with a bold courage thus spoke to the Knight of the Looking-glasses: If your
eagerness to fight, Sir Knight, have not spent your courtesy, for it, I
desire you to lift up your Visor a little, that I may behold whether the
liveliness of your face be answerable to that of your disposition, whether
vanquished or vanquisher you be in this enterprise. Sir Knight (answered he
of the Looking-glasses) you shall have time and leisure enough to see me; and
if I do not now satisfy your desire, it is because I think I shall do a
great deal of wrong to the fair Casildea de Vandalia, to delay so much time as
to lift up my Visor, till I have first made you confess what I know you go
about. Well, yet while we get a horseback (Don-Quixote said) you may resolve
me whether I be that Don-Quixote whom you said you had vanquished.

To this I answer you (said he of the Looking-glasses) You are as like the
Knight I conquered, as one egg is to another: But, as you say, Enchanters
persecute you, and therefore I dare not affirm whether you be he or no. It
suffices (quoth Don-Quixote) for me, that you believe your being deceived: but
that I may entirely satisfy you, let us to horse; for in less time then you
should have spent in the lifting up your Visor (if God, my Mistress, and mine
arm defend me) will I see your face; and you shall see that I am not the
vanquished Don-Quixote you speak of.

And here cutting off discourse, to horse they go, and Don-Quixote turned
Rozinante about to take so much of the Field as was fit for him, to return to
encounter his enemy; and the Knight of the Looking-glasses did the like. But
Don-Quixote was not gone twenty paces from him, when he heard that he of the
Looking-glasses called him: So the two parting the way, he of the Glasses
said, Be mindful, Sir Knight, that the condition of our combat is, that the
vanquished (as I have told you before) must stand to the discretion of the
vanquisher. I know it (said Don-Quixote) so that what is imposed and commanded
the vanquished, be within the bounds and limits of Cavallerie. So it is meant
said he of the Glasses.

Here Don Quixote saw the strange nose of the Squire, and he did not less
wonder at the sight of it then Sancho; insomuch that he deemed him a Monster,
or some new kind of man not usual in the world. Sancho that saw his Master
go to fetch his Career, would not tarry alone with Nose autem, fearing that
at one snap with to others Nose upon his, their fray would be ended, that
either with the blow, or it, he should come to ground: So he ran after his
Master, laying hold upon one of Rozinante's stirrup leathers; and when he
thought it time for his Master to turn back, he said; I beseech your Worship,
Master mine, that before you fall to your encounter, you help me to climb up
yon Cork-tree, from whence I may better, and with more delight then from the
ground, see the gallant encounter you shall make with this Knight.

Rather Sancho (said Don Quixote) thou would get aloft, as into a scaffold,
to see the Bulls without danger. Let me deal truly (said Sancho) the ugly nose
of that Squire has astonished me, and I dare not come near him. Such an one it
is (said Don-Quixote) that any other but I might very well be afraid of it;
and therefore come and I Will help thee up.

Whilst Don-Quixote was helping Sancho up into the Cork tree, he of the
Looking-glasses took up room for his Career, and thinking that Don-Quixote
would have done the like, without looking for Trumpets sound, or any other
warning sign, he turned his horses reins (no better to see to, nor swifter
then Rozinante) and with his full speed (which was a reasonable trot) he went
to encounter his enemy; but seeing him busied in the mounting of Sancho, he
held in his reins and stopped in the midst of his Career; for which his horse
was most thankful, as being unable to move. Don-Quixote who thought his enemy
by this came flying, set spurs lustily to Rozinantes hinder flank, and made him
post in such manner, that the Story says, now only he seemed to run, for all
the rest was plain trotting heretofore. And with this unspeakable fury he came
where he of the Looking-glasses was gagging his spurs into his horse to the
very hoops, without being able to remove him a fingers length from the place
where he had set up his rest for the Career.

In this good time and conjucture Don-Quixote found his contrary puzzled with
his horse, and troubled with his Lance; for either he could not, or else
wanted time to set it in his rest. Don Quixote that never looked into these
inconveniences, safely and without danger encountered him of the Looking-glasses
so furiously, that in spite of his teeth he made him come to the ground from
his horse crupper, with such a fall, that stirring neither hand nor foot, he
made show as if he had been dead. Sancho scarce saw him down, when he slid
from the Cork-tree, and came in all haste to his Master, who dismounted from
Rozinante, got upon him of the Looking-glasses, and unlacing his Helmet to see
if he were dead, or if he were alive, to give him air, he saw (who can tell
without great admiration, wonder, and amaze to him that shall hear it) he saw
(says the History) the self same face, the same visage, the same aspect, the
same phisiognomie, the same shape, the same perspective of the Bachelor Samson
Carrasco; and as he saw it, he cried aloud, Come Sancho, and behold what thou
may see, and not believe; run whoreson, and observe the power of Magic,
what Witches and Enchanters can do.

Sancho drew near, and saw the Bachelour Samson Carrasco's face, and so began
to make a thousand crosles, and to bless himself as often. In all this while the
overthrown Knight made no show of living. And Sancho said to Don-Quixote, I am
of opinion, Sir, that by all means you thrust your sword down this fellows
throat, that is so like the Bachelour Samson Carrasco, and so perhaps in him,
you shall kill some of your enemies the Enchanters. It Is not ill advised (quoth
Don-Quixote.) So drawing out his sword, to put Sancho's counsel in execution,
the Knights Squire came in, his nose being off, that had so dis-figured him,
and said aloud: Take heed, Sir Don-Quixote, what you do; for he that is now
at your mercy, is the Bachelor Samson Carrasco your friend, and I his Squire.

Now Sancho seeing him without his former deformity, said to him, And your
nose? To which he answered, Here it is in my pocket: and putting his hand to
his right side, he pulled out a pasted nose, and a varnisht vizard, of the
manifacture described. And Sancho more and more beholding him, with a loud and
admiring voice said, Saint Mary defend me: and is not this Thomas Ceciall my
neighbor and my Gossip? And how say you by that (quoth the un-nosed Squire?)
Thomas Ceciall I am, Gossip and friend Sancho, and straight I will tell you,
the conveyances, sleights and tricks that brought me hither: in the mean time
request and entreat your Master, that he touch not, misuse, wound or kill the
Knight of the Looking-glasses, now at his mercy; for doubtless it is the bold
and ill-advized Bachelor Samson Carrasco our Countryman.

By this time the Knight of the Looking-glasses came to himself, which
Don-Quixote seeing, he clapped the bare point of his sword upon his face, and
said, Thou die, Knight, if thou confess not, that the peerlesse Dulcinea del
Toboso excells your Casildea de Vandalia in beauty: and moreover, you shall
promise (if from this battle and fall you remain with life) to go to the
City of Toboso, and present your self from me before her, that she may
dispose of you as she pleases: and if she pardon you, you shall return to me;
for the tracke of my exploits will be your guide, and bring you where I am, to
tell me what has passed with her. These conditions (according to those we
agreed on before the battle) exceed not the limits of Knight Errantrie.

I confess, said the faln-Knight, that the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso's torn
and foul shoe, is more worth then the ill-combed hair (though clean) of
Casildea: and here I promise to go and come from her presence to yours, and
give entire and particular relation of all you require. You shall also confess
and believe (added Don-Quixote) that the Knight whom you overcame, neither was,
nor could be Don-Quixote) de la Mancha, but some other like him, as I confess
and believe, that you, although you seem to be the Bachelor Samson Carrasco,
are not he, but one like him, and that my enemies have cast you into his shape,
that I may withold and temper the force of my choler, and use moderately the
glory of my conquest. I confess, judge, and allow of all as you confess,
judge, and allow (answered the backe-broken Knight.) Let me rise, I pray you,
if the blow of my fall will let me; for it has left me in ill case. Don
Quixote helped him to rise, and Thomas Cecial his Squire, on whom Sancho still
cast his eyes, asking him questions, whose answers gave him manifest signs,
that he was Thomas Cecial indeed, as he said, but the apprehension that was
made in Sancho, by what his Master had said, that the Enchanters had changed
the form of the Knight of the glasses into Samson Carrasco's, made him not
believe what he saw with his eyes. To conclude, the Master and Man remained
still in their error: and he of the glasses and his Squire very moody and ill
Errants, left Don-Quixote, purposing to seek some town where he might
seare-cloth himself, and settle his ribs. Don-Quixote and Sancho held on
their way to Saragosa, where the story leaves them, to tell who was the Knight
of the Glasses and his Nosie Squire.

CHAP. XV.
Who the Knight of the Looking-glasses and his Squire were.
DOn-Quixote was extremely contented, glad and vainglorious, that he had
subdued so valiant a Knight as he imagined he of the Looking-glasses was,
from whose Knightly word he hoped to know if the Enchantment of his Mistress
were certain, since of necessity the said vanquished Knight was to return (on
pain of not being so) to relate what had happened unto him: but Don Quixote
thought one thing, and he of the Glasses another, though for the present he
minded nothing, but to seek where he might sear-cloth himself: The History
then tells us, that when the Bachelor Samson Carrasco advised Don Quixote to
prosecute his forsaken Cavallery, he entered first of all into counsel with
the Vicar and the Barber to know what means they should use, that Don-Quixote
might be persuaded to stay at home peaceably and quietly, without troubling
himself with his unluckie Adventures; from which counsel by the common consent
of all, and particular opinion of Carrasco, it was agreed, That Don-Quixote
should abroad again, since it was impossible to stay him; And that Samson
should meet him upon the way like a Knight Errant, and should fight with him,
since an occasion would not be wanting, and so to overcome him, which would
not be difficult, and that there should be a covenant and agreement, that the
vanquished, should stand to courtesy of the vanquisher, so that Don-Quixote
being vanquished, the Bachelor Knight should command him to get him home to his
Town and House, and not to stir from thence in two years after, or till he
should command him to the contrary; the which in all likelihood Don-Quixote
once vanquished would infallibly accomplish, as unwilling to contradict or be
defective in the Laws of Knighthood, and it might so be, that in this time of
sequestring, he might forget all his vanities, or they might find out some
convenient remedy for his madness. Carrasco accepted of it, and Thomas Cecial
offered himself to be his Squire, Sancho Panca's neighbor and Gossip, a merry
knave and a witty. Samson armed himself, as you have heard, and Thomas Cecial
fitted the false nose to his own, and afterward he clapped on his vizard, that
he might not be known by his Gossip when they should meet: So they held on
the same voyage with Don-Quixote, and they came even just as he was in the
Adventure of Deaths Wagon: And at last they lighted on them in the Wood, where
what befell them, the discreet Reader has seen, and if it had not been for the
strange opinion that Don Quixote had, that the Bachelor was not the selfsame
man, he had been spoiled for ever, for taking another Degree since he mist
his mark.

Thomas Cecial that saw what ill use he had made of his hopes, and the bad
effect that his journey took, said to the Bachelor; Truly Master Samson we
have our deserts; things are easily conceived, and enterprises easily
undertaken, but very hardly performed. Don Quixote mad; we wife; but he is gone
away sound and merry; you are here bruised and sorrowful; let us know then who
is the greatest madman, he that is so and cannot do withal, or he that is so
for his pleasure? The difference (quoth Samson) that between these madmen is,
that he that of necessity is so, will always remain so; and he that
accidentally is so, may leave it when he will. Since it is so (said Thomas
Cecial) I that for my pleasure was mad, when I would needs be your Squire; for
the same reason I will leave the Office and return home to my own house. It Is
fit you should (said Samson) yet to think that I will do so till I have
soundly banged Don Quixote is vain; and now I go not about to restore him to
his wits, but to revenge my self on him; for the intolerable pain I feel in my
ribs will not permit me a more charitable discourse. Thus they two went on
parlying, till they came to a Town where by chance they lighted upon a
Bone-setter, who cured the unfortunate Samson. Thomas Cecial went home and left
him, and he stayed musing upon his revenge: and the History hereafter will
return to him, which at present must make merry with Don Quixote.

CHAP. XVI.
What befell Don-Quixote with a discreet Gentleman of Mancha.
DOn-Quixote went on his journey with the joy, content and gladness as has
been mentioned, imaging that for the late victory he was the most valiant
Knight that that age had in the world, he made account that all adventures that
should from thence forward befall him, were brought to a happy and prosperous
end: he cared not now for any Enchantments, or Enchanters; he forgot the
innumerable bangs that in the prosecution of his Chivalry had been given him,
and the stones cast, that struck out half his teeth, and the unthankfullnesse
of the Gally-slaves, and the boldness and showers of stakes of the Yangueses.

In conclusion he said to himself, that if he could find any Art, Manner, or
Means how to disinchant his Mistress Dulcinea, he would not envy the greatest
happiness or prosperity that ever any Knight Errant of former times had obtained.

He was altogether busied in these imaginations, when Sancho told him: How say
you Sir, that I have still before mine eyes that ill-favored, more then
ordinary, nose of my Gossip Thomas Cecial? And do you hapily Sancho, think
that the Knight of the Looking Glasses was the Bachelor Samson Carrasco, and
his Squire Thomas Cecial your Gossip? I know not what to say to it (quoth
Sancho) only I know, that the tokens he gave me of my House, Wife, and
Children, no other could give um me but he; and his face (his nose being off)
was the same that Thomas Cecials, as I have seen him many times in our Town,
and next house to mine; and his voice was the same. Let us be reasonable
Sancho (quoth Don Quixote:) Come hither: How can any man imagine that the
Bachelor Samson Carrasco should come like a Knight Errant, armed with Arms
offensive and defensive, to fight with me? Have I ever given him occasion, that
he should dog me? Am I his Rival? or is he a professor of Arms, to envy the
glory that I have gotten by them? Why, what should I say (answered Sancho) when
I saw that Knight (be he who he will) look so like the Bachelor Carrasco,
and his Squire to Thomas Cecial my Gossip? and if it were an Enchantment (as
you say) were there no other two in the World they might look like? All is
juggling and cunning (quoth Don Quixote) of the Wicked Magicians that persecute
me, who foreseeing that I should remain Victor in this Combat, had provided
that the vanquished Knight should put on the shape of my friend Carrasco, that
the friendship I bear him might mediate betwixt the edge of my Sword and the
rigor of my arm, and temper my hearts just indignation; and so, that he
might escape with his life, that with tricks and devices sought to take away
mine: For proof of which, oh Sancho! thou know by experience, that will not
let thee lie or be deceived, how easy it is for Enchanters to change one face
into another, making the beautiful deformed, and the deformed beautiful; and
it is not two days, since with thine own eyes thou sawst the beauty and
liveliness of the peerlesse Dulcinea in its perfection and natural
conformity, and I saw her in the foulnes and meanness of a course Milk-maid,
with bleare-eyes and stinking breath, so that the perverse Enchanter that durst
cause so wicked a Metamorphosis, it is not much that he has done the like in
the shapes of Samson Carrasco and Thomas Cecial, to rob me of the glory of my
conquest. Notwithstanding I am of good comfort; for in what shape soever it
were, I have vanquished mine enemy. God knows all (said Sancho) and whereas
he knew the transformation of Dulcinea had been a trick of his, his Masters
Chimera's gave him no satisfaction: but he durst not reply a word, for fear of
discovering his cozenage.

Whilst they were thus reasoning, one overtooke them that came their way, upon
a fair flea-bitten Mare, upon his back a riding coat of fine green cloth,
welted with tawny Velvet, with a Hunters cap of the same; his Mares furnitur
was for the field, and after the Genet fashion, of the said tawny and green,
he wore a Moorish Semiter, hanging at a broad Belt of green and gold, his
buskins were wrought with the same that his belt was, his spurs were not gilt,
but laid on with a green varnish, so smooth and burnisht, that they were more
suitable to the rest of his clothes, then if they had been of beaten gold.
Coming near, he saluted them courteously, and spurring his Mare, rode on: But
Don-Quixote said to him, Gallant, if you go our way, and your haste be not
great, I should take it for a favor that we might ride together. Truly Sir,
said he with the Mare, I should not ride from you, but that I fear your horse
will be unruly with the company of my Mare. You may well, Sir (said Sancho)
you may well reyne in your Mare: for our horse is the honestest and manerliest
horse in the world; he is never unruly upon these occasions; and once when he
flew out, my Master and I paid for it with a witness. I say again, you may
stay if you please, for although your Mare were given him between two dishes,
he would not look at her.

The Passenger held in his reins, wondering at Don-Quixotes countenance and
posture, who was now without his helmet, for Sancho carried it in a Cloke-bag
at the pummell of Dapples pack-saddle: and if he in the Green did much look
at Don-Quixote, Don-Quixote did much more eye him, taking him to be a man of
worth; his age showed him to be about fifty, having few gray hairs, his face
was somewhat sharp, his countenance of an equal temper: Lastly, in his fashion
and posture, he seemed to be a man of good quality. His opinion of Don-Quixote
was, that he had never seen such a kind of man before; the lanknesse of his
horse, the talenesse of his own body, the sparenesse and palenesse of his face
made him admire; his arms, his gesture and composition, a shape and picture,
as it were, had not been seen (many ages before) in that Country.

Don-Quixote noted well with what attention the Traveller beheld him, and in
his suspense read his desire, and being so courteous and so great a friend, to
give all men content, before he demanded him any thing to prevent him, he said:
This outside of mine that you have seen, Sir, because it is so rare and
different from others now in use, may (no doubt) have bred some wonder in you:
which you will cease, when I shall tell you, as now I do, that I am a Knight,
one of those (as you would say) that seek their fortunes. I went out of my
Country, engaged mine estate, left my pleasure, committed my self to the Arms
of Fortune, to carry me whither she pleased. My desire was to raise again the
dead Knight Errantry, and long ago stumbling here, and falling there, casting
my self headlong in one place, and rising up in another, I have accomplished a
great part of my desire, succouring Widows, defending Damzels, favoring
married women, Orphans, and distressed children (the proper and natural office
of Knights Errant) so that by my many valiant and Christian exployts, I have
merited to be in the Press, in all or most nations of the world: thirty
thousand volumes of my History have been printed, and thirty thousand millions
more are like to be if Heaven permit. Lastly, to shut up all in a word, I am
Don-Quixote de la Mancha, otherwise called, The Knight of the Sorrowful
Countenance: And though one should not praise himself, yet I must needs do it,
that is, there being none present that may do it for me: so that, kind
Gentleman, neither this horse, this lance, nor this shield, nor this Squire,
nor all these arms together, nor the palenesse of my face, nor my slender
macilency, ought henceforward to admire you, you knowing now who I am, and the
profession I maintain.

This said, Don-Quixote was silent, and he with the green Coat was a great
while ere he could answer, as if he could not hit upon it: but after some
pause, he said: You were in the right, Sir Knight, in knowing, by my
suspension, my desire: but yet you have not quite remooved my admiration, which
was caused with seeing you; for although that, as you say Sir, that to know who
you are might make me leave wondering, it is otherwise rather, since now I know
it, I am in more suspense and wonderment: And is it possible that at this day
there be Knights Errant in the world? and that there be true Histories of
Knighthood printed? I cannot persuade my self, that any now favor widows,
defend Damzels, honor married Women, or succor Orphans; and I should never
have believed it, if I had not in you beheld it with mine eyes: Blessed be
Heavens! for with this History you speak of, which is printed of your true and
lofty Chivalrie, those innumerable falsities of fained Knights Errant will be
forgotten, which the world was full of, so hurtful to good education and
prejudicial to true Stories.

There is much to be spoken (quoth Don-Quixote) whether the Histories of
Knights Errant were fained or true. Why, is there any that doubts (said he in
the Green) that they be not false? I do (said Don-Quixote;) and let it
suffice; for if our Journey last, I hope in God to let you see that you have
done ill, to be led with the stream of them that hold they are not true. At
this last speech of Don-Quixote the Traveller suspected he was some Idiot, and
expected when some others of his might confirm it: but before they should be
diverted with any other discourse Don-Quixote desired to know who he was,
since he had imparted to him his condition and life. He in the Green made
answer; I, Sir Knighs of the Sorrowful Countenance, am a Gentleman borne in a
Town, where (God willing) we shall dine to day: I am well to live; my name is
Don Diego de Miranda; I spend my life with my Wife and Children, and Friends:
my sports are Hunting and Fishing: but I have neither Hawk nor Gray-Hounds;
only a tame Cock-Partridge, or a murdering Ferret; some six dozen of Books,
some Spanish, some Latin, some History, others Devotion: Your Books of
Knighthood have not yet entered the threshold of my door: I do more turn over
your Profane Books then Religious, if they be for honest recreation, such as
may delight for their language, and admire and supend for their invention,
although in Spain there be few of these. Sometimes I dine with my neighbors
and friends, and other whiles invite them: My Meals are neat and handsome, and
nothing scarce: I neither love to back-bite my self, nor to hear others do it:
I search not into other men's lives, or am a Lynce to other men's actions: I
hear every day a Mass; part my Goods with the Poor, without making a muster
of my good Deeds, that I may not give way to hypocrisy and vainglory to enter
into my heart, enemies that easily seize upon the wariest breast: I strive to
make Peace between such as are at Ods: I am devoted to our blessed Lady, and
always trust in Gods infinite Mercy.

Sancho was most attentive to this relation of the life and entertainments of
this Gentleman, which seeming to him to be good and holy, and that he that led
it worked miracles, he flung himself from Dapple, and in great haste laid hold
of his right stirrup, and with the tears in his eyes often kissed his feet;
which being seen by the Gentleman, he asked him, What do you Brother?
Wherefore be these kisses?

Let me kiss (quoth Sancho) for, me thinks, your Worship is the first Saint
that in all the days of my life I ever saw a horseback. I am no Saint (said
he) but a great Sinner: you indeed brother are, and a good Soul, as your
simplicity shows you to be. Sancho went again to recover his Pack-saddle,
having (as it were) brought into the Marketplace his Masters laughter out of a
profound melancholy, and caused a new admiration in Don Diego.

Don-Quixote asked him how many sons he had; who told him, that one of the
things in which the Philosophers Summum Bonum did consist (who wanted the true
knowledge of God) was in the goods of Nature, in those of Fortune; in having
many Friends, and many and virtuous Children. I, Sir Don-Quixote (answered the
Gentleman have a son, whom if I had not, perhaps you would judge me more happy
then I am, not that he is so bad but because not so good as I would have him:
he is about eighteen years of age, six of which he has spent in Salamenca,
learning the tongues, Greek and Latin, and when I had a purpose that he
should fall to other Sciences, I found him so besotted with Poesy, and that
Science (if so it may be called) that it is not possible to make him look upon
the Law (which I would have him study) nor Divinity the Queen of all Sciences.
I would he were the Crown of all his lineage, since we live in an age, wherein
our King does highly reward good learning: for learning without goodness, is
like a pearl cast in a Swines-snout; all the day long he spends in his
Critiscismes, whether Homer said well or ill in such a verse of his Iliads,
whether Martial were bawdie or no in such an Epigram, whether such or such a
verse in Virgil ought to be understood this way or that way. Indeed all his
delight is in these aforesaid Poets, and in Horace, Persius, Iuvenal, and
Tibullus; but of modern writers he makes small account: yet for all the grudg
he bears to modern Poesy, he is mad upon your catches, and your glossing upon
four verses, which were sent him from Salamanca, and that I think is his true
study.

To all which Don-Quixote answered; Children Sir, are pieces of the very
entrails of their Parents, so let them be good or bad they must love them, as
we must love our spirits that give us life: It concerns their Parents to
direct them, from their infancy, in the paths of virtue, of good manners, and
good and Christian exercises, that when they come to years, they may be the
staff of their age, and the glory of their posterity; and I hold it not so
proper, to force them to study this or that Science, though to persuade them
were not amiss, and though it be not to study to get his bread (the Student
being so happy, that God has given him Parents able to leave him well) mine
opinion should be, that they let him follow that kind of study he is most
inclined to, and though that of Poetry be less profitable then delightful,
yet it is none of those that will dishonor the Professor.

Poetry, Signior, in my opinion; is like a tender Virgin, Young and most
Beautiful, whom many other Virgins, to wit, all the other Sciences, are to
enrich, polish and adorn; she is to be served by them all, and all are to
be authorized by her: but this Virgin will not be handled and hurried up and
down the streets, nor published in every market-nooke, nor Court-corners. She
is made of a kind of Alchymie, that he that knows how to handle her, will
quickly turn her into the purest gold of inestimable value, he that enjoys
her must hold her at distance, not letting her lash out in unclean Satyrs,
nor in dull Sonnets, she must not by any means be vendible, except in
Heroic Poems, in lamentable Tragedies, or Pleasant and artificial Comedies:
She must not be meddled with by Jesters, nor by the ignorant vulgar, incapable
of knowing or esteeming the Treasures that are locked up in her; and think
not, Sir, that I call here only the common people vulgar, for whosoever is
ignorant, be he Potentate or Prince, he may and must enter into the number
of the vulgar: So that he who shall handle and esteem of Poetry with these
Requisites I have declared, he shall be famous, and his name shall be
extolled in all the Politic nations of the world.

And whereas Sir, your son neglects modern Poesy, I persuade my self he
does not well in it, and the reason is this: Great Homer never wrote in Latin,
because he was a Grecian; nor Virgill in Greek, because he was a Latin:
Indeed all your ancient Poets wrote in the Tongue which they learnt from their
Cradle, and sought not after strange languages to declare their lofty conceits.
Which being so, it were reason this Custom should extend it self through all
Nations, and that your Germane Poet should not be under valued, because he
writes in his language, nor the Castilian, or Biscayner, because they writ in
theirs: But your son (as I suppose) does not mislike modern Poesy, but
Poets that are merely modern, without knowledge of other Tongues or Sciences,
that may adorn, rowze up, and strengthen their natural impulse, and yet in
this there may be an error. For it is a true opinion, that a Poet is born so;
the meaning is, A Poet is naturaly born a Poet from his mothers womb, and with
that inclination that heaven has given him, without further Study or Art, he
composeth things, that verify his saying that said, Est Deus in nobis, etc.

Let me also say, that the natural Poet, that helps himself with Art, shall
be much better, and have the advantage of that Poet that only out of his Art
strives to be so; the reason is, because Art goes not beyond Nature, but only
perfects it; so that Nature and Art mixed together, and Art with Nature, make an
excellent Poet: Let this then be the scope of my discourse Sir; let your Son
proceed whither his Star calls him: for if he be so good a Student, as he
ought to be, and have happily mounted the first step of the Sciences, which is
the Languages, with them (by himself) he will ascend to the top of humane
learning, which appears as well in a Gentleman, and does as much adorn, honor,
and ennoble him, as a Miter does a Bishop, or a loose Cassock a Civilian. Chide
your Son of he write Satyrs that may prejudice honest men, punish him and
tear them: But if he make Sermons, like those of Horace, to the reprehension
of Vice in general, as he so elegantly did, then cherish him, for it is
lawful for a Poet to write against Envy, and to enveigh against envious
persons in his Verse, and so against other Vices, if so be he aim at no
particular person: But you have Poets that instead of uttering a jerk of wit,
they will venture a being banished to the Islands of Pontus. If a Poet live
honestly he will be so in his Verses; the pen is the minds tongue; as the
conceits are which be engendered in it, such will the writings be; and when
Kings and Princes see the miraculous Science of Poesy in wise, virtuous and
grave Subjects, they honor, esteem, and enrich them, and even crown them with
the leaves of that Tree which the thunderbolt offends not [ The Lawrell] in
token that none shall offend them that have their temples honored and adorned
with such crowns. The Gentleman admired Don-Quixotes discourse, and so much,
that now he forsook his opinion he had of him, that he was a Coxcombe. But in
the midest of this discourse Sancho (that was weary of it) went out of the way
to beg a little Milk of some Sheepheards not far off, curing of their Sheep:
so the Gentleman still maintained talk with Don-Quixote, being wonderfully
taken and satisfied with his wife discourse. But Don Quixote lifting up
suddenly his eyes, saw that in the way toward them, there came a Cart full of
the Kings Colors, and taking it to be some rare Adventure, he called to
Sancho for his Helmet. Sancho hearing himself called on, left the Sheepheards
and spurred Dapple apace, and came to his Master, to whom a rash and stupendous
Adventure happened.

CHAP. XVII.
Where is showed the last and extremest hazard, to which the unheard of
courage of Don-Quixote did or could arrive, with the prosperous accomplishment
of the Adventure of the Lions.
THe History says, That when Don-Quixote called to Sancho, to bring him his
Helmet, he was buying curds which the Sheepheards sold him; and being hastily
laid at by his Master, he knew not what to do with them, or how to bestow
them without losing them; for he had paid for them; so he bethought himself,
and clapped them into his Masters Helmet; and this good order taken, he went to
see what he would have; who, when he came, said, Give me, friend, that same
Helmet; for either I know not what belongs to Adventures, or that I see yonder
is one that will force me to take Arms. He of the green coat that heard this,
turned his eyes every way, and saw nothing but a Cart that came toward them
with two or three small flags, which made him think that the said Cart carried
the Kings money, and so he told Don-Quixote; but he believed him not, always
thinking that every thing he saw was Adventure upon Adventure: so he answered
the Gentleman, He that is warned is half armed: there is nothing lost in
being provided; for I know by experience, that I have enemies visible and
invisible; and I know not when, nor where, nor at what time, or in what shape
they will set upon me: and turning to Sancho, he demanded his Helmet, who
wanting leisure to take the curds out, was forced to give it him as it was. Don
Quixote took it, and not perceiving what was in it, clapped it suddenly upon his
head; and as the curds were squeazed and thrust together, the whay began to run
down Don Quixote face and beard; at which he was in such a fright, that he
cried out to Sancho; What ails me Sancho? for me thinks my skull is softened,
or my brains melt, or that I sweat from top to toe; and if it be sweat, I
assure thee it is not for fear, I believe certainly that I am like to have a
terrible Adventure of this; give me something, if thou have it to wipe on; for
this abundance of sweat blindes me. Sancho was silent and gave him a cloth,
and with it thanks to God, that his Master fell not into the business. Don
Quixote wiped himself, and took off his Helmet to see what it was, that (as he
thought) did be number his head, and seeing those white splaches in his Helmet,
he put them to his nose, and smelling to them, said, By my Mistress Dulcinea
del Toboso's life, they are curds that thou have brought me here, thou base
Traitor and unmannerly Squire. To which Sancho very cunningly, and with a great
deal of pawse answered: If they be curds, give them me pray, and I Will eat;
but let the Devil eat um, for he put um there: Should I be so bold as to
foul your Worships Helmet? and there you have found (as I told you) who did it.
In faith Sir, as sure as God lives, I have my Enchanters too that persecute me
as a creature and part of you, and I warrant have put that silth there to stir
you up to choler, and to make you bang my sides (as you use to do.) Well, I
hope this time they have lost their labor; for I trust in my Masters
discretion, that he will consider that I have neither curds nor milk, nor any
such thing; for if I had, I had rather put it in my stomach then in the Helmet.
All this may be (said Don Quixote.)

The Gentleman observed all, and wondered, especially when Don Quixote, after
he had wiped his Head, Face, Beard, and Helmet, clapped it on again, settling
himself well in his stirrops, searching for his Sword and grasping his Lance,
he cried out: Now come on it what will, for here I am with a courage to meet
Satan himself in person.

By this, the Cart with the flags drew near, in which there came no man but
the Carter with his Mules, and another upon the foremost of them. Don-Quixote
put himself forward, and asked; Whither go ye, my masters? what Cart is this?
what do you carry in it? and what colors be these? To which the Carter
answered, The Cart is mine, the Carriage is two fierce Lions caged up, which
the General of Oran sends to the King at Court for a Present: these Colors be
his Majesty's, in sign that what goes here is his. And are the Lions big,
said Don-Quixote? So big (said he that went toward the Cart door) that there
never came bigger out of Africa into Spain, and I am their keeper, and have
carried others, but never any so big: they are Male and Female, the Male is
in this first grate, the Female in the hindermost, and now they are hungry, for
they have not eat to day, and therefore I pray Sir give us way; for we had
need come quickly where we may meat them. To which (quoth Don-Quixote
smiling a little) Your Lion whelps to me? to me your Lion whelps? and at this
time of day? Well, I vow to God, your General that sends um this way shall
know, whether I be one that am afraid of Lions, Alight, honest fellow, and if
you be the Keeper, open their Cages, and let me your beasts forth; for I Will
make um know in the midst of this Champion, who Don-Quixote is, in spite of
those Enchanters that sent um. Fie, fie, (said the Gentleman at this instant to
himself) our Knight shows very well what he is, the Curds have softened his
skull, and ripned his brains. By this Sancho came to him and said; for Gods
love handle the matter so, Sir, that my Master meddle not with these Lions; for
if he do they will worry us all. Why, is your Master so mad (quoth the Gentleman)
that you fear, or believe he will fight with wild beasts? He is nor mad,
said Sancho, but hardy. I Will make him otherwise, said the Gentleman, and
coming to Don-Quixote, that was hastening the Keeper to open the Cages, said,
Sir Knight, Knights Errant ought to undertake adventures, that may give a
likelihood of ending them well, and not such as are altogether desperate: for
valor grounded upon rashness, has more madness then fortitude. How much
more, these Lions come not to assail you, they are carried to be presented to
his Majesty, and therefore 'twere not good to stay or hinder their journey.
Pray get you gone, gentle Sir (quoth 'Don-Quixote) and deal with your tame
Partridge, and your murdring Ferret, and leave every man to his function: this
is mine, and I am sufficient to know whether these Lions come against me or no:
so turning to the Keeper, he cried: By this-goodman slave, [Voto a tal. When
he would seem to swear, but swears by nothing.] if you do not forthwith
open the Cage, I Will nail you with my Lance, to your Cart. The Carter that
perceived the resolution of that armed Vision, told him, Seignior mine, will
you be pleased in charity to set me unyoke my Mules, and to put my self and
them in safety, before I unsheath my Lions? for if they should kill them, I am
undone all days of my life, for I have no other living but, this Cart and my
Mules. O thou wretch of little Faith (quoth Don-Quixote) light, and unyoke, and
do what thou will, for thou shall see thou might have saved a labor. The
Carter alighted, and unyoked hastily, and the keeper cried out aloud, Bear
witness, my Masters all, that I am forced against my will to open the Cages
and to let loose the Lions, and that I protest to this Gentleman, that all the
harm and mischief that these Beasts shall do light upon him; besides that he
pay me my wages and due. Shift you Sirs for your selves, before I open, for I
am sure they will do me no hurt. The Gentleman persuaded him the second time,
that he should not attempt such a piece of madness; for such a folly was to
tempt God.

To which Don-Quixote answered, that he knew what he did. The Gentleman
replied, That he should consider well of it, for he knew he was deceived. Well,
Sir, (said Don-Quixote) if you will not be a spectator of this (which you
think Tragedy) pray spur your Flea-bitten, and put your self in safety.
Which when Sancho heard, with tears in his eyes, he beseeched him to desist
from that enterprise, in comparison of which, that of the Winde-Mils was
Cake-bread, and that fearful one also of the Fulling-Mill, or all the
exployts that ever he had done in his life. Look ye, Sir (said Sancho) here is
no Enchantment, nor any such thing; for I have looked through the grates and
chinkes of the Cages, and have seen a clawe of a true Lion, by which clawe I
guess the Lion is as big as a mountain.

Thy fear at least (said Don-Quixote) will make him as big as half the world.
Get thee out of the way Sancho, and leave me, and if I die in the place, thou
know our agreement, repair to Dulcinea, and that is enough.

To these he added other reasons, by which he cut off all hope of his leaving
the prosecution of that foolish enterprise.

He of the Green-coat would have hindered him, but he found himself unequally
matched in weapons, and thought it no wisdom to deal with a mad man; for now
'Don-Quixote appeared no otherwise to him, who hastening the Keeper a fresh, and
reiterating his threats, made the Gentleman set spurs to his Mare, and Sancho
to his Dapple, and the Carter to his Mules, each of them striving to get as far
from the Cart as they could, before the Lions should be unhampered.

Sancho bewailed his Masters loss; for he believed certainly that the Lion
would catch him in his paws, he cursed his fortune, and the time that ever he
came again to his Masters service; but for all his wailing and lamenting, he
left not punching of Dapple, to make him get far enough from the Cart.

The Keeper when he saw those that fled far enough off, began anew to require
and intimate to Don-Quixote, what he had formerly done; who answered, That he
heard him, and that he should leave his intimations, for all was needless, and
that he should make haste.

Whilst the Keeper was opening the first Cage, Don-Quixot began to consider,
whether it were best to fight on foot or on horseback: And at last he
determined it should be on foot, fearing that Rozinante would be afraid to
look upon the Lions, and thereupon he leaped from his horse, cast by his
Lance, buckled his Shield to him, and unsheathed his Sword fair and softly,
with a marvelous courage and valiant heart, he martched toward the Cart,
recommending himself first to God, and then to his Lady Dulcinea.

And here it is to be noted, that when the Author of the true History came
to this passage, he exclames and cries. O strong (and beyond all comparison)
courageous Don Quixote! Thou Looking-glass, in which all the valiant Knights
of the World may behold themselves! Thou new and second Don Manuel de Leon, who
was the Honor and Glory of the Spanish Knights: With what words shall I
recount this fearful exployt? Or with what Arguments shall I make it credible
to ensuing times? Or what Praises shall not fit and square with thee? Though
they may seem Hyperboles above all Hyperboles? Thou on foot, alone, undaunted
and magnanimous, with thy Sword only, and that none of your cutting Fox-blades,
with a Shield, not of bright and shining steel, expectest and attendest two of
the siercest Lions that ever were bred in African Woods. Let thine own Deeds
extol thee, brave Manchegan: For I must leave um here abruptly, since I want
words to endere them.

Here the Authors exclamation ceased, and the thread of the Story went knitting
it self on, saying.

The Keeper seeing Don-Quixote in his posture, and that he must needs let
loose the Male Lion, on pain of the bold Knights indignation, he set the
first Cage wide open, where the Lion (as is said) was, of an extraordinary
bigness, fearful and ugly to see to. The first thing he did, was to tumble
up and down the Cage, stretch one paw, and rowze himself; forthwith he
yawned, and gently sneezed, then with his Tongue some two handfulls long, he
licked the dust out of his eyes, and washed his face; which done, he thrust
his head out of the Cage and looked round about him, with his eyes like
fire-coles; a sight and gesture able to make Temeritie it self afraid. Only
Don-Quixote beheld him earnestly, and wished he would leap out of the Cart,
that they might grapple, for he thought to slice him in pieces. Hitherto came
the extreme of his not-heard-of madness: But the generous Lion, more courteous
then arrogant, neglecting such childishness and bravadoes, after he had
looked round about him (as is said) turned his back, and showed his Tail to
Don-Quixote, and very quietly lay down again in the Cage. Which Don-Quixote
seeing, he commanded the Keeper to give him two or three blows to make him
come forth. No, not I (quoth the Keeper) for if I urge him, I shall be the
first he will tear in pieces. I pray you Sir Knight, be contented with your
days work, which is as much as could in valor be done, and tempt not a
second hazard. The Lions door was open, he might have come out if he would;
but since he has not hitherto, he will not come forth all this day. You have
well showed the stoutnesse of your courage: no brave Combatant (in my opinion)
is tied to more then to defy his Enemy, and to expect him in field; and if
his contrary come not, the disgrace is his, and he that expected, remains with
the prize.

True it is (answered Don-Quixote) friend, shut the door, and give me a
Certificate in the best form that you can, of what you have seen me do
here: to wit, That you opened to the Lion, that I expected him and he came not
out; that I expected him again yet all would not do, but he lay down. I
could do no more. Enchantments avaunt, God maintain right and truth, and true
Chivalrie: shut (as I bad you) whilst I make signs to them that are fled,
that they may know this exployt from thy Relation. The Keeper obeyed, and
Don-Quixote putting his handkerchief on the point of his Lance, with which he
had wiped the Curd-showre from off his face, he began to call those that fled,
and never so much as looked behind them, all in a Troop, and the Gentleman the
foreman: But Sancho seeing the white cloth said, Hang me if my Master have
not vanquished the wilde-Beasts, since he calls us. All of them made a stand,
and knew it was Don-Quixote that made the sign: So lessening their fear, by
little and little they drew near him, till they could plainly hear that he
called them. At length they returned to the Cart: And Don-Quixote said to the
Carter, Yoke your Mules again brother, and get you on your way: and Sancho,
give him two Pistolets in gold, for him and the Lyon-keeper, in recompense of
their stay. With a very good will (said Sancho:) But what is become of the
Lions? are they alive or dead? Then the Keeper fair and softly began to tell
them of the bickering, extolling, as well as he could, Don-Quixotes valor, at
whose sight the Lion trembling, would not, or durst not sallie from the Cage,
although the door were open a pretty while, and that because he had told the
Knight, that to provoke the Lion, was to tempt God, by making him come out by
force (as he would that he should be provoked in spite of his teeth, and
against his will) he suffered the door to be shut. What think you of this
Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote?) Can Enchantment now prevail against true Valor?
Well may Enchanters make me unfortunate; but it is impossible they should
bereave me of my Valor.

Sancho bestowed the Pistolets, and the Carter yoaked; the Keeper took leave
of Don-Quixote, and thanked him for his kindness, and promised him to relate
his valorous exploit to the King himself, when he came to Court. Well, if his
Majesty chance to ask who it was that did it, tell him The Knight of the
Lions: for henceforward, I will that my name be trucked, exchanged, turned and
changed now from that I had of The Knight of the sorrowful Countenance; and in
this I follow the ancient use of Knights Errant, that would change their names
when they pleased, or thought it convenient.

The Cart went on it is way, and Don-Quixote, Sancho, and he in the green held
on theirs. In all this while Don Diego de Miranda spoke not a word, being
busied in noting Don-Quixotes speeches and actions, taking him to be a wise
madman, or a madman that came somewhat near a wise man: He knew nothing as
yet of the first part of his History; for if he had read that, he would have
left admiring his words and deeds, since he might have known the nature of his
madness: But (for he knew it not) the held him to be wise, and mad by fits;
for what he spoke was consonant, elegant, and well delivered; but his actions
were foolish, rash, and unadvised; And (thought he to himself) what greater
madness could there be, then to clap on a Helmet full of Curds, and to make
us believe that Enchanters had softened his skull? or what greater rashness or
fopperie, then forcibly to venture upon Lions? Don-Quixote drew him from these
imaginations, saying, Who doubts, Seignior Don Diego de Miranda, but that you
will hold me in your opinion for an idle fellow, or a madman; and no marvel
that I be held so; for my Actions testify no less; for all that, I would
have you know that I am not so mad, or so shallow as I seem: It is a brave
sight to see a goodly Knight in the midst of the Marketplace before his
Prince, to give a thrust with his Lance to a fierce Bull: [In Spain they use
with Horsemen and Footmen to course their Bulls to death in the
Marketplaces.] And it is a brave sight to see a Knight armed in shining Armor
pass about the Tilt-yard at the cheerful Justs before the Ladies; and all
those Knights are a brave sight that in Military exercises (or such as may
seem so) do entertain, revive, and honor their Princes Courts: but above all
these, a Knight Errant is a better sight, that by Deserts and Wildernesses, by
Crosse-waies and Woods, and Mountains, searches after dangerous Adventures,
with a purpose to end them happily and fortunately, only to obtain glorious and
lasting Fame. A Knight Errant (I say) is a better sight, succouring a Widow in
some Desert, then a Court Knight courting some Damzell in the City. All
Knights have their particular exercises: Let the Courtier serve Ladies,
authorize his Princes Court with Liveries, sustain poor Gentlemen at his Table,
appoint Justs, maintain Tourneyes, show himself. Noble, Liberal, and
Magnificent; and above all, Religious: and in these he shall accomplish with
his obligation. But for the Knight Errant, let him search the corners of the
World; enter the most intricate Labyrinths; every foot undertake
Impossibilities, and in the Deserts and Wilderness: let him resist the
Sunne-beams in the midest of Summer, and the sharp rigor of the Winds and
Frosts in Winter: Let not Lions fright him, nor Spirits terrify him, nor
Hobgoblins make him quake; for to seek these to set upon them, and to overcome
all, are his prime exercises, And since it fell to my Lot to be one of the
number of these Knights Errant, I cannot but undergo all that I think comes
under the jurisdiction of my profession. So that the encountering those Lions
did directly belong to me, though I knew it to be an exorbitant rashness;
for well I know that valor is a virtue betwixt two vicious extremes, as
cowardice and rashness: but it is less dangerous for him that is valiant, to
rise to a point of rashness, then to fall or touch upon the Coward. For as it
is more easy for a Prodigal man to be liberal then a covetous, so it is
easier for a rash man to be truly valiant, then a Coward to come to true
valor. And touching the onset in Adventures, believe me Signior Don Diego, it
is better playing a good trump then a small, for it sounds better in the
hearers ears. Such a Knights is rash and hardy, then such a Knight is fearful
and cowardly.

I say, Signior (answered Don Diego) that all that you have said and done is
levelled out by the line of Reason, and I think if the Statues and Ordinances
of Knight Errantry were lost, they might be found again in your breast, as in
their own Storehouse and Register; and so let us haste for the day grows on
us, let us get to my Village and House, where you shall ease your self of your
former labor; which, though it have not been bodily, yet it is mental, which
does often redound to the bodies weariness. I thank you for your kind offer,
Signior (quoth Don-Quixote) and spurring on faster, about two of the clock they
came to the Villag and Don Diego's House, whom Don-Quixote styled, The Knight
of the green-Cassock.

CHAP. XVIII.
What happened to Don-Quixote in the Castle, or Knight of the Green Cassock his
house, with other extrravagant matters.
DOn-Quixote perceived that Don Diego de Miranda's house was spacious, after
the Country manner; and his Arms (though of course stone) upon the door
toward the street, his Wine-cellar in the Court, his other Cellar or Vault in
the Entry, with many great stone Vessels round about that were of Toboso,
which renewed the remembrance of his Enchanted and transformed Mistress
Dulcinea; so sighing, and not minding who was by, he said, O dulces prendas. A
beginning of a Sonnet in Diana de Monto Mayo^, which D. Q. here rap^ out upon a
sudden.
O happy pledges, found out to my loss,
Sweet and reviving, when the time was, once!


Oh you Tobosian Tons, that bring to my remembrance the sweet pledge of my
greatest bitterness! The Scholar Poet, son to Don Diego, that came out with
his Mother to welcome him, heard him pronounce this, and the Mother and son
were in some suspense at the strange shape of Don Quixote, who alighting from
Rozinante very courteously desired to kiss her hands: And Don Diego said; I
pray Wife, give your wonted welcome to this Gentleman, Signior Don Quixote de
la Mancha, a Knight Errant, and the valiantest and wisest in the world.

The Gentlewoman called Donna Christina welcomed him very affectionately, and
with much courtesy, which Don Quixote retorted with many wise and mannerly
complements, and did (as it were) use the same over again to the Scholar, who
hearing Don-Quixote speak, took him to be wondrous wise and witty. Here the
Author paints out unto us, all the circumstances of Don Diego his house,
deciphering to us all that a Gentleman and a rich Farmers house may have: But
it seemed good to the Translator to pass over these and such like trifles,
because they suited not with the principal scope of this History, the which is
more grounded upon truth, then upon bare digressions.

Don-Quixote, was led into a Hall; Sancho unarmed him; so that now he had
nothing on but his Breeches and a Chamois Doublet, all smudged with the silth
of his Armor: about his neck he wore a little Scholasticall Band, unstrach'd,
and without lace; his Buskins were Date-coloured; and his Shoes close on each
side: his good Sword he gyrt to him, that hung at a Belt of Sea-Wolves skins;
for it was thought he had the running of the Reins many years; he wore also a
long Cloak of good russet-cloth: but first of all, in five or six Kettles of
water (for touching the quantity there is some difference) he washed his Head
and his Face; and for all that the water was turned Whey-colour, God a mercy on
Sancho's gluttony, and the buying those dismal black curds that made his
Master so white with the aforesaid bravery, and with a sprightly air and
gallantry, Don Quixote martched into another Room, where the Scholar stayed
for him to entertain him till the cloth was laid; for the Mistress of the house,
Donna Christina, meant to show to her honorable guest, that she knew how to
make much of them that came to her house.

Whilst Don-Quixote was disarming himself, Don Lorenzo had leisure (for that
was Don Diego's sons name) to ask his Father, What do you call this
Gentleman Sir, that you have brought with you? for his name, his shape, and
your calling him Knight Errant, makes my Mother and me wonder. Faith son
(quoth Don Diego) I know not what I should say to thee of him; only I may tell
thee, I have seen him play the made pranks of any madman in the world, and
speak again speeches so wise as blot out and undo his Deeds; do thou speak
to him, and feel the pulse of his understanding, and since thou art discreet,
judge of his discretion or folly as thou see best, though to deal plainly
with thee, I rather hold him to be mad then wise.

Hereupon Don Lorenzo, as is said, went to entertain Don-Quixote, and amongst
other discourse that passed betwixt them, Don-Quixote said to Don Lorenzo;
Signior Don Diego de Miranda your Father, has told me of your rare abilities
and subtle wit, and chiefly that you are an excel^ent Poet. A Poet perhaps
(replied Don Lorenzo) but excellent, by no means: true it is that I am somewhat
affectionated to Poesy, and to read good Poets; but not so that I may deserve
the name of excellent, that my Father styles me with. I do not dislike your
modesty (quoth Don Quixote) for you have seldom times any Poet that is not
arrogant, and thinks himself to be the best Poet in the world. There is no
rule (quoth Don Lorenzo) without an exception, and some one there is that is
so, yet thinks not so. Few (said Don Quixote:) But tell me Sir; What Verses be
those that you have now in hand, that your Father says do trouble and puzzle
you? and if it be some kind of gloss, I know what belongs to glossing, and
should be glad to hear them; and if they be of your Verses for the Prize,
content your self with the second reward; [De justa literaria: A custom in
Universities in Spain, of rewards proposed to them that make the best Verses:]
For the first goes always by favor, or according the quality of the person;
and the second is justly distributed; so that the third comes (according to
this account) to be the second, and the first the third, according to degrees
that are given in Universities: but for all that the word first is a great
matter.

Hitherto (thought Don Lorenzo to himself) I cannot think thee mad: Proceed we:
and he said; It seems Sir, you have frequented the Schools; what Sciences
have you heard? That of Knight Errantry (quoth Don Quixote) which is as good as
your Poetry, and somewhat better. I know not what Science that is (quoth Don
Lorenzo) neither has it as yet come to my notice. It Is a Science (quoth
Don-Quixote) that contains in it all, or most of the Sciences of the world, by
reason that he who professes it, must be skillfull in the Laws, to know
Justice distributive and Commutative, to give every man his own and what
belongs to him: he must be a Divine to know how to give a reason clearly and
distinctly of his Christian profession, wheresoever it shall be demanded him:
He must be a Physician, and chiefly an Herbalist, to know in a Wilderness or
Desert, what herbs have virtue to cure wounds; for your Knight Errant must not
be looking every pissing while who shall heal him: He must be an
Astronomer, to know in the night by the stars what a clock it is, and in what
part and Climate of the world he is: He must be skillfull in the
Mathematics, because every foot he shall have need of them: And to let pass
that he must be adorned with all divine and moral virtues; descending to
other trifles, I say he must learn to swim, as they say, fish Nicholas, or
Nicolao did: He must know how to shoe a Horse, to mend a Saddle or Bridle:
And coming again to what went before, he must serve God and his Mistress
inviolably: he must be chaste in his thoughts; honest in his words; liberal in
his deeds; valiant in his actions; patient in afflictions; charitable toward
the poor: and lastly, a defender of truth, although it cost him his life for
it. Of all these great and lesser parts a good Knight Errant is composed, that
you may see Signior Don Lorenzo, whether it be a sniveling Science that the
Knight that learns it professes, and whether it may not be equalled to the
proudest of them all taught in the Schools.

If it be so (said Don Lorenzo) I say this Science goes beyond them all. If it
be so (quoth Don-Quixote.) Why let me tell you (said Don Lorenzo) I doubt
whether there be any Knights Errant now adorned with so many virtues. Often have
I spoken (replied Don-Quixote) that which I must now speak again, that the
greatest part of men in the world are of opinion, that there be no Knights
Errant; and I think, if Heaven do not miraculously let them understand the
truth, that there have been such, and that at this day there be, all labor
will be in vain (as I have often found by experience:) I will not now stand
upon showing you your error: all I will do, is, to pray to God to deliver you
out of it, and to make you understand how profitable and necessary Knights
Errant have been to the world in former ages, and also would be at present, if
they were in request: But now, for our sins, sloth, idleness, gluttony, and
wantonness do reign. I faith (thought Don Lorenzo) for this once our guest
has escaped me: but for all that, he is a lively Ass, and I were a dull fool
if I did not believe it.

Here they ended their discourse, for they were called to dinner. Don Diego
asked his son what trial he had made of their guests understanding; To
which he made answer; All the Physicians and Scriveners in the world will not
wipe out his madness. He is a curious madman, and has neat Dilemma's. To
dinner they went, and their meat was such as Don Diego upon the way described
it, such as he gave to his guests, well dressed, savory, and plentiful: But
that which best pleased Don-Quixote, was the mavelous silence throughout the
whole house, as if it had been a Covent of Carthusians: So (that lifting up his
eyes, and grace being said, and that they had washed hands) he earnestly
entreated Don Lorenzo to speak his Prize-verses.

To which (quoth he) because I will not be like your Poets, that when they
are over entreated, they use to make scruple of their works; and when they are
not entreated, they vomit them up; I will speak my Gloss, for which I expect
no reward, as having written them only to exercise my Muse. A wise friend of
mine (said Don-Quixote) was of opinion, that to Gloss was no hard task for any
man, the reason being, that the Gloss could never come near the Text, and
most commonly the Gloss was quite from the Theme given; besides that, the
Laws of Glossing were too strict, not admitting interrogations of Said he? or
Shall I say? or changing No^^s into Verbs, without other ligaments and
strictnesses to which the Glossor is tied, as you know. Certainly Signior
Don-Quixote (said Don Lorenzo) I desire to catch you in an absurdity, but
cannot; for still you slip from me like an Eele. I know not (said Don-Quixote)
what you mean by your slipping. You shall know my meaning (said Don Lorenzo;)
but for the present I pray you hearken with attention to my glossed verses, and
to the Gloss, as for example. If that my Was, might turn to Is,
If looked for it, then it comes complete,
Oh might I say, Now, now time it is,
Our after-griefs may be too great.
The Gloss.
AS every thing does pass away,
So Fortunes good, that erst she gave,
Did pass, and would not with me stay,
Though she gave once all I could crave:
Fortune, it is long since thou have seen
Me prostrate at thy feet (I wis)
I shall be glad (as I have been)
If that my Was return to Is.
Unto no honor am I bent,
No Prize, Conquest, or Victory,
But to return to my content,
Whose thought does grieve my memory;
If thou to me do it restore,
Fortune; the rigor of my heat
Allayed is, let it come, before
I look for it, then it comes complete.
Impossibles do I desire
To make time past return (in vain)
No Power on Earth can once aspire
(Past) to recall him back again,
Time does go, time runs and flies
Swiftly, his course does never miss,
He Is in an error then that cies,
Oh might I say, Now, now, time it is.
I live in great perplexity,
Sometimes in hope, sometimes in fear,
Far better were it for to die,
That of my griefs I might get clear;
For me to die 't were better far.
Let me not that again repeat,
Fear says, It Is better live long: for
Our after-griefs may be too great.


When Don Lorenzo had ended, Don-Quixote stood up and cried aloud, as if he had
screecht, taking Don Lorenzo by the hand, and said; Assuredly, genetous youth,
I think you are the best Poet in the world, and you deserve the Laurel, not of
Cyprus or Gaeta, as a Poet said (God forgive him) but of Athens, if it were
extant, Paris, Bolonia and Salamanca: I would to God those Judges that would
deny you the prize might be shot to death with arrows by Phoebus, and that
the Muses never come within their thresholds. Speak Sir, if you please, some of
your loftier verses, that I may altogether feel the pulse of your admirable
wit.

How say you by this, that Don Lorenzo was pleased, when he heard himself
thus praised by Don-Quixote, although he held him to be a madman? O power of
flattery, how far thou can extend, and how large are the bounds of thy
pleasing jurisdiction! This truth was verified in Don Lorenzo, since he
condescended to Don-Quixotes request, speaking this following Sonnet to him, of
the Fable or Story of Pyramus and Thisbe. The wall was broken by the Virgin
fair,
That op't the gallant breast of Pyramus:
Love parts from Cyprus, that he may declare
(Once seen) the narrow breach prodigious.
There naught but silence speaks; no voice does dare,
Through so strait a straight, be venturous;
Yet their minds speak, Love works this wonder rare,
Facilitating things most wondrous.
Desire in her grew violent, and hast^
In the fond Maid, instead of hearts delight,
Solicites death: See, ^ow the Story's past,
Both of them in a moment (oh strange sight!)
One Sword, one Sepulcher, one Memory,
Does kill, does cover, makes them never die.


Now thanked be God (quoth Don-Quixote, having heard this Sonnet) that amongst
so many consumed Poets as be, I have found one consummate, as you are, Sir,
which I perceive by your well-framed Sonnet. Don-Quixote remained four days
(being well entertained) in Don Diego's house, at the end of which he desired
to take his leave, and thanked him for the kindness and good welcome he had
received: but because it was not fit that Knights Errant should be too long
idle, he purposed to exercise his Function, and to seek after Adventures he
knew of^ for the place whither he meant to go to, would give him plenty
enough to pass his time with, till it were fit for him to go to the Justs at
Saragosa, which was his more direct course: but that first of all he meant to
go to Montesino's vault, of which there were so many admirable tales in every
man's mouth: so to search and enquire the Spring and Origin of those seven
Lakes, commonly called of Ruydera. Don Diego and his Son commended his noble
determination, and bid him furnish himself with what he pleased of their
house and wealth, for that he should receive it with all love and good will;
for the worth of his person, and his honorable profession obliged them to it.

To conclude, the day for his parting came, as pleasing to him, as bitter and
sorrowful to Sancho, who liked wondrous well of Don Diego's plentiful
provision, and was loath to return to the hunger of the forests and
wilderness, and to the hardness of his ill-furnisht wallets, notwithstanding
he filled and stuffed them with the best provision he could. And Don-Quixote,
as he took his leave of Don Lorenzo, said; I know not, Sir, whether I have
told you heretofore, but though I have, I tell you again, that when you would
save a great deal of labor and pains, to arrive at the inaccessible top of
Fames Temple, you have no more to do, but to leave on one hand the straight
and narrow path of Poesy, and to take the most narrow of Knight Errantry,
sufficient to make you an Emperor, ere you would say, What Is this?

With this Epilogue Don-Quixote shut up the Comedy of his madness, only this
he added: God knows, I would willingly carry Signior Don Lorenzo with me, to
teach him, what belongs to pardoning the humble, to curbing and restraining the
proud; virtues annexed to my profession: but since his slender age is not
capable, and his laudible enterprises will not permit him, I am only willing
to advize you, that being a Poet, you may be famous, if you govern your self
by other men's judgments, more then by your own; for you have no parents that
dislike their own children, fair or foul, and this error is more frequent
in men's understandings.

The Father and the Son afresh admired at Don-Quixotes often interposed reasons,
some wise, some foolish, and at his obstinate being bent altogether upon his
unlucky Adventures which he aimed at, as the mark and end of his desire, they
renewed again their kind offers and complements with him; but Don-Quixote
taking his leave of the Lady of the Castle, mounted his Rozinante, and Sancho
his Dapple; so they parted.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Adventure of the enamoured Shepherd, with other, indeed, pleasant
accidents.
DOn-Quixote was not gone far from Don Diego's town, when he overtooke two
men that seemed to be Parsons, or Scholars, with two Husbandmen that were
mounted upon four Asses. One of the Scholars had (as it were in a Portmantue)
a piece of white cloth for Scarlet, wrapped up in a piece of green Buckeram,
and two pair of Cotton Stockings. The other had nothing but two Foiless and a
pair of Pumpes. The Husbandmen had other things, which showed they came from
some Market Town, where they had bought them to carry home to their village:
so as well the Scholars as the Husbandmen fell into the same admiration, that
all they had done who first saw Don-Quixote, and they longed to know what
manner of fellow he was, so different from all other men. Don-Quixote saluted
them, and after he asked them whither they went, and that they had said they
went his way, he offered them his company, and desired them to go softlyer, for
that their young Asses traveled faster then his horse: and to oblige them the
more, he told them who he was, and of his profession, that he was a Knight
Errant, that he went to seek Adventures round about the world. He told them
his proper name was Don-Quixote de la Mancha, but his ordinary name, The Knight
of the Lions.

All this to the Husbandmen was Heathen Greek, or Pedlers French: but not to
the Scholars, who straight perceived the weakness of Don-Quixotes brain:
Notwithstanding they beheld him with great admiration and respect, and one of
them said, Knight, if you go no set journey, as they which seek Adventures
seldom do, I pray go with us, and you shall see one of the bravest and most
sumptuous marriages that ever was kept in the Mancha, or in many leagues round
about. Don-Quixote asked them if it were of any Prince (for so he imagined.)
No, Sir, (said he) but betwixt a Farmer, and a Farmers daughter: he is the
richest in all the Country, and she the fairest alive. Their provision for
this marriage is new and rare, and it is to be kept in a meadow near the Brides
town. She is, called, the more to set her out, Quiteria the fair, and he
Camacho the rich: she is about eightteene years of age, and he two and
twenty, both well met, but that some nice people, that busy themselves in all
men's linages, will say that the fair Quiteria is of better parentage then he:
but that is nothing, riches are able to soulder all clests. To say true, this
Chamacho is liberal, and he has longed to make an Arbor, and cover all the
Meadow on the Top so that the Sun will be troubled to enter to visit the
green herbs underneath. He has also certain warlike Morrices, as well of
swords, as little jyngling bells; for we have those in the town that will
jangle them. For your foot-clappers I say nothing, you would wonder to see them
bestirre themselves: but none of these, nor others I have told you of, are like
to make this marriage so remarkable, as the despised Basilius. This Basilius
is a neighboring swain of Quiteria's Town, whose house was next door to her
Fathers. From hence Love took occasion to renew unto the world, the long
forgotten loves of Pyramus and Thyshe; for Basilius loved Quiteria from a
child, and she answered his desires with a thousand loving favors. So that it
grew a common talk in the town, of the love between the two little ones.
Quiteria began to grow to some years, and her Father began to deny Basilius
his ordinary access to the house; and to avoid all suspicion, purposed to
marry her to the rich Camacho, not thinking it fit to marry her to Basilius,
who was not so rich in Fortunes goods, as in those of the mind, (for to say
truth without envy) he is the activest youth we have, a famous Barre-pitcher,
an excellent Wrastler, a great Tennis-player, he runs like a Dear,
out-leapes a shee-goat, and plays at ten pinnes miraculously, sings like a
Lark, plays upon a Gitterne as if he made it speak, and above all, fenceth
as well as the best.

For that slight only (quoth Don Quixote) the youth deserves not only to match
with the fair Quiteria, but with Queen Ginebra her self, if she were now
alive, in spite of Lansarote, and all that would gain say it. There Is for my
wife now (quoth Sancho that had been all this while silent) that would have
every one marry with their equals, holding her self to the Proverb, that
says; Like to like (quoth the Devil to the Collier.) All that I desire, is,
that honest Basilius (for me thinks I love him) were married to Quiteria, and
God give um joy (I was saying) those that go about to hinder the marriage of
two that love well. If all that love well (quoth Don-Quixote) should marry,
Parents would lose the privilege of marrying their children, when and with
whom they ought; and if daughters might choose their husbands, you should have
some would choose their fathers servants, and others, any passenger in the
street, whom they thought to be a lusty swaggerer, although he were a
cowardly Russian; for love and affection do easily blind the eyes of the
understanding, which is only fit to choose, and the state of Matrimony is a
ticklish thing, and there is great heed to be taken, and a particular favor to
be given from above to make it light happily.

Any man that would but undertake some voyage, if he be wise, before he is
on his way, he will seek him some good companion. And why should not he do
so, that must travel all his life time till he come to his resting place,
Death? and the rather if his company must be at bed and at board, and in all
places, as the Wives company must be with the Husband? Your wife is not a
commodity like others that is bought and sold, or exchanged; but an inseparable
accident, that lasts for term of life. It is a nooze, that being fastened about
the neck, turns to a Gordian knot, which cannot be undone but by Deaths sickle.

I could tell ye much more in this business, were it not for the desire I
have to be satisfied by Master Parson, if there be any more to come of
Basilius his story. To which he answered, This is all, that from the instant
that Basilius knew the fair Quiteria was to be married to the rich Camacho,
he was never seen to smile, or talk sensibly; and he is always sad and
pensative, talks to himself; an evident token that he is distracted: eats
little, sleeps much; all he cates is fruits, and all his sleep is in the
fields, upon the hard ground like a Beast; now and then he looks up to
Heaven, and sometimes casts his eyes downward, so senseless, as if he were
only a Statue clothed, and the very air strikes off his garments. In fine,
he has all the signs of a passionate heart, and we are all of opinion, that
by that time Quiteria to morrow gives the, I, it will be the Sentence of his
Death. God forbid (said Sancho) for God gives the wound, and God gives the
salve, no body knows what may happen, it is a good many hours between this
and to morrow, and in one hour, nay one minute, a house falls; and I have seen
the Sun shine, and foul weather in an instant; one goes to bed sound at
night, and stirs not the next morning: and pray tell me, is there any one
here that can say he has stayed the course of Fortunes great wheel? No
truly, and between a woman's I, and no, I would be loath to put a pins point,
for it would hardly enter. Let me have Mistrisse Quiteria love Basilius with
all her heart, and I Will give him a bag full of good luck, for your love (as I
have heard tell) looks wantonly with eyes that make copper seem gold, and
poverty riches, and filth in the eyes, pearls. Whether a plague run'st thou
Sancho, (quoth Don-Quixote?) when thou go threding on thy Proverbs and thy
flim-flams, Judas himself though he take thee cannot hold thee: Tell me
Beast; what know thou of fortune or her wheel, or any thing else? Oh if you
understand me not, no marvel though my sentences be held for fopperies: well,
I know what I say, and know I have not spoken much from the purpose; but you,
Sir, are allwaies the Tourney to my words and actions. Attorney thou would
say: God confound thee thou, prevaricator of language.

Do not you deal with me (said Sancho) since you know I have not been brought
up in Court, nor studied in Salamanca to know whether I add or diminish any of
my syllables. Lord God, you must not think your Galizian [One of that Province
that speak a bastard language to the Spanish,] can speak like your Toledonian,
and they neither are not all so nimble. For matter of your Court language
(quoth the Parson) it is true; for they that are bred in the Tanner-rows and the
Zocodoner [The Market place so called in Toledo,] cannot discourse like them
that walk all day in the high Church Cloisters; yet all are Toledonians, the
language is pure, proper, and elegant (indeed) only in your discreet Courtiers,
let them be borne where they will: Discreet I say, because many are otherwise,
and discretion is the Grammar of good language, which is accompanied with
practice: I Sir, I thank God have studied the Canons in Salamanca, and presume
sometimes to yield a reason in plain and significant terms. If you did not
presume (said the other Scholar) more on your using the foyles you carry then
your tongue, you might have been Senior in your degree, whereas now you are
lag. Look you Bachelour (quoth the Parson) you are in the most erroneous
opinion of the world, touching the skill of the weapon, since you hold it
frivolous. It Is no opinion of mine (said Corchuelo) but a manifest truth; and,
if you will have me show it by experience, there you have foyles commodious: I
have an arm, and strength, which, together with my courage, which is not
small, will make you confess I am not deceived; alight, and keep your
distance, your circles, your corners, and all your Science; I hope to make your
see the stars at noon day with my skill, which is but modern and mean, which
though it be small, I hope to God the man is yet unborn that shall make me
turn my back; and there is no man in the world but I Will make him give ground.
For turning your back (said the skillfull) I meddle not, though perhaps where
you first set your foot, there your grave might be diged, I mean, you might
be killed for despising skill. That you shall try (said Corchuelo) and
lighting hastily from his Ass, he snatched one of the Swords that the Parson
carried. Not so (said Don-Quixote instantly) I Will be the Master of this Fence,
and the Judge of this undecided controversy: and lighting from Rozinante, and
taking his Lance, he stepped between them till such time as the Parson had
put himself into his Posture and distance against Corchuelo, who rann (as you
would say) darting fire out of his eyes. The two Husbandmen that were by,
without lighting from their Asses, served for spectators of the mortal
Tragedy: the blows, the stockadoes, your false thrusts, your back-blows, your
doubling blows, that came from Corchuelo, were numberless, as thick as hopps,
or hail, he laid on like an angry Lion; but still the Parson gave him a
stopple for his mouth, with the button of his foil, which stopped him in the
midst of his fury; and he made him kiss it as if it had been a Relike,
though not with so much devotion as is due to them. In a word, the Parson with
pure Stocados told all the buttons of his Cassock which he had on, his skyrts
flying about him like a fishes tail. Twice he struck off his hat, and so
wearied him, that what for despite, what for choler and rage, he took the
sword by the hilt and flung it into the air so forcibly, that one of the
Husbandmen that was by, who was a notary, and went for it, gave testimony
after, that he flung it almost three quarters of a mile; which testimony
serves, and has served, that it may be known and really seen that force is
overcome by Art.

Corchuelo sat down, being very weary, and Sancho coming to him, said; Truly
Sir Bachelor, if you take my advice, hereafter challenge no man to fence, but
to wrestle or throw the bar, since you have youth and force enough for it; for
I have heard those that you call your skillfull men say, that they will thrust
the point of a Sword through the eye of a Needle. I am glad (quoth Corchuelo)
that I came from my Ass, and that experience has showed me what I would not
have believed. So rising up, he embraced the Parson, and they were as good
friends as before So, not staying for the Notary that went for the Sword,
because they thought he would tarry long, they resolved to follow, and come
betimes to Quiteriaes Village, of whence they all were. By the way the Parson
discourses to them, of the excellency of the Art of Fencing, with so many
demonstrative Reasons, with so many Figures and Mathematical demonstrations,
that all were satisfied with the rareness of the Science, and Corchuelo reduced
from his obstinacy.

It began to grow dark, but before they drew near, they all saw a kind of
heaven of innumerable Stars before the Town. They heard likewise harmonious and
confused sounds of diverse instruments, as Flutes, Tabers, Psalteries,
Recorders, hand-Drums and Bells; and when they drew near, they saw that the
trees of an Arbor, which had been made at the entrance of the town, were all
full of lights, which were not offended by the wind,^ that then blew not, but
was so gentle, that it scarce moved the leaves of the trees. The Musicians were
they that made the marriage more sprightly, who went two and two in companies,
some dancing and singing, others playing upon diverse of the aforesaid
instruments: Nothing but mirth ran up and down the Meadow, others were busied in
raising scaffolds, that they might the next day see the representations and
dances commodiously, dedicated to the marriage of the rich Camacho, and the
Obsequies of Basilius.

Don-Quixote would not enter the town, although the Husbandmen and the
Bachelor entreated him; for he gave a sufficient excuse for himself (as he
thought) that it was the custom of Knights Errant to sleep in Fields and
Forests, rather then in habitations, though it were under golden roofs: so he
went a little out of the way, much against Sanchoes will, who remembered the
good lodging he had in the Castle, or house of Don-Diego.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Marriage of rich Camacho, and the success of poor Basilius.
SCARCE had the silver morn given bright Phoebus leave, with the ardor of his
burning rays, to dry the liquid Pearls on his golden locks, when Don-Quixote
shaking off sloth from his drowzie Members, rose up, and called Sancho his
Squire, that still lay snorting: which Don-Quixote seeing, before he could
wake, he said; Oh happy thou above all that live upon the face of the earth,
that without envy, or being envied, sleep with a quiet breast, neither
persecuted by Enchanters, nor frighted by Enchantments. Sleep I say, once
again, nay an hundred times sleep: let not thy Masters jealousy keep thee
continually awake, nor let care to pay thy debts make thee watchful, or how
another day thou and thy small, but straightned Family may live, whom neither
ambition troubles, nor the worlds vain pomp does weary, since the bounds of
thy desires extend no farther then to thinking of thine Ass: for, for thine
own person, that thou have committed to my charge, a counterpoize and burden
that Nature and Custom has laid upon the Masters. The servant sleeps, and the
Master wakes, thinking how he may maintain, good him, and do him kindnesses;
the grief that it is to see heaven obdurate in relieving the earth with
seasonable moisture, troubles not the servant, but it does the Master, that
must keep in sterility and hunger, him that ved him in abundance and plenty.

Sancho answered not a word to all this, for he was a sleep, neither would he
have awaked so soon, if Don-Quixote had not made him come to himself with the
little end of his Lance. At length he awaked sleepie and drowsy, and turning
his face round about, he said, From this Arbor (if I be not deceived) there
comes a steem and smell rather of good broyled Rashers, then Time and Rushes: A
marriage that begins with such smells (by my Holidam) I think 'twill be brave
and plentiful.

Away Glutton (quoth Don-Quixote) come and let us go see it, and what becomes
of the disdained Basilius. Let him do what he will (said Sancho) were it not
better that he were poor still and married to Quiteria? There is no more in
it, but let the Moon lose one quarter and she will fall from the clouds: Faith
Sir, I am of opinion, that the poor fellow be contented with his fortunes, and
not seek after things impossible. I Will hold one of mine arms that Camacho will
cover Basilius all over with six-pences: and if it be so, as it is like,
Quiteria were a very fool to leave her bravery and Jewels that Camacho has and
can give her, and choose Basilius for his bar-pitching and fancing: In a Tavern
they will not give you a pint of wine for a good throw with the bar, or a
trick at fence; such abilities that are worth nothing, have um whose will for
me: But when they light upon one that has crowns withal, let me be like that
man that has them: Upon a good foundation a good building may be raised, and
money is the best bottom and foundation that is in the world. For Gods love
Sancho (quoth Don^Quixote) conclude thy tedious discourse; with which, I
believe, if thou were let alone, thou would neither eat nor sleep for
talking. If you had a good memory (said Sancho) you would remember the
articles of our agreement before we made our last sally from home, one of
which was, That you would let me speak as much as I list, on condition that it
were not against my Neighbor, or against your Authority; and hitherto I am
sure I have not broken that Article.

I remember no such Article Sancho (said he) and though it were so, I would
have you now be silent and come with me; for now the Instruments we heard
over night begin to cheer the Valleys; and doubtless the marriage is kept in
the cool of the morning, and not deferred till the afternoons heat. Sancho did
what his Master willed him, and sadling Rozinante, with his Pack-saddle clapped
likewise on D^pple, the two mounted, and fair and softly entered the Arbor. The
first thing that Sancho saw was a whole Steer spitted upon a whole Elm, and
for the fire, where it was to be roasted, there was a pretty mountain of
wood, and six pots that were round about this Bon-fire, which were never cast
in the ordinary mold that other pots were, for they were six half Olive-buts,
and every one was a very Shambles of meat, they had so many whole Sheep soking
in them which were not seen, as if they had been Pigeons; the flayed Hares, and
the pulled Hens that were hung upon the trees to be buried in the pots, were
numberless; Birds and Foul of diverse sorts infinite, that hung on the Trees,
that the air might cool them. Sancho counted above threescore skins of wine,
each of them of above two Arrobaes; [Arroba, a measure of 25. pound weight,
which may be some six gallons of Wine:] and as it afterward seemed, of
spritely liquor: there were also whole heaps of purest Bread, heaped up like
Corn in the threshing-floors: your Cheeses, like bricks piled one upon
another, made a goodly wall: and two Kettles of Oil, bigger then a Dyars,
served to fry their Paste-work, which they took out with two strong Peels when
they were fried, and they ducked them in another Kettle of Honey that stood by
for the same purpose: There were Cooks above fifty, men and women, all cleanly,
careful and cheerful: In the spacious belly of the Steer there were twelve
sucking Pigs, which being sowed there, served to make him more savory: The
Spices of diverse sorts, it seems they were not brought by pounds, but by
Arrones, and all lay open in a great Chest: To conclude, this preparation for
the marriage was rusticall; but so plentiful that it might furnish an Army.

Sancho Panca beheld all, and was much affected with it: and first of all the
goodly Pots did captivate his desires, from whence with all his heart he would
have been glad to have received a good Pipkin full; by and by he was enamored
on the skins; and last of all on the fried meats, if so be those vast Kettles
might be called Frying-pans ^so, without longer patience, wanting absteinence
he came to one of the Cooks, and with courteous and hungry reasons, desired
him, that he might sop a cast of bread in one of the Pots. To which the Cook
replied; Brother this is no day on which hunger may have any jurisdiction
(thanks be to the rich Camacho) alight, and see if you can find ever a ladle
there, and skimme out a Hen or two, and much good may they do you.

I see none (said Sancho.) Stay (said the Cook) God forgive me! what a Ninny
it is? And saying this, he laid hold of a Kettle, and sowsing into it one of
the half butts, he drew out of it three Hens and two Geese, and said to
Sancho; Eat friend, and break your fast with this froth till dinner time. I
have nothing to put it in (said Sancho.) Why take spoon and all (said the Cook)
for Camacho's riches and content will very well bear it.

Whilst Sancho thus passed his time, Don^Quixote saw that by one side of the
Arbor there came a dozen Husbandmen upon twelve goodly Mares, with rich and
sightly furniture fit for the Country, with many little bells upon their
Petrels, all clad in bravery for that days solemnity, and all in a joint troop
ran many Careers up and down the Meadow, with a great deal of mirth and jollity,
crying, Long live Camacho and Quiteria, he as rich as she fair, and she the
fairest of the world. Which when Don-Quixote heard, thought he to himself, it
well appears that these men have not seen my Dulcinea del Toboso: for if they
had, they would not be so forward in praising this their Quiteria.

A while after there began to enter at diverse places of the Arbor, certain
different Dances, amongst which there was one Sword-dance by four and twenty
Swains, handsome lusty Youths, all in white linen, with their Handkerchifs
wrought in several colors of fine silk, and one of the twelve upon the Mares
asked him that was the foreman of these, a nimble Lad, if any of the Dancers
had hurt themselves.

Hitherto (said he) no body is hurt; we are all well, God be thanked: and
straight he shuffled in amongst the rest of his companions, with so many
tricks, and so much slight, that Don-Quixote, though he were used to such
kind of Dances, yet he never liked any so well as this: He also liked
another very well, which was of fair young Maids, so young, that never a one
was under fourteen, nor none above eighteen, all clad in course green, their
hair partly filletted and partly loose^ but all were yellow, and might compare
with the Son, upon which they had Garlands of Iasmines, Roses, Woodbine and
Hony-suckles, [Jasmines, a little sweet white flower that grows in Spain in
hedges, like our sweet Marjoram:] they had for their guides a reverend old man
and a matronly woman, but more light and nimble then could be expected from
their years.

They Danced to the sound of a Zomara Bag-pipe: [Zomara, a Town in Castile
famous for that kind of Music, like our Lancashire Horn-pipe:] so that with
their honest looks and their nimble feet, they seemed to be the best Dancers
in the world. After this there came in another artificial Dance, of those
called Brawles, it consisted of eight Nymphs, divided into two ranks; God Cupid
guided one rank, and Money the other; the one with his Wings, his Bow, his
Quiver and Arrows; the other was clad in diverse rich colors of gold and silk:
The Nymphs that followed Love, carried a white parchment scrowle at their
backs, in which their names were written in great letters; the first was
Poesy, the second Discretion, the third Nobility, the fourth Valor. In the
same manner came those whom God Money led; the first was Liberality, the second
Reward, the third Treasure, the fourth quiet Possession: before them came a
wodden Castle, which was shot at by two Savages clad in Ivy, and Canvas dyed
in green, so to the life, that they had well-nigh frighted Sancho: Upon the
Frontispice, and of each side of the Castle, was written, The Castle of good
heed: Four skillfull Musicians played to them on a Taber and Pipe; Cupid began
the Dance, and after two changes, he lifted up his eyes, and bent his Bow
against a Virgin that stood upon the battlements of the Castle, and said to her
in this manner. I am the Powerful Deity,
In Heaven above, and earth beneath,
In Seas, and Hells profunditie,
Over all that therein live or breath.
What it is to fear, I never knew;
I can perform all that I will;
Nothing to me is strange or new;
I bid, forbid at pleasure still.


The Verse being ended, he shot a flight over the Castle, and retired to his
standing; By and by came out Money, and performed his two changes; the Tabor
ceased, and he spoke: Lo I that can do more then Love,
Yet Love is he that does me guide,
My of^spring great'st on earth, to Jove
Above I nearest am allied.
I Money am, with whom but few
Perform the honest works they ought;
Yet here a Miracle to show,
That without me they could do ought.


Money retired, and Poetry advanced, who after she had done her changes as
well as the rest, her eyes fix upon the Damzell of the Castle, she said: Lady,
to thee, sweet Poesy
Her Soul in deep conceits does send.
Wrapped up in Writs of Sonnetry,
Whose pleasing strains do them commend.
If with my earnestness, I thee
Importune not, fair Damzell, soon
Thy envied fortune shall, by me,
Mount the circle of the Moon.


Poetry gave way, and from Moneys side came Liberality, and after her
changes, spoke: To give is Liberality,
In him that shunnes two contraries,
The one of Prodigality,
The Other of hateful Avarice.
I Will be profuse in praising thee,
Profuseness has accounted been
A vice, yet sure it comes nie
Affection, which in gifts is seen.


In this sort both the shows of the two Squadrons, came in and out, and each of
them performed their changes, and spoke their Verses, some elegant, some
ridiculous, Don-Quixote only remembered (for he had a great memory) the
rehearsed ones, and now the whole troop mingled together, winding in and out
with great spritelynesse and dexterity, and still as Love went before the
Castle, he shot a flight aloft, but Money broke gilded bals, and threw into it.

At last, after Money had danced a good while, he drew out a great Purse made
of a Roman Cats skin, which seemed to be full of money, and casting it into
the Castle, with the blow, the boords were disjoined and fell down, leaving
the Damzell discovered, without any defense. Money came with his Assistants,
and casting a great chain of gold about her neck, they made a show of leiding
her Captive: Which when Love and his Party saw, they made show as if they would
have rescued her, and all these motions were to the sound of the Tabrer, with
skillfull dancing, the Savages parted them, who very speedily went to set up
and join the boords of the Castle, and the Damzell was enclosed there anew;
and with this the dance ended, an the great content of the spectators.

Don-Quixote asked one of the Nymphs, Who had so dressed and ordered her? She
answered, A Parson of the town, who had an excellent capacity for such
inventions. I Will lay a wager (said Don-Quixote) he was more Basilius his friend
then Camacho's, and that he knows better what belongs to a Satyr then an Even
song; he has well fitted Basilius his abilities to the dance, and Camacho's
riches.

Sancho Panca that heard all, said; The King is my Cock, I hold with Camacho.
Well, Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) thou art a very Peasant, and like them that,
Long live the Conqueror. I know not who I am like (said Sancho:) but I know I
shall never get such delicate froth out of Basilius his Pottage-pots, as I have
out of Camacho's: and with that showed him the kettle full of Geese and Hens,
and laying hold on one, he fell to it merrily and hungerly, and for Basilius
abilities this he said to their teeth: So much thou art worth as thou have, and
so much as thou have, thou art worth. An old Grandame of mine was wont to say,
there were but two linages in the world, Have-much, and Have-little; and she
was mightly inclined to the former: and at this day, Master, your Physician had
rather feel a having pulse, then a knowing pulse, and an Ass covered with
gold makes a better show then a horse with a pack-saddle. So that I say again,
I am of Camacho's side, the scumme of whose pots are Geese, Hens, Hares, and
Conies, and Basilius his, be they near or far off, but poor thin water.

Have thou ended with thy tediousness, Sancho (said Don-Quixote?) I must end
(said he) because I see it offends you; for if it were not for that, I had
work cut out for three days. Pray God, Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) that I may
see thee dumb before I die. According to our life (said Sancho) before you
die, I shall be mumbling clay, and then perhaps I shall be so dumb, that I
shall not speak a word till the end of the world, or at least till Doomsday.

Although it should be so, Sancho (said he) thy silence will never be equal
to the talking past, and thy talk to come; besides, it is very likely that I
shall die before thee, and so I shall never see thee dumb, no not when thou
drinkest or sleep, to paint thee out thoroughly. In good faith, Master (quoth
Sancho) there is no trusting in the raw bones, I mean Death, that devoures
lambs as well as sheep, and I have heard our Vicar say, she tramples as well
on the high Towers of Kings, as the humble cottages of poor men: this Lady
has more power then squeamishness, she is nothing dainty, she devoures all,
plays at all, and fills her wallets with all kind of people, ages, and
preeminences: She is no Mower that sleeps in the hot weather, but mowes at
all hours, and cuts as well the green grass as the hay: she does not chew,
but swallows at once, and crams down all that comes before her; she has a
Canine apetite, that is never satisfied, and though she have no belly, yet
she may make us think she is Hy^ropsicall, with the thrist she has to
drink all men's lives, as if it were a jugg of cold water.

No more, Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) at this instant, hold while thou art well,
and take heed of falling, for certainly thou have spoken of Death in thy
rusticall terms, as much as a good Preacher might have spoken. I tell thee,
Sancho, that for thy natural discretion, thou might get thee a Pulpit, and
preach thy fine knacks up and down the world. He preaches well that lives
well (said Sancho) and I know no other preaching. Thou need not (quoth he:)
But I wonder at one thing, that wisdom beginning from the fear of God, that
thou, who fear a Lizard more then him, should be so wise? Judge you of
your Knight Errantry (said Sancho) and meddle not with other men's fears or
valors, for I am as pretty a Fearer of God as any of my neighbors, and so let
me snuff away this scum: [ Meaning to eat his Hen and the Goose:] for all the
rest are but idle words, for which we must give account in another life. And
in so saying he began to give another assault to the kettle, with such a
courage, that he wakened Don-Quixote, that undoubtedly would have taken his
part, if he had not been hindered by that, that of necessity must be set down.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the prosecution of Camacho's marriage, with other delightful accidents.
AS Don-Quixote and Sancho were in their discourse mentioned in the former
chapter, they heard a great noise and outcry, which was caused by them that
rode on the Mares, who with a large Career and shouts went to meet the married
couple; who hemmed in with a thousand tricks and devices, came in company of
the Vicar, and both their kindreds, and all the better sort of the neighboring
towns, all clad in their best apparel. And as Sancho saw the Bride^ he said,
In good faith she is not dressed like a country-wench, but like one of your nice
Court Dames: by th'Masse me thinks her glass necke-laces she should wear
are rich Corrall; and her course green of Cuenca, is a thirty piled velvet, [
In stead of three piled;] and her lacing that should be white linen, (I vow
by me) is Satin: well look on her hands that should have their jette rings,
let me not thrive if they be not golden rings, arrant gold, and set with
pearls as white as a sillabub, each of them as precious as an eye. Ah
whoreson, and what locks she has? for if they be no^ false, I never saw
longer, nor fairer in my life. Well, well, find not fault with her liveliness
and stature, and compare her me to a Date tree, that bends up and down when it
is laden with bunches of Dates; for so does she with her trinkets hanging at
her hair and about her neck: I swear by my soul, she is a wench of
metal, and may very well pass the pike in Flanders.

Don-Quixote laughed at Sancho's rustic praises, and he thought that setting
his Mistress Dulcinea aside, he never saw a fairer woman: the beauteous
Quiteria was somewhat pale belike, with the ill night that Brides always have
when they dress themselves for the next days marriage: They drew near to a
Theater on one side of the Meadow that was dressed with Carpets and Boughs,
where the marriage was to be solemnized, and where they should behold the
Dances and inventions: And just as they should come to the place, they heard a
great outcry behind them, and a voice saying; Stay a while rash people as
well as hasty: At whose voice and words they all turned about, and saw that he
that spoke was one clad (to see to) in a black Jacket, all welted with Crimson
in flames, crowned (as they straight perceived) with a crown of mournful
Cypress; in his hand he had a great Truncheon: and coming nearer he was the
known to be the gallant Basilius, who were in suspense, expecting what should
be the issue of those cries and words, fearing some ill success from this so
unlooked-for arrival: He drew near, weary, and out of breath; and coming
before the married couple, and clapping his Truncheon upon the ground, which
had a steel pike at the end of it: his color changed, and his eyes fixed upon
Quiteria, with a fearful hollow voice, thus spoke.

Well know thou, forgetful Quiteria, that according to the Law of God that
we profess, that whilst I live thou can not be married to any other;
neither are you ignorant, that because I would stay till time and my industry
might better my Fortunes, I would not break that decorum that was fitting to
the preserving of thy honesty: but you forgetting all duty due to my virtuous
desires will make another Master of what is mine, whose riches serve not only
to make him happy in them, but every way fortunate; and that he may be so to
the full (not as I think he deserves it, but as the Fates ordain it for him) I
will with these hands remove the impossibility or inconvenience that may
disturb him, removing my self out of the way. Live rich Camacho, live with the
ungrateful Quiteria many and prosperous years; and let your poor Basilius die,
whose poverty cliped the wings of his happiness, and laid him in his grave:
And saying this, he laid hold of his Truncheon that he had stuck in the
ground, and the one half of it remaining still there, showed that it served for
a scabberd to a short Tuck that was concealed in it, and putting that which
might be called the hilt on the ground, with a nimble spring and a resolute
purpose, he cast himself upon it, and in an instant the bloody point appeared
out of his back, with half the steel blade; the poor soul weltring in his blood
all along on the ground, run through with his own weapon: His friends ran
presently to help him, grieved with his misery and miserable hap, and
Don-Quixote forsaking his Rozinante, went also to help him; took him in his
arms, but found that as yet there was life in him. They would have pulled out
the Tuck, but the Vicar there present, was of opinion that it were not best,
before he had confessed himself; for that the drawing it out and his death
would be both at one instant. But Basilius coming a little to himself, with a
faint and doleful voice, said, If thou would, O Quiteria, yet in this last
and forcible trance, give me thy hand to be my Spouse, I should think my
rashness might something excuse me, since with this I obtain to be thine.

The Vicar hearing this, bade him he should have a care of his souls health,
rather then of the pleasures of his body, and that he should heartily ask God
forgiveness for his sins, and for his desparate action. To which Basilius
replied, That he would by no means confess himself if Quiteria did not first
give him her hand to be his Spouse, for that content would make him cheerfully
confess himself. When Don-Quixote heard the wounded man's petition, he cried
aloud, that Basilius desired a thing very just and reasonable, and that Signior
Camacho would be as much honored in receiving Quiteria, the worthy Basilius
his Widow, as if he had received her from her Fathers side: here is no more
to do but give one I, no more then to pronounce it, since the nuptial Bed of
this marriage must be the Grave.

Camacho gave ear to all this, and was much troubled, not knowing what to do
or say: but Basilius his friends were so earnest, requesting him to consent
that Quiteria might give him her hand to be his Spouse, that he might not
endanger his Soul by departing desperately, that they moved him and enforced
him to say, That if Quiteria would, he was contented, seeing it was but
deferring his desires a minute longer. Then all of them came to Quiteria, some
with entreaties, others with tears, most with forcible reasons, and persuaded
her she should give her hand to poor Basilius; and she more hard then marble,
more lumpish then a statue, would not answer a word, neither would she at all,
had not the Vicar bid her resolve what she would do, for Basilius was even
now ready to depart, and could not expect her irresolute determination. Then
the fair Quiteria, without answering a word, all sad and troubled, came where
Basilius was with his eyes even set, his breath failing him, making show as if
he would dye like a Gentile, and not like a Christian. Quiteria came at
length, and upon her knees made signs to have his hand. Basilius unjoyned his
eyes and looking steadfastly upon her, said, Oh Quiteria! thou art now come to
be pitiful, when thy pity must be the sword that shall end my life, since
now I want force to receive the glory that thou give in choosing me for
thine, or to suspend the dolor that so hastily closes up mine eyes with the
fearful shade of death: All I desire thee is (oh fatal star of mine!) that
the hand thou requirest, and that that thou will give me, that it be not for
fashion-sake, nor once more to deceive me, but that thou confess and say,
without being forced to it, that thou give me thy hand freely, as to thy
lawful Spouse, since it were unmercifull in this Trance to deceive me, or to
deal falsely with him that has been so true to thee. In the midst of this
Discourse he fainted, so that all the standers by thought now he had been
gone. Quiteria all honest and shamefaced, laying hold with her right hand on
Basilius his hand, said to him; No force can work upon my Will, and so I give
thee the freest hand I have, to be thy lawful Spouse, and receive thine, if
thou give it me as freely, and that the anguish of thy sudden accident do
not too much trouble thee. I give it (said Basilius) lively and courageously,
with the best understanding that Heaven has endowed me withal, and therefore
take me, and I deliver my self as thy Espousall; and I (said Quiteria) as thy
Spouse, whether thou live long, or whether from my arms they carry thee to thy
Grave.

This young man said Sancho, being so wounded, talks much me think, let him
leave his wooing, and attend his souls health, which me thinks appears more
in his tongue, then in his teeth.

Basilius and Quiteria having their hands thus fastened, the Vicar
tenderhearted and compassionate, powered his blessing upon them, and prayed God
to give good rest to the new married man's soul, who as soon as he received
this benediction, suddenly starts up, and with an unlooked for agility, drew
out the Tuck which was sheathed in his body. All the spectators were in a maze,
and some of them, more out of simplicity then curiosity, began to cry out, A
miracle, a miracle: But Basilius replied, No Miracle, no miracle; but a Trick,
a trick. But the Vicar heed-lesse and astonished, came with both his hands to
feel the wound, and found that the blade had neither passed through flesh or
ribs, but through a hollow pipe of iron, that he filled with blood, well
fitted in that place, and (as after it was known) prepared so that it could
not congeale. At last the Vicar and Camacho, and all the standers by, thought
that they were mocked and made a laughing stock. The Bride made no great show
of sorrow, rather when she heard say that the marriage could not stand
current, because it was deceitful, she said, that she anew confirmed it; by
which they all collected, That the business had been plotted by the knowledge
and consentment of them both.

At which Camacho and his friends were so abashed, that they remitted their
revenge to their hands, and unsheathing many swords, they set upon Basilius, in
whose favor, in an instant there were as many more drawn: and Don^Quixote
taking the Vantguard on Horseback, with his Lance at his rest, and well
covered with his shield, made way through um all. Sancho (whom such fears did
never please or solace) ran to the pottage-pot, from whence he had gotten the
skimmings, thinking that to be a Sanctuary, and so to be respected.
Don-Quixote cried aloud, Hold, hold Sirs; for there is no reason that you
should take revenge for the wrongs that Love does us; and observe that Love and
War are all one; and as in war it is lawful to use sleights and stratagems
to overcome the Enemy; So in amorous strifes and competencies, Impostu^es and
juggling-tricks are held for good, to attain to the wished end, so it be not
in prejudice and dishonor of the thing affected. Quiteria was due to Basilius,
and Basilius to Quiteria, by the just and favorable inclination of Heaven.
Camacho, is rich, and may purchase his delight, and whom God has joined, let
no man separate. Basilius has but this one sheep, let none offer to take it
from him, be he never so powerful: He that first attempts it, must first
pass through the point of this Lance; at which he shaked his Lance strongly
and cunningly, that he frighted all that knew him not: But Quiteriaes disdain
was so inwardly fixed in Camachoes heart, that he forgot her in an instant; so
that the Vicars persuasions prevailed with him (who was a good discreet and
honest-minded man) by which Camacho and his accomplices were pacified and
quieted, in sign of which, they put up their swords, rather blaming Quiterias
facility, then Basilius his industry. Camacho framed this Discourse to
himself, That if Quiteria loved Basilius when she was a maid, she would
also have continued her love to him though she had been his wife, so that he
ought to give God thanks rather for having ridden him of her, then to have
given her to him. Camacho then, and those of his crew being comforted and
pacified; all Basilius his likewise were so: and Camacho, to show that he
stomacked not the jest, nor cared for it, was willing the Feast should go
forward, as if he had been really married. But neither Basilius nor his
Spouse, nor their followers would stay, but went to Basilius his Town: for your
poor that be virtuous and discreet, have as well those that will follow,
honor, and uphold them, as the rich theirs, and such as will flatter them.
Don-Quixote went with them too, for they esteemed him to be a man of worth and
valor: But Sancho's mind was in a mist to see that it was impossible for him
to stay for Camacho's sumptuous Feast and Sports that lasted till the evening;
so that straightned and sorrowful he followed on with his Master that went in
Basilius his Squadron, and thus left behind him those fleshpots of Egypt;
though he bore them with him in his mind, whose skum which he carried in the
Kettle being consumed now and ended, represented unto him the glorious and
abundant happinsse he lost; so that all sad and sorrowful, though
hungerlesse, without alighting from Dapple, he followed Rozinantes track.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the famous Adventure of Montesino's Cave, which is in the heart of Mancha,
which the valorus Don-Quixote happily accomplished.
THe married couple made wonderful much of Don^Quixote, obliged thereunto for
the willingness he showed to defend their cause, and with his valor they
paralel'd his discretion, accounting him a Cid in Arms, and a Cicero in
Eloquence. The good Sancho recreated himself three days at the Bridegrooms
charge, and now knew that Quiteria knew nothing of the feigned wounding, but
that it was a trick of Basilius, who hoped for the success that has been
showed: true it was, that he had made some of his loving friends acquainted
with his purpose, that they might help him at need, and make good his deceit.
They cannot be called deceits (quoth Don^Quixote) that are done to a virtuous
end, and that the marriage of a loving couple was an end most excellent: but by
the way, you must know that the greatest opposite that love has, is want and
continual necessity; for Love is all mirth, content, and gladsomenesse, and
the more, when he that Loves, enjoyes the thing Loved, against which,
Necessity and Poverty are open and declared enemies. All this he spoke with a
purpose to advise Basilius, that he should leave exercising his youthful
abilities, that although they got him a name, yet they brought no wealth, and
that he should look to lay up something now by lawful and industrious means,
which are never wanting to those that will be wary and apply themselves: the
honest poor man (if so be the poor man may be called honest) has a Jewel of
a fair Woman, which if any man bereave him of, dishonors him and kills her:
She that is fair and honest when her Husband is poor, deserves to be crowned
with Laurel and triumphant Bays. Beauty alone attracts the eyes of all that
behold it; and the Princely Eagles and high flying Birds do stoop to it as to
the pleasing Lure: but if extreme Necessity be added to that Beauty, then
Kites and Crows will grapple with it, and other ravenous Birds; but she that
is constant against all these assaults, does well deserve to be her Husbands
crown. Mark wise Basilius (proceeds Don-Quixote) it was an opinion of I know
not what sage man, that there was but one good woman in the World; and his
advice was, That every man should think that was married, that his Wife was
she, and so he should be sure to live contented. I never yet was married,
neither have I any thought hitherto that way; notwithstanding, I could be able
to give any man council herein that should ask it, and how he should choose
his Wife.

First of all I would have him rather respect Fame then Wealth; for the honest
woman gets not a good name only with being good, but in appearing so; for your
public looseness and liberty does more prejudice a woman's honesty, then
her sinning secretly. If you bring her honest to your house, it is easy keeping
her so and to better her in that goodness: but if you bring her dishonest,
it is hard mending her; for it is not very pliable to pass from one extreme
into another, I say not impossible; but I hold it to be very difficult.

Sancho heard all this, and said to himself, This Master of mine, when I speak
matters of marrow and substance, is wont to tell me, that I may take a Pulpit
in hand, and preach my fine knacks up and down the world; but I may say of him,
that when he once begins to thread his sentences, he may not only begin to
take a Pulpit in hand, but in each finger too, and go up and down the Market
place, and cry, Who buys my Ware? The Devil take thee for a Knight Errant,
how wise he is? On my soul ^ thought he had known only what belonged to his
Knight Errantrie; but he ^naps at all, and there is no boat that he has not
an oar in. Sancho spoke this somewhat aloud, and his Master overheard him,
and asked, What is that thou art grumbling Sancho? I say nothing, neither do I
grumble (quoth he) I was only saying to my self, that I would I had heard you
before I was married, and perhaps I might now have said, The sound man needs no
Physician, Is Teresa so bad Sancho, said Don-Quixote? Not very bad (said
Sancho) and yet not very good, at least, not so good as I would have her. Thou
do ill Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) to speak ill of thy Wife, who is indeed
mother of thy children.

There Is no love lost (quoth Sancho;) for she speaks ill of me too when she
list, especially when she is jealous; for then the Devil himself will not
cope with her. Well, three days they stayed with the married couple, where
they were welcomed like Princes. Don-Quixote desired the skillful Parson to
provide him a guide that might show him the way to Montesino's Cave, for he
had a great desire to enter into it, and to see with his own eyes if those
wonders that were told of it up and down the Country were true. The Parson
told him, that a Cousin-german of his, a famous Student, and much addicted to
Books of Knighthood should go with him, who should willingly carry him to the
mouth of the Cave, and should show the famous Lake of Ruydera, telling him he
would be very good company for him, by reason he was one that knew how to
publish Books, and direct them to great men

By and by the young Student comes me upon an Ass with Foale, with a course
packing cloth, or doubled carpet upon his Pack-saddle. Sancho saddled
Rozinante, and made ready his Dapple, furnished his Wallets, and carried the
Students too, as well provided; and so taking leave and bidding all, God be
with you, they went on, holding their course to Montesino's Cave. By the way
Don-Quixote asked the Scholar of what kind or quality the exercises of his
profession and study were. To which he answered, that his Profession was
Humanity, his Exercises and Study to make Books for the Press, which were
very beneficial to himself and no less grateful to the Commonwealth; that
one of his Books was entitled, The Book of the Liveries, where are set down
seven hundred and three sorts of Liveries, with their Colors, Motto's, and
Ciphers, from whence any may be taken at Festival times and shows by
Courtiers, without begging them from any body, or distilling (as you would say)
from their own brains to suit them to their desires and intentions; for I give
to the jealous, to the forsaken, to the forgotten, to the absent, the most
agreeable, that will fit them as well as their Punks. Another Book I have,
which I mean to call the Metamorphosis. or Spanish Ovid, of a new and rare
invention: for imitating Ovi^ in it, by way of mocking, I show who the Giralda
of Sevil was, the Angel of the Magdalena, who was the Pipe of Vecinguerra of
Cordova, who the Bulls of Guisando, Sierra Morena, the springs of Leganitos and
Lavapies in Madrid [all these several rarities of Spain.] not forgetting that
of Pioio, that of the gilded Pipe and of the Abbess, and all this with the
Allegories, Metaphors, and Translations, that they delight, suspend and
instruct all in a moment. Another book I have, which I call a supply to
Polydore Virgil, concerning the invention of things, which is of great reading
and study, by reason that I do verify many matters of weight that Polydore
omitted, and declare them in a very pleasing style; Virgil forgot to tell us
who was the first that had a Catarre in the world, and the first that was
anointed for the French-disease, and I set it down presently after I propose
it, and Authorize it with at least four and twenty Writers, that you may see
whether I have taken good pains, and whether the said book may not be
profitable to the World.

Sancho, that was very attentive to the Scholars narration, asked him: Tell
me Sir, so God direct your right hand in the Impression of your Books; Can
you tell me? (for I know you can, since you know all) who was the first man
that scratcht his head, for I believe it was our first father Adam? Yes marry
was it (said he) for Adam, no doubt, had both head and hair, and being the
first man in the world, would sometimes scratch himself. I believe it (quoth
Sancho) but tell me now, Who was the first Vaulter in the world? Truly Brother
(said he) I cannot at present resolve you, I will study it when I come to my
books, and then I Will satisfy you when we see one another again, for I hope
this will not be the last time. Well Sir said Sancho, never trouble your self
with this, for now I can resolve the doubt: Know, that the first Tumbler in the
world was Lucifer, when he was cast out of heaven, and came tumbling down to
hell.

You say true (quoth the Scholar.) And Don-Quixote said; This answer Sancho,
is none of thine, thou have heard some body say so. Peace Sir (quoth Sancho)
for if I fall to question and answer, I shall not make an end between this
and Morning: And to ask foolish Questions, and answer unlikelyhoods, I want
no help of my Neighbors. Thou have spoken more Sancho then thou think for
(quoth Don^Quixote) for you have some that are most busied in knowing and
averring things, whose knowledge and remembrance is not worth a button. All
that day they passed in these and other delightful Discourses, and at night
they lodged in a little Village, from whence the Scholar told them they had
but two little leagues to Montesinoes Cave, and that if he meant to enter it,
he must be provided of Ropes to tie, and let himself down into the depth.
Don^Quixote said, that though it were as deep as Hell, he would see whither
it reached; so they bought a hundred fathom of cordage, and the next day at
two of the clock they came to the Cave, whose mouth is wide and spacious, but
full of briers and brambles, and wild fig trees, and weeds so intricate and
thick, that they altogether blind and dam it up. When they came to it, Sancho
and the Scholar alighted, and Don-Quixote; whom they tied strongly with the
cordage, and whilst they were swathing and binding of him, Sancho said to him;
Take heed Sir what you do do not bury your self alive, and do not hang your
self, like a bottle, to be cooled in some well; for it neither concerns nor
belongs to you, to search this place, worse then a Dungeon.

Bind me and peace (quoth Don-Quixote) for such an enterprise as this, Sancho
was reserved for me. Then said the Guide, I beseech you Signior Don-Quixote,
that you take heed, and look about you with an hundred eyes, to see what is
within; for perhaps you may meet with things that will be fit for me to put
in my book of Transformations. He has his Instrument in his hand (quoth
Sancho) that knows how to use it.

This said, and Don-Quixotes binding ended (which was not upon his Harness,
but upon his arming doublet) he said. We did unadvisedly, in not providing
our selves of some small bell, that might have been tied with me to the same
cord, by whose sound you might know that I were still toward the bottom and
alive; but since there is now no remedy, God be our good speed, and straight
he kneeled upon his knees, and made a soft Prayer to God Almighty, desiring
his aid, and to give him good success in that (to see to) dangerous and
strange Adventure, and then straight ways he cried aloud; Oh thou Mistrisse
of my Actions and motions, most excellent, peerless Dulcinea del Toboso if it
be possible, that the prayers and requests of this thy happy Lover come to
thine ears, hearken (I beseech thee) by thy unheard of beauty, deny not now
unto me thy favor and protection, which I so much need: I go to cast my
self headlong to a plunge, and sink my self into the Abyssus that presents
it self to me, that the World may know, that if thou favor me, there shall
be nothing impossible for me to undergo and end.

And in saying this he came to the mouth, but saw he could not come near to be
let down, except it were by making way with maine force, or with cutting
through; and so laying hand on his Sword, he began to cut and slash the weeds
that were at the mouth of the Cave, at whose rushing and noise, there came out
an infinite company of Crows and Dawes, so thick and so hastily, that they
tumbled Don-Quixote on the ground^ and if he had been as superstitious, as good
Christian, he would have taken it for an ill sign, and not have proceeded.

Well, he rose, and seeing the Crows were all gone, and that there were no
other night-byrd, as Bats, that came out amongst the Crows, Sancho and the
Scholar let him down to search the bottom of that fearful Cave; but Sancho
first bestowed his benediction on him, and making a thousand crosses over him,
said; God and the Rock of France, together with the Trinity of Gaeta guide
thee, thou flower, cream and scum of Knights Errant; [ several places of
devotion:] There thou go, Hackster of the world, Heart of steel, and^ Arms
of brass, God again be thy guide, and deliver thee sound and without skarre to
the light of this World which thou leavest, to bury thy self in the obscurity
which thou seek.

The Scholar did (as it were) make the same kind of wishes and deprecations.
Don^Quixote cried out, that they should yet give him more Rope, which they gave
by little and little; and when his voice (that was stopped in the gutters of the
Cave) could be no longer heard, and that they had let down their hundred
fathom of Rope, they were of opinion to hoyst him up again, since they could
give him no more Cord; for all that, they stayed some half an hour, and then
began easily to draw up the Rope, and without any weight, which made them
think Don-Quixote was within, and Sancho believing it wept bitterly, and drew
up apace, that he might be satisfied; but coming somewhat near fourscore
fathom, they felt a weight, which made them very much rejoice.

At length when they came to ten, they plainly saw Don-Quixote, to whom Sancho
cried out saying; You are well returned Sir, for we thought you had stayed
there for breed. But Don-Quixote did not answer a word, but drawing him
altogether out, they saw that his eyes were shut, as if he were asleep; they
stretched him on the ground and unbound him, and for all this he awaked not. But
they so turned, tos^ed and shaked him, that a pretty while after he came to
himself, lazing himself, as if he had wakened out of a great and profound
sleep, and looking wildly round about him said; God forgive you Friends, for
you have raised me from one of the delicatest and pleasingest lives and sights
that ever was seen by humane eye: Now at length I perceive, that all the
delights of this world do pass like a shadow or dream, or wither like a
flower of the field: Oh unhappy Montesino's oh ill wounded Durandarte, of
luckless Belerma, oh mournful Guadiana, and you unfortunate daughters of
Ruydera, that show by your waters, those your fair eyes wept!

The Schaller and Sancho gave ear to these words which Don-Quixote spoke, as
if with great pain they came from his very entrails: They desired him to let
them know his meaning, and to tell them what he had seen in that hellish
place. Hellish, call ye it, said Don-Quixote? Well, call it not so, for it
deserves not the name, as straight you shall hear: He desired them to give
him somewhat to eat, for he was exceeding hungry. They laid the Scholars
course wrapper upon the green grass, and went to the Spence of their Wallets,
and all three of them being set like good fellows, eat their Bavar and supped
all together: The cloth taken up Don-Quixote said, Sit still Ho, let none of
you rise, and mark me attentively.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the admirable things that the unparalleled Don-Quixote recounted, which he
had seen in Montesino's profound Cave, whose strangeness and impossibility
makes this Chapter be held for Apocrypha.
IT was well toward four of the clock, when the Sur ne, covered between two
clouds, showed but a dim light, and with his temperate beams, gave Don-Quixote
leave, without heat or trouble, to relate to his two conspicuous Auditors, what
he had seen in Montesino's Cave; and he began as follows: About a twelve or
fourteen men's heights in the profunditie of this Dungeon, on the right hand,
there is a concavitie and space able to contain a Cart, Mules and all; some
light there comes into it by certain chinks and loop-holes, which answer to it
a far off in the Superficies of the earth; this space and concavitie saw I,
when I was weary and angry to see my self hanging by the rope, to go down to
that obscure, region without being carried a sure or known way; so I determined
to enter into it, and to rest a little; I cried out unto you, that you should
let down no more rope till I bade you; but it seemed you heard me not: I went
gathering up the rope you let down to me, and rolling of it up into a heap,
sat me down upon it very pensative, thinking with my self what I might do to
get to the bottom; and being in this thought and confusion, upon a sudden
(without any former inclination in me) a most profound sleep came upon me, and
when I least thought of it, without knowing how, nor which way, I awaked out of
it, and found my self in the midest of the fairest, most pleasant, and
delightful Meadow that ever Nature created, or the wisest humane discretion can
imagine; I snuffed mine eyes, wiped them, and saw that I was not asleep, but
really awake, notwithstanding I felt upon my head and my breast, to be assured
if I were there my self or ^p in person, or that it were some illusion, or
counterfeit; but my tounching, feeling, and my reasonable discourse that I made
to my self certified me, that I was then present, the same that I am now.

By and by I saw a Princely and sumptuous Palace or Castle, whose walls and
battlements seemed to be made of transparent Cristall, from whence (upon the
opening of two great gates) I saw that there came toward me a reverend old
man, clad in a tawny bays Frock, that he dragged upon the ground: over his
shoulders and breast he wore a Tippet of green satin, like your fellows of
Colleges; and upon his cap a black Milan Bonnet, and his hoary beard reached
down to his gyrdle; he had no kind of weapon in his hand, but only a Rosary
of Beads, somewhat bigger then reasonable Wall-nuts, and the Credo-Beads, about
the bigness of Ostrich eggs; his countenance, pace, gravitie, and his
spreading presence, each thing by it self, and all together, suspended and
admired.

He came to me, and the first thing he did, was to embrace me straightly, and
forthwith said; It is long since (renowned Knight, Don-Quixote de la Mancha)
that we who live in these enchanted Deserts have hoped to see thee, that thou
might let the World know what is contained here, and enclosed in this
profound Cave which thou have entered, called Montesino's Cave; an exploit
reserved only to be attempted by thy invincible Heart and stupendous Courage:
Come with me thou most illustrious Knight, for I will show thee the wonders
that this transparent Castle does conceal, of which I am the Governor, and
perpetual chief Warder, as being the same Montesinos, from whom the Cave takes
name.

Scarce had he told me that he was Montesinos, when I asked him, Whether it
were true that was bruited here in the world above, that he had taken his
great friend Durandartes heart out of the midest of his bosom with a little
Dagger, and carried it to the Lady Belerm^ (as he willed) at the instant of
his death? He answered me, that all was true, but only that of the Dagger; for
it was no Dagger, but a little Stilletto as sharp as a Nawle.

Belike (quoth Sancho) it was of Ramon de Hozes the Sevillians making. I know
not (said Don-Quixote) but 'twas not of that Stilletto-maker, for he lived but
the other day, and that battle of Roncesualles, where this accident happened,
was many years since: but this averring is of no importance or let, neither
alters the truth, or Stories text.

You say right (quoth the Scholar) for I hearken with the greatest delight in
the world. With no less do I tell it you (said Don-Quixote) and proceed; The
venerable Montesinos brought me into the Cristalline Palace, where in a low
Hall, exceeding fresh and cool, all of Alablaster, was a great Sepulcher of
Marble, made with singular Art, upon which I saw a Knight laid at length, not
of Brass, Marble, or Jaspar, as you use to have in other tombs, but of pure
flesh and bone, he held his right hand (which was somewhat hairy and sinowy, a
sign that the owner was very strong) upon his heart-side, and before I asked
Montesinos ought, that saw me in suspense, beholding the tomb, he said:

This is my friend Durandarte, the flower and mirror of Chivalrie, of the
enamoured and valiant Knights of his time: He is kept here enchanted, as my
self and many more Knights and Ladies are, by Merlin [For so I translate it,
to show the Authors mistake.] that French Enchanter; who, they say, was son
to the Devil, but as I believe he was not so, only he knew more then the
Devil. Why or how he enchanted us, no body knows, which the times will bring
to light, that I hope are not far off: all that I admire is, (since I know for
certain, as it is now day, that Durandarte dyed in my arms, and that after
he was dead, I took out his heart, and surely it weighed above two pounds;
for according to natural Philosophy, he that has the biggest heart, is more
valiant then he that has but a less: which being so, and that this Knight
died really) how he complains and sighs sometimes as if he were alive?
Which said, the wretched Durandarte, crying out aloud, said; Oh my Cousin
Montesinos, the last thing that I requested you when I was dying, and my soul
departing; was, That you would carry my heart to Belerma, taking it out of my
bosom, either with poniard or dagger: which when the venerable Montesinos
heard, he kneeled before the greeved Knight, and with tears in his eyes,
said; Long since, Oh Durandarte, long since my dearest Cousin, I did what you
en-joyn'd me in that bitter day of our loss; I took your heart, as well as I
could, without leaving the least part of it in your breast: I wiped it with a
laced handkerchiefe, and posted with it toward France, having first laid you
in the bosom of the earth, with so many tears as was sufficient to wash my
hands, or to wipe off the blood from them, which I had gotten by stirring them
in your entrails: and for more assurance that I did it, my dearest Cousin, at
the first place I came to from Roncesualle, I cast salt upon your heart, that
it might not stink, and might be fresh, and embalmed when it should come to
the presence of the Lady Belerma, who with you and me, Guadiana your Squire,
the waiting woman Ruydera, and her seven Daughters, and her two Neeces, and
many other of your acquaintances and friends, have been enchanted here by
Merlin that Wizard long since, and though it be above five hundred years
ago, yet none of us is dead; only Ruydera, her Daughters and Neeces are
wanting, whom by reason of their lamentation. Merlin that had compassion on
them, turned them into so many Lakes now living in the world: and in the
Province of Mancha they are called the Lakes of Ruydera; seven belong to the
Kings of Spain, and the two Neeces to the Knights of the most holy Order of
Saint John. Guadiana your Squire, wailing in like manner this mis-hap, was
turned into a River that bore his own name, who when he came to the
superficies of the earth, and saw the Sun in another heaven, such was his
grief to have left you, that he straight plunged himself into the entrails
of the earth: but, as it is not possible for him to leave his natural Current,
sometimes he appears and shows himself, where the Sun and men may see
him. The aforesaid Lakes do minister their waters to him, with which, and many
others, he enters Portugal in pomp: but which way so-ere he goes, he
shows his sorrow and melancholy, and contemnes the breeding of dainty fish in
his waters, and such as are esteemed, but only muddie and unsavorie, far
differing from those of golden Tagus; and what I now tell you, Cousin mine, I
have told you often, and since you answer me nothing, I imagine you either
believe me not, or not hear me; for which (God knows) I am heartily sorry.
One news I will let you know, which though perhaps it may not any way lighten
your grief, yet it will no way increase it: Know, that you have here in your
presence, (open your eyes and you shall see him) that famous Knight, of whom
Merlin prophesied such great matters, that Don-Quixote de la Mancha, I say,
that now newly and more happily then former Ages, has raised the long
forgotten Knight Errantry, by whose means and favor, it may be, that we
also may be dis-inchanted; for great exploits are reserved for great
Personages. And if it be otherwise (answered the grieved Durandarte) with a
faint and low voice, if it be otherwise, oh Cousin, I say, Patience and
shuffle: [Patiencia ybaraiar. A Metaphor taken from Card-players, who when they
lose, cry to the dealer, Patience, and shuffle the Cards.] and turning on one
side, he returned to his accustomed silence, without speaking one word.

By this we heard great howling and moan, accompanied with deep sighs, and
short-breathed accents: I turned me about, and saw that in another room there
came passing by the Crystal waters, a procession of a company of most
beautiful Damzels, in two ranks, all clad in mourning, with Turbants upon
their heads, after the Turkish fashion; at last, and in the end of the ranks,
there came a Lady, who by her majesty appeared so, clothed in like manner in
black, with a white dressing on her head, so large, that it kissed the very
ground. Her Turbant was twice as bigg as the bigest of the rest: she was
somewhat beetle-brow'd, flat-nosed, wide mouthed, but red lipped: her teeth,
for sometimes she discovered them, seemed to be thin, and not very well
placed, though they were as white as blanched Almonds: in her hand she carried
a fine cloth, and within it (as might be perceived) a mommied Heart, by reason
of the dry embalming of it: Montesinos told me, that all those in that
procession were servants to Durandarte and Belerma that were there enchanted
with their Masters; and that she that came last with the linen cloth and the
heart in her hand, was the Lady Belerma, who, together with her Damzels, four
days in the week did make that procession, singing, or to say truer, howling
their Dirges over the body and grieved heart of his Cousin; and if now she
appeared somewhat foul to me, or not so fair as Fame has given out, the cause
was, her bad nights, but worse days that she endured in that enchantment, as
I might see by her deep-sunk eyes, and her broken complexion, and her monthly
disease, is not the cause of these (an ordinary thing in women) for it is many
months since, and many years that she has not had it, not known what it is;
but the grief that she has in her own heart, for that she carries in her
hand continually, which renews and brings to her remembrance, the
unfortunatenesse of her lucklesse Lover; for if it were not for this, scarce
would the famous Dulcinea del Toboso equal her in Beauty, Wit, or liveliness,
that is so famous in the Mancha, and all the world over. Not too fast (then
said I) Signior Don Montesinos, on with your story as befits; for you know all
comparisons are odious; and so leave your comparing; the peerlesse Dulcinea del
Toboso is what she is, and the Lady Belerma is what she is and has been; and
let this suffice.

To which he answered, Pardon me Signior Don-Quixote, for I confess I did
ill, and not well, to say the Lady Dulcinea would scarce equal the Lady
Belerma, since it had been sufficient, that I understood (I know not by what
aim) that you are her Knight, enough to have made me bite my Tongue, before I
had compared her with any thing but Heaven it self. With this satisfaction
that Montesinos gave me, my heart was free from that sudden passion I had, to
hear my Mistress compared to Belerma.

And I marvel (said Sancho) that you got not to the old Carl and banged his
bones and pulled his beard, without leaving him a hair in it.

No friend Sancho, said he, it was not fit for me to do so; for we are all
bound to reverence our Elders, although they be no Knights, and most of all
when they are so, and are enchanted. I know well enough, I was not behind hand
with him in other questions and answers that passed between us. Then said the
Scholar, I know not Signior Don-Quixote, how you in so little time (as it is
since you went down) have seen so many things, and spoken and answered so
much. How long is it (quoth he) since I went down? A little more then an
hour (said Sancho.) That cannot be replied Don-Quixote, because it was
Morning and Evening, and Evening and Morning three times; so that by my
account, I have been three days in those parts so remote and hidden from our
sight. Surely my Master, quoth Sancho, is in the right; for as all things that
befall him are by way of Enchantment, so perhaps that which appears to us, but
an hour, is to him there three nights and three days. He has hit it (said
Don-Quixote.) And have you eat Sir in all this time (quoth the Scholar?) Not a
bit (quoth Don-Quixote) neither have I been hungry, or so much as thought of
eating. And the Enchanted, eat they, said the Scholar? No, said he, neither
are they troubled with your greater excrements, although it be probable that
their nails, their beards, and their hayres grow; Sleep they happily said
Sancho? No indeed said Don-Quixote, at least these three days that I have
been with them, not one of them has closed his eyes, nor I neither. That fits
the Proverb (quoth Sancho) which says, You shall know the Person by his
company; you have been amongst the Enchanted, and those that watch and fast;
no mervail therefore though you neither slept nor eat whilst you were amongst
them; but pray Sir pardon me if I say, God (or the Devil, I was about to say)
take me, if I believe a word of all this you have spoken. Why not, said the
Scholar? Do you think Signior Don-Quixote would lie to us, for though he
would, he has not had time to compose or invent such a million of lies? I do
not believe, quoth Sancho, that my Master lies: But what do you believe then
quoth Don-Quixote? Mary I believe (said Sancho) that that Merlin, or those
Enchanters that Enchanted all that rabble, that you say you have seen and
conversed with there below, clapped into your apprehension or memory all this
Machine that you have told us, and all that remains yet to be told. All this
may be Sancho, said Don-Quixote, but it is otherwise; for what I have told I
saw with these eyes, and felt with these hands: But what will thou say when I
shall tell thee, That amongst infinite other matters and wonders that
Montesinos showed me, which at more le^sure, and at fitting time, in process
of our journey I shall tell thee: He showed me three Country-wenches, that
went leaping and frisking up and down those pleasant fields, like Goats, and I
scarce saw them, when I perceived the one was the peerless Dulcinea, and the
other two, the self same that we spoke to when we left Toboso. I asked
Montesinos whether he knew them; who answered me, Not; but that sure they were
some Ladies of quality there Enchanted, that but lately appeared in those
fields, and that it was no wonder, for that there were many others of former
times, and these present, that were Enchanted in strange and different shapes,
amongst whom he knew Queen Guinivere, and her woman Quintani^na filling
Lansarotes Cups when he came from Britain.

When Sancho heard his Master thus far, it made him stark mad, and ready to
burst with laughter; for by reason that he knew the truth of Dulcineaes
Enchantment, as having been himself the Enchanter, and the raiser of that
Tale, he did undoubtedly ratify his belief, that his Master was mad and
out of his wits; and so told him: In an ill time, and dismal day (Patron mine)
went you down into the other world, and at an ill season met with Signior
Montesinos, that has returned you in this pickle: you were well enough here
above, in your right senses as God has given them you, uttering sentences, and
giving good counsel every foot, and not as now, telling the greatest
unlikelihoods that can be imagined.

Because I know thee Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) I make no account of thy words.
Nor I of yours (said he;) you may strike or kill me if you will, either for
those I have spoken, or those I mean to speak, if you do not correct and amend
your self. But pray tell me Sir, whilst we are at quiet, How knew you it was
our Mistress? Spoke you to her? What said she? And what answered you? I knew
her (said Don-Quixote) by the same clothes she had on at such time as thou
shewd'st her me; I spoke to her, but she gave me not a word, but turned her
back, and scudded away so fast, that a flight would not have overtaken her: I
meant to have followed her, and had done it but that Montesinos told me it was
in vain, and the rather, because it was now high time for me to return out of
the Cave. He told me likewise, that in process of time he would let me know
the means of disinchanting Durandarte, and Belerma, and himself, together with
all the rest that were there: But that which most grieved me, was, that whilst
I was thus talking with Montesinos, one of the unfortunate Dulcinea's
companions came on one side of me (I not perceiving it) and with tears in her
eyes and hollow voice said to me; My Lady Dulcinea del Toboso commends her to
you, and desires to know how you do; and withal, because she is in great
necessity, she desires you with all earnestness, thou you would be pleased
to lend her three shillings upon this new Cotton Petticoat that I bring you, or
what you can spare; for she will pay you again very shortly. This Message held
me in suspense and admiration: so that turning to Signior Montesinos, I asked
him, Is it possible, Signior, that those of your better sort that be enchanted
are in want? To which he answered, Believe me, Signior Don-Quixote, this
necessity rangeth and extends it self every where, and over-takes all men,
neither spares she the Enchanted; and therefore since the Lady Dulcinea
demands these three shillinigs of you, and that the pawn seems to be good,
lend them her, for sure she is much straightned. I will take no pawn (quoth I)
neither can I lend what she requires; for I have but two shillings: These I
gave, which were the same Sancho, that thou gave me the other day, for alms to
the poor we met: and I told the Maid, Friend, tell your Mistress that I am sorry
with all my heart for her wants, and I would I were a Fucar to relieve them:
[Fucares were a rich Family and name in Germany that maintained a bank of
moneys in Spain, and still used to furnish Philip the 2. with moneys in his
Wars:] and let her know that I neither can, nor may have health, wanting her
pleasing company and discreet conversation; and that I desire her as earnestly
as may be, that this her captive Servant and way-beaten Knight may see and
treat with her.

You shall also say, that when she least thinks of it, she shall hear say,
that I have made an Oath and Vow, such as was the Marquis his of Mantua, to
revenge his Nephue Baldwine, when he found him ready to give up the Ghost in
the midest of the Mountain; which was, Not to eat his meat with Napkins, and
other flim-flams added thereunto, till he had revenged his death: And so swear
I, Not to be quiet, till I have traveled all the seven partitions of the
World, more Punctually then Prince Don Manuel of Portugal, till I have
disinchanted her. All this and more you owe to my Mistress, said the Damzell;
and taking the two shillings, instead of making me a courtesy, she fetched a
caper two yards high in the air.

Blessed God! ( Sancho cried out) and is it possible that Enchanters and
Enchantments should so much prevail upon him, as to turn his right
understanding into such a wild madness? Sir, Sir, for Gods love have a care
of your self, and look to your credit: believe not in these bubbles that have
lessened and crazed your wits. Out of thy love Sancho, thou speak this (said
Don-Quixote) and for want of experience in the world, all things that have
never so little difficulty seem to thee to be impossible: but time will come
(as I have told thee already) that I shall relate some things that I have seen
before, which may make thee believe what I have said, which admits no reply or
controversy.

CHAP. XXIV.
Where are recounted a thousand flim-flams, as impertinent as necessary to the
understanding of this famous History.
THe Translator of this famous History out of his Original, written by Cid
Hamete Benengeli, says; That when he came to the last Chapter going before,
these words were written in the margin by the same Hamete. I cannot believe or
be persuaded that all that is written in the antecedent Chapter happened so
punctually to the valorous Don-Quixote: the reason is, because all Adventures
hitherto have been accidental and probable; but this of the Cave, I see no
likelihood of the truth of it, as being so unreasonable: Yet to think
Don-Quixote would lie, being the worthiest Gentleman, and noblest Knight of his
time, is not possible; for he would not lie though he were shot to death with
arrows. On the other side I consider, that he related it, with all the
aforesaid circumstances, and that in so short a time he could not frame such a
Machina of fopperies; and if this Adventure seem to be Apocrypha, the fault is
not mine; so that leaving it indifferent, I here set it down. Thou, Oh Reader,
as thou art wise, judge as thou think good; for I can do no more; though
one thing be certain, that when he was upon his deathbed, he disclaimed
this Adventure, and said, That he had only invented it, because it suited with
such as he had read of in his Histories: so he proceeds, saying:

The Scholar wondered, as well at Sancho's boldness as his Masters patience;
but he thought, that by reason of the joy that he received in having seen his
Mistress Dulcinea (though enchanted) that softness of condition grew upon him;
for had it been otherwise, Sancho spoke words that might have grinded him to
powder; for in his opinion he was somewhat saucy with his Master, to whom he
said:

Signior Don-Quixote, I think the journey that I have made with you very well
employed, because in it I have stored up four things: The first is, the having
known your self, which I esteem as a great happiness: The second, to have
known the secrets of this Montesinos Cave, with the transformations of Guadiana
and Ruydera's Lakes, which may help me in my Spanish Ovid I have in hand: The
third is, to know the antiquity of Card-playing, which was used at least in
time of the Emperor Charles the Great, as may be collected out of the words
you say Durandarte used, when, after a long speech between him and Montesinos,
he awakened saying, Patience and shuffle: and this kind of speaking he could
not learn when he was Enchanted, but when he lived in France, in time of the
aforesaid Emperor: and this observation comes in pudding time for the other
Book that I am making, which is, My supply to Polydore Vergil in the invention
of Antiquities, and I believe in his he left out Cards which I will put in, as
a matter of great importance, especially having so authentike an Author as
Signior Durandarte. The fourth is, to have known for a certain the true spring
of the River Guadiana, which has hitherto been concealed.

You have reason (said Don-Quixote:) but I would fain know of you, now that it
pleased God to give you abilities to print your Books, To whom will you direct
them? You have Lords and Grandees [A name given to men of Title, as Dukes
Marquisses, or Earls in Spain, whose only privilege is to stand covered before
the King,] in Spain (said the Scholar) to whom I may direct them. Few of them
(said Don-Quixote) not because they do not deserve the Dedications, but
because they will not admit of them, not to obliege themselves to the
satisfaction that is due to the Authors Pains and Courtesy. One Prince I
know that may supply the deserts of the rest, with such advantage, that should
I speak of it; it might stir up envy in some noble Breasts: But let this
rest till some fit time, and let us look out where we may lodge to night.

Not far from hence (said the Scholar) there is a Hermitage, where dwells a
Hermit that they say has been a Soldier, and is thought to be a good
Christian, and very discreet and charitable. Besides the Hermitage, he has a
little House which he has built at his own charge; yet though it be little,
it is fit to receive guests. Has he any Hens trow, said Sancho? Few Hermits
are without them, quoth Don-Quixote, for your Hermites now a days, are not
like those that lived in the Deserts of Egypt, that were clad in Palme-leaves,
and lived upon the roots of the Earth, but mistake me not, that because I
speak well of them, I should speak ill of these, only the penetency of these
times comes not near those; yet for ought I know, all are good, at least I
think so, and if the worst come to the worst, your Hypocrite that fains himself
good, does less hurt then he that sins in public.

As they were thus talking, they might espy a Footman coming toward them,
going a pace, and beating with his wand a hee-Mule laden with Lances and
Halberts; when he came near them, he saluted them and passed on; but
Don-Quixote said to him; honest fellow stay, for me thinks you make your Mule
go faster then needs. I cannot stay Sir, said he, because these weapons that
you see I carry, must be used to morrow Morning, so I must needs go on my way,
Farewell: But if you will know why I carry them, I shall lodge to night in the
Vente above the Hermitage, [ Ventes places in Spain, in barren unpeopled parts
for lodging, like our beggarly Alehouses upon the highways,] and if you go
that way, there you shall have me, and I will tell you wonders; and so once
more, Farewell. So the Mule pricked on so fast; that Don Quixote had no leisure
to ask him what wonders they were; and as he was curious, and always
desirous of novelties, he took order that they should presently go and pass
that night in the Vente, without touching at the Hermitage, where the Scholar
would have stayed that night.

So all three of them mounted, went toward the Vente, whither they reached
somewhat before it grew dark, and the Scholar invited Don-Quixote to drink a
sup by the way at the Hermitage; which as soon as Sancho heard, he made haste
with Dapple, as did Don-Quixote and the Scholar likewise: but as Sanchoes
ill-luck would have it, the Hermit was not at home, as was told them by the
under-Hermit; they asked him whether he had any of the deerer sort of wine?
who answered, his Master had none; but if they would have any cheap water, he
would give it them with a good will. If my thirst would be quenched with water,
we might have had Wels to drink at by the way. Ah Camachoes marriage, and Don
Diegoes plenty, how often shall I miss you? Now they left the Hermitage, and
spurred toward the Vente, and a little before them, they overtooke a youth that
went not very fast before them; so they overtooke him: he had a sword upon his
shoulder, and upon it, as it seemed, a bundle of clothes, as breeches and
cloak, and a shirt; for he wore a velvet jerkin that had some kind of
remainder of Satin, and his shirt hung out, his stockins were of silk, and
his shoes square at toe, after the Court fashion, he was about eighteen
years of age, and active of body to see to; to pass the tediousness of the
way, he went singing short pieces of Songs, and as they came near him he made
an end of one, which the Scholar (they say learnt by heart) and it was this: To
the Wars I go for necessity,
At home would I tarry if I had Money.


Don-Quixote was the first that spoke to him, saying; You go very naked, Sir
Gallant, And whither a Gods-name? Let Us know, if it be your pleasure to tell
us? To which the Youth answered, Heat and Poverty are the causes that I walk
so light, and my journey is to the Wars. Why for poverty (quoth Don-Quixote)
for heat it may well be, Sir said the Youth, I carry in this bundle a pair of
slops, fellows to this Jerkin, if I wear um by the way, I shall do my self
no credit with them when I come to any Town, and I have no money to buy others
with, so as well for this, as to air my self, I go till I can overtake
certain Companies of Foot, which are not above twelve leagues from hence,
where I shall get me a place, and shall not want carriages to travel in, till
I come to our imbarking place, which they say, must be in Cartagina, and I had
rather have the King to my Master, and serve him, then any beggerly-Courtier.
And, pray tell me, have you any extraordinary pay, said the Scholar.

Had I served any Grandee, or man of quality (said the Youth) no doubt I
should; for that comes by your serving good Masters, that out of the Scullary
men come to be Livetenants or Captains, or to have some good pay: but I
always had the ill-luck to serve your shag-rags and up-starts, whose alowance
was so bare and short, that one half of it still was spent in starching me a
Ruff, and it is a miracle, that one ventring Page amongst a hundred, should
ever get any reasonable Fortune. But tell me friend quoth Don-Quixote, is it
possible, that in all the time you served, you never got a Livery? Two said the
Page: but as he that goes out of a Monastery, before he professes has his
habit taken from him, and his clothes given him back; so my Masters returned me
mine, when they had ended their businesses, for which they came to the Court,
and returned to their own homes, and withheld their Liveries which they had
only showed for ostentation.

A notable Espilooherio [Cullionry,] as says your Italian (quoth Don-Quixote)
for all that, think your self happy that you are come from the Court, with so
good an intention, for there is nothing in the world better, nor more
profitable^ then to serve God first, and next your Prince and natural Master,
especially in the practice of Arms, by which, if not more wealth, yet at
least, more honor is obtained then by Learning: as I have said many times;
That though Learning has raised more Houses then Arms, yet your Swordmen
have a kind of (I know not what) advantage above Scholars, with a kind of
splendour, that does advantage them over all.

And bear in your mind what I shall now tell you, which shall be much for
your good and much lighten you in your travells, that is, not to think upon
adversity; for the worst that can come is death, which if it be a good death,
the best fortune of all is to die. Julius Caesar that brave Roman Emperor,
being asked, Which was the best death? answered, A sudden one, and unthought
of; and though he answered like a Gentile, and void of the knowledge of the
true God, yet he said well to save humane feeling a labor; for say you should
be slain in the first skirmish, either with Canon shot, or blown up with a
mine, what matter is it? All is but dying, and there is an end: And as Terence
says, A Soldier slain in the Field, shows better then alive and safe in
flight; and so much the more famous is a good Soldier, by how much he obeyes
his Captains, and those that may command him; and mark child, it is better for
a Soldier to smell of his Gunpowder then of Civet: and when old age comes
upon you in this honorable exercise, though you be full of scars, maimed, or
lame, at least you shall not be without honor, which poverty cannot diminish:
and besides, there is order taken now, That old and maimed Soldiers may be
relieved; neither are they dealt withal like those men's Negars, that when they
are old and can do their Masters no service, they (under color of making them
free) turn them out of doors and make themslaves to hunger, from which nothing
can free them but death: [ He describes the right subtle and cruel nature of
his damned Countrymen:] and for this time I will say no more to you, but only
get up behind me till you come to the Vente, and there you shall sup with me,
and to morrow take your Journey, which God speed as your desires deserve.

The Page accepted not of his invitement, to ride behind him; but for the
supper he did: And at this season (they say) Sancho said to himself; Lord
defend thee, Master; And is it possible, that a man that knows to speak such,
so many, and so good things (as he has said here) should say he has seen
such impossible fooleries, as he has told us of Montesino's Cave. Well, we
shall see what will become of it. And by this they came to the Vente just as it
was night, for which Sancho was glad, because too his Master took it to be a
true Vente, and not^ Castle, as he was wont. They were no sooner entered, when
Don Quixote asked the Venture for the man with the Lances and Halberds:
[Ventero, the Master of the Vente:] who answered him, He was in the stable
looking to his Moyle: Sancho and the Scholar did the same to their Asses,
giving Don-Quixotes Rozinante the best manger and room in the stable.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Adventure of the Braying, and the merry one of the Puppetman, with the
memorable soothsaying of the prophesying Ape.
DON-Quixote stood upon thorns, till he might hear and know the promised
wonders, of the man that carried the Arms, and went where the Venture had told
him, to seek him; where finding him, he said; That by all means he must
tell him presently, what he had promised him upon the way. The man answered
him, The story of the wonders requires more leisure, and must not be told thus
standing: good Sir let me make an end of provandring my Beast, and I will tell
you things that shall admire you.

Let not that hinder you (quoth Don-Quixote) for I Will help you: and so he
did, sifting his Barley, and cleansing the manger (a humility that obliged the
fellow to tell him his tale heartily:) thus sitting down upon a bench,
Don-Quixote by him, with the Scholar, Page, and Sancho, and the Venture, for
his complete Senate and Auditory, he began:

You shall understand, that in a town, some four leagues and an half from
this Vente, it fell out, that an Alderman there, by a trick and wile of a
wench, his maidservant (which were long to tell how) lost his Ass, and though
the said Alderman used all manner of diligence to find him, it was impossible.
His Ass was wanting (as the public voice and fame goes) fifteen days: when
the Alderman that lost him, being in the marketplace, another Alderman of the
same town told him; Pay me for my news, Gossip, for your Ass is
forth-comming. I will willingly, Gossip (said the other) but let me know where
he is? This morning (said the Second) I saw him upon the mountains without
his pack-saddle, or any other furniture, so lean, that it was pity to see
him, I would have gotten him before me, and have driven him to you, but he is
so mountainous and wild, that when I made toward him, he flew from me, and
got into the thickest of the wood: If you please, we will both return and
seek him, let me first put up this Ass at home, and I Will come by and by. You
shall do me a great kindness (quoth he) and I will repay you (if need be)
in the like kind.

With all these circumstances, just as I tell you, all that know the truth,
relate it: In fine, the two Aldermen, afoot and hand to hand, went to the Hills,
and coming to the place where they thought to find the Ass, they missed of
him, neither could they find him, for all their seeking round about. Seeing
then there was no appearance of him, the Alderman that had seen him, said to
the other; Hark you, Gossip, I have a trcike in my head, with which we shall
find out this Beast, though he be hidden under ground, much more if in the
mountain: Thus it is, I can bray excellent well, and so can you a little:
well, it is a match. A little, Gossip (quoth the other) Verily, I Will take no ods
of any body, nor of an Ass himself. We shall see then (said the second
Alderman) for my plot is, that you go on one side of the hill, and I on the
other, so that we may compass it round, now and then you shall bray, and so
will I, and it cannot be, but that your Ass will answer one of us, if he be
in the mountain,

To this the owner of the Ass answered; I tell you Gossip, the device is rare,
and worthy your great wit: so dividing themselves (according to the agreement)
it fell out, that just at one instant both brayed, and each of them cozened
with the others braying, came to look one another thinking now there had been
news of the Ass: and as they met, the Loser said; Is it possible Gossip, that
it was not mine Ass that brayed? No, 'twas I, said the other. Then (replied
the Owner) Gossip, between you and an Ass there is no difference touching your
braying; for in my life I never heard a thing more natural.

These praises and extolling (said the other) do more properly belong to you
then me; for truly you may give two to one, to the best and skillfullest
Brayer in the world; for your sound is lofty, you keep very good time, and your
cadences thick and sudden: To conclude, I yield my self vanquished, and give
you the prize and glory of this rare ability. Well (said the Owner) I shall
like my self the better for this hereafter, and shall think I know something,
since I have gotten a quality; for though I ever thought I brayed well, yet I
never thought I was so excellent at it as you say.

Let me tell you (said the other) there be rare abilities in the world that
are lost and ill employed in those that will not good themselves with them.
Ours (quoth the Owner) can do us no good but in such businesses as we have
now in hand, and pray God in this they may.

This said, they divided themselves again, and returned to their braying, and
every foot they were deceived and met, till they agreed upon a counter-signe,
that to know it was themselves and not the Ass, they should bray twice
together: So that with this doubling their brayes, every stitch-while they
compassed the hill, the lost Ass not answering so much as by the least sign:
but how could the poor and ill-thriving Beast answer, when they found him in
the Thicket eaten with Wolve? And his Owner seeing him, said; I marvelled he
did not answer; for if he had not been dead, he would have brayed, if he had
heard us, or else he had been no Ass: But in faith Gossip, since I have heard
your delicate braying, I think my pains well bestowed in looking this Ass,
though I have found him dead.

It Is in a very good hand Gossip (said the other: [En buenna mano esta.
Alluding to two that strive to make one another drink first,] And if the Abbot
sing well, the little Monk comes not behind him: [ The one as very an Ass as
the other.] With this all comfortless and hoarce, home they went, where they
told their Friends, Neighbors, and Acquaintances what had happened in the search
for the Ass, the one exaggerating the others cunning in braying; all which was
known and spread abroad in the neighboring Towns: And the Devell that always
watches how he may sow and scatter Quarrels and Discord every where, raising
brabbles in the air, and making great Chimeraes of nothing, made the People of
other Towns, that when they saw any of ours, they should bray, as hitting us in
the teeth with our Aldermans braying.

The Boys at length fell to it, which was, as if it had fallen into the jaws of
all the Devils in H^ll: so this braying spread it self from one town to the
other, that they which are borne in our Town, are as well known as the Beggar
knows his Dish; and this unfortunate scoff has proceeded so far, that many
times those that were scoffed at have gone out armed in a whole Squadron, to
give Battle to the Scoffers, without fear or wit, neither King nor Keiser
being able to prevent them: I believe that to morrow or next day those of my
Town will be in Field (to wit, the Brayers) against the next Town, which is
two leagues off, one of them that does most persecute us; and because we might
be well provided, I have bought those Halberds and Lances that you saw. And
these be the wonders that I said I would tell you of; and if these be not so,
I know not what may.

And here the poor fellow ended his discourse; and now there entered at the door
of the Vente one in Chamois, in hose and doublet, and called aloud; Mine Host,
have you any Lodging? for here comes the Prophesying Ape, and the Motion of
Melisendra. Body of me (quoth the Venture) here is Master Peter, we shall have
a brave night of it: (I had forgot to tell how this Master Peter had his left
eye and half his cheek covered with a patch of green Taffata, a sign that all
that side was sore:) So the Venture proceeded, saying; You are welcome Master
Peter; Where Is the Ape and the Motion that I see um not? They are not far off
(quoth the Chamois man) only I am come before to know if you have any lodging.

I would make bold with the Duke of Alva himself (said the Venture) rather then
Master Peter should be disappoynted: let your Ape and your Motion come; for
we have ghests here to night, that will pay for seeing that, and the Apes
abilities. In good time (said he of the Patch) for I will moderate the price,
so my charges this night be paid for; and therefore I will cause the Cart
where they are, to drive on: with this he went out of the Vente again.
Don-Quixote straight asked the Venture, What Master Peter that was, and what
Motion, or Ape those he brought?

To which the Venture answered; He is a famous Puppet-Master, that this long
time has gone up and down these parts of Aragon, showing this motion of
Melisendra, and Don Gayferos, one of the best histories that has been
represented these many years in this Kingdom. Besides, he has an Ape, the
strangest that ever was; for if you ask him any thing, he marketh what you
ask, and gets up upon his Masters shoulder, and tells him in his ear by way
of answer, what he was asked: which Master Peter declares: he tells things to
come, as well as things past, and though he do not always hit upon the
right, yet he seldom erres, and makes us believe the Divill is in him: Twelve
pence for every answer we give, if the Ape do answer, I mean, if his Master
answer for him, after he has whispered in his ear; so it is thought that
Master Peter is very rich, he is a notable fellow, and (as your Italian says)
a boon companion; has the best life in the world, talks his share for six
men, and drinks for a dozen, all at his Tongues charge, his Motion, and his
Apes.

By this, Master Peter was returned, and his Motion and Ape came in a small
carriage; his Ape was of a good bigness, without a tail, and his bumm as bare
as a Felt, but not very ill-favored. Don-Quixote scarce beheld him, when he
demanded, Master Prophesier, What fish do we catch? Tell us what will become
of us, and here is twelve-pence, which he commanded Sancho to give Master
Peter; who answered for the Ape and said: Sir, this beast answers not, nor
gives any notice of things to come, of things past he knows something, and
likewise a little of things present. Zwookers (quoth Sancho) I Will not give a
farthing to know what is past: for who can tell that better then my self? and
to pay for what I know, is most foolish: but since you say he knows things
present, here is my twelve-pence, and let good man Ape tell me what my wife
Teresa Panca does, and in what she busies her self.

Master Peter would not take his money, saying; I will not take your reward
before hand, till the Ape has first done his duty: So giving a clap or two
with his right hand on his left shoulder; at one frisk the Ape got up, and
laying his mouth to his ear, grated his teeth apace; and having showed this
feat the space of a Creeds saying, at another frisk he leaped to the ground,
and instantly Master Peter very hastily ran and kneeled down before
Don-Quixote, and embracing his legs, said; These legs I embrace as if they were
Hercules Pillars: O famous reviver of the long forgotten Knight Errantry! Oh
never sufficiently extolled Knight Don-Quixote de la Mancha! Raiser of the
Faint-hearted, Propper of those that Fall, the Staff and Comfort of all the
Unfortunate! Don Quixote was amazed, Sancho confused, the Scholar in suspense,
the Page astonished, the Bray Towns-man all in a gaze, the Venture at his wits
end, and all admiring that heard the Puppet-mans speech, who went on, saying:

And thou honest Sancho Panca, the best Squire to the best Knight of the world,
rejoice, for thy Wife Teresa is a good Houswife, and at this time she is
dressing a pound of Flax; by the same token she has a good broken-mouth'd pot
at her left side that holds a pretty scantling of Wine, with which she eases
her labor.

I believe that very well (said Sancho) for she is a good soul; and if she
were not jealous, I would not change her for the Gyantesse Andandona, that as
my Master says, was a woman for the nonce: and my Teresa is one of those that
will not pine her self, though her heirs smart for it.

Well, I say now (quoth Don-Quixote) he that reads much and travells much,
sees much and knows much: This I say; for who in the world could have persuaded
me that Apes could Prophecy, which now I have seen with mine own eyes? for I
am tho same Don Quixote that this Beast speaks of, although he have been
somewhat too liberal in my praise: but howsoever I am I give God thanks that
he has made me so relenting and compassionate; always inclined to do good
to all, and hurt to no man.

If I had money (said the Page) I would ask Master Ape what should befall me in
the Peregrination I have in hand. To which Master Peter answered, that was now
risen from Don-Quixotes foot; I have told you once that this little Beast
foretells not things to come; for if he could, 'twere no matter for your
money; for here is Signior Don Quixote present^ for whose sake I would forgo
all the interest in the world: and to show my duty to him, and to give him
delight, I will set up my Motion, and freely show all the company in the Vent
some pastime gratis. Which the Venture hearing, unmeasurably glad, pointed him
to a place where he might set it up; which was done in an instant.

Don-Quixote liked not the Apes prophesying very well, holding it to be
frivolous, that an Ape should only tell things present, or not past, or to
come. So whilst Master Peter was fitting his Motion, Don-Quixote took Sancho
with him to a corner of the Stable, and in private said:

Look thee Sancho, I have very well considered of this Apes strange quality,
and find that this Master Peter has made a secret express compact with the
Devil, to infuse this ability into the Ape, that he may get his living by
it, and when he is rich, he will give him his soul, which is that that this
universal enemy of mankind pretends: and that which induces me to this
belief, is, that the Ape answers not to things past, but only present; and the
Devils knowledge attains to no more; for things to come he knows not, only by
conjecture: for God alone can distinguish the times and moments; and to him
nothing is past, or to come; but all is present: Which being so, it is most
certain that this Ape speaks by instinct from the Devil, and I wonder he has
not been accused to the Inquisition, and examined, and that it has not been
pressed out of him, to know by what virtue this Ape Prophesies; for certainly,
neither he nor his Ape are Astrologers, nor know how to cast Figures, which
they call judiciary, so much used in Spain: for you have no paltry Woman, nor
Page, nor Cobbler that presumnes not to cast a Figure, as if it were one of the
Knaves at Cards upon a Table, falsifying that wondrous Science with their
ignorant lying.

I knew a Gentlewoman that asked one of these Figure-slingers, if a little
foysting-Hound of hers should have any Puppies, and if it had, how many, and of
what color the Whelps should be? To which my cunning-man (after he had cast
his Figure) answered, That the Bitch should have young, and bring forth three
little Whelps, the one Green, the other Carnation, and the third of a mixed
color, with this Proviso, that she should take the Dog between eleven and
twelve of the clock at noon, or at night, which should be on the Monday or the
Saturday; and the success was, that some two days after the Bitch dyed of a
surfeit, and Master Figure-raiser was reputed in the Town a most perfect
Judiciary, as all, or the greatest part of such men are. For all that (said
Sancho) I would you would bid Master Peter ask his Ape, whether all were true
that befell you in Montesino's Cave; for I think (under correction) all was
cogging and lying, or at least but a dream. All might be (said Don-Quixote)
yet I will do as thou do advise me, though I have one scruple remaining.

Whilst they were thus communing, Master Peter came to call Don-Quixote, and
to tell him that the Motion was now up, if he would please to see it, which
would give him content.

Don-Quixote told him his desire, and wished that his Ape might tell him, if
certain things that befell him in Montesinoes Cave were true, or but dreams;
for himself was uncertain whether. Master Peter, without answering a word,
fetched his Ape, and putting him before Don-Quixote and Sancho, said; Look you
Master Ape, Signior Don-Quixote would have you tell him, whether certain
things that happened to him in Montesinoes Cave were true or false? And making
the accustomed sign, the Ape whipped upon his left shoulder, and seeming to
speak to him in his ear, Master Peter straight interpreted. The Ape, Signior,
says that part of those things are false, and part of them true, and this is
all he knows touching this demand; and now his virtue is gone from him, and
if you will know any more, you must expect till Friday next, and then he will
answer you all you will ask, for his virtue will not return till then.

Law ye there (quoth Sancho) did not I tell you that I could not believe that
all you said of Montesinoes Cave could hold current? The success hereafter
will determine that (quoth Don-Quixote) for time the discoverer of all things,
brings every thing to the Suns light, though it be hidden in the bosom of
the earth; and now let this suffice, and let us go see the Motion, for I
believe we shall have some strange noveltie. Some strange one quoth Master
Peter; this Motion of mine has a thousand strange ones: I tell you Signior, it
is one of the rarest things to be seen in the world; operibus credit and non
verbis, and now to work for it is late, and we have much to do, say and show.

Don-Quixote and Sancho obeyed, and went where the Motion was set and opened,
all full of little wax lights, that made it most sightly and glorious. Master
Peter straight clapped himself within it, who was he that was to manage the
Artificial Puppets, and without stood his Boy to interpret and declare the
mysteries of the Motion; in his hand he had a white wand, with which he pointed
out the several shapes that came in and out. Thus all that were in the Vente
being placed, and some standing over against the Motion, Don-Quixote, Sancho,
the Scholar and the Page, placed in the best seats; the Trudgman began to speak
[ El Truxaman. An Interpreter amongst the Turks, but here taken for any in
generall] what shall be heard or seen, by him that shall hear or read the next
Chapter.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the delightful Passage of the Puppet-play, and other pleasant matters.
HERE Tyrians and Troyans were all silent, I mean all the Spectators of the
Motion had their ears hanged upon the Interpreters mouth, that should declare
the wonders; by and by there was a great sound of Kettle-Drums and Trumpets,
and a volly of great-shot within the Motion, which passing away briefly, the
Boy began to raise his voice and to say. This true History which is here
represented to you, is taken word for out of the French Chronicles, and the
Spanish Romants, which are in every bodies mouth, and sung by Boys up and
down the streets. It treats of the liberty that Signior Don Gayferos gave to
Melisendra his wife, that was imprisoned by the Moors in Spain, in the City
of Sansuena, which was then so called, and now Saragosa; and look you there,
how Don Gayseros is playing at Tables, according to the Song; Now Don Gayferos
at Tables does play,
Unmindful of Melisendra away.


And that Personage that peeps out there with a Crown on his head and a
Scepter in his hand, is the Emperor Charlemain, the supposed father of the said
Melisendra, who grieved with the sloth and neglect of his son in Law, comes
to chide him; and mark with what vehemence and earnestness he rates him, as
if he meant to give him half a dozen Cons with his Scepter; some Authors there
be that say he did, and sound ones too: and after he had told him many things
concerning the danger of his reputation, if he did not free his Spouse, 'twas
said he told him, I have said enough, look to it. Look ye Sir, again, how the
Emperor turns his back, and in what case he leaves Don Gayferos, who all
enraged, flings the Tables and the table-men from him, and hastily calls for
his Armor, and borrowes his Cosin-Germane Roldan his sword Durindana; who
offers him his company in this difficult enterprise. But the valorous enraged
Knight would not accept it, saying; that he is sufficient to free his Spouse,
though she were put in the deep center of the earth, and now he goes in to Arm
himself for his Journey.

Now turn your eyes to yonder Tower that appears, for you must suppose it is
one of the Towers of the Castle of Saragosa, which is now called the Aliaferia,
and that Lady that appears in the window, clad in a Moorish habit, is the
peerlesse Melisendra, that many a time looks toward France, thinking on Paris
and her Spouse, the only comfort in her imprisonment. Behold also a strange
accident now that happens, perhaps never the like seen: see you not that Moore
that comes fair and softly, with his finger in his mouth, behind Melisendra?
look what a smack he gives her in the midst of her lips, and how suddenly she
begins to spit, and to wipe them with her white smock-sleeves, and how she
laments, and for very anguish despighteously roots up her fair hayres, as if
they were to blame for this wickedness. Mark you also that grave Moor that
stands in that open Gallery, it is Marsilius King of Sansueuna, who when he saw
the Moors saw cinesse, although he were a kinsman, and a great favorite of
his, he commanded him straight to be apprehended, and to have two hundred
stripes given him, and to be carried through the chief streets in the City,
with Minstrels before, and rods of Justice behind; and look ye how the
Sentence is put in execution before the fault be scarce committed; for your
Moors use not (as we do) any legal proceeding. Child, child (cried
Don-Quixote aloud) on with your story in a direct line, and fall not into your
crookes and your transversals; for to verify a thing I tell you there had
need to be a Legal proceeding. Then Master Peter too said from within; Boy,
fall not you to your flourishes, but do as that Gentleman commands you, which
is the best course; sing you your playne-Song, and meddle not with the Treble,
lest you cause the strings break. I will Master (said the Boy) and proceeded
saying:

He that you see there (quoth he) on Horseback, claddo in a Gascoyne Cloak,
is Don Gayferos himself, to whom his Wife (now revenged on the Moore for his
boldness) shows her self from the Battlements of the Castle, taking him to
be some Passenger, with whom she passed all the Discourse mentioned in the
Romant, that says: Friend, if toward France you go,
Ask if Gayferos be there or no.


The rest I omit, for all prolixitie is irksome, it is sufficient that you see
there how Don Gayferos discovers himself, and by Melisendraes jocund
behavior, we may imagine she knows him, and the rather because now we see
she lets her self down from a bay-window to ride away behind her good Spouse:
but alas I unhappie creature, one of the skirts of her Kirtle has caught upon
one of the iron bars of the window, and she hovers in the air without
possibility of coming to the ground: but see how pitiful Heavens relieve
her in her greatest necessity; for Don Gayferos comes, and without any care of
her rich Kirtle, lays hold of it, and forcibly brings her down with him, and
at one hoist sets her astride upon his horses crupper, and commands her to sit
fast, and clap her arms about him, that she fall not; for Melisendra was not
used to that kind of riding, Look you how the Horse by his neighing shows that
he is proud with the burden of his valiant Master and fair Mistress: Look how
they turn their backs to the City and merrily take their way toward Paris.
Peace be with you, O peerlesse couple of true Lovers; safely may you arrive at
your desired Country, without Fortunes hindering your prosperous voyage: may
your Friends and Kindred see you enjoy the rest of your years (as many as
Nestors) peaceably.

Here Master Peter cried out aloud again, saying; Plainness, good Boy, do not
you soar so high, this affectation is scurvy. The Interpeter answered nothing,
but went on, saying, There wanted not some idle spectators that pry into every
thing, who saw the going down of Melisendra, and gave Marsilius notice of it,
who straight commanded to sound an Alarm; and now behold how fast the City
even sinks again with the noise of Bells that sound in the high, Towers of the
Mesquits: [Mesquitas, Moorish Churches.]

There you are out Boy (said Don-Quixote) and Master Peter is very improper in
his Bells; for amongst Moors you have no Bells, but Kettle-drums, and a kind
of Shaulmes that be like our Waits; so that your sounding of Bells in
Sansuenna is a most idle fopperie. Stand not upon trifles Signior Don-Quixote
(said Master Peter) and so strictly upon every thing, for we shall not know how
to please you: Have you not a thousand Comedies ordinarily represented; as full
of incongruities and absurdities, and yet they run their Career happily, and
are heard not only with applause, but great admiration also? On boy say on, and
so I fill my purse, let there be as many improprieties as moats in the Sun.
You are in the right (quoth Don-Quixote) and the Boy proceeded.

Look what a company of gallant Knights go out of the City in pursuit of the
Cotholike Lovers, how many Trumpets sound, how many Shaulmes play, how many
Drums and Kettles make a noise; I fear me they will over-take them, and bring
them back both bound to the same Horses tail; which would be a horrible
spectacle.

Don Quixote seeing and hearing such a deal of Moorisme and such a coil, he
thought fit to succor those that fled: So standing up, with a loud voice he
cried out; I will never consent while I live, that in my presence such an
outrage as this be offered to so valiant, and to so amorous a bold Knight as
Don Gayferos: Stay, you base Scoundrels, do not ye follow or persecute him;
if you do, you must first wage war with me: So doing and speaking, he
unsheathed his Sword, and at one frisk he got to the Motion, and with an
unseen and posting fury, he began to rain strokes upon the Puppetish
Moorisme, overthrowing some, and behading others, maiming this, and cutting in
pieces that; and amongst many other blows, he fetched one so down right, that
had not Master Peter tumbled and squatted down, he had clipped his Mazard as
easily as if it had been made of March-pane. Master Peter cried out, saying;
Hold Signior Don Quixote, hold; and know that these you hurl down, destroy, and
kill, are not real Moors, but shapes made of Paste-board: Look you, look ye
now (wretch that I am) he spoils all and undoes me. But for all this,
Don-Quixote still multiplied his flashes, doubling and redoubling his blows as
thick as hops.

And in a word, in less then two Credo's, he cast down the whole Motion (all
the tackling first cut to fitters, and all the Puppets) King Marsilius was sore
wounded, and the Emperor Charlemaine his head and crown were parted in two
places: The Senate and Auditors were all in a hurry; And the Ape gat up to the
top of the house, and so out at the window: The Scholar was frighted: The Page
clean dastarded: And even Sancho himself was in a terrible perplexity; for (as
he swear after the Storm was past) he never saw his Master so outrageous.

The general ruin of the Motion thus performed, Don-Quixote began to be
somewhat pacified, and said; Now would I have all those here at this instant
before me, that believe not how profitable Knights Errant are to the world; and
had not I been now present, what (I marvel) would have become of Signior Don
Gayferos and the fair Melisendra? I warrant e're this, those Dogs would have
overtaken and showed them some foul play: when all is done, long live Knight
Errantry above all things living in the world.

Long live it on Gods name (said Master Peter) again with a pitiful voice;
and may I die, since I live to be so unhappie, as to say with King Don
Roarigo. Yesterday I was Lord of all Spain, but to day have not a Battlement I
can call mine: [Don Rodrigo was the last King of the Goths that reigned in
Spain, conquered by the Moors:] It Is not yet half an hour, scarce half a
minute, that I was Master of Kings and Emperors; had my Stables, Coffers, and
Bags full of Horses and Treasure; but now I am desolate, dejected and poor: and
to add more affliction, without my Ape, that before I can catch him again, I am
like to sweat for it, and all through the unconsiderate furies of this Sir
Knight, who is said to protect the Fatherless, to rectify Wrongs, and to do
other Charitable works; but to me only this his generous intention has been
defective, I thank God for it: In fine, it could be none but The Knight of the
sorrowful Countenance that discountenanced me and mine. Sancho grew
compassionate to hear Master Peter's lamentation, and said; Weep not, nor grieve
Master Peter, for thou breakest my heart; and let me tell thee, that my Master
Don-Quixote is so scrupulous and Catholic a Christian, that if he fall into
the reekoning, that he have done thee any wrong, he knows how, and will
satisfy it with much advantage. If (said Master Peter) Signior Don-Quixote
would but pay me for some part of the Pieces that he has spoiled, I should be
contented, and his Worship might not be troubled in conscience; for he that
keeps that that is another man's, against the Owners will, and restores it not,
can hardly be saved.

That Is true (quoth Don-Quixote:) But hitherto, Master Peter, I know not
whether I have detained ought of yours. No? not, said Master Peter? why these
poor relikes that lie upon the hard and barren earth, who scattered and
annihilated them but the invincible force of that powerful arm? And whose
were those bodies, but mine? And with whom did I maintain my self, but with
them? Well, I now (said Don-Quixote) verily believe what I have done often,
that the Enchanters that persecute me, do nothing but put shapes really as
they are before mine eyes, and by and by truck and change them at their
pleasure. Verily my Masters, you that hear me, I tell you, all that here
passed seemed to me to be really so, and immediately that that Melisendra was
Melisendra; Don Gayf^ros, Don Gayferos, and Marsilius, Marsilius; and
Charlemain, Charlemain: And this was it that stirred up my choler; and to
accomplish my Profession of Knight Errant; my meaning was to succor those that
fled: and to this good purpose I did all that you have seen; which if it fell
out unluckily, 'twas no fault of mine, but of my wicked persecutors: yet for
all this error (though it proceeded from no malice of mine) I my self will
condemn my self in the charge; let Master Peter see what he will have for the
spoiled Pieces, and I will pay it all in present current coin of Castile.

Master Peter made him a low leg, saying; I could expect no less from the
unheard of Christianity of the most valorous Don-Quixote de la Mancha, the true
Succourer and Bulwark of all those that be in need and necessity, or wandering
Vagamunds; and now let the Venture and the Grand Sancho be Arbitrators, and
Price-setters between your Worship and me, and let them say what every torn
Piece was worth. The Venture and Sancho both agreed: And by and by Master Peter
reached up Marsilius King of Saragosa headless, and said; You see how
impossible it is for this Prince to return to his first being, and therefore,
saving your better judgments, I think fit to have for him two shillings and
threepence.

On then, quoth Don-Quixote. Then for this (quoth Master Peter) that is parted
from head to foot, taking the Emperor Charlemain up, I think two shillings
sevenpence halfpenny is little enough, Not very little quoth Sancho. Nor much
said the Venture; but moderate the bargain, and let him have half a crown.
Let him have his full asking (said Don-Quixote) for, for such a mishap as this,
we will nere stand upon three halfpence more or less, and make an end quickly
Master Peter; for it is near suppertime, and I have certain suspicions that I
shall eat. For this Puppet said M. Peter, without a nose, and an eye wanting,
of the fair Melisendra, I ask but in Justice fourteen pence halfpenny.

Nay, the Devil's in it (said Don-Quixote) if Melisendra be not now in France,
or upon the borders, at least, with her Husband; for the horse they rode on, to
my seeming, rather flew then ran; and therefore sell not me a Cat for a Coney,
presenting me here Melisendra nose less, when she (if the time require it)
is wantonly solacing with her Husband in France: God give each man his own,
Master Peter, let us have plain dealing; and so proceed. Master Peter, that
saw Don-Quixote in a wrong vain, and that he returned to his old Theme
thought yet he should not escape him, and so replied; Indeed this should not
be Melisendra, now I think on it; but some one of the Damzels that served her,
so that five pence for her will content me.

Thus he went on prizing of other torn Puppets, which the Arbitrating Judges
moderated to the satisfaction of both parties, and the whole prices of all
were, twenty one shillings and eleven pence, which when Sancho had disbursed,
Master Peter demanded over and above twelve-pence for his labor, to look the
Ape. Give it him Sancho (said Don-Quixote) not to catch his Ape, but a Monkey;
[ As was say, To catch a Fox;] and I would give five pound for a reward, to any
body that would certainly tell me, that the Lady Melisendra and Don Gayferos
were safely arrived in France, amongst their own people.

None can better tell then my Ape (said Master Peter) though the Devil
himself will scarce catch him; yet I imagine, making much of him, and hunger,
will force him to seek me to night, and by morning we shall come together.
Well, to conclude; the storm of the Motion passed, and all supped merrily, and
like good fellows, at Don-Quixotes charge; who was liberal in extremity.
Before day, the fellow with the Lances and Halberds was gone, and somewhat
after, the Scholar and the Page came to take leave of Don-Quixote, the one to
return homeward, and the other to prosecute his intended voyage, and for a
relief Don-Quixote gave him six shillings.

Master Peter would have no more to do with him; for he knew him too well. So
he got up before the Sun, and gathering the relikes of the Motion together,
and his Ape, he betook him to his Adventures. The Venture that knew not
Don-Quixote, wondered as much at his liberality, as his madness. To conclude,
Sancho paid him honestly, by his Masters order, and taking leave, about eight
of the clock they left the Vente, and went on their way, where we must leave
them; for so it is fit, that we may come to other matters pertaining to the
true declaration of this famous History.

CHAP. XXVII.
Who Master Peter and his Ape were, with the ill-successe that Don-Quixote had
in the Adventure of the Braying, which ended not so well, as he would, or
thought for.
CID Hamete, the Chronicler of this famous History, begins this Chapter with
these words: I swear like a Catholic Christian. To which the Translatour
says, That Cid his swearing like a Catholic Christian he being a Moore, as
undoubtedly he was, was no other wise to be understood, then that as the
Catholic Christian, when he swears, does or ought to swear truth, so did
he, as if he had sworn like a Catholic Christian, in what he meant to
write of Don-Quixote, especially in recounting who Master Peter and the
prophesying Ape were; that made all the Country astonished at his foretelling
things. He says then, that he who has read the former part of this History,
will have well remembered that same Gines de Passamonte, whom Don-Quixote,
amongst other Gally-slaves, freed in Sierra Morena, a benefit for which
afterward he had small thanks, and worse payment, from that wicked and
ungrateful Rowr.

This Gines de Passamonte, whom Don-Quixote called Ginesillo de Parapilla, was
he that stole Sancho's Dapple; which, because neither the manner nor the time
were put in the first part, made many attribute the fault of the Impression, to
the Authors weakness of memory. But true it is, that Gines stole him, as
Sancho slept upon his back, using the same trick and device of Brunelo's,
when as Sacripante being upon the siege of Albraca, he stole his horse from
under his legs; and after Sancho recovered him again, as was showed.

This Gines, fearful of being found by the Justices that sought after him, to
punish him for his infinite villainies and faults, that were so many and so
great, that himself made a great volume of them, determined to get him into
the Kingdom of Aragon, and so covering his left eye, to apply himself to the
office of a Puppet man; for this and juggling he was excellent at. It fell out
so, that he bought his Ape of certain captive Christians that came out of
Barbary, whom he had instructed, that upon making a certain sign, he should
leap upon his shoulder, and should mumble, or seem to do so, at least
something in his ear.

This done, before he would enter into any town with his Motion or Ape, he
informed himself in the nearest town, or where he best could, what particulars
had happened in such a place, or to such Persons, and bearing all well in mind,
the first thing he did, was to show his Motion, which was sometimes of one
story, otherwhiles of another; but all merry, delightful and familiarly known.

The sight being finished, he propounded the rarities of his Ape, telling the
People that he could declare unto them, all things past and present; but in
things to come, he had no skill: For an Answer to each Question he demanded
a shilling; but to some he did it cheaper, according as he perceived the
Demanders in case to pay him; and sometimes he came to such places as he knew
what had happened to the Inhabitants, who although they would demand nothing,
because they would not pay him; yet he would still make signs to the Ape, and
tell them the Beast had told him this or that, which fell out just by what he
had before heard, and with this he got an unspeakable name, and all men slocked
about him, and at other times (as he was very cunning) he would reply so, that
the answer fell out very fit to the questions: and since no body went about to
(...) or to press him, how his Ape did Prophesse, he gulled every one and
filled his Pouch.

As soon as ever he came into the Vente, he knew Don-Quixote and Sancho, and
all that were there; but it had cost him dear, if Don-Quixote had let his hand
fall somewhat lower, when he cut off King Marsilius his head, and destroyed all
his Chivalry, as was related in the antecedent Chapter. And this is all that
may be said of Mr. Peter and his Ape.

And returning to Don Quixote de la Manca, I say, that after he was gone out of
the Vente, he determined first of all to see the banks of the river Heber, and
all round about, before he went to the City of Saragosa, since between that and
the Justs there, he had time enough for all. Hereupon he went on his way, which
he passed two days without lighting on any thing worth writing, till the third
day, going up a ridg-way, he heard a sound of Drums, Trumpets and Guns; at
first he thought some Regiment of Soldiers passed by that way: so, to see
them, he spurred Rozinante, and got up the Ridg, and when he was at the top, he
saw (as he guessed) at the foot of it, near upon two hundred men, armed with
different sorts of Arms, to wit, Speers, Cros-bows, Partisans, Halberds and
Pikes, and some Guns, and many Targets. He came down from the high-ground, and
drew near to the Squadron, insomuch that he might distinctly perceive their
Banners, judged of their colors, and noted their Impreses, and especially one,
which was on a Standard or shred of white Satin, where was lively painted a
little Ass, like one of your Sardinian Asses, his head lifted up, his mouth
open, and his tongue out, in act and posture just as he were Braying, about him
were these two verses written in fair Letters: 'Twas not for naught that day.
The one and the other Judge did Bray.


By this device Don Quixote collected that those People belonged to the Braying
Town, and so he told Sancho, declaring likewise what was written in the
Standard; he told him also, that he that told them the Story was in the
wrong, to say they were two Aldermen that Brayed; for by the Verses of the
Standard, they were two Judges. To which Sancho answered, Sir, that breaks no
square; for it may very well be, that the Aldermen that then brayed, might come
in time to be Judges of the Town; so they may have been called by both Titles.
Howsoever, it is not material to the truth of the Story, whether the Brayers
were Aldermen or Judges, one for another, be they who they would, and a Judge
is even as likely to Bray as an Alderman.

To conclude, they perceived and knew that the Town that was mocked, went out
to skirmish with another that had too much abused them, and more then was
fitting for good neighbors. Don-Quixote went toward them, to Sancho's no
small grief, who was no friend to those Enterprises. Those of the Squadron
hemmed him in, taking him to be some one of their side. Don Quixote lifting up
his Visor, with a pleasant countenance and courage, came toward the Standard of
the Ass, and there all the chiefest of the Army gathered about him to behold
him, falling into the same admiration as all else did the first time they had
seen him, Don-Quixote that saw them attentively look on him, and no man
offering to speak to him, or ask him ought, taking hold on their silence, and
breaking his own, he raised his voice and said:

Honest friends, I desire you with all earnestness, that you interrupt not the
discourse that I shall make to you, till you shall see that I either distaste
or weary you; which if it be so, at the least sign you shall make, I will
seal up my looks and clap a gag on my tongue. All of them bade him speak what
he would; for they would hear him willingly.

Don-Quixote having this license, went on, saying; I, my friends, am a Knight
Errant, whose Exercise is Arms, whose Profession to favor those that need
favor, and to help the distressed. I have long known of your misfortune, and
the cause that every while moves you to take Arms to be revenged on your
Enemies. And having not once, but many times pondered your business in my
understanding, I find (according to the Laws of Duel) that you are deceived
to think your selves affronted; for no particular person can affront a whole
Town, except it be for defying them for Traitors in general, because he
knows not who in particular committed the Treason, for which he defied all the
Town.

We have an example of this in Don Diego Ordonnez de Lara, who defied the
whole Town of Zamora, because he was ignorant, that only Velido de Olfos
committed the treason in killing his King; so he defied them all, and the
revenge and answer concerned them all: though howsoever Don Diego was somewhat
too hasty and too forward; for it was needless for him to have defied the
Dead, or the Waters, or the Corn, or the Children unborn, with many other
trifles there mentioned: but let it go, for when choler over-flows, the
tongue has neither Father, Governor, or Guide that may correct it. This being
so then, that one particular person cannot affront a Kingdom, Province, City,
Commonwealth, or Town only, it is manifest, that the revenge of defiance for
such as affront is needless, since it is none; for it were a goodly matter
sure that those of the Town of Reloxa should every foot go out to kill those
that abuse them so: Or that your Cazoteros, Verengeneros, Vallenatos, Xanoneros
[Severall nicknames given to Towns in Spain, upon long tradition, and too
tedious to be put in a margent,] or others of these kinds of nicknames that
are common in every Boys mouth, and the ordinary sort of People: 'twere very
good I say, that all these famous Towns should be ashamed, and take revenge,
and run with their Swords continually drawn like Sack buts, for every slender
Quarrel. No, no, God forbid: Men of wisdom and well governed Commonwealths
ought to take Arms for four things, and so to endanger their Persons lives and
estates: First, To defend the Catholic Faith: Secondly, Their Lives; which is
according to Divine and Natural Law: Thirdly, To defend their Honor, Family,
and Estates: Fourthly, To serve their Prince in a lawful war; And if we
will, we may add a fifth (that may serve for a second) To defend their Country.
To these five capital causes, may be joined many others, just and reasonable,
that may oblige men to take Arms: But to take them for trifles, and things
that are rather fit for laughter and pastime then for any affront, it seems
that he who takes them wants his judgment. Besides, to take an unjust revenge
(indeed nothing can be just by way of revenge) is directly against Gods Law
which we profess, in which we are commanded to do well to our enemies, and
good to those that hate us; a Commandment that though it seem difficult to
fulfill, yet it is not only to those that know less of God then the world, and
more of the slesh then the Spirit; for Jesus Christ, true God and man, who
never lied, neither could, nor can, being our Lawgiver, said, That his Yoke
was sweet and his Burden light; so he would command us nothing that should be
unpossible for us to fulfill: So that, my Masters, you are tied both by Laws
Divine and humane to be pacified.

The Devil take me (thought Sancho to himself at this instant) if this Master
of mine be not a Divine; or if not not, as like one as one egg is to another.

Don-Quixote took breath a while, and seeing them still attentive, had
proceeded in his discourse, but that Sancho's conceitednesse came betwixt him
and home, who seeing his Master pause, took his turn, saying:

My Master Don-Quixote de la Mancha, sometimes called The Knight of the
sorrowful Countenance, and now The Knight of the Lions, is a very judicious
Gentleman, speaks Latin and his mother tongue as well as a Bachelour of Arts,
and in all he handles or advises, proceeds like a man of Arms, and has all
the Laws and Statutes of that you call Duel, ad unguem: therefore there is no
more to be done, but to govern your selves according to his direction, and let
me bear the blame if you do amiss. Besides, as you are now told it is a folly
to be ashamed to hear one Bray; for I remember when I was a Boy, I could have
brayed at any time I listed, without any bodies hinderance, which I did so
truly and cunningly, that when I Brayed, all the Asses in the Town would
answer me; and for all this I was held to be the son of honest Parents, and
though for this rare quality I was envied by more then four of the proudest
of my Parish, I cared not two straws; and that you may know I say true, do but
stay and hearken; for this Science is like swimming, once known never
forgotten: so clapping his hand to his nose he began to Bray so strongly that
the Valleys neer-hand resounded again. But one of them that stood nearest him,
thinking he had flouted them, lifted up a good Bat he had in his hand, and
gave him such a blow, that he tumbled him to the ground.

Don-Quixote, that saw Sancho so evil entreated, set upon him that did it,
with his Lance in his hand; but so many come betwixt, that it was not possible
for him to be revenged: rather seeing a cloud of stones coming toward
himself, and that a thousand bent Crosse-bowes began to threaten him, and no
less quantity of Gunnes; turning Rozinantes Reins, as fast as he could
gallop he got from among them, recommending himself heartily to God, to free
him from that danger, and fearing every foot, lest some Bullet should enter
him behind, and come out at his breast: so he still went fetching his breath,
to see if it failed him. But they of the Squadron were satisfied when they saw
him fly, and so shot not at him. Sancho they set upon his Ass (scarce yet
come to himself) and let him go after his Master, not that he could tell how
to guide him; but Dapple followed Rozinantes steps, without whom he was no body.

Don-Quixote being now a pretty way off, looked back, and saw that Sancho was
coming, and marked that no body followed him. Those of the Squadron were there
till dark night, and because their Enemies came not to Battle with them, they
returned home to their Town, full of mirth and jollitie: And if they had
known the ancient custom of the Grecians, they would have raised a Trophie in
that place.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of things that Benengeli relates, which he that reads shall know, if he read
them with attention.
WHen the Valiant man turns his back, the advantage over him is manifest, and
it is the part of wise men to reserve themselves to better occasions: This
truth was verified in Don-Quixote, who giving way to the fury of the people,
and to the ill intentions of that angry Squadron, took his heels, and without
remembering Sancho, or the danger he left him in, got himself so far as he
might seem to be safe. Sancho followed laid a-thwart upon his Ass, as has
been said: At last he over-took him, being now come to himself; and coming
near, he fell off his Dapple at Rozinantes feet, all sorrowful bruised and
beaten.. Don-Quixote alighted to search his wounds; but finding him whole from
top to toe, very angrily he said, You must Bray with a plague to you; and
where have you found that it is good naming the halter in the hanged man's house?
To your Bray music what counterpoint could you expect but Bat-blows? And
Sancho, you may give God thanks, that since they blessed you with a cudgel,
they had not made the per signum crucis on you with a Scemiter.

I know not what to answer (quoth Sancho) for me thinks I speak at my back;
pray let us be gone from hence, and I Will no more braying; yet I cannot but say,
that your Knights Errant can fly and leave their faithful Squires to be
bruised like Privet by their enemies.

To retire is not to fly (said Don-Quixote) for know Sancho, that Valor that
is not founded upon the Bassis of Wisdom, is styled Temerity, and the rash
man's actions are rather attributed to good fortune then courage. So that I
confess I retired, but fled not, and in this have imitated many valiant men,
that have reserved themselves for better times; and Histories are full of
these, which because now they would be tedious to me, and unprofitable to thee,
I relate them not at present.

By this time Sancho, with Don-Quixotes help, got to horse, and Don-Quixote
mounted Rozinante, and by little and little, they had gotten into a little
Elme-grove, some quarter of a league off; now and then Sancho would fetch a
most deep Heigh ho^ and dolorous sighs. And Don-Quixote demanding the reason
of his pitiful complaints, he said, that from the point of his backbone, to
the top of his crown, he was so sore th^^ he knew not what to do. The cause
of that pain undoubtedly (quoth Don-Quixote) is, that as the cudgel with
which they banged thee was long and slender, it lighted upon those parts of thy
back all along that grieve thee; and if it had been thicker, it had grieved
thee more. Truly (quoth Sancho) you have resolved me of a great doubt, and in
most delicate terms declared it to me. Body of me, was the cause of my
grief so concealed that you must needs tell me that all of me was sore
where the cudgel lighted? If my ankles did pain me, I warrant you would
riddle the cause of it; but it is poor ridling to tell that my bruising grieves
me. In Faith, in faith, Master mine, other men's ills are slightly regarded, and
every day I discover Land, and see how little I can expect from your service;
for if at this time you suffered me to be dry beaten, we shall come a
hundred and a hundred times to the Blanket-tossing you wot of, and other
childish tricks, which if they now lighted on my shoulders, they will after
come out at mine eyes. It were a great deal better for me, but that I am a
beast, and shall never do ought well while I live. It were a great deal
better (I say again) for me to get me home to my Wife and Children, to
maintain and bring them up with that little God has given me, and not to
follow you up and down these hy-waies, drinking ill, and eating worse. And for
your Bed, good honest Squire, even count me out seven foot of good earth; and
if you will have any more, take as many more; for you may feed at pleasure,
stretch your self at your case, I would the first that made stitch in Knight
Errantry were burned, or beaten to powder, or at least he that first would be
Squire to such fools, as all your Knights-Errant in former times have been, of
the present I say nothing; for your self being one, I respect them, and
because I know that you know an Ace more then the Devil in all you speak or
think.

I durst venture a good wager with thee Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote,) that now
thou talkest and no body controules thee, thou feel no pain in all thy
Body: Talk on, child mine, all that is in thy mind, or comes to thy Mouth,
for so thou be not grieved, I will be pleased with the distaste that thy
impertinencies might give me. And if you desire so much to be at home with
your Wife and Children, God forbid I should gain say it: you have money of
mine, and see how long it is since our third sally from home, and how much is
due to you for every Month, and pay your self.

When I served (quoth Sancho): Tome Carrasco, Father to the Bachelor Carrasco,
whom you know well, I had two Ducats a month besides my victuals: of you I
know not how much I shall have, though I am sure it is a greater toil to be a
Squire to a Knight Errant, then to serve a rich Husbandman; for indeed, we
that serve Husbandmen, though we labor never so much in the day time, if the
worst come to the worst, at night we sup with the Pottage-pot, and lie in a
bed, which I have not done ever since I served you, except it were that short
time we were at Don Diego de Miranda's house, and after when I had the cheer
of the skimmings of Camacho's pots, and when I ate and drunk and slept at
Basilius his house; all the rest has been upon the cold ground, to the open
air, and subject, as you would say, to the inclemencies of the Heavens, only
living upon bits of cheese, and scraps of bread, and drinking water, sometimes
of brooks, sometimes of Springs, which we met withal by the ways we went.

I confess, Sancho, (quoth Don-Quixote) that all thou say may be true; how
much more think thou should I give thee then Tome Carrasco?

You shall please me (quoth Sancho) with twelve pence more a month, and that
concerning my wages for my service: but touching your word and promise you gave
me, That I should have the Government of an Island, it were fit you added the
the other three shillings, which in all make up fifteen.

It is very well (said Don Quixote) and according to the wages that you have
allotted unto your self, it is now twenty five days since our last sallie;
reckon Sancho, so much for so much, and see how much is due to you, and pay
your self, as I have bidden you.

Body of me (said Sancho) you are clean out of the reckoning; for to^^hing the
promise of governing the Island, you must reckon from the time you promised,
till this present. Why, how long is it (quoth he) since I promised it? If I
be not forgetful (said Sancho) it is now some twenty years wanting two or
three days. Don-Quixote gave himself a good clap on the forehead, and began
to laugh heartily, saying; Why, my being about Sierra Morena, and our whole
travells were in less then two months, and do thou say it was twenty years
since I promised thee the Island? I am now of opinion, that thou would have
all the money thou have of mine consumed in paying thee wages: which if it be
so, and that thou art so minded, from hence forward take it, much good may it
do thee; for so I may not be troubled with such a Squire, I shall be glad to
be poor, and without a farthing. But tell me thou Prevaricator of the Squirely
Laws of Knight Errantry; where have thou ever seen or read of any Squire
belonging to Knight Errant, that has capitulated with his Master to give him
thus much or so much: Lanch, lanch, thou base lewd fellow, thou Hobgoblin;
Lanch, I say, into the Mare magnum of their Histories; and if thou find that
any Squire have said, or so much as imagined what thou have said, I will give
thee leave to brand my forehead; and to boot, to seal me with four tucks in the
mouth: [ A trick to give a tuck with the thumb upon ones lips, as fresh men
are used in a University:] Turn thy reins or thine Asses halter, and get thee
to thine house; for thou shall not go a step further with me. Oh ill given
bread, and ill placed promises! Oh man, more beast then man! now when I thought
to have put thee into a fortune, and such a one, that, in spite of thy wife,
thou should have been styled My Lord: Thou leavest me: now do thou go,
when I had a purpose to have made thee Lord of the best Island in the world.
Well, well, as thou thy self have said many times, The honey is not for the
Asses mouth; An Ass thou art, an Ass thou will be, and an Ass thou shall
die, and till then will thou remain so, before thou fallest into the reckoning
that thou art a Beast.

Sancho beheld Don Quixote earnestly all the while he thus rated him, and was
so moved that the tears stood in his eyes, and with a dolorous low voice he
said; Master mine, I confess, that to be altogether an Ass, I want nothing
but a tail; if you will put one on me, I will be contented, and will serve
you like an Ass all days of my life. Pardon me Sir, and pity my youth, and
consider my folly; for if I speak much, it proceeds rather out of simplicity
then knavery: Who erres and mends, to God himself commends.

I would be sorry, little Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) but that thou should
mingle some by-pretty Proverb in thy Dialogue. Well, I Will pardon thee for this
once, upon condition hereafter thou mend; and show not thy self so covetous,
but that thou rouse up thy Spirits, and encourage thy self with hope of the
accomplishment of my promise; for better late then not at all. Sancho answered
him, he would, though it were to make a virtue of necessity.

Hereupon they put into the Elme-Grove, and Don-Quixote got to the foot of an
Elm, and Sancho to the foot of a Beech; for these kind of Trees and such like
have always feet, but no hands. Sancho had an ill night on it; for his Bat
blow made him more sensible in the cold. Don-Quixote fell into his usual
imaginations; yet they both slept, and by day-peep they were on their way,
searching after the famous banks of Heber, where they happened upon what shall
be told in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the famous Adventure of the Enchanted Bark.
DON Quixote and Sancho, by their computation, two days after they were out of
the Elm Grove, came to the River Heber, whose sight was very delightsome to
Don-Quixote; for first he contemplated on the amenitie of those banks, the
cleernesse of the water, the gentle current and the abundancy of the liquid
Cristall, whose pleasing sight brought a thousand amorous thoughts into his
head, especially he fell to think what he had seen in Montesinos's Cave: for
though Master Peter's Ape had told him, that part of it was true, and part
false, he leaned more to the truth then to the other; contrary to Sancho, who
held all as false as Falsehood it self.

As they were thus going on, Don-Quixote might see a little Boat without Oars
or any other kind of Tackling, which was tied by the brink of the River to a
Trees stump on the bank. Don-Quixote looked round about him, but could see no
body; so without more ado, he alighted from Rozinante, and commanded Sancho
to do the like from Dapple, and that he should tie both the Beast very well
to the root of an Elm or Willow there. Sancho demanded of him the cause of
that sudden lighting, and of that tying. Don-Quixote made answer; Know Sancho,
that this Boat thou see directly (for it can be nothing else) calls and
invites me to go and enter into it, to give aid to some Knight, or other
personage of rank and note that is in distress: for this is the style of Books
of Knighthood, and of Enchanters that are there intermingled, that when any
Knight is in some danger, that he cannot be freed from it, but by the hand of
some other Knight, although the one be distant from the other two or three
thousand leagues or more, they either snatch him into a cloud, or provide him a
Boat to enter in, and in the twinkling of an eye, either carry him through the
air, or through the Sea, as they list, and where his assistance is needful: So
that Sancho, this Boat is put here to the same effect; and this is as clear as
day, and before we go, tie Dapple and Rozinante together, and let us on in
Gods name; for I will not fail to imbarque my self though barefoot Friars
should entreat me.

Well, seeing it is so (said Sancho) and that you will every foot run into these
(I know not what I shall call them) fopperies, there is no way but to obey and
lay down the neck; according to the Proverb, Do as thy Master commands thee,
and sit down at Table with him: But for all that, for discharge of my
conscience, let me tell you, that (me thinks) that is no Enchanted Boat, but
one that belongs to some Fishermen of the River; for here the best Saboga's in
the world are taken.

This he spoke whilst he was tying his Beasts, leaving them to the
protection and defense of Enchanters, which grived him to the soul. Don-Quixote
bade him he should not be troubled for the leaving those Beasts; for he that
should carry them through such longinque ways and regions, would also look to
the other. I understand not your Lognick (quoth Sancho) neither have I heard
such a word in all the days of my life. Longinque (said Don-Quixote) that is,
far, remote: and no marvel thou understandest not that word; for thou art
nor bound to the understanding of Latin, though ye have some that presume to
know when they are ignorant. Now they are bound (said Sancho) what shall we
do next?

What? (said Don-Quixote:) bless our selves and weight anchor, I mean, let us
imbarque our selves, and cut the rope by which this Boat is tied: So leaping
into it, and Sancho following him, he cut the cord, and the Boat fair and
softly fell off from the Bank; and when Sancho saw himself about a two rods
length within the River, he began to tremble, fearing his perdition: but
nothing so much troubled him as to hear Dapple-bray, and to see that Rozinante
strugled to unloose himself; and he told his Master; Dapple brayes and
condoles for our absence, Rozinante strives to be at Liberty to throw
himself after us. Oh most dear friends, remain you there in safety, and may
the madness that severs us from you, converted into Repentance, bring us back
to your Presence: And with that he began to weep so bitterly, that
Don-Quixote, all moody and choleric, began to cry out; What makes thee
fear, thou cowardly Impe? What cryest thou for, thou heart of Curds? Who
persecutes thee? Who baits thee thou soul of a Milk-sop? Or what want thou
in the midst of all abundance? Art thou happily to go barefoot over the
Riphaean Mountains? Rather upon a seat like an Archduke, through the calm
current of this delightful River; from whence we shall very quickly pass
into the maine Sea: But hitherto we have gone and sailed some seven or eight
hundred Leagues, and if I had an Astrol^be here, to take the height of the
Pole, I could tell thee how far we have gone, though, either my knowledge is
small, or we have now, or shall quickly pass the Aequinoctiall-Line, which
divides and cuts the two contraposed Poles in equal distance.

And when you come to this Line you speak of, how far shall we have gone? A
great way (answered Don-Quixote;) For of three hundred and sixty Degrees,
which the whole Globe contains of Land and Water, according to Ptolomies
computation, who was the greatest Cosmographer known, we shall have gone the
half, when we come to the Line I have told you of. Verily (quoth Sancho) you
have brought me a pretty witness to confirm your saying, To. ly-my and
Comtation [ Mistakes of the words, Ptolomeo and Computo, for so it is in the
Spanish] and I know not what. Don-Quixote laughed at Sanchoes interpretation he
had given to the name, and so the Computation and account of the Cosmographer
Ptolo^eus, and said to him; You shall understand Sancho, that when the
Spaniards, and those that imbarque themselves at Cadiz, to go to the East
Indies, one of the greatest signs they have, to know whether they have passed
the aequinoctial, is, that all men that are in the Ship, their Lice die upon
them, and not one remains with them, not in the Vessel, though they would give
their weight in gold for him: so that Sancho, thou may put thy hand to thy
thigh, and if thou meet with any live thing, we shall be out of doubt; if thou
find nothing, then we have passed the Line.

I cannot believe any of this quoth Sancho, but yet I will do what you will
have me, though I know no necessity for these trials, since I see with these
eyes that we have not gone five rods lengths from the Bank, for there
Rozinante and Dapple are, in the same places where we left them, and looking
well upon the matter, as I now do, I swear by Me, that we neither move nor go
faster then an Ant.

Make the trial that I bad you, and care for no other; for thou know not,
what Columns are, what Lines, Paralels, Zodiacks, Clyptilks, Poles, Solstices,
Aequinoctials, Planets, Signs, Points and Measures, of which the Caelestiall
and Terrestrial Spheres are composed: For if thou knew all these, or any
part of them, thou might plainly see what Paralels we have cut, what Signs
we have seen, and what Images we have left behind, and are leaving now. And
let me wish thee again that thou search and feel thy self: for I do not think
but that thou art as clean as a sheet of white smooth Paper.

Sancho began to feel, and coming softly and warily with his hand to the
left side of his neck, he lifted up his Head, and said to his Master; Either
your experience is false, or else we are not come near the place you speak
of, by many Leagues. Why (quoth Don-Quixote) have thou met with something? I
with some things (said he) and shaking his fingers, he washed his whole hand
in the River; by which, and in the Current, the boat softly slid along, without
being moved by any secret influence, or hidden Enchantment, but the very course
it self of the water, as yet soft and easy.

By this they discovered two great Water-Milles in the midst of the River:
And Don-Quixote, as soon as he saw them, cried aloud to Sancho; see thou
Friend, that City, Castle or Fortress, that shows it self, where some
Knight is sure oppressed, or some Queen or Princess in ill plight, for whose
succor I am brought hither?

What the Devil of City, Castle or Fortress, Sir, do you talk of (quoth
Sancho) do you not see that those are Water-Mills, in the River to grind
Corn? Peace Sancho (said he) for though they look like Water-Milles, yet
they are not, and I have told thee already, that these Enchantments chop and
change things out of their natural being; I say not that they change them out
of one being into another really, but in appearance, as was seen by experience
in the transformation of Dulcinea, the only refuge of my hopes.

Now the Boat being gotten into the midst of the Current, began to moove
somewhat faster then before. They of the Mills, that saw the Boat come down
the River, and that it was now even gotten into the swift stream of the
wheels, many of them came running out with long poles to stay it: and as their
faces and clothes were all covered with meale-dust, they made a strange show,
and cried out, saying; Divills of men, whither go you? Are you mad to drown
your selves, or be beaten to pieces against these wheels?

Did not I tell thee Sancho (said Don-Quixote) then, that we should come where
I should show the force of mine Arm? look what wicked uncouth fellows come to
encounter me; look what a troop of Hobgoblins oppose themselves against me;
look what ugly visages play the Bull-beggers with us: Now you shall see, you
Rascals; and standing up in the Boat, he began aloud to threaten the Millers,
saying; You base Scumme and ill-advised, free and deliver that person, which is
in your Fortress or Prison oppressed, be he high or low, or of what sort or
quality soever; for I am Don-Quixote de la Mancha, otherwise called The Knight
of the Lions, for whom the happy ending of this Adventure is reserved by order
of the high Heavens: and this said, he laid hand to his sword, and began to
fence in the air against the Millers, who hearing, but not understanding those
madnesses, stood with their poles to stay the Boat, which was now entering the
source and channel of the wheels. Sancho kneeled devoutly upon his knees,
praying Heaven to free him from so manifest a danger, which succeeded happily,
by the quickness and skill of the Millers, who opposing their staves to the
Boat, stayed it: but so, that they overturned it, and Don-Quixote and Sancho
topled into the River: but it was well for Don-Quixote, who could swim like a
Goose, though the weight of his Arms carried him twice to the bottom, and had
it not been for the Millers, who leaped into the water, and pulled them out
both, as if they had waighed them up, there they had both perished.

When they were both on land, more wet then thirsty, Sancho, upon his knees,
with joined hands, and his eyes nailed to Heaven, prayed to God with a large
and devout prayer, to free him from thence-forward, from the rash desires and
enterprises of his Master. And now the Fishermen came, the Owners of the Boat,
which was broken to pieces by the wheels, who seeing it spoiled, began to
dis-robe Sancho, and to demand payment of Don-Quixote, who very patiently, as
if he had done nothing, said to the Millers and Fishermen, that he would
very willingly pay for the Boat, upon condition they should freely deliver him,
without fraud or guile, the person or persons that were oppressed in their
Castle.

What person, or what Castle madman? (said one of the Millers) will you, trow,
carry away those that came hither to grind their corn? Enough, thought
Don-Quixote to himself, here a man may preach in a wilderness, to reduce a
base people to a good work. In this Adventure two deep Enchanters have met.
And the one disturbes the other: the one provided me the Bark, and the other
overthrew me out of it, God help us, all this world is tricks and devices, one
contrary to the other; I can do no more: and raising his voice, he went on,
saying; Friends, whosoever you are, locked up in this prison, pardon me; for,
by my ill fortune and yours, I cannot deliver you from your pain: this
Adventure is kept and reserved for some other Knight. When he had said this,
he agreed with the fishers, and paid 25. shillings for the boat, which Sancho
gave with a very good will, saying, With two of these boat-trickes we shall
sink our whole stock.

The Fishermen and the Millers were in a great admiration, to see two such
strange shapes, quite from the ordinary fashion of other men, and never
understood to what purpose Don-Quixote used all those discourses to them; so
holding them for madmen, they left them, and got to their Milles, and the
Fishers to their quarters. Don-Quixote and Sancho like beasts turn to their
beasts: and this end had the Adventure of the Enchanted Bark.

CHAP. XXX.
What happened to Don-Quixote with the fair Huntresse.
VEry melancholy and ill at ease went the Knight and Squire to horseback,
especially Sancho, for it grieved him at the soul to meddle with the stock of
their money; for it seemed to him, that to part with any thing from thence, was
to part with his eye balls. To be brief, without speaking a word, to horse
they went, and left the famous river. Don-Quixote, buried in his amorous
cogitations, and Sancho in those of his preferment; for as yet he thought he
was far enough off from obtaining it: for although he were a fool, yet he
well perceived, that all his Masters actions, or the greatest part of them were
idle: so he sought after some occasion, that without entering into farther
reckonings, or leavetaking with his Master, he might one day get out of his
clutches, and go home, but fortune ordered matters contrary to his fear. It
fell out then, that the next day about Sunsetting, and as they were going out
of a wood, Don-Quixote spreads his eyes about a green meadow, and at one end of
it saw company, and coming near, he saw they were Falconers; he came nearer,
and amongst them beheld a gallant Lady upon her Palfrey, or milke-white Nagge,
with green furniture, and her Saddlepummell of silver. The Lady her self was
all clad in green, so brave and rich, that bravery it self was transformed
into her. On her left hand she carried a Soare-Falcon, a sign that made
Don-Quixote think she was some great Lady, and Mistress to all the rest, as
true it was: so he cried out to Sancho; Run, son Sancho, and tell that
Lady on the Palfrey with the Soare-hawke, that I, The Knight of the Lions, do
kiss her most beautiful hands; and if her magnificence give me leave. I will
receive her commands, and be her servant to the uttermost of my power, that
her highness may please to command me in; and take heed, Sancho, how thou
speak, and have a care thou mix not thy Embassage with some of those
Proverbs of thine. Tell me of that? as if it were now the first time that I
have carried Embassies to high and mighty Ladies in my life? Except it were
that thou carriedst to Dulcinea (quoth Don-Quixote) I know not of any other
thou have carried, at least whilst thou were with me. That Is true, said
Sancho; but a good play master needs no surety: and where there is plenty, the
ghests are not empty, I mean, there is no telling nor advising me ought; for
of all things I know a little. I believe it (said Don-Quixote) get thee gone in
good time, and God speed thee.

Sancho went on, putting Dapple out of his pace with a Careere, and coming
where the fair Huntresse was, alighting, he kneeled down, and said; Fair
Lady, that Knight you see there, called The Knight of the Lions, is my Master,
and I am a Squire of his, whom at his house they call Sancho Panca; this said
Knight of the Lions, who not long since was called, The Knight of the
sorrowful Countenance, sends me to tell your Greatness, That you be pleased
to give him leave, that with your liking, good will, and consent, he put in
practice his desire, which is no other (as he says, and I believe) then to
serve your lofty high-flying beauty: [ For so it is in the Spanish to make the
simple Squire speak absurdly enough, for in stead of Alteca, the Author makes
him say Altaneria:] and if your Ladyship give him leave, you shall do a thing
that may redound to your good, and he shall receive a most remarkable favor
and content.

Truly honest Squire, said the Lady, thou have delivered thy Embassage with
all the circumstances that such an Embassage requires: Rise, rise, for the
Squire of so renowned a Knight as he of The sorrowful Countenance (of whom
we have here special notice) it is not fit should kneel: Rise up friend, and
tell your Master that he come near on Gods name, that the Duke my Husband and
I may do him service at a house of pleasure we have here.

Sancho rose up astonished, as well at the good Ladies beauty as her courtship
and courtesy, especially for that she told him she had notice of his Master,
The Knight of the sorrowful Countenance; for in that she called him not
Knight of the Lions, it was because it was so lately put upon him. The Duchess
asked him (for as yet we know not of what place she was Duchess) tell me,
Sir Squire, is not this your Master one of whom there is a History printed, and
goes by the name of, The ingenious Gentleman, Don-Quixote de la Mancha, the
Lady of whose life is likewise one Dulcinea del Toboso? The very self-same
(said Sancho) and that Squire of his that is or should be in the History,
called Sancho Panca am I, except I were changed in my cradle, I mean that I
were changed in the Press. I am glad of all this (quoth the Duchess:) go,
brother Panca, and tell your Master that he is welcome to our Dukedom, and
that no news could have given me greater content. Sancho, with this so
acceptable an answer, with great pleasure returned to his Master, to whom he
recounted all that the great Lady had said to him, extolling to the Heavens
her singular beauty, with his rusticall terms, her affablenesse and courtesy.
Don-Quixote pranked it in his saddle, sat stiff in his stirrops, fitted his
Visor, rowsed up Rozinante, and with a comely boldness went to kiss the
Duchesses hands, who causing the Duke her Husband to be called, told him,
whilst Don-Quixote was coming, his whole Embassy: So both of them having
read his first part, and understood by it his besotted humor, attended him
with much pleasure and desire to know him, with a purpose to follow his humor,
and to give way to all he should say, and to treat with him as a Knight
Errant, as he should be with them, with all the accustomed ceremonies in
Books of Knight Errantry, which they had read, and were much affected with.

By this Don-Quixote came with his Visor pulled up, and making show to alight,
Sancho came to have held his stirrup: but he was so unluckie, that as he was
lighting from Dapple, one of his feet caught upon a halter of the pack-saddle,
so that it was not possible for him to disintangle himself, but hung by it
with his mouth and his breast to the ground-ward. Don-Quixote who used not to
alight without his stirrops being held, thinking Sancho was already come to
hold it, lighted suddenly down, but brought saddle and all to ground (belike
being ill gyrt) to his much shame, and curses inwardly laid upon the unhappie
Sancho, that had still his leg in the stocks. The Duke commanded some of his
Falconers to help the Knight and Squire, who raised Don-Quixote in ill plight
with his fall, and limping as well as he could, he went to kneel before the
two Lordings: but the Duke would not by any means consent, rather alighting
from his horse he embraced Don-Quixote, saying:

I am very sorry Sir Knight of the sorrowful Countenance, that your first
fortune has been so ill in my ground; but the carelessness of Squires is often
the cause of worse successes. It is impossible, volorous Prince, that any
should be bad, since I have seen you, although my fall had cast me to the
profound Abisme, since the glory of seeing you would have drawn me out and
raised me up. My Squire (a curse light on him) unties his tongue better to
speak maliciously, then he gyrts his horses saddle to sit firmly: but
howsoever I am down or up, on foot or on horseback, I will always be at
yours and my Lady the Duchesses service, your worthy Consort, the worthy Lady
of beauty, and Princess of universal courtesy. Softly, my Signior (
Don-Quixote de la Mancha) quoth. the Duke, for where my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso
is present, there is no reason other beauties should be praised.

Now Sancho Panca was free from the noose, and being at hand, before his Master
could answer a word, he said, it cannot be denied but affirmed, that my Lady
Dulcinea del Toboso is very fair; but where we least think there goes the
Hare away; for I have heard say, that she you call Nature, is like a Potter
that makes Vessels of Clay, and he that makes a handsome Vessel, may make two
or three, or an hundred; this I say, that you may know my Lady the Duchess
comes not a whit behind my Mistress the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso. Don-Quixote
turned to the Duchess, and said; Your Greatness may suppose that never any
Knight in the world had ever such a prater to his Squire, nor a more conceited
then mine, and he will make good what I say, if your Highness shall at any
time be pleased to make Trial. To which quoth the Duchess, that honest
Sancho may be conceited, I am very glad, a sign he is wise; for your pleasant
conceits, Signior, as you very well know, rest not in dull brains, and since
Sancho is wittd and conceited, from hence forward I confirm him to be
discreet: And a Prater added Don-Quixote. So much the better (said the Duke)
for many conceits cannot be expressed in few words, and that we may not spend
the time in many, come, Sir Knight of the sorrowful Countenance. Of the Lions,
your Highness must say quoth Sancho, for now we have no more sorrowful
Countenance. And now let the Lions bear countenance. The Duke proceeded, I say
let the Knight of the Lions come to my Castle, which is near here, where he
shall have the entertainment that is justly due to so high a Personage, and
that that the Duchess and I are wont to give to Knights Errant that come to us.

By this time Sancho had made ready and gyrded Rozinantes saddle well; and
Don-Quixote mounting him, and the Duke upon a goodly Horse, set the Duchess in
the middle, and they went toward the Castle. The Duchess commanded that Sancho
should ride by her, for she was infinitely delighted to hear his discretions.
Sancho was easily entreated, and weaved himself between the three, and made a
fourth in their conversation. The Duke and Duchess were much pleased, who held
it for a great good fortune, to have lodged in their Castle such a Knight
Errant, and such a Squire Erred,

CHAP. XXXI.
That treats of many and great Affairs.
GREAT was the joy that Sancho conceived to see himself a favorite to the
Duchess, as he thought; for it shaped out unto him, that he should find in
her Castle, as much as in Don Diegoes, or that of Basilius; for he was always
affected with a plentiful life, and so laid hold upon Occasions lock, ever
when it was presented. The History then tells us, that before they came to the
house of Pleasure or Castle; the Duke went before, and gave order to all his
followers how they should behave themselves toward Don-Quixote, who as he
came on with the Duchess to the Castle gates, there came out two Lackyes, or
Palfrey-boyes, clothed down to the feet in coats like night-gownes, of fine
Crimson Satin, and taking Don-Quixote in their arms, without hearing or
looking on him they said; Go, and let your greatness help my Lady to alight.
Don-Quixote did so, and there was great complementing betwixt both about it;
but in the end the, Duchesses earnestness prevailed, and she would not
descend or alight from her Palfrey, but in the Dukes arms, saying, That she
was too unworthy to be so unprofitable a burden to so high a Knight. At length
the Duke helped her: and as they entered a great Base Court, there came two
beautiful Damzells, and cast upon Don-Quixotes shoulders a fair mantle of
finest Scarlet; and in an instant all the Leads of the Courts and Entries were
thronged with men and maidservants of the Dukes, who cried aloud; Welcome, oh
Flower and Cream of Knights Errant, and all or most of them sprinkled pots of
sweet water upon Don-Quixote, and upon the Duke, all which made Don-Quixote
admire; and never till then did he truly believe that he was a Knight Errant
really and not fantastically, seeing he was used just as he had read Knights
Errant were in former times.

Sancho, forsaking Dapple, showed himself to the Duchess, and entered into the
Castle; but his conscience pricking him, that he had left his Ass alone, he
came to a reverend old waiting woman that came out amongst others to wait upon
the Duchess and very softly spoke to her, Mistress Gonsalez, or what is your
name forsooth? Donna Rodriguez de Grishalua, said the waiting woman; what would
you have brother with me? To which (quoth^ Sancho) I pray will you do me the
favor as to go out at the Castle gate, where you shall find a Dapple Ass of
mine, I pray will you see him put, or put him your self in the Stable; for the
poor wretch is fearful, and cannot by any means endure to be alone. If the
Master (quoth she) be as wise as the man, we shall have a hot bargain on it:
get you gone with a Murrin to you, and him that brought you hither, and look to
your Ass your self; for the waiting women in this house are not used to such
drudgeries. Why truly (quoth Sancho) I have heard my Master say, who is the
very Wizard of Histories, telling that story of Lanzarote, when he came from
Britain, that Ladies Looked to him and waiting women to his Courser; and
touching my Ass in particular, I would not change him for Lanzarotes horse.
Brother (quoth she) if you be a Jester, keep your wit till you have use of
it, for those that will pay you, for I have nothing but this* figg to give you:
[*La higa: a word of disgrace.] Well yet (said Sancho) the figg is like to be
ripe, for you will not lose the Prima vista of your years by a peep less.
Son of a Whore (said the waiting woman all in^ensed with choler) whether I
am old or no, God knows, I shall give him account, and not to thee, thou
Rascal, that stinkest of Garlike. All this she spoke so loud that the
Duchess heard her, who turning and seeing the woman so altered, and her eyes
so bloody red, she asked her with whom she was angry?

Here (said she) with this Idiot, that has earnestly entreated me to put up
his Ass in the Stable that is at the Castle gate, giving me for an instance
that they have done so I know not where, that certain Ladies looked to one
Lanzarote, and waiting women to his Horse, and to mend the matter, in mannerly
terms calls me old one: [Vicia: a name that a woman in Spain cannot endure to
hear, though she were as old as Methusalem.] That would more disgrace me
(quoth the Duchess) then all he should say; and speaking to Sancho, she
said, Look you friend Sancho, Donna Rodriguez is very young, and that Stole
she wears is more for authority and for the fashion, then for her years. A pox
on the rest of my years I have to live (quoth Sancho) if I meant her any ill; I
only desired the kindness for the love I bear to mine Ass, and because I
thought I could not recommend him to a more charitable person then Mistress
Rodriguez Don-Quixote, that heard all, said; Are these discourses, Sancho, fit
for this place? Sir (said Sancho) let every man express his wants wheresoever
he be: Here I remembered my Dapple, and here I spoke of him; and if I had
remembered him in the Stable, there I would have spoken.

To this (quoth the Duke) Sancho is in the right, and there is no reason to
blame him: Dapple shall have Provander, as much as he will; and let Sancho
take no care, he shall be used as well as his own person. With these
discourses, pleasing unto all but Don-Quixote, they went up stairs, and brought
Don-Quixote into a goodly Hall, hung with rich cloth of Gold and Tissue; six
Damzels unarmed him, and served for Pages, all of them taught and instructed by
the Duke and Duchess what they should do, and how they should behave
themselves toward Don Quixote, that he might imagine and see they used him
like a Knight Errant.

Don-Quixote once un-armed, was in his straight Trouses and Doublet of Chamois,
dry, high and lanke, with his Jaws, that within and without bussed one
another; a picture, that if the Damzels that served him, had not had a care to
hold in their laughter (which was one of the precise orders their Lords had
given them) had burst with laughing. They desired him to uncloathe himself to
shift a shirt; but he would by no means consent saying; that honesty was as
proper to a Knight Errant, as valor. Notwithstanding, he bad them give a shirt
to Sancho, and locking himself up with him in a chamber, where was a rich bed,
he plucked off his clothes, and put on the shirt, and as Sancho and he were
alone, he thus spoke to him.

Tell me (modern Jester and old Jolt-head) is it a fit thing, to dishonor
and affront so venerable an old waiting woman, and so worthy to be respected as
she? Was that a fit time to remember your Dapple? Or think you, that these
were Lords to let Beasts fare ill, that so neatly use their Masters? For Gods
love Sancho, look to thy self, and discover not thy course thread, that they
may see thou art not woven out of a base web. Know sinner as thou art, that the
Master is so much the more esteemed, by how much his servants are honest and
mannerly; and one of the greatest advantages that great men have over
inferiors is, that they keep servants as good as themselves. Know thou not
poor fellow, as thou art, and unhappy that I am, that if they see thee to be a
gross Pesant, they will think that I am some Mountebank or shifting Squire?
No, no, friend Sancho; shun, shun these inconveniences, for he that
stumbles too much upon the Prater and Wit-monger, at the first toe-knock falls,
and becomes a scornful Jester: Bridle thy tongue, consider and ruminate upon
thy words, before they pass, and observe we are now come to a place, from
whence, with Gods help and mine arms valor, we shall go bettered three fold,
nay five-fold in fame and wealth.

Sancho promised him very truly, to sow up his Mouth, or to bite his Tongue,
before he would speak a word that should not be well considered, and to
purpose, as he had commanded; and that he should not fear, that by him they
should ever be discovered. Don-Quixote dressed himself, buckled his sword to
his Belt, and claped his skarlet mantle upon him, putting on a Hunters cap of
green satin, which the Damozels had given him; and thus adorned to the great
chamber he went, where he found the Damozells all in a row, six on one
side, and six on the other, and all with provision for him to wash, which they
ministered with many courtesies and ceremonies.

Betwixt them straight they got him full of Pomp and Majesty, and carried him
to another Room, where was a rich Table, with service for four Persons. The
Duke and Duchess came to the door to receive him, and with them a grave
Clergyman, one of them that govern greet men's Houses; [ A good Character of a
poor Pedant,] one of those, that as they are not borne nobly, so they know not
how to instruct those that are; one of those that would have great men's
liberalityes, measured by the straightness of their minds; of those that
teaching those they govern to be frugall, would make them miserable; such a
one I say, this grave Clergyman was, that came with the Duke to receive
Don-Quixote; there passed a thousand loving complements, and at last, taking
Don-Quixote between them, they sat down to dinner.

The Duke invited Don-Quixote to the upper end of the Table, which, though he
refused; yet the Duke so importuned him, that he was forced to take it. The
Clergyman sat over against him, and the Duke and Duchess on each side. Sancho
was by at all, gaping in admiration, to see the honor those Princes did to his
Master, and seeing the many Ceremonies and entreaties that passed betwixt the
Duke and him, to make him sit down at the Tables end, he said; If your
worships will give me leave, I Will tell you a tale that happened in our town,
concerning places. Scarce had Sancho said this, when Don-Quixote began to
shake, believing certainly he would speak some idle speech. Sancho beholding,
understood him and said; Fear not Sir, that I shall be unmannerly, or that I
shall say any thing that may not be to the purpose; for I have not forgotten
your Counsel, touching speaking much or little, well or ill.

I remember nothing Sancho (quoth Don Quixote) speak what thou will so thou
speak quickly. Well, what I shall speak (quoth Sancho) is as true, as my Master
Don-Quixote will not let me lie, who is here present. For me (replied
Don-Quixote) lie as much as thou will, for I Will not hinder thee: but take heed
what thou speak. I have so heeded and re-heeded it, that you shall see I
warrant ye. 'Twere very fit (quoth Don-Quixote) that your Greatnesses would
command this Coxcombe to be thrust out; for he will talk you a thousand
follies.

Assuredly (quoth the Duchess) Sancho shall not stir a jot from me; for I
know he is very discreet. Discreet years live your Holiness (quoth Sancho)
for the good opinion you have of me, although I deserve it not, and thus says
my Tale: A Gentleman of our Town, very rich and well born; for he was of the
blood of the Alimi of Medina del Campo, and married with Donna Mencia de
Quinnones, that was daughter to Don Alonso de Maranon, Knight of the order of
Saint sacques, that was drowned in the Herradura, touching whom that quarrel
was not long since in our Town; for, as I remember, my Master Don-Quixote was
in it, where little Thomas the Madcap, son to Baluastro the Smith was
wounded. Is not all this true, Master mine? [ After he had begun a Tale
without head or or foot, he asks a question.] Say by your life, that these
Lords may not hold me for a prating Liar.

Hitherto (said the Clergy man) I rather hold thee for a Prater then a Liar;
but from hence-forward, I know not for what I shall hold thee. Thou give so
many witnesses, and so many tokens Sancho, that I cannot but say (quoth
Don-Quixote) thou tellest true: on with thy Tale, and make an end; for I think
thou will not have ended these two days. Let him go on (quoth the Duchess)
to do me a pleasure, and let him tell his Tale as he pleases, though he
make not an end these six days; for if they were so many years they would be
the best that ever I passed in my life.

I say then, My Masters, that the said Gentleman I told you of at first, and
whom I know, as well as I know one hand from another (for, from my house to
his, it is not a Bow-shoot) invited a poor, but honest Husbandman. On Brother
(said the Clergyman) for me thinks you travel with your Tale, as if you would
not rest till the next world. In less then half this I will, if it please God
(said Sancho) and so I proceed: The said Husbandman coming to the said
Gentleman-Inviters house (God be merciful to him, for he is now dead) and
for a further token, they say, dyed like a Lamb; for I was not by: for at that
time I was gone to another Town to reaping.

I prithee (quoth the Clergyman) come back from your reaping, and without
burying the Gentleman (except you mean to make more obsequies) end your Tale.
The business then (quoth Sancho) was this, That both of them being ready to
sit down at Table; for, me thinks, I see them now more then ever. The Dukes
received great pleasure, to see the distaste that the Clergyman took at the
delays and pawses of Sancho's Tale. And `Don-Quixote consumed himself in
cho^^er and rage. Then thus (quoth Sancho) both of them being ready to sit
down, the Husbandman contended with the Gentleman, not to sit uppermost, and
he with the other that he should, as meaning to command in his own house: but
the Husbandman presuming to be mannerly and courteous, never would, till the
Gentleman very moody, laying hands upon him, made him sit down perforce,
saying, Sit down you Thresher; for wherefoe'ere I sit that shall be the Tables
end to thee: And now you have my Tale, and truly I believe it was brought in
here pretty well to the purpose.

Don Quixotes face was in a thousand colors, that Jaspered upon his brow. The
Lords dissembled their laughter, that Don-Quixote might not be too much
abashed, when they perceived Sancho's Knavery: And to change discourse, that
Sancho might not proceed with other fooleries, the Duchess asked Don-Quixote
what news he had of the Lady Dulcinea, and if he had sent her for a Present
lately any Giants or Bugbears, since he could not but have overcome many^ To
which Don-Quixote answered, Lady mine; my misfortunes, although they had a
beginning, yet they will never have ending: Giants, Elves, and Bug-bears I have
overcome and sent her; but where should they find her that is Enchanted, and
turned into the foulest creatures that can be? I know not (quoth Sancho) me
thinks she is the fairest creature in the world, at least I know well, that
for her nimblenesse and leaping [ A good mistake] she will give no advantage to a
Tumbler: In good faith, my Lady Duchess, she leaps from the ground upon an
Ass as if she were a Cat. Have you seen her Enchanted Sancho, said the Duke?
How? seen her (quoth Sancho?) Why, who the Devil but I was the first that fell
into the trick of her Enchantment? she is as much Enchanted as my Ass.

The Clergyman, that heard them talk of Giants, Elves, and Bug-bears, and
Enchantments, fell into reckoning, that that was Don-Quixote de la Mancha,
whose Story the Duke ordinarily read, and for which he had diverse times
reprehended him, telling him, 'twas a madness to read such fopperies, and
being assured of the certainty which he suspected, speaking to the Duke very
angerly, he said: Your excellency ought to give God Almighty an account for
this man's folly. This Don-Quixote, or Don Coxcombe, or how do you call him? I
suppose he is not so very an Idiot as your Excellency would make him, giving
him ready occasions to proceed in his emptie-brain'd madness. And framing his
discourse to Don-Quixote, he said:

And who, good man Dull-pate has thrust into your brain, that you are a
Knight Errant, that you overcome Giants, and take Bug-beares? get you in Gods
name, so be it spoken, return to your house, and bring up your children if you
have them, and look to your stock, and leave your ranging through the world,
blowing bubbles, and making all that know you, or not know you, to laugh. Where
have you ever found with a mischief, that there have been, or are Knights
Errant? Where any Giants in Spain? or Bug bears in Mancha? or Enchanted
Dulcinea's, with the rest of your troop of simplicities?

Don-Quixote was very attentive to this Venerable man's discourse, and seeing
him now silent, without any respect of the Dukes, with an angry countenance,
he stood up and said: But his answer deserves a Chapter by it self.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Don-Quixotes answer to his Reprehender, with other successes as wise as
witty.
DOn-Quixote being thus upon his legs, and trembling from head to foot, like
a man filled with quicke-silver, with a hasty and thick voice, said, The
place, and Presence before whom I am, and the respect I have, and always had
to men of your Coat, do bind and tie up the hands of my just wrath; so that as
well for what I have said, as for I know, all know that women, and gowned men's
weapons are the same, their tongues: I will enter into single combat with you
with mine, though I rather expected good counsel from you, then infamous
revilings; good and well-meant reprehensions require and ask other
circumstances, other points; at least, your public and so bitter reprehensions
have passed all limits, and your gentle ones had been better: neither was it
fit that without knowledge of the sin you reprehend, you call the sinner
without more ado, Cox-comb and Idiot. Well, for which of my Coxcombries seen
in me, do you condemn and revile me, and command me home to my own house,
to look to the governing of it, my wife and children, without knowing whether
I have any of these? Is there no more to be done, but in a hurry to enter
other men's houses, to rule their owners? nay one that has been a poor
Pedagogue, or has not seen more world then twenty miles about him, to meddle
so roundly to give Laws to Chivalry, and to judge of Knights Errant? Is it
happily a vain plot, or time ill spent, to range through the world, not seeking
it is dainties, but the bitterness of it, whereby good men aspaire to the seat
of immortality? If your Knights, your Gallants, or Gentlemen should have called
me Cox comb, I should have held it for an affront irreparable: but that your
poor Scholars account me a madman, that never trod the paths of Knight
Errantry, I care not a chip; a Knight I am, a Knight I Will die, if it please the
most Highest. Some go by the spacious field of proud ambition, others by the
way of servill and base flattery, a third sort by deceitful hypocrisy, and
few by that of true Religion: But I by my stars inclination go in the narrow
path of Knight-Errantry; for whose exercise I despise wealth, but not honor. I
have satisfied grievances, rectified wrongs, chastised insolences, overcome
Giants, trampled over Sprits; I am enamoured, only because there is a
necessity Knights Errant should be so, and though I be so, yet I am not of
those vicious Amorists, but of your chaste Platonicks. My intentions always
aim at a good end, as, to do good to all men, and hurt to none: If he that
understands this, if he that performs it, that practices it, deserve to be
called fool, let your Greatnesses judge, excellent Duke and Duchess.

Well, I advise you (quoth Sancho) Master mine, speak no more in your own
behalf, for there is no more to be said, no more to be thought, no more
persevering in the world: besides, this Signior, denying as he has done, that
there neither is, nor has been Knight Errant in the world, no marvel though
he knows not what he has said. Are you trow (quoth the Clergy man) that
Panca, whom they say your Master has promised an Island? Marry am I (said he)
and I am he that deserves it, as well as any other, and I am he that keep
company with good men, and thou shall be as good as they: [ He blunders out
Proverbs as usually to no purpose, which is Sancho's parts always:] and I am
one of those that: Not with whom thou were bred, but with whom thou have fed;
and of those that. Lean to a good tree and it will shadow thee. I have leaned
to my Master, and it is many Months since I have kept him company, and I am
his other self. If God please, live he and I shall live, he shall not want
Empires to command, nor I Islands to govern.

No surely friend Sancho straight said the Duke, for I in Signior Don-Quixotes
name, will give thee an od one of mine, of no small worth. Kneel down Sancho,
quoth Don-Quixote, and kiss his Excellencies foot for the favor he has done
thee; which Sancho did, but when the Clergyman saw this he rose up wonderful
angry, saying; by my holy Order, I am about to say; Your Excellency is as mad
as one of these sinners, and see if they must not needs be mad, when wise men
canonize their madness; your Excellency may do well to stay with them, for
whilst they be here, I Will get me home and save a labor of correcting what I
cannot amend; and without any more ado, leaving the rest of his dinner he went
away, the Duke and the Duchess not being able to pacifice him, though the Duke
said not much to him, as being hindered with laughter at his unseasonable
choler.

When he had ended his langhter, he said to Don-Quixote, Sir Knight of the
Lions, you have answered so deeply for your self, that you left nothing
unsatisfied to this your grievance, which though it seem to be one, yet is
not; for as women have not the power to wrong, neither have Churchmen, as you
best know. It Is true quoth Don Quixote, the cause is, that he who cannot be
wronged, can do no wrong to any body; women, children and Churchmen, as they
cannot defend themselves when they are offended, so they cannot suffer an
affront and a grievance, there is this difference (as your Excellency best
knows:) The affront comes from one that may best do it, and be able to make
it good, the grievance may come from either Party without affronting. For
example. One stands carelessly in the street, some ten men come armed, and
bastanadoing him, he claps hand to his sword, and does his devoir; but the
multitude of his assailants hinder him of his purpose, which is to be
revenged; this man is wronged, but not affronted, and this shall be confirmed
by another example. One stands with his back turned, another comes and strikes
him, and when he has done runns away; the other follows, but overtakes him not:
he that received the blow is wronged, but not affronted, because the affront
ought to have been maintained: if he that struck him (though he did it basely)
stand still and face his enemy; then he that was struck is wronged and
affronted both together: Wronged, because he was struck cowardly; Affronted,
because he that struck him stood still to make good what he had done: And so
according to the Laws of cursed Duel, I may be wronged, but not affronted;
for Children nor Women have no apprehension, neither can they fly, nor ought
to stand still: and so is it with the Religious; for these kinds of people
want Arms offensive and defensive: So that though they be naturally bound to
defend themselves, yet they are not to offend any body: and though even now I
said I was wronged, I saw now I am not; for he that can receive no affront,
can give none: for which causes I have no reason to resent, nor do I, the
words that that good man gave me; only I could have wished he had stayed a
little, that I might have let him see his error, in saying or thinking there
have been no Knights Errant in the world; for if Amadis had heard this, or one
of those infinite numbers of his Lineage, I know it had not gone well with his
Worship.

I Will swear that (quoth Sancho) they would have given him a slash that should
have cleaved him from top to foot like a Pomegranate or a ripe musk-Melon; they
were pretty Youths to suffer such jests. By my Holidam, I think certainly if
Renaldos de Montalnan had heard these speeches from the poor Knave, he had
bung'd up his mouth that he should not have spoken these three years; I, I, he
should have dealt with them, and see how he would have escaped their hands.

The Duchess was ready to burst with laughter at Sancho, and to her mind she
held him to be more conceited and madder then his Masser, and many at that
time were of this opinion.

Finally, Don-Quixote was pacified and dinner ended, and the cloth being taken
away, there came four Damzels, one with a silver Basin, the other with an Ewre,
a third with two fine white Towels, the fourth with her arms tucked up to the
middle, and in her white hands (for white they were) a white Naples
washing-ball. She with the Basin came very mannerly, and set it under
Don-Quixotes chin, who very silent and wondering at that kind of ceremony,
taking it to be the custom of the Country, to wash their faces instead of
their hands; he stretched out his face as far as he could, and instantly the
Ewre began to rain upon him, and the Damzell with the soap ran over his beard
apace, raising white slakes of snow; for such were those scowrings, not only
upon his beard, but over all the face and eyes of the obedient Knight, so that
he was forced to shut them.

The Duke and Duchess that knew nothing of this, stood expecting what would
become of this Lavatory. The Barber Damzell, when she had soaped him well with
her hand, feigned that she wanted more water, and made her with the Ewre to
go for it, whilst Signior Don-Quixote expected; which she did, and
Don-Quixote remained one of the strangest pictures to move laughter that could
be imagined. All that were present (many in number) beheld him, and as they
saw him with a neck half a yard long, more then ordinary swarthy, his eyes
shut, and his beard full of soap, it was great marvel, and much discretion
they could forbear laughing. The Damzels of the jest cast down their eyes, not
daring to look on their Lords; whose bodies with choler and laughter even
tickled again, and they knew not what to do, either to punish the boldness of
the Gyrls, or reward them for the pastime they received to see Don-Quixote in
that manner.

Lastly, she with the Ewre came, and they made an end of washing Don-Quixote,
and straight she that had the Towels wiped and dried him gently, and all four
of them at once making him a low courtesy, would have gone: but the Duke,
because Don-Quixote should not fall into the jest, called to the Damzel with
the Basin, saying, Come and wash me too, and see that you have Water enough.
The Wench, that was wily and careful, came and put the Basin under the Duke,
as she had done to Don-Quixote, and making haste, they washed and scowred him
very well, and leaving him dry and clean, making Courtesies, they went away.
After, it was known that the Duke swore that if they had not washed him as well
as Don-Quixote, he would punish them for their lightness, which they
discreetly made amends for, with soapeing him.

Sancho marked all the Ceremonies of the Lavatorie, and said to himself, Lord
(thought he) if it be the custom in this Country to wash the Squires beards,
as well as the Knights? for of my soul and conscience I have need of it, and
if they would, to run over me with a Rasor too.

What say thou to thy self Sancho? said the Duchess. I say Madam quoth
he, that I have heard that in other Princes Palaces they use to give water to
wash men's hands when the Cloth is taken away, but not Lie to scowre their
Beards; and therefore I see it is good to live long, to see much; although it is
said also, that he that lives long, suffers much, though to suffer one of
these Lavatories, is rather pleasure then pain.

Take no care Sancho quoth the Duchess, for I Will make one of my Damozells wash
thee, and if need be, lay thee a bucking. For my Beard quoth Sancho, I should
be glad for the present, for the rest God will provide hereafter. Look you,
Carver, said the Duchess, what Sancho desires, do just as he would have you.
The Carver answered, that Signior Sancho should be punctually served, and so
he went to dinner, and carried Sancho with him, the Dukes and Don-Quixote
sitting still, and conferring in many and several affairs, but all concerning
the practice of Arms and Knight Errantry.

The Duchess requested Don-Quixote to delineate and describe unto her (since
he seemed to have a happy Memory) the beauty and feature of the Lady Dulcinea
del Toboso, for according to Fames Trumpet, she thought that she must needs
be the fairest creature in the world, and also of the Mancha.

Don-Quixote sighed at the Duchesses command, and said; If I could take out my
heart, and lay it before your Greatnesses eyes upon this Table in a dish, I
would save my Tongue a labor to tell you that which would not be imagined:
for in my heart, your Excellency should see her lively depainted; but why
should I be put to describe and delineate exactly, piece for piece, each
several beauty of the peerless Dulcinea, a burden fitter for other backs
then mine; an enterprise in which the pensils of Parrasius, Timantes and
Apelles, and the tools of Lisippus, should indeed be employed, to paint and
carve her in tables of Marble and Brass, and Ciceronian and Demosthenian
Rhetoric to praise her.

What mean you by your Demosthenian, Signior Don-Quixote, quoth the Duchess?
Demosthenian Rhethorique (quoth he) is as much as to say, the Rhethorique of
Demosthenes, as Ciceronian of Cicere, both which were the two greatest
Rhethoricians in the world. It Is true quoth the Duke, and you showed your
ignorance in asking that question; but for all that, Sir Don-Quixote might much
deligh us, if he would paint her out; for I Will warrant, though it be but in
her first draught, she will appear so well, that the most fair will envy her.
I would willingly said he, if misfortune had not blotted out her Idea, that not
long since befell her, which is such, that I may rather bewail it, then
describ her; for your Greatnesses shall understand, that as I went heretofore
to have kissed her hands, and receive her Benediction, Leave and License, for
this my third sally; I found another manner of one then I looked for, I found
her Enchanted, and turned from a Princess to a Country-wench, from fair to
foul, from an Angel to a Deviil, from sweet to contagious, from well spoken
to rustic, from modest to skittish, from light to darkness, and finally from
Dulcinea del Tob^so, to a Peasantess of Sayago.

Now God defend us quoth the Duke, with a loud voice, who is he that has done
so much hurt to the world? Who has taken away the beauty that cheered it? The
quickness that entertained it? and the honesty that did credit it? Who, said
he? who but some cursed Enchanter? one of those many envious ones that
persecute me: This wicked race borne in the world to darken and annihilate the
exploits of good men, and to give light and raise the deeds of evil.
Enchanters have me persecuted: Enchanters me persecute: and Enchanters will me
persecute, till they cast me and my lofty Chivalry into the profound Abisme of
forgetfullnesse, and there they hurt and wound me where they see I have most
feeling; for to take from a Knight Errant his Lady, is to take away his
eyesight, with which he sees the Sun that does lighten him, and the food
that does nourish him. Often have I said, and now I say again, that a Knight
Errant without a Mistress is like a Tree without leaves; like a Building without
cement; or a Shadow without a Body, by which it is caused.

There is no more to be said (quoth the Duchess:) but yet if we may give
credit to the History of Don-Quixote, that not long since came to light, with a
general applause, it is said, as I remember, That you never saw Dulcinea, and
that there is no such Lady in the world; but that she is a mere fantastical
creature engendered in your brain, where you have painted her with all the
graces and perfections that you please.

Here is much to be said, quoth he, God knows, if there be a Dulcinea or no
in the world; whether she be fantastical or not: and these be matters,
whose justifying must not be so far searched into: Neither have I engendered
or brought forth my Lady, though I contemplate on her, as is fitting, she
being a Lady, that has all the parts that may make her famous through the whole
world: as these; Fair without Blemish; Grave without Pride; Amorous, but
Honest; Thankful, as Courteous; Courteous as Well-bred: And finally, of high
Descent; by reason that Beauty shines and martcheth upon her noble Blood in
more degrees of perfection then in mean born Beauties.

It Is true (said the Duke:) but Don-Quixote must give me leave to say what the
History, where his exploits are written, says, where is inferred, That though
there be a Dulcinea in Toboso, or out of it, and that she be fair in the
highest degree, as you describe her; yet in her highness of Birth she is not
equal to your Oriana's, your Alasiraxaria's, or your Madasima's, [Names of
feigned Ladies in Books of Knighthood,] with others of this kind, of which
your Histories are full, as you well know. To this I answer you (quoth
Don-Quixote) Dulcinea is Virtuous, and Virtue adds to Lineage, and one that is
Mean and Virtuous ought to be more esteemed then another Noble and Vicious:
Besides, Dulcinea has one shred that may make her Queen with Crown and
Scepter: for the merit of a Fair and Virtuous Woman extends to do greater
miracles, and although not formally, yet virtually she has greater fortunes
laid up for her.

I say, Signior Don Quixote (quoth the Duchess) that in all you speak, you go
with your leaden plummet, and, as they say, with your sounding Line in your
hand, and that henceforward I will believe, and make all in my house believe,
and my Lord the Duke too, if need be, that there is a Dulcinea in Toboso, and
that at this day she lives, that she is fair and well borne, and deserves that
such a Knight as Don-Quixote should serve her, which is the most I can, or know
how to endeer her: But yet I have one scruple left, and, I know not, some kind
of incling against Sancho: the scruple is, that the History says, That Panca
found the said Lady Dulcinea (when he carried your Epistle) winnowing a Bag of
Wheat, and for more assurance, that it was red Wheat, a thing that makes me
doubt of her high Birth.

To which Don-Quixote replied: Lady mine, you shall know, that all or the most
part of my Affairs are clean different from the ordinary course of other Knigts
Errant, whether they be directed by the unserutable will of the Destinies, or
by the malice of some envious Enchanter, and as it is evident, that all, or the
most of your famous Knights Errant, one has the favor not to be Enchanted;
another to have his flesh so impenetrable, that he cannot be wounded, as the
famous Roldan, one of the twelve Peers of France, of whom it was said, that he
could not be wounded, but upon the soale of his left foot; and that this too
must be with the point of a great Pin, and with no other kind of weapon; so
that when Bernardo del Carpio did kill him in Roncesualles, seeing he could not
wound him with his sword, he lifted him in his arms from ground and stifled
him, as mindful of the death that Hercules gave Anteon, that horrid Giant,
that was said to be the son of the earth.

From all this I infer, that it might be I might have had some of these
favors, as not to be wounded; for many times experience has taught me, that
my flesh is soft and penetrable, or that I might have the power not to be
Enchanted; but yet I have seen my self clapped in a Cage, where all the world
was not able to enclose me, had it not been by virtue of Enchantments; but
since I was free, I shall believe that no other can hinder me: So that these
Enchanters, who see, that upon me they cannot use their sleights, they revenge
themselves upon the things I most affect, and mean to kill me, by
ill-intreating Dulcinea, by whom I live; and so I believe, that when my Squire
carried my Embassage, they turned her into a Pesant, to be employed in so base
an Office, as winnowing of wheat; but I say, that wheat was neither red, nor
wheat; but seeds of Oriental Pearls, and for proof of this, let me tell your
Magnitudes, that coming a while since by Toboso, I could never find Dnlcineaes
Palace, and Sancho my Squire, having seen her before in her own shape, which is
the fairest in the world, to me she then seemed a foul course Country-wench,
and meanly nurtured, being the very Discretion of the world: And since I am not
Enchanted, neither can I be in all likelihood, she is she that is Enchanted,
grieved, turned, choped and changed, and my Enemies have revenged themselves on
me, in her, and for her I must live in perpetual sorrow, till she come to her
pristine being.

All this have I spoken, that no body may stand upon what Sancho said of that
sifting and winnowing of hers; for since to me she was changed, no marvel
though for him she was exchanged. Dulcinea is nobly borne, and of the best
blood in Toboso, of which I warrant she has no small part in her; and for her
that Town shall be famous in after-ages, as Troy for Helen, and Spayn for Cava
[Daughter to an Earl that betrayed Spain to the Moors. Vide Marian. Hist. de
Reb. Hisp.] though with more honor and reputation: On the other side I would
have your Lordships know that Sancho Panca is one of the prettiest Squires that
ever served Knight Errant; sometimes he has such sharp simplicities, that to
think whether he be fool or knave, causes no small content; he has malice
enough to be a knave, but more ignorance to be thought a fool; he doubts of
every thing, and yet believes all; when I think sometimes he will tumble
headlong to the foot, he comes out with some kind of discretion that lifts him
to the Clouds.

Finally, I would not change him for any other Squire, though I might have a
City to boot, therefore I doubt, whether it be good to send him to the
Government that your Greatness has bestowed on him, though I see in him a
certain fitness for this you call governing; for, triming his understanding
but a very little, he would proceed with his government as well as the King
with his Customs: Besides, we know by experience, that a Gevernor needs not
much learning, or other abilities; for you have a hundred that scarce can read
a word, and yet they govern like Ier-Falcons; the business is, that their
meaning be good, and to hit the matter aright they undertake, for they shall
not want Counselors to teach them what they shall do, as your Governors that
be swordmen and not Scholars, that have their Assistants to direct them: my
council should be to him; that neither Bribe he take, nor his due forsake, and
some other such toys as these that I have within me, and shall be declared at
fit time to Sancho's profit, and the Islands which he shall govern.

To this point of their discourse came the Duke, Duchess, and Don-Quixote,
when straight they heard a great noise of people in the Palace, and Sancho
came, into the Hall unlooked for, in a maze, with a strayner in stead of a Bib,
and after him many Lads, or Scullions of the Kitchen, and other inferior
people, and one came with a little kneadingtub of water, that seemed to be
dish-water who followed and persecuted Sancho, and sought by all means to join
the vessel to his chin, and another would have washed him.

What Is the matter, Hoe (quoth the Duchess?) What do ye to this honest man?
What? do ye not know he is Governor Elect? To which the Barber-Scullion
replied, This Gentleman will not suffer himself to be washed according to the
custom, as my Lord the Duke and his Master were. Yes marry will I (said
Sancho) in a great huffe: but I would have cleaner Towels and clearer Sudds,
and not so sluttish hands; for there is no such difference between my Master
and me, that they should wash him with Rose Water and me with the Devils lie:
The customs of great men's Palaces are so much the better, by how little
trouble they cause; but your Lavatory custom here is worse then
Penetentiaries; my beard is clean, and I need no such refreshing; and he that
comes to wash me, or touch a hair of my head (of my beard, I say) sir-reverence
of the company, I Will give him such a box, that I Will set my fist in his skull;
for these kind of ceremonies and soap-layings are rather flouts then
entertainers of guests.

The Duchess was ready to die with laughter, to see Sancho's choler, and to
hear his reasons: But Don-Quixote was not very well pleased to see him so ill
dressed with his jaspered Towell, and hemmed in by so many of the Kitchen
Pensioners; so making a low leg to the Dukes, as if he intended to speak,
with a grave voice he spoke to the skoundrels.

Hark ye Gentlemen, Pray let the youth alone, and get you gone as you came, if
you please; for my Squire is as cleanly as another, and these Troughs are as
straight and close for him as your little red clay drinking Cups: take my
counsel and leave him, for neither he nor I can abide jests. Sancho caught
his words out of his mouth and went on, saying; No, let um come to make sport
with the setting Dog and I Will let um alone; as sure as it is now night, let um
bring a Comb hither, or what they will, and curry my Beard, and if they find
any thing foul in it, let um shear me to fitters. Then quoth the Duchess,
(unable to leave laughing) Sancho says well, he is clean, as he says, and
needs no washing: and if our custom please him not, let him take his choice;
besides, you ministers of cleanliness have been very slack and careless, I
know not whether I may say presumtuous, to bring to such a personage and such a
beard, instead of a Basin and Ewre of pure gold and Diaper Towels, your
kneeding-Troughs and Dish-clouts: but you are unmannerly raskalls, and like
wicked wretches must needs show the grude you bear to the Squires of Knights
Errant.

The Rascal Regiment, together with the Carver that came with them, thought
verily the Duchess was in earnest: So they took the Sive-cloth from Sancho's
neck, and even ashamed went their ways and left him, who seeing himself out of
that (as he thought) great danger, kneeled before the Duchess, saying; From
great Ladies great favors are still expected; this that your worship has now
done me, cannot be recompensed with less, then to desire to see my self an
Armed Knight Errant, to employ my self all days of my life in the service of
so high a Lady. I am a poor Husbandman, my name is Sancho Panca, Children I
have, and serve as a Squire; if in any of these I may serve your Greatness, I
will be swifter in obeying, then your Ladyship in commanding.

It Is well seen Sancho, quoth the Duchess, that you have learnt to be
courteous in the very school of courtesy: I mean, it seems well, that you have
been nursed at Don-Quixotes breast, who is the cream of Complement, and the
flower of Ceremonies: well fare such a Master and such a Servant; the one for
North-starre of Knight Errantry, the other for the star of Squire-like
fidelity: Rise, friend Sancho, for I will repay your courtesy, in making my
Lord the Duke, as soon as he can, perform the promise he has made you, of
being Governor of the Island.

With this their discourse ceased, and Don-Quixote went to his afternoons
sleep, and the Duchess desired Sancho, that if he were not very sleepie, he
would pass the afternoon with her and her Damzels in a cool room. Sancho
answered, That though true it were, that he was used in the afternoons to take
a some five hours nap, yet to do her goodness service, he would do what he
could, not to take any that day, and would obey her command: so he parted.

The Duke gave fresh order for Don-Quixotes usage to be like a Knight Errant,
without differing a jot from the ancient style of those Knights.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the wholesome discourse that passed betwixt the Duchess and her Damzells,
with Sancho Panca, worthy to be read and noted.
WEll; the Story tells us, that Sancho slept not that day, but according to
his promise came, when he had dined, to see the Duchess, who for the delight
she received to hear him, made him sit down by her in a low Chair, though
Sancho, out of pure mannerlinesse, would not sit: but the Duchess bade him sit
as he was Governor, and speak as he was Squire, though in both respects he
deserved the very seat of Cyd Ruydiaz the Champion.

Sancho shrunk up his shoulders, [ The Spainiards lousy humility,] obeyed and
sat down, and all the Duchesses Waiting-women and Damzels stood round about
her, attending with great silence to Sancho's discourse: but the Duchess spoke
first, saying:

Now that we are all alone, and that no body hears us, I would Signior
Governor would resolve me of certain doubts I have, arising from the printed
History of the Grand Don-Quixote, one of which is, That since honest Sancho
never saw Dulcinea; I say the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, neither carried her
Don-Quixotes Letter (for it remained in the Note-Book in Sierra Morena) how he
durst feign the answer, and that he found her sifting of Wheat; this being a
mock and a lie and so prejudicial to the Lady Dulcinea's reputation, and so
unbefitting the condition and fidelity of a faithful Squire.

Here Sancho rose without answering a word, and softly crooking his body, and
with his finger upon his lips, he went up and down the room, lifting up the
hangings: which done, he came and sat down again, and said; Now I see Madame,
that no body lies in wait to hear us, besides the bystanders, I will answer
you without fear of fright, all that you have asked, and all that you will ask
me. And first of all I say, That I hold my Master Don-Quixote, for an
incurable Madman, though sometimes he speaks things, that in my opinion, and
so in all theirs that hear him, are so discreet, and carried in so even a
track, that the Devil himself cannot speak better; but truly and without
scruple I take him to be a very Frantic; for so I have it in my mazard, I
dare make him believe that, that has neither head nor foot, as was the answer
of that Letter, and another thing that happened some eight days ago, which is
not yet in print, to wit, the Enchantment of my Lady Dulcinea; for I made him
believe she is Enchanted, it being as true as the Moon is made of green Cheese.

The Duchess desired him to tell her that Enchantment and conceit; which he
did just as it passed; at which the hearers were not a little delighted. And
prosecuting her discourse, the Duchess said, I have one scruple leaps in my
mind,, touching what Sancho has told me, and a certain buz coming to mine
ears that tells me; If Don-Quixote de la Mancha be such a shallow Madman and
Widgin, and Sancho Panca his Squire know it; yet why for all that he serves
and follows him, and relies on his vain promises; doubtless, he is as very a
Madman and Block-head as his Master, which being so as it is, it will be very
unfitting for my Lord the Duke to give Sancho an Island to Govern; for he that
cannot govern himself, will ill govern others.

By'r Lady (quoth Sancho) that scruple comes in pudding-time: but bid your
Buzze speak plain, or how he will; for I know he says true; and if I had
been wise, I might long since have left my Master: but 'twas my luck, and this
vilde Errantry, I cannot do withal, I must follow him, we are both of one
place, I have eaten his bread, I love him well, he is thankful he gave me
the Asse-colts, and above all, I am faithful and it is impossible any chance
should part us, but death: and if your Altitude will not bestow the Government
on me, with less was I borne, and perhaps, the missing it might be better
for my conscience; for though I be a fool, yet I understand the Proverb that
says, The Ant had wings to do her hurt, and it may be, Sancho the Squire may
sooner go to Heaven, then Sancho the Governor. Here is as good bread made, as
in France; and in the night Ione is as good as my Lady; and unhappy is that
man, that is to break his fast at two of the clock in the afternoon; and
there is no heart a handful bigger then another; and the stomach is filled
with the coursest victuals; and the little Fowls in the air, have God for
their Provider and Cater; and four yards of course Cuenca cloth, keep a man
as warm, as four of fine Lemster wool of Segovia: [Their Lemster breed came
first out of England:] and when we once leave this world, and are put into the
earth, the Prince goes in as narrow a path as the Journey-man; and the Popes
body takes up no more room then a Sextons, though the one be higher then the
other; for when we come to the pit, all are even, or made so in spite of their
teethes and, and goodnight.

Let me say again, If your Lady-ship will not give me the Island, as I am a
fool I Will refuse it, for being a wise man: for I have heard say, The nearer
the Church, the further from God; and, All is not gold that glistreth; and that
from the Oxen, plough and yokes, the Husbandman Bamba was chosen for King of
Spain: and that Radrigo, from his tissues, sports, and riches, was cast out to
be eaten by Snakes (if we may believe the rimes of the old Romants, that lie
not.)

Why, no more they do not (said Donna Rodriguez, the Wayting-woman, that was
one of the Auditors) for you have one Romant that says, that Don Rodrigo was
put alive into a Tomb full of Toades, Snakes, and Lizards, and some two days
after from within the Tomb, he cried with a low and pitiful voice, Now they
eat, now they eat me in the place where I sinned most: and according to this,
this man has reason to say, he had rather be a Labourer then a King, to be
eaten to death with vermin.

The Duchess could not forbear laughing, to see the simplicity of her woman,
nor to admire to hear Sancho's proverbiall reasons, to whom she said; Honest
Sancho knows, that when a Gentleman once makes a promise, he will perform it
though it cost him his life. My Lord and Husband the Duke, though he be no
Errant, yet he is a Knight, and so he will accomplish his promise of the
Island, in spite of envy or the worlds malice. Be of good cheer, Sancho; for
when thou least dreamest of it, thou shall be seated in the Chair of thy
Island, and of Estate, and shall claspe thy Government in thy robes of Tissue.
All that I charge thee, is that you look to the governing your Vassalls, for
you must know, they are all well-borne and loyal.

For governing (quoth Sancho) there is no charging me; for I am naturally
charitable and compassionate to the poor, and of him that does well they will
not speak ill, and by my Holidam they shall play me no false play: I am an
old dog, and understand all their Hist, hist: and I can snuff my self when I
see time, and I will let no cobwebs fall in my eyes, for I know where my shoo
wrings me: this I say, because honest men shall have hand heart, but wicked
men neither foot nor fellowship. And meethinkes for matter of Government, there
is no more but to begin, and in fifteen days Governor, I could manage the
place, and know as well to govern, as to labor in which I was bredd. You have
reason, Sancho, quoth the Duchess, for no man is born wise, and Bishops are
made of men, and not of stones. But turning to our discourse that we had
touching the Lady Dulcinea's Enchantment, I am more then assured, that that
imagination that Sancho had to put a trick upon his Master, and to make him
think the Country wench was Dulcinea, that if his Master knew her not, all was
invented by some of those Enchanters that persecute Signior Don-Quixote; for I
know partly, that that Country wench that leapt upon the Asse-colt, was, and is
Dulcinea, and Sancho thinking to be the deceiver, is himself deceived; and
there is no more to be doubted in this, then in things that we never saw: and
know, Sancho, that here we have our Enchanters too, that love, and tell us
plainly and truly, what passed in the world, without tricks or devices; and
believe me, Sancho that leaping wench was, and is Dulcinea, who is enchanted
as the Mother that brought her forth, and when we least think of it, we
shall see her in her proper shape, and then Sancho will think he was deceived.

All this may be quoth Sancho, and now will I believe all that my Master told
me of Montesino's Cave where he said he saw our Mistress Dulcinea, in the
same apparel and habit, that I said I had seen her in, when I Enchanted her at
my pleasure; and it may be Madam, all is contrary (as you say) for from my rude
wit, it could not be presumed that I should in an instant make such a witty
Lie; neither do I believe that my Master is so mad, that with so poor and
weak a persuasion as mine, he should believe a thing so incredible; but for
all that good Lady, do not think me to be so malevolent, for such a Leeke as
I am, is not bound to boar into the thoughts and maliciousness of most wicked
Enchanters. I fained that, to escape from my Masters thre^ts, and not with any
purpose to hurt him, and if it fell out otherwise, God is above that judges
all hearts. It Is true said the Duchess, but tell me Sancho, what is that you
said of Montesino's Cave? I should be glad to hear it. Then Sancho began to
tell word for word, all that passed in that Adventure: Which when the Duchess
heard, she said; Out of this success may be inferred, that since the grand
Don-Quixote says that he saw there the same lobouring wench that Sancho saw
at their coming from Toboso, without doubt it is Dulcinea, and that in this the
Enchanters here are very listening and wary. This I said (quoth Sancho) that if
my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso be Enchanted, at her peril be it, for I Will have
nothing to do with my Masters Enemies, who are many, and bad ones. True it is,
that she that I saw was a Countrey-wench, and so I held her, and so I judged
her to be, and if that were Dulcinea, I Will not meddle with her, neither shall
the Blowze pass upon my account. I, I, let us have giving and taking every
foot. Sancho said it, Sancho did it, Sancho turned, Sancho returned, as if
Sancho were a dish-clout, and not the same Sancho Panca that is now in print
all the world over, as Samson Carrasco told me, who at least is one that is
Bachelorized in Salamanca, and such men cannot ly, but when they list, or that
it much concerns them; so there is no reason any man should deal with me,
since I have a good report, and as I have heard my Master say; Better have an
honest name then much wealth. Let um join me to this Government and they
shall see wonders; for he that has been a good Squire, will easily be a good
Governor.

Whatsoever Sancho hitherto has said (quoth the Duchess) is Caton^an
Sentences, or at least taken out of the very entrails of Michael Verinus,
Florentibus occidit annis. Well, well, to speak as thou do, a badd cloak
often hides a good drinker. Truly Madam, said Sancho, I never drunk
excessively in my life, to quench my thirst sometimes I have, for I am no
hypocrite, I drink when I am dry, and when I am urged too; for I love not to
be nice or unmannerly; for what heart of marble is there, that will not pledge
a friends carowse? but though I take my cup, I go not away drunk: besides,
your Knight Errants Squires ordinarily drink water, for they always travel
by Forests, Woods, Meadows, Mountains, cragy Rocks, and meet not with a
pittance of Wine, though they would give an eye for it.

I believe it, said the Duchess, and now, Sancho, thou may repose thy self,
and after we will talk at large, and give order how thou may be joined, as
thou say, to the Government.

Sancho again gave the Duchess thanks, but desired her she would do him
the kindness, that his Dapple might be well looked to. What Dapple (quoth
she?) My Ass (said Sancho) for not to call him so, I say my Dapple: and when
I came into the Castle, I desired this waiting woman to have a care on him, and
she grew so loud with me, as if I called her ugly or old; for I held it fitter
for them to Provander Asses, then to Authorize Rooms: Lord God, a Gentleman of
my Town could not endure these waiting-women. Some Pesant, quoth Donna
Rodriguez the waiting woman; for if he had been a Gentleman and well bred, he
would have extolled them above the Moon.

Go too, no more (quoth the Duchess;) Peace Rodriguez, and be quiet Sancho,
and let me alone to see that Sancho's Ass be made much of; for being Sancho's
household stuff, I will hold him on the Apples of mine eyes. Let him be in the
Stable (quoth Sancho;) for neither he nor I am worthy to be so much as a
minute upon those Apples of your Greatness eyes; and I had as liefe stab my
self as consent to that: for although my Master says, that in courtesies one
should rather lose by a card too much then too little; yet in these Asse-like
courtesies, and in your Apples, it is fit to be wary and proceed with
discetion. Carry him Sancho (quoth the Duchess) to thy Government; for there
thou may cherish him at thy pleasure, and manumit him from his labor. Do
not think you have spoken jestingly Lady Duchess (quoth Sancho;) for I have
seen more then two Asses go to Governments, and 'twould be no novelty for me
to carry mine.

Sancho's discourse renewed in the Duchess more laughter and content; and
sending him to repose, she went to tell the Duke all that had passed between
them, and both of them plotted and gave order to put a jest upon Don-Quixote
that might be a famous one, and suting to his Knightly style, in which kind
they played many pranks with him, so proper and handsome, that they are the
best contained amongst all the Adventures of this Grand History.

CHAP. XXXIV.
How notice is given for the dis-enchanting of the peerlesse Dulcinea del
Toboso, which is one of the most famous Adventures in all this Book.
GReat was the pleasure the Duke and Duchess received with Don-Quixote and
Sancho Panca's conversation; and they resolved to play some tricks with them,
that might carry some twi-lights and appearances of Adventures. They took for a
Motive that which Don-Quixote had told unto them of Montesinos Cave, because
they would have it a famous one: but that which the Duchess most admired at,
was, that Sancho's simplicity should be so great, that he should believe for
an infallible truth, that Dulcinea was Enchanted, he hmself having been the
Enchanter and the Impostor of that business: So giving order to their servants
for all they would have done, some a week after they carried Don-Quixote to a
Boar-hunting, with such a troop of Wood-men and Hunters, as if the Duke had
been a crowned King. They gave Don-Quixote a Hunters suit, and to Sancho one of
sinest green cloth: but Don-Quixote would not put on his, saying; That shortly
he must return again to the hard exercise of Arms, and that therefore he
could carry no Wardrobes or Sompters. But Sancho took his, meaning to sell it
with the first occasion offered.

The wished for day being come, Don-Quixote Armed himself, and Sancho clad
himself, and upon his Dapple (for he would not leave him, though they had
given him a Horse) thrust himself amongst the troop of the Wood-men. The
Duchess was bravely attyred, and Don-Quixote out of pure courtesy and manners
took the Reins of her Palfrey, though the Duke would not consent: at last they
came to a wood that was between two high Mountains, where taking their stands,
their lanes and paths, and the Hunters divided into several stands, the chase
began with great noise, hooting and hollowing, so that one could scarce hear
another, as well for the cry of the dogs, as for the sound of the Horns.

The Duchess alighted, and with a sharp Javelin in her hand, she took a
stand, by which she knew some wild Boares were used to pass: The Duke also
alighted and Don-Quixote and stood by her, Sancho stayed behind them all, but
stirred not from Dapple, whom he durst not leave, lest some ill chance should
befall him, and they had scarce lighted, and set themselves in order with some
servants, when they saw there came a huge Boar by them baited with the Dogs,
and followed by the Hunters, gnashing his teeth and tuskes, and foaming at the
mouth; and Don-Quixote seeing him, buckling his shield to him, and laying hand
on his sword, went forward to encounter him; the like did the Duke with his
Javelin; but the Duchess would have been foremost of all, if the Duke had not
stopped her. Only Sancho, wen he saw the valiant Beast, left Dapple, and began
to scud as fast as he could, and striving to get up into a high Oak, it was
not possible for him, but being even in the midst of it, fastened to a bough,
and striving to get to the top, he was so unluckie and unfortunate that the
bough broke, and as he was tumbling to the ground, he hung in the air fastened
to a snag of the Oak, unable to come to the ground, and seeing himself in
that perplexity, and that his green coat was torn, and thinking that if that
wilde-Beast should come thither, he might lay hold on him, he began to cry out
and call for help so outragiously, that all that heard him, and saw him not,
thought verily some wilde-Beast was devouring him.

Finally, the Tuskie Boar was laid along, with many Javelins points, and
Don-Quixote turning aside to Sanchoes noise, that knew him by his note, he saw
him hanging on the Oak and his head downward, and Dapple close by him, that
never left him in all his calamity; and Cid Hamete says, that he seldom saw
Sancho without Dapple, or Dapple without Sancho, such was the love and
friendship betwixt the couple:

Don-Quixote went and unhung Sancho, who seeing himself free and on the
ground, beheld the torn place of his hunting suite, and it grieved him to the
soul, for he thought he had of that suite at least an inheritance. And now
they laid the Boar athwart upon a great Mule, and covering him with
Rosemary-bushes, and Myrtle boughs, he was carried in sign of their victorious
spoils, to a great field-Tent, that was set up in the midst of the wood, where
the Tables were set in order, and a dinner made ready, so plentiful and well
dressed, that it well showed the bounty and magnificence of him that gave it.

Sancho, showing the wounds of his torn Garment to the Duchess said; If this
had been hunting of the Hare, my Coat had not seen it self in this
extremity: I know not what pleasure there can be in looking for a Beast, that
if he reach you with a tuske, he may kill you: I have often heard an old song
that says; Of the Bears may thou be eat, as was Favila the great. He was a
Gothish King (quoth Don-Quixote) that going a hunting in the Mountains, a Bear
eat him. This I say (said Sancho) I would not that Kings and Princes should
thrust themselves into such dangers, to enjoy their pleasure; for what pleasure
can there be to kill a Beast that has committed no fault?

You are in the wrong Sancho, quoth the Duke; for the exercise of Beast-hunting
is the necessariest for Kings and Princes that can be. The Chase is a show of
War, where there be stratagems, crafts, deceits to overcome the Enemy at
pleasure; in it you have sufferings of cold and intolerable heates, sleep and
idleness are banished, the powers are corroborated, the members agilitated. In
conclusion, it is an exercise that may be used without prejudice to any body,
and to the pleasure of everybody, and the best of it is, that it is not
common, as other kinds of sports are, except flying at the Foul only fit for
Kings and Princes. Therefore, Sancho, change thy opinion, and when thou art a
Governor, follow the chase, and thou shall be a hundred times the better.

Not so (quoth Sancho) it is better for your Governor to have his legs broken
and be at home: 'twere very good that poor suitors should come and seek him,
and he should be taking his pleasure in the Woods: 'twould be a sweet
Government in faith. 'Good faith Sir, the Chase and Pastimes are rather for idle
companions then Governors: My sport shall be Vyed Trump at Christmas, and at
Skettle pinns Sundaies and Holidays; for your Hunting is not for my condition,
neither does it agree with my conscience.

Pray God Sancho it be so (quoth the Duke;) for to do and to say go a
several way. Let it be how 'twill (said Sancho;) for a good Play Master needs
no Pledge, and Gods help is better then early rising; and the belly carries the
legs, and not the legs the belly: I mean, that if God help me, and I do
honestly what I ought, without doubt I shall Govern as well as a Ier-Falcon: I,
I, put your finger in my mouth, and see if I bite or no.

A mischief on thee, cursed Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote:) and when shall we
hear thee, as I have often told thee, speak a wise speech, without a Proverb?
My Lords, I beseech you leave this: Dunce; for he will grind your very souls,
not with his two, but his two thousand Proverbs, so seasonable, as such be his
health or mine, if I hearken to them.

Sancho's Proverbs (quoth the Duchess) although they be more then Mallara's,
yet they are not less to be esteemed then his, for their sententious brevity.
For my part, they more delight me then others that be far better, and more
sitting.

With these and such like savory discourses, they went out of the Tent to the
Wood, to seek some more sport; and the day was soon past, and the night came
on, and not so light and calm as the time of the year required, it being about
Mid-summer: but a certain dismallnesse it had, agreeing much with the Dukes
intention, and so as it grew to be quite dark; it seemed that upon a sudden,
all the wood was on fire, through every part of it; and there were heard here
and there, this way and that way, an infinite company of Cornets, and other
warlike instruments, and many troops of Horse that passed through the Wood: The
light of the Fire and the sound of the warlike Instruments, did as it were
blind, and stunned the eyes and ears of the bystanders, and of all those
that were in the wood. Straight they heard a company of Moorish cries, [Le li
lies, like the cries of the Wild Irish,] such as they use when they join
Battle; Drums and Trumpets sounded and Fifes, all, as it were, in an instant,
and so fast, that he that had had his senses, might have lost them, with the
confused sound of these Instruments.

The Duke was astonished, the Duchess dismayed, Don Quixote wondered, Sancho
trembled: And finally, even they that knew the occasion were frighted: Their
fear caused a general silence, and a Post in a Devils weed passed before
them, sounding, instead of a Cornet, a huge hollow Horn that made a hoarce and
terrible noise. Hark you Post (quoth the Duke; What are you? Whither go you?
And what men of war are they that cross over the Wood? To which the Post
answered, with a horrible and free voice; I am the Devil, I go to seek
Don-Quixote de la Mancha; and they which come here, are six Troops of
Enchanters that bring the Peerlesse Dulcinea del Toboso upon a Triumphat
Chariot; she comes here Enchanted with the brave French man Montesinos, to
give order to Don-Quixote, how she may be disinchanted.

If thou were a Devil, as thou say (quoth the Duke) and as they shape shows
thee to be, thou would have known that Knight Don-Quixote de la Mancha; for
he is here before thee. In my soul and conscience (quoth the Devil) I thought
not on it; for I am so diverted with my several cogitations, that I quite
forgot the chief for which I came. Certainly (said Sancho) this Devil is an
honest fellow, and a good Christian; for if he were not he would not have
sworn by his soul and conscience: and now I believe, that in Hell you have
honest men. Straight the Devil without lighting, directing his fight toward
Don Quixote said; The unluckie, but valiant Knight Montesinos, sends me to
thee, O Knight of the Lions (for me thinks now I see thee in their paws)
commanding me to tell thee from him, that thou expect him here, where he will
meet thee; for he has with him Dulcinea del Toboso, and means to give thee
instruction how thou shall disinchant her; and now I have done my message I
must away, and the Devils, like me be with thee: and good Angels guard the
rest. And this said, he winds his monstrous horn, and turned his back, and
went without staying for any Answer.

Each one began afresh to admire, especially Sancho and Don-Quixote. Sancho, to
see that in spite of truth, Dulcinea must be enchanted: Don-Quixote, to think
whether that were true that befell him in Montesino's Cave, and being elevated
in these dumps, the Duke said to him; Will you stay, Signior Don-Quixote?
Should I not, quoth he? Here will I stay courageous and undanted, though all
the Devils in Hell should close with me. Well quoth Sancho, if I hear another
Devil and another Horn, I Will stay in Flanders as much as here.

Now it grew darker, and they might perceive many lights up and down the Wood;
like the dry exhalations of the Earth in the Sky, that seem to us to be
shooting-Starres: Besides, there was a terrible noise heard, just like that of
your creaking Wheels of Oxe-wains, from whose piercing squeake (they say)
Bears and Wolves do fly, if there be any the way they pass. To this tempest
there was another added, that increast the rest, which was, that it seemed that
in all four parts of the Wood, there were four Encounters or Battles in an
instant; for there was first a sound of terrible Cannon-shotte, and an infinite
company of Guns were discharged, and the voices of the Combatants seemed to be
heard by and by a far off, the Moorish cries reiterated.

Lastly, the Trumpets, Cornets and Horns, Drums, Canons and Guns, and above
all, the fearful noise of the Carts, all together made a most confused and
horrid sound, which tried Don-Quixotes uttermost courage to suffer it: but
Sancho was quite gone, and fell in a swound upon the Duchesses coats, who
received him and commanded they should cast cold water in his face; which done,
he came to himself, just as one of the Carts of those whistling wheels came
to the place, four lazy Oxen drew it, covered with black clothes; at every
horn they had a lighted torch tied, and on the top of the Cart there was a
high seat made, upon which a venerable old man sat, with a Beard as white as
snow, and so long that it reached to his gyrdle; his garment was a long gown
of black-Buckoram: for because the Cart was full of lights, all within it might
very well be discerned and seen; two ugly Spirits guided it, clad in the said
Buckoram, so monstrous, that Sancho, after he had seen them, winked, because
he would see them no more; when the Cart drew near to their standing, the
venerable old man rose from his seat, and standing up with a loud voice said; I
am the wise Lyrgander; and the Cart passed on, he not speaking a word more,

After this, there passed another Cart in the same manner, with another old man
inthronized; who making the Cart stay; with a voice no less lofty then the
other said; I am the wise Alquife, great friend to the ungrateful Vrganda; and
on he went: And straight another Cart came on, the same pace; but he that sat
in the chief seat, was no old man (as the rest) but a good robustious fellow,
and ill favored, who when he came near, rose up, as the rest; but with a
voice more hoarce and divellish, said; I am Archelaus the Enchanter, mortal
enemy to Amadis de Gaul, and all his kindred: And so on he passed, all three
of these Carts turning a little forward, made a stand, and the troublesome
noise of their wheels ceased, and straight there was heard no noise, but a
sweet and consenting sound of well-formed music, which comforted Sancho, and
he held it for a good sign, and he said thus to the Duchess, from whom he
stirred not a foot, not a jot.

Madam, where there is music, there can be no ill. Neither (quoth the
Duchess) where there is light and brightness. To which (said Sancho) the fire
gives light, and your Bon-fires (as we see) and perhaps might burn us: but
Music is always a sign of feasting and jollity. You shall see that (quoth
Don-Quixote) for he heard all, and he said well, as you shall see in the next
chapter.

CHAP. XXXV.
Where is prosecuted the notice that Don-Quixote had, of dis-enchanting
Dulcinea, with other admirable accidents.
WHen the delightful Music was ended they might see one of those you call
Triumphant Chariots come toward them, drawn by six dun Mules, but covered with
white linen, and upon each of them came a Penetentiary with a Torch, clothed
likewise all in white: the Cart was twice or thrice as big as the three former,
and at the top and sides of it were twelve other Penetentiaries, as white as
snow, all with their Torches lighted, a sight that admired and astonished
jointly: And in a high throne sat a Nymph, clad in a vail of cloth of silver,
a world of golden spangles glimmering about her; her face was covered with a
fine cloth of Tiffany, for all whose wrinkles the face of a most delicate
Damzell was seen through it, and the many lights made them easily distinguish
her beauty and years, which (in likelihood) came not to twenty, nor were under
seventeen: Next her came a shape, clad in a gown of those you call
side-Garments, down to her foot; her head was covered with a black veil: But
even as the Cart came to be just over against the Dukes and Don-Quixote, the
Music of the Hoboyes ceased, and the Harps and Lutes that came in the Cart
began; and the gowned Shape rising up, unfolding her Garment on both sides, and
taking her vail off from her head, she discovered plainly the picture of
raw-boned Death, at which Don-Quixote was troubled, and Sancho afraid, and the
Dukes made show of some timorous resenting. This live Death standing up, with a
drowzie voice, and a tongue not much waking, began in this manner. I Merlin am,
Verses made on purpose absurdly, as the subject required, and so translated ad
verbum.
he that in Histories,
They say, the Devil to my Father had,
(A tale by Age succeeding authorized)
The Prince and Monarch of: the Magic Art,
And Register of deep Astrology,
Succeeding Ages, since, me emulate,
That only seek to sing and blazen forth
The rare exploits of those Knights Errant brave,
To whom I bore, and bear a liking great.
And howsoever of Enchanters, and
Those that are Wizards and Magicians be,
Hard the condition rough and devilish is;
Yet mine is tender, soft, and amorous,
And unto all friendly, to do them good.
In the obscure and darkest Caves of Dis,
Whereas my soul has still been entertained
In forming Circles and of Characters,
I heard the lamentable note, of fair
And peerless Dulcin^a del Toboso.
I knew of her Enchantment and hard hap,
Her transformation, from a goodly Dame
Into a Rustic wench, I sorry was,
And shutting up my spirit within this hollow,
This terrible and fierce Anatomy.
When I had turned a hundred thousand books
Of this my Devilish Science and uncouth,
I come to give the remedy that is fit
To such a grief, and to an ill so great.
Oh Glory thou of all, that do put on
Their coats of steel and hardest Diamond,
Thou light, thou lanthorn, path, north-star and guide
To those, that casting off their slugish sleep
And fether-beds, themselves accomodate
To use the e^ercise of bloody Arms,
To thee, I say, Oh never praised enough,
Not as thou ought to be! Oh valiant!
Oh jointly wise^ to thee Oh Don-Quixote,
The Mancha's splendor, and the Star of Spain,
That to recover to her first estate,
The peer^lesse Dulcinea del Tobos.
It is conven^^^t that Sancho thy Squire,
Himself three thousand and three hundred give
Lashes, upon his valiant buttocks both
Unto the Air discovered, and likewise
That they may vex, and smart, and grieve him sore
And upon this, let all resolved be,
That of her hard misfortunes Authors were
My Masters, this my cause of coming was.


By G^d (quoth Sancho) I say not three thousand; but I will as soon give my
self three stabs, as three, the Devil take this kind of dis-enchanting. What
have my Buttocks to do with Enchantments? Verily, if Master Merlin have found
no other means ^o dis-Enchant the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, she may go
Enchanted to her Grave.

Goodman-Rascall (quoth Don-Quixote:) you Garlic Stinkard; I shall take you,
and bind you to a Tree, as naked as your Mother brought you forth, and let me
not say three thousand and three hundredth, but I Will give you six thousand and
six hundred, so well laid on, that you shall not claw them off at three
thousand and three hundred plucks, and reply not a word, if thou do, I Will
tear out thy very Soul.

Which when M^rline heard, quoth he, It must not be so, for the Stripes that
honest Sancho must receive, must be with his good will, and not perforce, and
at what time he will, for no time is prefixed him; but it is lawful for him,
if he will redeem one half of this beating, he may receive it from another
hand that may lay it on well.

No other, nor laying on (quoth Sancho) no hand shall come near me: Am I
Dulcinea del Tobosoes Mother trow ye? That my Bu^^o^ks should pay for the
offense of her Eyes? My Master indeed, he is a part of her, since every
stitch while he calls her My Life, my Soul, my Sustenance, my Prop; he may
be whipped for her, and do all that is fitting for her dis-Enchanting, but
for me to whip my self I bernounce. [ Mistaken in stead of Renounce, for so
it go^^ in the Spanish.]

Sancho scarce ended his speech, when the silver Nymph that came next to
Merlins Ghost, taking off her thin veil, she discovered her face, which
seemed unto all to be extraordinary fair, and with a manly grace and voice not
very amiable, directing her speech to Sancho, she said, Oh thou unhappie
Squire, Soul of Lead, and Heart of Cork, and Entrails of Flint, if thou hadest
been bidden, thou face-flaying Thief, to cast thy self from a high Tower down
to the ground; if thou had been wished, enemy of mankind, to eat a dozen of
Toads, two of Lizards, and three of Snakes; if thou hadest been persuaded to
kill thy Wife and Children with some Truculent and sharp Scimiter; no marvel
though thou should show thy self nice and squeamish: but to make ado for
three thousand and three hundred lashes (since the poorest Schoolboy that is,
has them every month) admires, astonishes, and affrights all the pitiful
Entrails of the Auditors, and of all them that in process of time shall come
to hear of it: Put, oh miserable and flinty breast; put, I say, thy skittish
Moyles eyes upon the balls of mine, compared to shining stars, and thou shall
see them weep drop after drop, making surrows, careers, and paths, upon the
fair fields of my cheeks. Let it move thee knavish and untoward Monster, that
my flourishing age (which is yet but in it is ten, and some years; for I am
nineteen, and not yet twenty) does consume and wither under the Bark of a
rustic labourer: and if now I seem not so to thee, it is a particular favor
that Signior Merlin has done me, who is here present, only that my beauty may
make thee relent; for the tears of an afflicted fairness turn Rocks into
Cotton, and Tigers into Lambs. Lash, lash that thick flesh of thine, untamed
beast, and rowze up thy courage from sloth, which makes thee only fit to eat
till thou burst, and set my smooth flesh at liberty, the gentleness of my
condition, and the beauty of my face; and if for my sake thou will not be
mollified, and reduced to some reasonable terms, yet do it for that poor
Knight that is by thee; for thy Master (I say) whose soul I see is traversed in
his throat, not ten fingers from his lips, expecting nothing but thy rigid or
soft answer, either to come out of his mouth or to ^u^n back to his stomach.

Don-Quixote hearing this, felt to his throat, and turning to the Duke, said;
Before God Sir, Dulcinea has said true; for my soul indeed is traversed in my
throat like the nock of a Cross-bow. What say you to this Sancho, quoth the
Duchess? I say what I have said (quoth Sancho) that the lashes I bernounce.
Renounce thou would say Sancho, said the Duke. Let your Greatness pardon me
(said Sancho) I am not now to look into subtilties, nor your letters too many
or too few; for these lashe^ that I must have do so trouble me, that I know
not what to do or say: But I would fain know of my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso,
where she learn this kind of begging she has: she comes to desire me to
tear my flesh with lashes and calls me Leaden Soul, and Untamed Beast, with a
Catalogue of ill names, that the Devil would not suffer. Does she think my
flesh is made of brass? Or will her disinchan^ment be worth any thing to me
or no? What basket of white linen, of Shirts, Caps, or socks (though I wear
none) does she bring with her, to soften me with? only some kind of railing
or other, knowing the usual Proverb i^, An Ass laden with gold will go
lightly up hill^ and that Gifts do enter stone walls; and serve God and work
ba^d; and better a Bird in the hand then two in the bush. And my Master too,
that should animate me to this task, and comfort me, to make me become as soft
as wool, he says, that he will ^ye me naked to a tree and dou^le the number
of my lashes; and therefore these compassionate Gentles should consider, that
they do not only wish a Squire to whip himself, but a Governor also, as if it
were no more but drink to your (...) Le^um learn, let um learn with a pox, to
know how to ask and to demand; for all times are not alike; and men are not
always in a good humour^: I am new ready to burst with grief, to see my torn
Coat, and now you come to bid me whip my self willingly, I being as far from
it as to turn Cacicke [Caciques are great Lords amongst the West Indians.

By my faith Sancho (quoth the Duke) if you do not make your self as soft as
a ripe fig, you finger not the Government. 'Twere good indeed, that I should
send a cruel flinty-hearted Governor amongst my Islanders, that will not bend
to the tears of afflicted Damzells, nor to the entreaties, of discreet,
imperious, ancient, wise Enchanters. To conclude, Sancho, either you must whip
your self, or be whipped, or not be Governor.

Sir (quoth Sancho) may I not have two days respite to consider? No, by no
means, quoth Merlin, now at this instant, and in this place this business
must be dispatched, or Dulcinea shall return to Montesino's Cave, and to her
pristine being of a Country-wench, or as she is, she shall be carried to the
Elyzian fields, there to expect till the number of these lashes be fulfilled.
Go to, honest Sancho, said the Duchess, be of good cheer, show your love
for your Masters bread that you have eaten to whom all of us are indebted for
his pleasing condition, and his high Chivalry. Say I, son, to this
whipping-cheere, and hang the Devil, and let fear go whistle, a good heart
conquers ill fortune, as well thou know.

To this, Sancho yielded these foolish speeches, speaking to Merlin: Tell me,
Signior Merlin, said he, when the Devill-Post passed by here, and delivered
^^is message to my Master from Signior Monte^inos, bidd^ng him from him he
should expect him here, because he came to give order, that my Lady Duloinea
should b^^ disenchanted, where is he, that hitherto we have neither seen
Montesinos, or any such thing?

To which, said Merlin, Friend Sancho; The Devil is an Ass, and (...) I sent
him in quest of your Master: but not with any message from Mentesinos, but from
me, for he is still in his Cave, plotting, or to say truer, expecting his
disenchanment, for yet he want^ something toward it; and if he owe thee ought,
or thou have any thing to do with bi^, I Will b^ing him thee, and set him where
thou will ^ and therefore now make an end, and yield to this disciplining, and
believe thee it will do thee much good, as well for thy mind as for thy body:
for thy mind, touching the charity thou sha^ perform; for thy body, for I
know thou ar^ of asanguine complextion, and it can do thee no hurt to let out
some blood.

What a company of Physicians there be in the world, said Sancho? even the
very Enchanters are Physicians. Well, since every body tells me so, that it is
good (yet I cannot think so) I am content to give my self three thousand and
three hundred lashes, on condition that I may he giving of them as long as I
please, and I will be out of debt as soon as it is possible, that the world
may enjoy the beauty of the Lady Dulcin^^ del Tobo^^ since it appears,
contrary to what I thought, that she is fair. On condition likewise that I
may not dra^ blood with the whip, and if any lash go by too, it shall pass
for current: Item that Signior Merlin, if I forget any part of the number
(since he knows all) shall have a care to tell them, and to let me know how
many I want, or if I exceed. For your exceeding, quoth M^rlin, there needs no
telling, for coming to your just number, Forthwith Dulcinea shall be
dis-enchanted, and shall come in all thickfulnesse to se^ke Sancho, to gratify
and reward him for the good deed. So you need not be scrupnious, either of
your excess or defect, and God forbid I should deceive any body in so much as
a ha^^^^ breadth.

Well (quo^^ Sancho) a Gods name bed it, I yield to my ill fortune, and with
the aforesaid condition accept of the penitence.

Scarce had Sancho spoken these words, when the Waits began to play, and a
world of guns were shot off, and Don-Quixote hung about Sancho's neck, kissing
his cheeks and forehead a thousand times. The Duke, the Duchess, and all the
bystanders, were wonderfully delighted, and the Cart began to go on, and
passing by, the fair Dulcinea inclined her head to the Dukes, and made a low
courtsie to Sancho, and by this the merry morn came on apace, and the flowers
of the field began to bloome and rise up, and liquid Cristall of the brooks;
murmuring through the gray pebbles, went to give tribute to the Rivers, that
expected them, the sky was clear, and the air wholesome, the light
perspicuous, each by it self, and all together showed manifestly, that the
day, whose skirts Aurora came trampling on, should be bright and clear.

And the Dukes being satisfied with the Chase, and to have obtained their
purpose so discre^tly and happily, they returned to their Castle, with an
intention to second their jest; for to them there was no earnest could give
more content.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the strange and unimagined Adventure of the afflicted Matron, alias, the
Countess Trifaldi, with a Letter that Sancho Panca wrote to his Wife Teresa
Panca.
THe Duke had a Steward of a very pleasant and conceited wit, who played
Merlins part, and contrived the whole Furniture for the passed Adventure; he
it was that made the Verses, and that a Page should act Dulcinea. Finally, by
his Lords leave; he plotted another piece of work, the pleasantest and
strangest that may be imagined.

The Duchess asked Sancho the next day, if he had yet begun his Task of the
Penance, for the disinchanting of Dulcinea: he told her yes; and that as that
night he had given himself five lashes. The Duchess asked him, with what? He
answered with his hand. Those (quoth the Duchess) are rather claps then
lashes: I am of opinion, that the sage Merlin will not accept of this
softness; 'twere fitter that Sancho took the discipline of Rowels or Bullets
with Prickles that may smart; for the business will be effected with blood;
and the liberty of so great a Lady will not be wrought so slightly, or with so
small a price: and know Sancho, that works of charity are not to be done so
slow and (...), for they will merit nothing.

To which Sancho replied, Give me Madam, a convenient lash of some bough, and I
will lash my self that it may not smart too much; for let me tell your Worship
this, That though I am a Clown, yet my flesh is rather Cotton then Mattresse;
and there is no reason I should kill my self for another good. You say well
(quoth the Duchess) to morrow I Will give you a whip that shall fit you, and
agree with the tenderness of your flesh, as if it were a kinn to them. To
which (quoth Sancho) Lady of my soul, I beseech you know, that I have written a
Letter to my Wife Teresa Panca, letting her know all that has happened to (me,
since I parted from her; here I have it in my bosom, and it wants nothing but
the superscription: I would your discretion would read it; for me thinks it
goes fit for a Governor, I mean, in the style that Governors should write.
And who penned it, said the Duchess? Who should, said he, Sinner that I am;
but I my self? And did you write it (quoth she?) Nothing less (said he;) for
I can neither write nor read, though I can set to my firm. Let Us see your
Letter (quoth the Duchess) for I warrant thou show the ability and
sufficiency of thy wit in it. Sancho drew the Letter open out of his bosom;
and the Duchess taking it of him, read the Contents, as follows.

Sancho Panca's Letter to his Wife Teresa Panca.
IF I were well lashed, I got well by it: If I got a Government, it cost me
many a good lash. This, my Teresa, at present thou understandest not, hereafter
thou shall know it. Know now Teresa, that I am determined thou go in thy
Coach; for all other kind of going, is to go upon all four. Thou art now a
Governors Wife; let us see if any body will gnaw thy stumps. I have sent thee a
green Hunters suite, that my Lady the Duchess gave me; fit it so, that it may
serve our Daughter for a Coat and Bodies. My Master Don-Quixote, as I have
heard say in this Country, is a Mad Wiseman, and a conceited Coxcombe; and
that I am never a whit behind him. We have been in Montesinos Cave: and the
sage Merlin has laid hands on me for the dis-enchanting my Lady Dulcinea del
Toboso, whom you there call Aldonsa Lorenzo, with three thousand and three
hundred lashes lacking five, that I give my self, she shall be dis-enchanted
as the Mother that brought her forth: but let no body know this; for put it
thou to discant on, some will cry white, others black. Within this little while
I will go to my Government, whither I go with a great desire to make money;
for I have been told, that all your Governors at first go with the same
desire. I will look into it, and send thee word whether it be fit for thee to
come to me or no. Dapple is well, and commends him heartily to thee; and I will
not leave him, although I were to go to be Great Turk. My Lady the Duchess
kisses thy hands a thousand times: Return her two thousand; for there is nothing
costs less, nor is better cheap, as my Master tells me, then complement. God
Almighty has not yet been pleased to bless me with a Cloke-bag, and another
hundred Pistolets, as those you wot of: But be not grieved, my Teresa, there is
no hurt done; all shall be recompensed when we lay the Government a bucking:
only one thing troubles me; for they tell me, that after my time is expired, I
may dye for hunger; which if it should be true, I have paid deer for it,
though your lame and maimed men get their living by Begging and Alms: so that
one way or other thou shall be rich and happy: God make thee so, and keep me
to serve thee. From this Castle the twentieth of July, 1614.

The Governor thy Husband, Sancho Panca.


When the Duchess had made an end of reading the Letter, she said to Sancho;
in two things the good Governor is out of the way: the one in saying or
publishing, that this Government has been give him for the lashes he must
give himself, he knowing, for he cannot deny it, that when my Lord the Duke
promised it him, there was no dreaming in the world of lashes: The other is,
that he shows himself in it very covetous, and I would not have it so
prejudicial to him; for Covetousness is the Root of all evil, and the
covetous Governor does ungoverned Justice. I had no such meaning, Madam (quoth
Sancho) and if your worship think the Letter be not written as it should be,
let it be torn and we will have a new; and perhaps it may be worse, if it be
left to my noddle. No, no, (quoth the Duchess) it is well enough, and I Will have
the Duke see it. So they went to a Garden where they were to dine that day; the
Duchess showed Sanchoes Letter to the Duke, which gave him great content. They
dined and when the cloth was taken away, and that they had entertained
themse^ves a pretty while with Sanchoes savory conversation; upon a sudden
they heard a doleful sound of a Flute, and of a hoarce and untuned Drum; all
of them were in some amazement at this confused, martial, and sad harmony,
especially Don-Quixote, who was so troubled he could not sit still in his seat;
for Sancho there is no more to be said, but that fear carried him to his
accustomed refuge, which was the Duchesses side or her lap; for in good
earnest, the sound they heard was most sad and melancholy. And all of them
being in this maze, they might see two men come in before them into the Garden,
clad in mourning weeds, so long that they dragged on the ground, these came
beating of two Drums, covered likewise with black, with them came the Fife,
black and besmeared as well as the rest. After these there followed a personage
of a Gyantly body, bemantled, and not clad in a cole-black Cassock, whose skyrt
was extraordinary long, his Cassock likewise was gyrt with a broad black Belt,
at which there hung an unmeasurable Scimitar, with hilts and scabard; upon his
face he wore a transparent black Veil, through which they might see a huge long
beard, as white as snow His pace was very grave and stayed, according to the
sound of the Drum and Fife. To conclude, his hugeness, his motion, his
blackness, and his consorts, might have held all that knew him not, and looked
on him, in suspense.

Thus he came with the state and Prosopopeia aforesaid, and kneeled before the
Duke, who with the rest that stood up there, awaited his coming: but the Duke
would not by any means hear him speak till he rose, which the prodigious
Scar-crow did; and standing up, he plucked his mask from off his face, and
showed the most horrid, long, white, and thick beard, that ere till then
humane eyes beheld; and straight he let loose and roared out from his broad
and spreading breast, a majesticall loud voice, and casting his eyes toward the
Duke, thus said:

High and mighty Sir, I am called Trifaldin with the white beard, Squire to the
Countess Trifaldi, otherwise called The Afflicted Ma^ron, from whom I bring an
Embassage to your Greatness, which is, that your Magnificence be pleased to
give her leave, and license to enter and relate her griefs, which are the most
strange and admirable that ever troubled thoughts in the world could think:
but first of all, she would know whether the valorous and invincible Knight
Don-Quixote de la Mancha be in your Castle, in whose search she comes afoot,
and hungry from the Kingdom of Candaya, even to this your Dukedom: a thing
miraculous, or by way of Enchantment: she is at your Fortress gate, and only
expects your permission to come in; thus he spoke, and forthwith coughed and
wiped his Beard from the top to the bottom, with both his hands, and with a
long pawse attended the Dukes Answer, which was;

Honest Squire Trifaldin with the white Beard, long, since the misfortune of
the Countess Trifaldi has come to our notice, whom Enchanters have caused to
be styled. The afflicted Matron: tell her, stupendous Squire, she may come
in, and that here is the valiant Knight Don-Quixote de la Mancha, from whose
generous condition she may safely promise her self all aid and assistance:
and you may also tell her from me, that if she need my favor, she shall
not want it; since I am obliged to it by being a Knight, to whom the favoring
of all sorts of her sex is pertained and annexed, especially Matron widows
ruined and afflicted, as her Ladyship is. Which when Trifaldin heard, he bent
his knee to the ground, and making signs to the Drum and Flfe, that they
should play to the same pace and sound as when they entered, he returned back
out of the Garden, and left all in admiration of his presence and posture.

And the Duke turning to Don-Quixote, said; In fine Sir Knight, neither the
clouds of malice or ignorance can darken or obscure the light of valor and
virtue. This I say, because it is scarce six days since that your bounty [ A
forced word put in, in mockage purposely] has been in this my Castle, when the
sad and afflicted come from remote parts on foot, and not in Carroches and on
Dromedaries, to seek you, confident that in this most strenuous arm they shall
find the remedy for their griefs and labors, thanks be to your brave
exploits, that run over and compass the whole world.

Now would I, my Lord (quoth Don-Quixote) that that same blessed Clergyman
were present, who the other day at Table, seemed to be so distasted, and to
bear such a grudge against Knights Errant, that he might see with his eyes,
whether those Knights are necessary to the world; he might feel too with his
hands that your extraordinary afflicted and comfortless and great affairs, and
enormious mishaps go not to seek redress to Book-mens houses, or to some poor
Country Sextons, not to your Gentleman that never stirred from home, nor to the
lazy Courtier that rather hearkens after news which he may report again, then
procures to perform deeds and exploixts, that others may relate and write; the
redress of griefs; the succouring of necessities; the protection of Damzells;
the comfort of Widows, is had from no sort of persons so well as from Knights
Errant; and that I am one, I give heaven infinite thanks, and I think my
disgrace well earned, that I may receive in this noble calling. Let this Matron
come and demand what she will; for I will give her redress with this my
strong Arm and undaunted resolution of my courageous Spirit.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the prosecution of the famous Adventure of the Afflicted Matron.
THe Duke and Duchess were extremely glad to see how well Don-Quixote
satisfied their intentions: And then Sancho said, I should be loath this
Mistress Matron should lay any stumbling block in the promise of my Government;
for I have heard a Toledo Apothecary say (and he spoke like a Bull-fin^h) that
where these kind of women were intermedling, there could no good follow:
[Duennas: Here Sancho takes Duenna in the former sense, for an old
Waiting Woman.] Lord, what an enemy that Apothecary was to them! for since all
your Matrons, of what condition or quality soever they be, are irksome and
foolish; what kind of ones shall your afflicted be? as this Countess* Three
skirts, or Three tails; for tails and skirts, all is one: [* Alluding to the
name Trifaldi, as if she had been called tres faldes, which fignifies three
skirts; and this was his mistake.]

Peace, friend Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote; for since this Matron-Lady comes from
so remote parts to seek me, she is none of those that the Apothecary has in
his bed-roll: Besides, this is a Countess; and when your Countesses are
Waiting-women, it is either to Queens or Empresses, who in their houses are most
absolute, and are served by other Wayting-women. To this, quoth Donna
Rod^iguez, that was present, My Lady the Duchess has women in her service
that might have been Countesses, if Fortune had been pleased: but the weakest
go to the walls, and let no man speak ill of Waiting-women, and especially of
ancient Maids; for although I am none, yet I well and clearly perceive the
advantage, that your Maiden Wayting-women have over Widdow-women, and one pair
of sheers went between us both.

For all that (quoth Sancho) there is so much to be sheered in your
Waiting-women (according to mine Apothecary) that, The more you stir this
business, the more it will stink. Always these Squires (quoth Donna
Rodriguez) are malicious against us; for, as they are Faries that haunt the
out-rooms, and every foot spy us, the times that they are not at their
devotions (which are many) they spend in backbiting us, undigging our bones,
and burying our reputation. Well, let me tell these mooving Blocks that in
spite of them, we will live in the world and in houses of good fashion, though
we starve for it, or cover our delicate or not delicate flesh with a black
Monks weed, as if we were old walls covered with Tapistry, at the passing of a
Procession. In Faith if I had time and leisure enough, I would make all that are
present know, that there is no virtue, but is contained in a Waiting Woman. I
believe (said the Duchess) my honest Donna Rodriguez is in the right; but she
must stay for a fit time to answer for her self and the rest of Waiting-women,
to confound the Apothecaries ill opinion, and to root it out altogether from
Sancho's breast. To which (quoth Sancho) since the Governourship smoaks in my
head, all Squirely sumes are gone out, and I care not a wildefig for all your
Waiting-women.

Forward they had gone with this Wayting-woman discourse, had they not heard
the Drum and Fife play, whereby they knew that the afflicted Matron was
entering: the Duchess asked the Duke if they should meet her, since she was a
Countess and noble personage. For her Counteship (quoth Sancho, before the
Duke could answer) I like it that your Greatness meet her: but for her
Matronship, that ye stir not a foot. Who bids thee meddle with that Sancho,
quoth Don Quixote? Who Sir (said he?) I my self, that may meddle, that, as a
Squire, have learnt the terms of courtesy in your Worships School, that is
the most courteous and best bred Knight in all Courtship; and as I have heard
you say in these things, Better play a card too much then too little; and good
wits will soon meet. It Is true as Sancho says (quoth the Duke) we will see
what kind of Countess she is, and by that guess what courtesy is due to
her. By this the Drum and Fife came in, as formerly: And here the Author ended
this brief Chapter, beginning another, which continues the same Adventure, one
of the notablest of all the History.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The Afflicted Matron recounts her ill-Errantry.
A After the Music there entered in at the Garden, about some twelve
Matron-wayters, divided into two ranks, all clad in large Monks weeds, to see
to, of fulled Serge, with white Stoles of thin Callico, so long that they only
showed the edge of their black weeds. After them came the Countess Trifaldi,
whom Trifaldin with the white beard led by the hand, clad all in finest
unnapped Bays; for had it been napped, every grain of it would have been as
big as your biggest pease: Her tail or her train (call it whether you will)
had three corners, which was borne by three Pages, clad likewise in mourning:
Thus making a sightly and Mathematical show with those three sharp corners,
which the poynted skirt made, for which belike she was called the Countess
Trifaldi [the word in Spanish importing so] as if we should say the Countess
of the three trains; and Benengeli says it was true, and that her right name
was the Countess Lobuna, because there were many Wolves bred in her Country;
and if they had been Foxes, as they were Wolves, they would have called her the
Countess Zorruna, [Zorra in Spanish, a Fox] by reason that in those parts it
was the custom that great ones took their appellations from the thing or
things that did most abound in their States: but this Countess taken with the
strangeness of the threefold train, left her name of Lobuna, and took that of
Trifaldi.

The twelve Wayters and their Lady came a procession pace, their faces covered
with black vailes, and not transparent, was as Trifaldins, but ^o close that
nothing was seen through. Just as the Matronly Squadron came in; the Duke, the
Duchess, and Don-Quixote stood up, and all that beheld the large Procession.
The twelve made a stand and a Lane, through the midst of which the afflicted
came forward, Trifaldin still leading her by the hand, which the Duke, the
Duchess, and Don-Quixote seeing, they advanced some dozen paces to meet her.
She kneeling on the ground, with a voice rather course and hoarce, then fine
and clear, said, May it please your Greatnesses to spare this courtesy to your
servant; I say, to me your servant; for as I am The Afflicted, I shall not
answer you as I ought, by reason that my strange and unheard of misfortune has
transported my understanding I know not wither, and sure it is far off, since
the more I seek it, the less I find it. He should want it Lady (quoth the
Duke) that by your person could not judge of your worth, the which without any
more looking into, deserves the Cream of Courtesy, and the flower of all
mannerly Ceremonies: So taking her up by the hand, he led her to sit down in a
chair by the Duchess, who welcomed her also with much courtesy.

Don-Quixote was silent, and Sancho longed to see the Trifaldi's face, and some
of her waiting-women: but there was no possibility, till they of their own
accords would show them; so all being quiet and still, they expected who should
first break silence, which was done by the afflicted Matron, with these words.
Confident I am (most powerful Sir, most beautiful Lady, and most discreet
Auditors) that my most miserableness [ A fustian Speech on purpose and so
continued.] shall find in your most valorous Breasts shelter, no less pleasing
then generous and compassionate; for it is such as is able to make marble
relent, to soften the Diamonds, and to mollify the steel of the hardest
hearts in the world; but before it come into the marketplace of your hearing
(I will not say your ears) I should be glad to know, if the most
Purifiediferous Don-Quixote of the Manchissima, and his Squiriferous Panca, be
in this Lap, this Quire, this Company.

Panca is here (quoth Sancho) before any body else could answer, and
Don-Quixotissimo too, therefore most Afflictedissimous Matronissima, speak
what you willissimus [Sancho strives to answer in the same key] for we are all
ready and most forward to be your Servitorissimus. Then Don-Quixote rose up,
and directed his speech to the Afflicted Matron and said; If your troubles,
straightned Lady, may promise you any hope of remedy, by the valor and force
of any Knight Errant; Behold, here are my poor and weak arms, that shall be
employed in your service. I am Don-Quixote de la Mancha, whose Function is to
succor the needy, which being so (as it is) you need not, Lady, to use any
Rhetoric, or to seek any Preambles; but plainly and without circumstances,
tell your griefs; for they shall be heard by those, that if they cannot
redress them, yet they will commiserate them.

Which when the afflicted Matron heard, she seemed to fall at Don-Quixotes
feet, and cast her self down, striving to embrace them, and said; Before these
feet and legs I cast my self, oh invincible Knight; since they are the Basis
and Columns of Knight Errantry, these feet will I kiss, on whose steps the
whole remedy of my misfortunes does hang and depend. Oh valorous Errant! whose
valorous exploits do obscure and darken the fabulous ones of the Amadises,
Esplandiasus, and Belianises: And leaving Don-Quixote, she laid hold on Sancho
Panca, and griping his hands, said; Oh thou the loyallest Squire that ever
served Knight Errant, in past of present times! longer in goodness then my
Usher Trifaldins beard; well may thou vaunt, that in serving Don-Quixote,
thou servest, in Cipher, the whole Troop of Knights that have worn Arms in the
world: I conjure thee, by thy most loyal goodness, that thou be a good
Intercessor with thy Master, that he may eftsoons favor this most humble most
unfortunate Countess.

To which (said Sancho) that my goodness, Lady, be as long as your Squires
beard, I do not much stand upon; the business is, Bearded or with Mustacho's,
let me have my soul go to Heaven when I die: for, for beards here I care
little or nothing: but without these clawings or entreaties, I will desire my
Master (for I know he loves me well, and the rather, because now in a certain
business he has need of me) that he favor and help your Worship as much as
he may: but pray uncage your griefs, and tell them us, and let us alone to
understand them.

The Dukes were ready to burst with laughter, as they that had taken the pulse
of this Adventure, and commended within themselves the wit and dissimulation of
the Trifaldi, who sitting her down, said; Of the famous Kingdom of Taprobana,
which is between the great Taprobana and the South sea, some two leagues beyond
Cape Comorin, was Queen the Lady Donna Maguncia, widow to King Archipielo, her
Lord and Husband, in which matrimony they had the Princess Antonomasia, Heir
to the Kingdom: The said Princess was brought up, and increased under my
Tutorage and instruction, because I was the ancientest and chiefest Matron that
waited on her Mother. It fell out then, that times coming and going, the
Child Antonomasia being about fourteen years of age, she was so fair that
Nature could give no further addition. Discretion it self was a Snotty-nose to
her, that was as discreet as fair, and she was the fairest in the world, and
is, if envious Fates and inflexible Destinies have not cut the thread of her
life: but sure they have not; for Heaven will not permit, that Earth suffer
such a loss, as would be the lopping of a branch of the fairest Vine in the
world.

On this beauty (never-sufficiently extolled by my rude tongue) a number of
Princes were enamoured, as well Neighbors as strangers, amongst whom, a
private Gentleman durst raise his thoughts to the Heaven of that beauty, one
that lived in Court, confident in his youth and gallantry, and other abilities,
and happy facilities of wit; for let me give your Greatnesses to understand
(if it be not tedious) he played on a Gitterne, as if he made it speak, he
was a Poet, and a great Dancer, and could very well make Bird-cages, and only
with this Art, might have gotten his living, when he had been in great
necessity: so that all these parts and adornments were able to throw down a
mountain, much more a delicate Damzell: but all his gentry, all his graces,
all his behavior and abilities, could have little prevailed, to render my
childs fortress, if the cursed thief had not conquered me first. First, the
cursed Rascal Vagamund sought to get my good will, and to bribe me, that I,
ill keeper, should deliver him the keys of my fortress.

To conclude, he inveigled my understanding, and obtained my consent, with
some toys and trifles (I know not what) that he gave me: but that which most
did prostrate me, and made me fall, was certain verses, that I heard him
sing one night from a grated Window, toward a Lane where he lay, which were as
I remember these. An ill upon my soul does steal,
From my sweetest enemy:
And it more tormenteth me
That I feel, yet must conceal.


The Ditty was most precious to me, and his voice as sweet as sugar, and many
a time since have I thought, seeing the mis-hap I fell into, by these and such
other like verses, and have considered, that Poets should be banished from all
good and well-governed Commonwealths, as Plato counseled, at least lascivious
Poets; for they write lascivious verses, not such as those of the Marquess of
Mantua, [Old Ballad verses, the Author speaks here Satyrically,] that delight
and make women and children weep, but piercing ones, that like sharp thorns,
but soft, traverse the soul, and wound it like lightning, leaving the garment
sound; and again he sung. Come death, hidden, without pain,
(Let me not thy coming know)
That the pleasure to die so,
Make me not to live again.


Other kinds of songs he had, which being sung, enchanted, and written,
suspended: for when they daigned to make a kind of verse in Candaya, then in
use, called Roundelaies, there was your dancing of souls, and tickling with
laughter and unquietness of the body: and finally, the quicksilver of all the
senses. So, my Masters, let me say, that such Rithmers ought justly to be
banished to the Island of Lizards: but the fault is none of theirs, but of
simple creatures that commend them, and foolish wenches that believe in them:
and if I had been as good a Waiting Woman, as I ought to have been, his
over-nights conceits would not have moved me, neither should I have given
credit to these kind of speeches: I live dying, I burn in the frost, I shake
in the fire, I hope hopeless, I go, and yet I stay: with other
impossibilities of this seumme, of which his writings are full: and then, your
promising the Phoenix of Arabia, Ariadne's, Crown, the Locks of the Sun,
the Pearls of the South, the Gold of Tyber, and Balsamum of Pancaia: and here
they are most liberal in promising that, which they never think to perform.

But whither, aye me unhappy, do I divert my self? What folly or what
madness makes me recount other folks faults, having so much to say of mine
own? Aye me again, unfortunate, For not the verses, but my folly, vanquished
me; not his music, but my lightness, my ignorance softened me; that, and my
ill fore sight opened the way, and made plain the path to Don Clanixo, for
this is the aforesaid Gentle-mans name; so that I being the Bawd, he was many
times in the chamber of the (not by him, but me) betrayed Antonomasia, under
color of being her lawful Spouse; for though a sinner I am, I would not have
confented, that without being her Husband, he should have come to the bottom
of her shoo-sole.

No, no, Matrimony must ever be the color in all these businesses, that shall
be treated of by me: only there was one mischief in it, that Don Clanixo
was not her Equal, he being but a private Gentleman, and she such an
Inheritrix. A while this juggling was hid and concealed, with the sagacity of
my wariness, till a kind of swelling in Antonomasia's belly, at last
discovered it, the fear of which made us all three enter into counsel, and it
was agreed, that before the mis-hap should come to light, Don Clanixo should
demand Antonomasia for wife before the Vicar, by virtue of a bill of her hand,
which she had given him to be so: this was framed by my invention so
forcibly, that Samson himself was not able to break it.

The matter was put in practice, the Vicar saw the bill, and took the Ladies
confession: who confessed plainly, he committed her prisoner to a Sargeants
house. Then (quoth Sancho) have you Sargeants too in Candaya, Poets, and
Roundelayes? I swear I think, the world is the same everywhere: but make an
end, Madam Trifaldi: for it is late, and I long to know the end of this large
story. I will, answered the Countess.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Where the Trifaldi prosecutes her stupendous and memorable History.
AT every word that Sancho spoke, the Duchess was as well pleased as
Don-Quixote out of his wits: And commanding him to be silent, the Afflicted
went on, saying; The short and the long was this, after many givings and
takings, by reason the Princess stood ever stiffly to her tackling, the Vicar
sentenced in Don Clanixo's favor, whereat the Queen Donna Maguncia
Antonomasia's Mother was so full of wrath that some three days after we
buried her. Well, Sir Squire (quoth Sancho) it has been seen e're now, that
one that has been but in a swound, has been buried, thinking he was dead; and
me thinks that Queen Maguncia might but rather have been in a swound, for with
life many things are remedied; and the Princesses error was not so great, that
she should so resent it. If she had married with a Page or any other Servant
of her house (as I have heard many have done) the mischance had been
irreparable: but to marry with so worthy a Gentleman, and so understanding as
has been painted out to us, truly, truly, though 'twere an oversight, yet
'twas not so great as we think for; for according to my Masters rules, here
present, who will not let me lie, as Scholars become Bishops, so private
Knights (especially if they be Errant) may become Kings and Emperors.

Thou have reason Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote:) for a Knight Errant, give him but
two inches of good fortune, he is in potentia proxima to be the greatest
Sovereign of the World. But let the Afflicted proceed; for to me it appears,
the bitterest part of her sweet History is behind. The bitterest, quoth you,
said she? Indeed so bitter, that in comparison of this, Treacle and Elicampane
is sweet.

The Queen being stark dead, and not in a trance, we buried her, and scarce
had we covered her with earth, and took our ultimum vale, when Quis talia
fando temperet a lachrimis? the Giant Malambruno, Maguncia's Cousin Germane,
appeared before her Grave upon a wooden Horse, who besides his cruelty was also
an Enchanter, who with his Art to revenge his Cousins death, and for Don
Clanixo's boldness, and for despite of Antonomasia's oversight, enchanted
them upon the same Tomb, turning her into a Brazen Ape, and him into a
fearful Crocodile of unknown metal, and betwixt them both is likewise set a
Register of metal, written in the Siriack tongue, which being translated into
the Candayan, and now into the Castilian, contains this sentence:

These two bold Lovers shall not recover their natural form, till the valiant
Manchegan come to single ^ombat with me; for the Destinies reserve this unheard
of Adventure only for his great valor.

This done he unsheathed a broad and unwieldly Scimiter, and taking me by the
hair of the head, he made as if he would have cut my throat, or sheared off
my neck at a blow. I was amazed, my voice cleaved to the roof of my mouth; I
was troubled extremely: but I enforced my self as well as I could, and with a
dolorous and trembling voice, I told him such and so many things, as made him
suspend the execution of his rigorous punishment.

Finally, he made all the waiting-women of the Court be brought before him,
which are here present now also, and after he had exaggerated our faults, and
reviled the conditions of waiting^ women, their wicked wyles, and worse
sleights, and laying my fault upon them all, he said he would not capitally
punish us, but with other dilated pains, that might give us a civil and
continuate death: and in the very same instant and moment that he had said
this, we all felt that the Pores of our faces opened, and that all about them
we had prickles, like the pricking of needles; by and by we clapped our hands
to our faces, and found them just as you see them now; with this the Afflicted,
and the rest of the waiting-women lifted up their masks which they had on, and
showed their faces all with Beards, some red, some black, some white, and lime
smeared; at sight of which the Duke and Duchess admired; Don-Quixote and
Sancho were astonished, and all the bystanders wonder-strucken, and the
Trifaldi proceeded: Thus that Fellon and hard-hearted Malambruno punished us,
covering the softness and smoothenesse of our Faces with these rough Bristles:
Would God he had beheaded us with his unwildy Scemiter, and not so dimmed the
light of our Faces with these blots that hide us; for, my Masters if we fall
into reckoning, (and that which now I say, I would spoke it with mine eyes
running a Fountain of Tears, but the consideration of our misfortunes, and
the Seas that hitherto have rayned, have drawn them as dry as ears of Corn,
and therefore let me speak without Tears.) Whither shall a waiting woman
with a Beard go? What Father or Mother will take compassion on her? For when
her flesh is at the smoothest, and her Face Martyrized with a thousand sorts of
slibber-slabbers and Waters, she can scarce find any body that will care for
her; What shall she do then when she wears a wood upon her face? O Matrons,
Companions mine, in an ill time were we borne, in a lucklesse hour our
Fathers begat us: And saying this, she made show of dismaying.

CHAP. XL.
Of matters that touch and pertain to this Adventure, and most memorable
History.
CERTAINLY, all they that delight in such Histories as this, must be thankful
to Cid Hamete the Author of the Original, for his curiosity in setting down
every little tittle, without leaving out the smallest matter that has not been
distinctly brought to ^light; he paints out conceits, discovers imaginations,
answers secrets, cleeres doubts, resolves arguments: To conclude manifests the
least moate of each curious desire. Oh famous Author! Oh happy Don-Quixote! Oh
renowned Dulcinea! Oh pleasant Sancho! all together, and each in particular,
long may you live, to the delight and general recreation of mortals. The
Story then goes on, that just as Sancho saw the Afflicted dismayed, he said,
As I am honest man, and by the memory of the Pancaes, I never heard nor saw,
nor my Master never told me, nor could he ever conceit in his fancy such an
Adventure as this. A thousand Satan's take thee (not to curse thee) for an
Enchanter as thou art, Giant Malambruno, and had thou no kind of punishment
for these sinners but this bearding them? What, had it not been better and
fitter for them, to have bereaved them of half their Noses, though they had
snuffled for it, and not to have clapped these Beards on them? I hold a wager
they have no money to pay for their shaving. You say true Sir, quoth one of the
twelve, we have nothing to cleanse us with, therefore some of us have used a
remedy of sticking Plasters, which, applied to our faces, and clapped on upon
a sudden, make them as plain and smooth as the bottom of a stone Mortar;
for though in Candaya there be women that go up and down from house to house
to take away the hair of the body, and to trim the eyebrows, and other
slibber-sawces touching women, yet we my Ladies women would never admit them,
because they smell something of the Bawd: and if Signior Don-Quixote do not
help us, we are like to go with beards to our graves.

I would rather lose mine amongst Infidels (quoth Don-Quixote) then not ease
you of yours. By this the Trifaldi came to her self again, and said, the very
jyngling of this promise came into my ears in the midest of my Trance, and was
enough to recover my senses: therefore once again renowned Errant and untamed
Sir, let me beseech you that your graciouspromise be put in execution. For my
part it shall (quoth Don-Quixote:) tell me Lady what I am to do, for my mind
is very prompt, and ready to serve you.

Thus it is (quoth the Afflicted) from hence to the Kingdom of Candaya, if you
go by Land, you have five thousand leagues, wanting two or three; but if you
go in the air, some three thousand two hundred and seven and twenty by a
direct line. You must likewise know, that Malambruno told me, that when Fortune
should bring me to the Knight that must free us, that he would send a Horse
much better, and with fewer tricks then your Hirelings, which is the self-same
Horse of wood, on which the valiant Pierres stole and carried away the fair
Magalona, which Horse is governed by a pin that he has in his forehead, that
serves for a bridle, and flies in the air so swiftly as if the Devils
themselves carried him. This Horse, according to Tradition, was made by the
sage Merlin, and he lent him to his friend Pierres, who made long voyages upon
him, and stole away, as is said, the fair Magalona, carrying her in the air
at his Crupper, leaving all that beheld them on earth in a staring gaze; and
he lent him to none but those whom he loved, or that paid him best; and
since the Grand Pierres, hitherto we have not heard that any else has come
upon his back: Malambruno got him from thence by his Art, and keeps him, making
use of him in his voyages, which he has every foot through all parts of the
world; and he is here to day, and to morrow in France, and the next day at
Jerusalem: and the best is, that this Horse neither eats nor sleeps, nor needs
shooing; and he ambles in the air without wings, that he that rides upon
him, may carry a cup full of water in his hand, without spilling a jot: he
goes so soft and so easy, which made the fair Magalona glad to ride upon him.

Then (quoth Sancho) for your soft and easy going, my Dapple bears the bell,
though he go not in the air; but upon earth I Will play with him with all the
Amblers in the world.

All of them laughed, and the Afflicted went on: And this Horse (if Malambruno
will grant an end of our misfortune) within half an hour at night will be with
us; for he told me, that the sign that I had found the Knight that should
procure our liberty, should be the sending of that Horse, whither he should
come speedily. And how many (quoth Sancho) may ride upon that Horse? The
Afflicted answered, Two; one in the Saddle, and the other at the Crupper; and
most commonly such two are Knight and Squire, when some stolen Damzell is
wanting. I would feign know, Afflicted Madam (quoth Sancho) what this Horses
name is. His name (quoth she) is not like Bellerophons horse Pegasus, or
Alexanders the great Bucephalus, or Orlando Furioso's Briliadoro, or Bayarte
Reynaldos de Mantaluans, or Rogeros Frontino, or Boots, or Perithons, the
horses of the Sun, nor Orelia Rodrigo the last unhappie King of the Goths his
Horse, in that Battle where he lost his life and Kingdom together.

I hold a wager (said Sancho) that since he has none of all these famous
known names, that his name neither is not Rozinante my Masters horses name,
which goes beyond all those that have been named already.

It Is true (quoth the bearded Countess) notwithstanding he has a name that
fits him very well, which is Clavileno the swift: [Clavo a nail or wooden
pin; Leno wood in Spanish:] first, because he is of wood; and then, because
of the pin in his forehead: so that for his name, he may compare with
Rozinante. I dislike not his name (said Sancho:) but what bridle, or what
halter is he governed with? I have told (said the Trifaldi) that with the
pin, turned as pleases the party that rides on him; he will go either in
the air, or raking and sweeping along the earth, or in a mean which ought to
be sought in all well-ordered actions. I would feign see him (quoth Sancho) but
to think that I Will get up on him, either in the saddle, or at the crupper, were
to ask Pears of the Elm. 'Twere good indeed, that I that can scarce sit
upon Dapple, and a pack-saddle as soft as silk, should get up upon a wooden
crupper without a Cushion or Pillow-beere: by Gad I Will not bruise my self to
take away any bodies Beard; let every one shave himself as well as he can,
for I Will not go so long a Voyage with my Master: Besides, there is no use of
me for the shaving of these Beards, as there is for the disinchanting my Lady
Dulcinea. Yes mary is there, said the Trifaldi, and so much, that I believe,
without you we shall do nothing. God and the King (quoth Sancho) [ aqui del
Roy; The usual speech of Officers in Spain, when any arested Person resists.]
What have the Squires to do with their Masters Adventures, they must reap the
credit of ending them, and we must bear the burden? Body of me, if your
Historians would say, Such a Knight ended such an Adventure, but with the help
of such and such a Spuire, without whom it had been impossible to end it,
'twere something; but that they write drylie, Don Parlalipomenon, Knight of the
three stars, ended the Adventure of the six Hob-goblins, without naming his
Squires person that was present at all, as if he were not alive, I like it not
my Masters; I tell you again my Master may go alone, much good may it do
him, and I Will stay here with my Lady the Duchess, and it may be when he comes
back, he shall find the Lady Dulcineaes business threefold, nay five-fold
bettered, for I purpose at idle times and when I am at leisure to give my self
a Bout of whipping, bare-breeched. For all that (quoth the Duchess) if need
be you must accompany him, honest Sancho, for all good People will entreat,
that for your unnecessary fear these Gentlewomens faces be not so
thick-bearded, for it were great pity.

God and the King again (quoth Sancho) when this charity were performed for
some retired Damozels, as some working Gyrles, a man might undertake any
hazard; but for to unbeard wayting-women, a pox: I would I might see um bearded
from the highest to the lowest, from the nicest to the neatest. You are still
bitter against waiting-women friend, quoth the Duchess, you are much addicted
to the Toledanian Apothecaries opinion; but on my faith you have no reason, for
I have women in my House, that may be a Pattern for Waiting-women, and here
is Donna Rodriguez, that will not contradict me. Your Excellency (quoth
Rodriguez) may say what you will, God knows all, whether we be Good or Bad;
Bearded or Smoothe, as we are our Mothers brought us forth as well as other
Women, and since God cast us into the world, he knows to what end; and I rely
upon his mercy, and no bodies beard.

Well Mistrisse Rodriguez, and Lady Trifaldi quoth Don-Quixote, I hope to God
he will behold your sorrows with pitying eyes, and Sancho shall do as I will
have him, if Clavilenno were come once, and that I might encounter Malambruno;
for I know, no Rasor would shave you with more facility, then my Sword should
shave Malambrunoes head from his shoulders, for God permits the wicked, but not
for ever.

Ah (quoth the Afflicted) now all the stars of the heavenly Region look upon
your Greatness, valorous Knight, with a gentle aspect, and infuse all
prosperity into your mind, and all valor, and make you the shield and
succor of all dejected and reviled Waiting-woman-ship, abominable to
Apothecaries, backbited by Squires, and scoffed at by Pages, and the Devil
take the Queen that in the flower of her youth put not her self in a Nunnery,
rather then be a waiting woman, unfortunate as we are, for though we descend
in a direct line, by man to man from Hector the Trojan, yet our Mistresses will
never leave bethouing of us, though they might be Queens for it: O Giant
Malambruno (for though thou be an Enchanter, thou art most sure in my
promises) send the matchless Clavileno unto us, that our misfortune may have
an end; for if the heats come in, and these beards of ours last, woe be to our
ill fortune.

This the Trifaldi said with so much feeling, that she drew tears from all the
spectators eyes, and stroaked them even from Sancho's; so that now he resolved
to accompany his Master to the very end of the world, so he might obtain the
taking the wool from those venerable faces.

CHAP. XLI.
Of Clavileno's arrival, with the end of this dilated Adventure.
IT grew now to be night, and with it the expected time when Clavileno the
famous horse should come, whose delay troubled Don-Quixote, thinking that
Malambruno deferring to send him, argued, that either he was not the Knight
for whom the Adventure was reserved, or that Malambruno durst not come to
single Combat with him: But look ye now, when all unexpected, four Savages
entered the Garden, clad all in green Ivy, bearing upon their shouldiers a
great wooden horse: they set him upon his legs on the ground; and one of them
said, Let him that has the courage, get up upon this Engine.

Then (quoth Sancho) not I, I have no courage, I am no Knight. And the Salvage
replied, saying; And let his Squire ride behind; and let him be assured, that
no sword but Malambruno's shall offend him: And there is no more to be done,
but to turn that pinn, which is upon the horses neck, and he will carry them
in a moment where Malambruno attends: But lest the height and distance from
earth make them lightheaded, let them cover their eyes till the horse neigh, a
sign that they have then finished their voyage. This said, with a slow pace,
they martched out the same way they came.

The Afflicted, as soon as she saw the horse, with very tears in her eyes,
she said to Don-Quixote; Valourous Knight; Malambruno has kept his word, the
horse is here, our beards increase, and each of us with every hair of them
beseech thee to shave and sheere us, since there is no more to be done, but
that thou and thy Squire both mount, and begin this your happy new voyage. That
will I willingly (said Don-Quixote) my Lady Trifaldi, without a cushion or
spurs, that I may not delay time so much Lady, I desire to see you and all
these Gentlewomen smooth and clear. Not I (quoth Sancho) neither willingly nor
unwillingly; and if this shaving cannot be performed without my riding at the
Crupper, let my master seek some other Squire to follow him, and these
Gentlewomen some other means of smoothing themselves; for I am no Hagg that
love to hurry in the Air: And what will my Islanders say, when they hear
their Governor is hovering in the wind? Besides, there being three thousand
leagues from hence to Candaya, if the horse should be weary, or the Giant
offended, we might be these half dozen of years e're we return; and then
perhaps there would be neither Island nor dry-land in the world to acknowledge
me: and since it is ordinarily said, that delay breeds danger, and he that will
not when he may, etc. these Gentlewomens beards shall pardon me, for it is good
sleeping in a whole skin; I mean, I am very well at home in this house, where I
receive so much kindness, and from whose Owner I hope for so great a good, as
to see my self a Governor.

To which (quoth the Duke) Friend Sancho, the Island that I promised you, is
not moveable nor fugitive, it is so deep rooted in the earth, that a great many
pulls will not root it up: and since you know, that I know there is none of
these prime kind of Officers, that pays not some kind of bribe, some more,
some less, yours for this Government shall be, that you accompany your
Master Don-Quixote to end and finish this memorable Adventure, that, whether
you return on Clavileno with the brevity that his speed promises, or that your
contrary fortune bring and return you home on foot like a Pilgrim from Inn to
Inn, and from Alehouse to Alehouse; at your coming back, you shall find the
Island where you left it, and the Islanders with the same desire to receive you
for their Governor that they have always had, and my good will shall always
be the same; and doubt not Signior Sancho of this, for you should do much
wrong (in so doing) to the desire I have to serve you.

No more Sir (quoth Sancho) I am a poor Squire, and cannot carry so much
courtesy upon my back: let my Master get up and blindefold me, and commend me
to God Almighty, and tell me, if, when I mount into this high-flying, I may
recommend my self to God, or invoke the Angels that they may favor me.

To which the Trifaldi answered, You may recommend your self to God, or to whom
you will; for Malambruno, though he be an Enchanter, yet he is a Christian,
and performs his Enchantments with much sagacity, and very warily, without
meddling with any body. Go to then (quoth Sancho) God and the holy Trinity of
Gaeta help me. Since the memorable Adventure of the Full-Mills (quoth
Don-Quixote) I never saw Sancho so fearful as now; and if I were as
superstitious as some, his pusillanimity would tickle my conscience: but hark
thee Sancho; by these Gentles leaves, I will speak a word or two with thee: and
carrying Sancho amongst some trees in the Garden, taking him by both the hands,
he said, Thou see, Brother Sancho, the large voyage that we are like to
have, and God knows when we shall return from it, nor the leisure that our
affairs hereafter will give us: I prithee therefore retire thy self to thy
Chamber, as if thou wentst to look for some necessary for the way, and give thy
self in a trice, of the three thousand and three hundred lashes, in which thou
stand engaged, but five hundred only; so that the beginning of a business
is half the ending of it.

Verily (quoth Sancho) I think you have lost your wits, this is just: I am
going, and thou art crying out in haste for thy Mayden-head; I am now going to
sit upon a bare piece of wood, and you would have my bumm smart. Believe me,
you have no reason; let us now go for the shaving these Matrons; and when we
return, I Will promise you to come out of debt: let this content you, and I say
no more. Don-Quixote made answer, Well, with this promise Sancho I am in some
comfort, and I believe thou will accomplish it; for though thou be a fool,*
yet I think thou art honest. [* Here I left out a line or two of a dull
conceit; so it was no great matter; for in English it could not be expressed.]

So now they went to mount Clavileno, and as they were getting up, Don-Quixote
said, Hud-wink thy self Sancho, and get up; for he that sends from so far
off for us, will not deceive us; for he will get but small glory by it, and
though all should succeed contrary to my imagination, yet no malice can obscure
the glory of having undergone this Adventure. Let Us go Master (quoth Sancho)
for the beards and tears of these Gentlewomen are nailed in my heart, and I
shall not eat a bit to do me good, till I see them in their former
smoothness. Get you up Sir, and hud-wink your self first; for if I must ride
behind you, you must needs get up first in the faddle.

It Is true indeed (said Don-Quixote) and taking a hand-kerchief out of his
pocket, he desired the Afflicted to hide his eyes close: and when it was done,
he uncovered himself again, and said; As I remember, I have read in Virgill of
the Palladium, that horse of Troy, that was of wood, that the Grecians
presented to the Goddess Pallas, with child with armed Knights, which after
were the total ruin of all Troy; and so it were sit first to try what
Clavileno has in his stomach.

You need not (said she) for I dare warrant you, and know that Malambruno is
neither traitor nor malicious, you may get up without any fear, and upon me
be it, if you receive any hurt. But Don-Quixote thought, that every thing thus
spoken to his safety, was a detriment of his valor: so, without more
exchanging of words, up he got, and tried the pin that easily turned up and
down: so with his legs at length, without stirrups, he looked like an Image
painted in a piece of Flanders Arras, or woven in some Roman triumph. Sancho
got up fair and softly, and with a very ill will, and settling himself the
best he could upon the crupper, found it somewhat hard, and nothing soft, and
desired the Duke, that if it were possible, he might have a cushionet, or for
failing, one of the Duchesses cushions of State, or a pillow from one of the
Pages beds; for that Horses crupper, he said, was rather Marble then Wood.

To this (quoth Trifaldi) Clavileno will suffer no kind of furniture nor
trapping upon him: you may do well for your ease, to sit on him woman-wayes,
so you will not feel his hardness so much. Sancho did so, and saying
farewell, he suffered himself to be bound about the eyes, and after
uncovered himself again, and looking pitifully round about the Garden with
tears in his eyes, he desired that they would in that doleful trance join
with him each in a Paternoster, and an Ave Maria as God might provide them
some to do them that charitable office when they should be in the like trance.

To which (quoth Don-Quixote) Rascal, are you upon the Gallows, trow? or at
the last gasp, that you use these kind of supplications? Art thou not, thou
soule-lesse cowardly creature, in the same place, where the fair Magalona
sat, from whence she descended not to her grave, but to be Queen of France,
if Histories lie not? and am not I by thee? cannot I compare with the valorous
Pierrs, that pressed this seat, that I now press? Hudwinke, hudwinke thy
self, thou dis-heartned Beast, and let not thy fear come forth of thy mouth,
at least in my presence. Hudwinke me (quoth Sancho) and since you will not
have me pray to God, nor recommend me, how can I choose but be afraid, lest
some legion of Devils be here, that may carry us headlong to destruction.

Now they were hudwinked, and Don-Quixote perceiving that all was as it should
be, laid hold on the pin, and scarce put his fingers to it, when all the
Wayting-women, and as many as were present, lifted up their voices, saying; God
be thy speed, Valorous Knight; God be with thee, Undaunted Squire: now, now
you fly in the air, cutting it with more speed then an arrow: now you begin
to suspend, and astonish as many as behold you from earth. Hold, hold, valorous
Sancho; for now thou go waviug in the air, take heed thou fall not; for
thy fall will be worse then the bold Youths, that desired to govern his
father, the Suns, chariot.

Sancho heard all this, and getting close to his Master, he girt his arms
about him, and said; Sir why do they say we are so high, if we can hear
their voices? and me thinks they talk here hard by us. Never stand upon that
(quoth Don-Quixote) for as these kinds of flyings are out of the ordinary
course of thousa^ds of leagues, thou may hear and see any thing, and do not
press me so hard, for thou will throw me down: and verily, I know not why
thou should thus tremble and be afraid; for I dare swear, in all my life,
I never rode upon an easier-paced horse, he goes as if he never moved from
the place: Friend, banish fear; for the business goes on successefully, and
we have wind at will. Indeed it is true, quoth Sancho: for I have a wind
comes so forcibly on this side of me, as if I were blowed upon by a thousand
pair of bellows: and it was true indeed, they were giving him air, with a
very good pair of bellows.

This Adventure was so well contrived by the Duke, the Duchess, and the
Steward, that there was no requisite awanting, to make it perfect. Don-Quixote
too feeling the breath, said: Undoubtedly, Sancho, we are now come to the
middle Region, where Hail, Snow, Thunder and Lightning, and the Thunderbolt
are engendered in the third Region, and if we mount long in this manner, we
shall quickly be in the Region of fire, and I know not how to use this Pin,
that we mount not where we shall be scorcht.

Now they heated their faces with flax set on fire, and easy to be quenched, in
a Cave a far off: and Sancho, that felt the heat said^ Hang me, if we be
not now in that place where the fire is; for a great part of my Beard is
signed, I Will unblind-fold my self Master, and see where abouts we are. Do not
quoth. Don-Quixote, and remember that true tale of the Scholar Toraina, whom the
Devil hoysted up into the air a horseback on a Reed, with his eyes shut [ A
story believed in Spain as Gospel,] and in twelve hours he arived at Rome,
and lighted at the Tower of Nona, which is one of the streets of the City, and
saw all the mis-chance, the assault and death of Borbon, and the morrow after
returned back to Madrid, relating all he had seen; and said; That as he went
in the air, the Devil bid him open his eyes, which he did, and saw himself
as he thought so near the body of the Moon, that he might have touched her
with his hands, and that he durst not look toward the Earth, for fear to be
made giddy. So that Sancho, there is no uncovering us; for he that has the
charge of carrying us, will look to us, and peradventure we go doubling of
points, and mounting on high to fall even with the Kingdom of Candaya, as does
the Sacar or Hawke upon the Heron, to catch her, mount she never so high; and
though it seem to us not half an hour since we parted from the Garden,
believe me, we have traveled a great way.

I know not what belongs to it (quoth Sancho) but this I know, that if your
Lady Magallanes, or Magalona were pleased with my seat, she was not very tender
breech'd. All these discourses of the two most valiant were heard by the Duke
and Duchess, and them in the Garden, which gave them extraordinary content;
who willing to make an end of this strange and well composed Adventure, clapped
fire with some flax at Clavileno's tail; and straight, the horse being stuffed
with Crackers, flew into the air, making a strange noise, and threw
Don-Quixote and Sancho both on the ground, and singed. And now all the
bearded-Squadron of the Matrons vanished out of the Garden, and Trifaldi too
and all, and they that remained, counterfeited a dead swound, and lay all along
upon the ground.

Don-Quixote and Sancho, ill-intreated, rose up, and looking round about, they
wondered to see themselves in the same Garden from whence they had parted, and
to see such a company of People laid upon the ground; and their admiration was
the more increased, when on one side of the Garden, they saw a great Lance
fastened in the ground, and a smoothe white piece of Parchment hanging at it,
with two twisted strings of green silk, in which the following words were
written with Letters of Gold,

THE famous and valorous Knight Don-Quixote de la Mancha, finished and ended the
Adventure of the Contesse Trifaldi, otherwise called, The Afflicted Matron, and
her Company, only with undertaking it,

Malambruno is satisfied and contented with all his heart, and now the
Wayting-womens chins are smoothe and clean, and the Princes Don Clanixo and
Aptonomasia are in their pristine being, and when the Squires whipping shall
be accomplished, the white Pigeon shall be free from the pestiferous
Ier-Falcons that persecute her, and in her loved Lullers arms: for so it is
ordained by the sage Merlin, proto-Enchanter of Enchanters.

When Don^Quixote had read these Letters of the parchment, he understood
plainly that they spoke of the disinchanting of Dulcinea, and giving many
thanks to Heaven, that with so little danger he had ended so great an exploit,
as reducing the faces of the venerable Wayting-women to their former
smoothness, that was now gone: he went toward the Duke and the Duchess, who
were not as yet come to themselves; and taking the Duke by the hand, he said;
Courage, courage, noble Sir, all is nothing, the Adventure is now ended, without
braking of bars, as you may plainly see by the writing there in that Register.

The Duke (like one that rises out of a profound sleep) by little and little
came to himself, and in the same Tenor the Duchess, and all they that were
down in the Garden, with such shows of marvel and wonderment, that they did
even seem to persuade, that those things had happened to them in earnest, which
they counterfeited in jest. The Duke read the scrowle with his eyes half shut;
and straight with open arm, he went to embrace Don-Quixote, telling him, he
was the bravest Knight that ever was. Sancho looked up and down for the
Afflicted, to see what manner of face she had, now she was dis-bearded, and
if she were so fair as her gallant presence made show for: But they told him,
that as Clavileno came down burning in the air, and lighted on the ground, all
the Squadron of Wayting-women with Trifaldi vanished, and now they were shaved
and unfeathered.

The Duchess asked Sancho, how he did in that long voyage? To which he
answered, I, Madam, thought (as my Master told me) we passed by the Region of
fire, and I would have uncovered my self a little; but my Master (of whom I
asked leave) would not let me: but I that have certain curious itches, and a
desire to know what is forbidden me, softly, without being perceived, drew up
the Hankerchiffe that blinded me, a little above my nose, and there I saw the
earth, and me thoughts it was no bigger then a grain of Mustard Seed, and the
men that walked upon it, somewhat bigger then Hazel-nuts that you may see how
high we were then. To this (said the Duchess) Take heed, friend Sancho, what
you say; for it seems you saw not the earth, but the men that walked on it:
for it is plain, that if the earth showed no bigger then a grain of
Mustard-seede, and every man like a Hazel-nut, one man alone would cover the
whole earth.

It Is true indeed (quoth Sancho) but I looked on one side of it, and saw it
all. Look you, Sancho (quoth the Duchess) one cannot see all of a thing by
one side. I cannot tell what belongs to your seeing, Madam (quoth Sancho) but
you must think, that since we flew by Enchantment; by Enchantment, I might
see the whole earth and all the men, which way soever I looked: and if you
believe not this, neither will you believe, that uncovering my self about my
eyebrows, I saw my self so near heaven, that betwixt it and me there was not
a handful and a half; and I dare swear Madam, that it is a huge thing: and it
happend that we went that way where the seven Shee-goat-starrs were; and in my
soul and conscience, I having been a Goat-heard in my youth, as soon as I saw
them, I had a great desire to pass some time with them; which had I not done,
I thought I should have burst. Well, I come then, and I take; What do I do?
without giving notice to any body? no, not to my Master himself: fair and
softly I lighted from Clavileno, and played with the Goats that were like white
Violets, and such pretty flowers, some three quarters of an hour, and
Clavileno moved not a whit all this while.

And while Sancho was playing with the Goats all this while, quoth the Duke,
What did Signior Don-Quixote? To which, quoth Don-Quixote, as all these things
are quite out of their natural course, it is not much that Sancho has said:
only for me I say, I neither perceived my self higher or lower; neither saw I
Heaven or Earth, or Seas or Sands: True it is, that I perceived I passed through
the middle Region, and came to the fire: But to think we passed from thence, I
cannot believe it; for the Region of Fire being between the Moon and Heaven,
and the latter Region of the Air, we could not come to Heaven, where the
seven Goats are, that Sancho talks of, without burning our selves; which since
we did not, either Sancho lies or dreams.

I neither lie nor dream, quoth Sancho; for ask me the signs of those Goats,
and by them you shall see whether I tell true or no. Tell them Sancho, quoth
the Duchess. Two of them, quoth Sancho, are green, two blood-red, two blew,
and one mixt-coloured. Here Is a new kind of Goats, quoth the Duke: in our
Region of the earth we have no such colored ones. Oh, you may be sure, quoth
Sancho, there is difference between those and these. Tell me Sancho, quoth the
Duke, did you see amongst those She Is any Hee-Goat? [ An equivocall question;
for in Spain they use to call Cuckolds, Cabrones, hee-Goats.] No Sir, quoth
Sancho, for I heard say, that none passed the horns of the Moon.

They would ask him no more touching his voyage; for it seemed to them, that
Sancho had a clew to carry him all Heaven over, and to tell all that passed
there, without stirring out of the Garden. In conclusion this was the end of
the Adventure of the Afflicted Matron that gave occasion of mirth to the Dukes,
not only for the present, but for their whole life time, and to Sancho to
recount for many ages, if he might live so long. But Don-Quixote whispering
Sancho in the ear, told him; Sancho, since you will have us believe all that
you have seen in Heaven, I pray believe all that I saw in Montesinos Cave, and
I say no more.

CHAP. XLII.
Of the advice that Don-Quixote gave Sancho Panca, before he should go to
govern the Island, with other matter well digested.
THe Dukes were so pleased with the happy and pleasant success of the
Adventure of The Afflicted, that they determined to go on with their jests,
seeing the fit subject they had, to make them pass for earnest; so having
contrived and given order to their servants and vassals, that they should obey
Sancho in his Government of the promised Island; the next day after the jest of
Clavileno's flight, the Duke bade Sancho prepare, and put himself in order to
go to be Governor; for that now his Islanders did as much desire him, as
showers in May.

Sancho made an obeisance to him, and said; Since I came down from Heaven, and
since from on high I beheld the earth, and saw it so small, I was partly cooled
in my desire to be a Governor; for what greatness can there be to command
in a grain of Mustard Seed? or what dignity or power to govern half a dozen of
men about the bigness of Hazel-nuts? for to my thinking, there were no more in
all the earth. If it would please your Lordship to give me never so little in
Heaven, though 'twere but half a league, I would take it more willingly then
the biggest Island in the world. Look you friend Sancho (quoth the Duke) I can
give no part of Heaven to any body, though it be no bigger then my nail; for
these favors and graces are only in Gods disposing. What is in my power I give
you, that is, an Island, right and straight, round and well proportioned, and
extraordinary fertile and abundant, where, if you have the Art, you may with
the riches of the earth, hoord up the treasure of Heaven.

Well then (quoth Sancho) give us this Island, and in spite of Rascals I Will
go to Heaven; and yet for no covetousness to leave my poor Cottage, or to get
me into any Palaces, but for the desire I have, to know what kind of thing it
is be a Governor.

If once you prove it Sancho (quoth the Duke) you will be in love with
Governing; so sweet a thing it is to command, and to be obeyed: I warrant,
when your Master comes to be an Emperor, for without doubt he will be one
(according as his affairs go on) that he will not be drawn from it, and it
will grieve him to the soul to have been so long otherwise.

Sir (quoth Sancho) I suppose it is good to command, though it be but a head of
Cattle.

Let me live and die with thee Sancho (quoth the Duke) for thou know all,
and I hope thou will be such a Governor as thy discretion promises, and let
this suffice; and note, that to morrow about this time thou shall go to the
Government of thy Island, and this afternoon thou shallt be fitted with
convenient apparel to carry with thee, and all things necessary for thy
departure.

Clad me (quoth Sancho) how you will, for howsoever ye clad me, I Will be
still Sancho Panca.

You are in the right (quoth the Duke) but the Robes must be suitable to the
Office or digitie which is professed; for it were not fit that a Lawyer should
be clad like a Soldier, or a Soldier like a Priest. You Sancho, shall be
clad, partly like a Lawyer, and partly like a Captain; for in the Island that
I give you, Arms are as requisite as Learning.

I have little learning quoth Sancho, for as yet I scarce know my A. B. C. but
it is enough that I have my Christ's Cross ready in my memory to be a good
Governor. I Will manage my weapon till I fall again, and God help me. With so
good a memory quoth the Duke, Sancho cannot do amiss.

By this time Don-Quixote came, and knowing what passed, and that Sancho was so
speedily to go to his Government, with the Dukes leave, he took him by the
hand, and carried him aside, with a purpose to advise him how he should behave
himself in his Office. When they came into Don-Quixotes chamber, the door
being shut he forced Sancho, as it were, to sit down by him, and with a stayed
voice said:

I give infinite thanks friend Sancho, that before I have received any good
fortune, thou have met with thine; I that thought to have rewarded thy service
with some good luck of mine to have saved that labor, and thou suddenly past
all expectation have thy desires accomplished, others bribe, importune,
solicit, rise early, entreat, grow obstinate, and obtain not what they sue
for; and another comes hab-nab, and goes away with the place or Office that
many others sought for, and here the Proverb comes in and joins well; that
Give a man luck and cast him into the Sea. Thou, that in my opinion art a very
Goose, without early rising, or late siting up, without any labor, only the
breath of Knight Errantry breathing on thee, without any more ado art
Governor of an Island, a matter of nothing: All this I say, Sancho, that thou
attribute not this happiness to thy Deserts, but that thou give God thanks,
that sweetly disposes things: Next, thou shall impute them to the greatenesse
of the profession of Knight Errantry: (Thy heart then disposed to believe what
I have said) be attentive, Oh my son, to this thy Cato, that will advise
thee, be thy North-starre, and guide to direct and bring thee to a safe Port,
out of this troublesome Sea where thou go to ingulfe thy self; for your
Offices and great charges are nothing else but a profound gulf of confusions.

First of all, O son, thou must fear God, for to fear him is wisdom, and being
wise, thou can err in nothing.

Secondly, thou must consider who thou art, and know thy self, which is the
hardest kind of knowledge that may be imagined: From this knowledge thou
shall learn not to be swollen like the frogge that would equal himself with
the Ox, for if thou do this, thou shall (falling down the wheel of thy
madness) come to know thou were but a hog-keeper.

That Is true (quoth Sancho) but 'twas when I was a Boy; but after, when I grew
to be somewhat manish, I kept Geese, and not Hogs; but this me thinks is
nothing to the purpose, for all they that Govern come not from the Loins of
Kings.

It Is true (said Don-Quixote) therefore these that have no noble beginnings,
must mix the gravitie of their Charge they exercise, with mild sweetness,
which guided with wisdom, may free them from malicious murmuring, from which
no state or calling is free.

Rejoice, oh Sancho, in the humility of thy lineage, and scorn not to say, thou
come of laboring men, for when thou art not ashamed thy self, no body will
seek to make thee so, and always strive to be held mean and virtuous, rather
then proud and vicious; an infinite number from low beginnings have come to
great risings, as Pontifical and Imperial Dignities; and to confirm this, I
could bring thee so many examples as should weary thee.

Note, Sancho, that if you follow virtue for your mean, and strive to do
virtuous deeds, you need not envy those that are borne of Princes and great
men; for Blood is inherited, but Virtue is achieved; Virtue is of worth by it
self alone, so is not Birth.

Which being so, if perchance any of thy Kindred come to see thee when thou art
in thy Island, refuse him not, nor affront him; but entertain, welcome, and
make much of him, for with this God will be pleased, that would have no body
despise his making, and thou shall also in this correspond to good nature.

If thou bring thy Wife with thee (for it were not fit that those who are to
govern long, should be without them) teach her, instruct her, refine her
natural rudeness; for many times all that a discreet Governor gets, a
clownish woman spills and loses.

If thou chance to be a Widdower (a thing that may happen) and desire to marry
again, take not such a one as may serve thee for a bait and Fishing-rod to take
bribes: for let me tell thee, the Husband must give an account of all that
(being a Judge) his Wife receives, and at the general Resurrection, shall pay
fourfold what he has been accused for in his life time.

Never pronounce judgment rash or wilfully, which is very frequent with
ignorant Judges, that presume to be skillfull.

Let the tears of the poor find more compassion (but not more Justice) then
the information of the rich.

Seek as well to discover the truth from out the promises and corruptions of
the rich, as the sobs and importunities of the poor.

When equity is to take place, lay not all the rigor of the law upon the
Delinquent; for the fame of the rigorous judge is not better then of the
compassionate.

If thou slacken Justice, let it not be with the weight of a bribe, but with
the weight of pity.

When thou happenest to judge thine enemies case, forget thy injury, and
respect equity.

Let not proper passion blind thee in another man's Cause; for the errors thou
shall commit in that, most commonly are incurable, or if they be helped, it
must be with thy wealth and credit.

If any fair woman come to demand Justice of thee, turn thy eyes from her
tears, and thy ears from her lamentations, and consider at leisure the sum of
her requests, except thou mean that thy reason be drowned in her weeping, and
thy goodness in her sighs.

Him that thou must punish with Deeds, revile not with Words; since to a Wretch
the punishment is sufficient, without adding ill language: [ A good Item to our
Judges of the Common Law.]

For the Delinquent that is under thy jurisdiction, consider that the miserable
man is subject to the temptations of our depraved nature, and as much as thou
can, without grievance to the contrary party: show thy self mild and gentle;
for although Gods attributes are equal, yet to our sight his mercy is more
precious and more eminent then his Justice.

If Sancho, thou follow these Rules and Precepts, thy days shall be long, thy
fame eternal, thy rewards full, thy happiness indelible, thou shall marry thy
Children how thou will, thy shall have titles, and thy grandchildren, thou
shall live in peace and love of all men; and when thy life is ending, death
shall take thee in a mature old age, and thy Nephews shall close thy eyes with
their tender and delicate hands.

Those I have told thee hitherto, are documents, concerning thy soul to adorn
it; hearken now to those that must serve for the adorning thy body.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of the second advice that Don-Quixote gave Sancho Panca.
WHo could have heard this discourse, and not held Don-Quixote for a most wise
Personage, and most honest? But as it has been often told in the progress of
this large History, he was only besotted, when he touched upon his Chivalry,
and in the rest of his talk he showed a clear and current apprehension: so that
every foot his works bewrayed his judgment, and his judgment his works: But
in these second documents he g^ve now to Sancho, he showed a great deal of
lenity, and balanced his judgment and his madness in an equal scale. Sancho
hearkened most attentively unto him, and strove to bear in mind his
instructions, as thinking to observe them, and by them to be very well
delivered of his bigswoln Government. Don-Quixote proceeded, saying:

Touching the governing thine own Person and Household Sancho, the first thing
I enjoin thee to, is, to be cleanly, and to pair thy Nails, not letting them
grow as some do, whose ignorance has made them think it is a fine thing to
have long Nails, as if that excrement and superfluity that they let grow, wear
only their Nails, rather the claws of a Lizard-bearing Castrell, and a foul
abuse it is.

Go not ungirt or loose, for a slovenly Garment is the sign of a careless
mind, if so be this kind of slovenly looseness be not to some cunning end,
as it was judged to be in Julius Caesar.

Consider with discreetion what thy Government may be worth, and if it will
afford thee to bestow Liveries on thy Servants, give them decent and profitable
ones, rather then gawdie or sightly, and so give thy cloth amongst thy Servants
and the poor; I mean, that if thou have six Pages, give three of them Liveries,
and three to the poor; so shall thou have Pages in earth, and in Heaven: and
your vainglorious have not attained to this kind of giving liveries.

Eat not Garlic or Onions, that thy Pesantry may not be known by thy breath:
walk softly, and speak stayedly; but not so as if it appeared thou hearkenedst
to thy self, for all kind of affectation is naught.

Eat little at dinner, but less at supper; for the health of the whole body is
forged in the forge of the stomach.

Be temperate in drinking; considering that too much Wine neither keeps secreet
nor fulfills promise.

Take heed Sancho of chewing on both sides, or to ruct before any body.

I understand not your ructing (quoth Sancho.) To ruct (quoth he) is as much
as to belch; and this is one of the fowlest words our language has, though it
be very significant; so your more neat people have gotten the Latin word, and
call belching ructing, and belchers ructers: and though some perhaps understand
not this; it is no great matter, for use and custom will introduce them that
they may easily be understood, and the power that the vulgar and custom has,
is the enriching of a language.

Truly, (said Sancho) one of your advices that I mean to remember, shall be
not to belch, for I am used to do it often. Ruct Sancho, not belch (quoth
Don-Quixote.) Ruct I will say (quoth he) hence forward, and not forget it.

Likewise Sancho, you must not intermixe your discourse with that multiplicity
of Proverbs you use; for though Proverbs be witty short sentences, yet thou
bring them in so by head and shoulders, that they are rather absurdities
then sentences. This (quoth Sancho) God Almighty can only help; for I have more
Proverbs then a Book will hold, and when I speak, they come ^o thick to my
mouth, that they fall ou^, and strive one with another, who shall come out
first: but my tongue casts out the first it meets withal, though they be
nothing to the purpose, but I will have a care hereafter to speak none but
shall be fitting to the gravity of my place; for where there is plenty, the
Guests are not empty; and he that works, does not care for play; and he is in
safety that stands under the Bells; And h^s judgments rare, that can spend and
spare.

Now, now (quoth Don-Quixote) glue, thread, fasten thy Proverbs together, no
body comes; the more ^thou art told a thing, the more thou do it: I bid thee
leave thy Proverbs, and in an instant thou have cast out a Letany of them, that
are as much to the purpose, as, To morrow I found a horse-shooe. Look thee
Sancho, I find not fault with a Proverb brought in to some purpose; but to
load and heap on Proverbs hudling together, makes a discourse wearisome and
base.

When thou ge^st on horseback, do not go casting thy body all upon the
crupper, nor carry thy legs stiff down, and stradling from the horses belly,
nor yet so loosly, as if thou were still riding on thy Dapple, for your
horse-riding makes some appear Gentlemen, others Grooms.

Let thy sleep be moderate; for he that rises not with the Sun, loses the
day: And observe Sancho, That diligence is the Mother of good Fortune; and
sloth the contrary, that never could satisfy a good desire.

This last advice that I mean to give thee, though it be not to the adorning
of thy body, yet I would have thee bear it in thy memory; for I believe it will
be of no less use to thee, then those that I have hitherto given thee, and it
is,

That thou never dispute of Linages, comparing them together, since of
necessity amongst those that are compared, one must be the better; and of him
thou debasest, thou shall be abhorred; and of him thou ennoblest, not a whit
rewarded.

Let thy apparel be a painted Hose, and Stocking, a long-skirted Jacket, and
a Cloak of the longest; but long Hose by no means, for they become neither
Gentlemen nor Governors.

This is all Sancho, I will advise thee to for the present; as the time and
occasion^ serve hereafter, so shall my instructions be, so that thou be
careful to let me know how thou do.

Sir (quoth Sancho) I see well that you have told me nothing but what is good,
holy, and profitable: but to what purpose, if I remember nothing? True it is,
that of not letting my nails grow, and to marry again if need be, I shall not
forget; but your other slabb^r-sawces, your tricks and quillets, I cannot
remember them, nor shall not, no more then last years clouds: therefore I pray
let me have them in writing; for though I can neither write nor read, I Will give
them to my Confessor, that he may frame them into me, and make me capable of
them at time of need.

Wreth that I am (quoth Don-Quixote) how ill it appears in a Governor, not to
write or read! for know Sancho, that for a man not to read, or to be
left handed, argues that either he was a son of mean Parents, or so unhappie
and untowardly that no good would prevail on him.

I can set to my name (quoth Sancho) for when I was Constable of our Town, I
learnt to make certain Letters, such as are set to mark trusses of stuff, which
they said spelt my name: Besides, now I Will feign that my right hand is maimed,
and so another shall firm for me; for there is a remedy for every thing but
death: and since I bear sway, I Will do what I list: for according to the
Proverb, He that has the Judge to his Father, etc. [ a troop of absurd
speeches still to Sancho's part:] and I am a Governor, which is more then
Judge. I, I, let um come and play at bo^-peep, let um back-bite me, let um come
for wool, and I Will send them back shorn; whom God loves, his house is savory
to him; and every man bears with the rich man's follies; so I being rich, and a
Governor, and liberal too, as I mean to be, I will be without all faults.
No, no, pray be dainty, and see what will become on it; have much, and thou
shall be esteemed much, quoth a Grandame of mine; And might overcomes right.

Oh, a plague on thee Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) threescore thousand Sata^s
take thee and thy Proverbs; this hour thou have been stringing them one upon
another, and giving me tormenting potions with each of them: I assure thee that
one of these days these Proverbs will carry thee to the Gallows; for them thy
Vassalls will bereave thee of thy Government, or there will be a community
amongst them. Tell me ignorant, where do thou find them all? Or how do
thou apply them, Ninny-hammer? for, for me to speak one and appply it well, it
makes me sweat and labor as if I had dug.

Assuredly, Master mine, quoth Sancho, a small matter makes you angry: why the
Devil do you pine that I make use of my own goods? for I have no other, nor
any other stock but Proverbs upon Proverbs: and now I have four that fall out
jump to the purpose, like Pears for a working Basket: but I will say nothing,
for now Sancho shall be called, Silence. Rather babbling, quoth Don-Quixote, or
obstinacy it self; yet I would feign know what four Proverbs they be that
came into thy mind, so to the purpose; for I can think upon none, yet I have a
good memory.

What better (said Sancho) then meddle not with a hollow tooth: And, Go from my
house, What will you have with my wife? There Is no answering, and, If the pot
fall upon the stone, or the stone on the pot, ill for the pot, ill for the
stone; all which are much to the purpose. That no body meddle with their
Governor, nor with their Superior, lest they have the worst, as he that puts
his hand to his teeth (so they be not hollow, it is no matter if they be
teeth) Whatsoever the Governor says, there is no replying, as in saying. Get
you from my house, and, What will you have of my wife? and that of the pot and
the stone, a blind man may perceive it: so that he that sees the moate in
another man's eye, let him see the beam in his own, that it may not be said
by him, The dead was afraid of her that was flayd. And you know, Sir, that the
fool knows more in his own house, then the wise man does in another.

Not so, Sancho, (quoth Don-Quixote:) for the fool, neither in his own house
nor another, knows ought, by reason that no wise edifice is seated upon the
increase of his folly: and let us leave this, Sancho for if thou govern ill,
thou must bear the fault, and mine must be the shame; but it comforts me that
I have done my duty in advising thee truly, and as discreetly as I could, and
with this I have accomplished with my obligation, and God speed thee Sancho, and
govern thee in thy Government, and bring me out of the scruple I am in, that
thou will turn thy Government with the heels upwards, which I might prevent,
by letting the Duke know thee better, and telling him that all that fatness,
and little corpse of thine, is nothing but a sack of Proverbs and knavery.

Sir (quoth Sancho) if you think I am not fit for this Government, from
henceforward I lose it: I had rather have a poor little scrap of the nail of
my soul, then my whole body: and I can as well keep my self with, pliane
Sancho, a Loaf and an Onyon, as a Governor with Capons and Patridges: and
whilst we are asleep, all are alike: great and small, poor and rich: and if
you consider on it, you shall find, that you only put me into this vein of
governing: for I know no more what belongs to governing of Islands then a
Vulture, and rather, then in being a Governor, the Devil shall fetch my
soul; I had rather be Sancho, and go to heaven, then a Governor and go to
hell. Truly, Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, for these last words thou have spoken,
I deem thee worthy to govern a thousand Islands: thou have a good natural
capacity, without which no science is worth ought; serve God, and err not in
thy maine intentions, I mean thou always have a firm purpose and intent, to
be sure in all businesses that shall occur, because Heaven always favors
good desires, and let us go dine: for I believe now the Lords expect us.

CHAP. XLIV.
How Sancho Panca was carried to his Government, and of the strange Adventure
that befell Don-Quixote in the Castle.
It Is said, that in the original of this History, it is read, that when Cid
Hamete came to write this Chapter, the Interpreter translated it not as he had
written it, which was a kind of complaint of himself, that he undertook so
dry and barren a story, as this of Don-Quixote, because it seemed that
Don-Quixote and Sancho were the sole-speakers, and that he durst not enlarge
himself with other digressions, or graver accidents and more delightful: and
he said, That to have his invention, his hand and his quill, tied to one sole
subject, and to speak by the mouths of few, was a most insupportable labor,
and of no benefit to the Author: so that to avoid this inconvenience, in the
first part he used the Art of Novels, as one, of The Curious Impertinent,
another of The captived Captain, which are (as it were) separated from the
History, though the rest that are there recounted, are matters happened to
Don-Quixote, which could not but be set down: he was of opinion likewise, as
he said, that many being carried away with attention to Don-Quixotes exployts,
would not heed his Novels, and skip them, either for have or irkesomenesse,
without noting the cunning worke-manship, and framing of them, which would be
plainly shown, if they might come to light by themselves alone without
Don-Quixotes madness, or Sancho's simplicities; therefore in this second part,
he would not engraffe loose Novels, or adjoining to the Story, but certain
accidents that might be like unto them, sprung from the passages that the
truth it self offers, and these too sparingly, and with words only proper to
declare them: and since, he is shut up and contained in the limits of this
narration, having understanding, sufficiency and ability to treat of all, his
request is, that his labor be not contemned, but rather that he be
commended, not for what he writes, but for what he has omitted to write: so
he goes on with his History, saying;

That when Don-Quixote had dined, the same day that he gave Sancho his
instructions, in the afternoon he let him have them in writing, that he
might seek some body to read them to him: but as soon as ever he had given
him them, he lost them, and they came to the Dukes hands, who showed them to
the Duchess; and both of them afresh admired at Don-Quixotes madness, and his
understanding together: and so going forward with their jests, that afternoon
they sent Sancho well accompanied to the place, that to him seemed an Island.

It fell out then that the charge of this business was laid upon a Steward of
the Dukes, a good wise fellow, and very conceited; for there can be no wit
that is not governed with discretion; he it was that played the Countess
Trifaldi's part, with the cunning that has been related, with this and with
his Masters instructions how he should behave himself toward Sancho, he
performed his task marvellously. I say then, that it happened, that as Sancho
saw the Steward, the very face of Trifaldi came into his mind, and turning to
his Master, he said: Sir, the Devil bear me from hence just as I believe,
if you do not confess, that this Steward of the Dukes here present, has the
very countenance of the Afflicted.

Don-Quixote earnestly beheld the Steward, and having thoroughly seen him, said
to Sancho: There is no need of the Devils taking thee just as thou beleevest
(for I know not what thou meanest) for the Afflicteds face is just the same
that the Stewards is^ but for all that, the Steward is not the afflicted: for
to be so, were a minifest contradiction, and now it is no time to sift out
these things, which were to enter into an intricate Labyrinth: believe me,
Friend; 'twere fit to pray to God very earnestly, to deliver us from these
damned Witches and Enchanters. It Is no jesting matter, quoth Sancho, for I
heard him speak before, and me thought the very voice of Trifaldi sounded in
my ears.

Well, I will be silent: but yet I will see henceforward, if I can discover
any sign to confirm or forgo my jealousy. You may do so, Sancho, quoth
Don-Quixote; and you shall give me notice of all that in this business you
can discover, and of all that shall befall you in your Government.

Sancho in conclusion departed with a great troop, clad like a Lawyer, and
upon his back he had a goodly tawny riding Coat of watered Chamlet, and a
Hunters Cap of the same, he rode upon a He Moyle after the Ginet fashion, [
The Stirrops short, and his legs tru^^ed up,] and behind him, by the Dukes
order, his Dapple was led, with trappings and Also-like ornaments all of
silk: Sancho turned his head now and then to look upon his Ass, with whose
company he was so well pleased, that he would not have changed to have been
Emperor of Germany. At parting he kissed the Dukes hands, and received his
Masters benediction, who gave it him with tears, and Sancho received it with
blubberings.

Now Reader let honest Sancho part in peace and in good time, and expect two
bushels of laughter, which his demeanor in his Government will minister to
thee: and in the mean time, mark what befell his Master that very night: for if
it make thee not laugh outright, yet it will cause thee show thy teeth, and
grin like an Ape: for Don-Quixotes affairs must either be solemnized with
admiration or laughter.

It Is said then, that Sancho was scarce departed, when Don-Quixote resented his
solitariness, and if it had been possible for him to have revoked his
Commission or taken away his Government, he would have done it.

The Duchess knew his Melancholy, and asked him why he was so sad: for if it
were for Sancho's absence, she had Squires, and Waiting-women, and Damzells in
he house that would do him all service.

True it is Madam (quoth Don-Quixote) that I resent Sancho's absence: but that
is not the principal cause that makes me appear sad: And of those many
kindenesses that your Excellency offers me, I only accept and make choice of
the good will with which they are offered; and for the rest, I humbly beseech
your Excellency that you give me leave in my Chamber to serve my self.

Truly Signior Don-Quixote (quoth the Duchess) it must not be so; for four of
my Damzells shall wait upon you, as fair as flowers. They shall be no flowers
to me (quoth he) but very thrones that prick my soul. They shall fly as soon
as enter into my Chamber, or come near me. If your Greatness will continue in
your favors toward me, let this be one; That I may serve my self within mine
own doors, that I may put a wall in midst of my desires and honesty; and I will
not forgo this custom for all the liberality that your Highness will show
unto me. To conclude, I will rather sleep in my clothes, then yield that any
body shall help to undresse me.

Enough, enough, Signior Don-Quixote (quoth the Duchess) for my part, He give
order that not so much as a Fly shall come within your distance, much less a
Damzel: I am none of those that would make Signior Don-Quixote transcend his
decency; for as I have a kind of glimmerring, one of Signior Don-Quixotes most
eminent virtues is his honesty. Undresse your self, and go to bed alone,
after your own fashion how you will, and no body shall hinder you, and in your
Chamber you shall have all things necessary, and lock your door to you; your
vessels shall be ready, that no natural cause make you rise to open it.

Long live the Grand Dulcinea del Toboso, and her name far extended upon the
Globe of the Earth, since she deserved to be beloved of so honest and valiant a
Knight; and the gracious Heavens infuse into Sancho Panca o^r Governor his
heart, a desire to finish the disciplining of himself quickly, that the world
may re-enjoy the beauty of so great a Lady.

To which (quoth Don-Quixote) your Highness has spoken like your self; for no
ill thing can proceed from the mouth of so good a Lady, and Dulcinea shall be
the more happy, and more esteemed in the world, in that your Greatness has
praised her, then if she had had the praises of the best Rhetoricians in the
world.

Well: go too, Signior Don-Quixote (quoth the Duchess) it is now supper time,
and the Duke expects us; come Sir, let us sup and to bed betimes: For your
voyage yesterday from Candaya, was not so short, but it has left some
weariness in you.

None at all, Lady quoth he, for I may swear to your Excellency, that in my
life time I never rode upou a gentler nor better-paced Beast then Clavileno;
and I know no reason why Malambruno should lose so swift and so gentle a horse,
and so burn him without more ado.

You may imagine quoth she, that he repenting him of the hurt he had done
Trifaldi and her company, and many others; and of the wickedness, that as a
Witch and Enchanter he had committed, would destroy the instruments of his
Office, and so burnt Clavileno as the chiefest of them; and that which did most
disquiet him, roving up and down; and so with his burnt ashes, and the trophy
of the scrole, Don-Quixotes valor is eternized.

Don-Quixote again gave fresh thanks to the Duchess: and when he had supt,
he retired to his Chamber alone, without permitting any body to serve him, he
was so afraid to meet with occasions that might induce him to forget the honest
decorum due to his Lady Dulcinea, Amadis his goodness being always in his
imagination, the flower and Looking-glass of Knights Errant.

The door he shut after him, and undressed himself by the light of two
waxe-Candles, as he pulled off his stockins (Oh ill luck unworthy such a
Personage) there broke from him, not sighs or any such thing that might
discredit his cleanly neatness, but some four and twenty stitches and a
half, that made his stockins look like a Lattice-window: The good Knight was
extremely afflicted, and would have given for a dram of green silk, an ounce
of silver: greene-silke, I say, for his stockins were green: and here
Benengeli exclamed saying; Oh poverty, poverty, I know not what moved that
famous Cordovan Poet, to call thee holy thankless gift. For I that am a Moore,
know very well by the communication I have had with Christians, that holiness
consists in Charity, Humility, Faith, Obedience and Poverty: But yet a man
had need have a special grace from God, that can be contented, being poor,
except it be with such a kind of poverty as one of the greatest Saints
speaks o^: Esteem of all things as if you had them not, and this is called
poorness of Spirit. But thou, second poverty (of that kind that I mean) why
do thou mix thy self with Gentlemen, and those that be well borne? Why
do thou make them cobble their shoes; and that the buttons of their Jerkins
be some silk, others hair, others Glass? Why must their Ruffs for the most
part be unset Lettice ways, and not set with the stick? (and by this you may
perceive how ancient the use of Starch is, and of setting Ruffs.) He proceed^:
Unhappie he, that being well born, puts his credit to shifts, as by ill
faring, with his door locked to him, making his Tooth-picker an Hypocrite, with
which he comes to the street door picking his Teeth, though he have eat
nothing that should require such cleanliness: [ He describes the right
custom of his hungry Countrymen in general.] Unhappy he, I say, whose
credit is skarred, and thinks that a patch upon his shoe is spyed a League
off, or the through sweating of his Hat, or the threed-barenesse of his Cloak,
or the hunger of his Maw. All this was renewed in Don^Quixote by the breach of
his Stocking: but his comfort was that Sancho had left him a pair of Boots
which he thought to put on the next day. Finally, to Bed he went heavy and
pensative, as well for want of Sancho's company, as for the irreparable
misfortune of his Stocking, whose stitches he would have taken up, though it
had been with silk of another color, which is one of the greatest signs of
misery that may befall a Gentleman in the progres of his prolixe necessity. He
put out the lights; 'twas hot, and he could not sleep; so he rose from his Bed,
and opened a little the lid of an Iron window that looked toward a fair
Garden; and opening it, he perceived and heard people stirring and talking in
the Garden; they below raised their voices, insomuch that these speeches might
be heard.

Be not so earnest with me, O Emerencia, to have me sing; for thou know
that ever since this stranger has been in the Castle, and that mine eyes
beheld him, I cannot sing but weep; besides my Ladies sleep is rather short
then sound; and I would not that she should know we were here for all the goods
in the world; and though she should sleep, and not wake, my singing yet were in
vain, if this new Aeneas sleep, and wake not to give ear to it, this that is
come into my kingdom to leave me scorned and forsaken.

Think not of that, friend Altisidora (said they) for doubtless the Duchess
and every body else in the house is asleep, except the Master of thy heart, and
thy souls alarm; for now I heard him open his window, and he is certainly
awake: sing poor grieved Wretch, in a low and sweet tune, to the sound of thy
Harp; and if the Duchess should perceive it: our excuse shall be, that we
are here by reason it is so hot within doors.

It Is not for our being here, O Emerencia, quoth Altisidora! but that I am not
willing my Song should discover my heart; and that I should be held by those
that have no notice of the powerful force of love, for a longing and light
huswife: but come what will on it, better shame in the face then a spot in the
heart: and with this she heard a Harp most sweetly played on. Which when
Don-Quixote heard, it amazed him; and in the instant an infinite number of
Adventures came into his mind, of Windows, Grates, Gardens, Music, Courting,
and Fopperies, that he had read in his sottish Books of Knighthood; and
straight he imagined that some Damzell of the Duchesses was enamored on him,
and that her honesty enforced her to conceal her affection, he was afraid lest
he should yield, but firmly purposed not to be vanquished; so recommending
himself, heart and soul, to his Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, he determined to
hearken to the Music: and that they might know he was there, he feigned a
sneeze, which not a little pleased the Damzels, that desired nothing else: so
Altisidora running on, and tuning her Harp, began this Song. Thou that in thy
Bed do lie,
In midst of Holland sheets;
Sleeping with thy legs out-stretcht,
All night long, until the morn.
Oh thou Knight the valiantest
That all Mancha has produced,
More honest, and more blessed withal;
Then the fin'st Arabia gold:
Hear a Damzell sorrowful,
Tall of growth; but ill sh'hath thrived;
That, with light of thy two Suns,
Feels her soul enflamed and scorcht.
Thou thy Adventures followest,
Others mis-adventures find'st;
Thou giv'st wounds, and yet deny'st
To give healing remedy.
Tell me, O thou valiant Knight;
(God increase thy miseries)
Were thou bred in Africa,
Or in Jaca Mountanous?
Serpents nourish thee with Milk;
Or perhaps thy Nurses were
Th'uncouth thinknesse of the Woods,
Or the Mountains horrible.
Well may Dulcinea, she,
That same Damzell plump and sound,
Bragg that she has conquered a
Tiger and a salvage Beast.
For which she shall famous be,
From Henares to Xarama,
Tagus, Mansanares, and
Pisverga, and Arlanza too.
Oh that I might change with her,
I would give my Coat to boot,
And the gaudy'st that I have,
All bedawb'd with golden fringe,
Oh that I were in thy arms,
If not so, but near thy bed,
That I might but scratch thy head,
And the Dand-roff rid from thee
Much I ask, but not deserve
Favors so remarkable:
Let me then but touch thy foot,
Fit for my humility.
Oh what night-Caps I would give,
And what silver Socks to thee,
What Damaska Breeches eke,
And what cloaks of Holland too.
Likewise of the finest Pearls,
Each as bigg as any Gall,
Which, if that there were but one,
Might be called, The one alone.
Do not from thy Tarpey view
This same fire that does me s^orch
Manchegan Nero of the world,
Nor kindle't with thy cruelty.
Young I am, a tender chick,
Not yet my age is past fifteen,
Fourteen am I, three months more,
I swear to thee in conscience.
I do not limp, I am not lame,
Nothing about me maimed;
And my locks like Lillies are
That do drag upon the ground.
And although my mouth be wide,
Yet my nose is something flat,
And my Teeth are Topaces:
Beauty lift^ me to the clouds.
My voice you see, if that you hark,
To the sweetest, equal is,
And my disposition too,
Less then reasonable is.
These and other Graces more,
Of thy Quiver are the spoils;
Of this house I Damzell am,
And Altisidora called.


Here the sore wounded Altisidora ended her Song, and the fright of the
required Don-Quixote began, who fetching a deep sigh, said within himself, That
I must be so unhappie an Errant, that no Damzell that sees me, but is
enamoured on me: That Dulcinea del Toboso should be so unfortunate, that they
will not let her alone enjoy my incomparable firmness: Queens, what mean you
toward her ^ Empresses, why do you persecute her! Damzells of fourteen or
fifteen years, why do you bait her! Leave, leave the poor Creature; Let her
triumph, joy, and rejoice with the lot that Love gave her, in yielding her my
Heart, and delivering her my Soul. Look ye, enamoured troop, for Dulcinea only
am I of Pass and Sugar-pellets, and for all else of Flint: for her I am Honey;
for you bitter Aloes: Dulcinea only is to me fair, discreet, honest, gallant,
well-born: and others foul, foolish, light, and wor^-borne. Nature threw me
into the world to be only hers, and no bodies else: let Altisidora weep or
sing: let the Lady despair for whom I was banged in the Castle of the Enchanted
Moor [ His Adventure in the first part with the Carrier and Maritornes in the
Vent:] for sod or roasted, I am Dulcinea's, clean, well nurtured, and honest,
in spite of all the powerful Witch-crafts of the earth: and with this he
clapped to the window suddenly, and all angry and despiteous, as if some disgrace
had befaln him, he got him to bed, where for the present we will leave him,
for the Grand Sancho Panca calls upon us, who means to begin his famous
Government.

CHAP. XLV.
How the Grand Sancho Panca took possession of his Island, and the manner of
his beginning to Govern.
OPerpetuall discoverer of the Antipodes; Torch to the World; Eye of Heaven;
sweet Stirrer of Wine-cooling Vessels: one while Titan, another Phoebus: some
times an Archer, other whiles a Physician; Father of Poesy; Inventer of
Music; thou that always risest, and (though it seem so) yet never set. To
thee I speak, O Sun, by which man begets man: To thee I speak; help me, and
lighten my obscure wit, that I may punctually runn through the narration of the
Grand Sancho Panca's Government; for without thee I am dull, unmolded, and
confused. I proceed then thus.

Sancho with all his troop came to a Town, which had in it about a thousand
Inhabitants, which was one of the best the Duke had: They told him the Island
was called Barataria, either because the Town was called Baratario, or else
because he had obtained his Government so cheap. When he came to the Town
Gates (for it was walled) the Officers came out to welcome him; the bells rung,
and all the Inhabitants made show of a general gladness, and they carried him
in great pomp to the high Church, to give God thanks: and straight, after some
ridiculous ceremonies, they delivered him the Keys, and admitted him for
perpetual Governor of the Island Barataria. His apparel, his beard, his
fatness, and the shortness of this new Governor, made all the people admire
that knew not the jigg of the matter, and those also that knew it, which were
many.

Finally, when he came out of the Church, they carried him to the Judgment
seat, and seated him i^ it, and the Dukes Steward told him; It is an old
custom, Sir Governor in this Island, that he that comes to take possession
of this famous Island, must answer to a question that shall be asked him, that
must be somewhat hard and intricate, by whose answer the Town ghesseth and
takes the pulse of their new Governors capacity, and accordingly, is either
glad or sorry at his coming.

Whilst the Steward said this to Sancho, he was looking upon certain great
letters that were written upon the wall over against his seat; and because he
himself could not read, he asked what painting that was in the wall? It was
(answered him:) Sir, the day is set down there in which your Honor took
possession of this Island, and the Epitaph says thus; This day, such a day of
the month and year, Signior Don Sancho Panca took possession of this Island,
long may he enjoy it. And whom call they Don Sancho Panca (said Sancho?) Your
Honor (quoth the Steward;) for no other Panca has come into this Island, but
he that is seated in that seat. Well, mark you Brother (quoth Sancho) there
belongs no Don to me, neither ever was there any in all my Lineage; I am plain
Sancho, my Father was called Sancho, my Grandfather and all were Pansa's
without any additions of Dons or Donnaes, and I believe this Island is as full
of Dons as stones: but it is enough, God knows my meaning; and perhaps if my
Government last but four days to an end, I Will weed out these Dons that with
their multiplicity do weary and trouble like Mosquitos. On with your question,
Master Steward, I Will answer you as well as I can, let the Town be sorry or not
sorry.

At this instant two men came into the Judgemen^ place; the one clad like a
Husbandman, and the other like a Tailor, having sheeres in his hand; the Tailor
said, Sir Governor, I and this Husbandman are come before you for this cause:
This honest man came yesterday to my shop, and I, saving your reverence, am a
Tailor, and a free man, God be thanked, and showing me a piece of cloth,
asked me; Sir, will there be enough here to make me a Capouch? I measuring
the cloth, answered him, Yes: he thought as I did, and I thought true, that I
would steal some of his cloth, being maliciously bent, and out of the ill
opinion he had of Ta^l^rs: and he replied again, that I should tell if there
were enough to make two: I smelt his drift, and told him, I; and my Gallant in
his first knavish intention, went adding more Capouches, and I answered with
more yesses, till we came to five, and even now he came for them, I give them
him, but he will not pay me for the making, rather he demands that I pay
him, or return him his cloth. Is it true this (quoth Sancho)? Yes, said the
fellow; but pray, Sir, let him show his five Capouches that he has made me
With a very good will, (quoth the Tailor:) and continently taking his hand from
under his cloak, he showed five Capouches in it, upon each finger one, and
said; Behold here the five Capouches that this man would have me make, and in
my soul and conscience I have not a jot of cloth left, as any workman shall
judge.

All the by standers laughed at the number of the Capouches, and the strange
contention. Sancho, after a little consideration, said; Me thinks, in this
suit there need no delays, but a quick and plain judgment; My sentence
therefore is, that the Tailor lose his labor, and the Husbandman his cloth,
and that the Capouches be carried to the poor in the prison, without any more
ado.

If the sentence that passed of the Grazier bred admiration in the by-stander,
this moved them to laughter; but what the Governor commanded, was fulfilled:
before whom, two ancient men were now presented; the one had a hollow Cane, in
stead of a staff, the other had none: he without the staff, said, Sir, I
lent this honest man long since, ten Crowns in good Gold, to do him a
kindness: I let him alone a good while, without asking for them, because I
would not put him to more trouble to repay me, then he had to borrow them of
me; but because I saw him careless of the payment, I have asked him more then
once or twice for my money^ which he not only does not return me, but
denies, and says, he never received the ten Crowns I lent him or that if I
did lend them him, he has paid me: I have no witnesses, neither of the
lending, or of the payment: I pray, Sir, will you take his Oath? and if he
will swear that he has paid me, I give him an acquitance from henceforth,
and before God. What say you to this, honest old man with the staff (quoth
Sancho?) Sir, I confess that he lent them me, and hold down your rod, [ The
custom in Spain being, that he who is to swear, makes a cross over the rod
of Justice,] and since he will have me swear, I will, that I have paid him
really and truly. The Governor held out his rod, and in the mean time, he
with the staff, gave it to the other old man to hold, whilst he was to
swear, as if it had hindered him: so with his hand he made a cross over the
rod of Justice, saying, 'Twas true that he had lent him the ten crowns that
he demanded; but that he had truly restored them to him again, and that his
forgetting of it, made him continually demand them. Which when the Grand
Governor saw, he asked the Creditor what he could say against his Adversary?
He said, that surely his debtor said true, for he held him to be an honest
man, and a good Christian, and that it might be he had forgotten, how or when
he paid him, and that from henceforward he would never demand him ought. The
debtor took his staff again making an obeisance, was going out of the
judgment place: Which when Sancho saw, and that he was going without any more
ado, and seeing likewise the others patience, he nodded with his head on his
breast, and clapped the Index of his right hand, upon his nose and eyebrows, and
a pretty while was as it were considering, and by and by lifted up his head,
and commanded that the old man with the staff should be brought to him: and
Sancho seeing him, said, Honest man, give me that staff; for I have use for
it. With a very good will, quoth the old man^^here it is, Sir, and gave it him.
Sancho took it, and giving it to the other old man, ^ayd, Go on Gods name,
now you are paid. I Sir, said the old man? why, can this Cane be worth ten
crowns? Yes, said the Grvernour, or else I am the veriest block-head in the
world: and now you shall see whether I have a brain or no to govern a whole
Kingdom: so he commanded that before them all the Cane should be broken,
which was done, and in the midst of it, they found the ten crowns.

All of them admired at this and held their Governor for a second Solomon.
They asked him how he gathered that the ten Crowns was in the Cane? He
answered, That because he saw the old man that was to swear, give his
Adversary the staff whilst he took his oath, and that he swore he had
given him the money truly and really; and that when he had ended his oath, he
demanded his staff of him again, it came into his imagination, that within it
the money was hidden; whereby it may be collected, That although many
Governors are stark Asses, yet sometimes it pleases God to direct them in
their Judgments; for besides, he had heard the Vicar of his parish tell of
such an Accident as this, and that he had a special Memory, for if it were
not for forgetting all he desired to remember, there were not such a Memory in
the Island.

At last one of the old men ashamed, and the other paid his money, they
departed, and those that were present were astonished; and he that wrote down
Sanchoes words, deeds and behavior, could not resolve, whether he should set
him dawn a fool or a wiseman.

As soon as this suit was ended, there came a woman into the place of
Judgment, laying hold strongly on a man clad to see too, like a rich Grazier,
who came crying aloud, saying, Justice (Lord Governor) Justice; and if I have
it not on Earth, I will seek it in Heaven. Sweet Governor this wicked man met
me on the highway, and has abused my body, as if it had been an un-washed
ragge; and, unhappy that I am, he has gotten that that I have kept these
three and twenty years, defending it from Moors and Christians, from
homebred ones and strangers; I have been as hard as a Corke-tree, and kept my
self as entire as the Salamander in the fire, or as the wool amongst the
Briars, and this man must come now with a washed hand and handle me. This is to
be tried yet (quoth Sancho) whether this gallants hands be washed or no; and
turning to the fellow he said. What answer you to yonder woman's complaint?
Who all in a fright answered: Sir (quoth he) I am a poor Grazier, and deal in
swine; and this morning I went (with pardon be it spoken) from this Town to
sell four Hoggs, and the tallage and other fees cost me little less then they
were worth: as I went homeward, by the way I met with this good Matron, and the
Devil, the Author of all mischief, yoaked us together: I gave her sufficient
pay, but she not satisfied, laid hold on me, and would not let me go till
she had brought me hither: she says I forced her, but I swear she lies; and
this is true every jot of it. Then the Governor asked him, if he had any
money about him? Who answered him, Yes; that he had in a leathern purse in his
bosom some twenty Crowns in silver. He commanded him to take it out, and
deliver it just as it was to the Plaintiff; which he did trembling: The woman
received it, and making a thousand Moorish ducks to the company and praying to
God for the Governors life and health, that was so charitable to poor Orphans
and Maidens, she went out from the place of Judgment, laying fast hold with
both her hands on the purse, though first she looked whether 'twere silver
within or no. She was scarce gone, when Sancho said to the Grazier, that had
tears standing in his eyes, and his heart going after his purse; Honest fellow,
run after yonder woman, and take her purse from her whether she will or no,
and bring it me hither. He spoke not to a fool or a deaf man, for straight he
parted like lightning, and went to perform what was commanded him.

All that were present were in suspense and expectation of the end of that
suit, and a little after, both man and woman returned together, more fastened
and clung together then formerly, she with her coat up and her purse in her
lapp, and he striving to get it from her, which was not possible, she did so
resist, crying out and saying, Justice of God and the World: Look you, Sir
Governor, mark the little shame or fear of this desperate man, that in the
midest of a congregation, and in the midest of a street, would take away my
purse that you commanded him to give me.

And has he got it (said the Governor?) Got it (said she?) I had rather
lose my life then the purse: I were a pretty child in faith then; you must set
other manner of Colts upon me then this poor nasty sneak up: Pincers, Hammers,
Beetles, scraping-Tools, shall not get it out of my claws, out of my Lions
paws; they shall rather get one half of my soul out of my flesh. She says
right (quoth the fellow) I yield to her; I have no more power, I confess my
force is not sufficient to take it away.

Then said the Governor to the woman; You, Honesty, Virago, give me that purse
hither; which she did: and the Governor restored it again to the man; and said
to the forcible woman, but not forced, Do you hear, sister? if you had showed
but half your valor and breath to defend your body, that you did for your
purse, Hercules his force could not have forced you: get you gone with a Pox;
come not into this Island, nor in six leagues round about it, on pain of two
hundred lashes: get you gone straight (I say) Makebate, shameless Coozener.
The woman was afrighted, and away she went like a Sheep-biter, and melancholy;
and the Governor said to the man, Honest fellow, get you home on Gods name
with your Money; and henceforward if you mean not to lose it, pray have no mind
to yoke with any body. The man as clownishly as he could, thanked him, and
went his way: The bystanders admired afresh at the judgment and sentences of
their new Governor. All which noted by his Chroniclist, was straight written
to the Duke, that with much desire expected it. And leave we honest Sancho
here: for his Master hastens us now, that was all in a hurly-burly with
Altifidora's Music.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of the fearful Low-Bell-Cally horror, that Don-Quixote received in process
of his Love, by the enamoured Altisidora.
We left the Grand Don-Quixote enveloped in the imaginations, which the Music
of the enamoured Damzell Altisidora had caused in him: to bed he went with
them, and as if they had been Fleas, they gave him no rest or quiet, and to
these were added those of his torn Stockings: but as time is swift and no
stumbling block will stay him, he went on horseback on the hours, and the
morning came on speedily: Which when Don-Quixote saw, he left his soft bed,
and nothing lazy, put on his Chamoize apparel and his Boots, to hide the hole
of his Stockings; he cast his scarlet Mantle upon him, and put on his head his
Hunters Cap of green velvet, laced with silver lace; his Belt he hung at his
shoulder, with his trusty cutting Blade; he laid hold on a Rosary which he
used still to carry with him: and with goodly representation and gate, he
went toward an out room, where the Duke and Duchess were ready dressed, and as
it were, expecting him: And as he was to pass through a Gallery, Altisidora
and the other Damzell her friend, were greedily expecting him: and as soon as
Altisidora saw him, she fained a swounding; and her friend got her into her
lap, and in all haste went to unlace her.

Don-Quixote that saw it, coming near them said, Now I know from whence these
fits proceed.

I know not from whence (said her friend) for Altisidora is the healthiest
Damzell in all this house, and I never perceived so much as a sigh from her
since I have known her: a mischief on all Knights Errant in the world, if all
be so ungrateful: pray Signior Don-Quixote, get you gone; for as long as you
are here, this poor Wench will not come to her self.

To which said Don-Quixote, Get me, Mistress, a Lute into my Chamber soon at
night, and I Will comfort this afflicted Damzell as well as I can: for in amorous
beginnings plain dealing is the most approved remedy; so he went away, because
they that passed by should not note or observe him: he was no sooner gone,
when the dismayed Altisidora coming to her self, said to her companion: By all
means let him have the Lute; for undoubtedly Don-Quixote will give us Music,
and being his, it cannot be bad.

Straight they went to let the Duchess know what passed, and of the Lute that
Don-Quixote required: and she jocund above measure, plotted with the Duke and
her Damzells, to play a trick with him that should be more pleasant then
hurtful; and so with much longing they expected till it should be night,
which came on speedily as the day had done, which the Dukes passed in savory
discourse with Don-Quixote: and that day the Duchess indeed dispatched a Page
of hers, that in the wood acted the enchanted Dulcinea's part, to Teresa Panca
with her Husband Sancho's Letter, and with the bundle of stuff that he had
left to be sent her, charging him to bring her a true relation of all that he
passed with her.

This done, and it growing toward eleven of the clock at night, Don-Quixote
found a Voyall in his Chamber: he tuned it, opened the window, and heard
people walk in the Garden, and having run over the frets of the Violl, and
ordering it as well as he could, he spit and cleared his breast, and straight
with a voice somewhat hoarceish, though tunable, he sung the ensuing Romant,
which the same day he had composed. These verses and the former of Altisidora,
are made to be scurvy on purpose by the Author, fitting the occasions and the
subjects, so he observes neither Verse nor Rhyme,
THE powerful force of Love
Often does un hinge the Soul,
Taking for his Instrument
Ever careless idleness.
To use to sow and work,
And to be ever occupi'd,
Is the only Antidote
Against the poison of Loves griefs,
Damozels that live retired,
With desire of Marriage,
Honesty their portion is,
And the Trumpet of their praise.
They that Knights Errant be,
They that in Court do live,
Court the looser sort of Maids,
And the honest make their Wives.
Some Loves are of the East,
Loves that are held with Hostesses,
That straight set in the West,
End when the parting is.
The Love that new come is,
Comes to day, to morrow parts,
Never leaves the Images,
In the Souls imprinted well.
Picture upon Picture drawn,
Shows not well, nay leaves no draught^
Where a former beauty is,
Second needs must lose the trick.
Painted, Dulcinea, I,
Del Toboso, so well have
In smoothe Tablet of my Soul,
That there is naught can blot her out.
Constancy in Lovers is
The part most to be esteemed;
For which love does Miracles,
And does raise us up aloft.


Here Don-Quixote ended his Song, which was hearkened to by the Duke, Duchess,
Altisidora, and almost all the folk of the Castle; when suddaily from the top
of an open Turret, there fell heavily down upon Don-Quixotes window, by the
leting down of a cord, a great sack of Cats with little Low-bels tied at their
tails, the noise of which was so great, and the mewing of the Cats, that
although the Dukes were the Inventers of the Jest, yet they themselves were
even afrighted, and Don-Quixote was timorous and amazed; and such was his
ill-luck, that two or three of the Cats got in at the window of his Cabin, and
leaping up and down on every side, it seemed to him that there were a Region of
Devils in his Chamber; they put out the Candles that were burning there, and
now they sought how to get out: the rising and falling of the Cord, at which
the Low-bells were hanged, ceased not; and most of the people in the Castle,
that knew not the certainty of the business, were astonished.

Don-Quixote got him on his legs, and laying hold on his sword, began to
thrust and flash at the window, crying out aloud; Avaunt ye wicked Enchanters,
avaunt ye haggish scum; for I am Don-Quixote de la Mancha, against whom your
wicked plots cannot prevail, or have any power: And turning to the Cats that
were in his Chamber, he struck many blows at them; they got the Iron window,
and there got out: but one of them that saw himself so baited with Don-Quixotes
slashes, leapt upon his face, and with his nails and teeth, laid hold on his
nose with the paw. Don-Quixote roared out as loud as he could: Which when the
Duke and Duchess heard, and considering what it might be, they ran up in all
haste to his Chamber, and opening it with a Master key, they found the poor
Knight striving with all his might to unroot the Cat from his face: they called
for lights, and saw the unequal Combat: The Duke came to part the fray, and
Don-Quixote cried aloud; Let him alone; leave me hand to hand with this Devil,
this Witch, this Enchanter; for I Will make him know the difference betwixt me
and him; and who Don-Quixote de la Mancha is: But the Cat careless of these
threats, purred and held fast.

But at length the Duke unloosed him, and flung him out of the window.
Don-Quixotes face was sifted over, and his nose was not very sound; yet he was
very angry that they would not let him finish the battle, that was so long
drawn out betwixt him and that cursed Enchanter. They made some oil of Aparice
to be brought, and Altisidora her self, with her fair hands, bound up the
wounds; and laying to the clothes she told him in his ear, All these mis-haps
befell thee, flinty Knight, for the sin of thy hard-hearted obstinacy; and
God grant that Sancho thy Squire may forget to whip himself, that they beloved
Dulcinea may still be enchanted, neither may thou enjoy her, or come to her
bed, at least while I live, that adore thee.

To all this Don-Quixote answered not a word, but fetched a deep sigh, and
straight laid him down on his bed, thanking the Dukes for their courtesy; not
for that he was afraid of that Cattish-Low-Belly Enchanting crew; but that he
was persuaded of their good wills to come to retire him.

The Dukes left him to his rest, and went away sorrowful for the ill success
of the jest; for they thought that Adventure would not have lighted so heavily
on Don-Quixote, which cost him five days retirement and keeping his bed, where
another Adventure befell him, more pleasing then the former, which the
Historian will not recount yet, because of repairing to Sancho Panca, that was
very careful and conceited in his Government.

CHAP. XLVII.
How Sancho demeaned himself in his Government.
THe Story tells us, That Sancho from the Judgment Seat was carried to a
sumptuous Palace, where, in a great and spacious Hall was spread a Royal and
plentiful Table: The winde-Musick played, and four Pages came in to minister
water to him, which he used with much state: The wind instruments ceased, and
Sancho sat him down at the upper end of the Table, because there was no other
seat, nor no other Napkin laid but that.

At his elbow their stood a certain personage, that after showed to be a
Physician, with a Whale-bone rod in his hand: then they took off a rich white
Towell, which covered many sorts of Fruits, and a great variety of several
dishes of meats: One that served to be a kind of Student, said grace; and a
Page put a laced Bib under Sancho's chin; and another that played the Carvers
part, set a dish of fruit before him: but he had no sooner eaten a bit, when
he with the rod touching the dish, it was very suddenly taken from before him:
but the Carver set another dish of meat before him. Sancho would have tasted of
it; but before he could touch it, he with the rod was at it, and a Page set it
away with as much celerity as the fruit: which when Sancho saw, he began to
be in suspense, and beholding all that were by, asked if that meat were to be
eaten like your Childrens Coral: [ only to be touched, but not swollowed.]

To which he with the rod made answer; It must be eaten Sir Governor (quoth
he) according to the use and custom of Governors in other Islands. I Sir, am
a Physician, and am Stipended in this Island to be so to the Governors of it;
and I am much more careful of their health then of mine own; studying night
and day, and weighing the complexion of the Governor, that I may hit the
better upon the curing him, whenever he falls sick: and the principal thing
I do, is, to be present with him at meats, and to let him eat what I think
fit for him, and to take away what I imagine may do him hurt, or be naught
for his stomach; and therefore I now commanded the dish of fruit to be taken
away, because it is too moist; and the other dish, because it was too hot, and
had much spice, that provoked thirst; and he that drinks much kills and
consumes his humidum radicale, wherein life consists. So that (quoth Sancho)
you dish of Partridges there roasted, and in my opinion well seasoned, will do
me no hurt at all.

To which (said the Physician) You shall not eat of them Sir, as long as I live.

Why so (quoth Sancho?) the Physician answered, Because Hypocrates our Master,
North star and light of Physic, ^ayes in an Aphorism of his; Omnis
saturatio mala, Perdicis autem pessima: the meanings is, All surfeit is ill,
but that of a Partridge is worst of all.

If it be so (quoth Sancho) pray see, Master Docter, which of all these dishes
will be most wholesome for me and do me least hurt, and let me eat of that,
without banging of it with your Rod: for in good sadness I tell you plain, I
am ready to dye with hunger; and to deny me my victuales, in spite of Master
Doctor, let him say what he will, is rather to take away my life then to
increase it.

You say true, Sir Governor (quoth the Physician) and therefore my opinion is,
that you touch not those boiled Conies, nor that Veal, for it is watrish meat:
if it were roasted or powdered? but 'twere much about one. Then (quoth Sancho)
that great dish that stands fuming there before, me thinks it is an Olla Podrida
[a pot of all kind of flesh sod together,] and by reason of the diversities of
things it has in it, I cannot but meet with something that will do me good.
A^^sit, quoth the Physician, far be such an ill thought from us, quoth the
Physician: there is nothing in the world that worse nourishes then an Olla
Podrida, fit only for your Prebends and Rectors of Colleges, or for your
Country Marriages: Let your Governors Tables be without them, and let them
be furnished with all prime dainties and quaintness: And the reason is,
because always, and wheresoever, and by whomsoever, your simple Medicines are
in more request then your Compounds; because in Simples there can be no error;
in Compounds there are many, astring the quantity of things, of which they are
composed; but that that I know is fit for the Governor to eat at present to
preserve his health, and corroborate it, is, some hundred of little hollow
Wafers, and some pretty slice or two of Quince-Marmelade, that may settle his
stomach, and help his digestion.

When Sancho heard this, he leaned himself to the back of his chair, and by
fits now and then looked at the Physician, and with a grave voice, asked him
his name, and where he had studied.

To which he answered my name, Sir Governor, is Doctor Pedro Rezio de Agnero;
I was born in a Town called Tirte a fuera, which is between Caraguel and
Almodonar d^l Campo^ upon the right hand, and I took my degree of Doctor in the
University of Osuna. To which (quoth Sancho) all inflamed with choler; well
Master Doctor Pedro Rezio of Agnero, borne at Tirte a fuera, a town on the
right hand as we go from Caraguel to Almodonar del Campo, Graduated in Osuna,
get you straight out of my sight, or I vow by the Sun, I Will get me a cudgel,
and with bangs begin with you, and so forward, till I leave not a Physician in
all the Island, at least such as I know to be ignorant; for your wise, prudent
and discreet Physicians, I will hug them, and honor them as Divine persons. I
say again, Pedro Rezio, get you gone, or else I Will take the chair I sit upon,
and dash it upon your head, and let me be called in question for it, when I
give up my Office, for I can discharge my self, by saying that I did God
service to kill such a Physician, the Common-wealths-hang-man: and let me eat,
or else take your Government again; for an Office that will not afford a man
his victuals, is not worth two Beans.

The Doctor was in an uproare to see the Governor so chollerick, ^and would
have gone out of the Hall, but that at that instant a posting-Horne sounded in
the Street, and the Carver peeping out of the Window, turned back saying; A
Post is come from my Lord the Duke, that brings some important dispatch. The
Post came straight in, sweating and amazed, and drawing a Packet out of his
bosom, he delivered it to the Governor. Sancho gave it to the Steward, and
bad him read the superscription, which was this. To Don Sancho Panca,
Governor of the Island Barataria, to his own hands, or to his Secretary.
Which when Sancho heard, he said, Who is here my Secretary? And one that was
by answered I Sir; for I can Write and Read; for I am a Biscayner. With that
addition (quoth Sancho) you may well be Secretary to the Emperor himself;
open your Packet, and let us hear the Contents.

The newborn Secretary did so; and having viewed the Contents, said, That it
was a business to be imparted in private. Sancho commanded those in the
Presence to avoid, and only the Steward and the Carver to remain, and the
rest, with the Physician went out, and presently the Secretary read the Letter
following.

I Am given to understand, Signior Don Sancho Panca, that certain Enemies of
mine, and of that Island, mean one of these nights to give it a furious
assault: twere fit you caused watch and ward to be kept, that they take you not
unprovided; I know also by faithful Spies, that four Persons have entered
there the Island disguised to kill you, for they stand much in awe of your
abilities: have a care to see who comes to speak to you, and eat of nothing
that shall be presented unto you; I will be careful to send you aid, if you be
in necessity, and in the rest I hope you will proceed, as is expected from
your understanding. From hence the 4 of August, at four of the clock in the
morning.

Your Friend, The Duke.


Sancho was astonished, and the standers by seemed to be no otherwise; and
turning to the Steward he said, I Will tell you what is fit to be done, and that
presently; Clap me Doctor Rezio into dungeon; for if any body kill me, it is
he, and with so vile and trivial a death as hunger: Me thinks too, said the
Carver, you should do well to eat nothing of all this meat upon the Table; for
this dinner was presented by Nuns, and it is an old saying, The nearer the
Church the farther from God. I grant ye so (quoth Sancho) and therefore for
the present give me only a piece of bread, and some four pound of grapes; for
in them there can be no poison, and indeed I cannot live without eating: for
if we must provide our selves for these wars that threaten us, 'twere fit to
be well victualed; for the guts uphold the heart, and not the heart the guts.
And you Secretary, answer my Lord the Duke, tell him that his commands shall be
fullfilled most punctually; and commend me to the Duchess, and say that I
request her, that she forget not to send my letter by a special Messenger, and
likewise the fardell to my Wife Teresa, Panca, and in it she shall do me a
particular favor, and I will be careful to serve her to the uttermost of my
power: And by the way you may clap in a commendation to my Master, Signior
Don-Quixote de la Mancha, that he may see I am thankful for his bread: And
you like a good Secretary, and an honest Biscayner, may in the rest add what
you will, or shall think fitting. And take away here; and yet leave me
something to eat; and let these Spies, these Murderers and Enchanters come upon
my and my Island, I Will deal with them well enough.

And now a Page came in, saying; Here Is a Husbandman, a suitor, that would
speak with your Honor in a business of importance, as he says, It Is a
strange thing of these suitors (quoth Sancho:) Is it possible they should be
so foolish as not to perceive that these be not times for them to negotiate
in? belike we that Govern, we that are Judges, are not men of flesh and
blood; and is it not fit that we should ease our selves, when necessity
requires, except they think we should be made of marble? Verily, and in my
Conscience, if my Government last (as I have a glimmering it will not) I Will lay
one of these fellows up for it. Well, bid this honest fellow come in for this
once; but see first that he be none of the Spies, or any of my murderers. No
Sir (quoth the Page) for he is a very dull soul to see to: either I know
little, or he has no more harm then a piece of good bread. There Is no
fearing him (said the Steward) for we all are here.

Carver (quoth Sancho) were it not possible, now that Doctor Rezio is not here,
that I might eat a bit of some substantial meat though it were but a crust and
an onion? To night at Supper (quoth the Carver) your Dinner shall be amended,
and your Honor shall be satisfied. God grant it (quoth Sancho:) and now the
Husbandman came in, one of a very goodly presence, and that you might see a
thousand miles off, was a good hurtlesse soul. The first thing that he said
was, Which is my Lord the Governor? Who should it be (quoth the Secretary) but
he that sits there in the Chair? I humble my self to his presence then (quoth
the Husbandman) and kneeling on his knees, desired his hand to kiss. Sancho
denied it, and commanded him to rise, and to say what he would have. The
Husbandman did so, and said:

I Sir, am a Husbandman, born in Miguel Turra, a Town some two leagues from
Cindercall. Here Is another Tirte a fuera, quoth Sancho: Say on Brother, for let
me tell you, I know the place very well, and it is not far from my Town. The
Business Sir, is this, quoth the Husbandman; I by Gods blessing, and the full
consent of the Catholic Roman Church, am Married, have two Sons that be
Students; the youngest studies to be Bachelor, and the eldest to be Master. I
am a widdower, for my Wife dyed, or to say trulier, a wicked Physician killed
her, that purged her when she was great with Child: and if it had pleased God
that she had been delivered, and it had been a Son. I would have set him to
study to have been Doctor, that he might not have envied his Brothers, the
Bachelor and Master. So that (quoth Sancho) if your Wife had not been dead, or
if they had not killed her, you had not now been a Widdower? No Sir, by no
means (quoth the Husbandman.) We are much the nearer (quoth Sancho:) forward
brother, it is time to sleep, have you any more to say? I say (quoth the
Husbandman) that my Son that was to be the Bachelor, fell in love in the
same Town with a Maiden, called Clara Perlerina, Daughter to Andrew Perlerina a
rich Farmer: and this name of Perlerina's comes not to them by any offspring,
or descent, but that all of this race and name are Palsigiste; and to better
the name, they were called Perlerina's; and indeed the Maid is as fair as an
Oriental Pearl: and looking upon her right side, she is like a flower in the
field; but on her left, otherwise; for there she wants an eye, that flew out
of her head with the smallpox: and though she have many holes left still in
her face, many say that love her well, that those are not holes, but graves
where her Lovers souls are buried.

She is so cleanly, that because she will not bewray her face, she wears
her nose (as you would say) tucked up, as if it fledd from her mouth, and for
all that, it becomes her passing well; for she has a wide mouth: and were it
not that she wanted ten or twelve teeth and her grinders, she might pass,
and set a mark for the well-favouredst to come to. For her lips, I say
nothing, for they are so thin and delicate that if they did use to reele
lips, they might make a skeine of hers: but because they are of a more
different color then we see ordinarily in lips, they are miraculous; for
they are Jaspered with blue and green, and Berengena-coloured, and under
correction, Sir Governor, since I paint out the parts of her that I mean to
make my daughter so exactly, it is a sign I love her, and that I do not
dislike her.

Paint what you will (quoth Sancho) for I recreate my self with the painting:
and if I had dined, there were no better dish of fruit to me then your picture.

I humbly thank you, sir, for that (quoth the Husbandman:) but time will come
that I may be thankful, if I be not now, and if I should paint out to you
her gentleness, and the height of her body, 'twould admire you: but that
cannot be, for she is crooked, her knees and her mouth meet, and for all that
it is well seen, that if she could stand upright, she would touch the roof
with her head, and long ere this, she would have given her hand to my son to
be his spouse, but that she cannot stretch it out, it is so knotted and
crumpled up; for all that her goodness and good shape appears in her long and
guttured nails.

It Is very well (quoth Sancho) and make account, Brother, that now you have
painted her from head to foot. What would you now? come to the matter without
fetches, or lanes, or digressions, or additions. I would desire you (quoth the
Husbandman) to give me a Letter of favor to my brother by marriage, her
father; to desire him to consent that this marriage may go forward, since our
fortunes be equal and our births; for to say true, Sir Governor, my son is
possessed with the Devil, and there is not a day passes, but the wicked
spirits torment him, and once falling in the fire, has mad his face as
wrinkled as a piece of parchment, and his eyes are somewhat bleered and
running, and he is as soft conditioned as an Angel; for if it were not for
buffeting of himself now and then, he were a very Saint.

Will you any thing else, honest friend, quoth Sancho? One thing more (quoth
he) but that I dare not tell it; but let it out, it shall not rotte in my
breast, speed how it will. I desire, Sir, that you would give me three hundred,
or six hundred Dukats to help my Bachelors portion, I mean to help him to
furnish his house, for they will live by themselves, without being subject to
the impertinencies of fathers in Law.

Will you have any thing else (quoth Sancho?) and be not abashed or ashamed to
tell it. No truly (quoth the Husbandman:) and he had scarce said this, when
the Governor rising up, laid hold on the chair that he sat on, saying; I vow
to you goodman splay-foot, unmannerly clown, if you go not strait and hide
your self out of my presence, I Will break your head with this chair here ye
whoor-son Rascal, the Devils painter: come thou at this time of day to
ask me six hundred Ducats? And where have I them, stinkard? and if I had
them, why should I give them thee, sottish knave? What a pox care I for Miguel
Turra, or all the lineage of the Perlerinas! Get thee out of my sight or I
swear by my Lord the Dukes life, that I Will do as I have said, Thou art not of
Miguel Turra, but some crafty knave, sent from hell to tempt me. Tell me,
desperate man! it is not yet a day and a half since I came to the Government:
how would thou have me have six hundredth Ducats? The Carver made signs to
the Husbandman, to get him out of the Hall; who did so like a sheepbyter, and
to see to very fearful, lest the Governor should execute his choler on him:
for the cunning knave very well knew what belonged to his part: but leave we
Sancho to his choler, and peace be in the Quire, and return we to
Don-Quixote; for we left his face bound up, and dressed for his Cattish wounds,
of which he was not sound in eight days: in one of which this befell him,
that Cid Hamete promises to recount with all the punctualitie, and truth that
he usually does in the most trivial matters of this History.

CHAP. XLVIII.
What happened to Don-Quixote with Donna Rodriguez, the Duchesses Waiting Woman;
with other successes, whorthy to be written, and had in eternal remembrance.
THe ill-wounded Don-Quixote was exceeding musty and melancholy, with his face
bound up, and scarred, not by the hand of God, but by the nails of a Cat
(misfortunes annexed to Knight Errantry) six days past ere he came abroad:
in one of which, in a night, when he was awake and watching, thinking upon his
mishaps, and his being persecuted by Altisidora, he perceived that some body
opened his Chamber door with a Key; and straight he imagined that the inamored
Damzell came to set upon his honesty, and to put him to the hazard of
forgoing his loyalty due to his Mistress Dulcinea del Toboso. No said he,
believing in his imagination, and this so loud that he might easily be heard,
no beauty in the world shall make me leave her that is graved and stamped in
the midst of my heart, and in my innermost entrails: be thou, Mistress mine,
either transformed into an Onion-like husband-woman, or into a Nymph of the
Golden Tagus, weaving webs made of silk and gold twist: be thou in Merlins
power, or in Montesino's, where ere they will have thee: for wheresoever thou
art, thou art mine; and wheresoever I am, I will be thine. His speech ended,
and the door opened both together.

Up he stood upon the bed, wrapped from head to foot in a quilt of yellow
Satin, a woollen cap upon his head, his face and Mustachos bound up: his face
for his scratches; his Mustachoes, because they should not dismay or fall down:
in which posture, he looked like the strangest aparition, that can be imagined.

He nailed his very eyes upon the door: and whereas he thought to have seen
the vanquished and pitiful Altisidora enter, he saw that it was a most
reverend Matron, with a long white gathered Stole, so long that it did cover
and bemantle her from head to foot: betwixt her left hand fingers she had
half a Candle lighted, and with her right hand she shaddowed her self, to
keep the light from her eyes, which where hid with a great pair of spectacles:
she came treading softly, and moving her feet gently.

Don-Quixote from his Watch-towre beheld her: and when he saw her furniture,
and noted her silence, he thought it had been some Hagge or Magician, which
came in that shape to do him some shrewd turn; and he began apace to
bless himself.

The Vision came somewhat neeeer: but being in the midst of the Chamber, she
lifted up her eyes, and saw with what haste Don-Quixote was crossing himself;
as if he were afraid to see such a shape; she was no less affrighted with
his: for seeing him so lanke, and yellow in the quilt, and with the bends that
dis-figured him, she cried out, saying, Jesus, What Is this? and with the
sudden fright, the Candle dropped out of her hand, and being in the dark, she
turned her back to be gone; but for fear stumbled upon her Coats, and had a
sound fall.

Don-Quixote timorous, began to say, I conjure thee, Apparition! Or whatso'ere
thou art, to tell me who thou art, and what thou will have with me: If thou
be a soul in Purgatory, tell me, and I will do what I am able for thee:
for I am a Catholic Christian, and love to do good to all the world: for, for
this cause I took upon me the order of Knight Errant, which I profess (whose
practice extends even to do good to the souls in Purgatory.) The broken
Matron that heard her self thus conjured, by her fear ghessed at Don-Quixote,
and with a low and pitiful voice she answered him, Signior Don-Quixote, (if
you be he I mean) I am no Apparition, nor Vision, nor soul of Purgatory, as
you have thought: but Donna Rodriguez, my Lady the Duchesses honored Matron,
that come to you with a case of necessity of those that you usually give
redress to.

Tell me, Donna Rodriguez (quoth Don-Quixote) come you happily about some piece
of brokage? For let me tell you, if you do, there is no good to be done with
me for any body, thanks to the peerless Beauty of my Mistress Dulcinea del
Toboso: So that let me tell you, Donna Rodriguez, setting aside all amorous
messages, you may go light your candle again, and return and impart what you
will command me, and any thing you please, excepting, I say, all kind of
inciting nicities. I Sir, messages from any body? You know not me in faith: I am
not so stale yet, that I should fall to those triflles, for, God be praised, I
have life and flesh, and all my teeth and my grinders in my mouth, except some
few that the Catarrs, which are so common in this Country of Aragon, have
usurped on: but stay a little Sir, I Will go out and light my Candle and, I Will
come in an instant, and relate my griefs to you, as to the Redressor of all
such like in the world: And so without staying for an answer, she left the
rooms, where Don-Quixote remained still and pensative expecting her: but
straight a thousand imaginations came into his mind, touching this new
Adventure, and he thought it would be very ill done, or worse imagined, to
endanger the breach of his vowed loyalty to his Mistress, and said to himself;
Who knows whether the Devil, that is so subtle and crafty, may deceive me now
with this Matron, which he has not been able to do with Empresses, Queens,
Duchesses, Marquesses? and I have heard say often, by many well experienced
men, that he will rather make a man sin with a foul then a fair one: and who
knows whether this privacie, this opportunity and silence may not awake my
desires now sleeping? and that now in my old age I may fall, where I never
stumbled in such like chances? it is better fly then try the combat: but sure I
am out of my wits, since I talk thus idly; and sure it is not possible that a
white-stoled lank-spectacled Matron should moove or stir up a lascivious
thought in the ungodliest breast in the world: Is there any Matron in the world
that has soft flesh? Is there any that is not foolish, nice, and coy? Avaunt
then, you Matronly troops, unprofitable for man's delight.

How well did that Lady, of whom it was observed, that she had two Matrons
Statue-wayes of wood, with their Spectacles and Pin-pillows at the end of her
Seat of State, as if they had been at work? and those Statues served as well to
authorize her room, as if they had been real Matrons. And this said, he flung
from the Bed to have shut the door, and not have let Mistress Rodriguez come in:
but as he was going to do it, she was come back with her candle lighted of
white wax: and when she saw Don Quixote near her, wrapped in his Quilt, his
Bends, his woollen Cap, and a thick cloth about his neck, she began to fear
again: and stepping two or three steps backward, she asked, Am I safe, Sir
Knight? for I hold it not a very honest sign, that you are up from your Bed.
'Twere fit I asked that question of you (quoth Don-Quixote;) and therefore let
me know, whether I shall be free from ravishing. By whom (quoth she?) By you
(said Don-Quixote;) for neither am I of marble, or you of brass; neither is it
now ten a clock at day time, but midnight and something more, as I think: and
we are in a more secret and close couch then the Cave, in which the bold
traiterous Aeneas enjoyed the fair and pitying Dido: but give me your hand
Mistress, and I Will have no other assurance then mine own continency and
wariness: And in saying this, he kissed her right hand; and she laid hold of
his, which she gave him with the same solemnity.

Here Cid Hamete makes a parenthesis, and earnestly protests he would have
given the best coat he had, to have seen them both go so joined and linked from
the Chamber door to the bed.

In fine, Don-Quixote went to his Bed, and Donna Rodriguez sat down in a
Chair a pretty way from it, without taking off her spectacles, or setting
down the Candle.

Don-Quixote crowded up together, and covered himself all over, leaving
nothing but his face uncovered: So both of them being quiet; the first that
broke off their silence was Don-Quixote, saying. Now, Mistrisse Rodriguez, you
may unrip your self, and dis-mawe all that you have in your troubled Heart,
and grieved Entrails, which shall be heard by my chaste Ears, and relieved
with my pious Works.

I believe no less said the Matron: for from your gentle and pleasing
presence, there could not be but a Christian answer expected.

Thus then it is, Signior Don-Quixote, that though you see me set in this
Chair, and in the midst of the Kingdom of Aragon, in the habit of a poor and
way-beaten Matron; I was borne in the Asturias [A barcen Mountainous country
in Spain, like our Wales] and Kingdom of Oniedo, and of a lineage allied to
the best of that Province: but my hard fortune, and my fathers lavishing, that
grew to be a Beggar before his time (God knows how) brought me to the Court
at Madrid, where very quietly, and to avoid other inconveniences, my friends
placed me to serve as a Chambermaid to a worthy Lady; and though I say it,
that for white-worke, hemming and stitching, I was never yet put down in all
my life. My friends left me at service, and returned homeward, and not long
after went (in likelihood) to heaven, for they were wonderful good Catholic
Christians; thus was I an Orphan, and stinted to the miserable wages and hard
allowance that at Court is given to such kind of servants: and at that time (I
not giving any occasion thereto) a Squire of the house fell in love with me,
somewhat an elderly man, big-bearded and personable, and above all, as good a
Gentleman as the King, for he was of the Mountains; we kept not our loves so
close but that they came to my Ladies ears; who without any more ado, with
full conof our Holy Mother the Catholic Roman Church, caused us to be
married, by sent which Matrimony to end my good fortune, if I had any; I had a
Daughter, if I had any, I say it was ended, not that I dyed of Childe-bed, for
I mis-carried not; but that my Husband not long after dyed of a fright he had,
and had I now time to tell you of it, 'twould admire you: And with this she
began to weep most tenderly, and said; Pardon me, Signior Don-Quixote, for
I cannot do withal; as often as I remember my unfortunate Husband, the Tears
trickle down mine eyes. Lord God! and how stately he would carry my Lady
behind him, upon a lusty black Mule, as black as Jeat: For then they used no
Coaches nor hand-Chayres, as now (they say they do) and then Gentlewomen rode
behind their Squires: And I cannot but tell you this Tale, that you may see
the punctualnesse and good manners of my Husband.

As he was going in at Saint Jacques his street in Madrid, which was somewhat
narrow, a Judge of the Court, with two Sargeants before him, was coming out;
and as soon as my honest Squire saw him, he turned his Mules reins, making
show as if he would wait upon him: My Lady that rode behind, asked him
softly, What do thou knave? Do not see that I am here? The Judge very
mannerly laid hold on his rein, and said, Keep your way Sir: for it were fitter
for me to wait upon my Lady Casilda; (for that was my Ladies name.) Yet still
my Husband was earnest with his Cap in his hand, and would have waited on the
Judge: which when my Lady saw, full of wrath and anger, she pulled out a great
Pin; or rather, as I believe, a little Bodkin out of her Estoises, and thrust
him into the rump; insomuch that my Husband cried out, and wrigling his body,
my Lady and he came to the ground together.

Two of her Lackies came to raise her; and the Judge and the Sergeants
likewise: the Gate of Guadalaxara was in an uproar, I mean the idle people up
and down there.

My Lady was feign to walk on foot, and my Husband got him to a Barbers house,
saying, that he was run quite through and through. This mannerlynesse of my
Husbands was bruted up and down; insomuch, that the very Boys in the streets
mocked him: so that for this, and because too he was somewhat pore-blinde, my
Lady the Duchess turned him away; for grief of which, I verily believe he
dyed, and I remained Widow, and succourlesse, with a child to boot, that went
on increasing in beauty like the foam of the Sea.

Finally, for as much as I had the report of an excellent Seamstresse, my Lady
the Duchess that was newly Married to my Lord the Duke, would needs bring me
with her here to this Kingdom of Aragon, together with my Daughter; where in
process of time she grew up, and with her all the prettiness that could be:
she sings like a Lark; she danceth in company as quick as thought; and alone
like a cast-a-way; she writes and reads like a Schoolmaster; and casts
Account like a Usurer: for her cleanliness I say nothing; the water that runns
is not cleaner: and she is now (if I forget not) about sixteen years old, five
months, and three days, one or two more or less. In fine, a rich Farmers
Son fell in love with my Daughter, one that lives in one of my Lord the
Dukes Villages, not far from hence: In effect, I know not how, but they met,
and under color of Marriage he mocked my Daughter, and will not keep his
promise, and though the Duke know it: for I have complained to him often of it,
and beseeched him, to command the young Farmer to Marry my Daughter: but he
has a Trades-mans ears, and will not hear me: the reason is, because the
coozning knaves father is rich, and lends him money, and lets him have credit
every foot to go on with his juggling, and will by no means discontent or
trouble him.

I beseech you Sir therefore, to take upon you the redressing of this wrong,
either by entreaties, or by force; since, as all the world says, you were
borne to right wrongs, and protect the needy: Consider that my Daughter is an
Orphan; consider her gentleness, her youth, and all the good parts that I have
told you of; for in my soul and conscience, amongst all the Damzells that my
Lord has, there is none worthy to untye her shoe: and one of them they call
Altisidora, which is the lustiest and gallantest, in comparison of my Daughter
is no body: For let me tell you Sir, all is not gold that glisters; for this
Altisidora is more bold then beauteous; more gamesome then retired: besides,
she is not very sound; for she has a certain breath that anoyes, and you
cannot endure her to stand by you a moment: and my Lady the Duchess too: but
Mum; they say walls have ears.

What ails my Lady Duchess, by your life, Mistress Rodriguez (quoth
Don-Quixote?) By that (said she) I cannot but answer you with all truth.

Do you mark Sir (quoth she) that beauty of my Ladies, that smoothness of
her face, that is like a polisht sword, those two cheeks of Milk and Vermilion,
in one of which she has the Sun, in the other the Moon, and that state with
which she goes, trampling and despising the ground, as if she went dealing of
health up and down? Know Sir, that first she may thank God for it, and next,
two issues that she has in both her legs, at which all the ill humor is let
out, of which Physicians say she is full.

Saint Mary (quoth Don-Quixote) and is it possible that my Lady the Duchess
has such out-lets? I should not have believed it if barefoot Friars had told
me so: but since Donna Rodriguez tells me, it is so: but from such issues, and
such places, no ill humor, but liquid Amber is^ distilled: I now verily
believe that this making of issues is a thing very necessary for the health.

Scarce had Don-Quixote ended this speech, when at one pluck the Chamber door
was opened; and with the sudden fright Donna Rodriguez Candle fell out of her
hand, and the room was as dark as Pitch; straight the Matron felt that they
laid hands upon her throat so hard, that they gave her no time to yawle: and
one of them very quickly lifting up her coats, with a slipper (in likelihood)
began to give her so many jerks, that 'twas pity: and though Don-Quixote had
some compassion on her, yet he stirred not from his bed, and knew not what
might be the matter: quiet was he, and silent, fearing lest the whipping task
and tawing might light upon him, and his fear was not needless: for when the
silent executioners had left the Matron well curried (who durst not c^y out)
they came to Don-Quixote, and unwrapping him from the Sheet and the Quilt, they
pinched him so hard and so often, that he could but go to buffets to defend
himself: and all this passed in admirable silence; the combat lasted some half
an hour; the apparitions vanished; Donna Rodrignez tucked up her Coats, and
bewailing her mishap, got her out of the door, not speaking a word to
Don-Quixote; who heavy and all to be pinched, sad and pensative, remained
alone; where we will leave him desirous to know who was the perverse Enchanter
that had so dressed him: But that shall be told in due time; for Sancho Panca
calls us, and the Decorum of this History.

CHAP. XLIX.
What happened to Sancho in walking the Round in his Island.
We left the famous Governor moody and angry with the knavish
Husbandman-painter: who, instructed by the Steward, and the Steward by the
Duke; all made sport with Sancho: but he held them all tack, though a Fool, a
Dullard, and a Block; and said to those about him, and to Doctor Pedro Rezio;
for as soon as he had ended the secret of the Dukes Letter, he came into the
Hall again.

Certainly (said he) I think now Judges and Governors had need be made of
Brass, that they may have no feeling of the importunities of suitors, that
would, that at all hours and all times they should give them audience and
dispatch them, intending only their business; let them have never so much of
their own: and if the poor Judge hear them not, or dispatch them not; either
because he cannot, or because they come not in a fit time to have audience;
straight they back-bite and curse him, gnaw his bones, and unbury his
Ancestors. Oh foolish Suitor and idle, make not such haste; stay for a fit
season and conjuncture to negotiate in; come not at dinner time or bed time:
for Judges are flesh and blood, and must satisfy nature, except it be I, that
give my self nothing to eat, thanks to Master Doctor Pedro Rezio Tirte a fuera
here present, that would have me die for hunger, and yet stands in it, that
this death is life; such a life God grant him and all his profession; I mean
such ill Physicians; for the good deserve Laurel and Palm.

All that knew Sancho, admired him, when they heard him speak so elegantly, and
knew not to what they should attribute it, except it were that Offices and
great charges do eythet season the understanding, or altogether dull it.

Finally, the Doctor Pedro Rezio Agnero de Tirte a fuera, promised him he
should sup that night, though he exceeded all Hypocrates his Aphorisms.

With this the Governor was well pleased, and very greedily expected the
coming of the night and supper time, and though time (as he thought) stood
still, not moving a jot from his place, yet at length it came, so longed for by
him; and he had to supper a cold mince-meat of Beef and Onions, with a Calves
foot somewhat stale, and fell to as contentedly as if they had given him a
God-wit of Milan, or a Pheasant of Rome, or Veale of Sorrentum, or Partridges
of Moron, or Geese of Lanaxos: and in the midest of his Supper, he turned to
the Doctor, and said, Look ye, Master Doctor, hence-forward never care to give
me dainties, or exquisite meats to eat; for you will pluck my stomach quite off
the hinges, which is used only to Goat, Beef and Bacon, Pork and Turnips, and
Onions: and if you come to me with your Court dishes, they make my stomach
squeamish, and many times I loath um.

Carver, let it be your care to provide me a good Olla podrida, and the more
podrida it is, the better, and more favorie; and in your Olla's you may boil
and ballast in what you will, so it be victuals, and I will be mindful of
you, and make you amends one day: and let no man play the fool with me; for
either we are, or we are not: Let Us be merry and wife; when the Sun
shines, he shines upon all: I Will Govern this Island without looking my due, or
taking Bribes; and therefore let all the world be watchful, and look to their
bolt, for I give um to understand, there is Rods in Piss for them; and if they
put me to it, they shall see wonders: I, I, cover your selves with Honey, and
you shall see the Flies will eat you.

Truly, Sir Governor (quoth the Carver) you have reason in all you speak; and
let me promise you in the behalf of all the Islanders of this Island, that they
will serve you with all diligence, love, and good will; for the sweet and mild
kind of Governing that hitherto in the beginning you have used, makes them
neither do nor speak ought that may redound to your contempt.

I believe it (quoth Sancho) and they were very Asses if they did or thought
otherwise: and therefore let me say again, Let there be a care had for the
maintenance of my Person and Dapples, which is very important, and to the
matter: And so when it is time to walk the Round, let us go; for my purpose is,
to cleanse this Island from all kind of filth, Vagamunds, lazy and
masterlesse persons: for know friends, that slothful and idle people in a
Commonwealth, are the same that Drones in Hives, that eat the Honey which the
laboring Bees make. I purpose to cherish the Husbandman, and to grant the
Gentlemen their preeminencies, to reward the Virtuous, and above all, to have
Religion in reverence, and to honor Religious persons.

What think ye of this friends? Say I ought? or do I talk idly? So well Sir
(said the Steward) that I wonder to see that a man so without learning as you
(for I think you cannot skill of a letter) should speak such sentences and
instructions, so contrary to what was expected from your wit by all that sent
you, and by all us that came with you. Every day we see novelties in the
world, jests turned to earnest, and those that mock are mocked at.

Well, it was night, and the Governor supped, with Master Doctor Rezio's
license. They made ready to walk the Round, the Steward, the Secretary, and
Carver went with him, and the Chroniclist, that was careful to keep a Register
of his actions, together with Constables and Notaries; so many, that they might
well make a reasonable Squadron. Sancho went in the midest of them with his Rod
of Justice, which was the only chief fight: and when they had walk^ some few
streets of the Town, they heard a noise of flashing, thither they made, and
found that they were two men only that were together by the ears; who seeing
the Justice coming, stood still, and the one of them said; Here for God and
the King, shall I be suffered to be robbed in the midest of a Town? and that
the midest of the streets be made the highway?

Softly honest friend (quoth Sancho) and tell me what is the reason of this
fray, for I am the Governor.

The other, his contrary, said, Sir Governor, I Will tell you briefly the matter.
You shall understand Sir, that this Gentleman even now at a Gaming-house here
over the way, got a thousand Ry^lls (God knows by what tricks) and I being
present judged many a doubtful cast on his side, contrary to what my
conscience told me: he came away a winner, and when I thought he would have
given me a Pistolet at least for recompense, according to the use and custom
of giving to men of my fashion, which stand by upon all occasions, to order
differences and to take up quarrels: [Barato signifies originally cheap; but
amongst Gamesters dar Barato is when a Gamester by way of courtesy gives
something to a stander by: and this in Spain is so frequent, that from the King
to the Beggar all both give and take this Barato:] he pursed up the money and
got him out of the house: I came hastily after him, yet with courteous language
entreated him to give me only a matter of four shillings, since he knew me to
be a good fellow, and that I had no other kind of trade or living; for my
friends brought me up to nothing, nor left me nothing; and this cunning skab,
no more Thief then Cacus, nor less Cheater then Andradilla [ Some famous
Cheater in Spain,] would give me but two shillings; so you may see Sir
Governor how shameless and void of conscience he is: But in faith if you had
not come, I would have made him vomit out his winning, and he should have
known how many pounds he had had in the scale.

What say you to this (quoth Sancho?) And the other answered, That true it was
which his contrary had said, that he would give him but two shillings, because
he had often before given him; and they that expect what shall be given them
in courtesy, must be mannerly, and take any thing that is given them, in good
part, and without standing upon terms with the winner, except they knew him to
be a Cheater, and that his money was unlawfully gotten; and that it might be
seen that he for his part was honest, and not a Thief, as the other said,
there was no greater sign then his giving so little; for your Cheaters are
always large Tributaries to the lookers on that know them.

He says true (quoth the Steward) and therefore what is your pleasure, Sir,
to do with these men?

Marry thus (quoth Sancho) You Sir, that have won, honest, or Knave, or
indifferent, give your Hackster here presently a hundred Ryalls; besides, you
shall disburse thirty more for the poor of the prison. And you, Sir, that have
neither Trade nor Living, and live odly in this Island, take your hundred
Ryalls, and by to morrow get you out of the Island, and I banish you for tenn
years, on pain, that if you break this Order, you accomplish it in another
life, by being hanged upon a Gybbet by me, or at least, by the Hangman, by my
command.

The one disbursed, and the other received; this went out of the Island, and
that home to his house: And the Governor that remained, said, Well, it shall
cost me a fall, but I will put down these Gaming-houses; for I have a kind of
glimpse that they are very prejudicial.

This at least (quoth one of the Notaries) you cannot remove, because it
belongs to a man of quality, and he loses a great deal more at the years end
then he gets by his Cards, Against other petty Gamesters you may show your
authority; for they do more mischief, and conceal more abuses, then Gentlemen
of qualities houses, where your famous Cheaters dare not use their slights; and
since the vice of play has turned to so common a practice, it is better to
suffer it in houses of fashion, then in poor men's where they catch a poor
snake, and from midnight till morning flay him quick.

Well Notary (quoth Sancho) there is much to be said in this case. And now one
of the Sergeants Yeomen came with a Youth which he had laid fast hold on, and
said; Sir, this Youth came toward us, and as he had a glimpse of the Justice,
he turned his back, and began to scud away like a Dear, a sign he is some
Delinquent; I ran after him, and had it not been that he stumbled and fell,
I had never over-taken him.

Why ranst thou fellow (quoth Sancho?) To which the young man answered, Sir, to
avoid the many questions that your Constables use to ask. What trade are you
of? a Weaver (said he.) And what weave you? Iron pegs for Lances, with your
Worships good leave. You are a pleasant companion Sir, and you presume to play
the Jester: it is very well. And whither went you now? To take the Air Sir. And
where in this Island would you have taken the Air? Where it blows. Good, you
answer to the purpose Youth; make account then that I am the Air, and that I
blow a stern on you, and steer you to the prison. Go to, lay hold on him,
carry him; for to night I Will make him sleep without Air in the prison. I
protest (quoth the Youth) you shall as soon make me King, as make me sleep this
night in Prison. Why (quoth Sancho) have not I power to apprehend thee, and
free thee when I please? For all your power (said the Youth) you shall not make
me sleep this night in Prison. No? you shall see (quoth Sancho:) Carry him
presently where he shall see his error; and lest the Jailer should for a bribe
befriend him, I Will lay a penalty of two thousand Crowns upon him, if he let
thee stir a foot out of the prison. All this is needless, said the Youth:
the business is, All the world shall not make me sleep this night in prison.
Tell me, fiend, quoth Sancho, have thou some Angel to free thee, or take thy
shackles off that I mean to have clapped on thee? Well, Sir, (quoth the Youth
very pleasantly) let us come to reason, and to the matter. Suppose you command
me to be carried to prison, and that I have shackles and chains put upon me
and that I be put into a dungeon, and that there be extraordinary penalties
inflicted upon the Jailer if he let me out: for all that, if I mean not to
sleep, or to join my eyelids together all night; Can you with all your
Authority make me sleep against my will?

No indeed (said the Secretary) the fellow is in the right: so that (quoth
Sancho) your forbearing to sleep, is only to have your own will, but not to
contradict mine. No otherwise, Sir, (quoth the Youth) not so much as in thought.

Well, God be with you, (quoth Sancho) get you home to bed, and God send you
good rest, I mean not to disturb you; but let me advise you, that
henceforward you be not so conceited with the Justice; for you may meet with
one that will clap your wit to your noddle.

The young man went his way, and the Governor went on with his Rounding, and a
while after there came two Yeomen with a man in hold, and said, Sir, here is one
that seems to be a man, but is none, but a woman, and not ill-favored, clad
in a man's habit. Then they set two or three Lanthornes to his face, and
perceived a woman's face, to look to, of about sixteen years of age; her hair
plaited up with a cawle of Gold and green silk, as fair as a thousand
Pearls: they beheld her all over, and saw that she had on her a pair of
Carnation silk stockins, and white Taffata garters fringed with gold, and
embroidered with pearl; her long breeches were of cloth of gold, and the
groundwork green, with a loose Cassocke or Jerkin of the same, opened on
both sides, under which she had also a Doublet of cloth of gold, the ground
white: her shoes were white men's shoes, she had no sword, but a very fair
hatched Dagger, with many rings upon her fingers.

Finally, she pleased them all very well, but none of them knew her. The
Inhabitants of the place said, they could not guess who she should be; and
they that were the contrivers of the tricks against Sancho, were those that
most seemed to admire, because that accident and chance was not purposed by
them: so they were in suspense, to see what would be the issue of it.

Sancho was amazed at the maidens beauty, and he asked her who she was,
whither she would, and what occasion had moved her to clad her self in that
habit?

She, with her eyes fixed upon the earth, most shamefac'dly answered.

Sir, I cannot tell you in public, what concerns me so much to be kept
secret: only this let me tell you; I am no thief nor malefactor, but an
unhappie maid, forced by some jealousies to break the Decorum due to my
honesty. Which when the Steward heard, he said to Sancho; Sir, command the
company aside, that this Gentlewoman may tell her tale without being abashed.
The Governor gave his command, and all of them went a side, but the Steward,
the Carver, and Secretary. Being thus private, the maid proceeded, saying;

I, Sirs, am daughter to Pedro Perez Mazorca, Farmer of this towns woolls, that
often uses to go and come to my Fathers house, There Is no likelihood in this,
Gentlewoman, quoth the Steward; for I know Pedro Perez very well, and know that
he has never a child, neither Male nor Female: besides, you say he is your
Father, and by and by you add, that he uses to go often to your fathers
house. I thought upon that too (quoth Sancho.) Why alas (quoth she) I am so
frighted, that I know not what I say: but true it is, that I am daughter to
Diego de la Liana, whom I believe, you all know. This may be (said the
Steward) for I know Diego de la Liana to be an honest and a wealthy Gentleman,
and that he has a son and a daughter, and since he has been a widdower,
there is none in this town can say he has seen his daughters face; for he
keeps her so close, that he scarce gives the Sunn leave to look on her: and
for all that, Fame says she is wondrous fair.

It Is true (quoth the Maid) and I am that daughter, whether Fame lie or no,
concerning my beauty; now you are satisfied, since you have beheld me; and
with this she began to weep tenderly. Which when the Secretary saw, he
whispered the Carver in the ear, and told him; Doubtless some matter of
consequence has befaln this poor Virgin, since in this habit, and at this
time of night, being so well borne, she is from her home. There Is no doubt of
that (quoth the Carver) for her tears too confirm the suspicion.

Sancho comforted her the best he could, and bad her without fear, tell what
had befalne her; for that all of them would strive to give her remedy with all
possible diligence.

The business, Sirs, quoth she, is this: My Father has kept me close these
ten years; for so long it is since my Mother died: in the house we have a
Chapel, where Mass is said, and I in all this time have seen nothing but
the Sun by day, and the Moon and stars by night: neither know I what
streets, or Marketplaces, or Churches are, nor men, except my Father, a
Brother of mine, and Pedro Perez the Farmer, who because he uses to come
ordinarily to our house, it came into my mind to say he was my Father,
because I would conceal the right. This keeping me close, and denying me to
stir not so much as to the Church, has this good while discomforted me, and
I had a desire to see the world, at least, the town where I was borne, as
thinking this longing of mine was not against the Decorum that Maidens of my
birth ought to observe: when I heard talk of Bull-baitings, running with
Reeds, and representing Comedies: I asked my Brother that is a year younger
then I, what kind of things those were, and many others, which I have not
seen; and he told me as well as he could: but all was to inflame my desire
the more to see.

Finally, to shorten my misfortune, I entreated my Brother, (I would I had
never done it:) and then she renewed her tears.

Then said the Steward, On, Gentlewoman, and make an end of telling us what
has befalne you: for you hold us all in suspense, with your words, and your
tears.

Few words have I to say (quoth she) but many tears to weep: for they be the
fruits of ill-placed desires.

The Maids beauty was now planted in the Carvers heart, and he held up his
Lantern again, to behold her afresh; and it seemed to him, that she wept
not tears but seed-pearl, or morning dew: and he thought higher, that they
were liker oriental Pearls; and his wish was, that her misfortune might not
be such, as the shows of her moan and sighing might promise.

The Governor was mad at the Wenches slownesse and delaying her Story; and
bade her, she should make an end and hold them no longer in suspense, for that
it was late, and they had much of the town to walk. She betwixt broken sobs,
and halfe-fetcht sighs, said, My misfortune is nothing else, but that I desired
my Brother that he would cloth me in man's apparel, in one of his Suits; and
that some night or other he would carry me to see the town, when my Father
should be asleep; he importuned by my entreaties, condiscended to my
request: and putting this Suit on me; and he putting on another of mine, that
sits him, as if it were made for him; for he has never a hair upon his chin,
and might be taken for a most beautiful Maid: this night somewhat above an
hour ago, we went abroad; and rambling up and down, we have gone thorowout
the whole town: and going homeward, we saw a great troop of people coming
toward us; and my Brother said, Sister: this is the Round, Take you to your
heels, and put wings to them, and follow me, that we be not known: for it
will be ill for us; and this said, he turned his back, and began, I say not,
to run, but fly: I within four or five steps fell down for fear: and
then came this Officer that brought me before you; where, for my vilde
longing, I am ashamed before so many people. So that, Gentlewoman, (quoth
Sancho) no other mishap has befalne you; neither was it jealousy, as you said
in the beginning of your tale, that made you go abroad? Nothing else (said
she) nor jealousies: but a desire to see the world, and which exetended no
further then to see this Towns streets: And the coming now of two other Yeomen
with her Brother, confirmed this to be true, whom one of them overtook when
he fled from his Sister: He had nothing on but a rich Kirtle, and a half
Mantle of blue Damask, edged with a broad gold Lace: his head without any kind
of dressing or adornment, then his own locks; which by reason of their color
and curling, seemed to be rings of gold. Aside they went with the Governor,
the Steward, and the Carver; and not letting his Sister hear, they asked why
he came in that habit? And he with the same shamefaced bashfullnesse told the
same Tale that his Sister had done; at which the enamoured Carver was
wonderfully pleased. But the Governor said to them, Truly hoe, this has been
a great childishness in you; and you needed not so many sighs and tears to
tell such a piece of foolish boldness; for it had been enough if you had said,
We, such and such a one, went out of our Fathers house only for curiosity to
walk up and down the Town, and there had been an end, without your sighing and
your whining on Gods name.

You say true Sir (quoth the Maid) but you may think that I was so troubled,
that I could not tell how to behave my self.

There Is nothing lost (quoth Sancho) let us go, and we will leave you in your
fathers house; perhaps he will not have missed you; and from hence-forward be
not such children, and so longing to see the world; for the honest Maid better
at home with a bone broken, then a gadding: The Woman and the Hen are lost with
straggling: and let me tell you too; she that desires to see, has a desire
likewise to be seen, and I say no more.

The Youth thanked the Governor for the favor he did them, to let them go
home; whither they went, for it was not far from thence.

Home they came; and the Youth throwing a little stone at one of the Iron
windows; straight there came a Maidservant down, that sat up for them, and
opened them the door, and in they went, leaving those without as well to admire
her gentleness and beauty, as the desire they had to see the world by night,
without stirring out of the Town: but they attributed all to their slander age.

The Carvers heart was stricken through; and he purposed the next day to demand
her of her Father to Wife, assuring himself he would not deny her him, because
he was the Dukes servant: Sancho too had a certain longing and inkling to
marry the Youth with his Daughter Sanchica: and he determined to put the
matter in practice betimes, as thinking that a Governors Daughter was fit for
any Husband: and so the Round was ended for that night; and some two days
after his Government too, with which all his designs were lopped off and
blotted out, as hereafter shall be said.

CHAP. L.
Where is declared, who were the Enchanters and Executioners that whipped the
Matron, pincht and scratcht Don-Quixote; with the success the Page had that
carried the Letter to Teresa Panca, Sancho's Wife.
CID Hamete, the most punctual Searcher of the very m^ats of this true
History, says, That when Donna Rodriguez went out of her Chamber, to go to
Don-Quixotes lodging, another Wayting-woman that lay with her, perceived her:
and as all of them have an itch to smell after novelties, she went after so
softly, that the good Rodriguez perceived it not: and as soon as the
Waiting Woman saw her go in to Don-Quixote, that she might not be defective
in the general custom of Make-bates, she went presently to put this into the
Duchesses head; and so told her that Donna Rodriguez was in Don-Quixotes
Chamber; the Duchess told the Duke, and asked his leave, that she and
Altisidora might go see what the Matron would have with Don-Quixote: the Duke
granted, and both of them very softly came close to Don-Quixotes door, and so
near that they heard all that was spoken within: and when the Duchess heard
that Rodriguez had set the Ara^xnez of her springs a running in the streets,
she could not suffer it, nor Altisidora neither: so, full of rage and greedy
to revenge, they entered the Chamber so dainly, and stabbed Don-Quixote with
their nails, and banged the Woman, as has been related: for affronts that are
directly done against beauty, do awaken women's choler, and inflame in them a
desire of revenge.

The Duchess told the Duke what had passed, which made him passing merry: and
the Duchess proceeding with her intention of mirth and pastime with Don
Quixote, dispatched the Page that played the Enchanted Dulcinea's part (for
Sancho had forgotten it, being busied in his Government) to Teresa Panca with
her Husbands Letter, and and another from her self, and a chain of fair Coral
for a token.

The Story too tells us, that the Page was very discreet and witty, and with a
desire to serve his Lords, he went with a very good will to Sancho's Town; and
before he entered into it, he saw a company of women washing in a brook; whom
he asked, if they could tell him, if there lived in that Town a woman, whose
name was Teresa Panca, wife to one Sancho Panca, Squire to a Knight called
Don-Quixote de la Mancha; to which question a little Girl that was washing
there, stood up and said, That Teresa Panca is my Mother, and that Sancho my
Father, and that Knight our Master.

Well then Damzell (quoth the Page) come and bring me to your Mother; for I
bring her a Letter and a Present from your said Father.

That I will with a very good will Sir, said the Wench, that seemed to be
about a some fourteen years of age, more or less: and leaving the clothes that
she was washing to another companion of hers, without dressing her head or
putting on stockings and shoes (for she was bare-legged, and with her hair
about her ears) she leaped before the Pages Beast he rode on, and said, Come
Sir, for our house is just as you come in at the Town, and there you shall
find my Mother with sorrow enough, because she has not heard from my Father
this great while.

Well, I have so good news for her (quoth he) that she may thank God for it.

At length, leaping, running, and jumping, the Girl got to the Town, and
before (...) came into the house, she cried out aloud at the door: Come out
Mother Teresa, Come out, come out: for here is a Gentleman has Letters and
other things from my good Father: at which noise Teresa Panca her Mother came
out, spinning a roll of Flax, with a Russet Petti-coat, and it seemed by the
shortness of it, that it had been cut off at the Placket; and she had Russet
bodies of the same, and she was in her smo^k-sleeves; she was not very old,
for she looked as if she had been about forty: but she was strong, tough,
sinowie, and raw-boned; who seeing her Daughter, and the Page a horseback,
said, What Is the matter, child? What Gentleman is this? A servant of my Lady
Teresa Panca's (quoth the Page:) so, doing and speaking, he flung himself
from his horse, and with great humility went to prostrate himself before the
Lady Teresa, saying, My Lady Teresa, give me your hands to kiss, as you are
lawful and particular Wife to my Lord Don Sancho Panca, proper Governor of
the Island Barataria.

Ah good Sir, forbear I pray do not do so, quoth Teresa: for I am no
Court-noll, but a poor Husband-woman, a Ploughmans daughter, and wife to a
Squire Errant, and not a Governor.

You are (quoth the Page) a most worthy wife, to an Arch-worthy Governor: and
for proof of what I say I pray receive this Letter, and this token; when
instantly he plucked out of his pocket a Coral string, with the laced Beads
of gold, and put it about her neck, and said, This Letter is from the
Governor; and another that I bring; and these Corals are from my Lady the
Duchess that sends me to you.

Teresa was amazed, and her daughter also: and the Wench said, Hang me, if our
Master Don-Quixote have not a hand in this business; and he it is that has
given my Father this Government or Earldom that he so often promised him.

You say true (quoth the Page) for, for Signior Don-Quixotes sake, Signior
Sancho Panca is now Governor of the Island Barataria, as you shall see by this
Letter.

Read it, gentle Sir, said Teresa: for though I can spin, I cannot read a
jot; nor I neither, added Sanchica: but stay a little and I Will call one that
shall; either the Vicar himself, or the Bachelor Samson Carrasco, who will
both come hither with all their hearts to hear news of my Father.

You need not call any body, said he: for though I cannot spin, yet I can
read, and therefore I will read it; so he did thorowout: which, because it
was before related, it is not now set down here and then he drew out the
Duchesses, which was as follows:

FRiend Teresa, your Husbands good parts of his wit and honesty, moved and
obliged me, to request the Duke my Husband, to give him the Government of one
of the many Islands he has: I have understood, that he governs like a
Ier-Falcon, for which I am very glad; and consequently my Lord the Duke: for
which I render heaven many thanks, in that I have not been deceived in making
choice of him for the said government: for let me tell, Mistress Teresa, it is
a very difficult thing, to find a good Governor in the world; and so God
deal with me, as Sancho governes. I have sent you (my beloved) a string of
Coral Beads, with the tens of gold, I could wish they had been Oriental
Pearls; but something is better then nothing: time will come, that we may
know and converse one with another; and God knows what will become of it.

Commend me to Sanchica your Daughter, and bid her from me, that she be in a
readiness; for I mean to Marry her highly when she least thinks of it.

They tell me that in your Town there, you have goodly Acornes; I pray send me
some two dozen of them, and I shall esteem them much as coming from you: and
write me at large, that I may know of your health and well-being; and if you
want ought, there is no more to be done but mouth it, and your mouth shall have
full measure, so God keep you. From this Town.

Your loving Friend, The Duchess.


Lord! quoth Teresa, when she heard the Letter, what a good plain meek-Lady
it is! God bury me with such Ladies, and not with your stately ones that are
used in this town, who think, because they are Jantle-folks, the wind must not
touch them: and they go so fantastically to Church, as if they were Queens at
least, and they think it a disgrace to um to look upon a poor Country Woman:
But look you, here is a good Lady, that though she be a Duchess, calls me
friend, and uses me as if I were her equal: equal may I see her with the
highest Steeple in the Mancha: and concerning her Acorns, Signior mine, I will
send her Ladyship a whole Pecke, that every body, shall behold, and admire them
for their bigness: and now, Sanchica, do thou see that this Gentleman be
welcome: set his Horse up, and get some Eggs out of the Stable, and cut some
Bacon: he shall fare like a Prince, for the good news he has brought us,
and his good face deserves it all: in the mean time I will go tell my
neighbors of this good news, and to our father Vicar, and Master Nicholas the
Barber, who have been, and still are so much thy fathers friends.

Yes marry will I (quoth Sanchica: but hark you: you must give me half that
string, for I do not think my Lady Duchess such a fool, that she would
send it all to her.

It Is all thine, Daughter, said Teresa: but let me wear it a few days about
my neck: for verily, it glads me to the heart.

You will be glad (quoth the Page) when you see the bundle that I have in my
Port-mantue, which is a garment of fine cloth, which the Governor only wore
one day a Hunting, which he has sent to Mistress Sanchica. Long may he live
(quoth Sanchica) and he that brings it too.

Teresa went out with her chain about her neck, and played with her fingers
upon her Letters, as if they had been a Timbrel: and meeting by chance with the
Vicar, and Samson Carrasce, she began to dance, and to say, in faith now there
is none poor of the kinn, we have a little Government; No, no. Now let the
proudest Gentlewoman of um all meddle with me, and I Will show her a new trick.

What madness is this, Teresa Panca, and what Papers are these? No madness
(quoth she) but these are Letters from Duchesses and Governors: and these I
wear about my neck are fine Corals; the Ave-Maries and Pater-nosters are of
beaten gold, and I am a Governesse

Now God shield us Teresa: we understand you not, neither know we what you
mean.

There you may see (quoth Teresa) and gave um the Letters.

The Vicar reads them that Samson Carrasco might hear: so he and the Vicar
look^ one upon the other, wondering at what they had read.

And the Bachelor asked, Who brought those Letters? Teresa answered, that they
should go home with her and they should see the Messenger; a young Youth as
fair as a golden Pineapple, and that he brought her another Present twice as
good.

The Vicar took the Corals from her neck and beheld them again and again, and
assuring himself that they were right, he began to wonder afresh, and said; By
my Coat I swear, I know not what to say or think of these Letters and Tokens:
for on the one side, I see and touch the finenesse of these Corals; and on the
other, that a Duchess sends to beg two dozen of Acornes. Come crack me that
nut, quoth Carasco. Well, let us go see the Bearer of this Letter, and by him
we will be informed of these doubts that are offered. They did so, and Teresa
went back with them: they found the Page sifting a little Barley for his Beast,
and Sanchica cutting a Rasher to* pave it with Eggs for the Pages dinner, whose
presence and attire much contented them both; [*Para Empedarte. A pretty
metaphor, for in Spain they use to fry their Collops and Eggs all together; not
as we do, first Bacon, and then Eggs: and therefore the Author calls it
paving:] and after they had courteously saluted him, and he them, Samson asked
him for news as well of Don-Quixote as Sancho: for though they had read Sancho
and the Lady Duchesses Letters, yet they were troubled, and could not guess
what Sancho's Government should mean, especially of an Island, since all or the
most that were in the Mediterranean Sea, belonged to his Majesty.

To which the Page answered; That Signior Sancho Panca is Governor, it is not
to be doubted; but whether it be an Island or no that he governs, I meddle not
with it; it is enough that is a place of above a thousand Inhabitants^ and
concerning the Acornes let me tell you: My Lady the Duchess is so plain and
humble, that her sending for Acornes to this Countrey-woman is nothing. I have
known when she has sent to borrow a Comb of one of her neighbors, and let
me tell you; The Ladies of Aragon, though they be as Noble, yet they stand
not so much upon their points, neither are so lofty as your Castilians, and
they are much plainer.

Whilst they were in the midst of this discourse, Sanchica came leaping with
her lap full of Eggs, and asked the Page; Tell me, Sir, does my Father wear
pained hose since his being Governor? I never marked it, quoth the Page, but
sure he does. Oh God, quoth she, what a sight it would be, to see my Father
in his linen hose first! how say you? that ever since I was borne I have had a
desire to see my Father in pained hose. With many of these you shall see him
(quoth the Page) if you live. And I protest, if his Government last him but two
Months longer, he will be likely to wear a Cap with a Beaver.

The Vicar and Bachelor perceived very well, that the Page played the Jack with
them; but the goodness of the Corall-Beads and the hunting suit that Sancho
sent made all straight again, for Teresa had showed them the apparel, and they
could not but laugh at Sanchica's desire, and most when Teresa said, Master
Vicar, pray will you hearken out if there be any body that go toward Madrid
or Toledo, that they may buy me a Farthingale round and well made, just in the
fashion, and of the best sort; for in truth, in truth, I mean to credit my
Husbands Government as much as I can; and if I be angry, I Will to Court my self
too, and have my Coach as well as the best: for she that has a Governor to
her Husband may very well have it and maintain it.

And why not Mother (quoth Sanchica?) and the sooner the better, though those
that see me set with my Mother in the Coach should say, Look ye on Mistrisse
Whacham, good man Garlike-eaters daughter, how she is set and stretched at ease
in the Coach, as if she were a Pope Ioane: but let them tread in the dirt, and
let me go in my Coach: a pox on all back-biters; the Fox fares best when he
is cursed. Say I well Mother mine? Very well (quoth she) and my good Sancho
foretold me of all these blessings and many more; and thou shall see Daughter.
I Will never rest till I am a Countess; for all is but to begin well, and (as I
have often heard thy good Father say, who is likewise the father of Proverbs:)
Look not a given horse in the mouth: when a Government is given thee, take it;
when an Earldome, gripe it; and when they hist, hist, to thee with a reward [
hiss, hiss, as if it were the calling of a dog to give him meat] take it up.
No, no, be careless, and answer not good fortune when she knocks at your
doors. And what care I (quoth Sanchica) what he says that sees me stately and
Majesticall: there is a dog in a doublet and such like.

When the Vicar heard all this, he said, I cannot believe but all the stock of
the Panca's were borne with a bushel of Proverbs in their bellies, I never saw
any of them that did not scatter them at all times, and upon all occasions. You
say true (quoth the Page) for Signior Sancho the Governor speaks them every
foot; and though many of them be nothing to the purpose, yet they delight, and
my Lady the Duchess and the Duke do much celebrate them. That still you
should affirm Sir, that this of Sancho's Government is true, and that there can
be any Duchess in the world that sends him Presents, and writes to him; for
we, although we see them, and have read the Letters, yet we cannot believe it
and we think that this is one of Don-Quixote our Countryman his inventions,
who thinks that all are by way of Enchantment: So that I am about to desire to
feel and touch you, to see whether you be an ayrie Ambassador, or a man of
flesh and blood.

Sir (quoth the Page) all I know of my self, is, that I am a real Ambassador,
and that Signior Sancho Panca is an effective Governor, and that my Lords the
Duke and Duchess may give, and have given the said Government; and I have
heard say that the said Sancho Panca demeans himself most robustiously in it.
If in this there be any Enchantment, you may dispute it amongst your selves,
for I know no more, by an oath I shall swear, which is, By the life of my
Parents, who are alive, and I love them very well.

It may very well be (quoth the Bachelour) but dubitat Augustinus. Doubt it
who so will (quoth the Page) I have told you the truth, which shall always
prevail above lies, as the oil above the water: and if not operibus credit
and non verbis, one of you go with me, and you shall see with your eyes what
you will not believe with your ears. That journey will I go (quoth Sanchica;)
you shall carry me Sir, at your horses crupper, and I Will go with a very good
will to see my Father. Governors Daughters (quoth he) must not travel alone,
but accompanied with Carroches and Horse-Litters, and good store of Servants.
Marry (quoth Sancha) I can go as well upon a young Asse-Colt, as upon a Coach;
you have a dainty piece of me no doubt.

Peace wench (said Teresa) thou know not what thou say, and this
Gentleman is in the right; the times are altered: When thy Father was Sancho,
then might thou be Sancha; but now he is Governor, Madam; and I know not
whether I have said ought. Mistress Teresa says more then she is aware of
(quoth the Page) and now pray let me dine and be quickly dispatched, for I must
return this afternoon. Then (quoth the Vicar) you shall do Penance with me to
day; for Mistress Teresa has more good will then good cheer to welcome so good
a guest. The Page refused, but for his better fare, he was forced to accept of
the kindness; and the Vicar carried him the more willingly, that he might
have time to ask at leisure after Don-Quixotes exploits. The Bachelor offered
Teresa to write the answers of her Letters, but she would not that he should
deal in her affairs; for she held him to be a Scoffer: and so she gave a
little roll of bread and a couple of eggs to a little Monk that could write,
who wrote her two Letters, one for her Husband, and the other for the Duchess,
framed by her own pate, and are not the worst in all this grand History, as you
may see hereafter.

CHAP. LI.
Of Sancho's proceeding in his Government, with other successes as good as
touch.
THe day appeared after the Governors Rounding night, in which the Carver
slept not a whit, being busied in thinking upon the face, feature and beauty of
the disguised Damzell: and the Steward spent the remainder of it in writing to
his Lords Sancho Panca's words and actions, both which he equally admired; for
both were mixed with certain appearances of Discreet and Fool.

The Governor in fine was gotten up, and by Doctor Pedro Rezio's appointment,
he broke his fast with a little Conserve, and some two or three spoonfulls of
cold water, which Sancho would willingly have changed for a piece of bread and
a bunch of grapes; but seeing there was no remedy, he passed it over, though
with much grief of mind and weariness of Stomach; for Pedro Rezio made him
believe, that few dishes, and those delicate, did quicken the wit, which was
the only thing for persons that bore Rule, and weighty Offices; where they must
benefit themselves, not only with corporal force, but strength of
understanding too.

With this Sophistry Sancho was almost starved, so that in secret he cursed the
Government, and also him that gave it him; but yet, with his hunger and his
Conserve he sat in Judgment that day, and the first thing that came before
him, was a doubt that a stranger proposed unto him, the Steward and the rest of
the fraternity being present, and it was this.

Sir, a main River divided two parts of one Lordship (I pray mark, for it is a
case of great importance, and somewhat difficult:) I say then that upon this
River there was a Bridge, and at the end of it a Gallows, and a kind of
Judgment Hall, in which there were ordinarily four Judges, that Judged
according to the Law that the owner of the River, Bridge, and Lordship had
established, which was this: If any one be to pass from one side of this
Bridge to the other, he must first swear whether he goes, and what his
business is: If he swear true, let him pass; if he lie let him be hanged
upon the Gallows that shows there without remission. This Law being divulged,
and the rigorous condition of it, many passed by, and presently by their oaths,
it was seen whether they said true, and the Judges let them pass freely. It
fell out that they took one man's oath, who swore and said, that he went to be
hanged upon that Gallows, and for nothing else.

The Judges were at a stand, and said, If we let this man pass, he lied in
his oath, and according to the Law he ought to die; and if we hang him, he
swore he went to die upon the Gallows, and having sworn truly, by the same Law
he ought to be free. It is now, Sir Governor, demanded of you, what should
be done with this man, for the Judges are doubtful and in suspense; and
having had notice of your quick and elevated understanding, they sent me to
you, to desire you on their behalfs to give your opinion in this intricate and
doubtful case.

To which (quoth Sancho) Truly these Judges that send you to me might have
saved a labor; for I am one that have as much wit as a Setting-dogg: but
howsoever repeat me you the business once again, that I may understand it, and
perhaps I may hit the mark.

The Demandant repeated again, and again, what he had said before: And Sancho
said, In my opinion it is instantly resolved, as thus:

The man swears that he goes to die upon the Gallows; and if he dye so, he
swore true; and so by the Law deserves to pass free: and yet if he be not
hanged, he swore false, and by the same Law he ought to be hanged. It Is just
as Master Governor has said (quoth the Messenger;) and concerning the
understanding of the Case, there is no more to be required or doubted. I say
then (quoth Sancho) that they let that part of the man pass that spoke truth,
and that which told a lie, let them hang it, and so the condition of the Law
shall be literally accomplished.

Why Sir (said the Demandant) then the man must be divided into two parts,
lying and true; and if he be divided he must needs dye, and so there is
nothing of the Law fulfilled, and it is expressly needful, that the Law be
kept.

Come hither honest fellow (quoth Sancho) either I am a very Leek, or this
Passenger you speak of has the same reason to dye, as to live and pass the
Bridge; for if the truth save him, the lie condemns him equally: which being so
as it is, I am of opinion that you tell the Judges that sent you to me, That
since the reasons to save or condemn him be in one rank that they let him
pass freely; for it is ever more praiseworthy to do good, then to do ill;
and this would I give under my hand if I could write: and in this Case I have
not spoken from my self; but I remember one precept amongst many others, that
my Master Don-Quixote gave me the night before I came to be Governor, which
was; That when Justice might be any thing doubtful, I should leave, and apply
my self to pity; and it has pleased God I should remember it in this Case,
which has fallen out pat.

It Is right (quoth the Steward;) and sure Licurgus Lawgiver to the
Lacedaemonians, could not have given a better sentence then that which the Grand
Sancho Panca has given. And now this mornings audience may end, and I will
give order that the Governor may dine plentifully. That I desire (quoth
Sancho) and let us have fair play: Let me dine, and then let Cases and doubts
rain upon me, and I Will snuff them apace.

The Steward was as good as his word, holding it to be a matter of conscience
to starve so discreet a Governor: Besides, his purpose was to make an end with
him that night, performing the last jest, which he had in Commission toward
him. It happened then, that having eaten contrary to the prescriptions and orders
of the Doctor Tirte fuera, when the cloth was taken away, there came in a Post
with a Letter of Don-Quixotes to the Governor. Sancho commanded the Secretary
to read it to himself, and that if there came no secret in it, he should read
it aloud. The Secretary did so, and suddenly running it over, said, It may well
be read out, for this that Don-Quixote writes to you, deserves to be stamped
and written in golden Letters, and thus it is.

Don-Quixotes Letter to Sancho Panca, Governor of the Island Barataria.
WHen I thought (friend Sancho) to have heard news of thy negligence and folly,
I heard it of thy discretion, for which I gave to God particular thanks. I hear
thou Governest as if thou were a man, and that thou art a man as if thou were a
beast, such is thy humility thou usest; yet let me note unto thee, That it is
very necessary and convenient many times, for the Authority of a place to go
against the humility of the heart; for the adornment of the person that is in
eminent Offices, must be according to their greatness, and not according to
the measure of the meek condition to which he is inclined. Go well clad; for
a stake well dressed, seems not to be so: I say not to thee that thou wear
toys, or gaudy gay things; not that being a Judge thou go like a Soldier,
but that thou adorn thy self with such a habit as thy place requires; so that
it be handsome and neat.

To get the good will of those thou Governest, amongst others, thou must do
two things; the one, to be courteous to all, which I have already told thee
of; and the other, to see that there be plenty of sustenance; for there is
nothing that does more weary the hearts of the poor then hunger and dearth.

Make not many Statute Laws, and those thou do make, see they be good, but
chiefly that they be observed and kept; for Statutes not kept, are the same as
if they were not made; and does rather show that the Prince had Wisdom and
Authority to make them, then valor to see that they should be kept: And Laws
that only threaten, and are not executed, become like the beam, King of Frogs,
that at first scarred them, but in time they despised, and gat up on the top of
it.

Be a Father of Virtue, but a Father-in-law of Vice.

Be not always cruel, nor always merciful, choose a mean betwixt. these
two extremes, for this is a point of discretion.

Visit the Prisons, the Shambles, and the Markets, for in such places the
Governors presence is of much importance.

Comfort the Prisoners that hope to be quickly dispatched.

Be a Bull-begger to the Butchers, and a scar-Crow to the Hucksterwomen for the
same reason.

Show not thy self (though perhaps thou art, which yet I believe not)
Covetous, or a Whore-monger, or a Glutton; for when the Town, and those that
converse with thee, know which way thou art inclined, there they will set upon
thee, till they cast thee down headlong.

View and re-view, pass and re-passe thine eyes over the Instructions I gave
thee in writing, before thou wentest from hence to thy Government, and thou
shall see how thou find in them, if thou observe them, an allowance to help
thee to bear and pass over the troubles that are incident to Governors,

Write to my Lords, and show thy self thankful; for Ingratitude is the
Daughter of Pride, and one of the greatest sins that is: and he that is
thankful to those that have done him good, gives a testimony that he will be
so to God too, that has done him so much good, and daily does continue it

My Lady Duchess dispatched a Messenger a purpose with thy apparel; and another
present to thy Wife Teresa Panca; every minute we expect an answer.

I have been somewhat ill at ease of late with a certain Cat business that
happened to me not very good for my nose, but 'twas nothing; for if there be
Enchanters that misuse me, others there be that defend me. Let me know if the
Steward that is with thee had any hand in Trifaldi's actions, as thou
suspectedst: and let me hear likewise of all that befalls thee, since the way
is so short; besides, I think to leave this idle life e're long, for I was not
born to it.

Here is a business at present, that I believe will bring me in disgrace with
these Nobles: but though it much concern me I care not; for indeed I had rather
comply with my Profession, then with their wills, according to the saying;
Amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas. I write thee this Latin, because I
think, since thy being Governor thou have learnt to understand it. And so
farewell, God keep thee, and send that no man pity thee.

Thy Friend, Don-Quixote de la Mancha.


Sancho heard the letter very attentively, and those that heard it, applauded
it for a very discreet one: and presently Sancho rose from the Table, and
calling the Secretary locked him to him in his lodging Chamber, and without more
delay meant to answer his Master Don-Quixote: and therefore he bade the
Secretarle without adding or diminishing ought to write what he would have him;
which he did: and the Letter in answer was of this ensuing tenor.

Sancho Panca's Letter to Don-Quixote de la Mancha.
My business and employments are so great, that I have not leisure either to
scratch my head, or pare my nails, which is the reason they are so long (God
help me.)

This I say (dear Signior mine) that you may not wonder, if hitherto I have not
given you notice of my well or ill being at this Governmeut; in which I am now
more hungry, then when you and I traveled in the Woods and Wilderness.

My Lord the Duke wrote me the other day, by way of advice, that there were
certain Spies entered the Island, to kill me: but hitherto I have discovered
none but a certain Doctor, who is entertained in this Town, to kill as many
Governors as come to it: and his name is Doctor Pedro Rezio born in Tirte a
fuera: that you may see what a name this is for me to fear lest he kill me.

This aforesaid Doctor says of himself, that he cures not infirmities when
they are in present being, but prevents them before they come: and the
Medicines he uses, are diet upon diet, till he makes a man nothing but bare
bones; as if leanness were not a greater sickness then a Calenture.

Finally, he has even starved me, and I am ready to dye for anger: for when I
thought to have comne to this Island to eat good warm things and to drink
cool, and to recreate my body in Holland sheets and Feather-Beds; I am forced
to do penance as if I were an Hermit: and because I do it unwillingly, I
believe at the upshot the Devil will have me.

Hitherto have I neither had my due, nor taken bribe, and I know not the
reason: for here they tell me that the Governors that use to come to this
Island, before they come, they of the Town either give or lend them a good sum
of money: and this is the ordinary custom, not only in this Town but in many
others also.

Last night as I walked the Round, I met with a fair maid in man's apparel, and
a Brother of hers in woman's: my Carver fell in love with the Wench, and
purposed to take her to Wife, as he says; and I have chosen the youth for my
son in law; and to day both of us will put our desires in practice with the
Father of them both, which is one Diego de la Liana, a Gentleman and an old
Christian, as much as you would desire. I visit the Market places (as you
advised me) and yesterday found a Huckster that sold new Hazel-nuts, and it was
proved against her, that she had mingled the new with a bushel of old, that
were rotten and without kernels; I judged them all to be given to the
Hospital Boys that could very well distinguish them; and gave sentence on
her, That she should not come into the Marketplace in fifteen days after:
'twas told me, that I did most valorously: All I can tell you is, that it is
the common report in this Town, That there is no worse People in the world then
these women of the Marketplaces; for all of them are impudent, shameless, and
ungodly; and I believe it to be so by those that I have seen in other Towns.
That my Lady the Duchess has written to my Wife Teresa Panca, and sent her a
Token, as you say, it pleases me very well, and I will endeavor at fit time
to show my self thankful: I pray do you kiss her hands on my behalf, and
tell her, her kindness is not ill bestowed, as shall after appear.

I would not that you should have any thwart-reckonings of distaste with those
Lords; for if you be displeased with them, it is plain it must needs redound to
my damage; and 'twere unfit that, since you advise me not to be unthankful,
you should be so to them that have showed you so much kindness, and by whom
you have been so well welcomed in their Castle.

That of your Cat business I understand not; but I suppose it is some of those
ill feats that the wicked Enchanters are wont to use toward you; I shall know
of you when we meet. I would fain have sent you something from hence, but I
know not what, except it were some little Canes to make Squirts, which with
Bladders too they make very curiously in this place: but if my Office last, I Will
get something worth the sending.

If my Wife Teresa Panca write to me, pay the Portage, and send me the Letter:
for I have a wonderful desire to know of the Estate of my House, my Wife and
Children: and so God keep you from ill-minded Enchanters, and deliver me well
and peaceably from this Government; for I doubt it, and think to lay my bones
here, according as the Doctor Pedro Rezio handles me.

Your Worships Servant, Sancho Panca the Governor.


The Secretary made up the Letter, and presently dispatched the Post; and so
Sancho's Tormentors joining together, gave order how they might dispatch him
from the Government. And that afternoon Sancho passed in setting down orders
for the well Governing the Island he imagined to be so: And he ordained there
should be no Hucksters for the Commonwealths Provisions; And likewise, That
they might have Wines brought in from whencesoever they would; only with this
Proviso, To tell the place from whence they came, to put prices to them
according to their value and goodness: And whosoever put Water to any Wine, or
changed the name of it, should die for it: he moderated the prices of all kind
of clothing, especially of Shoes, as thinking Leather was sold with much
exorbitancie.

He made a Taxation for Servants Wages, who went on unbridled for their profit.

He set grievous penalties upon such as should sing bawdie or ribaldry Songs,
either by night or day.

He ordained likewise, That no blinde-man should sing miracles in Verse, except
they brought authentical testimonies of the truth of them: for he thought that
the most they sung, were false and prejudicial to the true.

He created also a Constable for the poor, not that should persecute, but
examine them to know if they were so: for under color of fained maimnesse, and
false sores, the Hands are Thieves, and Health is a Drunkard.

In conclusion, he ordered things so well, that to this day they are famed, and
kept in that place, and are called, The Ordinances of the Grand Governor
Sancho Panca.

CHAP. LII.
The Adventure of the second Afflicted or straightned Matron, alias Donna
Rodriguez.
CID Hamete tells us, that Don-Quixote being recovered of his scratches, he
thought the life he had led in that Castle, was much against the Order of
Knighthood he professed: so he determined to crave leave of the Dukes to part
toward Saragoza, whose Justs drew near, where he thought to gain the Armor
that uses to be obtained in them. And being one day at the Table with the
Dukes, and beginning to put his intention in execution, and to ask leave:
Behold, unlookt for, two women came in at the great Hall door, clad (as it
after appeared) in mourning from head to foot: and one of them coming to
Don-Quixote, she fell down all along at his feet, with her mouth sowed to
them; and she groaned so sorrowfully and so profoundly, that she put all that
beheld her into a great confusion: and though the Dukes thought it was some
trick their servants would put upon Don-Quixote; notwithstanding, seeing with
what earnestness the woman sighed, groaned and wept, they were a little
doubtful and in suspense, till Don-Quixote in great compassion raised her from
the ground, and made her discover her self, and take her mantle from her
blubbered face. She did so, and appeared to be (what could not be imagined)
Donna Rodriguez the Waiting-women of the house; and the other in mourning was
her wronged Daughter, abused by a rich Farmers son. All were in admiration
that knew her, especially the Dukes: for though they knew her to be foolish,
and of a good mould that way; yet not to be so near mad.

Finally, Donna Rodriguez turning to the Lords, she said, May it please your
Excellencies, to give me leave to impart a thing to this Knight; for it
behooves me to come out of a business, into which the boldness of a wicked
Rascal has thrust me.

The Duke said, he gave her leave, and that she should impart what she would to
Signior Don-Quixote. She directing her voice and gesture to Don-Quixote, said,
Some days since, valorous Knight, I related to you the wrong and treachery
that a wicked Farmer has done to my beloved Daughter, the unfortunate one here
now present; and you promised me to undertake for her to right this wrong that
has been done her: and now it has come to my notice, that you mean to part
from this Castle in quest of your Adventures (God send them) and therefore my
request is, that before you scowre the ways, you would defy this untamed
Rustic, and make him marry my Daughter, according to the promise he gave her
before he coupled with her: For to think that my Lord the Duke will do me
Justice, is to seek Pears from the Elm; for the reason, that I have plainly
told you; and so God give you much health, and forsake not us.

To these reasons, Don-Quixote answered with great gravity and Prosopopeia:
Good Matron, temper your tears, and save your sigh^s, and I am firmly resolved
to engage my self to right your Daughter; for whom it had been much better, not
to have been so easy of believing her Lovers promises, which for the most part
are light in making, but heavy in accomplishing: and therefore with my Lord the
Dukes leave, I will presently part in search of this ungodly youg man, and
find and challenge him, and kill him if he deny to accomplish his promise:
For the chief aim of my profession is, to pardon the humble, and to chastize
the proud; I mean, to succor the wretched, and to destroy the cruel.

You need not (quoth the Duke) be at the pains of seeking the Clown, of whom
the good Matron complains; neither need you ask me leave to defy him, it is
enough, that I know you have done it; and let it be my charge to give him
notice that he accept the challenge, and come to my Castle to answer for
himself, where safe lists shall be set up for you both, observing the
conditions that in such acts ought to be observed; and both your Justices
equally, according as Princes are obliged to do, that grant single combat to
those that fight within their Dommions. Why, with this security and your
Greatnesses license (quoth Don-Quixote) here I say that for this once I
renounce my Gentry, and do equalize my self to the meannesse of the Offender;
and so qualify him to combat with me: and so, though he be absent, I
challenge and defy him for that he did ill to defraud this poor creature that
was a Maid, and now by his Villainy is none, and that he shall either fulfill
his word he gave her to marry her, or die in the demand.

And straight plucking off his Glove, he cast it into the midest of the Hall,
and the Duke took it up, saying, That he (as had been said) in his Vassals
name accepted the challenge, and appointed the prefixed time six days after,
and the Lists to be in the Court of that Castle, and the usual Arms of
Knights, as Lance and Shield, and laced Armor, with all other pieces without
deceit, advantage, or superstition, seen and allowed by the Judges of the
Lists: But first of all it is requisite, that this honest Matron, and this ill
Maid commit the right of their cause into Signior Don-Quixote de la Mancha's
hands; for otherwise there will be nothing done; neither will the said
challenge be put in execution.

I do (quoth the Matron:) and I too, said the Daughter, all blubbered and
shamefaced, and in ill taking.

This agreement being made, and the Dukes imagining what was to be done in the
business, the mourners went their ways, and the Duchess commanded they
should be used not as their Servants, but like Lady-Adventurers, that came to
their house to ask justice, and served as Strangers, to the wonderment of other
servants that knew not what would become of the madness and levity of Donna
Rodriguez, and her Errant Daughter.

Whilst they were in this business, to add more mirth to the Feast, and to
end the Comedy: behold where the Page comes in that carried the Letter and
tokens to Teresa Panca; whose arrival much pleased the Dukes, desirous to know
what befell him in his voyage, and asking him, The Page answered that he could
not tell them in public, nor in few words; but that their excellencies would
be pleased to reserve it for a private time, and that in the mean time they
would entertain themselves with those Letters; and taking them out, he gave two
to the Duchess, the superscription of the one was, To my Lady Duchess, I know
not whence: and the other, To my Husband Sancho Panca, Governor of the Island
Barataria, whom God prosper longer then me.

The Duchess could not be quiet, till she had read her Letter; so openning it
and reading it to her self, and seeing that she might read it aloud, she did
so, that the Duke and the bystanders might hear it, as follows.

Teresa Panca's Letter to the Duchess.
LLady mine: Your Greatnesses Letter you wrote me, did much content me; for I
did very much desire it: Your string of Corals was very good; and my Husbands
Hunting-suit comes not short of it: That your Honor has made my Consort
Governor, all this Town rejoices at it, though there is none that will
believe it; especially, the Vicar, Master Nicholas the Barber, and Samson
Carasco the Bachelor: but all is one to me, so it be true, as it is; let each
one say what he will: but if you go to the truth, had it not been for the
Coral and the Suit I should not have believed it neither; for all in this Town
hold my Husband for a very Leek; and taking him from his governing a Flock of
Goats, they cannot imagine for what Government else he should be good; God
make him so and direct him as he sees best, for his Children have need of it.
I, Lady of my Life, am determined, with your Worships good leave, to make use
of this good fortune in my house, and to go to the Court to stretch my self in
a Coach, to make a thonsand envious persons blind that look after me. And
therefore I request your Excellency to command my Husband to send me some
stock of money to purpose, because I hear the Court expenses are great; that a
Loaf is worth sixpence, and a pound of Mutton five-pence, that it is
wonderful: and that if he mean not that I shall go, he let me know in time;
for my feet are dancing till I be jogging upon the way; for my friends and
neighbors tell me, that if I and my Daughter go glistring and pompously in
the Court, my Husband will be known by me more then I by him; for that of
necessity many will ask, What Gentlewomen are these in the Coach? Then a
servant of mine answers, The Wife and Daughter of Sancho Panca, Governor of
the Island Barataria; and by this means Sancho shall be known, and I shall be
esteemed, and to Rome for all: [ A phrase used by her to no purpose: but it is a
usual thing in Spain among ill livers to cry a Roma per todo, there to get
absolution for their Villainies,] I am as sorry as sorrow may be, that this year
we have gathered no Acorns; for all that, I send your highness half a peck,
which I culled out, and went to the Mountain on purpose, and they were the
bigest I could find: I could have wished they had been as big as Eastritch
Eggs. Let not your pompossity forget to write to me, and I Will have a care to
answer and advise you of my health, and all that passes here where I remain,
praying to God to preserve your Greatness, and forget not me: my Daughter
Sancha and my Son kiss your hands. She that desires more to see, then to
write to, your Honor,

Your Servant, Teresa Panca.


Great was the content that all received to hear Teresa Panca's Letter,
principally of the Dukes, and the Duchess asked Don-Quixotes advice, if it
were fit to open the Letter that came for the Governor, which she imagined was
most exquisite. Don-Quixote said, that to pleasure them he would open it:
which he did, and saw the contents which were these.

Teresa Panca's Letter, to her Husband Sancho.
I Received thy Letter, my Sancho of my soul, and I promise and swear to thee
as I am a Catholic Christian, there wanted not two fingers breadth of making me
mad for joy: Look you Brother, when I came to hear that thou art a Governor, I
thought I should have fallen down dead with gladness; for thou know, that
it is usually said, that sudden joy as soon kills as excessive grief. The water
ran down thy daughter Sanchica's eyes without perceiving it, with pure content.
The Suit thou sentest me I had before me, and the Corals my Lady the Duchess
sent, and the Letters in my hands and the bearer of them present, and for all
this I believed and thought that all I saw or felt was but a dream: For who
could think that a Goat-heard should come to be a Governor of Islands? and
thou know friend, that my Mother was used to say, That 'twas needful to
live long, to see much. This I say, because I think to see more, if I live
longer; for I hope I shall not have done, till I see thee a Farmer or Customer,
which are Offices, that though the Devil carry away him that discharges them
badly, yet in the end good store of coin goes through their hands. My Lady the
Duchess will let thee know what a desire I have to go to the Court; consider
of it, and let me know they mind, and I will do thee honor there, going in
my Coach. The Vicar, Barber, Bachelour, nor Sexton cannot believe that thou art
a Governor, and say, that it is all juggling or Enchantment, as all thy Master
Don-Quixotes Affairs are; And Samson says, he will find thee ous, and put
this Government out of thy noddle, and Don-Quixotes madness out of his
Coxcombe. I do nothing but laugh at them and look upon my Coral chain, and
contrive how to make my Daughter a Gown of the Suit thou sentest me. I sent my
Lady the Duchess some Acornes, I would they had been of gold: I prithee send me
a string of Pearls, if they be used in that Island.

The news of this Town is, that Berneca married her Daughter to a scurvy
Painter that came to this Town to paint at random. The Burgers of the Town
willed him to paint the Kings Arms over the Gate of the Town Hall; he demanded
two Ducats, which they gave him beforehand: he wrought eight days, in the
end painted nothing, and said; he could not hit upon painting such a deal of
Pedlery ware: so he returned them their money; and for all this, he married
under the name of a good Workman: true it is, that he has left his pencill,
and taken the Spade, and goes to the field most Gentleman like. Pedro de Lobo's
son has taken Orders and shaved his head, with purpose to be a priest.
Mingimtsa Mingo Siluctos never knew of it, and she has put a Bill against him
for promising her marriage: malicious tongues will not stick to say, that she
is great by him, but he denies it stiffly.

This year we have had no Olives, neither is there a drop of Vinegar to be had
in all the Town. A Company of Soldiers passed by here, and by the way they
carried three Wenches from this Town with them; I will not tell thee who they
are, for perhaps they will return, and there will not want some that will marry
them for better for worse; Sanchica makes bone-lace, and gets her
three-half-pence a day clear, which she puts in a box with a slit to help to
buy her Household Stuff; but now that she is a Governors Daughter, thou will
give her a portion, that she needs not work for it. The stone-Fountain in the
Marketplace is dried up: a Thunderbolt fell upon the Pillory, there may they
fall all. I expect an answer of this, and thy resolution touching my going to
the Court; and so God keep thee longer then me, or as long; for I would not
leave thee in this world behind me.

Thy Wife, Teresa Panca.


These Letters were extolled, laughed at, esteemed and admired: and to mend the
matter, the Post came that brought one from Sancho to Don-Quixote, which was
likewise read aloud; which brought the Governors madness in question. The
Duchess retired with the Page, to know what had befaln him in Sancho's Town,
who told her at large, without omitting circumstance: he gave her the Acornes,
and a Cheese too which Teresa gave him for a very good one, much better then
those of Tronion; the Duchess received it with great content; in which we will
leave her, to tell the end that the Government of the Grand Sancho Panca had,
the Flower and Mirror of all Islandish Governors.

CHAP. LIII.
Of the troublesome end and up-shot that Sancho Panca's Government had.
TO think that the affairs of this life should last ever in one being, is
needless; for it rather seems otherwise: The Summer follows the Spring, after
the Sumer the Fall, and the Fall the Winter, and so Time goes on in a
continuated wheel. Only man's Life runns to a speedy end, swifter then Time,
without hope of being renewed, except it be in another life, which has no
bounds to limit it.

This said Cid Hamete, a Mahometicall Philosopher; for many without the light
of Faith, only with a natural instinct, have understood the swiftness and
uncertainty of this Life present, and the lasting of the eternal Life which is
expected: But here the Author speaks it for the speediness with which
Sancho's Government was ended, consumed and undone, and vanished into a shade
and smoke: who being a-bed the seventh night after so many days of his
Government, not cloyed with Bread or Wine, but with Judging and giving
Sentences, making Proclamations and Statutes, when sleep maugre and in despite
of hunger, shut his eye lids, he heard such a noise of Bells and Outcries, as
if the whole Island had been sunk: he sat up in his Bed, and was very
attentive, harkening if he could guess at the cause of so great an Up-roar;
but he was so far from knowing it, that a noise of a world of Drumms and
Trumpets added to that of the Bells and Cries, made him more confused, and more
full of fear and horror; and rising up, he put on a pair of Slippers for the
moystnesse of the ground, and without any Nightgown upon him, or any thing
like it, he went out at his Chamber door, at such time, as he saw at least
twenty persons come running through the Entries, with Torches in their hands
lighted, and Swords unsheathed, crying all out aloud; Arm, Arm, Sir Governor,
Arm; for a world of enemies are entered the Island, and we are undone, if your
skill and valor help us not.

With this Fury, Noise, and Uproar, they came where Sancho was, astonished and
embeseld with what he heard and saw: and when they came to him, one of them
said, Arm your self strait Sir, if you mean not to be destroyed, and that all
the Island be lost.

I Arm my self (quoth Sancho?) Know I any thing what belongs to Arms or
Succors? 'twere better leave these things to my Master Don-Quixote de la
Mancha, he will dispatch and put them in safety in an instant; for I (sinner
that I am) understand nothing of this quick service. Ha, Sir Governor, said
another, what faint-heartednesse is this? Arm your self, for here we bring you
Arms offensive and defensive: Martch to the M^rket-place, and be our Guide and
Captain, since you ought (being our Governor) to be so. Arm me on Gods name
(quoth Sancho.) And strait they brought him two Shields, of which they had good
store, and they clapped them upon his Shirt, without letting him take any other
clothes; one they put before, and the other behind, and they drew out his arms
at certain holes they had made, and bound him very well with cords, so that he
was walled and boorded up straight like a spindle, not able to bend his knees
or to move a step: In his hands they put a Lance, on which he leant to keep
himself up. When they had him thus, they bade him martch and guide them, and
cheer them all; for that he being their Lantern, North, and Morning star,
their matters would be well ended. How should I (wretch that I am) martch
(quoth Sancho?) for my knee bones will not move, since these boords that are so
sowed to my flesh do hinder me: your only way is to carry me in your arms,
and to lay me a-thwart, or let me stand up at some Postern, which I will make
good either with my Lance or body. Fie Sir, said another, it is more your fear
then the boords that hinder your pace; make an end for shame, and bestir your
self; for it is late, and the enemies increase, the cries are augmented, and
the danger waxes more and more. At whole persuasions and vitupery, the poor
Governor tried if he could move himself; so he fell to the ground, and had
such a fall, that he thought he had broken himself to pieces; and now he lay
like a Tortoise, shut in and covered with his shell, or like a Flitch of Bacon
clapped between two boords, or like a Boat overturned upon a flat; and for all
his fall, those Scoffers had no compassion at all on him, but rather putting
out their Torches, they began to re enforce their cries, and to reiterate their
Arm, Arm, so fast, running over poor Sancho, giving him an infinite company of
flashes upon his Shields, that if he had not withdrawn himself, and shrunk his
head up into them, the poor Governor had been in woeful plight; who being thus
shrugged up in this straight, he was in a terrible sweat and berayed, and
recommended himself heartily to God Almighty to deliver him from that danger.
Some stumbled upon him, others fell, and another would get upon him for a good
while, and from thence, as from a Watchtower, governed the Army, and cried
aloud, Here on our side, here the enemies are thickest; Make this Breach good;
keep that Gate shut; down with those Ladders, Wilde-fire-Balls, Pitch and
Rozin, and Kettles of scalding Oil: Trench the streets with Beds; in fine, he
named all manner of Ware, Instruments, and Furniture of War for the defense
of a City assaulted: And the bruised Sancho that heard and suffered all, said
to himself; Oh that it would please the Lord that this Island were once lost,
or that I were dead or delivered from this strait! Heaven heard his Petition,
and when he least expected, he heard this cry, Victory, Victory, the Foes are
vanquished. Ho, Sir Governor, rise, rise, enjoy the conquest, and divide the
spoils that are taken from the enemies, by the valor of your invincible arm.

Raise me, quoth the grieved Sancho, with a pittyfull voice. They helped to
raise him, and being up, he said; Every enemy that I have vanquished, nail
him in my forehead: I Will divide no spoils of enemies, but desire some friend,
if I have any, to give me a draught of Wine, that may dry up this sweat for I
am all water. They wiped him, brought him Wine, and unbound the Shields from
him; he sat upon his Bed, and with the very anguish of the sudden fright, and
his toil, he fell into a swound; and they that played that trick with him were
sorry it fell out so heavily: but Sancho's coming straight to himself tempered
their sorrow.

He asked them what a clock it was? They answered him it grew to be day.

He held his peace, and without more words, began to cloth himself, all
buried in silence, and all beheld him, expecting what would be the issue of
his hasty dressing himself.

Thus by little and little, he made himself ready, for by reason of his
weariness he could not do it very fast, and so went toward the Stable (all
they that were there following him) and coming to Dapple he embraced and gave
him a loving kiss on the forehead, and not without tears in his eyes, said:

Come thou hither, companion mine and friend, fellow-partner of my labors and
miseries; when I consorted with you, no other cares troubled me, then to mend
thy Furniture, and to sustein thy little corpse: happy then were my hours, days
and years: but since I left thee, and mounted on the towers of Ambition and
Pride, a thousand miseries, a thousand toils, four thousand unquietnesses have
entered my soul. And as he was thus discoursing, he fitted on the Pack-saddle,
no body saying ought unto him. Dapple being thus Pack-saddled, with much ado
he got upon him, and directing his speeches and reasons to the Stward, the
Doctor and many others there present, he said:

Give me room Sirs, and leave to return to my former liberty; let me seek my
ancient life, to rise from this present death: I was not born to be a
Governor, not to defend Islands nor Cities from enemies that would assault
them: I can tell better how to Plough, to Digg, to Prune, and Plant Vineyards,
then to give Laws, or defend Provinces and Kingdoms: it is good sleeping in a
whole skin: I mean it is fit that every man should exercise the Calling to which
he was borne: a Sickle is better in my hand, then a Governors Scepter. I had
rather fill my self with a good dish of Gaspachos, then be subject to the
misery of an impertinent Physician, that would kill me with hunger: I had
rather solace my self under the shade of an Oak in Summer, and cover my self
with a double sheep skin in Winter quietly, then lay me down to the
subjection of a Government in fine Holland sheets, and be clothed in Sables:
fare you well Sir, and tell my Lord the Duke, Naked was I borne, naked I am, I
neither win nor lose: I mean, I came without cross to this government, and
I go from it without a cross, contrary to what Governors of other Islands
are used to do. Stand out of the way, and let me go, for I must seare-cloth
my self; for I believe all my ribs are bruised, I thank the enemy that
trampled over me all this night.

You shall not do so, Sir Governor, quoth Doctor Rezio, for I will give you a
drink good against falls and bruises, that shall straight recover you: and
touching your diet, I promise you to make amends, and you shall eat plentifully
of what you list. It Is too late (quoth Sancho) I Will as soon tarry as turn
Turk: these jests are not good the second time: you shall as soon get me to
stay here, or admit of any other Government, (though it were presented in two
platters to me) as make me fly to heaven without wings. I am of the lineage
of the Panca's, and we are all headstrong, and if once we cry odd, odd it
must be (though it be even) in spite of all the world. Here in this Stable let
my Ants wings remain that lifted me up in the air, to be devouted by
Marrlets and other birds, and now let us go a plain pace on the ground: and
though we wear no pinked Spanish-leather shoos, yet we shall not want course
pack-thread Sandals. Like to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier, and let
every man cut his measure according to his cloth, and so let me go, for it is
late.

To which quoth the Steward, With a very good will you should go, though we
shall be very sorry to lose you: for your judgment and Christian proceeding
oblige us to desire your company: but you know, that all Governors are
obliged, before they depart from the place which they have governed, to render
first an account of their place, which you ought to do for the ten days you
have governed; and so Gods peace be with you.

No man can ask any account of me, said he, but he whom my Lord the Duke
will appoint; to him I go, and to him I Will give a fi^ting account: besides, I
going from hence so bare as I do, there can be no greater sign that I have
governed like an Angel.

I protest (quoth Doctor Rezio) the Grand Sancho has a great deal of reason,
and I am of opinion that we let him go; for the Duke will be infinitely glad
to see him. So all agreed, and let him go, offering first to accompany him,
and whatsoever he had need of for himself, or for the commodiousnesse of his
Voyage.

Sancho told them, he desired nothing but a little Barley for Dapple, and
half a Cheese and a Loaf for himself; for that by reason of the shortness
of the way, he needed no other provision. All of them embraced him, and he
with tears embraced them, and left them astonished, as well at his discourse,
as his most resolute and discreet determination.

CHAP. LIVE.
That treats of matters concerening this History and no other.
THe Duke and Duchess were resolved that Don-Quixote's Challenge that he made
against their Vassal for the aforesaid cause, should go forward; and though
the young man were in Flanders, whither he fled because he would not have
Donna Rodriguez to his Mother in Law, yet they purposed to put a Gascoigne
Lackey in his stead, which was called Tosilos, instructing him first very well
in all that he had to do.

Some two days after, the Duke said to Don-Quixote, that within four days
his contrary would be present, and present himself in the field like an armed
Knight, and maintain that the Damzell lied in her throat, if she affirmed
that he had promised her marriage. Don-Quixote was much pleased with this
news, and promised to himself to work miracles in this business, and he
held it to be a special happiness to him, that occasion was offered, wherein
those Nobles might see how far the valor of his powerful arm extended: and so
with great jocundnesse and content, he expected the four days which in the
reckoning of his desire, seemed to him to be four hundred Ages. Let we them
pass (as we let pass diverse other matters) and come to the Grand Sancho, to
accompany him, who betwixt mirth and mourning, upon Dapple went to seek out
his Master, whose company pleased him more then to be Governor of all the
Islands in the world.

It fell out so, that he having not gone very far from the Island of his
Government (for he never stood to aver whether it were Island, City,
Village, or Town which he governed) he saw that by the way he went, there
came six Pilgrims with their walking staves, your strangers that use to beg
alms singing, who when they came near, beset him round, and raising their
voices all together, began to sing in their language, what Sancho could not
understand, except it were one word, which plainly signified Alms, which he
perceived they begged in their song. And he (as says Cid Hamete) being very
charitable, took half a Loaf, and half a Cheese out of his wallet, of which
he was provided, and gave it them, telling them by singnes he had nothing
else to give them: they received it very willingly, and said, Guelte, Guelte. I
understand you not what you would have (good people) quoth Sancho. Then one of
them took a purse out of his bosom, and showed it to Sancho, whereby he
understood they asked him for money; but he putting his thumb to his throat,
and his hand upward, gave them to understand he had not a Denier; and spurting
Dapple, he broke through them: and passing by one of them looking wishly upon
him, laid hold on him, and casting his arms about his middle, with a loud
voice, and very good spanish, said, God defend me, and what do I see? is it
possible I have my dear friend in my arms, my honest neighbor Sancho Panca?
Yes sure I have, for I neither sleep, nor am drunk.

Sancho wondered to hear himself so called by his name, and to see himself
embraced by a Pilgrime-stranger, and after he had beheld him a good while,
without speaking a word, and with much attention, yet he could never call him
to mind: but the Pilgrim seeing his suspension, said:

How ^ow, is it possible, Brother Sancho Panca, thou know not thy neighbor
Ricote the Morisco Grocer of thy town? Then Sancho, beheld him more earnestly,
and began to remember his favor, and finally knew him perfectly: and so
without alighting from his Ass, he cast his arms about his neck, and said,
Who the Devil, Ricote, could know thee, in this vizardly disguize? What Is the
matter? who has made such a Franchote of thee? [ A word of disgrace the
Spaniard uses to all strangers, but chiefly to the French:] and how dare
thou return back again into Spain? where if thou be caught or known, woe be
to thee? If thou reveal me not Sancho, I am safe, quoth the Pilgrim; for in
this disguise no body will know me: Come let us go out of the highway into
yonder Elm Grove, for there my companions mean to dine and repose themselves,
and thou shall eat with them, for they are very good people, and there I shall
have leisure to tell thee what has befaln me, since I departed from our Town
to obey his Majesty's Edict, which so rigorously threatened those unfortunate
ones of our Natiou, as thou heardst.

Sancho consented, and Ricote speaking to the rest of the Pilgrims, they went
to the Elm Grove that appeared a pretty way distant from the highway, they
flung down their staves, and cast off their Pilgrims weeds, and so remained in
Hose and doublet; and all of them were young and handsome fellows, except
Ricote, who was well entered in years: all of them had Wallets, which were (all
to see to) well provided at least with incitatives that provoked to drink two
miles off.

They sat upon the ground, and making Table-clothes of the Grass; they set
upon it Bread, Salt, Knives, Wall-nuts, slices of Cheese, and clean Gammon of
Bacon-bones; which though they would not let themselves be gnawed, yet they
forbade not to be sucked.

They set down likewise a kind of black meat, called Caviary, made of Fishes
Eggs; a great Alarm to the bottle, there wanted no Olives, though they were
dry without any Pickle; yet savory, and made up a dish: but that which most
flourisht in the field of that Banquet was, six bottles of wine, which each of
them drew out of his Wallet; even honest Ricote too, who had transformed
himself from a M^risco into a Germane or Dutchman, he drew out his that for
quantity might compare with the whole five.

Thus they began to eat with great content, and very leisurely relishing every
bit which they took, upon a Knives point, and very little of every thing; and
straight all of them together would lift their arms and Bottles up into the
air, putting their own mouths to the Bottles mouths, their eyes nailed in
Heaven, as if they had shot at it: and in this fashion moving their heads from
one side to the other, signs of their good liking of the Wine, they remained a
good while, straining the entrails of the Vessels in their stomachs.

Sancho marked all, and was grieved at nothing; rather to fulfill the Proverb,
that he very well knew, [ Cum sueris Romae, etc] When thou go to Rome, etc.
he desired the Bottle of Ricote, and so took his aim as well as the rest, and
with no less delight then they: thus the Bottles suffered themselves to be
hoisted on end four times: but it was not possible the fifth: for they were now
as soakt and dry as a Matteresse, which made their joy hitherto shown, now very
muddy: now and then one of them would take Sancho by the right hand, and say,
Spaniard and Dutchman all one, bon compagno. And Sancho answered, Bon compagno,
juro a di: [Swears in a broken language:] and with that discharged such a
laughter as lasted a long hour, not remembering as then ought that had befaln
him in his Government; for cares are wont to have little jurisdiction upon
leisure and idleness, whilst men are eating and drinking.

Finally, the ending of their Wine, was the beginning of a drowsinesse that
seized upon them all, so they even fell to sleep where they sat; only Ricote
and Sancho watched it out, for they had eaten more and drunk less: so Ricote
taking Sancho apart, they sat at the foot of a Beech, leaving the Pilgrims
buried in sweet sleep, and Ricote without stumbling a jot into his Morisco
tongue, in pure Castillian language, uttered to him this ensuing discourse.

Thou well know, O Sancho Panca, friend and neighbor mine, how the
Proclamation and Edict that his Majesty commanded to be published against
those of my Nation, put us all into a fear and fright, at least me it did: and
me thought, that before the time that was limited us for our departure from
Spain; the very rigor of the penalty was executed upon me and my children.

I provided therefore (in my judgment wisely) as he which knows that by such
a time the house he lives in shall be taken from him, and so provides himself
another against he is to change: I provided, I say, to leave our Town, all
alone without my Family, and to seek some place whither I might Commodiously
carry them, and not in such a hurry as the rest that went: For I well saw, and
so did all our graver sort, that those Proclamations were not only threats, as
some said, but true Laws to be put in execution at their due time: and I was
enforced to believe this truth; because I knew the Villainous, but foolish
attempts of our Nation; such, as me thought it was a divine inspiration that
moved his Majesty, to put so brave a resolution in effect: not because we are
all faulty; for some there were firm and true Christians; but they were so few,
they could not be opposed to those that were otherwise: and it was not fit to
nourish a Serpent in his bosom, and to have enemies within doors.

Finally, we were justly punished with the penalty of Banishment, which seemed
to some soft and sweet; but to us the terriblest that could be inflicted:
wheresoever we are, we weep to think on Spain; for indeed here we were
borne, and it is our natural Country; we no where find the entertainment
that our misfortune desires, and in Barbary, and all parts of Africa, where we
thought to have been received, entertained, and cherished; there it is where
we are most offended and misused: we knew not our happiness till we lost
it, and the desire we all have to return to Spain is so great, that the most
part of such (which are many) who speak the language, as I do, return hither
again, and leave their Wives and Children there forsaken, so great is the love
they bear their Country, and now I know and find by experience that the saying
is true, Sweet is the love of ones Country.

I went (as I say) out of our. Town and came into France, and though there we
were well entertained, yet I would see it all; and so passed into Italy, and
arrived in Germany; and there I found we might live with more freedom; for the
Inhabitants do not look much into niceties, every one lives as he pleases;
for in the greatest part of it there is liberty of Conscience.

There I took a house in a Town near Augusta, and so joined with these Pilgrims
that usually come for spain, many of them every year to visit the Devotions
here, which are their Indies, and certain gain, they travel all the Kingdom
over; and there is no Town from whence they go not away with meat and drink
(as you would say) at least, and sixpence in money; and when they have ended
their Voyage, they go away with a hundred Crowns overplus, which changed into
gold either in the hollows of their Staves, or the patches of their weeds, or
by some other slight they can, they carry out of the Kingdom, and pass into
other Countries, in spite of the Searchers of the dry Ports, where the money
ought to be registered. And now Sancho, my purpose is to carry away the
treasure that I left buried; for, because it is without the Town, I may do it
without danger, and write from Valencia to my Wife and Daughter that I know are
in Argiers, and contrive how I may bring them to some Port of France, and from
thence carry them into Germany, where we will expect how God will please to
dispose of us; for indeed Sancho, I know certainly that Ricota my Daughter, and
Francisca Ricota my Wife, are Catholic Christians: and though I be not
altogether so, yet I am more Christian then Moor; and my desire to God always
is, to open the eyes of my understanding, and to let me know how I may serve
him.

And all I admire, is, that my Wife and Daughter should rather go into
Barbary then into France, where they mgiht have lived as Christians.

To which Sancho said, Look you Ricote, perhaps they could not do withal; for
John Tyopeio your Wives Brother carried them: and he, belike, as he was a rank
Moor, would go where he thought best: and I can tell you more, I think it is
in vain for you to seek what you left hidden; for we had news that your
Brother in law, and your Wife had many Pearls taken from them, and a great deal
of gold which was not registered.

That may very well be Sancho (quoth Ricote) but I know they touched not my
Treasure. For I would not tell them where it was hidden, as fearing some
mishap; and therefore if thou will come with me Sancho, and help me to take it
out, and conceal it, I Will give thee two hundredth Crowns to the relief of thy
necessities, for thou know, I know thou have many.

Were I covetous (quoth Sancho) I would yield to this; and were I so, this
morning I left an Office, which had I kept, I might have made my house walls
of Gold, and within one six months have eaten in silver dishes: so that
partly for this, and partly not to be a Traitor to my King, in favoring his
enemies, I will not go with thee, though thou would give me four hundredth
Crowns.

And what Office was that thou leftest Sancho, quoth Ricote?

I left to be Governor of an Island (quoth Sancho) and such a one, that
in faith in three Bow-shootes again you shall scarce meet with such another.

And where is this Island, said he? Where, quoth Sancho? Why, two Leagues off,
and it is called the Island Barataria.

Peace, Sancho, quoth Ricote: for your Islands are out in the Sea, you have no
Islands in the Terra Firma.

No, quoth Sancho? I tell you, friend, Ricote, this morning I left it; and
yesterday I governed in it at my pleasure like a Sagittarius: but yet I left
it, as thinking the Governors Office to be dangerous.

And what have you gotten by it, quoth Ricote? I have gotten (said he) this
experience, that I am not fit to govern ought but a Herd of Cattle, and that
in those kind of Governments there is no wealth gotteo, but with labor, toil,
loss of sleep and sustenance: for in your Islands your Governors fare very
ill; especially if they have Physicians that look to their health.

I understand thee not, Sancho, quoth Ricote: but me thinks thou talkest
without sense: for who would give thee Islands to govern? want there in the
world more able men then thou to be Governors? Peace, Sancho, and return to
thy wits, and see if thou will go with me, as I have said, and help me take
out the Treasure that I have hidden, for it may very well be called a
Treasure; and I will give thee sufficient to maintain thee.

I have told thee, Ricote, quoth Sancho, that I will not: let it suffice, I
will not discover thee, and go on thy way, on Gods name, and leave me to
mine: for I know that what is well gotten, is lost; but what is ill gotten, it
and the Owner too.

I will not be too earnest with thee, said he: but tell me, wast thou in our
town, when my Wife, my Daughter, and my Brother in law departed? Marry was I
(quoth Sancho) and I can tell you, your Daughter showed so beautiful, that all
the Town went out to see her: and every one said she was the fairest creature
in the world: she went weeping, and embraced all her friends and
acquaintances, and as many as came to see her, and entreated all to recommend
her to God, and this so feelingly, that she made me weep, that am no
Bel-weather: and in faith many had a good mind to have concealed her, and to
take her away upon the way: but fear of resisting the Kings commandment, made
them abstain: he that showed himself most enamoured, was Don Pedro Gregorio,
that Youth, the rich heir that you know very well; he, they say, loved her
very much, and since she went, was never seen more in our Town, and we all
thought he followed to steal her away: but hitherto there is nothing known.

I always suspected (quoth Ricote) that this Gentleman loved my Daughter: but
being confident in Ricota's worth, is never troubled me, to know that he
loved her well: for I am sure Sancho, thou have heard say, that Morisco women
seldom or never for love married with old Christians: and so my Daughter, who,
as I believe, rather tended her souls health then to be enamoured, cared
little for this rich heirs soliciting.

God grant it, quoth Sancho: for it would be very ill for them both: and now,
Ricote, let me go from hence, for I mean this night to see my Master
Don-Quixote.

God be with thee, Brother Sancho: for now my companions are sti^ring and it
is time to be on our way: and staight both of them took leave; and Sancho gate
upon Dapple, and Ricote leant on his Pilgrims Staff; and so both departed.

CHAP. LV.
Of matters that befell Sancho by the way, and others the best in the World.
SANCHO'S long stay with Ricote was the cause that he reached not that day to
the Dukes Castle, though he came within half a league of it, where the night
took him, somewhat dark and close but being Summer time, it troubled him not
much, and therefore he went out of the way, purposing to rest till the
morning: but as ill luck would have it, seeking a place where he might best
accommodate himself, he and Dapple fell into a most dark and deep pit, which
was amongst certain ruinous buildings; and as he was falling, he recommended
himself withal his heart to God, thinking he should not stop till he came to
Hell, but it fell out otherwise; for within a little more then three fathoms
length, Dapple felt ground, and he sat still upon him without any hurt or
damage received.

He felt all his body over, and held in his breath to see if he were sound or
pierced any where: but seeing himself well and whole, and in catholic health,
he thought he could never praise God sufficiently for the favor he had done
him: for he thought verily he had been beaten into a thousand pieces: he
went likewise groping with his hands about the walls of the pit, to see if it
were possible to get out without help; but he found them all smooth, without
any place to lay hold on, which grieved him very much, especially when he heard
Dapple cry out tenderly and dolefully, and no marvel: for it was not for
wantonness, he saw himself in a pitiful taking.

Alas (quoth Sancho then ^) and what sudden and unthought of accidents befall
men that live in this miserable world? who would have supposed that he, who
yesterday saw himself inthronized Governor of an Island, commanding Servants
and Vassals, should to day be buried in a Pit, without any bodies help, without
Servant or Vassal coming to succor him?

Here I and my Ass are like to perish with hunger, if so be that first we
dye not; he with his bruise, I with grief and anguish: at least I shall not
be so happy as my Master Don-Quixote was when he descended and went down
into that enchanted Cave of Montesinos, where he found better welcome then if
he had been at his own house; and it seemed he found the cloth ready laid,
and his bed made; there saw he goodly and pleasant Visions: and here (I
believe) I shall see nothing but Toads and Snakes: unfortuuate that I am; what
is my madness and folly come to? My bones will be fetched out from hence (when
it shall please Heaven that I am found) white and smooth, the flesh picked off,
and my trusty Dapples with them; whereupon peradventure it shall be known who
we are, at least by those that shall take notice that Sancho and the Ass
never parted, nor the Ass from Sancho. Again, I say, Unhappy we! our ill
fortune would not that we should dye in our Country and amongst our friends,
where, though our misfortune had found no redress; yet we should not have
wanted pity, and at last gasp we should have had our eyes closed. Oh
companion mine and friend! how ill have I rewarded thy honest service? Pardon
me; and desire Fortune in the best manner thou can, to deliver us from this
miserable toil in which we are both put; and I here promise to set a Crown of
Laurel on thy head, that thou shall look like a Poet Lawreat; and I will double
thy Provander allowance.

Thus Sancho lamented, and his Ass hearkened to him, without answering a word;
such was the strait and anguish in which the poor Scab found himself.

Finally, having passed over the whole night in complaints and lamentations,
the day came on, with whose cleernes^e and splendour Sancho saw that there was
no manner of possibility to get out of that well without help, and he began
again to lament and make a noise, to see if any body heard him: but all his
crying out was as in a Desert; for in all the Country round about, there was
none to hearken to him: and then Dapple lay with his mouth open, and Sancho
thought he had been dead: yet he so handled the matter, that he set him upon
his legs; and taking a piece of bread out of his Wallets (which had run the
same fortune with them) he gave it his Ass, which came not amiss to him; and
Sancho said to him, as if he had understood it, Sorrows great are lessened
with meat.

By this he discovered on the one side of the Pit a great hole, whereat a man
might pass through, crooking and stooping a little. Sancho drew to it, and
squatting down, entered in, and saw that within it was large and spacious, and
he might well discern it; for by a place that you might call the roof, the
Sunbeam entered in, that discovered it all: he saw likewise that it was
enlarged by another spacious concavitie: which when he saw, he turned back
again to his Ass, and with a stone began to pull down the earth of the hole,
and in a little while made way for his Ass to go out, which he did, and
Sancho leading him by the halter went forward along the Cave, to see if he
could find any egresse on the other side; sometimes he went dark long and
without light; but never without fear. Lord God! said he, this that to me is a
misfortuue, were to my Master Don-Quixote a famous Adventure; he would think
these profundities and Dungeons were flowery Gardens, and Galiana's Palaces,
and he would hope to get out of this straightness and darkness into some
flowery Field: but I unfortunate, illadvised, and faint-hearred! think that
every moment I shall fall into a deeper profunditie then this former, that will
swallow me downright: it is a good ill that comes alone. In this mannar, and in
this imagination he thought he had gone somewhat more then half a league; and
at last he discovered a kind of twy-light, as if it had been day, and, came in
at some open place, which seemed to open an entrance to another world.

Here Cid Hamete Benengeli leaves him, and turns again to treat of Don-Quixote,
who, jocund and contented expected the prefixed time, for the Combat he was
to perform with the dishonourer of Donna Rodriguez Daughter, and thought to
rectify the wrong and uncouth turn she had done her.

It fell out then that going out one morning to exercise and practice against
the Trance in which e're long he was to see himself ^ fetching up Rozinante
with a full Career, he came close to a Caves mouth; that had he not reined him
in hard, it had been impossible but he must have fallen into it.

Well he stopped him, and fell not in: and coming somewhat nearer, without
alighting, looked into that depth, and beholding of it, heard a great noise
within, and harkening, attentively, he might perceive and understand that he
that made it, cried out, Ho, above there, is there any Christian that hears me?
or any charitable Gentleman that will take pity of a sinner buried alive? of
an unhappy ungoverned Governor?

Don-Quixote thought he heard Sancho Panca's voice, at which he was in suspense
and affrighted: but raising his voice as high as he could, he said, Who is
below there? Who is that cries out? Who should be here? or who should cry out,
they answered, but the weather-beaten Sancho Panca Governor with a Pox to him,
for his ill-Errantrie of the Island Barataria, Squire sometime to the famous
Knight Don-Quixote de la Mancha?

When Don-Quixote heard this, his admiration was doubled, and his astonishment
increased, as thinking Sancho Panca might be dead, and that his soul was there
doing penance: and carried with this imagination, he said, I conjure thee by
all I may, as I am a Catholic Christian, that thou tell me who thou art: and
if thou be a soul in penalty, tell me what thou will have me do for thee;
for since my profession is to succor and help the needy of this world, it
shall always be so to help and aid the needy in another world, that cannot
help themselves.

Then, said they below, Belike you that speak to me are my Master Don-Quixote
de la Mancha, and by the Organ of your voice can be no other.

Don-Quixote I am, quoth he, that both aid the living and dead in their
necessities. Therefore tell me, who thou art, for thou amazest me: for if
thou be Sancho Panca my Squire, and that being dead, the Devil have not
seyzed on thee, and by Gods mercy thou be in Purgatory, our holy Mother the
Catholic Roman Church has sufficient suffrages, to deliver thee from the
pain thou endurest, and I with my wealth will solicit all that I can: and
therefore make an end, and tell me who thou art.

Gods me, by whose birth so ever you will, Signior Don-Quixote: I swea^e I am
your Squire Sancho panca, and I never dyed in all my life; but that having left
my Government for matters and causes that must be told more at leisure;
overnight I fell into this Pit, where I lie and Dapple too, who will prove me
to be no liar: for he is here with me: Will you any more? And it seemed, the
Ass understood what Sancho said: for at the instant, he began to bray so
loud, that all the Cave resounded.

A famous witness, quoth Don-Quixote, I know this Bray, as if I had brought it
forth, and I hear thy voice, my Sancho: Stay, and I Will go to the Dukes Castle
that is here hard by: and I will get some to help thee out of this Pit, into
which thy sins have cast thee.

Go, Sir (quoth Sancho) for Gods love, and return quickly: for I can no
longer endure to be buried here alive, and I dye for fear. Don-Quixote left
him, and went to the Castle to let the Dukes know Sancho's mis-hap: at which
they marvelled not a little, though they knew well enough how he might fall in
for the knowledge they had, time out of mind of that Vault: but they could not
imagine how he had left his Government, they knowing nothing of his coming.
Finally, they caused Ropes and Cables to be sent, and with much cost and
labor of people, Sancho and Dapple were drawn out of that dismanesse to the
sunns light. A Scholar saw him, and said, Thus should all bad Governors come
out of their Governments, as this sinner does out of this profound Abisme, pale
dead for hunger, and (as I believe) without a cross to bless him with.

Sancho heard him, and said, It Is eight or ten days, Good Man Murmurer, since
I began to govern the Island; in all which I never eat bread that kept me
from hunger one hour; in all that time Physicians have persecuted me, and
enemies have bruised my bones: neither have I had leisure to take bribes, or to
recover my due; which being so, I deserved not (in my opinion) to come out in
this manner: but man purposes, and God disposes: and God best knows what
each man needs: and let every man fit himself to the times, and no man say,
I Will drink no more of such a drink: for where we think to fare well, there is
often ill usage, God Almighty knows my mind, it is enough and I say no more,
though I could. Be not angry, Sancho, nor vexed with what thou hear, for so
thou shall never be in quiet: come with a good conscience, let them say what
they will; for to bridle malicious tongues, is as much as to set Gates in the
Highway.

If a Governor come rich from his Government, they say he has played the
Thief: and if poor, that he has been a weak unable Cox-comb.

I warrant you (quoth Sancho) this bout, they shall rather hold me to be a
Coxbombe then a Thief. With this discourase they went toward the Castle hemmed
in with many boys, and other people; where the Duke and Duchess were in
certain running Galleries, expecting Don-Quixote and Sancho: who, before he
would go up to see the Duke, would first accommodate Dapple in the Stable: for
he said he had had a mavelous ill night on it at their lodging; and so
straight he went up to see his Lords, before whom upon his knees, he said; I,
my Lords, because your Greatnesses would needs have it so, without any desert
of mine, went to govern your Island, Barataria; into which, naked I entered, and
naked come I out, I neither win nor lose, whether I governed well or ill, here
be witnesses present to say what they please: I have resolved Doubts;
sentenced Causes, and have been ready to be starved: because Master Doctor
Pedro Rezio, borne at Tirte a fuera, would have it so that Island and
Governourish Physician; enemies set upon us by night: and having put us in
great danger, they of the Island say that they were freed, and got the vict^ry,
by the valor of my arm; such health God send them, as they tell truth herein.

In fine, I have summed up all the burdens and the cares that this governing
brings with it, and find by my account, that my shoulders cannot bear them;
neither are they a weight for my ribs, nor Arrows for my quiver: and
therefore, left I should be cast away in my Government, I have cast it away,
and since yesterday morning I left the Island as I found it, with the same
streets, houses, and roofes that it had when I came into it.

I have borrowed nothing of no body, nor hoorded up any thing: and though I
thought to have made some profitable Ordinances, yet I did not, as fearing they
would not be kept, which is as much as if they had never been made.

I left the Island (as I say) without any bodies accompanying me, but Dapple:
I fell into a Pit, went forward in it, until this morning by the Suns light
I got out: but not so easily; for if heaven had not provided me my Master
Don-Quixote, there I had stuck till the end of the world.

So that my Lords, Duke and Duchess, here is Sancho Panca your Governor, that
has only learnt to know in these ten days that he has governed, that he
cares not for governing, not an Island, nay were it the whole world: this
presupposed, kissing your Honors hands, imitating boys play, that cry, Leap
thou, and then let me leap; [ Like our Trusse or Fail:] So I leap from the
Government, and pass again to my Master Don-Quixotes service: for in fine,
though with him I eat my victuals sometimes in fear, yet I have my belly full;
and so that be, alls one to me, that it be with Carrets, or with Partridge.
With this, Sancho ended his tedious discourse: Don-Quixote searing always that
he would blunder out a thousand fopperies: but feeing him end with so few, he
thanked Heaven in his heart: and the Duke embraced Sancho, and said, He was
sorry in his soul that he left the Government so quickly: but that he would
cause some Office of less trouble, and more profit in his estate to be given
him: the Duchess likewise embraced him, and commanded he should be made much
of, for he seemed to be much wearied, and to be worse entreated.

CHAP. LVI.
Of the unmercifull and never seen battle that passed betwixt Don-Quixote and
the Lackey Tosilos, in defense of the Matron Donna-Rrodriguez Daughter.
THe Dukes repented them not of the jest that was put upon Sancho in the
Government which they gave him; especially, because that very day their Steward
came, and told them very punctually all the words and actions, that Sancho both
did and said in that time: and finally, so described the assault of the Island,
and so set out Sancho's fear, and sallie, that they received no small delight.

After this, the History tells us, that the day of the prefixed battle came,
and the Duke having often instructed his Lackey Tosilos how he should behave
himself with Don-Quixote to overcome him, without killing or wounding him: he
gave order that their Pikes should be taken from their Lances, telling
Don-Quixote, that Christianity (which he preferred) permitted not, that that
battle should be with so much hazard and danger of their lives: and that it
was enough that he granted him free. Lists in his Country, though it were
against the Decree of the holy Council, that prohibites such challenges; yet
he would not put that matter so strictly in execution.

Don-Quixote bade his Excellency dispose of that business as he pleased, and
that he would obey him in all.

The fearful day being come, the Duke commanded that there should be a
spacious scaffold set up in the place where the Judges of the Lists might
stand; and the Matron and her daughter the Plaintiffs.

There repaired a world of people, from all the towns, and neighboring
Villages, to see the noveltie of that battle, who never saw, nor ever heard
tell of the like in that Country; neither the living, nor those that where
dead. The first that entered the field and Lists, was, the Master of the
Ceremonies, who measured out the ground, and passed all over it, that there
might be no deceit, nor any hidden thing to make them stumble or fall: by and
by the women entered, and sat down in their seats, with their mantles over
their eyes and breasts, with shows of no small resenting; Don-Quixote present in
the Lists.

A while after, the Grand Lackey Tosilos, appeared on one side of the large
place, accompanied with many Trumpets, and upon a lusty Courser, sinking the
very ground under him: his Visor was drawn, and he was all arraied in strong
and shining Armor, his horse was Frizeland, well spread, of color flea-bitten,
each set-locke having nine and twenty pound of wool upon it. The valiant
Combatant came, well instructed by his Master, how he should demean himself
with the valorous Don-Quixote de la Mancha, advertized that he should by no
means kill him, but that he should strive to shun the first encounter, to
'excuse the danger of his death which was certain, if he met him full butt.
He paced over the place, and coming where the Matron was, he stayed a while
to behold her that demanded him for her husband. The Master of the Lists called
Don-Quixote, that had now presented himself in the place, and together with
Tosilos: he spoke to the women, asking them, if they agreed that Don-Quixote de
la Mancha should undertake their cause. They said, I, and that they allowed of
all he should in that case perform, for firm and available.

By this the Duke and Duchess were set in a Gallery, which looked just to the
Lists all which was covered with abundance of people, that expected to see the
rigorous trance never seen.

The conditions of the Combatant was, That if Don-Quixote overcame his
Contrary, he should marry with Donna Rodriguez daughter; and that if he were
overcome, his Contendor was freed from his promise given, and not tied to any
satisfaction. The Master of the Ceremonies divided the Sun between them, and
set each of them in their places. The Drums struck up, and the sound of
Trumpets filled the air, the earth shook under them, and the hearts of the
spectator troop, were in suspense, some fearing, others expecting the good or
ill succes^e of this matter.

Finally, Don-Quixote recommending himself heartily to God and his Mistress
Dulcinea del Toboso, stood looking when the precise sign of the encounter
should be given: but our Lackey was in another mind, he thought upon what now
I will tell you It seems, that as he stood looking upon his enemy, she
seemed to him to be the fairest, woman in the world, and the little blind
boy, whom up and down the streets folk call Love, would not lose the occasion
offered, to triumph upon a Lackeyan soul, and to put it in the list of his
Trophies: and so coming to him, fair and softly, without any body perceiving
him, he clapped a flight two yards long into his left side, and struck his
heart through and through, and he might safely do it; for love is invisible,
and goes in and out where he (...); no body asking him any account of his
actions. Let me tell you then, that when the sign of the on set was given,
our Lackey was ^eamsported, thinking on the beauty of her that he had made
Mistress of his liberty, and so he took no notice of the Trumpets sound, as
did Don-Quixote, who scarce heard it, when he set spurs, and with as full
speed as Rozinant^ would permit, went against his enemy, and his good squire
Sancho Panca, seeing him depart, cried out aloud, God guide thee, Cream and
Flower of Knights Errant, God give thee the victory, seeing thou have right on
thy side: And though Tosilus saw Don-Quixote come toward him, yet he moved not
a whit from his place, but rather aloude called the Master of the Lists, who
coming to see what he would have, Tosilos said.

Sir, does not this Battle consist in my marrying or not marrying with that
Gentlewoman? Yes, it was answered him. Well then (quoth the Lackey) I am
scrupulous of Conscience, which would much be burdened if this Battle should
proceed: And therefore I say, I yield my self vanquished, and will marry this
Gentlewoman presently.

The Master of the Lists wondered at Tosilos reasons; and as he was one of those
that knew of the contriving that business, could not answer him a word.

Don-Quixote stopped in the midst of his Careere, seeing his Enemy met not.

The Duke knew nothing why the Combat should not go forward; but the Master of
the Lists went to tell him what Tosilos said, at which he was in suspense, and
extremly chollerick.

Whilst this happened, Tosilos came where Donna Rodriguez was, and cried
aloude, Mistress, I will marry your Daughter, and therefore will never strive
for that with Suites and Contentions, which I may have Peaceably, and without
danger of Death.

The valorous Don-Quixote heard this, and said; Seeing it is so and that I am
loosed and free from my promise, let them marry on Gods name, and since God
has given her him, S. Peter bless her.

The Duke now came down into the Place, and coming to Tosilos said; Is it true,
Knight, that you yield your self vanquished, and that instigated by your
timorous Conscience, you will marry that Maid? I Sir, quoth Tosilos.

He does very well, quoth Sancho then, for that thou would give the Mouse,
give the Cat, and he will free thee from trouble.

Tosilos began now to unlace his Helmet, and desired them to help him apace,
for his spirits and his breath failed him, and he could not endure to see
himself so long shut up in that norrow Chamber. They undid it apace, and now
the Lackies face was plainly discovered. Which when Donna Rrdriguez and her
Daughter saw, they cried out saying; This is coozenage, this is coozenage: They
have put Tosilos my Lord the Dukes Lackey in stead of our true Husband: Justice
from God and the King, for such malice, not to say, villainy.

Grieve not your selves Ladies, quoth Don-Quixote; for this is neither malice
nor villainy, and if it be, the Duke is not in fault, but vilde Enchanters that
persecute me; who envying that I should get the glory of this Conquest, have
converted the face of your Husband into this, which you say is the Dukes
Lackey: take my Council, and in spite of the malice of my Enemies, marry him,
for doubtless, it is he that you desire to have to Husband.

The Duke that heard this, was ready to burst all his choler into laughter,
and said; The things that happen to Signior Don-Quixote are so extraordinary,
that it makes me believe this is not my Lackey; but let us use this slight
and device, let us defer the marriage only one fifteen days, and keep this
personage that holds us in doubt, locked up, in which perhaps he will return to
his pristine shape; for the rancor that Enchanters bear Signior Don-Quixote,
will not last so long, they gayning so little by these cozenages and
transformations they use.

O Sir, quoth Sancho, these wicked Elves do usually change one thing into
another in my Masters affairs: not long since they changed a Knight he
conquered, called The Knight of the Looking-glasses, into the shape of the
Bachelor Samson Carrasco, borne in our town, and our special friend, and they
turned my Mistrisse Dulcinea del Toboso into a Rustic Clown: and so I imagine
this Lackie will live and die so, all days of his life.

To which (quoth Rodriguez Daughter) let him be who he will that demands me
to Wife (I thank him) I had rather be lawful wife to a Lackey, then a
Paramour to be mocked by a Gentleman, though besides he that abused me is
none.

The upshot of all was, that Tosilos should be kept up, till they saw what
became of his transformation. All cried, Don-Quixote's was the Victory, and
the most were sad and Melancholy, to see that the expected Combatants had not
beaten one another to pieces; as boys are sad, when the party they look for
comes not out to be hanged, when either the contrary, or the Justice pardons
him.

The people departed, and the Duke and the Duchess returned, and Don-Quixote
with them to the Castle, Tosilos was shut up, Donna Rodriguez and her Daughter
were most happy, to see that one way or other, that business should end in
marriage, and Tosilos hoped no less.

CHAP. LVII.
How Don-Quixote took his leave of the Duke, and what befell him with the
witty-Wanton Altisidora, the Duchesses Damozell.
NOw it seemed good to Don-Quixote, to leave the idle life he had in the
Castle, thinking it a great wrong to his person, to be shut up, and lazy
amongst so many delights and dainties as were offered to him as a Knight Errant
by those Nobles, and he thought he was to give a strict account to Heaven for
that idleness and retirement, and so asked license one day of the Dukes to
depart: which they gave him, but seemed to be very sorrowful that he would
leave them. The Duchess gave Sancho Panca his wives Letters, who wept in them,
and said, Who would have thought that such great hopes as the news of my
Government, engendered in my Wife Teresa Panca's breast, should stop in this,
that I must return to my Master Don-Quixote's dragged Adventures? For all that,
I am glad to see that my Teresa was like her self, by sending the Acorns to
the Duchess, which if she had not sent, I being sorry she had showed her
self ungrateful: my comfort is, that this kind of Present could not be
called a bribe; for I had my Government before she sent it, and it is very fit
that they who receive a benefit, though it be but in tristes, show themselves
thankful. In effect, naked I came into the Government, and naked I go out of
it, and therefore I may say (which is no small matter) with a safe Conscience,
Naked was I borne, naked I am I neither win nor lose. This Sancho discoursed
with himself at the time when he was to depart and Don-Quixote going out,
(having taken his leave the night before of the Dukes) one morning he
presented himself all armed in the Castle Court, all the people of the house
beheld him from the Galleries, and the Dukes too went out to see him. Sancho
was upon his Dapple, with his Wallets, his Cloakbagge, and his
Sumpter-provision most frollike; for the Dukes Steward, he that had been
Trifaldis, gave him a purse with two hundred crowns in gold, to supply his
wants by the way, and yet Don-Quixote knew nothing of this.

Whilst all were thus beholding him, unlookt for, amongst other Matrons and
Damzells of the Duchesses, the witty and wanton Altisidora beheld him, and with
a woeful voice said; HEarken, O thou wicked Knight;
Hold a little back thy reins;
Do not so bestirre the ^lanke,
Of thy most ungoverned beast.
False; behold, thou ^liest not
From a Serpent that is fierce,
No; but from a little Lamb,
Lacks not much of being a Sheep
Horrid Monster, thou have abused
The most beauteous Damozell,
That Diana in hills has seen,
Or Venus in woods beheld.
Cruel Virenus, Aeneas fugitive,
Barrabas take thee, never may thou thrive.
Thou carriest (Oh ill carrying)
In thy wicked clutching paws,
The entrails of an humble one,
Tender and enamoured.
Three Night-caps have thou borne hence,
And a pair of Garters too,
That do equal Marble pure,
For their smoothness, white and black.
Two thousand sighs thou bear away,
Which, were they but fire, they might
Set on fire two thousand Troyes.
(If two thousand Troyes there were.)
Cruel Virenus, Aeneas fugitive,
Barrabas take thee, never may thou thrive.
Of thy Squire that Sancho he,
May his entrails be so tough,
And so hard that Dulcinea
may not dis-enchanted be.
For the Fault that thou have made,
Let poor she the burden bear,
For the just, for wrongers do
Sometimes in my Country pay,
Let thy best Adventures all,
Into mis adventures turn:
All thy pleasure to a Dream,
Firmness to forgetfullnesse.
Cruel Virenus, Aeneas fugitive,
Barrabas take thee, never may thou thrive
May thou false accounted be,
From Sevill to Marchena,
From Granada unto Loia,
From Though these Verses were made on purpose, to be absurd; yet sure the
authority here fell into the common absurdity, that I have known many of his
Countrymen do, which is, that England is in London, and not Vice Versa.
London to England.
Whenso'ere thou plai'st at Trumpe,
At Primera, or at Saint,
Never mai'st thou see a King,
Aces, sevens fly from thee.
If thou chance to cut thy Corns,
May thou wound till blood do come^
Also let the stumps remain,
If thou pluck out hollow Teeth.
Cruel Virenus, Aeneas fugitive,
Barrabas take thee, never may thou thrive.


Whilst the grieved Altisidora thus lamented, Don-Quixote beheld her, and
without answering a word, turning to Sancho, he said; By thy forefathers
lives, I conjure thee, my Sancho, that thou tell me one truth: tell me happily,
have thou the three night-Caps and the Garters that this enamoured Damzel
speaks of? To which (quoth Sancho) the three Caps I have; but for your Garters
as sure as the sea burns.

The Duches^e wondered at Al^isidora's loosnesse: for though she held her to be
bold, witty and wanton; yet she never thought she would have proceeded so far:
and knowing nothing of this jest, her admiration was the greater.

The Duke meant to second the sport; and therefore said, I do not like it
well, Sir Knight, that having received this good entertainment that has been
made you in my Castle, you should presume to carry away three night-Caps at
least; if it were but only my Damzels Garters, it is a sign of a false heart,
not suitable to your Honor; and therefore restore her Garters: if not, I
challenge you to a mortal combat; and I Will not fear that your Elvish Enchanters
will truck or change my face as they have done my Lackie Tosilos, that was to
have fought with you.

God forbid (quoth Don-Quixote) that I should unsheath my sword against your
most illustrious Person, from whom I have received so many favors. The
night-Caps I will restore; for Sancho says he has them: the Garters it is
impossible; for neither her nor I received them: and if this your Damzel will
look into her corners, I warrant her she finds them. I, my Lord, was never
Thief, nor never think I shall as long as I live, if God forsake me not. This
Damzell speaks (as she pleases) as being enamoured on what I am not faulty
of: and therefore I have no reason to ask forgiveness, neither of her nor your
Excellency, whom I beseech to have a better opinion of me: and again, I desire
your License to be upon my way.

God send you, Signior Don-Quixote (quoth the Duchess) so good a journey, that
we may always hear happy news of your brave exploits, and so God be with you^
for the longer you stay, the more you increase the flames in the Damzels hearts
that behold you: and for mine, I Will punish her so, that hence forward she shall
neither mis-behave her self in look or action. Hear me then but a word, oh
valorous Don-Quixote (quoth Altisidora) which is, That I cry thee mercy for the
theft of my Garters; for in my soul and conscience I have them on; and I have
fallen into the same carelessnesse of his that looked for his Asle when he rode
upon him.

Did not I not tell you (quoth Sancho) I am a fit Youth to conceal Thefts? for
had I been so, I had in two bouts fit occasions in my Government.

Don-Quixote inclined his head, and made an obeisance to the Dukes and
bystanders, and turning Rozinantes reins, Sancho following him on Dapple, he
went out of the Castle, taking his way toward Saragosa.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of Adventures that came so thick and threefold on Don-Quixote, that they gave
no respit one to the other.
WHen Don-Quixote saw himself in open Field, free and uncumbred from
Altisidora's wooing, he thought himself in his Center, and that his spirits
were renewed to prosecute his new project of Chivalrie; and turning to Sancho,
said:

Liberty, Sancho, is one of the preciousest Gifts that Heaven has given men;
the treasure that the earth encloseth and the Sea hides, cannot be equalized to
it. Life ought to be hazarded as well for Liberty, as for a man's Honor; and by
the contrary Captivity is the greatest evil that can befall men. This I tell
thee Sancho, because, thou have well observed the cheer and plenty we have had
in the Castle we left. Well, in the midest of those savoury Banquets, and those
drinks cooled with snow, me thought I was straightned with hunger; for I
enjoyed nothing with the liberty I should have done, had it been mine own; for
the obligations of recompencing benefits and favors received, are ties that
curb a free mind. Happy that man to whom Heaven has given a piece of bread,
without obligation to thank any else but Heaven alone.

For all that (quoth Sancho) it is not fit for us to be unthankful for two
hundred Crowns that we have received in gold, which the Dukes Steward gave me
in a purse, which I carry as comforting Cordial next my heart, for what may
fall out; for we shall not always find Castles where we shall be much made
on; sometimes we shall meet with Inns, where we shall be cudgelled.

In these and such like discourses went the Errants on, Knight and Squire, when
they saw (having gone about half a league upon the grass of a green Meadow,
some dozen men with their Cloaks spread at dinner, clad like Husbandmen;
somewhat near them they had, as it were, white sheets, with which they covered
something underneath: they were set upright and stretch at length, and put a
pretty distance one from another.

Don-Quixote came to those that were eating, and saluting them first
courteously, he asked them what was under that linen? One of them answered
him, Sir, under this linen there be certain Images of Embossed work in wood,
which must serve in a show we make in our Village: we carry them covered,
that they may not be ^ullied and on our shoulders that they be not broken. If
you please (quoth Don-Quixote) I should be glad to see them; for Images carried
so charily doubtless are good ones. Good (quoth one?) if they be not, let
their price speak; for there is none of them but cost fifty Ducats; and that
you may see it is true, pray stay, and you shall see it with your eyes: and
rising he left his dinner, and went to uncover the first Image, which showed
to be Saint George on horse back, with a winding Serpent at his feet, and his
Lance run through the throat of it, with the fierceness he uses to be
painted with: all the Images seemed to be of pure gold. And Don-Quixote seeing
it, said, This Knight was one of the best Errants that the divine War-fare had,
his name was Saint George, and he was a wonderful defender of Damzels. Let Us
see this next. The man discovered it, and it seemed to see Saint Martin on
Horseback, that divided his cloak with the poor man; and Don-Quixote no sooner
saw it, but he said, This Knight also was one of our Christian Advent^rers, and
I believe he was more liberal then valiant, as thou may see Sancho by his
dividing his cloak, and giving the poor man half; and doubtless it was then
Winter; for had it been Summer, he would have given him all, he was so
charitable.

Not so (quoth Sancho) but he stuck to the Proverb, To give and to have does a
brain crave.

Don-Quixote laughed, and desired them to take away another piece of linen,
under which was the Image of the Patron of Spain on Horseback, his sword
bloodied, trampling on Moors, and treading on heads: and Don-Quixote seeing it,
said, I marry Sir, here is a Knight indeed, one of Christ's Squadrons, this is
called Don-Saint Diego, Moorkiller, one of the Valientest Saints and Knights in
the world then, or in heaven now. Then they discovered another piece, which
showed Saint Paul his falling from his Horse, with all the circumstances
usually painted in the Table of his Conversion: when he saw him so lively, as
if you would say, Christ were then speaking to him, and Paul answering, he
said, This was the greatest enemy that the Church of God had in a long time,
and the greatest Defender that ever it shall have, a Knight Errant in his life
time, and a quiet Saint in his death, a restless Laboror in the Vineyard of the
Lord, a Doctor of Nations, whose School was Heaven, and Christ himself his
Reader and Instructor. Now there were no more Images: and so Don-Quixote
commanded them to cover them again, and said to those that carried them, I hold
it for a propitious sign Brethen, to have seen what I have seen; for those
Saints and Knights were of my Profession, which is, to exercise Arms; only
the difference between them and me is, that they were Saints, and fought
Divinely; I am a sinner, and fight humanely. They conquered heaven by force of
their Arms (for heaven suffers force) and hitherto I know not what I conquer
by the force of my sufferings: but if my Dulcinea del Toboso be once free from
hers, my Fortune bettering it self, and my judgment repaired, perhaps I might
take a better course then I do.

God grant, and Sin be deaf, quoth Sancho straight.

The men wondered as well at Don-Quixotes shape, as at his discourse, and
understood not one half what it meant. They ended their dinner and got up their
Images, and taking leave of Don-Quixote, they went on their way. Sancho admired
afresh, as if he had never known his Master, at his knowledge, thinking there
was no Historyin the world, or Accident, that he had not ciphered upon his
nail, and nailed in his memory, and said, Truly (Master mine) if this that
has befaln us to day may be called an Adventure, it has been one of the most
delicious sweetest, that in all our peregrination has befaln us; for we are
come out of it without blows or affrightment, or laying hands to our swords, or
without beating the earth with our bodies, or being hungry: God be thanked that
he has let me see this with these eyes of mine.

Thou say well Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) but thou must know, the times are
not always alike, nor run on in one fashion, and that which the vulgar
commonly call Bodings, which are not grounded upon any natural reason, ought
to be held, and reputed, and judged by a wise man for good luck. One of your
Wizards rises in a morning, goes out of his house, meets with a Friar of the
blessed Order of S. Francis, and as if he had met with a Griffin, turns his
back and runs home again. The Other Mendoza he spils the salt on the Table, and
straight has a melancholy sprinkled all over his heart, as if Nature were
bound to show signs of ensuing mischances, with things of so small moment as
the aforesaid: The discreet Christians ought not to stand upon points, or to
look into the doings of Heaven. Scipio comes into Africa, and leaping on shore,
he stumbles; his Soldiers hold it for an ill sign: but he embracing the
ground, said, Thou can not fly from me Africa, for I have fast hold on thee
in mine Arms. So that Sancho, the meeting with these Images has been a most
happy success to me.

I believe you (quoth Sancho) and pray tell me the cause why we Spainiards cry
Saint Jacques, and shut Spain? is Spain open troe, so that it needed be shut?
or what ceremony is this?

Thou art most simple Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) and look; This Grand Knight
with the red Cross, God has given him to Spain for a Patron and Protector,
especially in the hard conflicts that the Moors and we had together; and
therefore they invoke and call on him as their Protector in all their battles
they give, and many times they have visibly seen him in them, overthrowing,
trampling, destroying and killing Agaren Squadrons. Many examples could I
produce to confirm this, out of the true Spanish Histories.

Sancho changed his discourse, and said to his Master, Sir, I do wonder at the
loosnesse of Altisidora, the Duchesses, Damzell; that same fellow called Love,
has bravely wounded and run her through; they say, he is a little blind
boy, that though he be blear^ eyed or to say truer, blind: takes the least
heart for his mark, and hits it, and pierces it with his Flight from one side
to the other. I have also heard say, that in the modesty and wariness of
Damzells, his amorous Arrows are headless and dull: but in this Altisidora, it
seems they are rather whetted then dull. Look you Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote).
Love has no respect or limit in his dealing, and has the same condition with
Death, that as well sets upon the high Palaces of Kings, as the low Cottages of
Sheepheards, and when he takes entire possession of a soul, the first thing he
does, is to banish shame, without which Altisidora declared her desires, that
rather engendered in my breast confusion then pity.

Notable cruelty (quoth Sancho) unheard of thanklesnesse^ I know for my part,
that the least amorous reason of hers would have humbled and made me her
Vassal; ah whoreson, what a heart of marble, entrails of brass, and soul of
rough-cast had you? but I cannot imagine what this Damzel saw in you, that
should so vanquish her? What Gallantry? What Courage? What Conceit? What
Countenance? which of these alone, or all together enamoured her? for truly, I
behold you many times from head to foot, and I see more in you to affright then
to enamour: and having also heard say; that Beauty is the first and principal
part that does enamour, you having none, I know not on what the poor soul was
enamoured.

Mark Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) there be two kinds of beauty, one of the
mind, the other of the body; that of the mind does march and is seen in the
understanding, in honesty, in good proceeding, in Liberality, in being well
bred; and all these qualities are untamed, and may be in an ill-favored-man;
and when the choice is set upon this beauty, and not upon that of the body, it
causes Love with more force and advantage. I see Sancho that I am not lovely,
and yet I know too that I am not deformed, and it is enough for an honest man,
if he be not a Monster, to be beloved, so I have the Portions of the mind I
have told thee of.

In these Reasons and Discourses they went entering in at a Wood that was out of
the way, and suddenly, before they were aware, Don-Quixote found himself
entangled in nets of green thread, that were set from one Tree to another; and
not imagining what it might be, he said ^o Sancho, Me thinks Sancho, this
Adventure of these Netts is one of the strangest that may be imagined; hang me
if the Enchanters that persecute me, mean not to entangle me in them, and to
stop my way, in revenge of the rigor I have used toward Altisidora. Well, let
them know that these Nets, were they of hardest Diamonds as they are of green
thread, or stronger then that the jealous God of the Black-Smiths entangled
Venus and Mars with, I would break it as if it were BullRushes or Yarn: and
striving to get forward, suddenly two most beautiful Sheepheardesses coming
from out the Thicket, appeard before him, two at least attired like
Sheepheardesses, only their loose Jackets and Coats were of fine cloth of Gold,
I say, their Kirtles were of Tissue; their hairs hung loose over their
shoulders, that for golden, might compare with the Sunnebeams: they were
crowned with two Garlands woven with green Bays, and red-flower gentle: their
ages seemed to be not under fifteen, nor past eighteen.

This was a sight that astonished Sancho, suspended Don-Quixote, made the Sun
stop in his Career to behold them, and held all the four in mavelous silence.
In fine, the first that spoke was one of the Sheepheardesses, that said to
Don-Quixote, Hold Gentlemen, and break not our Nets that are spread there, not
to your hurt, but for our recreation; and because I know you will ask us why
they are so put, and who we are I will tell you briefly.

In a Village some two leagues hence, where there are many Gentlemen of quality
and rich; amongst many acquaintances and Kindred it was agreed, that the Wives,
Sons and Daughters, Neighbors, Friends and Kinsfolk, should join to make
merry in this place, which is one of the pleasantest here round about, forming
as it were amongst us a new and pastoral Arcadia, clothing the Maids like
Sheepheardesses, and the Young men like Sheepheards: two Eglogues we have
studied, one of the famous Poet Garsilasso, and the other of that most
excellent Poet Camoes in his own Mother Portugal Tongue, which hitherto we
have not repeated. Yesterday was the first day we came hither; we have our
Tents, called Field-Tents, pitche amongst these Trees, close by the brink of a
goodly running Brook, which fructifies all these Medows: last night we did
spread our Nets on these Trees to catch the poor Birds that being allured with
our call should fall into them. If you please Sir, to be our Guest, you shall
be entertained liberally and courteously; for now into this place comes
neither Sorrow not Melancholy. With this she was silent and said no more.

To which Don-Quixote answered; Truly (fairest Lady) Act^on was not more
astonished when he saw Diana bathing her self in the Fountain, then I have been
in beholding your beauty: I commend the manner of your pastime, and thank you
for your kind offers, and if I may serve you, so I may be sure you will be
obeyed, you may command me: for my Profession is this, To show my self
thankful, and a Doer of good to all sorts of people, especially of the rank
that your person shows you to be; and if those Nets, as they take up but a
little piece of ground, should take up the whole World, I would seek out new
worlds to pass through, rather then break them: and that you may give credit to
this my exaggeration, behold, at least he that promises you this, is
Don-Quixote de la Mancha, if happily this name has come to your hearing.

Ah sweet friend (quoth the other Sheepheardesse) what good luck is this? See
thou this Gentleman before us? Well let me tell thee, he is the valiantest,
the most enamoured, and the most courteous in the world, if the History lie not
and deceive us, which is in print, of his famous exploits, which I have read: I
hold a wager this honest fellow here with him, is (what call ye him?) Sancho
Panca his Squire, that has no fellow for his mirth.

It Is true (quoth Sancho) I am that merry fellow, and that Squire you speak of,
and this Gentleman is my Master, the very self same Don-Quixote aforesaid and
Historified.

Ah (quoth the other) let us entreat him friend, to stay with us, for our
Friends and Kindred will be infinitely glad of it, and I have heard tell as
well as thou of his worth and wit; and above all, they say of him, that he is
the ^irmest and loyallist Amourist that is known, and that his Mistress is one
Dulcinea del Toboso, that bears the prize from all the Beauties in Spain.

With just reason she does (quoth Don-Quixote) if so be your matchless
beauties put it not in controvesie: Weary not your selves Ladies in deteining
me; for the precise ties of my Profession will let me rest no where.

By this there came a Brother of one of the Sheepheardesses, where the four
were as brave and gallant as they: they told him that he which was with them,
was the valorous Don-Quixote de la Mancha, and the other Sancho his Squire, of
whom he had notice, as having read his History.

The gallant Shepherd saluted him, desiring him to come with him to their
Tents. Don-Quixote was forced to consent, which he did. And now the Nets were
drawn and filled with diverse little Birds, who deceived with the color of
them, fell into the danger they shunned: There met in that place above thirty
persons, all gallantly clad like Sheepheards and Sheepheardesses; and instantly
they were made to know who Don-Quixote was, and his Squire; at which they were
not a little contented; for they had notice of him by his History: They came to
the Tents, and found the Tables covered, rich, abundant, and neat: they
honored Don-Quixote with the chief seat; all of them beheld him, and admired
to see him.

Finally, the cloth being taken away, Don-Quixote very gravely lifted up his
voice, and said, Amongst the greatest sins there are committed (though some say
Pride) yet I say Ingratitude is one, holding my self to the usual saying, That
Hell is full of the ungrateful. This sin, as much as possible I could, I
have sought to avoid ever since I had reason: and if I cannot repay one good
turn with another, in stead of that, my desires are not wanting, and when they
suffice not I publish them: for he that acknowledges and publishes good
turns received, would also recompense them with others, if he could; for, the
most part, they that receive, are inferior to those that give, and so God is
above all; because he is giver above all, and the gifts of men cannot be
equal to Gods for the infinite difference betwixt them: and this straightness
and bareness does in some measure supply a thankfulness: I therefore being
thankful for the kindness I have here received, and not able to correspond
in the same proportion, containing my self in the narrow limits of my ability,
offer what I may and what I have from my Harvest: and therefore I say, that I
will for two long days, maintain in the midst of the Kings highway toward
Saragosa, that these Ladies, counterfeit Sheepheardesses here present, are the
fairest and most courteous Damzels in the world, excepting only the peerlesse
Dulcinea del Toboso, sole Mistress of my thoughts, with peace be it spoken to
as many, both he is and she is, as hear me.

Which when Sancho heard, that had attentively listened, crying out, he said,
Is it possible there can be any body in the world, that dares say or swear
that this Master of mine is mad? Pray speak: You Gentlemen Shepherds, is
there any Country Vicar, be he never so wise, or never so good a Scholar,
that can say what my Master has said? or is there any Knight Errant, let him
be never so much famed for his valor, that can offer what my Master has here
offered?

Don-Quixote turned to Sancho and all enflamed and choleric, said, Is it
possible, O Sancho, that there is any body in the world that will say, Thou are
not a Coxcomb, lined with the same, and hemmed with I know not what malice or
knavery? Who bids thee meddle with my matters, in sifting out, whether I be
wise or a jolt-head? Peace and not a word, but saddle Rozinante, if he be
unsaddled, and let us put my offer in execution: for with the justice that I
have on my side, thou may presume, as many as I meet withal are vanquished:
and so with great fury, and in a terrible huffe he rose from his Chair,
leaving all the bystanders in admiration, and in doubt whether they should
hold him mad, or wise. Finally, they persuaded him, he should not thrust
himself into such an engagement: for they acknowledged his thankful good
will, and that there needed no new demonstrations to know his valourous mind:
for his exploits mentioned in his History were sufficient.

For all that, Don-Quixote proceeded in his purpose, and mounted on Rozinante,
buckling his shield to him, and taking his Lance, he got to the Highway, not
far from the green Meddow. Sancho followed him upon Dapple, with all the
Pastoral flock, desirous to see what might be the issue of that arrogant, and
never seen offer.

Don-Quixote being (as I have said) upon the way, he wounded the air with
these words: Oh you Passengers, and wayfaring Knights, Squires on foot, or on
horseback, that either now pass this way, or are to pass in these two ensuing
days, know, that Don-Quixote de la Mancha, Knight Errant, is here ready to
maintain, that setting the beauty of the Mistress of my soul aside, Dulcinea
del Toboso, the Nymphs that inhabit these Meddowes and Groves, are the fairest
that may be: and he that is of a contrary opinion, let him come; for here I
expect him.

Twice he repeated these selfsame words, and twice they were not heard by
any Adventurer: but his good luck that directed his affairs better and
better, so ordained, that a pretty while after, they might see a troop of
horsemen upon the way, and many of them with Lances in their hands, all of
them going in a heap together, and apace: they that were with Don-Quixote as
soon as ever they saw them, turned their backs, and got far enough out of
the way: for they knew if they stayed, they might be in some danger, only
Don-Quixote with an undaunted heart stood still; and Sancho Panca warded
himself with Rozinante's buttocks.

The troop of the Lances came on, and one that was foremost cried out aloud to
Don-Quixote, saying, out of the way, madman: for these Bulls will beat thee to
pieces.

Go to, ye skoundrels, quoth Don-Quixote, your Bulls shall not prevail with
me, though they were the fiercest that Xarama has feeding on his Banks:
Confess, yo^ Elves, all in one, that what I have proclaimed here, is a truth,
or else come and combat with me.

The Heards-man had no leisure to answer, nor Don-Quixote to get out of the
way, though he would: and so the troop of wild Bulls, together with the tame
Kine, and the multitude of Heards-men, and others, that carried them to be kept
up in a town, where they were the next day to be baited, trampled over
Don-Quixote, Sancho, Rozinante and Dapple, tumbling them all down upon the
ground.

Sancho was bruised, Don-Quixote astonished, Dapple banged, and Rozinante not
very Catholic: but in fine all of them gate up, and Don-Quixote in all haste,
sometimes stumbling, other whiles falling, began to run after the whole
Heard, crying aloud, Hold, Stay, ye Elvish crew; for one only Knight expects
you, who is not of that mind or opinion of those that say, to a flying enemy a
Silver bridge. But the hasty runners stayed never a whit the more for this; nor
made any reckoning of his threats more then of last years clouds.

Don-Quixote being weary stayed him. So, fuller of anger then revenge, he sat
in the way, expecting when Sancho, Rozinante, and Dapple should arrive. At
length they came, and Master and man gat up; and without leave taking of the
fained or counterfeit Arcadia, with more shame then delight, they went onward
their way.

CHAP. LIX.
Of an extraordinary accident that befell Don-Quixote, which may be held for
an Adventure.
THe dust and weariness that Don-Quixote and Sancho received from the
unmannerly Bulls, was recompensed with a clear and running Fountain, which they
found in a cool Grove, on whose Margen leaving Rozinante and Dapple lose
without a Briddle or Halter, the two way-beaten, Master and Man sat down.
Sancho repaired to the Cup-boord of his Wallets, and took out of them that
which he called his sauce, and rensed his mouth: Don-Quixote washed his face,
with which refreshing his faint spirits, recovered breath.

Don-Quixote ate nothing for pure grief, neither durst Sancho touch any meat
before him for pure mannerlinesse, and expected his Master should first be his
Taster: but seeing him carried on with his imaginations, not remembering to put
a bit in his mouth, he never asked him: and overrunning all kind of manners,
he began to barrel up all the Bread and Cheese that was before him in his
stomach.

Eat, friend Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, hold life together; for thou have more
need then I, and leave me to dye by the hands of my sorrows, and the force of
my misfortunes. I was borne, Sancho to live dying, and thou, to dye eating:
and that thou may see I tell thee true; consider me printed in Histories,
famous in Arms, well nurtured in mine. Actions, respected by Princes, courted
by Damzells: now at the end of all, when I hoped for Bays, Triumphs and
Crowns laid up and merited by my famous exploits: this morning I have seen my
self trampled on and kicked, and bruised with the feet of base un-cleane
Beasts: the consideration of this duls my teeth, makes slow my grinders, and
benummes my hands, and altogether be^eaves me of my appetite; so that I think
I shall dye with hunger, the cruellest of all deaths.

So that, quoth Sancho (not leaving his fast chewing) you will not allow of
that Proverb that says, Let Martha dye, so she dye not empty: at least, I
will not because of my death. I mean rather to do as the Shoo-maker does,
that streacheth the Leather with his teeth, till he makes it reach as he
list; I Will draw out my life by eating, till it come to the end that Heaven has
allotted it: and know Sir, there is no greater madness in the world, then to
despair as you do: and believe me, and after you have eaten, rest your self
a little upon the Downe-beds of this green Grass, and you shall see, that when
you wake, you shall find your self somewhat lightened.

Don-Quixote took his council, taking his reasons to be rather
Philosophical, then senseless, and said, If thou, O Sancho, would do,
what I shall now tell thee for me, my lightsomnesse would be certain, and my
sorrows not so great; which is that whilst I (obeying thy counsel) sleep,
thou go out of the way a little, and with Rozinantes reins, turning thy flesh
to the air, give thy self three or four hundred lashes upon account of the
three thousand, and so many that thou art to give for the dis-enchanting
Dulcinea, which is no small pity, that that poor Lady should be enchanted by
thy carelessness and negligence.

There is much to be said in this business (quoth Sancho) let us both sleep
now, and God will provide afterward: Know, Sir, that this whipping in cold
blood is a cruel thing, especially, if it light upon a weak body and worse
fed; let my Lady Dulcinea have patience, for when she least thinks of it,
she shall see me a very sieve with lashes, and till death all is life, I
mean, I live with a desire to fulfill my promise.

Don-Quixote giving him thanks, eat something, and Sancho a great deal,
leaving the two continual friends and companions, Rozinante and Dapple to
their Liberum Arbitrium, disorderly feeding upon the Pasture that was
plentiful in that Meddow.

They awaked somewhat late, and up they got again, and went on their way,
making haste to come to an Inn, which seemed to be about a league off: I say
an Inn, for Don-Quixote called it so; contrary to his ordinary custom of
calling all Innes Castles. Well, to it they come, they asked mine Host if there
were any Lodging? He answered, Yes, with all the commodiousnesse and provision
that they might have in the Town of Saragosa.

They alighted, and Sancho retired with his Sumptry into a Chamber, of which
the Host gave him the Key: the Beasts he carried to the Stable, and gave them
their stint, and so went to see what Don-Quixote (who sat by upon a Bench)
would command him, giving God particular thanks, that that Inn had not
appeared to him, a Castle,

Supper time came on: So to their resting place they got.

Sancho asked mine Host what he had for supper? To which quoth he, Your mouth
shall have measure, ask what you will? [ a good character of a lying,
beggarly, vainglorious Spanish-Host in general.] For from the Byrds of the
air, to the Poultry of the earth, and the fishes of the sea, that Inn was
provided.

Not so much quoth Sancho, for so we may have a couple of roasted Chickens,
'twill be enough: For my Master is weak somack'd, and eats little, and I am
no very greedy-gut.

Mine Host answered him, he had no Chickens, for the Kytes had devoured them,
Why then let us have a tender Pullet roasted, quoth he, A Pullet! My Father as
soon; trust me, trust me; I sent above fifty yesterday to the City to sell:
saving Pullets, ask what you will.

Why then (quoth Sancho) you want no Veale, or Kidde? We have none in the
House now, said mine Host, for it is all spent; but by next week we shall
have to spare.

The matter is mended (quoth Sancho) I hold a wager all these wants are
supplied with Eggs and Bacon.

Assuredly (quoth mine Host) here is fine doings with my guest; I have told him
we have neither Pullet nor Hens, and yet he would have Eggs. Run, if you will,
to other dainties, and leave these gluttonies.

Resolve us (Body of me, quoth Sancho) and tell me what we shall have, and
leave you your running mine Host. The Host said, The very truth is, I have two
Neates-feete, like Calves-feet; or two Calves-feet, like Neates-feet, they are
sod with their Pease, Bacon and Onyons, and just at this instant cry Come eat
me, Come eat me.

For mine I mark them hence forward, quoth Sancho, and let no man touch them;
for I Will pay more for them then any body else, and there could have been no
better meat for me in the world.

No man shall touch them (said mine Host:) for other Guests, I have out of pure
Gentilitie, bring their Cook, Cater, and Butler with them. If it go by Gentle
(quoth Sancho) none more gentle then my Master: but his Calling permits no
Landers or Butteries: we clap us down in the midest of a field, and fill our
selves with Acorns and Medlars.

This discourse passed between Sancho and the Host, without Sancho's answering
him, who asked what Calling his Master was of. Supper was ready, Don-Quixote
went to his Chamber; mine Host brought the pot of meat just as it was, and sat
him fair and well down to supper: it seemed that in another Chamber next
Don-Quixotes, divided only by a thin Lath wall, he might hear one say, By
your life Signior Don Ieronimo, whilst supper is to come in let us read
another Chapter in the second part of Don-Quixote.

Don-Quixote scarce heard himself named, when up he stood, and watchfully gave
care to their discourse concerning him; and he heard that the aforesaid Don
Ieronimo answered, Signior Don John, why should we read these fopperies? he
that has read the first part of Don-Quixote, it is impossible he should take
any pleasure in reading the second.

For all that (quoth Don John) 'twere good reading it: for there is no book so
ill, that has not some good thing in it.

That which most displeases me in this is, thet he makes Don-Quixote
disenamoured of Dulcinea del Toboso.

Which when Don-Quixote heard, full of wrath and despite he lifted up his
voice saying, Whosoever says Don Quixote de la Mancha has forgotten, or can
forget Dulcinea del Toboso, I will make him know with equal Arms, that he is
far from the truth: for the peerlesse Dulcinea del Toboso cannot be
forgotten; neither can forgetfullnesse be contained in Don-Quixote: his
Scutchion is Loyalty; his Profession sweetly to keep it, without doing it any
violence.

Who is that answers us, said they in the next room? Who should it be (quoth
Sancho) but Don-Quixote himself, that will make good all he has said, or as
much as he shall say; for a good Play Master cares not for his pawnes.

Scarce had Sancho said this, when the two Gentlemen came in at the Chamber
door; for they seemed no less to them: and one of them casting his Arms about
Don-Quixotes neck, said, neither can your presence belie your name, or your
name credit your presence. Doubtless you Sir, are the right Don-Quixote de la
Mancha, North-starre, and Morning-starre of Knight Errantry, in spite of him
that has usurped your name, and annihilated your exploits, as the Author of
this Book, I here deliver has done: and giving him the Book that his companion
had, Don-Quixote took it, and without answering a word, began, to turn the
leaves, and a while after returned it, saying, In this little that I have seen,
I have found three things in this Author worthy of reprehension, [ This the
Author of this Book brings in by way of invective against an Aragonian
Scholar, that wrote a second part of Don Quixote before this was published.]

The first is, some words I have read in this Prologue.

The second, that his language is Arragonian: for sometimes he writes without
Articles. And the third, which does most confirm his ignorance, is, That he
errs and strayes from the truth in the chiefest of the History: for here he
says that Sancho Panca my Squires Wifes name was Mary Gutierrez, which is not
so; but she is called Teresa Panca: and therefore he that errs in so main a
matter, it may well be feared he will err in all the rest of the History.

To this Sancho said, prettily done indeed of the Historian; he knows very
well sure what belongs to our Affairs, since he calls my Wife Teresa Panca,
Mary Gutierrez. Pray take the Book again Sir, and see whether I be there, and
whether he have changed my name. By your speech friend (quoth Don Ieronimo) you
should be Sancho Panca Signior Don-Quixotes Squire. I am (quoth Sancho) and I
am proud of it.

Well, in faith (said the Gentleman) this modern Author does not treat of you
so neatly, as your person makes show for: he paints you out for a Glutton, and
Idiot, and nothing witty, and far different from the Sancho that is described
in the first part of your Masters History.

God forgive him (said Sancho;) he should have left me in my corner, and not
remembered me; for every man in his ability, and it is good sleeping in a whole
skin.

The two Gentlemen entreated Don-Quixote to go to their chamber, and Sup with
them; for they knew well that in that Inn he found not things fitting to his
person.

Don-Quixote, who was ever courteous, condescended to their requests, and
supped with them: Sancho remained with his flesh-pot sole Lord and Governor.
Sancho sat at the upper end of the Table, and with him the Innkeeper, that
was no less affectioned to his Neats-feet, then Sancho.

In the midst of supper Don John asked Don Quixote what news he had of his
Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, whether she were married, or brought a Bed, or great
with child; or being entire, whether (respecting her honesty and good decorum)
she were mindful of Signior Don Quixotes amorous desires? To which he
answered; Dulcinea is as entire, and my desires as firm as ever; our
correspondency in the ancient barrennsse; her beauty transformed into the
complexion of a base Milk-wench: and straight he recounted unto them every
tittle of her Enchantment, and what had befaln him in Montesinos Cave, with the
order that the sage Merlin had given for her dis-enchanting, which was by
Sancho's stripes.

Great was the delight the two Gentlemen received to hear Don Quixote tell the
strange passages of his History, and so they wondered at his fopperies, as also
his elegant manner of delivering them; here they held him to be wise, there he
slipped from them by the fool: so they know not what medium to give him,
betwixtn wisdom and folly.

Sancho ended his Supper, and leaving the Innkeeper, passed to the Chamber
where his Master was; and entering, said, Hang me Sirs, if the Author of this
Book that your Worships have, would that we should eat a good meal together;
pray God, as he calls me Glutton, he say not that I am a Drunkard too.

Yes marry does he (said Don Ieronimo;) but I know not how directly, though I
know his reasons do not hang together, and are very erroneous, as I see by
Sancho's Phisiognomy here present. Believe me (quoth Sancho) Sancho and
Don-Quixote are differing in this History, from what they are in that Cid
Hamete Benengeli composed; for we are, my Master valiant, discreet and
amorous: I simple and conceited; but neither Glutton nor Drunkard.

I believe it (said Don John) and were it possible, it should be commanded,
that none should dare to treat of the Grand Don Quixotes Affairs, but Cid
Hamete, his first Author: as Alexander commanded that none but Apelles should
dare to draw him.

Let whose will draw me (quoth Don-Quixote:) but let him not abuse me; for of^
times patience falls when injuries over-load. None (quoth Don John) can be done
Signior Don-Quixote, that he will not be revenged of, if he ward it not with
the Shield of his patience, which in my opinion is strong and great.

In these and other discourses they passed a great part of the night, and
though Don John would that Don-Quixote, should have read more in the Book, to
see what it did descant on, yet he could not prevail with him, saying, He
made account he had read it, and concluded it to be but an idle Pamphlet, and
that he would not (if it should come to the Authors knowledge that he had
meddled with it) he should make himself merry to think he had read it; for our
thoughts must not be busied in filthy and obscene things, much less our eyes.

They asked him whither he purposed his voyage? He answered to Saragosa, to
be at the Justs in Harness, that use to be there yearly.

Don John told him, that there was one thing in that new History, which was,
That he should be at a Running at the Ring in that City, as short of
Invention, as poor in Mottos, but most poor in Liveries, and rich in nothing
but Simplicities.

For this matter only (quoth Don-Quixote) I will not set foot in Saragosa: and
therefore the world shall see what a liar this modern Historiographer is, and
people shall perceive I am not the Don-Quixote he speaks of.

You shall do very well (quoth Don Iereimno) for there be other Justs in
Barselona, where Signior Don-Quixote may show his valor. So I mean to do
(quoth Don Quixote) and therefore let me take leave of you (for it is time) to
go to bed, and so hold me in the rank of your greatest friends and Servitors.
And me too (quoth Sancho) for it may be I shall be good for somewhat.

With this they took leave, and Don Quixote and Sancho retired to their
Chamber, leaving Don John and Don Ieronimo in admiration, to see what a medly
he had made with his discretion and madness; and they verily believed that
these were the right Don-Quixote and Sancho, and not they whom the Aragonian
Author described.

Don-Quixote ro^e early, and knocking upon the thin wall of the other Chamber,
he took leave of those Guests. Sancho paid the Host royally; but advised him,
he should either less praise the Provision of his Inn, or have it better
provided.

CHAP. LX.
What happened to Don-Quixote going to Barselona.
THe morning was cool, and the day promised no less, when Don-Quixote left the
Inn, informing himself first, which was the ready way to Barselona, without
coming to Saragosa; such was the desire he had to prove the new Historian a
liar, who (they said) dispraised him so much. It fell out so, that in six days
there fell out nothing worth writing to him; at the end of which he was
be-nighted, going out of his way, in a thicket of Oaks or Cork-Trees; for in
this Cid Hamete is not so punctual, as in other matters he uses to be.

The Masters and man alighted from their Beasts, and setting themselves at the
Trees roots, Sancho that had had his beaver that day entered roundly the gates
of sleep: but Don-Quixote, whom imaginations kept awake much more then hunger,
could not join his eyes, but rather was busying his thoughts in a thousand
several places: Sometimes he thought he found himself in Montesinos Cave:
and that he saw Dulcinea converted into a country Wench, leap upon her
Asse-Colt: now the sage Merlin's words rang in his ears, repeating unto him
the conditions that were to be observed for her dis-enchanting: he was stark
mad to see Sancho's Laziness, and want of Charity; for, as he thought, he
had only given himself five stripes, a poor and unequal number to those
behind; and he was so grieved and enraged with this, that he framed this
discourse to himself:

If Alexander the Great did cut the Gordian knot, saying, Cutting and undoing
is all one, and yet for all that, was Lord of all Asia; no other wise may it
happen in the dis-enchanting: of Dulcinea if I should whip Sancho, volens
nolens; for if the condition of this remedy be, that Sancho receive three
thousand and so many jerks, what care I whether he give them, or that another
do, since the substance is in him that gives them, come they by what means
they will?

With this imagination he came to Sancho, having first taken Rozinante's
Reins, and so fitted them, that he might lash him with them, he began to
untrusse his points: The opinion is, tha^ he had but one before, which held up
his Gally-Gascoynes. But he was no sooner approached, when Sancho awaked, and
came to himself, and said, Who is that? Who is it touches and untrusseth me?
It Is I (quoth Don-Quixote) that come to supply thy defects, and to remedy my
troubles; I come to whip thee Sancho, and to discharge the Debt in part thou
stand obliged in, Dulcinea perishes; thou live carelessly; I dye
desiring: and therefore untrusse thy self willingly; for I have a mind, in
these Deserts, to give thee at least two thousand lashes.

Not so (quoth Sancho) pray be quiet; and if not, I protest deaf men shall hear
us; the stripes in which I engaged my self must be voluntary, and not
enforced, and at this time I have no mind to whip my self; it is enough that I
give you my word to beat my self; and fly-flap me when I have a disposition to
it.

There Is no leaving of it to thy coutesie, Sancho, (quoth Don-Quixote) for thou
art hard hearted, and though a Clown, yet tender of flesh; and so he
contended and strove to unlace him: which when Sancho Panca saw, he stood to
it, and setting upon his Master, closed with him, and tripping up his heels,
cast him upon his back on the ground, he put his right knee upon his breast,
and with his hands held his, so that he neither let him stir nor breathe.

Don-Quixote cried out, How now, Traitor, rebellest thou against thy natural
Lord and Master? Presumest thou against him that feeds thee? I neither make
King, nor depose King (quoth Sancho) I only help my self that am mine own
Lord: promise me you, Sir, that you will be quiet, and not meddle with
whipping of me now, and I Will set you loose and free; and If not, here thou
die, Traitor, enemy to Donna Sancha. Don-Quixote promised him, and swore by
the life of his thoughts, he would not touch so much as a hair of his head,
and that he would leave his whipping himself, to his own free will and
choice when he would.

Sancho gate up, and went a pretty way from him, and going to lean to another
tree, he perceived something touch him upon the head, and lifting up his
hands, he lighted on two feet of a man, with Hose and Shoes on; he quaked
for fear, and went to another tree, and the like befell him; so he cried out,
calling to Don-Quixote to help him; Don-Quixote did so, and asking him what had
befaln him? and why he was afraid? Sancho answered, That all those trees were
full of men's feet and legs. Don-Quixote felt them, and fell strait into the
account of what they might be, and said to Sancho, Thou need not fear; for
these fect and legs thou feel and feast not, doubtless are of some
free-booters and robbers in troops, that are hanged in these trees; for ^here
the Justice hangs them by twenty and thirty at a clap, by which I understand
that I am near Barcelona: and true it was as he supposed. They lifted up
their eyes, and to see to, the free-booters bodies hung as if they had been
clusters upon those trees: and by this it waxed day; and if the dead men feared
them, no less were they in tribulation with the sight of at least forty live
Shanditi, who hemmed them in upon a sudden, bidding them in the Catalan tongue,
they should be quiet, and stand till their captain came.

Don-Quixote was on foot, his horse unbridled, his Lance set up against a
tree, finally, void of all defense, and therefore he deemed it best to cross
his hands, and hold down his head, reserving himself for a better occasion and
conjuncture.

The Thieves came to flea Dapple, and began to leave him nothing he had,
either in his Wallets or Cloke-bage; and it fell out well for Sancho, for the
Dukes Crowns were in a hollow girdle girt to him, and those likewise that he
brought from home with him, and for all that, those good fellows would have
weeded and searched him to the very entrails, if their Captain had not come
in the Interim, who seemed to be about thirty years of age, strongly made,
and somewhat of a tall stature; his look was solemn, and his complexion
swarthy: he was mounted upon a powerful Horse, with his Steel coat on, and
four Petronels (called in that Country Pedrenales) which he wore two at each
side: and now his squires (for so they call those that are in that vocation)
came to make spoil of Sancho: he commanded them they should not, and he was
strait obeyed, and so the Girdle escaped he wondered to see a Lance reared up
on a tree, a Shield on the ground, and Don-Quixote armed and pensative, with
the saddest Melancholiest visage, that sadness it self could frame. He came
to him, saying, Be not sad, honest man; for you have not fallen into the hands
of any cruel Osiris, but into Roque Guinarts, that have more compassion then
cruelty in them.

My sadness is not, quoth, Don-Quixote, to have fallen into thy power, oh
valorous Roque (whose Fame is boundless) but that my carelessness was such,
that they soldiers have caught me without bridle, I being obliged (according
to the order of Knight Errantry, which I profess, to keep watch and ward, and
at all houses, to be my own Centinell; for let me tell thee, Grand; Roque,
if they had taken me on Horseback with my Lance and Shield, they should not
easily have made me yield; for I am Don-Quixote de la Mancha, he, of whose
exploits all the world is full. Straight Roque Guinarte perceived that
Don-Quixote's infirmity proceeded rather of Madness then Valor, and though
he had sometimes heard tell of him, yet he never could believe his deeds to
be true, neither could he be persuaded that such a humor should reign in
any man's heart, and he was wonderfully glad to have met with him, to see by
experience what he had heard say of him; and therefore he said, Valorous
Knight, vex not your self, neither take this Fortune of yours to be sinister;
for it may be, that in these stumbling blocks your crooked Lot may be
straightned; for heaven does usually raise up those that fall, and enrich the
poor by strange and unseen ways (by men not imagined.)

Don-Quixote was about to have rendered him thanks, when as they perceived a
noise behind them, as if there had been some troop of Horse, but there was but
one only, upon which there came with full speed a Youth, to see to, about some
twenty years of age, clad in green Damask; his Hose and loose Jerkin were laid
on with gold lace, with a Hat turned up from his band, with close fit Boots,
Sword and Dagger gilt, and a little Birding-Peece in his hand, and two Pistols
at his sides. Roque turned his head to the noise and saw this beautiful shape,
who coming near him, said, In quest of thee I came, oh valorous Roque, to
find in thee, if not redress, at least some lightsomnesse in this my
misfortune: And to hold thee no longer in suspense, because I know thou know
me not, I will tell thee who I am, that is, Clandia seronima daughter to Simon
Forte thy singular friend, and only enemy to Clanquell Torellas, who is also
thine, as being one of thy contrary Faction; and thou know that this
Torellas has a Son called Don Vincente Torellas, or at least was so called
not two hours since: He then, to shorten my unfortunate Tale, I will tell thee
in few words what has befallen me: He saw me, courted me, I gave ear to him,
and my Father unwitting of it, I affectionated my self to him^ for there is no
woman, be she never so retired or looked to, but she has time enough to put
in execution and effect her hasty longing.

Finally, he promised me marriage, and I gave him my word, to be his, so no
more passed really: Yesterday I came to know, that, forgetful of his
obligation, he contracted to another, and that this morning he went to be
married; a news that troubled my brain, and made an end of my patience: and by
reason my Father was not at home I had opportunity to put my self in this
apparel thou see, and making speed with this horse, I overtook Don Vincente
about a league from hence, and without making any complaint, or hearing his
discharge, I discharged this Piece, and to boot, these Pistols, and I believe I
sent two bullets into his body, making way, through which my honor, enwrapped
in his blood, might sally out: therefore I left him to his servants, who not
durst, nor could put themselves in his defense. I came to seek thee, that thou
might help me to pass me into France, where I have kindred, with whom I may
live; and withal, to desire thee to defend my Father, that the number of Don
Vincentes Friends take no cruel revenge upon him.

Roque wondering at the Gallantry, Bravery, handsomnesse and Success of the
fai^ Claudia, said, Come Gentlewoman, and let us go see if your enemy be
dead, and afterward what shall be most fitting to be done.

Don Quixote, that hearkened attentively to all that Claudia said; (and Roque
Guinart answered) said, No man need take pains to defend this Lady; let it be
my charge: Give me my Horse and my Arms, and expect me here, and I will go
seek this Knight, and alive or dead, will make him accomplish his promise to so
great a Beauty.

No man doubt it (quoth Sancho) for my Master has a very good hand to be a
marriage ^ maker: and not long since, he forced another to marry, that denied
his promise to a Maid; and had it not been that Enchanters persecuted him, and
changed the true shape into the shape of a Lackey, by this time the said Maid
had been none.

Roque, that attended more to Claudia's Success then the reasons of Master or
Man, understood them not; and so commanding his Squires, they should restore to
Sancho all they had taken from Dapple, and commanding them likewise to retire
where he lodged the night before, he went straight with all speed with
Claudia, to find the wounded or dead Don Vincente.

To the place they came, where Claudia met him, where they found nothing but
late shed blood: But looking round about them, they discovered some People upon
the side of a Hill; and they thought, as true it was, that that was Don
Vincente, whom his servants carried alive, or dead; to cure, or give him
burial: They hasted to overtake them, which they easily might do, the others
going but softly. They found Don Vincente in his servants Arms, whom he
entreated with a weak and weary Voice to let him die there: For the grief of
his Wounds would not sus^er him to go any further.

Claudia and Roque ^lung themselves from their Horse, to him they came, the
servants feared Roques presence; and Claudia was troubled to see Don Vincente;
and so betwixt mild and merciless, she came to him, and laying hold of his
hands, she said; If thou had given me these according to our agreement, thou
had never come to this extremity: The wounded Gentleman opned his half-shut
eyes, and knowing Claudia said, I well perceive, fair and deceived Mistress,
that thou art she that have slain me: a punishment not deserved, nor due to my
desires, in which, nor in any action of mine, I never knew how to offend thee.

Then belike, it is false, that thou went this morning to be married to
Leonora the rich Baluasho's daughter.

No verily said Don Vincente, my ill fortune brought thee that news, that being
jealous thou should bereave me of my life; which since I leave it in thy
hands, and embrace thee, I think my self most happy; and to assure thee that
this is true, take my hand, and if thou will receive me for thy Husband, for I
have no other satisfaction to give thee for the wrong thou think I have done
thee.

Claudia wrung his hand, and her self was wrung to the very heart; so that upon
Don Vincent's blood and breast, she fell into a swound, and he into a mortal
Paroxisme. Roque was in a maze and knew not what to do. The servants went to
fetch water to sting in their faces, and brought it, with which they bathed
them.

Claudia revived again, but Don Vincente never from his Paroxisme, with which
he ended his life.

Which when Claudia saw, out of doubt, that her Husband was dead, she burst
the Air with her sighs, and wounded Heaven with her complaints: She tore her
Hair, and gave it to the Wind: With her own hands she dis-figured her face,
with all the shows of dolor and feeling that might be imagined from a
agrieved Heart.

Oh cruel and inconsiderate Woman (said she) how easily (...) thou moved to
put so cruel a Design in Execution? Oh raving force of Jealo^^ to what
desperate ends do thou bring those that harbor thee in their (...)? Oh my
Spouse! whose unhappy fortune; for being my Pledge, has brought from Bed to
Burial.

Such and so bad were the complaints of Claudia, that even from Roques eyes
drew tears, not used to shed them upon any occasion: the servants howled, and
Claudia every stitch-while swouned, and the whole circuit looked like a field of
sorrow, and a place of misfortune.

Finally, Roque Guinart gave order to Don Vincentes Servants, to carry his body
to his Fathers Town, that was near there to give him burial. Claudia told
Roque she would go to a Monastery where an Aunt of hers was Abbess, where
she meant to end her days, accompanied with a better and an eternal Spouse.

Roque commended her good intention, and offered to accompany her whither she
would, and to defend her Father from her Kindred, and from all the world that
would hurt him.

Claudia would by no means accept of his company, and thanking him the best
she could for his offer, she took leave of him weeping. Don Vin^entes.
Servants bore away his body, and Roque returned to his people: and this was the
end of Claudia Ieronima's love: but no marvel if jealousy contrived the plot
of her lamentable Story.

Roque Guinarte found his Squires where he had willed them to be; and
Don-Quixote amongst them upon Rozinante, making a large discourse to them, in
which he persuaded them to leave that kind of life, dangerous as well for
their souls as bodies: but the most of them being Gascoignes, a wild and
unruly people, Don-Quixotes discourse prevailed nothing with them.

When Roque was come, he asked Sancho, if they had restored his implements to
him, and the Prize which his Soldiers had taken from Dapple. Sancho answered,
Yes, only that he wanted three Night-caps, that were worth three Cities.
What say you fellow? Quoth one of them: I have them, and they were not worth
eighteen pence.

It Is true (said Don-Quixote) but my Squire esteems them in what he has
said, for the parties sake that gave them me,

Roque Guinart straight commanded they should be restored, and commanding his
people to stand round, he willed them to set before them, all the apparel,
Jewels, and money, and all that since their last sharing they had robbed: and
casting up the acdount briefly, returning that that was not to be reparted;
reducing it into money, he divided it amongst all his company, so legally, and
wisely, that he neither added nor diminished, from an equal distributive
justice

This done, and all contented, satisfied, and paid, Roque said to Don-Quixote,
If I should not be thus punctual with these fellows, there were no living
with them: To which said Sancho, By what I have here seen, Justice is so good,
that it is fit and necessary, even amongst thieves themselves.

One of the Squires heard him, and lifted up the snap-haunce of his Piece, with
which he had opened his Mazer, if Roque Guinart had not cried out to bid him
hold.

Sancho was amazed, and purposed, not to unsow his lips, as long as he was in
that company.

Now there came one or more of the Squires, that were put in Centinell, upon
the ways, to see who passed by, and to give notice to their Chief, what
passed; who said, Sir, not far hence, by the way that goes to Barcolona, there
comes a great Troop of people. To which quoth Roque, Have thou marked whether
they be of those that seek us, or those we seek? Of the latter, said the
Squire.

Well, get you out all quoth Roque, and bring them me hither straight, and let
not a man escaped. They did so, and Don-Quixote and Roque, and Sancho stayed and
expected to see what the Squires brought: and in the Interim, Roque, said to
Don-Quixote, Our life will seem to be a strange kind of one to Signior
Don-Quixotes strange Adventures, strange successes, and dangerous all; and I
should not wonder that it appear so. (...) confess truly to you, there is no
kind of life more unquiet nor morefull of (...) then ours. I have flan into it
by I know not what desires of revenge, that have power to trouble the most
quiet hearts.

I am naturally compassionate, and well-minded: but as I have said, the desire
of revenging a wrong done me, does so das^ this good inclination in me, that
I persevere in this estate, maugre my best judgment: and as one horror brings
on another, and one sin: so my revenges have been so linked together, that I
not only undergo mine own, but also other men's: but God is pleased, that
though I see my self in the midst of this Labyrinth of Confusions, I despair
not to come to a safe harbor.

Don-Quixote admired to hear from Roque such good and sound reasons: for he
thought, that amongst those of this profession of robbing, killing, and
High-way-laying, there could be none so well spoken, and answered him:

Signior Roque, the beginning of health consists, in knowing the infirmity and
that the sick man be willing to take the Medicines that the Physician
ordaines. You are sick: you know your grief, and heaven, or (to say truer) God
who is our Physician, will apply Medicines that may cure you, which do heal by
degrees, but not suddenly, and by miracle: Besides, sinners that have
knowledge, are nearer amendment then those that are without it: and since you,
by your discourse, have showed your discretion, there is no more to be done,
but be of good courage, and despair not of the recovering, your sick
conscience; and if you will save a labor, and facilitate the way of your
salvation; come with me and I will teach you to be a Knight Errant, and how
you shall undergo so many labors and mis-adventures, that taking them by way
of penance, you shall climb Heaven in an instant.

Roque laughed at Don-Quixotes counsel, to whom (changing their discourse) he
recounted the Tragical success of Claudia Ieronimo; at which Sancho wept
exceedingly; for the Beauty, Spirit and Buck-somenesse of the Wench, misliked
him not.

By this the Squires returned with their Prize, bringing with them, two
Gentlemen on horseback, and two Pilgrims on foot, and a Coach full of Women,
and some half a dozen of Servants, that, on horseback and on foot, waited on
them, with two Mulemen that belonged to the two Gentlemen. The Squires brought
them in triumph, the Conquerors and Conquered being all silent, and expecting
what the Grand Roque should determine: who asked the Gentlemen, who they were?
whither they would? and what money they carried? One of them answered him, Sir,
We two are Captains of Spanish Foot, and have companies in Naples, and are
going to imbarke our selves in four Galleys, that we hear are bound for
Silicia: we carry with us two or three hundred Crowns, which we think is
sufficient, as being the largest treasure incident to the ordinary penury of
Soldiers.

Roque asked the Pilgrims the same questions; who answered him likewise, That
they were to be imbarqued toward Rome; and that they carried a matter of
thirty shillings between them both. The same he likewise desired to know of
those that went in the Coach, and one of them on Horseback answered;

My Lady Donna Guiomar de Quinnones, Wife to a Judge of Naples, with a little
Gyrle and her Maids, are they that go in the Coach; and some six servants of
us wait on her: and we carry six hundred Pistolets in gold. So that (said
Roque Guinarte) we have here in all nine hundredth Crowns, and sixty Ryals; my
Soldiers are about a sixty; let us see what comes to each man's share; for I
am a bad Arithmetician.

When the Thieves heard this, they cried alowd, Long live Roque Guinarte, in
spite of the Cullions that seek to deltory him.

The Captains were afflicted, the Lady was sorrowful, and the Pilgrims never a
whit glad, to see their goods thus confiscated. Roque a while held them in this
suspense: but he would no longer detein them in this sadness, which he might
see a gun-shoot off in their faces: and turning to the Captains, said,
Captains, you shall do me the kindness as to lend me threescore Ducats; and
you Madam, fourscore, to content my Squadron that follows me; for herein
consists my Revenue: and so you may pass on freely, only with a safe conduct
that I shall give you; that if you meet with any other Squadrons of mine, which
are divided upon these Downs, they do you no hurt: for my intent is not to
wrong Soldiers, or any woman, especially Noble.

The Captains infinitely extolled Roques courteous liberality, for leaving them
their money. The Lady would have cast her self out of the Coach to kiss the
Grand Roques feet and hands: but he would by no means yield to it; rather
asked pardon that he had presumed so far, which was only to comply with the
obligation of his ill employment.

The Lady commanded a Servant of hers, to give him straight fourscore Ducats,
which were allotted him: the Captains too disbursed their sixty; and the
Pilgrims tendered their Poverty: but Roque bade them be still: and turning to
his people, said, Out of these Crowns, there are to each man two due; and there
remain twenty: let the poor Pilgrims have ten of them, and the other ten, this
honest Squire, that he may speak well of this Adventure: and so bringing him
necessaries to write, of which he ever went provided, he gave them a safe
conduct to the heads of his Squadrons; and taking leave of them, let them pass
free: and wondering at the nobleness of his brave and strange condition,
holding him rather for a great Alexander, then an open Robber: One of the
Thieves said in his Catalan language, This Captain of ours were fitter to be a
Friar then a Robber: and if he mean henceforward to be so liberal, let it
be with his own goods, and not with ours.

This the Wretch spoke not so softly, but Roque might over hear him; who
catching his Sword in hand, almost clove his pate in two, saying, This is the
punishment I use to saucy Knaves: All the rest were amazed, and durst not reply
a word; such was the awe in which they stood of him. Roque then retired aside,
and wrote a Letter to a friend of his to Barselona, advising him how the famous
Don-Quixote de la Mancha was with him, that Knight Errant so notorious: and he
gave him to understand, that he was the most conceited understanding fellow in
the world: and that about some four days after, which was Mid-summer day, he
should have him upon the City Wharf, Armed at all points, upon his Horse
Rozinante, and his Squire likewise upon his Ass: And that he should let the
Niarros his friends know so much, that they might solace themselves with him:
But he could wish the Cadels his Adversaries might want the pastime that the
madness of Don-Quixote, and his conceited Squire would make. He delivered the
Letter to one of his Squires; who changing his Thieves habit for a
Country-mans, went to the City, and delivered it to whom it was directed.

CHAP. LXI.
What happened to Don-Quixote at his entrance into Barselona, with other events
more true, then witty.
THree days and three nights was Don-Quixote with Roque, and had he been so
three hundred years, he should not have wanted matter to make him see and
admire his kind of life: One while here they lie; another, there they dine:
Sometimes they fly from I know not whom; other while, they wait for I know not
whom.

They sleep standing, a broken sleep, changing from place to place: all ways
setting of Spies, listening of Sentinels, blowing Musket matches, though of
such shot they had but few; most of them carrying Petronels. Roque himself
slept apart from the rest, not letting them know where he lodged, because the
many Proclamations which the Viceroy of Barselona had caused to be made to
take him, made him unquiet and fearful, and so he durst trust no body,
fearing his own people would either kill or deliver him to the Justice: a life
indeed wretched and irksome: at length, by by-waies and cross-paths Roque and
Don-Quixote got to the Wharf of Barselona, where Roque gave Sancho the ten
Crowns he promised him; and so they parted with many complements on both parts.

Roque returned, and Don-Quixote stayed there, expecting the day just as he was
on horseback: and a while after, the face of the, white Aurora, began to peep
through the Bay-windows of the East, cheering the Herbs and Flowers, in stead
of delighting the ear, and yet at the same instant a noise of Ho-boyes and
Drums delighted their ears, and a noise of Morris-bels, with the Pat a pat of
horsemen running, to see too, out of the City.

Aurora now gave the Sun leave to rise out of the lowest part of the East,
with his face as big as a Buckler.

Don-Quixote and Sancho spread their eyes round about, and they might see the
Sea, which till that time they had never seen: it seemed unto them most large
and spacious, more by far then the Lake of R^ydera, which they saw in the
Mancha: they beheld the Galleys in the Wharf, who clapping down their Tilts,
discovered themselves full of Flaggs and Streamers that waved in the wind, and
kissed and swept the water: within the Clarines, Trumpets and Ho-boyes sounded
that far and near filled the Air with sweet and warlike accents: they began
to move and make show of skirmish upon the gentle water, a world of Gallants
answering them on land, which came out of the City upon goodly Horses, and
brave in their Liveries.

The Soldiers of the Galleys discharged an infinite of shot, which were
answered from the Walls and Forts of the City, and the great shot with
fearful noise cut the Air, which were answered with the Galleys fore-Castle
Canons: the Sea was cheerful, the Land jocund, the sky clear, only somewhat
dimmed with the smoke of the Artillery, it seemed to infuse and engender a
sudden delight in all men. Sancho could not imagine how those Bulks that moved
upon the Sea, could have so many feet. By this they ashore in the rich
Liveries began to run on with their Moorish out cries, even to the very place
where Don-Quixote was wondering and amazed: and one of them, he who had the
Letter from Roque, said to Don-Quixote thus, alowd; Welcome to our City is the
Looking-glass, the Lantern and North-starre of all Knight Errantry, where it
is most in practice. Welcome, I say, is the Valorous Don Quixote de la Mancha:
not the false, fictitious, or Apocryphal, that has been demonstrated to us of
late in false Histories; but the true, legal, and faithful He, which Cid
Hamete the flower of Historians describes unto us. Don-Quixote answered not a
word, neither did the Gentlemen expect he should; but turning in and out with
the rest, they wheeled about Don-Quixote: who turning to Sancho, said, These
men know us well; I Will lay a wager they have read our History, and that too of
the Aragonians lately printed. The Gentlemen that spoke to Don-Quixote came
back again, and said to him; Signior Don-Quixote, come with us, I beseech you;
for we are all your Servants, and Roque Guinarte's dear Friends. To which
Don-Quixote replied: If edurtesies engender courtesies, then yours, Sir Knight,
is daughter or near kindred to Roques: carry me whither you will, for I am
wholly yours, and at your service, if you please to command me. In the like
Courtly strain, the Gentleman answered him: and so locking him in the midest of
them, with sound of Drumms and Ho-boyes, they carried him toward the City,
where at his entrance, as ill luck would have it, and the Boys, that are the
worst of all ill, two of them, bold Crack-ropes, came among the thrust, and one
of them lifting up Dapples tail, and the other Rozinantes, they fastened each
their handful of Nettles. The poor Beasts felt the new spurs, and clapping
their tails close, augmented their pains; so that after a thousand winces, they
cast down their Masters.

Don-Quixote all abashed and disgraced, went to take this Plumage from his
Coursets tail, and Sancho from Dapples. Those that guided Don-Quixote, would
have punished the Boys for their sauciness; but it was not possible, for they
got themselves into the thickest of a thousand others that followed.
Don-Quixote and Sancho returned to their seats, and with the same applause and
Music, they came to their Guides house, which was fair and large, indeed, as
was fit for a Gentleman of means; where we will leave him for the present,
because Cid Hamete will have it so.

CHAP. LXII.
The Adventure of the Enchanted head, with other flim-flams that must be
recounted.
DOn-Quixotes Hosts name was Don Antonio Morino, a rich Gentleman and a
discreet, and one that loved to be honestly and affably merry; who having
Don-Quixote now at home, began to invent how, without prejudice to him, he
might divulge his madness; for Jests ought not to be too bitter, nor pastimes
in detriment of a third person.

The first thing he did then, was to cause Don-Quixote to be unarmed, and to
make him appear in that straight Chamois apparel of his (as heretofore we have
painted and described him:) so he brought him to a Bay-window which looked
toward one of the chiefest streets in the City, to be publicly seen by all
comers, and the Boys that beheld him as if he had been a Monkey. They in the
Liveries began a-fresh to fetch Careers before him, as if for him only (and not
to solemnize that Festivall-day) their Liveries had been put on: And Sancho was
most jocund, as thinking he had found out, he knew not how nor which way, a
new Camacho's marriage, or another house like Don Diego and Miranda's, or the
Dukes Castle.

That day some of Don Antonio's friends dined with him, all honoring
Don-Quixote, and observing him as a Knight Errant; with which being most
vainglorious, he could scarce contain himself in his happiness. Sancho's
conceits were such, and so many, that all the Servants of the house hung upon
his lips, and as many also as heard him.

Being at Table Don Antonio said to Sancho: We have heard here, honest Sancho,
that thou love Leech and roasted Olives so well, that when thou can eat no
more, thou keep the rest in thy bosom till another time. No Sir, '^is not
so (said Sancho) for I am more cleanly then so, and my Master Don-Quixote here
present knows well, that we are wont both of us to live eight days with a
handful of Acorns or Walnuts^ true it is, that now I look not a given horse in
the mouth (I mean) I eat what is given me, and make use of the time present;
and whosoever has said that I am an extraordinary eater, and not cleanly, let
him know he does me wrong; and I should proproceed farther, were it not for
the company here at Table.

Truly (said Don-Quixote) the parsimony and cleanliness with which Sancho
feeds, may be written and graved in sheets of brass, that it may be eternally
remembered by ensuing Ages: True it is, that when he is hungry, he is somewhat
Ravenous, eats a-pace, and chews on both sides; but for cleanliness, that he
has punctually observed: and when he was a Governor, he learnt to eat most
neatly; for he would eat you Grapes, nay, Pomgranat seeds with his fork. How
(quoth Don Antonio) has Sancho been a Governor? I (said Sancho) and of an
Island called Barataria: ten days I governed to my will, in them I lost my
rest, and learnt to contemn all the Governments in the world. From thence I
came flying, and fell into a Pit, where I thought I should have dyed, from
whence I escaped miraculously.

Don-Quixote recounted all the particulars of Sancho's Government, with which
the hearers were much delighted. The cloth now taken away, and Don Antonio
taking Don-Quixote by the hand, carried him into a private chamber, in which
there was no other kind of furniture but a Table that seemed to be of Jasper,
born up with feet of the same upon which there was set a Head, as if it had
been of brass, just as your Roman Emperors are used to be, from the breast
upward: Don Antonio walked with Don-Quixote up and down the chamber, and having
gone a good many turns about the Table, at last he said: Signior Don-Quixote,
now that I am fully persuaded no body hears us, and that the door is fast, I
will tell you one of the rarest Adventures, or rather Novelties, that can be
imagined; provided, that what I tell you, shall be deposited in the uttermost
privy Chambers of secrecy.

That I vow, said Don-Quixote: and for more safety, I will clap a Tombe-stone
over it; for let me tell you, Signior Don Antonio (for now he knew his name)
you converse with one, that though he have ears to hear, yet he has no
tongue to tell: so that what is in your breast, you may freely translate it into
mine, and rest assured, that you have flung it into the Abissus of silence.

In confidence of this promise (answered Don Antonio) I will make you admire at
what you shall hear and see, and so you shall somewhat ease me of the trouble
I am in, in not finding one that I may communicate my secrets with; with which,
every one is not to be trusted.

Don-Quixote was in great suspense, expecting what would be the issue of all
these circumstances; so Don Antonio taking him by the hand, he made him feel
all over the brazen head and the Table, and Jasper feet, and then said, This
head, Signior, was made by one of the greatest Enchanters or Magicians that
has been in the world, and I believe, by Nation he was a Polander, and one
of that famous Scotus his disciples, of whom so many wonders are related, who
was here in my house, and for a thousand Crowns I gave him, framed me this
head, that has the property and quallity to answer to any thing that it is
asked in your ear: he had his tricks and devices, his painting of
Characters, his observing of Stars, looked to every tittle, and finally,
brought this head to the perfection that to morrow you shall see, for on the
Fridayes still it is mute, which being this day, we must expect till to
morrow; and so in the mean time you may bethink you what you will demand; for
I know by experience, this head answers truly to all that is asked.

Don-Quixote admired at the virtue and property of the head, and could scarce
believe Don Antonio, but seeing how short a time there was to the trial, he
would not gainsay him, but thanked him for discovering so great a secret: So
out of the room they went: Don Antonio locked the door after him, and they
came into a Hall where the rest of the Gentlemen were: in this Interim, Sancho
had related to them many of the Adventures and successes that befell his
Master. That afternoon they carried Don-Quixote abroad, not armed, but clad
in the City garb, with a loose coat of tawny cloth, that in that season might
have made frost it self sweat: they gave order to their servants to entertain
Sancho, and not let him stir out of doors. Don-Quixote rode not upon
Rozinante, but on a goodly trotting Mule, with good furniture, they put his
coat upon him, and at his back (he not perceiving it) they sowed a piece of
Parchment, wherein was written in Text letters, This is Don-Quixote de la
Mancha: as they began their walk, the scrowle drew all men's eyes to look on
it, and as they read, This is Don-Quixote de la Mancha, he admired to see what
a number beheld and named him, and knew him; and turning to Don Antonio that
went by him, said, Great is the Prerogative due to Knight Errantry, since over
all the world, it makes its Professors known and renowned; for look you,
Signior Don Antonio, even the very boys of this City having never seen me
before, know me. It Is true, Signior, quoth Don Antonio: for as fire cannot be
hidden nor bounded, no more can virtue but it must be known; and that which
is gotten by the Profession of Arms, does most flourish and triumph above the
rest.

It happened, that Don-Quixote riding with this applause, a Castillian that read
the scrowle at his back, raised his voice, saying. The Devil take thee for
Don-Quixote de la Mancha: and art thou gotten hither without being killed with
those infinite bastings thou have borne upon thy shoulders? Thou art a madman,
and were thou so in private, and within thy house 'twere less evil; but thy
property is, to make all that converse or treat with thee, madmen and
Cox-combes, as may appear by these that accompany thee: get thee home, Idiot,
and look to thy Estate, Wife, and Children, and leave these vanities that
Worm eat thy brains, and defile thy Intellect. Brother, said Don Antonio,
follow your way, and give no counsel to those that need it not, Signior
Don-Quixote is wise, and we that do accompaine him, are no fools: Virtue is
worthy to be honored wheresoever she is; and so be gone with a pox to you,
and meddle not where you have nothing to do. I vow (quoth the Castilian) you
have reason; for to give counsel to this man, is to strive against the stream:
but for all that, it pitties me very much, that the good understanding they say
this block-head has in all things else, should be let out at the pipe of his
Knight Erranty, and a pox light on me (as you wish Sir) and all my Posterity,
if from hence-forward, though I should live to the years of Methusalem, I give
consail to any, though it be desired.

Thus the Counselor went by, and the show went on: but the Boys and all
manner of people pressed so thick to read the scrowl, that Don-Antonio was
forced to take it off from him, as if he had done something else.

The night came on, and they returned home, where was a Revels of women; for
Don Antonio's Wife, that was well-bred, mirthfull, fair, and discreet, invited
other shee-friends of hers, to come and welcome her new Guest, and to make
merry with his strange madness. Some of them came, and they had a Royal
supper, and the Revels began about ten a clock at night. Among these Dames,
there were two of a notable waggish disposition, and great scoffers; and though
honest, yet they strained their carriage, that their tricks might the better
delight without irksomenesse; these were so eager to take Don-Quixote out to
Dance, that they wearied not only his body, but his mind likewise: 'twas a
goodly sight to see his shape, long, lank, lean, his visage pale, the whole man
shut up in his apparel, ungraceful and unweildy. The Damzels wooed him as it
were by stealth, and he by stealth disdained them as fast: but seeing himself
much pressed by their courtings, he lifed up his voice, and said, Fugite parts
adv^rsae, and leave me, oh unwelcome imaginations, to my quiet: Get you farther
off with your wishes Ladies; for she that is the Lady of mine, the peerlesse
Dulcinea del Toboso, will have none but hers subject and conquer me: and so
saying, he sat him down in the midest of the Hall upon the ground, bruised
and broken with his dancing exercise. Don Antonio made him be taken up in men's
arms, and carried to Bed: the first that laid hold on him was Sancho, saying,
In the name of God, what meant you, Master mine to Dance? Think you that all
that are valiant, must be Dancers? and all Knights Errant Skipjacks? I say, if
you think so, you are deceived; you have some that will rather kill Giants then
fetch a caper: if you were to frisk, I would save you that labor; for I can
do it like a Ier-Falcon; but in your dancing, I cannot work a stitch.

With this, and such like discourse Sancho made the Revellers laugh, and laid
his Master to Bed, laying clothes enough on him, that he might sweat out the
cold he had taken by dancing.

The next day Don Antonio thought fit to try the enchanted Head; and so, with
Don Quixote, Sancho, and others his friends, and the two Gentlewomen that had
so labored Don-Quixote in the Dance, that staid all night with Don Antonio's
Wife, he locked himself in the Room where the head was; he told them its
property, enjoyhing them to silence; and he said to them, That this was the
first time in which he meant to make proof of the virtue of the Enchanted
head, and, except his two friends, no living creature else knew the trick of
that Enchantment; and if Don Antonio had not discovered it to them, they also
would have fallen into the same admiration that the rest did; for it was not
otherwise possible; the fabric of it being so curious and cunning.

The first that came to the Heads hearing, was Don Antonio himself, who spoke
softly, but so that he might be heard by all: Tell me Head, by the virtue that
is contained in thee, What think I now? And the Head answered (not moving the
lips, with a loud and distinct voice, that all the bystanders might hear this
reason) I judge not of thoughts. Which when they all heard, they were
astonished, and the more, seeing neither in all the Room, nor any where about
the Table, there was not any humane creature to answer. How many here be there
of us (quoth Don Antonio again?) And answer was made him in the same tenor
voice: There are thou and thy Wife, with two of thy hee-friends, and two of her
shee-friends, and a famous Knight called Don-Quixote de la Mancha, and a Squire
of his that hight Sancho Panca. I marry Sir, here was the wondering a-fresh;
here was every ones hair standing on end with pure horror! And Don Antonio
getting him aside from the Head, said, It Is enough now for me to know that I
was not deceived by him that sold thee me, sage Head, talking Head, answering
Head, admired Head ^ Come another now, and ask what he will: and as your women
for the most part are hastiest, and most inquisitive, the first that came, was
one of Don Antonio's Wives friends, and her demand was this: Tell me Head, What
shall I do to make my self fair? The answer was, Be honest. I have done, said
she. Straight came her other companion, and said, I would fain know Head,
whether my Husband love me or no. And the answer was, Thou shall know by his
usage. The Married woman stood by, saying; The question might have been spared;
for good usage is the best sign of affection. Then came one of Don Antonio's
friends, and asked, Who am I? The answer was, Thou know. I ask thee not
that, said the Gentleman, but whether thou know me? I do, it was answered;
Thou art Don Pedro Noris. No more, O Head ^ let this suffice to make me know
thou know all. And so stepping aside, the other friend came and asked, Tell
me Head, What desires has my eldest son? I have told you (it was answered)
That I judge not of thoughts; yet let me tell you, your son desires to bury
you: That (quoth the Gentleman) I know well, and daily perceive: but I have
done. Don Antonio's Wife came next, and said, Head, I know not what to ask
thee, I would only fain know of thee, If I shall long enjoy my dear Husband.
And the answer was, Thou shall, for his health and spare diet promise him many
years, which many shorten by distempers.

Now came Don-Quixote, and said, Tell me, thou that answerest, Was it true or a
dream, that (as I recount) befell me in Montesino's Cave? Shall Sancho my
Squires whipping be accomplished? Shall Dulcinea be dis-enchanted? For that of
the Cave (quoth the Answerer) there is much to be said; it partakes of all:
Sancho's whipping shall be prolonged: but Dulcinea's dis-enchanting shall come
to a real end. I desire no more (said Don-Quixote) for so Dulcinea be
disenchanted, I make account all my good fortunes come upon me at a clap.

Sancho was the last Demander, and his question was this: Head, shall I happily
have another Government? Shall I be free from this penurious Squires life?
Shall I see my Wife and Children again? To which it was answered him: In thy
house thou shall Govern; whither, if thou return, thou shall see thy Wife and
Children; and leaving thy Service, thou shall leave being a Squire. Very good
(quoth Sancho) this I could have told before, my self, and my Fathers Horse
could have said no more. Beast (quoth Don-Quixote) what answer would thou
have? Is it not enough, that the answers this Head gives thee, are
correspondent to thy questions? It Is true (said Sancho) but I would have known
more.

And now the questions and answers were ended: but not the admiration, in which
all remained, but Don Antonio's friends that knew the conceit. Which Cid Hamete
Benehgeli would forthwith declare, not to hold the world in suspense, to think
that some Witch or extraordinary mystery was enclosed in the said Head: And
thus says he, That Don Antonio Moreno, in imitation of another Head which he
saw in Madrid, framed by a Carver, caused this to be made in his house, to
entertain the simple, and make them wonder at it; and the Fabric was in this
manner:

The Table it self was of wood, painted and varnished over like Jasper, and the
foot, on which it stood, was of the same, with four Eagles claws standing out
to uphold it the better.

The Head that showed like the Medall, or picture of a Roman Emperor and of
brass color, was all hollow, and so was the Table too; to which it was so
cunningly joined, that there was no appearance of it: the foot of the Table was
likewise hollow, that answered to the breast and neck of the head: and all this
answered to another Chamber, that was under the Room where the Head was: and
through all this hollownesse of the foot, the table, breast and neck of the
Medall, there went a tin pipe, made fit to them, that could not be perceived.

He that was to Answer, set his Mouth to the Pipe, in the Chamber
underneathe, Answering to this upper Room; so that the Voice ascended and
descended, as through a Trunk, so clearly and distinctly, as it was hardly
possible to make discovery of the juggling.

A Nephew of Don Antonio's, a Scholar, a good witty and discreet youth was the
answerer; who having notice from his Uncle of those that were to enter the
Room, it was easy for him to answer suddenly and punctually, to their first
questions, and to the rest he answered by discreet conjectures.

Moreover Cid Hamete says, that this marvelous Engine lasted for some ten or
twelve days; but when it was divulged up and down the City, that Don Antonio
had an Enchanted Head in his House that answered to all questions; fearing lest
it should come to the notice of the waking Sentinels of our Faith: Having
acquainted those Inquisitors with the business, they commanded him to make
away with it, lest it should scandalize the ignorant vulgar: But yet in
Don-Quixote and Sanchoes opinion the Head was still Encha^ted and answering;
but indeed not altogether so much to Sanchoes satisfaction.

The gallants of the City, to please Don Antonio, and for Don-Quixotes better
hospitality, and on purpose that his madness might make the more general
sport, appointed a running at the Ring, about a six days after, which was
broken off upon an occasion that after happened.

Don-Quixote had a mind to walk round about the City on foot, fearing that
if he went ^ Horsehack, the Boys would persecute him: So he and Sancho, with
two servants of Don Antonioes went a walking. It happened, that as they passed
through one Street, Don-Quixote looked up and saw written upon a Door in
great Letters, Here are Books printed, which did please him very wonderfully,
for till then he had never seen any Press; and he much desired to know the
manner of it.

In he went with all his retinue, where he saw in one place drawing of sheets,
in another Correcting, in this Composing, in that mending: Finaly, all the
Machine that is usual in great Presses.

Don-Quixote came to one of the Boxes, and asked what they had in hand there?
the workmen told him; he wondered and passed farther. To another he came, and
asked one that was in it, what he was doing? The workman answered Sir, This
Gentleman you see (and he showed him a good comely proper man and somewhat
ancient) has translated an Italian Book into Spanish; and I am composing of
it here to be Printed.

What is the name of it (quoth Don-Quixote?) To which said the Author, Sir, it
is called Le Bagatele, to wit, in Spanish, The Trifle, and though it bear but
a mean name, yet it contains in it many great and substantial matters.

I understand a little Italian, said Don Quixote, and dare venture upon a Stanzo
of Ariostoes: But tell me Signior mine (not that I would examine your skill,
but only for Curiosity:) Have you ever found set down in all your writing the
word Pinnata? Yes, often quoth the Author; and how translate you it, said
Don-Quixote.

How should I translate it said the Author, but in saying Potage pot? Body of
me said Don-Quixote, and how forward are you in the Italian Idiome? I Will lay a
good wager that where the Italian says, Piaccie, you translate it Please; and
where Pin, you say more; and Su is above; and Giu, beneath.

Yes indeed do I said the Author; for these be their proper significations.

I dare swear (quoth Don-Quixote) you are not known to the world, which is
always backward in rewarding flourishing wits, and laudable industry: Oh what
a company of rare abilities are lost in the world! What wits cubbed up? What
Virtues contemned; but for all that me thinks, this translating from one
language into another (except it be out of the Queens of Tongues, Greek and
Latin) is just like looking upon the wrong side of Arras hangings; that
although the Pictures be seen, yet they are full of thred-ends that darken
them, and they are not seen with the plainness and smoothness, as on the
other side; and the translating out of easy languages, argues neither wit, nor
elocution, no more then does the coppying from out of one Paper into another:
yet I infer not from this, that translating is not a laudable exercise: for a
man may be far worse employed, and in things less profitable.

I except amongst Translators our two famous ones: the one, Doctor Christoval
de Figneroa in his Pastor fido, and the other, Don John de Xaurigni, in his
Amyntas, where they happily leave it doubtful, which is the Translation or
Original. But tell me, Sir, Print you this Book upon your own charge, or
sell you your license to some Bookebinder? Upon mine own, said the Author, and
I think to get a thousand crowns by it at least, with this first impression:
for there will be two thousand Copies, and they will vent at three shillings
apiece roundly.

You understand the matter well, said Don-Quixote: it seems you know not the
passages of Printers, and the correspondencies they have betwixt one and the
other: I promise you, that when you have two thousand Copies lying by you,
you will be so troubled, as passes; and the rather, if the book be but a
little dull, and not conceited all through.

Why, would you have me (quoth the Author) let a Booke-seller have my License,
that would give me but a halfe-penny a Sheet, and that thinks he does me a
kindness in it too? I print not my works to get fame in the world: for I am by
them well known in it, I must have profit; for without that, fame is not worth
a rush.

God send you good luck, said Don-Quixote; so he passed to another Box, where
he saw some correcting a sheet of a Book, Entitled, The light of the Soul:
and in seeing it, he said, Such Books as these (though there be many of
them) ought to be imprinted: for there be many sinners, and many lights are
needful, for so many be darkened.

He went on, and saw them correcting another Book; and enquiring the Title,
they answered him, that it was called, The second part of the Ingenious Knight
Don-Quixote de la Mancha, made by such a one, an Inhabitant of Tordesillas.

I have notice of this Book, said Don-Quixote, and in my conscience, I thought
before now, it had been burnt and turned to ashes for an idle Pamphlet: but it
will not, like Hogs, want it is Saint Martin: [ Against that Saints day is Hogs
searing:] for your fained Histories are so much the more good and delightful,
by how much they come near the truth, or the likeness of it: and the true
ones are so much the better, by how much the truer; and saying thus, with some
shows of distaste, he left the Press: and that very day Don Antonio purposed
to carry him to the Galleys, that were in the Wharfe: at which Sancho much
rejoiced; for he had never in his life seen any.

Don Antonio gave notice to the General of the Galleys, that in the afternoon
he would bring his guest, the famous Don-Quixote de la Mancha, to see them: of
whom all the City by this time had notice. And in the next Chapter, what
happened to him, shall be declared.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of the ill chance that befell Sancho at his seeing the Galleys, with the
strange Adventure of the Morisca.
GReat were the Discourses that Don-Quixote framed to himself, touching the
answers of the Enchanted head, but none of them fell into the Imposture, and
all concluded in the promise, which he held for certain, of the
dis-enchantment of Dulcinea: there his blood flowed within him, and he
rejoiced within himself, believing he should soon see the accomplishment of
it: And Sancho, though (as has been said) he abhorred to be a Governor, yet
he desired to bear sway again, and to be obeyed: for such is the desire of
Rule though it be but in jest.

In conclusion, that afternoon Don Antonio Moreno their Host, with his two
friends, Don-Quixote, and Sancho, went to the Galleys. The General, who had
notice of their coming, as soon as they were come near the Sea side, made all
the Galleys strike their Tilt-sayles, and the Ho-boyes sounded, and they
lanched a Cock-boat to the water, which was all covered with rich clothes, and
Cushions of Crimson-Velvet: and just as Don Quixote entered into it, the
Admiral Gally discharged her fore-Castle piece; and the rest of the Galleys
likewise did the same: and as Don-Quixote mounted at the right side Ladder, all
the fry of the Slaves, as the custom is, when any man of quality enters the
Gally, cried, Hu, Hu, Hu, thrice a-row.

The General, who was a man of quality, a Valencian Gentleman, gave him his
hand: and being entered, embraced him, saying, This day will I mark with a white
stone, for one of the best that shall have befaln me in all my life time;
having seen Signior Don-Quixote de la Manca; the time and signs that appear
in him, showing that all the worth of a Knight Errant, is contained and summed
up in him. With the like courteous phrase replied Don-Quixote, jocund above
measure, to see himself so Lord-like treated withal.

They all went a-Stern, which was very well dressed up, and they sat upon the
Railes. The Boat-Swain got him to the fore-Castle, and gave warning with his
whistle to the Slaves, to dis-robe themselves; which was done in an instant.

Sancho, that saw so many naked men, was astonished; and the more, when he saw
them hoyst up their Tilt so speedily, that he thought all the Devils in Hell
labored there. Sancho sat upon the Pilots seat, near the hindermost Rower, on
the right hand; who being instructed what he should do, laid hold on Sancho;
and so lifting him up passed him to another; and the second to a third: so the
whole rabble of the Slaves, beginning at the right side, passed and made him
vault from one seat to another so violently, that poor Sancho lost his sight,
and undoubtedly believed, that the Fiends of Hell carried him; and they gave
him not over, till they had pasted him over all the left fide too, and then set
him again on the Stern: so the poor soul was sore bruised and bemauled, and
scarce imagined what had happened to him.

Don-Quixote, that saw this slight of Sancho's without wings, asked the
General, if those were Ceremonies, that were used to such as came newly into
the Gallie? for if they were, that he who intended not to profess in them,
liked no such pastime: and he vowed to God, that if any came to lay hold on
him, to make him tumble, he would kick out his soul: and in so saying, he
stood up, and grasped his sword.

At this instant they let down the Tilt again, and with a terrible noise, let
fall the Main-yard, so that Sancho thought Heaven was off the hinges, and fell
upon his head, which he crouched together, and clapped it for fear betwixt his
legs. DonQuixote was not altogether as he should be; for he began to quake
and shrink up his shoulders and grew pale. The Slaves hoysted the Main-yard
with the same fury and noise that they had formerly struck it with, and all
with such silence, as if they had had neither voice nor breath. The Boat-Swain
made signs to them to weigh Anchor: and leaping toward the fore-Castle, in the
midest of them, with his whip or Bulls-pizzle, he began to fly-flap their
shoulders.

When Sancho saw such a company of red feet move at once (for such he ghessed
the Oars to be) he said to himself, I marry, here be things truly Enchanted,
and not those my Master speaks of. What have these unhappy souls committed,
that they are thus lashed? And how dares this fellow that goes whistling up and
down alone, whip so many? Well, I say this is Hell, or Purgatory at least.

Don Quixote, that saw with what attention Sancho beheld all that passed, said,
Ah friend Sancho, how speedily, and with how little cost might you, if you
would, take off your doublet, and clap your self amongst these fellows, and
make an end of dis-enchanting Dulcinea? for having so many companions in
misery, you would not be so sensible of pain: and besides, it might be, that
the sage Merlin might take every one of these lashes, being well laid on, for
ten.

The General would have asked what lashes those were, and what dis-enchatment
of Dulcinea's? when a Mariner cried out, Momiri makes signs that there is a
Vessel with Oars toward the west side of the Coast. (Which said) The General
leapt upon the fore-Castle, and cried out, Go to, my hearts, let her not
escape; this Boat that our watch-towre discovers, is some Frigot of Argiers
Pirates.

And now the three other Galleys came to their Admiral to know what they
should do. The General commanded that two of them should lanch to the Sea;
and he with the other would go betwixt Land and Land, that so the Vessel
might not escape them.

The Slaves rowed hard, and so furiously drove on the Galleys, as if they had
flown; and those that lanched first into the Sea, about two miles off
discovered a Vessel, which in sight they marked to have about a fourteen or
fifteen Oars, as it fell out to be true: which Vessel, when she discovered
the Galleys, she put her self in chase; hoping by her swiftness to escape: but
it prevailed nothing; for the Admiral Gally was one of the swiftest Vessels
that sailed in the Sea, and so got of the other so much, that they in the
Frigot plainly saw, that they could not escape: and so the Master of her would
have had them forsaken their Oars and yielded, for fear of offending our
General: but fate that would have it otherwise, so disposed the matter, that
as the Admiral came on so nigh, that they in the Bark might hear a cry from
the Gally that they should yield: two Toraquis, that is, two drunken Turks that
were in the Frigot with twelve others, discharged two Calievers, with which
they killed two Soldiers that stood abaft our Gally. Which when our General
saw, he vowed not to leave a man alive in the Vessel: and coming in great
fury to grapple with her, she escaped under the Galleys Oars: the Gally
passed forward a pretty way: they in the Vessel saw themselves gone, and began
to set sail, and to fly afresh as they saw the Gally coming on them: but their
industry did them not so much good, as their presumption hurt: for the Admiral
overtaking them within one half mile, clapped his Oars in the Vessel, and so
took her and every man alive in her.

By this the two other Galleys came; and all four returned to the Wharf with
their Prize, where a world of People expected them, desirous to see what they
brought: the General cast Anchor near land, and perceived that the Viceroy of
the City was on the shore; he commanded that a Cock-boat should be lanched to
bring him; and that they should strike the Main yard to hang presently the
Master of the Frigot, and the rest of the Turks that they had taken in her,
which were about six and thirty persons, all goodly men, and most of them
Turkish shot.

The General asked who was Master of the Bark? and answer was made him by one
of the Captives in Spanish (who appeared after to be a Runagate Spainiard;)
This Youth you see here is our Master; and he showed him one of the goodliest
comely Youths that could be deciphered by humane imagination.

He was not to see to, above twenty years of age: The General asked; Tell me
ill-advised Dog, what moved thee to kill my Soldiers, since thou sawst it was
impossible for to escape? is this the respect due to Admiralls? Know not
thou that rashness is not valor? doubtful hopes may make men bold, but not
desperate.

The Master would have replied, but the General could not as yet give him the
hearing, by reason of his going to welcome the Viceroy aboard, who entered now
the Gally with some servants of his, and others of the City.

You have had a pretty chase on it, my Lord General (said the Viceroy.) So
pretty (said the General) that your excellency shall see it hanged up at the
Main-yard. How so (quoth the Viceroy?) Why, they have killed me (said he)
against all Law of Arms, Reason, or Custom of Wars, two of the best Soldiers
I had in my Galleys, and I have sworn to hang them all, especially this Youth,
the Master of the Frigot; and he showed him one that had his hands bound, and
the halter about his neck, expecting his death. The Viceroy beheld him, and
seeing him so comely, handsome, and humble withal, his beauty giving him in
that instant, as it were, a Letter of recommendation: the Viceroy had a mind
to save him; and therefore asked; Tell me Master, Art thou a Turk born, or a
Moor, or a Runagate?

To which the Youth answered him in his own language: Neither of all. Why, what
art thou (quoth the Viceroy?) A Christian woman (said the young man.) A Woman
and a Christian in this habit, in these employments? a thing rather to be
wondered at then believed. My Lords, I beseech you (quoth the Youth) let my
execution be a little deferred, whilst I recount my life. What heart so hard
that would not be softened with that reason, at least to hear the sad and
grieved Youth to tell his story? The General bade him proceed, but that there
was no hope for him of pardon for his notorious offense. So the Youth began in
this manner.

Of that Lineage, more unhappie then wise, on which a Sea of misfortunes in
these latter times have rained, am I; born of Moriscan Parents; and in the
current of their misery, was carried by two of my Uncles into Barbary; it
nothing availing me to say I was a Christian, as I am indeed, and not seeming
so, as many of us, but truly Catholic: but this truth prevailed nothing with
the Officers that had charge given them to look to our banishment, neither
would my Uncles believe I was a Christian, but that it was a trick of mine to
stay in my native Country; and so rather forcibly then by my consent they
carried me with them. My Mother was a Christian, and my Father discreet, and so
likewise I sucked the Catholic Faith in my Milk: I was well brought up, and
neither in my language or fashion, made show to be a Morisca. With these
Virtues my beauty (if so be I have any) increased also; and though my
restraint and retirement was great, yet it was not such, but that a young
Gentleman, called Don Gasper Gregorio had gotten a sight of me: This Gentleman
was Son and Heir to a Knight that lived near to our Town: he saw me, and we
had some speech; and seeing himself lost to me, but I not won by him, 'twere
large to sell, especially fearing that as I am speaking, this halter must
throttle me: yet I say, that Don Gregorio would needs accompany me in my
banishment: and so mingling himself with Moriscos that came out of other places
(for he understood the language well) in our Voyage he got acquainted with my
two Uncles that went with me; for my Father wisely when he heard the Edict of
our banishment, went out of our Town, and went to seek some place in a Foreign
Country, where we might be entertained; and he left many Pearls, precious
Stones, and some money in double Pistolets hidden in a secret place (which I
only know of) but he commanded me by no means to meddle with it, if we were
banished before his return. I did so, and with my Unkles and others of our
Kindred, passed into Babary, and our resting place was Argiers, I might have
said Hell. The King there had notice of my beauty, and likewise that I was
rich, which partly fell out to be my happiness. He sent for me, and asked me
of what part of Spain I was, and what money and jewels I brought? I told him
the place; but that my Jewels and Moneys were buried: but that they might
easily be had, if I might but go thither for them. All this I said, hoping
his own covetousness would more blind him then my beauty.

Whilst we were in this discourse, they told him there came one of the
goodliest fair Youths with me that could be imagined. I thought presently it
was Don Gregorio they meant, whose comeliness is not to be paralelled. It
troubled me to think in what danger he would be; for those Barbarous Turks
do more esteem a handsome Boy, then a Woman, be she never so fair. The King
commanded straight, that he should be brought before him, that he might see
him, and asked me if it were true they said of the Youth. I told him Yes (and
it seemed Heaven put it into my head) but that he was no man, but a woman as I
was, and I desired him he would give me leave to cloth her in her natural
habit, that her beauty might appear to the full, and that otherwise too, she
would be too shamefast befoe him. He bad me do so, and that on the morrow
he would give order for my return to Spain to seek the hidden Treasure. I
spoke with Don Gaspar, and told him what danger he had been in by being a man:
so I clad him like a Moorish woman, and that afternoon brought him to the Kings
presence, who seeing him, admired at her beauty, and thought to reserve him,
and to send him for a Present to the Grand Signior: and so to avoid the danger
in his Sarraglio of women if he put her there; he commanded her to be kept
in a house of certain Moorish Gentlewomen, whither he was carried. How this
troubl^^ as both (for I cannot deny that I love him) let them consider that
have been absent from their Loves. The King gave order then, that I should come
for Spain in this Frigot, and that these two Turks that killed your Soldiers,
should accompany me, and this Renegate Spaniard, pointing to him that had
first spoken, who I know is in heart a Christian, and has a greater desire to
remain here, then to return into Barbary, the rest are Moors and Turks that
only serve for Rowers. The two covetous and insolent Turks, not respecting
the order we had, that they should set me and this Runnagate Spaniard on the
first shore, in the habits of Christians (of which we were provided) would
needs first scowre the coast, and take some prize, if they could, fearing that
if they first should set us on land, by some mischance we might discover, the
Frigot to be upon the coast: so that they might be taken by the Galleys, and
overnight we described this wharf, and not knowing of these four Galleys, we
were discovered, and this has befalne us that you have seen. In fine, Don
Gregorio remains in his woman's habit amonst Women in manifest danger of his
destruction, and I am here Prisoner, expecting, or to say truer; fearing the
losing of my life, which notwithstanding wearies me. This, Sirs, is the
conclusion of my lamentable History, as true as unfortunate: my request is,
that I may die a Christian, since (as I have said) I am not guilty of that
crime into which the rest of my Nation have fallen: and with this she broke
off; her eyes pregnant with tears, which were accompanied with many from the
standers by also.

The Viceroy, all tender and compassionate, came to her and undid the Cord that
bound the Moors fair hands. In the mean time, whilst this Christian Morisca
related her Story, an ancient Pilgrim that entered the Gally had his eyes
fastened upon her; and she had no sooner ended her discourse, when he cast
himself at her feet, and embracing them with interrupted words, Sighs, and
Sobs, said, Oh my unfortunate Daughter Ana Felix, I am Ricote thy Father, that
have returned to seek thee, as not being able to live without thee; for thou
art my very soul. At these words Sancho opend his eyes, and lifted up his head
(which he held down, thinking upon his ill-favored tossing in the Gally) and
beholding the Pilgrim, knew him to be the same Ricote that he met the same
day he left his Government, and it appeared she was his Daughter, when being
unbound she embraced her Father, mingling her tears with his. Then said he
to the General and Viceroy, This, my Lords, is my Daughter, more unhappy in
her success, then in her name, as famous for beauty, as I for Wealth. I left
my Country, to find a resting place in some strange Country, and having found
one in Germany, returned in this Pilgrims weed in company of other Germans to
seek my Daughter, and to dig out my hidden Treasure, but found not her, and the
Treasure I bring with me, and now by strange chance have lighted on my
greatest Treasure, that is, my beloved Daughter: if so be our small offense,
and her tears and mine together, with the integrity of your Justice, may open
the gates of mercy, show it us that never had so much as a thought once to
offend you, nor conspired with those of our own lineage, who were justly
banished. Then said Sancho, I know Ricote well, and know all is true he says,
concerning that Ana Felix is his Daughter, but for other flim-flams, whether
he had a good or bad intention, I intermeddle not.

The bystanders wondering all at this accident, the General said, Well, your
tears will not let me accomplish my vow: live, fair Ana Felix, as long as
Heaven will give thee leave, and let those rash Slaves dye that committed the
fault: So he commanded that the two Turks that had killed his two Soldiers,
should presently be hanged upon the Main-yard: but the Viceroy desired him
earnestly not to hang them, since they had showed more madness then valor. The
General condescended, for revenge is not good in cold blood; and straight they
contrived how to get Don Gregorio free. Ricote offered two thousand Ducats he
had in Pearls and Jewels toward it: Many means were thought on, but none so
good as that of the Renegado Spanyard that was mentioned, who offered to return
to Argiers in some small Bark, only with some six Christian Oars; for he knew
where, how, and when to dis-embarke himself, and the house also where Don
Gasper was. The General and Viceroy were in some doubt of him, or to trust
him with the Christians that should row with him. But Ana Felix undertook for
him, and Ricote offered to ransom the Christians if they were taken. And being
agreed, the Viceroy went ashore, and Don Antonio Moreno carried the Morisca
and her Father with him: the Viceroy enjoining him to use them as well as
possibly he might, and offered him the command of any thing in his house toward
it. Such was the charity and benevolence that the beauty of Ana Felix had
infused into his breast.

CHAP. LXIV.
Of an Adventure that most perplexed Don-Quixote, of any that hitherto befell
him.
THe History says that Don Antonio Moreno's Wife took great delight to see Ana
Felix in her house: she welcomed her most kindly, enamoured as well on her
goodness, as beauty and discretion; for in all the Morisca was exquisite, and
all the City came (as if by a warning Bell) to see her. Don-Quixote told Don
Antonio, that they took a wrong course for the freeing of Don Gregorio, which
was more dangerous then convenient; and that it had been better, that he were
set on shore in Barbary with his Horse and Arms; for that he would deliver
him in spite of the whole Moorisme there, as Don Gayseros had done his Spouse
Melisendra.

Look you Sir, said Sancho (when he heard this) Don Gayferos brought his
Spouse through firm land, and so carried her into France: but here, though we
should deliver Don Gregorio, we have no means to bring him into Spain, the Sea
being betwixt us and home.

There is a remedy for every thing but death (said Don-Quixote;) for it is but
having a Bark ready at the Sea side, and in spite of all the world we may
embarke our selves.

You do prettily facilitate the matter (said Sancho) but it is one thing to
say, and another to do: and I like the Runnagate; for me thinks he is a good
honest plain fellow. Don Antonio said, That if the Runnagate performed not the
husinesse, that then the Grand Don-Quixote should pass over into Barbary. Some
two days after the Runnagate embarked in a little Boat with six Oars on a
side, manned with lusty tall fellows, and two days after that, the Galleys
were Eastward bound; the General having requested the Viceroy, that he would
be pleased to let him know the success of Don Gregorio's liberty, and
likewise Ana Felix. The Viceroy promised to fulfill his request.

And Don-Quixote going out one morning to take the air upon the Wharf, armed
at all points; for as he often used to say, his Arms were his Ornaments, and
to skirmish his delight; and so he was never without them; he saw a Knight
come toward him, armed from top to toe, carrying upon his shield a bright
shining Moon painted, who coming within distance of hearing, directing his
voice to Don-Quixote aloud, said: Famous Knight, and never sufficiently
extolled Don-Quixote de la Mancha, I am the Knight of the white Moon, whose
renowned Deeds perhaps thou have heard of; I am come to combat with thee, and
by force of Arms to make thee know and confess, that my Mistress, be she
whom she will, is without comparison, fairer then thy Dulcinea del Toboso;
which truth, if thou plainly confess, thou shall save thy life, and me a
labor in taking it: and if thou fight, and that I vanquish thee, all the
satisfaction that I will have, is, that thou forsake thy Arms, and leave
seeking Adventures, and retire thy self to thy home for the space of one whole
year, where thou shale live peaceably and quietly, without laying hand to thy
Sword, which befits thy estate, and also thy souls health: And if thou vanquish
me, my head shall be at thy mercy; and the spoils of my Horse and Armor
shall be thine, and also the same of my exploits shall pass from me to thee:
Consider what is best to be done, and answer me quickly; for I have only this
days respit to dispatch this business.

Don-Quixote was ashonisht and in suspense, as well at the Knight of the White
Moon his arrogance, as the cause of it, for which he challenged him: and so
with a quiet and staid demeanor answered him:

Knight of the white Moon, whose exploits hitherto I have not heard of, I dare
swear thou never sawst the famous Dulcinea; for if thou hadest, I know thou
would not have entered into this demand: for her sight would have confirmed,
that their neither has been, nor can be a beauty to be compared with hers: and
therefore not to say you lie, but that you err in your proposition, I accept
of your challenge with the aforesaid conditions; and strait because your
limited day shall not pass, and I only except against one of your conditions,
which is, That the fame of your exploits pass to me; for I know not what kind
of ones yours be, and I am content with mine own such as they be: beginn you
then your Career when you will, and I will do the like, and God and S. George.

The Viceroy had notice of this, and thought it had been some new Adventure
plotted by Don Antonio Moreno, or some other Gentleman: and so out of the City
he went with Don Antonio, and many other Gentlemen that accompanied him to the
Wharf, just as Don-Quixote was turning Rozinantes Reins to take up as much
ground as was sit for him. When the Viceroy saw in both of them signs to
encounter, he put himself betwixt them, and asked, what was the cause of their
single Combat? The Knight of the white Moon answered him, that it was about a
precedence in beauty, and briefly repeated what he had formerly done to Don
Quixote, together with the conditions accepted by both Parties.

The Viceroy came to Don Antonio, and asked him in his care, if he knew that
Knight of the white Moon, or if it were some trick they meant to put upon
Don-Quixote?

Don Antonio made answer, that he neither knew the Knight, or whether the
Combat were in jest or earnest.

This answer made the Viceroy doubt whether he should let them proceed to the
Combat; but being persuaded that it could not be but a jest, he removed,
saying: Sir Knights, if there be no remedy but to confess or dye, and that
Signior Don-Quixote be obstinate, and you Knight of the white Moon more so then
he, God have mercy on you, and to 't.

The Knight of the white Moon most courteously thanked the Viceroy for the
license he gave them, and Don-Quixote too did the like; who heartily
recommending himself to Heaven, and his Mistress Dulcinea (as he used upon all
such occasions) he turned about to begin his Careere, as his enemy had done,
and without Trumpets sound, or of any other warlike instrument that might give
them signal for the onset: they both of them set Spurs to their Horses, and
the Knight of the White-Moones being the swifter, met Don-Quixote ere he had
ran a quarter of his Careere so forcibly (without touching him with his
Lance, for it seemed he carried it aloft on purpose) that he tumbled Horse
and Man both to the ground, and Don-Quixote had a terrible fall: so he got
straight on the top of him; and clapping his Lances point upon his Visor,
said, You are vanquished, Knight, and a dead man, if you confess not,
according to the conditions of our combat.

Don-Quixote all bruised and amazed, without heaving up his Visor, as if he
had spoken out of a Toombe, with a faint and weak voice, said, Dulcinea del
Toboso, is the fairest Woman in the world, and I the unfortunatest Knight on
earth; and it is not fit that my weakness defraud this truth: thrust your
Lance into me, Knight, and kill me, since you have bereaved me of my
honor. Not so truly, quoth he of the White-Moone, let the same of my Lady
Dulcinea's beauty live in her entirenesse: I am only contented that the Grand
Don-Quixote retire home for a year, or till such time as I please, as we
agreed, before we began the battle.

All this, the Viceroy with Don Antonio and many others standing by heard; and
Don-Quixote answered, that so nothing were required of him in prejudice of his
Lady Dulcinea, he would accomplish all the rest, like a true and punctual
Knight.

This Confession ended, the Knight of the white-Moone turned his Horse, and
making a low obeisance on Horseback to the Viceroy, he rode a false gallop
into the City. The Viceroy willed Don Antonio to follow him, and to know by
all means who he was.

Don-Quixote was lifted up, and they discovered his face, and found him
discolored and in a cold sweat. Rozinante out of pure hard handling, could not
as yet stir.

Sancho all sad and sorrowful knew not what to do or say, and all that had
happened, to him seemed but a dream: and all that Machine, a matter of
Enchantment: he saw his Master was vanquished, and bound not to take Arms for
a year. Now he thought the light of his glory was Eclipsed, the hopes of his
late promises were undone, and parted as smoke with wind: he feared lest
Rozinante's bones were broken, and his Masters out of joint: Finally, in a
Chair, which the Viceroy commanded to be brought, he was carried to the
City, whither the Viceroy too returned, desirous to know who the Knight of
the White-Moone was, that had left Don-Quixote in so bad a taking.

CHAP. LV.
Who the Knight of the White-Moon was, with Don Gregorio's liberty, and other
passages,
DOn Antonio Moreno followed the Knight of the White-Moone, and many Boys too
followed and persecuted him till he got him to his Inn into the City. Don
Antonio entered, desirous to know him; and he had his Squire to un-arme him:
he shut himself in a lower Room, and Don Antonio with him, who stood upon
Thorns, till he knew who he was.

He of the White-Moone, seeing then that the Gentleman would not leave him,
said, I well know, Sir, wherefore you come, and to know who I am; and since
there is no reason to deny you this, I will tell you, whilst my man is
unarming me, the truth without erring a jot. Know Sir, that I am styled the
Bachelour Samson Carrasco, and am one of Don-Quixotes Town; whose wild
madness has moved as many of us as know him to compassion; and me amongst
the rest most: and believing that the best means to procure his health, is to
keep him quiet: And so to have him in his own house, I thought upon this
device: and so about a three months since I met him upon the way, calling my
self by the name of The Knight of the Looking-glasses, with a purpose to fight
with him, and vanquish him, without doing him any hurt, and making this the
condition of our Combat, That the vanquished should be left to the discretion
of the vanquisher: and that which I would enjoyne him (for I held him already
conquered) was, That he should ret^rn home, and not abroad again in a whole
year; in which time he might happily have been cured: but fortune would have it
otherwise; for he vanquished me, and unhorsed me, and so my project took no
effect: he went on his way, and I returned conquered, ashamed, and bruised
with my fall, that was very dangerous: but for all that, I had still a desire
to find him again, and to conquer him, as now you have seen.

And he being so punctual in observing the Orders of Knight Errantry, will
doubtless keep his promise made to me.

This Sir is all I can tell you, and I beseech you conceal me from
Don-Quixote, that my desires may take effect; and that the man who has
otherwise a good understanding, may recover it if his madness leave him.

Oh Sir (said Don Antonio) God forgive you the wrong you do the whole world,
in seeking to recover the pleasantest madman in the world.

Perceive you not that this recovery cannot be so much worth, as the delight
that his fopperies cause? but I imagine, Sir Bachelor, that all your Art will
not make a man so irrecoverably mad, wise again: and if it were not
uncharitable, I would say, Never may he recover: for in his health we lose not
only his own conceits, but Sancho Panca his Squires too, each of which would
turn melancholy it self into mirth: for all that I will hold my peace, I will
say nothing, and see whether I guess right, that Signior Carrasco's pains will
be to no purpose. Who answered, that as yet the business was brought to a
good pass, and he hoped for a happy success: and so offering Don Antonio his
service, he took leave of him: And causing his Armor to he packed upon a
great he Mule, at the instant he got himself upon the Horse, with which he
entered the Lists; and the same day he went out of the City homeward, where by
the way nothing happened to him worth the relating in this true History.

Don Antonio told the Viceroy all that Carrasco said; at which he received
not much content, for in Don-Quixotes retirement, was theirs also that ever had
notice of his mad pranks.

Six days was Don-Quixote in his bed, all muddy, sad and sorrowful, and
wayward, descanting in his thoughts upon his ill fortune to be vanquished.
Sancho comforted him, and amongst other reasons, told him, Signior mine, cheer
up, be lively, if you can, give Heaven thanks, that though you came with a
tumbling cast to the ground, yet you have never a rib broken; and since you
know that sweet meat must have sour sauce, and that there is not always good
cheer where there is a smoking Chimney, cry, A fig for the Physician, since
you need not his help in this disease. Let Us home to our houses, and leave
looking after these Adventures through Countries and places we know not: and if
you consider it well I am here the greatest loser though you be in the worst
pickle. ^^though when I left to be a Governor, left also my desires that way;
yet left not my desire of being an Earl, which will never be effected, if you
leave to be a King, by leaving the exercise of Chivalrie, and so my hopes are
like to vanish into smoke.

Peace Sancho (said Don-Quixote) my retirement shall be but for a year, and
then I Will straight to my honorable Profession again, and I shall not want a
Kingdom for my self, and some Earldome for thee.

God grant it (said Sancho) and let sin be deaf; for I have always heard
that a good hope is better then a bad possession. In this discourse they were,
when as Don-Antonio entered, with shows of great content, saying, My reward
Signior Don-Quixote for the news I bring; for Don Gregorio and the Runnagate
Spainiard with him, are upon the Wharf: the Wharf, quoth I? in the Viceroys
house, and will be here presently.

Don-Quixote was somewhat revived, and said, Truly I was about to have said, I
would it had been otherwise, that I might have gone into Barbary, and with the
strength and vigor of this Arm, not only have given liberty to Don Gregorio,
but to all the Christian Captives in Barbary.

But what say I, wretch that I am? Am not I vanquished? Am not I overthrown? Am
not I he that must not touch Arms this twelve months? What then do I
promising? Why do I praise my self, since it were fitter for me to use a
Distaff then a Sword? No more of that Sir (said Sancho) a man is a man, though
he have but a hose on his head. To day for thee, and to morrow for me: and for
these thumps and encounters, there is no heed to be taken; for he that falls
to day may rise to morrow, except it be that he mean to lie a-bed; I mean, to
dismay and not take heart to fresh skirmishes: and therefore raise you your
self now to welcome Don Gregorio; for me thinks the people of the house are in
an uproar, and by this he is come: and he said true; for Don Gregorio having
given the Viceroy account of his going and coming, desirous to see Ana Felix,
he came with the Runnagate to Don Antonio's house: and though Don Gregorio,
when they brought him out of Argiers were in a woman's habit, yet by the way in
the Boat he changed it with a Captive that came with him: but whatsoever habit
he had been in, he would have seemed a personage worthy to be coveted,
sought after, and served; for he was extraordinary comely, and about some
seventeen or eighteen years of age. Ricote and his Daughter went out to welcome
him, the Father with tears, and the Daughter with honesty.

They did not embrace each other; for where there is Love, there is never much
looseness.

The two joint Beauties of Don Gregorio and Ana Felix astonished all the
bystanders.

Silence there spoke for the two Lovers, and their eyes were tongues that
discovered their joyful, but honest thoughts: The Runagate told them the means
and slight he had used to get Don Gregorio away. Don Gregorio told his dangers
and straits he was put to amongst the women with whom he remained, not in
tedions manner, but with much brevity; where he showed that his discretion was
above his years.

Finally, Ricote paid and royally satisfied as well the Runagate, as those that
had rowed with him. The Runagate was reduced and re-encorporated with the
Church, and of a rotten member became clean and sound by penance and repentance.

Some two days after the Viceroy treated with Don Antonio, about means, that
Ricote and his Daughter might remain in Spain, thinking it to be no
inconvenience, that so Christianly a Father and a Daughter should remain, and,
to see too, so well intentionated.

Don Antonio offered to negotiate it amongst other business, for which he was
to go to the Court of necessity, letting them know, that there by favor and
bribes, many difficult matters are ended.

There is no trust in favors or bribes (said Ricote then present) for with the
Grand Don Bernardine de Volasco, Count Salazar, to whom his Majesty has
given in charge our expulsion, neither entreaties, promises, bribes or
compassion can prevail; for though true it be, that he mixeth his Justice with
Mercy, yet because he sees the whole body of our Nation is putrid and
contaminated, he uses rather cauterizing that burns it, then ointment that
softens it: and so with prudence, skill, diligence, and terror, he has born
upon his strong shoulders, and brought to due execution, the weight of this
great Machine; our industries, tricks, slights, and frauds, not being able to
blind his watchful eyes of Argus, which wake continually, to the end that
none of ours may remain; that like a hidden root, may in time sprout up, and
scatter venomous fruit throughout all Spain, now cleansed and free from the
fear, into which their multitude put her, a heroic resolution of the Grand
Philip the third, and unheard of wisdom, to have committed it to Don
Bernardino and Velasco.

Well, when I come thither (said Don Antonio) I will use the best means I can,
and let Heaven dispose what shall be fittest. Don Gregorio shall go with me,
to comfort the affliction of his Parents for his absence: Ana Felix shall stay
with my Wife here, or in a Monastery: and I know the Viceroy will be glad to
have honest Ricote stay with him, till he sees how I can negotiate.

The Viceroy yielded to all that was proposed: but Don Gregorio knowing what
passed, said, that by no means he could or would leave Ana Felix: but
intending to see his friends, and to contrive how he might return for her, at
length he agreed. Ana Felix remained with Don Antonio's Wife, and Ricote in
the Viceroy his house.

The time came that Don Antonio was to depart, and Don-Quixote and Sancho,
which was some two days after; for Don-Quixotes fall would not suffer him to
travel sooner. When Don Gregorio parted from Ana Felix, all was tears,
swounding, sighs, and sobs. Ricote offered Don Gregorio a thousand Crowns: but
he refused them, and borrowed only five of Don Antonio, to pay him at the
Court again: With this they both departed, and Don-Quixote and Sancho next (as
has been said) Don-Quixote disarmed, and Sancho on foot, because Dapple was
laden with the Armor.

CHAP. LXVI.
That treats of what the Reader shall see, and he that hearkens hear.
AS they went out of Barselona, Don-Quixote beheld the place where he had his
fall, and said, Hic Troja fuit, here was my ill fortune, and not my cowardice,
that bereaved me of my former gotten glory: here Fortune used her turns and
returns with me: here my exploits were darkened; and finally, my fortune fell,
never to rise again. Which Sancho hearing, said, Signior mine, It Is as proper
to great Spirits to be patient in adversity as jo^und in prosperity: and this
I take from my self: for if when I my self being a Governor was merry; now
that I am a poor Squire on foot, I am not sad: For I have heard say, that she
you call up and down Fortune, is a drunken longing woman, and withal blind,
and so she sees not what she does; neither knows whom she casts down, or
whom she raises up.

Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) thou art very Philosophical; thou speak
mavelous wisely, I know not who has taught thee. All I can tell thee, is,
that in the world there is no such thing as Fortune; neither do things that
happen in it, good or evil, fall out by chance, but by the particular
providence of Heaven: hence it is said, That every man is the Artificer of his
own Fortune, which I have been of mine, but not with the discretion that might
have been fitting; and so my rashness has been requited: for I might have
thought that it was not possible for Rozinante's weakness, to have resisted
the powerful greatness of the Knight of the white-Moon's Horse. In fine, I
was hardy, I did what I could: down I came; and though I lost my honor, yet I
lost not, nor can lose my virtue, to accomplish my promise. When I was a Knight
Errant, bold and valiant, with my works and hands I ennobled my deeds: and now
that I am a foot Squire, I will credit my works with the accomplishment of my
promise: jog on then Sancho, and let us get home, there to pass the year of
our Probationership: in which retiredness we will recover new Virtue, to
return to the never forgotten exercise of Arms.

Sir, said Sancho, It Is no great pleasure to travel great journeys on foot:
let us leave your Armor hanged up upon some tree, instead of a hanged man: and
then I may get upon Dapple, and rid as fast as you will: for to think that I
will walk great journeys on foot, is but a folly.

Thou have said well, Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote: hang up my Arms, for a
Trophy; and at the bottom, or about them we will carve in the Trees, that
which in the Trophy of Roldans was written. Let none these move.
That his Valor will not
With Roldan prove.


All this (me thinks, said Sancho) is precious: and if it were not that we
should want Rozinante by the way, 'twere excellent good hanging him up.

Well, neither he, nor the Armor, quoth Don-Quixote, shall be hanged up,
that it may not be said, So good a servant, an ungrateful Master.

You say marvelous well, quoth Sancho: for according to the opinion of wise
men, the fault of the Ass must not be laid upon the Pack-saddle: and since in
this last business you your self were in fault, punish your self, and let
not your fury burst upon the hacked and bloody Armor, or the mildness of
Rozinante, or the tenderness of my feet, making me walk more then is fitting.

All that day and four more they passed in these reasons and discourses: and
the fifth after, as they entered a Town, they saw a great many of People at an
Inn door, that by reason of the heat were there shading themselves.

When Don-Quixote approached, a Husbandman cried aloud, Some of these
Gentlemen, that know not the parties, shall decide the business of our wager.
That will I (said Don-Quixote) with all uprightness, if I may understand it.
Well, good Sir, said the Husbandman, this is the matter; Here Is one dwells in
this town so fatt, that he weighs eleven Arrobaes, [Arroba, measure of twenty
five pound weight,] and he challenged another to run with him that weighes but
five: the wager was to run one hundred paces with equal weight, and the
Challenger being asked how thy should make equal weight, said, That the other
that weighed but five Arrobas, should carry six of Iron, and so they should
both weigh equally.

No, no, said Sancho, before Don-Quixote could answer, It concerns me (that
not long since left being a Governor and a Judge as all the world knows) to
decide doubts, and to sentence this business. Answer on Gods name, friend
Sancho (said Don-Quixote) for I am not in the humor to play at Boyes-play,
since I am so troubled and tormented in mind.

With this license, Sancho said to the Husbandmen that were gaping round about
him, expecting his sentence, Brothers, the fat man's demand is unreasonable, and
has no appearance of equity; for if he that is challenged may choose his
weapons, the other ought not to choose such as may make his contrary unweldy and
unable to be Victor: and therefore my opinion is, that the fat Challenger do
pick, and cleanse, and Withdraw, and Pollish, and Nibble, and pull away six
Arrobaes of his flesh, some-where or other from his body (as he thinks best)
and so having but five remaining, he will be made equal with his opposite,
and so they may run upon equal terms.

I vow by me, said the Husbandman that heard Sancho's sentence, this Gentleman
has spoken blessedly, and sentenced like a Canon: but I warrant, the fat man
will not lose an ounce of his flesh, much less six Arrobaes.

The best is, said another, not to run, that the lean man strain not
himself with too much weight, nor the fat man dis-flesh himself, and let
half the wager be spent in Wine, and let us carry these Gentlemen to the
Tavern that has the best, and give me the cloak when it raines; [ A good
Wish, as if he would have said, Let the burden light upon him.]

I thank you Sir, said Don-Quixote; but I cannot stay a jot: for my sad
thoughts make me seem unmannerly, and travel more then ordinarily. And so
spurring Rozinante, he passed forward, leaving them to admire and note, as
well his strange shape as his man's discretion; for such they judged Sancho. And
another of the Husbandmen said; If the man be so wise, what think ye of the
Master? I hold a wager, that if they went to study at Salamanca, they would be
made Judges of the Court in a trice, for all is foppery to your studying: study
hard, and with a little favor and good luck, when a man least thinks of it,
he shall have a Rod of Justice in his hand, or a Miter upon his head.

That night the Master and Man passed in the open field: and the next day being
upon their way, they saw a footman coming toward them with a pair of
Wallets about his neck, and a Javelin or Dart in his hand, just like a
footman, who coming near Don-Quixote, mended his pace, and beginning to
runn, came and took him by the right thigh; for he could reach no higher, and
said with a great deal of gladness; Oh my Signior Don-Quixote de la Mancha,
and how glad my Lord Duke will be, when he knows you will return to his
Castle? for he is there still with my Lady Duchess.

I know you not, friend, said Don-Quixote, who you are, except you tell me.

I, Signior Don-Quixote, said the footman, am Tosilos the Dukes Lackey, that
would not fight with your Worship about the marriage of Donna Rodriguez
daughter.

God defend me, said Don-Quixote, and is it possible? and are you he, into
whom the Enchanters my enemies transformed my contrary, to defraud me of the
honor of that combat?

Peace, Sir, quoth the Letter foot-post, there was no Enchantment, nor changing
of my face, I was as much Tosilos the Lackey, when I went into the Lists, as
when I came out: I thought to have married without fighting, because I liked
the wench well; but it fell out otherwise. My Lord Duke caused me to be well
banged, because I did not according as I was instructed before the battle was
to begin: and the conclusion is, the wench is turned Nun, and Donna Rodriguez
is gone back again into Castlle, and I am going now to Barselona to carry a
Packet of Letters to the Viceroy which my Lord sends, him: and if it please
you to drink a sup (though it be hot, yet pure) I have a little Gourd here
full of the best Wine, with some slices of excellent Cheese, that shall serve
for a provoker and Alarm to thirst if it be asleep.

I see the Vy, said Sancho, and set the rest of your courtesy, and therefore
skink, honest Tosilos, in spite of all the Enchanters in the Indies.

Well Sancho, quoth Don Quixote, thou art the only Glutton in the world, and
the only Ass alive, since thou can not be persuaded that this foot man is
Enchanted, and this Tosilos counterfeit; stay thou with him and fill thy self,
I Will go on fair and softly before, and expect thee.

The Lackey laughed, and unsheathed his Bottle, and drawing out his Bread and
Cheese, he and Sancho set upon the green Grass, and like good fellows they
cast Anchor upon all the Wallets provant so hungerly, that all being gone, they
licked the very Letter-Packet because it smelt of Cheese.

Tosilos said to Sancho; Doubtless thy Master, friend Sancho, is a very
madman. He owes no man nothing in that kind, said Sancho; for if the money
he were to pay, be in madness, he has enough to pay all men. I see it well
enough, and tell him of it, but it is to no purpose; for he is now even past
recovery, since he has been vanquished by the Knight of the White-Moone.
Tosilos desired him to tell him what had befalne him: but Sancho answered, it
was a discourtesie to let his Master stay for him; but at some other time when
they met, he should know: and so rising up after he had well dusted himself,
and shaked the crumbs from his beard, he caught hold of Dapple before, and
crying farewell, left Tosilos, and overtooke his Master that stayed for him
under the shade of a tree.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of the resolution Don-Quixote had to turn Shepherd, and to lead a Country
life, whilst the promise for his year was expired, with other accidents,
truly, good, and savoury.
IF Don-Quixote were much troubled in mind before his fall, he was so much
more after it: He stood shading himself under the tree (as you heard) and
there his thoughts set upon him, as Flies upon Honey; some tending to the
disenchantment of Dulcinea, others to the life that he meant to lead in the
time of his forced retirement.

Sancho now drew near, and extolled the liberality of Tosilos.

Is it possible, Sancho, said Don-Quixote, that still thou think that that
was a true Lackey, and that thou have forgotten too that Dulcinea was converted
and transformed into a Countrey-wench, and the Knight of the Looking-glasses,
into the Bachelor Samson Carrasco: all these by the doings of Enchanters my
enemies that persecute me? But tell me now, did thou ask that Tosilos, what
became of Altisidora? did she lament my absence, or has she forgotten her
amorous passions, that when I was present troubled her?

I never thought on'^ (said Sancho) neither had I leisure to ask after such
fooleries. Body of me, Sir, you are now in a humor of asking after other
folks thoughts, and amorous ones too.

Look thee, Sancho, there is a great deal of difference betwixt love and
gratefullnesse; it may well be that a Gentleman may not be amorous: but it
cannot be (speaking in all rigor) that he should be ungrateful: Altisidora
in likelihood loved me very well, she gave me the three Night-caps thou
wotest of, she cried at my departure, cursed me, reviled me, and without
modesty railed publicly, all signs that she adored me; for the anger of
Lovers often ends in maledictions. I could give her no comfort, nor no
treasure, all I have being dedicated to Dulcinea, and the treasure of Knights
Errant is like that of Fairies, false and apparent only, and all I can do, is
but to remember her, and this I may do without prejudice to Dulcinea, whom
thou wrongest with thy slacknesse in whipping thy self, and in chastising that
flesh of thine, that I wish I might see devoured by Wolves, that had rather
preserve it self for Worms, then for the remedy of that poor Lady.

Sir, said Sancho, if you will have the truth, I cannot persuade my self that
the lashing of my posteriors can have any reference to the dis-enchanting of
the Enchanted, which is as much as if you should say, If your head grive you,
anoint your knees, at least, I dare swear, that in as many Histories as you
have read of Knight Errantry, you never saw whipping dis-enchant any body: but
howsoever, I will take it when I am in the humor, and when time serves I Will
chastise my self.

God grant thou do, said Don-Quixote, and heaven give thee grace to fall into
the reckoning and obligation thou have to help my Lady, who is thy Lady too,
since thou art mine.

With this discourse they held on their way, till they came just to the place
where the Bulls had over-runne them: and Don-Quixote called it to mind, and
said to Sancho; In this field we met the brave shepheardesses, and the lusty
Swains, that would here have imitated and renewed the Pastoral Arcadia: an
invention as strange as witty; in imitation of which, if thou think fit,
Sancho, we will turn Shepherds for the time that we are to live retired:
I Will buy Sheep, and all things fit for our Pastoral vocation, and calling my
self by the name of the Shepherd Quixote, and thou the Shepherd Pansino,
we will walk up and down the Hills, through Woods and Meadows, singing and
versifying, and drinking the liquid Cristall of the fountains sometimes out of
the clear Springs, and then out of the swift running Rivers; The Oaks shall
afford us plentiful of their most sweet fruit, and the Bodies of hardest,
Corke-trees shall be our seats, the Willowes shall give us shade, the Roses
their Perfume, and the wide Meadows Carpets of a thousand Flourished colors:
the Air shall give us a free and pure breath: the Moon and Stars in spite
of Nights darkness shall give us light, our Songs shall afford us delight, and
our wailing Mirth, Apollo verses, and Love-conceits, with which we may be
eternallized and famous, not only in this present Age, but Ages to come also.
By ten, quoth Sancho, this kind of life is very suitable to my desires, and I
believe the Bachelor Samson and Master Nicholas the Barber will no sooner have
seen it, but they will turn Sheepheards with us: and pray God the Vicar have
not a mind to enter into the sheep-coat too, for he is a merry Lad and jolly.
Thou have said very well, Sancho, said Don-Quixote, and the Bachelor Samson
Carrasco, if so be he enter the Pastoral lap (as doubtless he will) may
call himself the Shepherd Samsonmo, or Carrascon. Master Nicholas may call
himself Niculoso, as the ancient Boscan called himself, Nemoroso; [ Alluding
to the word Bosque for a Wood.] I know not what name we should bestow upon the
Vicar, except it were some derivative from his own, calling him the Shepherd
Curiambro. The Sheepheardesses on whom we must be enamoured, we may choose
their names as amongst Pears: and since my Ladies name serves as well for a
Sheepheardesse as for a Princess, I need not trouble my self to get her
another better, give thou thine what name thou will.

Mine, said Sancho, shall have no other name but Teresona, which will fit her
fatness well, and it is taken from her Christian name, which is Teresa, and
the rather I celebrating her in my verses, do discover my chaste thoughts,
since I seek not in other men's houses better bread then is made of Wheat:
'twere not fit that the Vicar had his sheepheardesse, to give good example, but
if the Bachelor will have any, it is in his own free choice.

Lord bless me, Sancho, said Don-Quixote, and what a life shall we have on
't? What a world of Horne-pipes, and Zamora Bag-pipes shall we hear? What
Tabouring shall we have? What janggling of Bells and playing on the Rebocke?
And if to these different Musicks we have the Albogne too, we shall have all
kind of pastoral instruments.

What is Albogne (quoth Sancho?) It is, said Don-Quixote, a certain plate made
like a Candlestick, and being hollow, gives, if not a very pleasing or
harmonious sound, yet it displeases not altogether, and agrees well with the
rusticke Tabor and Bag-pipe; and this word Albogne is Moorish, as all those in
our Castilian tongue are, that begin with All, to wit, Almoasa, Almorzar,
Alhombra, Alguazil, Alucena, Almazon, Alsancia and the like, with some few
more; and our language has only three Moorish words that end in I, which are
Borcegni, Zaguicami, and Meravedi: Albeli and Alfaqui are as well known to be
Arabic by their beginning with All, as their ending in I.

This I have told thee by the way, the word Albogne having brought it into my
head, and one maine help we shall have for the perfection of this calling, that
I, thou know, am somewhat Poetical, and the Bachelor Samson Carrasco is a
most exquisit one, for the Vicar I say nothing, but I lay a wager he has his
smacke, and so has Master Nicolas too: for all these, or the most of them play
upon a Gittern, and are Rimers, I will complain of absence: thou shall praise
thy self for a constant Lover, the Shepherd Carrascon shell mourn for being
disdained, and let the Vicar Curiambro do what he pleases, and so there is
no more to be desired.

To which (said Sancho) Sir, I am so unlucky, that I fear I shall not see the
day, in which I may see my self in that happy life: oh what neat Spoones shall
I make when I am Shepherd! What Hodg-potches and Cream! What Garlands and
other pastoral trumperies? that though they get me not a fame of being wise,
ye^ they shall, that I am witty. My little Daughter Sanchica shall bring our
dinner to the Flock: but soft, she is handsome, and you have Sheepheards more
Knaves then Fools, and I would not have her come for Wool, and return shorn:
and your loose desires are as incident to the fields as to Cities, and as well
in Sheepheards Cotages, as Princes Palaces, and the cause being removed, the
sin will be saved, and the heart dreams not of what the eye sees not, and
better a fair pair of Heels, then die at the Gallows.

No more Proverbs, Sancho, (said Don-Quixote) since each of these is enough to
make us know thy meaning, and I have often advised thee, not to be so
prodigal of thy Proverbs, but more sparing: but it is in vain to bid thee; for
the more thou art bid, the more thou will do it. Me thinks, Sir, said
Sancho, you are like what is said, that the Drying Pan, said to the Kettle,
Avaunt, Blacke-browes; you reprehend me for speaking of Proverbs, and you thread
up yours by two and two.

Look you, Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, I use mine to purpose, and when I speak
them, they fit as well as a little Ring to the Finger: but thou bring in
thine so by head and shoulders, that thou rather draggest then guidest them:
and if I forget not, I told thee heretofore, that Proverbs are brief
sentences, drawn from the experience and speculation of our An^ient Sages, and
a Proverb ill applied, is rather a foppery then a sentence: but leave we this
now; and since night comes on us, let us retire a little out of the Highway,
where we will pass this night, and God knows what may befall us to Morrow.
So they retired, and made a short supper, much against Sancho's will, who now
began to think of the hard life of Knight Errantry in Woods and Mountains,
especially calling to his remembrance, the Castles and houses as well of Don
Diego de Miranda, and where the rich Camacho's marriage was^ and likewise Don
Antonio Moreno's: but he considered with himself, that nothing could last
ever: and so he slept away the rest of that night, which his Master passed
watching.

CHAP. LXVIII.
Of the Bristled Adventure that befell Don-Quixote.
THe night was somewhat dark, though the Moon were up, but she was obscured;
for sometimes my Lady Diana goes to walk with the Antipodes, and leaves the
Mountains black, and the Valleys darkened. Don-Quixote complied with Nature,
having slept his first sleep, he broke off his second, contrary to Sancho, for
his lasted from night till morning: a ^^gne of his good complexion, and few
cares. These kept Don-Quixote waking in such sort, that he awakned. Sancho,
and said to him;

I wonder, Sancho, at thy free condition: I imagine thou art made of Marble, or
of hard Brass, which neitheir moves, or has any feeling. I wake, when thou
sleep; I weep, when thou singest; I am ready to faint with fasting, when
thou art lazy, and unweidly with pure cramming in: 'twere the part of good
Servants, to have a fellowfeeling of their Masters griefs, if it were but for
decency: behold this nights brightness, and the solitude we are in, which
invites us to intermingle some watching with sleep: rise by thy life, and get
thee a little apart, and with a good courage and thankful cheer, give thy self
three or four hundredth lashes upon account, for Dulcinea's disenchanting: and
this I entreat of thee; for I will not now, as heretofore, come to handygripes
with thee; for I know, thou have shrewd Clutches: and after thou have done, we
will pass the rest of the night; I, chanting my absence, and thou thy
constancy, beginning from henceforward our Pastoral exercise, which we are to
keep in our Village.

Sir (said Sancho) I am of no Religious Order, that I should rise out of the
midest of my sleep to discipline my self; neither do I think it possible, that
from the pain of my whipping, I may proceed to Music. Pray Sir let me sleep,
and do not press me so to this whipping; for you will make me vow never to
touch so much as a hair of my coat, much less of my flesh. O hard heart! oh
ungodly Squire! oh ill given bread! and favors ill placed which I bestowed,
and thought to have more and more conferred upon thee: By me thou wast a
Governor; and from me thou wast in good possibility of being an Earl, or
having some equivalent Title, and the accomplishment should not have failed
when this our year should end: for I post tenebras spero lucem. I understand
not that (said Sancho) only I know that whilst I am sleeping, I neither fear
nor hope, have neither pain nor pleasure: and well fare him that invented
sleep, a cloak that covers all humane thoughts; the food, that slakes hunger;
the water, that q^encheth thirst; and the fire, that warmeth cold; the cold
that tempers heat; and finally, a current coin with which all things are
bought, a balance and weight that equals the King to the Shepherd; the fool
to the wise man: only one thing (as I have heard) sleep has ill, which is,
that it is like death, in that between a man asleep and a dead man, there is
little difference.

I have never Sancho (said Don-Quixote) heard thee speak more elegantly then
now; whereby I perceive, the Proverb thou often ^sest is true; You may know the
man by the conversation he keeps. Gods me, Master mine, I am not only he now
that threads on Proverbs: and they come freer from you (me thinks) and betwixt
yours and mine, there is this only difference, that yours are fitly applied,
and mine unseasonably.

In this discourse they were, when they perceived a deaf noise through all the
valleys. Don-Quixote stood up and laid hand to his sword, and Sancho squatted
under D^pple, and clapped the bundle of Armor, and his As^es Pack-saddle on each
side of him, as fearful as his Master was outrageous: still the noise increast
and drew nearer the two timorous persons, at least one; for the others valor
is sufficiently known.

The business was, That certain fellows drove some six hundred Swine to a
Fair to sell, with whom they traveled by night; and the noise they made with
their grunting and squeaking, was so great, that it deased Don-Quixote and
Sancho's ears, that never marked what it might be. It fell out that the
goodly grunting Herd were all in a troop together, and without respect to
Don-Quixote or Sancho's person, they trampled over them both, spoiling Sancho's
Trenches, and overthrowing not only Don-Quixote, but Rozinan^e also: the fury
of the sudden coming of these unclean beasts made a confusion, and laid on
ground the Pack-saddle, Armor, Rozinante, Sancho, and Don^Quixote. Sancho rose
as well as he could, and desired his Masters sword, telling him, he would
kill half a dozen of those unmannerly Hoggs; for now he knew them to be so.

Don-Quixote said, Let them alone friend, for this affront is a penalty for my
fault, and a just punishment it is from Heaven, that Dogs and Wasps ea^ a
vanquished Knight Errant, and that Swine trample over him.

And it is a punishment of Heaven too, belike (said Sancho) that Flies do bite
the Squires of vanquished Knights, that Li^e eat them, and Hunger close with
them. If we Squires were Sons, or near Kinsmen to the Knights we serve,
'twere not much we were partakers with them, even to the fourth generation;
but what have the Panca's to do with the Quixotes? Well; yet let us go fit our
selves again, and sleep the rest of the night, and 'twill be day, and we
shall have better luck.

Sleep thou Sancho (said Don-Quixote) for thou wast born to sleep, and I was
borne to wake: betwixt this and daybreak, I will give reins to my thoughts,
and vent them out in some Madrigall, that without thy knowledge I composed this
night.

Me thinks (said Sancho) that thoughts that give way to verses, are not very
troublesome: and therefore versifie you as much as you list, and I Will sleep as
much as I can: and so taking up as much of the ground as he would, he
crowched up together and slept liberally: Debts, nor suretiship, nor any other
affliction disturbing him.

Don-Quixote leaning to the body of a Beech or Cork-tree (for Cid Hamete
Benengeli distinguishes not what Tree it was) to the Music of his own sighs,
sung as solloweth: Love; when I think, etc. Each of which verses were
accompanied with many sighs, and not sew tears, fit for a vanquished Knight, and
one who had his heart pierced through with grief, and tormented with the absence
of his Dulcinea.

Now day came on, and Sir Sol with his beams played in Sancho's eyes; who awoke
and lazed himself, shaking and stretching out his lither limbs; he beheld the
havoc the Swine had made in his Sumpterie, and he cursed and re-cursed the
Herd.

Finally, both of them returned to their commenced Journey; and toward Sunset,
they saw some ten Horsemen coming toward them, and four or five footmen.
Done Quixote was aghast at heart, and Sancho shivered, for the troop drew nearer
to them, who had their Spears and Shields all in war like array.

Don-Quixote turned to Sancho, and said: If, Sancho, it were lawful for me to
exercise Arms, and that my promise had not bound my hands, I should think this
were an Adventure of Cake-bread: but perhaps it may be otherwise then we
think for.

By this the Horse men came, and lifting up their Lances without a word
speaking, they compassed in Don-Quixote before and behind; one of the footmen
threatening him with death, and clapping his finger to his mouth, in sign he
should not cry out; and so he laid hold on Rozinantes Bridle, and led him out
of the way: and the rest of the footmen catching Sancho's Dapple, all of them
most silently followed after those that carried Don-Quixote; who twice or
thrice would have asked, whither they carried? and what they would with him?
But he no sooner began to move his lips, when they were ready to close them
with their Lances points: And the same happened to Sancho, when one of the
footmen pricked him with a Goad, he offering but to speak; and Dapple they
punched too, as if he would have spoken: It now began to grow dark, so they
mended their pace; the two prisoners fears increased; especially when they
might hear that sometimetimes they were cried out on, Oa, on, ye Troclodites;
peace, ye barbarous Slaves; revenge, ye Anthropophagi; complain not, ye
S^ythians; open not your eyes, ye murderous Polyphemans, ye Butcherous Lions;
and other such names as these, with which they tormented the ears of the
lamentable Knight and Squire.

Sancho said within himself, We Tortelites? We Barbers Slaves? We
Popingeyes? We little Bitches to whom they cry Hist, Hist? [Sancho's
mistakes:] I do not like these names, this wind winnows no Corn, all our ill
comes together, like a whip to a Dog; and I would to God this Adventure might
end no worse.

Don-Quixote was embeseld; neither in all his discourse could he find what
reproachful names those should be, that were put upon him, whereby he
plainly perceived there was no good to be hoped for; but on the contrary, much
evil.

Within an hour of night they came the to Castle; which Don-Quixote well
perceived to be the Dukes, where but a while before they had been. Now God
defend (said he) as soon as he knew the place: what have we here? Why in this
house all is courtesy and good usage: but for the vanquished, all goes from
good to bad, and from bad to worse.

They entered the chief Court of the Castle, and they saw it so dressed and
ordered, that their admiration increased, and their fear redoubled; as you
shall see in the following Chapter.

CHAP. LXIX.
Of the newest and strangest Adventure that in all the course of this History
befell Don-Quixote.
THe Horsemen all alighted, and the Footmen taking Don-Quixote and Sancho
forcibly in their Arms, they set them in the Court, where round about were
burning a hundred Torches in their Vessels of purpose; and about the Turrets
above five hundred lights; so that in spite of dark night, they might there
see day.

In the midest of the Court there was a Hearse raised some two yards from the
ground, covered with a Cloth of State of black Velvet, and round about it there
burned a hundred Virgin Wax Candles in silver Candle-sticks; on the top of it
there lay a fair Damzell that showed to be dead, that with her beauty made
death her self seem fair: her head was laid upon a Pillow-bear of Cloth of
gold, crowned with a Garland, woven with diverse odoriferous Flowers: her hands
was crosted upon her breast, and betwixt them was a bough of flourishing yellow
Palm.

On one side of the Court there was a kind of Theater set up, and two
personages in their Chaires, who with their Crowns on their heads and Scepters
in their hands, seemed to be either real or feigned Kings: at the side of
this Theater where they went up by steps there were two other Chaires, where
they that brought the prisoners set Don-Quixote and Sancho; and all this with
silence, and signs to them that they should be silent too: but without that
they held their peace; for the admiration of what they there saw, tied their
tongues: After this two other principal personages came up, whom Don-Quixote
straight knew to be the Duke and Duchess, his Host and Hostess, who sat down
in two rich Chairs, near the two seeming Kings. Whom would not this admire?
especially having seen that the body upon the Hearse was the fair Altisidora?
When the Duke and Duchess mounted, Don Quixote and Sancho bowed to them, and
the Dukes did the like, nodding their heads a little: And now an Officer entered
athwart them; and coming to Sancho, clapped a Coat of black Buckram on him, all
painted with flames of fire: and taking his Cap off, he set a Miter on his
head, just such a one as the Inquisition causes to be set upon Heretics, and
bade him in his ear, he should not unsow his lips, for they would clap a gagg
in his mouth, or kill him.

Sancho beheld himself all over, and saw himself burning in flames; but since
they burned not indeed, he cared not a rush for them: he took off his Miter
and saw it painted with Devils; he put it on again, and said within himself:
Well, yet neither the one burns nor the other carries me away.

Don-Quixote beheld him also, and though fear suspended his senses, he could
not but laugh at Sancho's Picture: and now from under the Hearse there seemed
to sound a low and pleasant sound of Flutes, which being un-interrupted by any
man's voice (for there it seemed silence it self kept silence) was soft and
amorous.

Straight there appeared suddenly on the Pillow of the Hearse, a Carkeise of a
goodly Youth clad like a Roman, who to the sound of a Harp himself played on,
with a most sweet and clear voice, sung these two Stanza's following; [Which I
likewise omit, as being basely made on purpose, and so not worth the
translation.] Enough, said one of the two that seemed to be Kings; Enough,
divine singer: for it were to proceed in insinitum to paint unto us the
misfortunes and graces of the peerlesse Altisidora, not dead, as the simple
world surmizeth; but living in the tongues of Fame, and in the penance that
Sancho is to pass, to return her to the lost fight: and therefore thou, oh
Radamanthus! that judge with me in the darksome Caves of Dis, since thou
know all that is determining in the inscrutable Fates, touching the
restoring of this Damzel, tell and declare it forthwith, that the happiness
we expect from her return, may not be deferred.

Scarce had Judge Minos said this, when Radamanthus standing up, said, Go too,
Ministers of this house, high and low, great and small, come one after another,
and seal Sancho's Chin with four and twenty Tuckes, twelve Pinches, and with
Pins prick his Arms and Buttocks six times, in which Altisidora's health
consists.

When Sancho Panca heard this, he broke off silence, and said, I vow, you
shall as soon Tuck me, or handle my face, as make me turn Moor. Body of
me, what has the handling my face to do with this Damozells Resurrection?
The old Woman tasted the Spinach, etc. Dulcinea is enchanted, and I must be
whipped to disenchant her: Altisidora dies of some sickness it pleased God to
send her; and her raising must be with four and twenty Tucks given me, and
with grinding my body with Pins thrusts, and Pinching my Arms black and Blue:
away with your tricks to some other, I am an old Dog, and there is no Histing
to me.

Thou dyest, quoth Radamanthus aloud: ^elent, thou Tiger, humble thy self
proud Nembroth, suffer and be silent, since no impossibilities are required of
thee; and stand not upon difficulties in this business: thou shall be Tuckt,
and see thy self grinded, thou shall groan with Pinching. Go too, I say,
Ministers, fulfill my command; if not, as I am honest man, you shall rue the
time that ever you were born.

Now there came through the Court, six like old Waiting-women, one after another
in Procession; four with Spectacles, and all with their right hands lifted
aloft, with four fingers breadths of their wrists discovered, to make their
hands seem larger (as the fashion is.)

No sooner had Sancho seen them, when bellowing like a Bull, he said, Well
might I suffer all the world else to handle me, but that Waiting-women touch
me, I will never consent: Let um Cat-scratch my face, as my Master was served
in this Castle: let um thrust me through with Bodkin-pointed Daggers: let um
pull off my flesh with hot burning Pincers, and I will beareit patiently and
serve these Nobles: but that Waiting-women touch me let the Devil take me, I
will not consent.

Don-Quixote then interrupted him saying, Have patience soon: and please these
Lordings, and thank God, that he has given such vitrue to thy person; that
with the Ma^tyrdome of it thou may disenchant the enchanted, and raise up the
dead!

And now the Waiting-women drew near Sancho; who being won and persuaded,
settled in his Chair, offered his face and Chin to the first that came, who
gave him a well-sealed Tuck, and so made him a courtsie. Less courtsie, and
less Slabbersauces, good Mistress Mumpsimus, quoth Sancho: for, I protest your
hands smell of Vinegar.

At length all the Waiting-women sealed him, and others Pinched him: but that
which he could not suffer, was the Pins-pricking; and therefore he rose out
of his Chair very moody, and laying hold of a lighted Torch that was near
him, he ran after the women, and his executioners, saying, Avaunt, infernal
Ministers, for I am not made of Brass, not to be sensible of such
extraordinary martyrdom.

By this Altisidora that was weary with lying so long upon her back, turned on
one side: which when the bystanders saw, all of them cried out jointly,
Altisidora lives, Altisidora lives,

Radamanthus commanded Sancho to lay aside his choler, since now his intent
was obtained.

And as Don-Quixote saw Altisidora stir, he went to kneel down to Sancho,
saying, Son of my entrails; It Is now high time, that thou give thy self
some of the lashes to which thou art obliged, for the disenchanting of Dulcinea.

Now, I say, is the time, wherein thy virtue may be seasoned, and thou may
with efficacy effect the good that is expected from thee.

To which (quoth Sancho) Heida: this is lowre upon sour: 'twere good after
these Pinchings, Tucks and Pins-prickings, that lashes should follow; there is
no more to be done, but even take a good Stone, and tie it to my Neck, and cast
me into a Well: for which I should not grieve much; if so be that to cure
other folks ills, I must be the Pack-horse; let me alone, if not, I shall
mar all: And now Altisidora sat up in the Hearse, and the Ho-boyes,
accompanied with Flutes and Voices, began to sound, and all cried out, Live
Altisidora, Altisidora live. The Dukes rose up, and with them Minos and
Radamanthus, and altogether with Don-Quixote and Sancho went to receive
Altisidora, and to help her out of the Hearse, who feigning a kind of
dismaying, bowed down to her Lords, and to the two Kings, and looking askonce
on Don-Quixote said: God pardon thee, discourteous Knight, since by thy cruelty
I have remained in another world, me thinks at least this thousand years: And
thee I thank, the most compassionate Squire in the world; I thank thee for the
life I possess: And now dispose of six of my Smocks, which I give thee to make
six shirts; and if they be not all whole, yet they are clean at least.

Sancho kissed her hands with his Miter off and his knees on the ground, and
the Duke commanded they should return him his Cap, and instead of his Gown with
the flames, they should return him his Gaberdine. Sancho desired the Duke, that
they would leave him both, which he would carry into his Country, in memory of
that unheard of success. The Duchess answered they should, and that he knew
how much she was his friend. The Duke commanded all to avoid the Court, and to
retire to their lodgings, and that Don-Quixote and Sancho should be carried to
theirs they knew of old.

CHAP. LXX.
Of diverse rare things, which serve for the better illustration and clearing of
this History.
SANCHO slept that night upon a Quilt, and in Don-Quixotes own Chamber which he
would feign have avoided, had it been in his power; for he knew full well that
his Master would hardly let him sleep all night, by reason of the many
questions he would demand of him, to which he must of necessity make answer.
Now was he in no good humor to talk much; for he felt yet the smart of his
fore-passed torments, which were an hindrance to his tongue: And without doubt
he would rather have layn alone in any poor Shed, then with company in that
goodly house: So true was his fear, and so certain his doubt, as he was scarce
laid in his Bed, but his Master began this discourse unto him.

Sancho, what think thou of this nights success? Needs must a man confess
that great and powerful is the force of disdain, since as thou thy self have
seen with thine own eyes Altisidora had surely dyed, and that by no other
arrows, nor by any other sword, nor other instrument of War, no, nor by the
force of poison, but by the apprehension of the churlish rigor, and the disdain
wherewith I have ever used her.

She might (answerrd Sancho) have died in good time, and at her choice and
pleasure, so she would have let me alone in mine own house, since I was never
the cause that she became a Lover, nor did I ever in all my life scorn or
disdain her. But I wot not, nor can I imagine how it may be, that the health
or welfare of Altisidora, a Gentlewoman more fantastical then discreet, has
any reflection (as I have said heretofore) upon the afflictions of Sancho
Panca. Now I plainly and distinctly perceive, that there be both Enchanters
and Enchantments in the world, from whom God deliver me, since I cannot well
deliver my self from them: and therewithal I entreat you to let me sleep; and
except you will have me throw my self out of a window, ask me no more
questions.

Sleep my friend Sancho (replied Don-Quixote) unless the nipping scoffs and
bitter frumps which thou have received will not permit thee so to do.

There is no grief (answered Sancho) comparable unto the affront of scoffing
frumps, and so much the more sensible am I of such affronts, as that I have
received them by old women; a mischief take them: I beseech you once more that
you will suffer me to sleep, since that sleep is an easing of all miseries. Be
it as thou say (quoth Don-Quixote) and God accompany thee.

So they both fell a-sleep, and whilst they slept, Cid Hamete, Author of this
great History, would needs write and relate, why the Duke and the Duchess had
caused this monument to be built and invented, all that you have seen above.

He writes then, That the Bachelor Samson Carrasco, having not forgotten what
had happened to him, at what time, under the name of the Knight of the
Looking-glasses, he was vanquished and overthrown by Don-Quixote; and
therewithal how all his designs and purposes were vanished into smoke; yet
nevertheless would he (hoping for better success) attempt the combat again:
Therefore is it, that being informed by the Page who brought the Letter, and
with it the present unto Teresa Panca, the Wife of Sancho, from the place where
Don-Quixote made his residence, he recovered new Arms and a Horse.

Then caused he the white Moon to be painted in his Shield: A Mulet carried
all this equipage, and a Lob or Swain led the same, and not Thomas Ceciall his
ancient Esquire, for fear he should be known of Sancho and Don-Quixote.

He so well bestirred himself in his journies, that at last he came to the
Dukes Castle, who taught him the way or tract that Don-Quixote had taken, and
how he had a great desire to be present at the Tiltings and Tournaments of
Saragosa. He likewise related unto him the gullings or gudgeons that he had
given him, with the invention of Dulcinea's dis-enchantment, which should be
accomplished at the charges of Sancho's buttocks. In sum, he understood from
him the fob or jest that Sancho had used toward his Master, in making him
believe that Dulcinea was Enchanted and transformed into a Country Less, and
how the Duchess his Wife had given Sancho to understand, that himself was the
man that received himself, for so much as Dulcinea was verily Enchanted.

The Bachelour could not contain himself from laughing, and therewithal to be
amazed, considering the quaint subtilty, and plain simplicity of Sancho, equal
unto the extreme folly of Don-Quixote. The Duke desired him, that if he met
with him, and either vanquished him or not, he would be pleased to come that
way again, to the end he might advertise him of it.

The Bachelor promised him to do it, and so took his leave of the Duke, to go
and see whether he could find Don-Quixote. He found him not at Saragosa, but
went farther: and then befell him what you have already heard.

He came afterward to the Dukes Castle, and there made report of all, together
with the conditions of the Combat: He moreover told them, that Don-Quixote
came again to accomplish, as a perfect Knight Errant, the promise which he had
made, to retire himself to his own Village, and there to abide the full space
of one whole year. And that during the said time, it might peradventure be
brought to pass (said the Bachelor) that he might be cured of his folly.
That he never had other intention, and that for this only cause he had thus
disguised himself; for it was great pity that a Gentleman, so well skilled and
versed in all things as Don-Quixote was, should become a fool.

With that he took leave of the Duke, and went to his Borough, where he
staid for Don-Quixote, who was coming after him. Whereupon the Duke took
occasion to put this trick upon him; for he took a wondrous pleasure of what
succeeded unto Sancho and Don-Quixote: and therefore he caused all the
approaches and highways about his Castle to be laid and watched, especially
where he imagined our Knight might come. And for the said cause he placed
diverse of his servants, as well on foot as on horseback, to the end that if
they met with him, willed he or nilled he, they should bring him to the Castle

Now it fortuned that they met with him, and forthwith they gave the Duke
knowledge of it, who was already resolved what he would do. As soon then as
he knew of his coming, he caused all the Torches and lights that were in the
Court to be lighted, and Altisidora to be placed upon the Tomb with all the
preparation that you have seen before; and that so lively represented, as one
would have found very little difference between the truth and that which was
counterfeit.

Cid Hamete goes yet farther: for he says, that he asturedly believes,
that the mockers were as foolish as the mocked: and that there wanted not two
inches of the Dukes and Duchesses utter privation of common understanding,
since they took so much pains to mock two fools, whereof the one was then sound
asleep; and the other broad awake, transported with his raving and ranging
thoughts.

In the mean time the day surprised them, and they desired to rise; for the
sluggish feathers were never pleasing unto Don-Quixote, were he conquered or
conqueror.

Altisidora, who, as Don-Quixote, supposed, being risen from death to life,
conforming her self to her Master and Mistrisses humor, being crowned with the
very same Garland which she had in the tomb, attired in a loose Gown of white
Ta^^ata, all beset with flowers of gold; her hair loose and dangling down her
shoulders, leaning upon a staff of fine Ebony wood, she entered into
Don-Quixotes Chamber, who so soon as he saw her, was so amazed and confounded
at her presence, as he shrunk down into his Bed, all covered with the clothes
and hid with the sheets and counterpoint, that he neither spoke word, nor used
any manner of gesture toward her, as might witness that he desired to show
her any courtesy.

Altisidora sat down in a chair, which was near unto Don-Quixote's head, and
after fetching a deep deep sigh, with a low sweet and mild voice, she thus
bespake him.

Sir Don Quixote, whenever women of quality, or maidens of discretion trample
their honor under their feet, and give their tongue free liberty and scope to
exceed the bounds of convenience or modesty, publishing the secreets lurking in
their hearts, they then shall find themselves brought to extreme misery and
distress.

Now am I one of those pressed, vanquished, and also enamoured: All which
notwithstanding I suffer patiently, and continue honest. So that having been
so, too much silence was the cause that my soul went out of my body, and I lost
my life. It is now two days since, that the consideration and remembrance of
the rigor, (which thou oh more stony-minded then any marble, and inexorable
Knight, so to reject my plaints) which you have used toward me, brought me to
my lives end, or at least I have been deemed and taken for dead by all those
that saw me. And had it not been that Love, who taking pity of me, deposed my
recovery among the grievous torments of this good Esquire, I should for ever
have remained in the other world. Love might well depose it (replied Sancho) in
those of my Ass, and I would have been very glad of it: But tell me I pray you
good Damzel, even as Heaven may provide you of another more kind loving-Lover
then my Master, what is it that you have seen in the other world? What is there
in Hell that he who dies desperate must necessarily undergo? I must needs
(quoth Altisidora) tell you the plain truth of all. So it is, that I was not
wholly or thoroughly dead, since I came not into Hell: for had I once been
therein, there is no question, but I had never been able to come out of it at
my pleasure.

True it is, that I came even unto the gate thereof, where I met with a dozen
of Devils, who in their hosen and doublets were playing at Tennis-ball; they
did wear Falling-bands set with peaks of Flemmish bone-lace, with Cuffs of the
very same, so deep, as they appeared four good inches longer then the arm, to
the end their hands might seem the greater: Their Battledors or Rackets were of
fire. But that which made me wonder most, was, that they used Books in stead of
Balls, which Books were full stuffed with wind and stifning, a thing both
wondrous and newly-strange, yet did not that so much astonie me: for as it is
proper unto those, that win at any Game, to rejoice and be glad; whereas those
that lose, are ever sad and discontent: there all grumbled, chafed, fretted,
and bitterly cursed one another.

That Is no wonder (quoth Sancho) since the Devils, whether they play, or play
not; whether they winn, or winn not at that play, they can never be content.

Belike it is even so (replied Altisidora:) but there is also another thing,
which likewise bred some amazement in me; that is to say, brought me into
admiration. Which is, that the Ball, that was but once tossed or stricken,
could not serve another time, so that at every stroke, they were forced to
change Books whether they were old or new which was a mavelous thing to
behold.

Now it happened, that they gave so violent a stroke unto a modern Book, and
very fairly bound, that it made the very Guts to fly out of it, and scattered
the Leaves thereof up and down.

Then said one Devil unto another, I prithee look what that Book treats
of. It is (answed the other Devil) the Second part of the History of
Don-Quixote de la Mancha, not composed by Cid Hamete, it is first Author, but
by an Aragonis, who braggeth to be born at Tordesillas. Now fie upon it (quoth
the other Devil) out of my sight with it, and let it be cast into the very
lowest pit of Hell, so deep as mine eyes may never see it again. But why (said
the other Devil?) is it so bad a Book? It is so vile a Book (replied the
first Devil) that had I my self expressly composed it, I could never have
encountered worse.

In the mean time they followed on their game, tossing other Books to and fro
but having heard the name of Don-Q^ixote, he whom I love so passionately, I
have labored to engrave that vision in my memory.

Now without doubt then (said Don-Quixote) it was a right vision: for, there is
no other Man of that name in the whole World but my self: And that History
does already go from Hand to hand through all parts of the Universe: and yet
stays in no place, for so much as every one will have a kick at it. Now I
have not been angry or vexed, when I have heard that I wander up and down
like a fantastic body, amidst the Pitchy shades of Hell, and not in the light
of the earth; since I am not the man that History speaks of. If it be true
and faithfully compiled, it will live many ages; but if it be nothing worth it
will dye even at it is birth.

Altisidora would have continued her plaints, accusing Don-Quixote of rigor
and unkindnes^e; but he said thus unto her, Madame, I have often told you,
that I am very angry, that you have settled your thoughts on me; since you can
draw nothing from me but bare thanks, and no remedy at all. I was only borne
for Dulcinea of Toboso, and to her only have the Destinies (if there be any)
wholly dedicated me. To think, that any other beauty can possess or usurp
the place, which she possesses in my soul, were to believe an impossibility.
And this should suffice to disabuse you, and to make you to retire your self
within the bounds of your honesty, since no creature is tide unto
impossibilities.

Altisidora hearing these words, made a semblance to be very angry: so that,
as it were in a great anger, she thus bespake him, I swear by the Prince of
the Mumps, the soul of a Mortar, and stone of a Date; more obstinate and
hard-hearted, thena rude and base Pesant when one sueth unto him, and when he
addresseth his level to the Butt or Mark: if I take you in hand, I will
pluck your very Eyes out of your head.

Do you happily suppose, Sir vanquished, and Don Knocked down with Bats and
Cudgels, that I would have dyed for you? No, no, Sir, whatsoever you have seen
this night, has been nothing but a fiction, or thing fained. I am not a
Maiden, that would suffer so much as the least-least pain at the tip of my
Nails for such a Camel as you are; much less that I would dye for such a
gross Animal.

I believe it well (quoth Sancho then) for all these Lovers deaths are but to
cause sport and laughter. Well may they say, that they dye: but that they will
hasten their deaths, Judas may believe it if he list.

As they were in these discourses, the Musician and Poet, who had sung the
foregoing Stanza's, entered into the Chamber, and making a very low reverence
unto Don-Quixote, he thus said unto him, Sir, Knight, I beseech you to hold
me in the number of your humblest servants. I have long since been most
affectionate unto you, as well by reason of your farre-bruited renown, as for
your high-raised fears of Arms.

Tell me (answered Don-Quixote) who you are, that my courtesy may answer your
merit.

The Young man gave him to understand, that he was the Musician and the
Panegirick of the fore-passed night.

In good sooth (replied Don-Quixote) you have a very good voice: Nevertheless
me seems, that what you sung was not greatly to the purpose: for what have the
Stanza's of Garsilasse to do with the death of this Damzell? My fair Sir, said
the Musician, you ought not to wonder at that; the best and choicest Poets of
our age do practice it: so that every man writes as best pleases his
fantasy, and steals what, and from whom he lists, whether it cohere with the
purpose or not: By reason whereof all the follies, absurdities, or fopperies
that they sing, indite, or write, they ascribe unto a Poetical license.

Don-Quixote would have answered, but he was hindered by the Duke and Duchess,
who both entered the Chamber to see him. Amongst whom there passed so long a
discourse and pleasant a conference, in which Sancho alleged so many ready
quips, witty conceits, merry Proverbs, and therewithal so many wyly shifts and
subtle knaveries, as the Duke and the Duchess were all astonished again, as
well by reason of his simplicity, as of his subtlety.

Don-Quixot^ besought them to give him leave to depart the very same day; since
that Knights subdued, as he was, ought rather to dwell in an homely Cottage or
simple Shed, then in Kingly Palaces; which they most willingly granted him: And
the Duchess demanded of him whether Altisidora was in his good favor, or no.
Madame (answered Don-Quixote) you are to understand, that all the infirmity of
this Damzell takes its beginning and being from idleness, and that an honest
occupation and continual exercise is the only remedy for it: She was even now
telling me, that in Hell they are working Tapistry work, and that there are
made Tyrings and Net works.

I think that she is skillfull in such works, and that is the reason she
therein imployes her self, never ceasing to handle small Spindles or Spooles:
and thus the Images of him she loves will never be removed in her imagination.

What I tell you is most certain^ It is my opinion, it is my consell.

And mine also (quoth Sancho) since I never saw any workman that applied or
busied himself about such works, that dyed for love. The Maidens, I say,
occupied about such works think more on the accomplishing of their task, then
on that of their Loves. I judge of it by my self, whilst I am digging or
delving, I never think on my Pinkany at all; I speak of my Teresa Panca, whom I
love better a thousand times then my very eye lids.

Sancho, you speak very well (said the Duchess) and I will take such order, as
my Altisidora shall henceforward occupy her self about such works; for she
can work them excellently well.

Madame (quoth Altisidora) I shall not need to use such a remedy, since the
remembrance or consideration of the cruelties and unkindnesses which this
Robber and roving Thief has used toward me^ will be of force, without any
other device or artifice to blot and deface them out of my memory. In the mean
while, with your Highnesses permission, I will be gone from hence, that so
mine eyes may not behold, not only his filthy and ghastly shape, but his ugly
and abominable countenance.

The words (replied the Duke) which you utter, make me remember the old
Proverb, which teaches us, that he who sharply chides is ready to pardon.

Altisidora made a show to dry up the tears from her eyes with a Handkerchief;
and then making a very low courtesy unto her Master and Mistress, she went out
of the Chamber.

Alas poor Damzel (said then Sancho) I send thee ill luck, since thou have
already met with it, in lighting upon a soul made of a Skuttle, and a heart of
Oak. Had thou had to do with me, thou should have found a Cock of me
that would have crowed after another fashion.

Thus their discourse brake off; Don-Quixote took his clothes, dined with the
Duke and Duchess, and in the afternoon went his way.

CHAP. LXXI.
Of what befell Don-Quixote and his Squire Sancho Panca, in their travel
toward their Village.
THe vanquished Knight Errant, Don-Quixote de la Mancha went on his Journey
very sad and pensive on the one side, and most glad and buxome on the other:
from his being conquered proceeded the cause of his sadness; and his
gladness, in considering the worth and virtue of Sancho, whereof he gave
manifest evidence, in the resurrection of Altisidora; although with some
scruple he persuaded himself, that the enamoured Damzell was not verity dead.

Sancho was no whit well pleased, but chafed to himself because Altisidora had
not kept promise with him, and given him the Shirts he expected at her hands.
And therefore musing and pondring on them, he said to his Master: By my faith
Sir, I am the most unfortunate Physician that may be found in the world: There
be some Leaches that kill a sick man whom they have under cure, and will
nevertheless be well paid for their pains. Now all they do, is but to write
a short Bill of certain Medicines, which the Apothecary, and not they, does
afterward compound: Whereas I, clean contrary, to whom the recovery and health
of others does cost many a clod of blood, many a first and bob, many a bitter
frump, and many a lash with whips and rods, reap not so much as one poor
farthing.

But certainly I promise you, if any diseased or sick body fall into my hands
again, before I cure um, He be very well greased for my pains: For the Abbot
lives singing, and I cannot think, that the heavens have endowed me with the
virtue and knowledge I have, to the end I should communicate and impart the
same unto others for nothing.

My good friend Sancho (answered Don-Quixote) thou art in the right, and
Altisidora has done very ill, that she has not given thee the shirts which
she promised thee, although that virtue and property which thou have, have
been given thee gratis, and that in learning and studying it, thou have not
been at a penny charge: nevertheless the troubles and vexations which thou
have received, and endured in thine own person, are far more then all the
studies that thou could have undergone or employed about. As for me, I can
tell thee, that if thou would have had the full pay for the whip-lashes that
thou should give thy self for the dis-enchanting of Dulcinea, thou have
already fully received it: Yet know I not whether the wages or hire will answer
the Cure, or recovery; and I would not have it be an hindrance to the remedy.
Me seems notwithstanding^ that one shall lose nothing in the trial. Consider
Sancho, what thou will have, and forthwith whip thy self, and with thine own
hands pay thy self downright, since thou have money of mine in thy keeping.

Sancho presently opened his eyes and ears a foot wide at these kind offers,
and took a resolution with a cheerful heart to whip and lash himself: and
therefore said unto his Master: Now is the time my Noble Sir, that I will
wholly dispose my self to give you satisfaction, since I shall reap some
bene^it by it. The love of my Children and my Wife induces me to have no
regard at all unto the harm or ill that may thereby come unto me.

Tell me then, what will you give me for every stripe or lash? If I were bound
to pay thee (replied Don-Quixote) equivalent to the greatness and quality of
the remedy, the treasure of Venice, and the rich Mines of Peru would not
suffice to recompense thee. Look well thy self what thou have of mine, and
value every lash as thou will. The whip lashes (quoth Sancho) are in number
three thousand three hundred and odd: I have already given my self five, the
other remain behind: Let the five serve to deduct the odd number remaining,
and let all be reduced to three thousand and three hundred: My meaning is, to
have for every lash a piece of three blanks (and less I will not have should
all the world command me the contrary) so that they will amount to three
thousand and three hundred pieces of three blanks. The three thousand, make a
thousand and five hundred half Ryalls, and they make seven hundred and fifty
whole Ryalls; and the three hundred make one hundred and fifty half Ryalls,
which amount unto the sum of threescore and fifteen Ryalls, which added unto
the seven hundred and fifty, the whole sum amounts unto eight hundred and
five and twenty Ryalls.

I will reckon this sum, and deduct it from that I have of yours in my
keeping, and by this means shall enter into my house both rich and well
satisfied, albeit well whipped and scourged: for trouts are not caught with
nothing; and I say no more.

Oh thrice happy Sancho! oh amiable Sancho! (said Don-Quixote) how am I and
Dulcinea bound to serve thee, so long as the Heavens shall be pleased to give
us life? If she recover her first being, and if it be impossible to continue
(...) in that state, her misfortune shall prove most fortunate, and my defeat
or conquest, a most glorious and happy triumph. Then look Sancho, when thou
will begin this discipline, and I will give thee one hundred Ryalls over and
above, that so I may bind thee to begin betimes. When (replied Sancho?) Even
this very night. Be you but pleased, that this night we meet in the open
field, and you shall see me open, gash, and flay my self.

To be short, the night came, which Don-Quixote had with all manner of
impatience long looked for; to whom it seemed that the wheels of Apollo's
Chariot had been broken, and that the day grew longer then it was wont, even as
it happens unto Lovers, who think that they shall never come to obtain the
accomplishment of their desires. At last they entered a grove of delight some
Trees, which was somewhat remote, and out of the highway. After they had taken
off the saddle and Pack-saddle of Rozinante and Dapple, they sat down upon the
green grass, and supped with such Victuals as Sancho had in his Wallets.

This good Squire having made of Dapples halter or head-stall a good big whip
or scourage, he went about twenty paces from his Master, and thrust himself
among bushes and hedges.

Don-Quixote seeing him martch thus all naked and with so good a courage, began
thus to discourse unto him: Take heed, good friend, that thou hack not thy self
in pieces, and that the stripes and lashes stay the one another leisure; thou
must not make such haste in thy Career, that thy wind or breath fail in thy
couse. My meaning is, that thou must not lash thy self so hard and fast, that
thy life faint before thou come to thy desired number: But to the end that thou
lose not thy self for want of a pair of writing-Tables, more or less, I will
stand aloof off, and upon these my prayer-beads will number the lashes that
thou shall give thy self. Now the heavens favor thee, as thy good meaning well
deserves.

A good Play Master (answered Sancho) will never grudge to give wages; I think
to curry or so belabour my self, that without endangering my life, my lashes
shall be sensible unto me, and therein must the substance of this miracle
consist. And immediately Sancho stripped himself bare from the gyndle upward,
and taking the whip in his hand began to rib-baste and lash himself roundly;
and Don-Quixote to number the strokes. When Sancho had given himself seven or
eight stripes, he thought he had killed himself; so that pawsing a while, he
said to his Master, that he was very much deceived, and would therefore
appeal, for so much as every whip-lash did in lieu of a piece of three Blanks,
deserve half a Ryall.

Make an end my friend Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) and be not dismayed; for I
will re-double thy pay.

Now by my life then (quoth Sancho) blows shall shore upon me as thick as
hail: but the Mountebank and cheating companion, in stead of lashing his
shoulders, he whipped the Trees, and so sighingly groaned at every stroke,
that you would have thought his soul had flown out of his body.

Don-Quixote, who was now full of compassion fearing he would kill himself,
and that, through the folly of Sancho, his desires should not be accomqlished,
began thus to say unto him: Friend, I conjure thee, let this business end
here; this remedy seems to me very hard and sharp. It shall not be amiss,
that we give time unto Time; for Rome was never built in one day. If I have
told right, thou have already given thy self more then a thousand lashes: it
now suffices; let me use a homely pharse, That the Ass endure his charge, but
not the sur-charge.

No, no, my good Sir (answered Sancho) it shall never be said of me, Money well
paid, and the Arms broken. I pray you go but a little aside, and permit me to
give my self one thousand stripes more, and then we shall quickly make an end;
yea, and we shall have more left behind. Since thou art so well disposed
(replied Don-Quixote) I will then withdraw my self, may the heavens assist and
recompense thee.

Sancho returned to his task, with such an earnest passion, that the bark of
many a Tree fell off, so great was the rigor and fury wherewith he scourged
himself. Now in giving such an exceeding and outrageous lash upon a hedge, he
cried out alowd, Here is the place where Samson shall dye, with all those that
are with him.

Don-Quixote ran presently at the sound of that woeful voice, and at the noise
of that horrible whip-stroak. Then laying fast hold on the halter, which served
Sancho in lieu of an Oxe-pizle, he said to him: Friend Sancho, let Fortune
never permit that thou, to give me contentment, hazard the loss of thy life,
which must serve for the entertainment of thy Wife and Children, I will contain
my self within the bounds of the next hope, and will stay until thou have
recovered new strength, to the end, this business may be ended to the
satisfaction of all parties.

My good Sir (said Sancho) since you will needs have it so, in good time be
it. In the mean while, I beseech you Sir, cast your Cloak upon my shoulders: I
am all in a sweat, and I would be loath to take cold. Our new disciplinants
run the like danger.

Don-Quixote did so, and leaving himself in his doublet, he covered Sancho, who
fell a-sleep, and slept until the Sun awakned him. They kept on their way so
long, that at last they arrived to a place three leagues off, and at last staid
at an Inn.

Don-Quixote knew it to be an Inn, and not a Castle round environed with
ditches or trenches, fortified with Towers, with Port-^^llices, and strong
Draw-bridges: for since his last defeature, he discerned and distinguished of
all things that presented themselves unto him with better judgment, as we
shall presently declare.

He was lodged in a low chamber, to which certain old-worn curtains of painted
Serge served in lieu of Tapistry hangings, as commonly they use in Country
Villages. In one of the pieces might be seen painted by a bungling and
unskillfull hand, the rape of Helen, at what time her fond-hardy guest stole
her from Menelaus. In another was the History of Dido, and Aeneas; She on an
high Turret with a sheet, making sign unto her fugitive guest, who on the Sea,
carried in a Ship, was running away from her.

Don-Quixote observed in these two stories, that Helen seemed not to be
discontented with her rape, for so much as she leared and smiled underhand;
whereas beauteous Dido seemed to trickle down tears from her eyes as big as
Wall-nuts. Don Quixote in beholding this painted work, said; These two Ladies
were exceedingly unfortunate that they were not borne in this age, and I most
of all thrice unhappy, that I was not born in theirs; In faith I would so have
spoken to these Lordly gallants, as Troy should not have been burned, nor
Carthage destroyed, since that only by putting Parts to death, I should have
been the occasion that so many mischiefs would never have happened.

I hold a wager (quoth Sancho) that e're long there shall be never a
Tipling-house, Tavern, Inn, Hostory, or Barbers Shop, but in them all we
shall see the History of our famous Acts painted: nevertheless I would with
with all my heart, that they might be drawn by a more cunning and skillfull
hand, then by that which has pourtraid these figures.

Thou have reason Sancho (answered Don-Quixote:) for this Painter is like unto
Orbanegia, who dwelled at Vbeda, who when he was demanded what he was
Painting, made this answer, That which shall come forth to light: And if
perchance he drew a Cock, he would write above it, This is a Cock, lest any
man should think it to be a Fox. Now me thinks Sancho, that such ought to be
the Painter or the writer: (for all is one same thing) who has set forth the
History of this new Don-Quixote, because he has painted or written that which
may come forth to the open light. He has imitated a certain Poet named
Mauleon, who the last year was at the Court, who suddenly would make answer to
whatsoever was demanded him. And as one asked him one day, what these words
Deum de Deo signified? He answered in Spanish, De donde diere. But omitting
all this, tell me Sancho, Have thou a mind to give thy selfanother touch this
night, and will thou have it to be under the roof of a house, or else in the
open air?

Now I assure you (quoth Sancho) for the stripes and lashes that I intend to
give my self, I love them as well in the house as in the open fields: yet with
this Proviso, That I would have it to be amongst Trees; for me thinks that
they keep me good company, and do exceedingly help me to endure and
undergo my travel and pains.

Friend Sancho (said Don-Quixote) that shall not be: rather reserve them, that
you may exercise them when we shall be arrived at our Village, whither at the
farthest we shall reach the next day after to morrow; and in the mean time thou
shall have recovered new strength.

Sancho answered, that he might do what best pleased him; but notwithstanding
he desired to dispatch this business in hot blood, and whilst the Mill was
going; for dangers consist often in lingering and expectation, and that with
prayers unto God, a man must strike with his Mallet; That one, take it, is more
worth then two; thou shall have it: And better is one Sparrow in the hand, then
a Vulture flying in the air.

Now for Gods sake Sancho (replied Don-Quixote) let us not allege so many
Proverbs; me thinks thou art still returning unto Sicut erat. I prithee speak
plainly, clearly, and go not so about the bush with such embroyled speeches,
as I have often told thee: and thou shall see, that one loaf of bread will
yield thee more then an hundred.

I am so unluckie (quoth Sancho) that I cannot discourse without Proverbs, nor
can I allege a Proverb, that seems not to be a reason unto me: Nevertheless,
if I can, I will correct my self: and with that they gave over their
enterparlie at that time.

CHAP. LXXII.
How Don-Quixote and Sancho arrived at their Village.
DOn-Quixote and Sancho looking for night, stayed in that Inn: The one to end
in the open fields, the task of his discipline; and the other to see the
success of it, whence depended the end of his desires. During which time a
Gentleman on horseback, followed by three or four Servants, came to the Gate
of the Inn, to whom one of his attendants said thus: My Lord Don Alvaro Tarfe,
you may here rest your self, and pass the great heat of the day: This Inn
seems to be very cleanly and cool.

Which speech Don Quixote hearing, he said unto Sancho; Thou ought to know,
that when I turned over the Book of the second part of my History, me thought
that in reading of the same, I met with this name of Don Alvaro Tarfe.

That may very well be (said Sancho) but first let us lee him alight from his
horse, and then we will speak unto him.

The Knight alighted, and the Hostess appointed him a low Chamber, near unto
that of Don-Quixote, and which was furnished with like figures of painted
Serge. The new-come Knight did forthwith put off his heavy clothes; and now
going out of the Inn Porch which was somewhat spacious and fresh, under which
Don-Quixote was walking, he demanded of him: Whither go you, my good Sir
Gentleman? I am going (answered Don-Quixote) unto a certain Village, not far
off, where I was born. And you, my Lord, whither go you? I travel (said the
Knight) toward Granada, which is my native Country. Sir, you were born
(replied Don-Quixote) in a very good Country; in the mean time I pray you in
courtesy tell me your name; for it stands me very much upon to know it, yea,
more then can well be imagined. I am called Don Alvaro Tarfe (answered the
Knight.) Then are you undoubtedly (quoth Don-Quixote) that Alvaro Tar^e, whose
name is imprinted in the second part of the History of Don-Quixote de la
Mancha, which a modern Author has lately set forth. I am the very same man of
whom you speak (said the Knight) and that Don Quixote who is the principal
subject of such an History, was my very great friend.

It was even I that drew him first out of his Village, or at least that
persuaded him to be at the Justs and Tiltings which were then kept at Saragosa,
and whither I was going: and in good truth I did him a great favor; for I was
the cause that the hangman did not well claw and bum-baste his back, having
rightly deserved such a punishment, because he was over ^rash and fool ^hardy.

But tell me, I beseech you then (quoth Don-Quixote) my Lord, Don Alvaro, do I
in any thing resemble the said Don-Quixote of whom you speak? Nothing at all
(answered the other.) And did that Don-Quixote (replied our Knight) conduct
with him a Squire named Sancho Panca? Yes verily (quoth Don Alvaro) And the
report went, that this Squire was very blithe, pleasant, aad gamesome; but yet
I never heard him speak any thing with a good garb or grace, nor any one word
that might cause laughter.

I believe it well (said Sancho then) for it suits not with all the world to
be pleasant and jesting: and the very same Sancho of whom you speak (my Lord
the Gentleman) must be some notorious Rogue, some Greedy-gut, and notable
Thief. It is I that am the right Sancho Panca, that can tell many fine Tales;
yea, more then there are drops of water when it raineth: If so you please, my
Lord, you may make experience of it: and follow me at least one year, and you
shall then see, that at every step I shall speak so many unpleasant things,
that very often, without knowing what I utter, I make all them to laugh that
listen unto me. In good sooth, Don-Quixote de la Mancha, the far renowned,
the valiant, the discreet, the amorous; he who is the redresser of wrongs, the
revenger of outrages, the Tutor of Infants, the Guardian of Orphans, the
Rampire of Fortres^e of Widows, the Defender of Damzels and Maidens: he who
has for his only Mistress, the matchless Dulcinea del Toboso, is the very same
Lord whom you see here present, and who is my good Master. All other
Don-Quixote, and all other Sancho Panca's are but dreams fopperies and fables.

Now by my Holydam I believe as much (answered Don Alvaro;) for in those few
words by you even now uttered, you have showed more grace then ever did the
other Sancho Panca in all the long and tatling discourses that I have heard
come from him. He savoured more of the Gormand, then of a well-spoken man; more
of a Coxcombe, then of a pleasant. Without doubt I believe that the Enchanters
which persecute the good Don-Quixote, have also gone about to persecute me, in
making me to know the other Don Quixote, who is of no worth or merit at all.
Nevertheless I wot not well what to say of it, since I durst swear that I left
him at Toledo in the Nuncio his house, to the end he might be cured and
healed, and behold here another Don Quixote, but far different from mine.

As for me (quoth Don Quixote) I know not whether I be good or no, but well I
wot I am not the bad: And for a manifest trial of my saying, my Lord Don
Alvaro Tarfe, if you please, you shall understand, that in all my lifetime I
was never at Saragosa. And having of late understood, that the imaginary Don
Quixote had been present at the Tournaments and Tiltings in that City, I would
by no means come or go into it, that in view of all the world I might manifest
his false Tale; Which was the reason that I went strait unto Barselona, the
treasury or storehouse of all Courtesy, the retreat and refuge of all
Strangers, the relieving harborough of the poor and needy, the native home of
valourous men, where such as be wronged or offended are avenged; and where true
friendships are reciprocal, and in sum, a City that has no peer, be it
either for beauty, or for the fair situation of it.

And albeit what has befaln me bring me no great content, I do
notwithstanding somewhat allay the grief with the pleasure, which by the sight
thereof I have received and felt.

To conclude, my Lord Don Alvaro Tarfe, I am Don Quixote de la Mancha, and the
very same man of whom Fame speaks, and not he, that unhappy wretch, who to
honor himself with my Designs, has gone about to usurp my name.

In the mean while I humbly beseech you, by the profession which you make to
be a Noble Knight, that before the ordinary Judge of this place, you will be
pleased to make me a Declaration and Certificate, how, so long as you have
lived, even until this present hour, you never saw me, and that I am not the
said Don-Quixote imprinted in this second part: And likewise, That this Sancho
Panca my Squire, is not he whom you heretofore have known.

I shall do it with all my heart (quoth the Knight Don Alvaro) although I be
very much amazed to see two Don Quixotes, and behold two Sancho's at one very
instant, so conformable in name, and so different in actions. But I tell you
again and again, and I assuredly believe that I have not viewed what I have
seen, and that what has happened unto me concerning this subject, has not
befaln at all.

Without doubt, my Lord (then said Sancho) it is very likely that you are
Enchanted, even as my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso is: would to God that your
dis-enchanting might be brought to pass with giving other three thousand and
odd whip lashes, as I do for her; I would most willingly give them unto my
self, without any interest at all.

I know not what you mean (quoth Don Alvaro) by these whip-lashes. To whom
Sancho said, it would be too long a discourse to relate; but yet he would make
him acquainted with the whole story, if peradventure they should both travel
one same way.

By this time the hour of dinner was at hand, and they fed and ate together. At
the very same time the Judge of the place came into the Inn, attended on by a
Clerk or Notary, whom Don Quixote required that he would take a Certificat or
declaration, which this Knight Don Alvaro Tarfe would declare unto him; for so
much as it did highly concern his honor and reputation.

Now the Tenor of the Declaration was, that the said Gentleman did in no sort
know Don-Quixote who was there present, and that he was not the man, whose
name they had lately imprinted in an History entitled, The second part of
Don-Quixote de la Mancha, composed by Abellaneda, born at Tordesillas.

To conclude, the Judge engrossed all according to the form of Law. The
Declaration was made in form and manner as all Notaries are accustomed to be,
in such and the like cases. By which means Don-Quixote and Sancho rested very
glad, and well appaid, as if such a Declaration had been of very great moment
and consequence unto them, and as if their actions and speeches had not
apparently showed the difference, and odds that was between the two
Don-Quixotes, and the two Sancho's

Diverse complements, an^ many offices and offers of courtesy did mutually
enterpasse between Don Alvaro and Don-Quixote, wherein our heroik Knight de la
Mancha declared so much wisdom and such discretion, that he resolved Don
Alvaro of the doubt wherein he was: for he persuaded himself that he was
Enchanted, since with his own hands he felt and touched two Don-Quixotes so
different and contrary one to another.

Midday being past, and the heat allayed, they departed from that place all
together. They had not gone above half a league, but they met with two several
paths, the one led to Don-Quixotes Village, and the other to the place where
Don Alvaro was going.

During which little space, Don-Quixote related at large unto him, the disaster
of his overthrow, the enchantment and the remedy of Dulcinia. All which things
bred and caused a new admiration in the mind of Don Alvaro, who kept on his
way, and Don-Quixote his.

Our Knight passed that night among the Trees, to the end he might give Sancho
means and leisure to fulfill his penance, which he accomplished even as he
had done the fore-passed night, more at the charges of the hedges, shrubs, and
trees there growing, then of his back and shoulders: For he kept them so safe
and well, that the lashes which he gave himself would not have caused a fly to
stir, had she taken up her stand there

Don-Quixote thus abused, lost not one stroke with mis-reckoning, and found
that those of the foregoing night, joined unto these, were just the sum of
three thousand nine and twenty.

It seemed the Sun rose that morning earlier then his wont, to behold this
sacrifice, and they perceiving that it was bright day, went on their Journey,
discoursing of the error wherein Don Alvaro was, and how they had done very
well in taking a Declaration before the Judge, and that so authentically.

They wandered all that day, and the night succeeding, without encountering any
thing worthy the relation, unless it be, that the very same night Sancho
finished his whipping task, to the great contentment of Don Quixote, who
greedily longed for peep of day, to see if in their travels they might meet
with his sweet Mistress Dulcinea, who was now dis-enchanted.

Thus wandering, they met no woman, but they would approach and close with her,
to take perfect view of her, and to discern whether it were Dulcinea of Toboso,
confidently assuring themselves, as of an infallible truth, that the promises
of the Prophet Merlin could not possibly prove false.

Whilst they were musing on these things, and their longings increasing, they
unawares ascended a little hillock, whence they discovered their Village. Which
Sancho had no sooner perceived, but he prostrated himself on his knees, and
uttered these words:

Oh my dear-dearly-beloved, and long desired native Country, open thine eyes,
and behold how they Son Sancho returns at last to thee again; who, if he be
not very rich, yet is he at least very well whipped and lashed. Open thine arms
likewise, and friendly receive thy Son Don-Quixote: And if he return to thee
vanquished by the force of a strange Arm; he yet at least returns conqueror
of himself. And as himself has often told me, it is the greatest victory that
any man can desire or wish for. I have good store of money; for if they gave me
sound whip-lashes, I found much good in being a worthy Knight.

Let us leave these fooleries (said Don-Quixote) and forthwith wend unto our
Village, where we will give free passage unto our imaginations and prescribe
unto our selves the form and method that we are to keep and observe in the
rural or pastoral life, which we intend to put in practice. Thus reasoning
together, they fair and gently descended the hillock, and approached to their
Village.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Of the presages and fore-boadings, which happened to Don-Quixote at the entrance
into his Village; with other Adventures, which serve for grace and ornament
unto this famous History, and which give credit unto it.
CID Hamete reports, That as they were come near unto the entrance into their
Village Don Quixote perceived how in the Commons thereof there were two young
Lads, who in great anger contested and disputed together. The one said to the
other: Pierrot, thou must not chafe or be angry at it; for, as long as thou
live thou shall never set thine eyes upon her. Which Don Quixote hearing, he
began this speech unto Sancho: Friend (said he) do not thou understand what
yonder young Lad says? So long as thou live thou shall never let eyes upon
her.

And what imports (quoth Sancho) what the young Lad has spoken? What (replied
Don Quixote?) see thou not, how that applying the words unto mine intention;
his meaning is, that I shall never see my Dulcinea. Sancho was about to answer
him, but he was hindered by an Hare, which chased, crossed their way. She was
eagerly pursued by diverse Gray-hounds and Hunts-men; so that fearfully amazed
she squatted down between the feet of Dapple.

Sancho boldly took her up and presented the same unto Don Quixote, who cried
out alowd, Malum signum, malum signum: A Hare runs away, Gray-hounds pursue
her, and Dulcinea appears not. You are a strange man (then quoth Sancho) let us
imagine that this Hare is Dulcinea, and the Gray-hounds which pursue her, the
wicked Enchanters that have transformed her into a Country-Lasse: She runs
away, I take her up and deliver her into your own hands: You hold her in your
arms, you hug and make much of her: What ill-boading may this be? and what
misfortune can be employed upon this?

In the mean while, the two young Boys came near unto them, to see the Hare:
and Sancho demanded of one of them the cause or ground of their brabling
controversy? Then he who had uttered the words, So long as thou live, thou
shall never set eyes upon her, related unto Sancho, how that he had taken from
the other boy a little cage full of Crickets, and that he never purposed to
let him have it again. Then Sancho pulled out of his pocket a piece of six
Blanks, and gave it to the other Boy for his Cage, which he put into Don
Quixotes hands, saying thus unto him, Behold, good Sir, all these fond
Sooth-sayings and ill-presages are dashed and overthrown, and have now nothing
to do with our Adventures (according to my understanding, although I be but a
silly gull) no more then with the last years snow. And, if my memory fail me
not, I think I have heard the Curate of our Village say, That it fits not good
Christians and wise folks to stand upon such fopperies.

It is not long since you told me so your self, vnd gave me to understand, That
all such Christians as plodded and amused themselves upon Augures or
Divinations, were very fools: And therefore let us no longer trouble our selves
with them, but let us go on and enter into our Village. There whilst the
Hunters came in, they demanded to have their Hare, and Don^Quixote delivered
the same unto them.

Then he and Sancho kept on their way; and at the entrance into the Village,
in a little Meadow, they met with the Curate and the Bachelor Carrasco, who with
their Beads in their hands were saying their prayers.

It is to be understood, that Sancho Panca had placed upon Dapple, and upon
the fardell of their weapons, the Jacket or Gaberdine of Boccasin, all painted
over with fiery flames, which was upon him in the Dukes Castle, the night that
Altisidora rose again from death to life; which Jubb or Jacket served them
instead of a Carpet or Sumpter-cloth.

They had likewise placed upon the Asses head, the Miter, whereof we have
spoken before. It was the newest kind of transformation, and the fittest
decking or array, that ever Ass did put upon his head.

The Curate and the Bachelor knew them incontinently, and with wide-open arms
ran toward them.

Don^Quixote alighted presently and very kindly embraced them. But the little
Children who are as sharp-sighted as any Linx, having eyed the Asses Myter,
flocked suddenly about them to see the same, saying the one to the other, Come,
come, and run all you Camarados, and you shall see Sancho Panca's Ass more
brave and gallant then Mingo: and Don^Quixotes Palfry leaner, fainter, and more
flaggy then it was the first day.

Finally, being environed with a many young Children, and attended on by the
Curate and Bachelor, they entered the Village, and went directly unto
Don^Quixotes house: At the door whereof they met with his Maidservant, and
with his Niece, who had already heard the news of their coming.

Teresa Panca, the Wife of Sancho, had likewise been advertised thereof. She
ran all dishevelled and half naked to see her Husband, leading her Daughter
Sanchica by the hand. But when she saw that he was not so richly attired as
she imagined, and in that equipage a Governor should be, she thus began to
discourse with him: My Husband, after what fashion do thou come home? Me
thinks thou come on foot, and with toylesome traveling all tired and
faint-hearted: Thou rather bear the countenance of a miserable wretch, then
of a Governor.

Hold thy peace Teresa (quoth Sancho) for oftentimes when there be Boots,
there be no Spurs: Let us go unto our house, and there thou shall hear
wonders. So it is, that I have Money, which is of more consequence, and I have
gotten it by mine own industry, without doing wrong to any body.

Why then you have Money, my good Husband (replied Teresa?) That Is very well.
It is no matter how you came by it, be it by hook or crook: For, after what
manner soever you have laid hands on it, you bring no new custom into the
world. Sanchica embraced her Father, and asked him whether he had brought her
any thing; and that she had as earnestly looked for him, as men do for dew in
the month of May.

Thus his Wife holding him by the one hand, and his Daughter by the one side of
his Girdle, and with the other hand leading Dapple, they entered into their
Cottage, leaving Don^Quixote in his own house, in the power of his Niece and
Maidservant, and in the company of the Curate and the Bachelor.

Don-Quixote without longer delay, at that very instant drew the Bachelour and
the Curate aside, and in few words related his being defeated unto them, and
the Vow which he had been forced to make, Not to go out of his Village during
the space of one whole year: how his purpose was fully to keep the same,
without transgressing it one jot or attome; since that by the rules of Knight
Errantry, and as he was a true Knight Errant, he was strictly obliged to
perform it: Which was the reason that he had resolved, during the time of
that year, to become a Shepherd, and entertain himself among the Deserts and
solitary places of that Country, where he might freely vent out and give
scope to his amorous passions, by exercising himself in commendable and
pastoral exercises: And now besought them, if they had no greater affairs in
hand, and were not employed in matters of more importance, they would both be
pleased to become his companions and fellow Sheepheards: For he would buy
store of sheep, and get so sufficient a Flock together, as they might well take
upon them the name of Sheepheards.

And in the mean time he gave them to understand, that the chiefest point of
his business was already effected: for he had already appointed them so
proper and convenient names, as if they had been cast in a mould.

The Curate would needs know these names. Don-Quixote told him, that himself
would be called the Shepherd Quixotis; the Bachelor, the Shepherd
Carrascon; and the Curate, the Shepherd Curambro; and as for Sancho Panca,
he should be styled Pansino.

They were all astonished at Don-Quixotes new folly: Nevertheless, that he
might not another time go out of his Village, and return to his Kinghthoods
and Cavaliers tricks: and therewithal supposing, that in the space of this
year he might be cured and recovered; they allowed of his design and new
invention, and in that rural exercise offered to become his companions.

We shall lead a pleasant life (said Samson Carrasco) since, as all the world
knows, I am an excellent Poet, and shall every hand-while be composing of
Pastoral Ditties and Eglogues, or else some Verses of the Court, as best shall
agree to our purpose. Thus shall we entertain our selves by the ways we
shall pass and go.

But good Sirs, the thing that is most necessary is, that every one make choice
of the name of the Sheepheardesse whom he intends to celebrate in his
Verses: and that there be no Tree, how hard or knurry soever but therein we
shall write, carve, or engrave her name, even as amorous Sheepheards are
accustomed to do.

In good sooth, that will do passing well (quoth Don-Quixote) albeit I need
not go far to find out an imaginary Sheepheardesse, since I have the never
matched or paralelled Dulcinea of T^boso, the glory of all these shores; the
ornament of these medows; the grace and comeliness of beauty; the cream and
prime of all gracefulness: and (to be short) the subject on which the
extremity of all commendations may rightly be conferred, how hyperbolicall
soever it be.

It is most true (said the Curate:) But for us, we must seek out some barren
Sheepheardesses, and at least, if they be not ^it and proper for us, yet on
way or other they may stead us, if not in the main, yet in the by. Although we
have none (quoth Samson Carrasco) yet will we give them those very names as
we see in print, and wherewith the world is full. For we will call them
Phillis, Amarillis, Diana, Florinda, Galathea, and Belisarda. Since they are
publicly to be sold in the open Marketplace, we may very well buy them;
and lawfully appropriate them unto our selves.

If my Mi^tris or to say better, my Sheepheardesse have to name Anna, I will
celebrate her under the style of Anarda; If she be called Francis, I will
call her Francina; And if she hight Lucie, her name shall be Lucinda; for all
such names square and encounter. As for Sancho Panca, if he will be one of our
fraternity, he may celebrate his Wife Teresa Panca under the name of Teresaina.

Don-Quixote burst out a laughing at the application of these names, whilst
the Curate did infinitely commend and extol his honorable resolution, and
again offered to keep him company all the time that he could spare, having
acquitted himself of the charge unto which he was bound.

With that they took leave of him, persuading, and entreating him to have a
care of his health, and endeavor to be merry.

So it happened, that his Niece and his Maidservant heard all the speeches,
which they three had together: And when the Bachelour and the Curate were gone
from him, they both came near unto Don^Quixote, and thus his Niece bespake him.

What means this (my Lord, mine Uncle?) Now when we imagined that you would
have continued in your own house, and there live a quiet, a reposed, and
honorable life, you go about to cast your self headlong into new Labyrinths
and troubles, with becoming a Swain or Shepherd: Verily the corn is already
over-hard to make Oaten pipes of it.

But how (quoth the Maidservant) can you endure and undergo in the opon
fields the scorching heat of Summer, and the cold and frost of winter nights,
and hear the howlings of Wolves, without quaking for very fear? No truly, for
so much as that belongs only to such as are of a robust and surly complexion,
of a hard and rugged skin, and that from their Cradles are bred and enured to
such a Trade and occupation. If the worst come to the worst, it were better to
be still a Knight Errant, then a Shepherd.

I beseech you, good my Lord, follow my counsel which I give you, not as being
full of Wine and Bread, but rather fasting, and as one that have fifty years
upon my head: Abide still in your house, think on your domestic Affairs,
confess your self often, serve God, do good unto the poor, and if any harm
come to you of it, let me take it upon my soul.

Good Wenches hold your peace (replied Don-Quixote;) for I know what I have to
do: In the mean while, let me be had to bed; me thinks I am not very well: yet
assure your selves, that whether I be an Errant Knight, or a Shepherd, I
will carefully provide for all that you may stand in need of, and you shall see
the effects of it.

The Niece and the Maidservant who without doubt were two merry good Wenches,
laid him in his bed, and attended and looked so well unto him, as they could not
possibly have done better.

CHAP. LXXIV.
How Don-Quixote fell sick: Of the Will he made; And of his death.
AS all humane things being transitory, and not eternal, are ever declining
from their beginnings, until they come unto their last end and period; but
more especially, the lives of men. And as that of Don-Quixote had no privilege
from Heaven to continue in one estate, and keep it is course, his end surprised
him, at what time he least thought of it, I wot not whether it proceeded of
the melancholy which the sad remembrance of his being vanquished caused in him;
or whether the disposition of the Heavens had so decreed: So it is, that a
burning Fever seized upon him, which forced him to keep his bed six days.
During which time, the Curate, the Bachelor, and the Barber, who were all his
good friends, did very often visit him: and Sancho Panca his good Squire never
went from his bedside.

They supposing, that the vexation and fretting which he felt for having been
conquered; as also because he saw not the accomplishment of his desires,
touching the dis-enchantment of Dulcinea, caused this sickness in him,
endeavored by all possible means to make him merry.

The Bachelor desired him to be of good courage, and to rise, that they might
begin their Pastoral exercise, and how he had already composed an Eglogue,
which was nothing behind those that Sanazaro had compiled: That for the same
purpose he had bought two goodly and fair Dogs, and of great renown, for to
keep their Flock, whereof the one was called Barcino and the other Butron; and
how a Shepherd of Quintanar had sold them to him.

But for all this Don-Quixote quitted not his sorrow, nor left off his sadness.

His friends called for a Physician, who was nothing well pleased with his
pulse which he felt. And therefore he told him, that whatsoever might happen,
he should not do amiss to begin to think on the salvation of his soul; for
the health of his body was in very great danger.

Don-Quixote, without being any whit amazed, did very quietly listen unto this
discourse, which neither his Niece, his Maid, nor his Squire did; for they were
so deeply plunged in tears and weeping, as had they seen ghastly death in the
face, they could have done no more.

The Physician told them plainly, That only melancholy, and his troublesome
cares were the cause of his death.

Don-Quixote entreated the company to leave him alone, because he had a great
desire to sleep a while. They did so, and he had a sound nap (as they say) of
six hours, so that the Maid and his Niece thought he would never have waked
again. Well, he waked at last, and with a loud and audible voice he uttered
these words: The Almighty God be for ever blessed, that has done so much good
for me. To be short, his mercies have no bounds, they are neither shortened nor
hindered by the sins of man.

The Niece listened with heedy attention unto her Uncles words, and perceiving
that they were better couched, and wiser disposed then those he was accustomed
to pronounce in all his sicknesses, she proposed this question unto him: My
Lord and Uncle, what is that you say? Is there any new matter befaln? What
mercies do you speak of? Or what sins of men? My good Niece (replied
Don-Quixote) the mercies I talk of, are those which God of his goodness has
at this instant conferred upon me wretched sinner, and my sins have been no
stop or let unto them. I possess now a free and clear judgment, and nothing
over-shadowed with the misty clouds of ignorance, which the continual reading
and plodding on books of Chivalry had over-cast me withal.

I acknowledge all these extravagancies, and confess them to be but coozening
tricks; and am agrieved that this disabuse has happened so late unto me, as it
affords me no leisure to make amends for my oversight, by reading of other
good books, and which might serve and tend to the enlightening of my soul. My
deer Niece, I feel my self near unto death, but I would not have it to be
such, as the surname of Fool should rest upon me; for although I have been
foolish in my life, I desire not to confirm the truth of it in my death: And
therefore, my dear friend, go and cause the Curate, the Bachelor Samson
Carrasco, and Master Nicholas the Barber to come immediately unto me: I desire
to confess my self, and to make my last Will and Testament. His Niece was
eased of this labor, by the coming of them all three, who even then entered
the Chamber, Don Quixote no sooner saw them, but said thus unto them.

My good Sirs, give me some new years gift, I am no more Don Quixote de la
Mancha, but rather Alonso Quixano, unto whom my honest life and civil
conversation has heretofore appropriated the surname of Good. I am now a
professed enemy to Amadis de Gaul, and of all the infinite rabble of his race.
Now are all the profane Histories of Errant Chivalrie hateful unto me; I now
acknowledge my folly, and perceive the danger whereinto the reading of them
has brought me. But now, by the mere mercy of my God, become wise at my own
proper cost and charges, I utterly abhor them. When these three friends heard
him speak so, they believed undoubtedly that he was possessed with some new
kind of foolishness. My Lord Don Quixote (said Samson unto him) now that the
news are come unto us, that the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso is dis-enchanted, do
you speak in this manner? And now that we are so near hand to become
Sheepheards, that so we may in singing mirth and jollity lead a kind of
Princely life, do you intend to become a Hermit?

Hold your peace, I pray you (replied Don-Quixote) recollect your wits
together, and let us leave all these discourses: That which hitherto served me
to my hurt and detriment, my death, by the assistance of Heaven, shall turn to
my good, and redound to my profit. Good Sirs, I perceive and feel death to
follow me at my heels: Let us leave off and quit all merriments and jesting,
and let me have a confessor to shrift me, and a Notary to draw my last Will and
Testament. In the extremity whereunto I now find and feel my self, a man must
not make a jest of his soul: and therefore whilst Master Curate is taking of
my Confession, let me have a Scrivener fetched.

They stood all gazing one upon another, wondering at Don-Quixotes found
reasons, although they made some doubt to believe them. One of the signs which
induced them to conjecture that he was near unto deaths door, was, that with
such facility he was from a stark fool become a wise man: For to the words
already alleged, he added many more so significant, so Christian-like, and so
well couched, that without doubt they confidently believed that Don-Quixote was
become a right wise man. The Curate made all those who were in the Chamber to
avoid, and being left alone with him, took his Confession. The Bachelor
Carrasco went to find out a Notary, who not long after came with him, and with
Sancho Panca. This good Squire having understood from the mouth of the
Bachelour, that his Master was in a very bad estate, and finding his
Maidservant and his Niece weeping very bitterly, began like a madman, with
his own fists, to thump and beat himself, and to shead brackish tears.

The Confession being ended, the Curate came forth, and was heard to utter
these words: Verily, verily, he is at his last gasp, and verily the good
Alonso Quixano is become wise, and it is high time for him to make his last
will and Testament.

These heavy news opened the sluices of the tears-full and swoln-blubbering eyes
of the Maid, of the Neeces, and of his good Squire Sancho Pansa; so that they
showred forth whole fountains of tears, and fetched from the very bottom of
their aggrieved hearts a thousand groaning sighs: For, in effect (as we have
already declared elsewhere) whilst Don Quixote was simply the good Alonso
Quixano, and likewise when he was Don Quixote de la Mancha, he was ever of a
mild and affable disposition, and of a kind and pleasing conversation: and
therefore was he not only beloved of all his Household, but also of all those
that knew him.

In the mean space the Notary came, who, after he had written the beginning of
his Will, and that Don Quixote had disposed of his soul, with all the
circumstances required and necessary in a true Christian: and that he was come
unto the Legacies, he caused this to be written. Item, concerning a certain
sum of money which Sancho Panca, who^^ I made my Squire, whilst my folly
possessed me, has yet in his custody: For so much is between him and me there
remain certain odd reckonings and accounts to be made up, of what he has
received and laid out: My will and pleasure is, That he be not tied to yield
any account at all, nor be in any Bond for it: Nay, rather if any overplus
remain in his hands, having first fully paid and satisfied him of what I owe
and am indebted to him (which is no great matter) my purpose is, That it be
absolutely his own, and much good may it do him.

And as, being then a fool, I was the cause that he had the Government of an
Island given him, I would to God (now I am wise and in my perfect senses) it
were in my power to give him a Kingdom: for the sincerity of his mind, and
the fidelity of his comportments do well deserve it. Then addressing himself
unto Sancho, he made this speech unto him: My dear friend, pardon me, that I
have given thee occasion to seem a fool as I was, in making thee to fall into
the same error wherein I was fallen, that the world there have been, and still
are Errant Knights.

Alas and wellady! my good Sir (answered Sancho throbbing and weeping) yield
not unto death I pray you, but rather follow my counsel, which is, That you
endeavor to live many fair years. The greatest folly that any man can commit
in this world, is to give himself over unto death without apparent cause,
except he be wilfully slain, or that no other hand bring him to his end but
that of melancholy.

Once more I beseech you, suffer not remissness or faint-heartednesse to
overcome you. Rather rise out of your Bed, and let us go into the fields
attired like Sheepheards, as we were once resolved to do. It may come to
pass that we behind some Bush or Shrub shall find the Lady Madame Dulcinea
dis-enchanted, so that we shall have no more business. If the vexation or
irksomenesse you feel to have been vanquished attempt to bring you unto
death, let me undertake the blame, who will stoutly maintain in all places,
and before all men, That you were overthrown and quelled, because I had not
well gyrt your Palfrey Rozinante.

And you have seen and read in your Books of Chivalry, that it is an ordinary
thing for one Knight to thrust another out of his saddle; And that he who is
to day conquered, is to morrow a conqueror.

It is most true (quoth Samson) and Sancho Panca relates the very truth of such
accidents.

My Sirs (replied Don-Quixote) I pray you go not on so fast, since that in the
Nests of the last year there are no Birds of this year: Whilome I was a fool,
but now I am wise: Sometimes I was Don-Quixote de la Mancha, but am now (as I
have already told you) the good Alonso Quixano. Let my unfeigned repentance, and
the truth of what I say, obtain this favor at your courteous hands, that you
will have the same estimation of me now, which you have had heretofore. And so
let Master Notary proceed.

Item, I make and institute my Niece Antoinette Quixana (who is here present)
general Heir of all my goods whatsoever, having first deducted out of them,
all that shall be necessary for the full accomplishment of the Legacies which I
have bequeathed: And the first thing I would have discharged, I purpose, shall
be the wages which I owe unto my Maidservant; and that over and besides, she
have twenty Ducats delivered unto her, to buy her some good clothes withal.

Item, I appoint and institute Master Curate, and Master Samson Carrasco the
Bachelour here present, to be the Overseers and Executors of this my last Will
and Testament.

Item, my will and pleasure is, That if Antoinette Quixana my Niece chance to
marry, that it be a man of whom diligent enquiry shall first be made, that
he is utterly ignorant of Books of Chivalrie, and that he never heard speech
of them. And if it should happen, that he have read them, and that
notwithstanding my Niece will, or take him to her Husband, That she utterly
lose, and never have any thing that I have bequeathed her as an inheritance,
all which my Executors and Assigne^^ may at their pleasure as shall seem good
unto them, employ and distribute in pious uses.

Item, I entreat the said Executors and Overseers of my Will, that if by good
fortune they come to the knowledge of the Author, who is said to have composed
an History which goes from hand to hand, under the Title of The second part of
the heroike feats of Arms of Don Quixote de la Mancha, they shall in my behalf
most affectionately desire him to pardon me; for that I have unawares given
them occasion to write so infinite a number of great extravagancies and idle
impertinencies; for so much as I depart out of this life with this scruple upon
my conscience, to have given him subject and cause to publish them to the world.

He had no sooner ended his discourse, and signed and sealed his Will and
Testament, but a swouning and faintness surprising him, he stretched himself
the full length of his Bed. All the company were much distracted and moved
thereat, and ran presently to help him. And during the space of three days,
that he lived after he had made his Will, he did Swoun and fall into Trances
almost every hour.

All the house was in a confusion and uproare: All which notwithstanding, the
Niece ceased not to feed very devoutly; the Maidservant to drink profoundly,
and Sancho to live merrily. For when a man is in hope to inherit any thing,
that hope does deface, or at least moderate in the mind of the inheritor the
remembrance or feeling of the sorrow and grief, which of reason he should have
a feeling of the Testators death.

To conclude, the last day of Don-Quixote came, after he had received all the
Sacraments, and had by many and Godly reasons made demonstration to abhor all
the Books of Errant Chivalry.

The Notary was present at his death, and reports how he had never read or
found in any Book of Chivalrie, that any Errant Knight dyed in his Bed so
mildly, so quietly, and so Christianly, as did Don-Quixote.

Amidst the wailfull plaints and blubbering tears of the bystanders he
yielded up the ghost, that is to say, he dyed; which the Curate perceiving,
he desired the Notary to make him an Attestation or Certificate, how Alonso
Quixano, surnamed the good, and who was commonly called Don-Quixote de la
Mancha, he was deceased out of this life unto another, and dyed of a natural
death: Which Testificate he desired, to remove all occasions from some
Authors, except Cid Hamete Benengeli falsely to raise him from death again, and
write endless Histories of his famous Acts.

This was the end of the ingenious Gentleman de la Mancha, of whose birthplace
Cid Hamete has not been pleased to declare manifestly the situation unto us,
to the end that all Villages, Towns, Boroughs and Hamlets of la Mancha should
contest, quarrel, and dispute among themselves the honor to have produced
him, as did the seven Cities of Greece for the love of Homer: we have not been
willing to make mention and relate in this place, the doleful plaints of
Sancho; nor those of the Niece and Maidservant of Don Quixote; nor likewise
the sundry new and quaint Epitaphs which were graven over his tomb; Content
your self with this which the Bachelor Samson Carrasco placed there. Here lies
the Gentle Knight, and stout,
That to that height of valor got,
As if you mark his deeds throughout,
Death on his life triumphed not
With bringing of his death about.
The world as nothing he did prize,
For as a Scar-crow in men's eyes,
He lived, and was their Bugbear too;
And had the luck with much ado,
To live a fool, and yet die wise.


In the mean while, the wise and prudent Cid Hamete Benengeli addressed this
speech unto his witty Pen: Here it is (oh my slender Quill, whether thou be
ill or well cut) that thou shall abide hanged upon those Racks whereon they
hang Spits and Broaches, being there-unto fastened with this Copper Wire: There
shall thou live many ages, except some rash, fond-hardy and lewd Historian take
thee down to profane thee. Nevertheless, before they lay hands upon thee,
thou may, as it were by way of advertisement, and as well as thou can,
boldly tell them. Away, pack hence, stand a far off, you wicked botchers, and
ungracious Souters, and touch me not since to me only it belongs to cause to
be imprinted Cum bono Privilegio Regiae Majestatis. Don-Quixote was borne for
me alone, and I had my birth only for him. If he has been able to produce
the effects, I have had the glory to know how to write and compile them well.
To be short, He and I are but one selfsame thing, maugre and in despite of
the fabulous Scribler de Tordesillas, who has rashly and malap^rtly dared with
an Estridge course and bungling Pen, to write the prowess and high Feats of
Arms of my valorous Knight.

This fardle is too-too heavy for his weak shoulders, and his dull wit
over-cold and frozen for such an enterprise. And if peradventure thou know him,
thou shall also advise him to suffer the weary and already rotten bones of
Don-Quixote to rest in his Sepulcher: For, it would be too great a cruelty, if
contrary to all Orders and Decrees of Death, he should go about to make show
of him in Castila the old, where in good sooth he lies within a Sepulcher,
laid all along, and unable to make a third journey and a new outrode. It is
sufficient to mock those that so many wandering Knights have made, that those
two whereof he has made show unto the world, to the general applause, and
universal content of all Peoples and Nations that have had knowledge of them,
as well through the whole Countries of Spain, as in all other foreign
Kingdoms. Thus shall thou perform what a good Christian is bound to do, in
giving good counsel to him that wishes thee evil. As for me I shall rest
contented and well satisfied to have been the first that fully enjoyed the
fruits of his writings, and that according to my desires; since I never
desired any other thing, then that men would utterly abhore the fabulous
impertinent and extravagant Books of Chivalries: And to say truth, by means
of my true Don-Quixote, they begin already to stagger; for, undoubtedly such
fables and slim-slam tales will shortly fail, and I hope shall never rise
again. Farewell.

FINIS.

