woodcut, birth of Christ woodcut, miracles of Christ woodcut, miracles of
Christ A SACRED POEM Wherein The BIRTH MIRACLES DEATH RESURRECTION and
ASCENSION of the Most Holy Jesus are delineated With His Prayer before his
APPREHENSION Also Eighteen of DAVID'S PSALMS with the Book of LAMENTATIONS
PARAPHRASED. Together with Poems on several Occasions. By James Chamberlayne
Gent.
woodcut, death of Christ woodcut, resurrection of Christ woodcut, cension of
Jesus of Christ LONDON Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes in Russel street in
Covent Garden



A SACRED POEM.

Wherein the BIRTH, MIRACLES, DEATH, RESURRECTION, and ASCENSION of the Most
Holy JESUS Are Delineated.

With his PRAYER before his APPREHENSION.

ALSO Eighteen of DAVID'S Psalms; with the Book of Lamentations, PARAPHRASED.

Together With Poems on several Occasions.

By James Chamberlain.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1680.

TO THE READER.
I Never did design, when first I set about these ensuing Miscellanies to
expose them to every Eye: For I truly judged, that having little other help
than my Mother Tongue to assist me therein, nothing worthy of a public View
could be produced by me. My only aim was to compose some few things for my
private Devotion, and that I might not trifle away too much of that time, which
God has given me, having no Calling to follow, nor Public Concern to divert
me.

But contrary to this my first intention, I have been prevailed with (through
the persuasion of an intimate Friend of mine, who had the perusal of these when
they were finished, and who believed, they might be useful to promote holy
desires in the sincere Christian) to make them public. I therefore deem it
necessary to acquaint thee concerning the History of our Savior's Birth and
Passion, (that thou may not expect more in it than I intended) that I never
did design an exact Relation of all that is Recorded concerning him in the four
Evangelists. My purpose was, only to Paraphrase the two first Chapters of Saint
Luke, and the seventeenth, eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth Chapters of
Saint John. With these when I had finished, (upon the review) I thought
convenient, where handsomely I could, to intermix some few material Passages
out of the other Evangelists, to make the draught more full and clear.

If what I have done shall prove an help to further any particular Person in
his Devotion, or excite an abler Pen to undertake, and complete what here shall
be found imperfect, I shall think my self (with respect to my first intentions)
more than sufficiently recompensed; and with patience shall endure the many
Censures I am like to meet with from several persons, for presuming (in an Age,
in which Poetry is arrived to that height of perfection as now it is) to bring
on the public Theater a Muse so meanly habited as mine. From the truly Pious I
question not but to receive a gentle and charitable construction for this
Action, and for my other sort of Readers I value not their severest Censures.

THE TABLE.
THe Promise of John's Birth and Office. 2 The Conception of Saint John
Baptist. 3 The Salutation. 4 The Promise of Conception of the most holy Jesus.
5 The Conception it self. 6 Mary's saluting Elizabeth. ibid. Elizabeth's
Exclamation. 7 Magnificat. ibid. Saint John's Birth. 8 Benedictus. 10 John's
Education. 11 The Birth of Christ. 12 The Publication of Christ's Birth. ibid.
The Circumcision. 13 His Presentation in the Temple. 14 Nunc Dimittis. 15
Simeon's Prophecy. ibid. Anna's Prophecy. 16 Christ's stay at Jerusalem, and
conferring with the Doctors. 17 His Baptism. 18
Miracles.
JEsus his turning Water into Wine at a Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee. 19
His Cure of a Noble Man's Son who lay Sick of of a Fever at Capernaum. 21 The
taking of a vast Draught of Fish, at the command of Jesus to Launch out into
the Deep, etc. 42 The Cure of a Demoniack in the City of Capernaum. 27 The Cure
of Peter's Wives Mother, who was sick of a Fever. 29 The Cure of diverse sick
Persons in the Evening of that Sabbath. 30 The healing of several Sick and
Diseased Persons, by Jesus, as he went through Galilee, and more particularly
the Cure of a Leper. 31 The Cure of a Man sick of a Palsy at Capernaum. 33 The
Cure of a impotent Man by the Pool of Bethesda. 45 The Cure of one who had a
withered Hand, wrought in Galilee. 38 The Cure of several Persons by our
Savior, when he came down from the Mountain. 42 The Cure of a Leper by our
Savior, after he had ended his Sermon on the Mountain. 43 The Cure of a
Centurion's Servant in Capernaum, who was sick of a Palsy. 46 The raising of a
Widow's Son to Life, who dwelt at Naim. 51 Jesus's Cure of a Demoniack, who was
Blind and Dumb, after his return to Capernaum; and of the difference and
Concertation between him and the Scribes about it. 53 The Prayer of the most
Holy Jesus, before his Apprehension. 64 On Jesus his Apprehension, Examination,
Death, Resurrection and Ascension. 68 His Apprehension. 70 His Examination. 71
His Death. 81 His Resurrection. 81 His Ascension. 90 On Christ's Sufferings. 91
PSALMS.
Psalm 22. 95 Psalm 23. 99 Psalm 25. 100 Psalm 31. 104 Psalm 40. 108 Psalm 41.
110 Psalm 51. 112 Psalm 55. 115 Psalm 73. 118 Psalm 49. 122 Psalm 78. 124 Psalm
90. 129 Psalm 91. 132 Psalm 111. 133 Psalm 124. 135 Psalm 125. 136 Psalm 133.
137 Psalm 140. 138
LAMENTATIONS.
CHAP. I. 1. The miserable estate of Jerusalem by reason of her Sin. 12. She
complains of her grief. 18. And confesses Gods Judgment to be righteous. 143
CHAP. II. 1. Jeremiah lamenteth the Misery of Jerusalem. 20. He complains
thereof to God, 149 CHAP. III. 1. The Faithful bewail their Calamities. 31.
They acknowledge Gods Justice. 155 CHAP. IV. 1. Sion bewaileth her pitiful
Estate. 13. She confesses her Sins. 162 CHAP. V. A pitiful Complaint of Sion
in Prayer unto God. 166 Conclusion. 168 A Prayer for the Church. 169
Poems on several Occasions.
The Sinners Wish. 175 On Lazarus raised. 176 To Death. ibid. The Morning
Sacrifice. 177 On Reprobation. 178 A Meditation on Man's Folly. 180 A Vow. 181
Deus Mi. 182 Domine Jesu. ibid. To a young Person that was about to vow
Celibacy. 183 Justice. 187 The Prodigal Son. 188 Thou did hide thy Face, and
I was troubled. 189 On Mary Magdalene weeping. 190 On the ten Lepers made
clean. ibid. Riches and Beauty are deceitful, but a faithful Friend is the
Medicine of Life. 191 The Sensualist. 192 A Prayer. 194 Gods Goodness and Man's
Folly. 195 An Admonition. 196 The Penitent. 197 A Prayer before the Sacrament.
198 A Farewell to the World. 199
1.
THis little Book, my God and King,
The first fruits of my Muse, I bring
Unto thy Throne, an Offering.
2.
'Twould look more lovely, I confess,
Were it attired in the dress
Of abler Pens, than in my Verse;
3.
But since my Numbers could not flow
In loftier Strains, than here they do,
For Reasons Thou and I do know:
4.
Accept the Present; though it be
Too mean a Gift for Majesty,
Lord, it is my All, and due to Thee.
ERRATA.
PAge 14. l. 1. Assembly r. Synagogue, l. 14. include in a Parenthesis, p. 18.
l. 22. needful r. sacred, p. 24. l. 15. tired r. tired, p. 39. l. 2. work r.
works, p. 40 l. 8. Disciple r. Disciples, p. 50. l. 27. unto r. into, p. 55. l.
11. inconsistant r. inconsistent, p. 57. l. 23. ingen'ous r. ingenuous, p. 63.
l. 5. r. make, p. 65. l. 6. hear r. here, p. 68. l. 17. r. when to the three,
p. 69. l. 16. hea'vny r. heavenly, p. 88. l. 25. the r. their Souls, p. 90. l.
2. those cruel marks the Jews, p. 119. l. 12. soon r. some p. 136. l. 2. coule,
r. could, p. 137. l. 13. r. and communion, p. 145. l. 15. mounful r. mournful,
p. 152. l. 21. false r. base lies, p. 165. l. 6. Age r. Aged, l. 7. looked r.
looked l. 19. are r. was tan'e, p. 168. l. 11. r. Turn thou us, Lord, p. 169.
l. 14. Sin r. Sins, p. 170. l. 4. r. we have against thee done, p. 187. l. 9.
should r. should, l. 15. Women r. Woman. p. 192. l. 18. higer r. high'r.

A SACRED POEM.
The Birth of S. John and the most holy Jesus, Luke the first.

SInce there are many who have undertook,
Of those great Wonders, to compile a Book,
Which of late years were in this Nation done,
Just in that order as they were made known
To them, by those who at the same time were
Eyewitnesses of what they did declare;
To me, who from the first have understood
Exactly several things, it seemed good,
To write, Divine Theophilus, to thee,
This following matter, as 'twas told to me:
That thou the truth of all those things may know,
Which I suppose was taught thee long ago.
In Herod's days, who King of Jewry was,
There lived a sacred Priest called Zacha'ras,
One of Abia's Course; he had to Wife
Elizabeth, of an Exemplar life
The Virgin was, before she knew his Bed;
Nor was she less devout when married.
Both righteous were; both blamelesly did live,
In all those Laws God to the Jews did give.
No Child they had, nor e're were like to have;
Elizabeth too old was to Conceive.
It came to pass, while that he went to burn
Within the Temple Incense in his turn,
Before the Lord, and all the People were
Without devoutly on their knees at Prayer;
On the right hand of the flaming Altar he
Perceived an Angel of the Lord to be:
His aged Limbs, scared at the Vision, shook;
Trembling he stood, until the Angel spoke.
The Promise of John's Birth and Office.

Fear not, said he, thy Prayers are heard; a Son
Thy Wife shall bear, and thou shall call him John:
Thousands of hearts glad at his birth shall be,
As well as thou, and praise the Lord with thee.
He shall be great in the Almighty's sight,
For abstinence a perfect Nazarite;
Not tasting Drink that is strong, nor any Wine;
Endu'd early with the Spirit Divine:
Many of Isr'el's Children to the Lord
Shall be converted by his powerful Word.
He shall before the true Messiah go,
In The Power and Spirit of Elijah; so
That he shall make the Ceremonious Jews
Admire Justice, and her Paths to choose;
And so prepare them to be wise, that they
Shall Christ receive, and his Commands obey.
How shall I know, since I am now grown old,
Said Zacharias, what thou have foretold
Shall come to pass? my Wife is likewise known,
Through heatless age, past hopes to have a Son.
Gabriel's my name; by the great God's command,
Before whose sacred presence I do stand,
With these glad Tidings I am sent to thee;
But since thou faithless art, and wilt not be
Persuaded of the truth of what I say,
Deaf shall thou be, and dumb, until that day
Thine aged Wife shall bring forth to thy joy,
From her now barren Womb, this promised Boy.
Long did the People, with amazement, wait
For Zacharias, at the Temple Gate:
Forth at the length the aged Priest did come,
Deaf, as the Angel said, and likewise dumb;
Soon they perceived something revealed had been
By a winged Herald, which he there had seen:
Beck'ning he stood, but could not for his heart,
What he had heard and seen to them impart.
The Conception of S. John Baptist.

It came to pass, so soon as he had done
His priestly Office, and the Crowd was gone,
The silent Priest departed to his home,
And straight his Wife received a pregnant Womb.
Five Months from home, not willing to abide
The People's Censure, she withdrew aside;
Although, assured she was, her marr'age Bed
Was never stained with a disloyal deed.
She knew this Mercy in her aged days,
Was an unwonted Gift; and so gave praise
Unto the Lord, who had removed that day
From her the shame of barrenness away.
In the sixth Month the glorious Gabriel came
From the Almighty, to a Town, whose name
Was Nazareth; within whose happy Wall
There lived a Virgin, whom they Mary call:
Youthful and florid, as the blooming- May,
Devout and piously employed each day;
Of Body chaste, and humble too in mind,
In whom all Heavenly Graces brightly shined.
She was betrothed to Joseph for a Wife;
A man all just, and of a pious life:
And was descended from that valiant King
Who Israel freed with a smooth Stone and Sling
To her the Angel came, as she alone
On bended Knees was praying to the Throne
Of the great God, and thus to her he said:
The Salutation.

Hail, thou most lovely person, happy Maid
The Lord is with thee; thou art highly blessed
Of all thy Sex thou art the happiest.
When she beheld the glorious Messenger,
Who in this manner had saluted her;
A Rosy Blush diffused it self all over
Her lovely Face, and shame-fac'd on the Flore
She cast her Eyes, troubled, and in her mind
seeking the importance of his words to find;
But while she musing was, silence he broke,
And thus the borrowed Form to Mary spoke.
The Promise of Conception of the most Holy Jesus.

Fear not, thou lovely Maid; from Heavens King,
Before whose Face thou have found Grace, I bring
Most joyful news; Thou shall conceive a Son,
Who shall to Israel bring Salvation:
Him thou shall Jesus call; he great shall be,
The happy product of Divinity.
He shall his Father David's Throne ascend;
His Scepter over Israel shall extend:
Of his Dominion there shall be no end.
To him the Rulers of the Earth shall bring
Their borrowed Crowns, and own him as their King.
How can I hope, blessed Gabriel, said she,
While I a Virgin am, that this to me
Can ever happen? to conceive a Son,
A thing never heard off, nor was ever known:
Thy God does know how I have always led Throne
A single life, and never defiled my Bed.
Therefore, said Gabriel, from the glorious
Of the most High, his Spirit shall come down,
And fruitful make thine hallowed Womb, to bear
Jesus, the Son of God, thy Savior.
What I have said, the Almighty will fulfill:
His Power is able to effect his Will:
And as a Token that thou shall conceive,
She who is barren, called Elizabeth,
Is now with Child: To Zach'ry I brought down
The joyful Message of a wisht-for Son.
Six Months with Child she is gone; with God there is naught,
How strange soever, but he can bring't about.
The Conception it self.

Behold, said she, the Handmaid of the Lord;
Be it to me according to thy Word.
For ever, Lord, thy Glorious Name be praised,
Who, from a low and abject State have raised
And in renown exalted me, above
The rest of Women, by this mark of Love.
Mary's saluting Elizabeth.

No sooner Gabriel had his Message done,
But back he flew to Heaven's Glorious Throne;
Up from her bended Knees the Virgin rose,
And straightway went to Zacharia's house,
Within Judeas hilly Country, where
She found her Cousin, and saluted her.
The welcome Greeting did no sooner sound
Within her Ears, but she the Infant found
To leap within her Womb; and straight her Breast
With a Prophetic Spirit was possessed,
And thus she spoke.
Elizabeth's Exclamation.

Blessed art thou, most lovely Maid, above
The rest of Women in the Almighty's Love;
Blessed, for ever Blessed, is that Son
Of the Great God, within thy Virgin Zone!
O what a joy is it for me to see
The Mother of my Lord to visit me!
For lo, mine ears no sooner heard thy Voice,
But in my Womb the Infant did rejoice.
Blessed art thou, because thou did believe
The Angels Message; it shall never grieve
Thee, that thy Faith was so much wrought upon,
For e're nine Months thou shall bring forth this Son.
Then Mary said,
Magnificat.

My Soul does praise the Lord for evermore,
And Spirit joys in God my Savior;
For he regarded has the low estate
Of his poor Servant, and has made her great.
So great, that Generations henceforth shall
Respect my name, and highly-Blessed call.
For he, that mighty is, great things has done
For me, beyond imagination.
His Mercy is from Age to Age on them
Who serve him; blessed be his Glorious Name.
He with his Powerful Arm has to the great
And proud Designers given a Defeat:
He from their Seats the Mighty has put down,
And raised the humble Soul unto a Crown.
He has the needy with good things supplied;
But to the proud his Mercies has denied.
He, in remembrance of his promise made
To Abra'm and his Seed, has now made glad,
And helped Israel; for within my Womb
There lies enclosed the promised Seed to come.
S. John's Birth.

Well nigh three Months within her Cousins House,
Remained the lovely new betrothed Spouse
Of Joseph; till she plainly did perceive
Her Womb contained him who the World should save:
Then she took leave, and forthwith to her home
Poor and despised Nazareth did come.
Some few days after of a lovely Boy
Eliz'beth was delivered, to the joy
Of all her Neighbors; her Relations were
Glad, when they heard how God a Son and Heir
Had given to her, and had Mercy shown,
Making her pregnant, who was barren known.
On the Eighth Day they all together came
To Circumcise, and give the Child a Name:
The bloody Act performed, they voted all
Him by the name of Zachary to call;
But when the Mother heard how they her Son
Had Zachary named, she gave the name of John.
They told her none of her Relations were
Called by that Name, as ever they could hear.
Unto the Father they made signs to know
How he would have him called, and 't should be so:
He made them signs to have a Book; which brought
Within it John, unto their wonder, wrote.
Which having done, his Tongue immediately
From its restraint was set at liberty:
And, in most thankful manner, the first thing
Was the Almighty's praise which he did sing.
When they heard this, who round about did dwell,
A reverential fear upon them fell;
Believing all, this Child in time would prove
Some mighty man, whom Heaven so did love;
Who in the Womb, and ever since has been,
By God so favored as was never seen.
Old Zacharias, who was musing on
What Gabriel said, of his and Mary's Son,
A sacred flame arose within his Breast,
And thus divinely sung the inspired Priest.
Benedictus.

Blessed be the God of Israel, and esteemed,
Who has his People visited and Redeemed,
And raised, within his servant David's house,
A mighty King and Savior unto us;
As by his holy Prophets mouths he spoke,
Which have been since he the vast World did make;
That we should be delivered from all those
Who are our secret, or our open Foes,
To keep his mercy, which he promised
To our Forefathers, and their numerous Seed;
The Oath he swore to Abraham on this wife,
That he would free us from our Enemies;
That we securely may devote our days,
To do his Will, and sing his worthy praise.
And thou, my Child, of the most High I know
Shall be a mighty Prophet; thou shall go,
Before the Christ, to instruct the World how they
May him embrace and all his Laws obey:
To teach them how, when they have evil done,
Through him they may obtain Remission;
All through the mercy of our God, whereby
Christ has to us descended from on high,
To give them Light who do in Blindness sit,
Within the Vale of Death, and guide our Feet
Into the path of peace; which pleasant way
Will lead us all to joys which never decay.
Thus sung the aged Priest, unto his joy;
In Spirit strong, and stature grew the Boy.
John's Education.

Within the Mountains of Judea, he
Severely past his tender Infancy;
There he abode, until the day wherein
His Ministerial Function did begin.
Now, in the forty fourth year of his Reign.
The great Augustus Caesar did ordain,
And strictly charge, that all in every Town
Within the Roman Empire, should set down
Their Names, and Fortunes, in those Cities where
Their Ancestors were born, of whom they were:
When this first Taxing was by Caesar made,
Cyrenius for his Province Syria had;
To their respective Cities each one went
To be enrolled in Caesar's Government.
From Galilee, out of Naz'reth, Joseph came,
With Mary big with Child to Bethlehem;
Because they both of David's Princely Race
Descended were, who born was in that place.
It came to pass they were no sooner there,
But Mary found the happy time drew near,
Wherein she must her first born Son bring forth;
The Word by whom God made both Heaven and Earth.
The Birth of Christ.

Within the Inn no room she could obtain,
Although she sought it over and over again;
Into the Stable she was forced to go:
Then on the ground her Knees did humbly bow,
And in the midst of glorious thoughts, the Son
Of the Most High brought forth without a groan.
In Swadling-Cloaths she wrapped her Firstborn Child,
And on the Straw she laid him; in the Field
Were Shepherds, who by nightly turns did look
Unto their innocent and wealthy Flock;
When lo an Angel from the glittering Throne
Of the Almighty came, and round them shone.
The daz'ling brightness of his presence made
The watchful Shepherds terribly afraid;
The Publication of Christ's Birth.

Fear not, said he, most joyful News I bring
To you, and all the World; this day a King,
And a Redeemer's born, the Christ is He:
To Bethle'm haste, and your Salvation see.
Yet, that you may not when you come mistake
And for the Lord of Life, another take;
Within a Stable you shall find him lie.
With none but Joseph, and his Mother by.
Then with the Angel of the Lord there stood
An Host of heavenly Spirits praising God,
Singing this following Hymn -- By those above,
Angels, Archangels, to the God of Love
Be glory given, for this Infants Birth;
And to the good a lasting peace on Earth.
Up from the Earth unto Heavens radiant Throne,
This blessed Quire was no sooner gone;
But that the trembling Shepherds, by consent,
To see what they were told, to Bethle'm went:
Thither they came, and there the Child they saw
Lie in the Stable on a heap of Straw
With Joseph and his Wife, abroad they spread,
What they had seen, and what the Angel said;
And all who heard them with amazement were
Seized at the Story, which they did declare.
But Mary pondered these things over and over,
And grew in Faith, and knowledge more and more:
Back to their Flocks the joyful Shepherds went;
And all the time of their returning spent
In glorifying of the Almighty's Name,
For all those things which he revealed to them:
The Circumcision.

On the eighth day after the Child was born,
The pious Joseph early in the Morn,
With his Redeemer to the Assembly came;
Who Circumcised was, and by the Name
Of Jesus called; as Gabriel order gave
Unto the Virgin, e're she did conceive.
And when her forty days accomplished were
According to the Law, they did repair
With the Messiah to Jerusalem;
His Presentation in the Temple.

Where, to the Priest, they both presented him.
For by the Law, the Firstborn Male among
The Jews, unto Jehovah did belong;
E're since that fatal night wherein he smote
Aegypts Firstborn, and thence his Israel brought.
Two Turtle Doves she for her self did bring,
Although a poor yet legal Offering:
Unto the Lord, from out the bleating Flock,
A Lamb she could not purchase with her Stock.
Within the Town of Solyma lived one,
Who just and pious was, called Simeon,
Full of the Holy Ghost, attending there
When Isr'els Consolation would appear:
To him the Spirit did reveal, that he
Should e're he died the promised Blessing see.
He by divine impulse to the Temple came,
Just as the Father and his pious Dame
Arrived with the blessed Offspring of her Womb,
To do for him what the strict Law did doom:
Where in his presence they a tender made
Of their Firstborn, and his cheap ransom paid;
Then in his feeble Arms old Simeon took
The heavenly Babe, and thus divinely spoke. --
Nunc Dimittis.

Lord, let me now into the silent Grave
In peace depart, since with mine Eyes I have
Beheld the Christ, which thou have long foretold,
Whom now thy People in this place behold;
A Light to those who do in Darkness dwell,
And the great Glory of thine Israel.
Joseph and Mary much surprised were,
At those mysterious Truths the reverend Seer,
Concerning Jesus, in that place declared;
Such as before their Ears had never heard:
Simeons Prophecy.

Then Simeon blessed them; and to Mary said, --
Behold this Child of thine, thou lovely Maid,
Is for the ruin of the Ungodly sent,
And the redemption of the Penitent:
And for a Sign in Israel he shall stand;
Against whom the wicked of the World shall band;
That all the thoughts of men which are concealed,
Both of the good and bad, may be revealed.
And thou, the Mother of this blessed Son,
When thou behold'st their barbarous cruelty,
Shall find thy Soul with sorrow overrun;
Some great affliction it shall bring to thee.
Anna's Prophecy.

Into the Temple at this instant came,
Of Asers Tribe, a Widow, who by name
Was Hannah called, who in her younger life,
But seven years had lived a married Wife.
Eighty and four years old, this woman was,
A strict observer of the Jewish Laws;
Who duly did the Temple-Prayers frequent,
And every Week two days in Fasting spent.
She likewise thanked the Lord, and spoke of him,
To all who dwelt within Jerusalem.
Now when the Parents had the Law fulfilled,
Both unto Bethlem with the blessed Child
Returned again, where for a while they were,
Till in a Dream the Almighty did appear
To Joseph, with a strict command, that he
Should take the Child, and into Egypt flee:
There they remained until the Tyrant's death,
And afterward returned to Nazareth.
In Spirit strong and Stature Jesus grew,
Whom God with mighty Wisdom did indue.
When twelve years old the blessed Jesus was,
His Parents who devoutly kept the Laws
Of the great God; the time now drawing near
To celebrate the annual Passover;
Took this same hopeful Child along with them
To keep this great Feast at Jerusalem:
And when the days of it accomplished were,
Joseph and Mary homewards did repair,
With their Acquaintance, and Relations, who
In Naz'reth did dwell, or near thereto.
Christ's stay at Jerusalem, and conferring with the Doctors.

Onwards they traveled, but never mist their Son,
Who in Jerus'lem staid; to them unknown
Until they had a whole days Journey gone.
Then amongst their Kindred and their Friends they went,
Inquiring for him, but no news they learnt.
With thoughtful care for their neglect of him,
They back returned unto Jerusalem.
After a three days search, their Child they found
Within the Temple Porch, encompassed round
With the most noted Rabbis of the Jews,
Asking such things which did the Scribes amuse;
So that they all with wonder seized were
At his wise answers, and discourses there.
When 'midst the learned of the Jewish Land
His Mother and her Husband saw him stand,
The amazed Virgin to her Son did go;
Jesus, said she, thou did unkindly do,
To raise such fears within thy Fathers mind,
And mine, as thou did by thy stay behind;
But he replied, the fittest place for me
Is where I am; know ye not I must be
About my Fathers business? But they could
Not this mysterious Speech of his unfold.
However back to Nazareth he came,
With his ore-joyed Parents: at that same
Laborious Calling eighteen years he wrought,
Which Joseph did profess, and him had taught;
And to their just Commands was never known
To show himself a disrespectful Son.
His Baptism.

Up to the Age of thirty years being grown,
He forthwith went to be Baptized by John,
(Who at the River Jordan was that time
Baptizing several that did come to him;)
But John this Office at the first did wave,
Until the Ever-blest such Reasons gave
To have it done, that, in the Peoples sight,
He there conferred on him that needful Rite.
When lo, the Eternal Spirit from above
Hovering, descended on him as a Dove:
And from the Clouds at that same time was heard,
A thundering Voice, which these same words declared:
This is my well-beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased; who from my self did come,
On purpose to reveal my Will below,
That all might know what it is they ought to do.
Jesus indu'd with power from on high,
Took on him now the public Ministry:
And taught the People Doctrines so Divine,
The Sun not clearer than their Truths did shine;
Confirming them with Wonders, such as never
Eye saw before, nor ear did ever hear.
MIRACLE I. Jesus his turning Water into Wine, at a Marriage Feast, in Cana of
Galilee.
THe first he wrought was in a certain Town
Of Galilee, by the Name of Cana known.
Where the blessed Virgin to a Nuptial Feast,
Was by the Bridegroom called to be a Guest.
Jesus, and his Disciples, likewise were
Bid with some others, and all present there.
Down sat the Bridegroom cheerful as the day,
And by his side the blushing Bride, all gay.
The welcome Guests around the Table sat,
With several sorts of healthful Viands freight.
All Dinner while a diligent Slave did stand,
With watchful Eye, and with a ready hand,
Behind each Guest, to fetch what he did need,
Not with a Leaden-heel, but nimble speed.
No loose Discourses at the Table were,
Civil the Guests were, no Buffoon was there.
One who imagines he does glory get,
To be discoursive in the dregs of Wit;
Yet harmless mirth; and flowing Goblets went
Around the Board, till all the Wine was spent.
Mary, who knew the Bridegrooms Store was gone,
Unto her Son, the want of Wine made known,
She told him 'twas a fit occasion now
In public his Mirac'lous Power to show;
By doing that they all would judge Divine,
With an Almighty Word create more Wine.
Jesus who knew his time of action best,
Unwilling yet his Power to manifest
Unto the World, he gently did repress
His Mothers too impatient forwardness;
Yet he assured her, that the Guests should be
Supplied with Wine, but done so privately,
That none but she, and his Disciples should,
With those who served, the Miracle behold.
Straight to the Waiters did the Virgin go,
And what he willed commanded them to do.
Within the Room six Cisterns stood, each one
Holding three Firkins, all of Marble-stone.
These in their order, on their several Stands,
Were filled with Water, for to wash the Hands
Of the invited Jews, an act profane
Esteeming it, to eat with hands unclean.
Up to the Brim with Water Jesus bid
The Servants fill these Vessels, which they did.
Straight he commanded one of them to bear
A full Glass of it to the Governor;
Who when he tasted of the Work Divine,
The Water turned into generous Wine,
He called the Bridegroom of the liberal Feast,
And asked him why he had reserved his best
Of Wines till last; all men, says he, at first
Bring their best Liquors, but at last their worst.
But thou the noblest Wine, of richest taste,
After w' have freely drank, have brought at last.
This Wonder Jesus the Eternal Son
Performed in Cana; and his Power shone
So bright in his Disciples Eyes, that they
Owned him the Son of God from that same day.
MIRACLE II. His Cure of a Noble Man's Son, who lay Sick of a Fever at
Capernaum.
IN Galilee a Noble Man there was,
Belonging unto Herod Antipas,
Whose Son did Sick at Capernaum lie,
Past all the hopes of Physick's remedy;
Hearing that Jesus was to Galilee
Out of Judea come, away went he
To Cana, and besought him to come down
Unto his house, and heal his dying Son.
Now Christ, who knew the Galileans well
To be of Tempers most inflexible,
That to his Doctrine they would not be brought
To give belief, except he wonders wrought,
Resolved forthwith, from his tormenting pain,
To raise this Courtiers Son to health again:
But he, poor man! impatient of delay,
Thinking his Son could not outlive the day,
Importuned Christ to come immediately,
And work this Cure before his Son did dye.
Jesus, who saw the faithful Parents Tears,
Willing to rid him of his anxious fears,
Told him he might unto his home retire,
His Son was well, and that the raging Fire
Which did inflame the Blood in every Vein,
Was now extinguished, and all calmed again.
Which when the Father heard he went his way,
Fully believing what the Lord did say.
Unto his house as he was trav'lling down,
The welcome news of his recovered Son
Came to his Ears, brought by the nimble care
Of some who his domestic Servants were.
His Arms around the first Man's Neck he flung,
Tell me, said he, tell me my Friend, how long
It Is since the burning Fever did depart
From my recovered Son, my dearest heart?
Just at the seventh hour thy Son, said he,
Whom we concluded past recovery,
All on a sudden yesterday was well,
And so we left him, as these here can tell;
Who in the joyful news did all accord,
So home they went with their rejoicing Lord.
Arrived at length to his beloved Son,
After a thousand kind expressions shown,
He in the hearing of his Wife, and those
Who of his household were, did straight disclose
The wondrous manner of his Child's great Cure,
And what great grief his fears made him endure;
And then precisely reckoning up the time
Of 's Sons being well, and Christ's so telling him,
They all concluded, when these things they knew,
To his Almighty Word the Cure was due;
And with their Lord, to the great God did give
Glory, and in his Son the Christ believe.
This second Wonder Jesus wrought when he
Came from Judea into Galilee.
No doubt but several more were done by him,
Both in Judea and Jerusalem,
Only these two (as done the first year) stand
Upon Record, writ by the faithful hand
Of his beloved John, and now we go,
To tell what in the next year he did do.
MIRACLE I. In the second year of Christ's public Ministry. The taking of a
vast draught of Fish at the command of Jesus to launch out into the Deep, etc.
ASsist me, Lord, while I the Wonders pen,
Which thou have wrought among the Sons of Men.
Near to Gennes'reth's Lake as Jesus was
Teaching aright the much abused Laws
Unto the People, who long while had been
Falsely instructed by their Priests therein;
From neighboring Towns the Crowd did so increase,
That he was well nigh stifled in the Press.
Close to the Shore two Boats a float did lie,
The one belonged unto old Zebedee,
And his two Sons his Partners, James and John,
Andrew, and Peter, did the other own.
These, all the night, a Fishing in the Lake
Had toyling been, but never a Fish could take.
And now upon the Shore all tired stood,
Having made clean their Nets within the Flood.
Jesus, who before he taught, these Boats did see,
With much ado, got from the Company,
And went into the Boat which did belong
To Simon Peter, from the gazing throng,
And causing him to thrust it from the Land,
The People taught, who on the Shore did stand.
When his discourse was ended, and each one
Of the confused Rabble home were gone.
Simon, said he, launch out into the Main,
And cast your Nets, to try your Luck again,
Into the watery Chambers of the Deep,
And thence on Shore the Scaly Dwellers sweep.
But Simon told him, we have all the night
Labored in vain, and on no Fish could light,
And now at noon day, and a Sky serene,
To think we shall be more successful than
We yet have been, is a conceit so vain,
That none who knows the Trade can entertain,
Nevertheless at thy request we'll wet
Once more our Nets, although no Fish we get.
Then down into the deep they hopeless cast,
Their fatal Engines; and enclosed at last
So vast a draught of Fish, both great and small,
That their Nets brake, and they were forced to call
To James and John, to come and help them take
The slutt'ring Pris'oners forth the crystal Lake.
Come to their help, with much, ado they got
Part of the laden Net into the Boat,
Still by degrees they more of it did pull,
Till they had heaped with Fish their Boat so full,
That down into the deep they sinking were,
At which the greedy Simon full of fear,
Fell at the knees of Jesus, and besought
Him to depart out of the sinking Boat,
For Lord (said he) my Sins so numerous are,
They Will render me unfit to reap a share
Of this great draught, so great as never was known,
Which is a cause of admiration,
To me, and my Companions, who before
Never saw the like, nor ever shall see more.
But Jesus bid him lay aside all fear,
They were as safe as if on Land they were.
Besides, said he, if thou and these will be,
(Who are thy Partners) Followers of me,
Ye shall have all by much a nobler Trade,
Than this, of men ye shall be Fishers made,
And with the Gospel-Net which you shall use,
Millions of Gentiles ye shall take, and Jews;
And through Death's Chambers safely to the Shore
Of Life and Bliss bring them for evermore.
Now when the four their Vessels safe had brought
Unto the Shore, which once they never thought
Alive they should have reached, from that same time
They forsook all they had, and followed him.
MIRACLE II. The Cure of a Demoniack in the City of Capernaum.
JEsus to Capernaum went straightway
With his Disciples, on the Sabbath Day,
When a great number of the City were
Assembled in the Synagogue, to hear
Their Rabbis, with a reverence profound,
Erroneously Gods sacred Law expound.
Jesus came in, and while they did unfold
Their wronged Law, and strange Traditions told,
His patient ear attentively did lend
Unto their roving talk, till it did end.
Then stretching, forth his Arm, the eternal Son
Of the great God his heavenly Speech begun,
Teaching the Jews sublimer Truths than they
By their conceited Priests were taught that day;
Preaching, as one Commissioned from above,
The unheard of Mercies of the God of Love,
With so much power, that they wondered all,
Having never heard the like from any fall.
Now that same restless Spirit, who does go
Round the vast Orb, to work the overthrow
Of fallen Man, had then among the rest
Of the assembled Jews, a Man possessed;
Who when he heard the ever blessed Lord
Divinely teach, most hellishly he roared,
And thus he spoke, -- Cannot we be let alone,
Since we are banished from the heavenly Throne,
To have the freedom of this lower World,
Must we from hence as from above be hurled,
What have we, Jesus, for to do with thee,
Are we not here from thy Dominion free?
Art thou with power come down to make us leave
Those conquered Souls, which by our wiles we have
Fettered, with a design to make them be
Companions with us in our misery;
I know thee, who thou art, and must thee own
To be the mighty Savior, and the Son
Of that just God, whom, by our fatal Pride,
We would have equaled, but in vain we tried.
Then Jesus sharply did rebuke the Fiend,
And to his saucy Questions put an end;
Commanding him to hold his peace, and quit
The captived Body, and never argue it.
The enraged Fiend, who durst no longer stay
Within his conquered Tenement of Clay,
All foaming threw him on the paved Floor,
Beating his Face till 'twas imbrued all over
With Froth and Blood, then with an hideous yell
Forth sallied the infernal Imp of Hell.
Now when the Standers by beheld the deed,
They all astonished were, and all agreed
That sure his Doctrine must be heavenly,
And that the Teacher more than Man must be,
Whom the affrighted Devils do obey,
Tremble when he commands, and sneak away.
Then through the Coasts of Galilee his Name
Tryumphing rode upon the Wings of Fame.
MIRACLE III. The Cure of Peter's Wives Mother, who was sick of a Fever.
NO sooner was the Sabbath-duty done,
And to their homes the amazed Jews all gone,
But Jesus, James and John, with Simon, went,
And Andrew, to their poor retirement;
Where almost till the dawn of the next day,
With the two pair of Brothers he did stay.
Within the house sick at that time did lie,
Simon's Wives Mother, at the point to dye,
Whose aged blood, caused by a feav'rish flame,
Boiled with such fury, that no Art could tame,
Whom the Physicians had quite given over,
Knowing their skill could not her health restore.
Peter, who just before had seen his Lord
Effect a Cure, by his Almighty Word,
Upon a Man whom Satan had possessed,
Fell on his Knees, and humbly did request,
That by his mighty Power he would cure,
His aged Mother's raging Calenture.
Jesus, who ever ready was to give
Relief to those who did in him believe,
Came to the Bed, where the distempered Soul,
Tortured with scorching heat, did toss and roll,
And in the view of all who there did stand,
He took the woman by the burning hand,
And raising her upright, the Fever straight
Did by his Sovereign touch its rage abate.
So well she was, that forthwith she did go,
And made Provision for her Guests below.
MIRACLE IV. The Cure of diverse sick persons in the Evening of that Sabbath.
NOw when the fiery Chariot of the Sun
Had round this part of our Horizon run,
Most of the City hearing of the Fame
Of Jesus, to the door of Peter came,
Bringing their Sick; their Blind, their Lame, and all
Those whom the Devil had long held in thrall.
Jesus, whose love no limits ever knew,
When he beheld the sad diseased Crew,
And heard their dying groans, and fearful cries,
Arising from their various miseries,
Out of a tender pity to Mankind,
Cured the Possessed, the Sick, the Lame, and Blind,
And the infernal Fiends would not allow,
Whom he cast forth, to say they did him know.
MIRACLE V. The healing of several Sick and Diseased Persons, by Jesus as he
went through Galilee, and more particularly the Cure of a Leper.
BEfore the gilded Planet of the East
Had from his watery Bed arose, and dressed
His nimble Body with a fulgent ray,
Up Jesus got, and went aside to pray,
Into a solitary place, when soon
He was by Simon, Andrew, James and John
Followed, and on his Knees upon the ground,
With lifted hands in fervent Prayer found,
Straight with the reasons of their coming out
They did inform him, how his fame had brought.
By those he had restored, as many more
Diseased persons, round about the door,
Who there attended to receive their doom,
And would not thence depart till he did come.
But he who came commissioned from the Throne
Of the great God, to make his Gospel known,
Asked them with him to the neighboring Towns to go,
For so his Father ordered him to do,
That they his glorious Truths might likewise hear
And Power see, and of them witness bear.
Then with the four he went (such care had he)
To preach the Gospel throughout Galilee.
And daily in their Synagogues he taught
The abused People, and such Wonders wrought,
In curing those whom Satan had possessed,
That his Almighty Power was manifest.
There was a Jew who a long while had been
Vexed with a Leprous Scab all over his Skin,
Who by the Priest was, by a rigid doom,
Forbid within their Synagogues to come;
He came to Jesus with an humble Soul,
And begged, on bended Knees, to be made whole.
For Lord, said he, I know if thou do please,
It Is in thy power to cure my soul Disease.
The Son of Love, who of our Bodies here,
As well as Souls hereafter, takes a care,
Stretched forth his Arm, and touching him, said he,
My pleasure it is, that thou henceforth shall be
Freed from this Leprous Scab; and, as he said,
All on a sudden he was healthful made.
Then to the Priest he ordered him to go,
(As by the Law he was obliged to do)
And show himself, and for his cleansing bring
What was required for an Offering.
But how he came to be restored, to none,
No not unto the Priest, to make it known.
Yet when he was departed, he began
To publish it, that Jesus was the Man,
Who wrought this mighty Cure, and though forbid
To tell it, told them all he said, and did,
So that with safety Jesus could no more
Enter the City, as he did before,
In public, but a while withdrew aside
To Desert places, where he did abide;
But there the Galileans found him out,
Flocking from every quarter round about.
MIRACLE VI. The Cure of a Man sick of a Palsy at Capernaum.
JEsus (though for a while he did refrain
From Capernaum) came at length again
Into the City, in the open day,
And to the house of Simon went straightway.
Long had he not been there, but a great Crew
Was met together, when they once it knew;
A Crew so numerous, that there was no room,
No not about the door, for all to come.
Jesus, who all occasions did embrace
To teach the People, what their duty was,
Arose, and sweetly the Almighty's will
Into their itching Ears did there instill.
But while amidst the Doctors of the Laws,
His Fathers sacred Truths he teaching was,
A Paralytick to the house was brought,
To have a Cure by his great power wrought.
But the ungoverned press into the Room
Would not permit the Bedridden Wretch to come.
When lo, his Friends bethought them of a wile,
And, climbling to the top of the low built Pile,
The Roof uncovered; when they so had done,
Into the Room they let the Palsy'd down.
When Jesus saw the strange unusual way,
The Friends of the diseased had to convey
The Paralytick to him, Son, said he,
For thy great Faith, thy Sins forgiven be.
Which when the Scribes and Pharisees, who were
Sitting within the Room, with him, did hear,
They thought within themselves, how dares this Man
Blaspheme at this rate, since there is none that can
Forgive our Sins, but that Almighty One,
Who sits above in his Celestial Throne.
Jesus, who by his Power Divine could tell
Those ranc'rous thoughts, which in their heart did dwell
Looking upon the envious Scribes, did say,
Why judge ye thus? Which is the easier way,
To tell the Sick, thy Sins forgiven be,
Or thou art cured of thine Infirmity?
But that ye may the mighty Power know
The Son of Man has over all below,
To make both Soul, and Body to arise
Healthful, and free from all Infirmities.
He steadfast looked upon the Palsied Soul,
And bid him rise, for he was now made whole,
Who straight obeyed, and taking up his Bed,
Went forth before them all, recovered.
Now when the Jews beheld what Christ had done,
They were amazed, having the like never known,
And with their mouths gave glory to the Lord,
Who so empowered his great Prophets Word.
MIRACLE VII. The Cure of an Impotent Man, by the Pool of Bethesday.
AT Solyma there was a noted Feast,
To celebrate the which, the ever-Blest,
Who never omitted what he ought to do,
In all obedience to the Law did go.
Within the Town there stood (just by the place
Wherein the Jews did use to wash always
The slaughtered Bodies of their harmless Beasts,
Which were to be the Victims at their Feasts)
An House of Mercy, where the Blind and Lame,
And Withered Persons lay, who thither came
To be immersed within this bloody Pool,
In which who-e're was plunged, was straight made whole.
Under this Roof an helpless Wretch did ly,
Bound with the Bands of an Infirmity
Thirty eight years, expecting there to find
Some pious Person, who would prove so kind,
As him into this healing Bath to set,
That he thereby might Strength and Vigor get;
But this neglected He, could find not one
(So little did they all his Case bemoan)
That when the Waters troubled were therein,
Would his assistance lend to put him in.
The Son of Love, who all his life time spent
In works of Mercy to the Impotent,
Came to the place where the Diseased did lie,
And looking on him with a tender Eye,
Proposed this question to the Bedridden Soul,
Whether he willing was to be made whole?
Sir, said the Man, long have I waited here
For this intent, but I am never the near;
No Friend I have that when the Waters be
Troubled, their helping hand will lend to me,
To put me in, others this blessing gain,
(Through help of Friends) which I cannot obtain.
Jesus, who knew the sad and helpless case
Of the Diseased, and how he friendless was,
Bid him arise, take up his Bed, and go
Unto his house, for he was healed now.
Then straight he rose, and taking up his Bed
On which a long and sad Life he had led,
Begun with it upon the Sabbath Day
(On which the Cure was wrought) to go away.
This when the Jews beheld, who did detest
All violations of their Day of Rest,
They were enraged, and told him what he did
Upon that day, their sacred Law forbid,
Which no laborious action would allow,
And such was his, which he ought not to do.
But boldly he replied, the Man who made
Me whole this day, the same unto me said,
Take up thy Bed, and walk, and so I will,
Though in the very act you do me kill.
Then they demanded of him, who he was,
That durst command him to infringe their Laws,
And break the rest of that same sacred day,
Which he was strictly bound to keep always;
But unto this the man could nothing say;
For then he knew not Jesus, who that day
Had healed him, and to the Jews unknown
Was stepped aside, and from their envy gone.
After a while the ever-blessed Lord
Found him in the Temple whom he had restored,
Who out of tender pity to the man
Bid him be careful how he sinned again,
Since of his tedious Sickness he was well,
Lest a more fearful Judgment him befell.
But straight unto the Jews this silly Soul
Went and informed them Jesus made him whole,
Therefore they sought the ever-Blest to slay,
Because he healed him on the Sabbath Day.
MIRACLE VIII. The Cure of one who had a withered Hand, wrought in Galilee.
AS Jesus traveled through the Fields of Corn,
With his Disciples, on the Sabbath Morn,
His little Flock with gnawing Hunger took,
To Appease its rage, the full-ear'd Corn did pluck.
When this the formal Pharisees did see,
(Who no respect had to necessity)
They told the ever-blessed Jesus, how
His Follow'rs did what they ought not to do.
They broke upon that Solemn Day their Fast,
Before the public Services were past,
Which strictly by their Moses was forbid
In his own Law, and which they never did.
Jesus, who through this Vail their envy saw,
And better knew the meaning of the Law.
Than these dissembling Zealots did, replied,
Have ye not read what God's Anointed did,
And his Companions, when from Saul they fled?
How they did eat the consecrated Bread,
Which to the Temple, and the Priests belonged,
And by this action thought the Law not wronged.
And in the Law have ye not notice taken,
How that the Priests in the Temple do profane
The sacred Sabbath? And yet blameless are,
Although the work they then performed were,
But for the service of the Temple, not
To be allowed on that day to be wrought.
Now if that David and his men, who were
With Hunger pinched, might safely without fear
The Shewbread take, and without sinning eat
Those hallowed Loaves, for want of other Meat,
Why may not my Disciples be allowed
(Since they were destitute of other Food)
To pluck and eat the ripened ears of Corn,
Although they did it on the Sabbath Morn?
That which they did, being but to abate
Their raging Hunger, which required Meat,
And in the Laws intention sure they are,
No more blameworthy, than the other were.
Their Cases are alike, and therefore must
Both sinful be, or both accounted just.
And if the appeasing Sacrifices may,
Be by the Priests dressed on the Sabbath Day,
Why may not my Disciples crop the Corn,
As they walked through it on the Sabbath Morn,
Since holy days, as well as things, may be
Profaned in cases of necessity?
If inhumane ye were not, as ye are,
And so unlike to God, who does declare,
That Mercy is more pleasing in his Eyes
By far, than is the richest Sacrifice,
You would (as 'twas your duty to have done)
Put on this act the best construction:
And not have charged my Follow'rs, for this deed,
With an offense, 'cause what they herein did,
Was but in order to my Service done,
And with my liking, and permission,
Who Lord am of the Sabbath, and so may
Forgive the breach of that Religious day.
This said, and having justified this Deed,
And his Disciple from the Cavils freed,
Of the most spightful Pharisees, the place
He forthwith left, where the Contention was,
And went another Sabbath day into
Their Synagogue, and, as he used to do,
The silly People most divinely taught,
Where this ensuing Miracle he wrought.
Among the great Assembly there did stand
A poor disabled Person, whose right hand
Was shrivel'd up, he hearing of the Fame
Of Jesus, to be healed, unto him came.
The baffled Scribes and Pharisees, who were
Thirsty for an occasion to ensnare
The blessed Jesus, waiting for him lay,
To see him heal upon the Sabbath Day:
A deed, which they accounted such a Crime,
That 'twould condemn him in the Sanhedrim.
But Jesus, who their thoughts did understand,
Commanded him who had the withered Hand
To rise, and in the midst stand forth of all
Those who their Malice did Religion call;
Straight he arose, and this command obeyed,
Then Jesus, sternly looking on them, said --
One thing I Will ask of you, who seem so wise
To think all knowledge in your bosom lies,
Who so great Critics in your Laws are known,
Is good or evil lawful to be done
Upon your Sabbath Days? Or is it fit
To destroy Life, or else to rescue it?
But they so puzzled were at what he said,
That to his Queries they no answer made.
Then went he on -- Who is there of you all
Shall have a Sheep, that by a chance shall fall
Into a steepy-pit of the Sabbath Day,
And will not take the liberty to lay
Hold on it, and endeavor all he can
To pull it out? -- How much more is a Man
Better than such a Creature? Wherefore know,
Men may good actions on the Sabbath do.
Then fiercely looking on the thronging Crowd
Who there around him (full of envy) stood,
Grieved at the very Soul, to find not one
That had the Bowels of Compassion,
He bid the Man who had the withered Hand,
(And in the middle of the Throng did stand)
To stretch it forth, who did as Jesus said,
And whole that Hand was as the other made.
MIRACLE IX. The Cure of several Persons by our Savior, when he came down from
the Mountain.
JEsus, whose Soul was on Devotion bent,
Having all night in fervent Prayer spent
Upon a Mountain: when the Worlds great Eye
Pierced through the sable Clouds, and made them fly:
Called his Disciples to him, and of them
Made choice of twelve for to attend on him.
These he Apostles named, because that he
Purposed, so soon as they were fit to be
Employed by him; to send them forth to Preach,
Those right'ous Laws which he came down to Teach:
But first in Jewry they were to make known,
The eternal Precepts of the mighty One,
And after that (when he was Throned on High)
Throughout the World to Preach up Piety.
The Apostles thus made choice of to fulfill,
The pleasure of his just and sacred Will,
He from the Leavy-Mountains shady Brow,
On which he Prayed, did with his Follow'rs go,
Into the spacious Plain, and there he stood,
As most convenient for the Multitude,
Who with more ease might there his Doctrine hear,
And to him come, those who diseased were.
Being there, (besides the residue of those
Who Jesus for their blessed Master chose)
Great multitudes of People to him came
Out of Judea and Jerusalem,
And from the Seacoasts of the stately Tire
And pop'lous Sydon: some with a desire
To hear him Preach, and some, infirm that were,
In hope once come, they should be healed there.
Herein so gracious was the blessed Son
Of the Almighty, that there was not one
That mist his expectation, for he Preached
The Gospel to them, and his Virtue reached
To those who were Diseased. So good was he
That through his mighty Love he set them free
That came possessed with Devils, and them cured
Who any kind of Miseries endured,
And did but touch him, such an healing power,
Then issuing from him, that the self same hour
Unto as perfect Health, as e're before,
He did their Bodies, and their minds restore.
MIRACLE X. The Cure of a Leper by our Savior, after he had ended his Sermon
on the Mountain.
DOwn from the Mountain Jesus did descend,
Into the Plain, when he had made an end,
Of his Discourse, and with him many were,
Who came from places far remote, and near;
Amongst the rest whom fame had thither brought,
Hearing the wondrous Cures which Christ had wrought,
A poor infected Leper came, and laid
Humbly himself at his blessed Feet, and said,
Lord, if thou will my Cure but undertake,
Thou can me clean of my Distemper make;
Say but the Word, and I am well assured,
So soon as it is spoke, I shall be cured.
When Jesus saw his Faith, and likewise how
He was assured what his Power could do,
Though his Disease was such as there was none
Could heal, besides the ever blessed Son,
Stretched sorth his hand, to show how ready he
Was to do good, and touched him presently.
What legal Priest or Pharisee is there,
Who durst in this case do, as he did here?
Sure if a Leper had to any one
Of them but come, and his Disease made known,
And for his Cure as humbly made request
To him, as this did to the ever-Blest,
He would have loathed the most deplored sight
Of such a Wretch, and nimbly took his slight,
For fear the Infection which he carried,
Might with a leprous Scab his Skin o're-spread.
But Jesus, whose kind love does overflow,
And knows no bounds to us poor Souls below,
Dealt not, upon the account of his Disease,
So with this man, as he would in this case,
But was so far from being inhumane,
As to avoid the poor infected Man,
When he came to him to be cured, that he
Seeing his Faith and great humility,
No otherwise beseeching from his hand
His Health, than might with his good pleasure stand,
Both touched him with his hand, and likewise said,
(To show the mighty Power which he had)
Because thou do believe, and art most sure,
That if I will I can effect thy Cure,
I Will do it for thee, therefore from thy foul
And leprous Scab be thou for ever whole.
No sooner had the ever-blessed Lord
This said, but so effect'al proved his Word,
That it the Lepers Skin immediately
Altered, and cleans'd him from his Leprosy.
The Leper cleansed, Jesus bid him tell
To no man who it was, that made him well:
For if this should be to the Phar'sees known,
Which I have for thee at this instant done,
So spightful are they, and they hate me so,
That what they could to blast this Cure they would do,
And on my Fall so firmly they are bent,
They Would make me feel what Malice can invent,
But go thou to the Priest, and to him show
Thy self, as by the Law thou ought to do,
And if he does declare thee to be free,
And thoroughly purged of thy Leprosy.
As he has hitherto, upon good ground,
Judged thee infected, and a man unsound;
Then offer him the Gift with thine own hand,
Which God by Moses strictly did command;
That he, by his receiving it of thee,
May own you are cleansed from thy Leprosy:
That when the Multitude this thing shall know,
That thou art clean, and by him judged so,
They may believe, what now they will not own,
That I am truly their Jehovah's Son,
Since this great Cure I wrought on thee is such,
As none could do, but by an heavenly touch.
MIRACLE XI. The Cure of a Centurions Servant in Capernaum, who was sick of a
Palsy.
NEar to Genes'reth's Lake there is a Town,
Within the known Precincts of Zabulon,
And Nepthali, which all men by the Name
Of Capernaum call, of noted Fame.
Hither the holy Jesus often came,
Because the place was populous, and so
Gave him occasions oftentimes to do
Many stupend'ous Wonders, and thereby
Those sacred Truths he taught, to ratify.
As he was entering now into this place,
It so fell out, that there a Captain was
Whose faithful Servant had for sometime lain
Sick of a Palsy, in such a horrid pain,
That he was past all humane art to save,
And now descending to the silent Grave.
At this much troubled the Centurion was,
And highly grieved for his Slave, because
He dearly loved him, having found him just
In all those things committed to his trust.
Hearing therefore from sundry Jews the Fame
Of Jesus, who were once both Sick and Lame,
Whom he had healthful made, how happy he
Was in the curing any Malady,
That either was inflicted on the Mind,
Or on the Body seized, of any kind;
Sent unto him the Elders of the Jews,
To beg him in their Names not to refuse
To come, and heal his Servant who had proved
Faithful to him, and whom he dearly loved.
Not with the least mistrust did he request
This favor of them to the ever-blest,
Thinking that if he personally came,
Jesus unto him would not grant the same:
But merely out of great humility,
And a most wise and bashful modesty,
Knowing himself to be an Alien,
And then a Soldier, both which kind of Men
The Jews did for the greatest part abhor,
As men of no Religion, thought therefore
Himself unworthy for to come, and crave
This favor of him for his faithful Slave.
And this the Elders of the Jews did know,
And therefore they, when begged by him to go
To Jesus, with his humble suit to have
Some speedy help for his poor dying Slave,
Went forthwith to him, and with earnestness
The holy Jesus for his Cure did press,
And thus they said -- Sir, we beseech thee, take
No notice that the man, for whose kind sake
We come unto thee, is a Stranger here,
And more than that a Roman Soldier;
And that the person we entreat to have
Restored to health, is this same Soldier's Slave.
For lo the Captain, whom this man does serve,
A worthy person is, and does deserve
In several respects (to us well known)
To have as great a kindness to him shown
As this, for which we are now come to thee;
For he is our real Friend, and one that we
Are well assured does our Nation love,
And this which he has done for us does prove,
For we have by his bounty, at this day,
And cost, a Synagogue wherein to Pray.
When Jesus heard the sayings of these men;
To show that he despised no man, how mean
Soever, if he truly did believe
That he could help and succor to him give,
Went with the Elders of the Jews straightway
Toward the house where the sick Servant lay,
And being not far distant from the place,
Where the tormented Paralytick was,
Some Friends of his the Captain did request
To go with him, and meet the ever-Blest,
Who with a lowly reverence drawing near,
Did with these following words salute his Ear --
Lord, trouble not thy self, for I am one
Who am not worthy to have favor shown,
So great a Favor as I ask of thee,
Under my homely Roof thy Face to see.
Wherefore I neither thought my self in the least
Worthy to come to thee with this request;
But let thy blessed lips but speak the word,
And to his health my Slave shall be restored.
For so all powerful art thou, I am sure
Thou needs not present be, to work a Cure,
But can a Patient to his Health restore,
Though absent, and by Sickness at Deaths door.
Besides this Cure's too mean, and much below
Thy Majesty, to come thy self and do.
Matters of small importance I transfer
Unto those Persons, who my Servants are,
And bearing rule, with me they never stand
To argue, but obey my just command.
For if I say to one man go, he go'th,
And to another come, this thing he does;
And do but this unto my Servant say,
Forthwith he does it, without more delay.
Now if such force in my Commands do lie,
That they (though I sit still) as certainly
Are executed by those men who are
Under my Rule, as if I present were,
And did put all those things which they have done
For me, my self in Execution.
How much more shall thy Servants, Lord, fulfill
What thou injoyn'st, and do thy sacred Will,
Although thou do not stir to see it done,
For such thy power is, that there is none
That can for greatness equal it, and thou
Can make them able, what thou will, to do.
Thus spoke the Captain, and his words were such
That Jesus marvell'd at them very much,
And turning him about did thus declare
Unto the People, who him following were,
So great a Faith as this, I freely say,
I have not found in Israel to this day;
And furthermore, I tell you, there shall come
Many from all parts of the World, on whom
You look and do abhor, as men who are
Strangers and Aliens to your Nation here,
Who shall by Faith admitted be into
The Church of God, though now contemned by you,
And in the Kingdom of that Holy One,
With your Renowned Ancestors sit down,
And for their Faith, as their dear Children be
Owned, and with them enjoy felicity.
Whereas the Children who from those did come,
That promised were this Kingdom, and to whom
It by the Virtue of the Covenant made,
Had still belonged, if foolishly they had
Not forfeited their right by such a Life
Which wicked was, and full of unbelief:
I say, that none of these Children shall be,
Admitted to this blessed Eternity,
But unto utter Darkness shall be thrown,
And there the loss of those blessed Joys bemoan,
And gnash their Teeth, that that felicity
Which they were promised, and have mist, should be
Conferred on them, whom they looked upon
As merely Strangers to their Nation.
When Jesus thus unto the Jews had spoke,
He on the Captain cast a gracious look,
And said unto him -- Go thy way, and as
Thou have believed so it shall come to pass.
And when they came unto the house they found,
Just as the Lord had said, the Servant sound.
MIRACLE XII. The raising of a Widow's Son to Life, who dwelt at Naim.
THe morrow, after the beloved Son
Of the Most High, the wondrous Cure had done
For the Centurion's Servant, who was just
Crumbling again into his Mother Dust,
He, with the rest who his Attendants were,
To Naim went; and as they did draw near
Unto the City Gate, with solemn pace,
A numerous Train from thence just coming was,
Attending to the Grave the only Son,
Of a discons'late Widow of that Town.
Jesus, who saw as they did pass along,
The grieving Parent amongst the mournful throng,
Touched with compassion at the Tears she shed,
For the lost Pledge of her once Nuptial Bed,
Unto the sad and des'late Widow made,
And thus aloud, these following words, he said, --
Weep not, fond Woman, for thine only Son,
Nor blame God's goodness, who this thing has done,
Though in thine eyes, this dealing seems severe,
Such must be born with by his Creatures here;
Who knows but God (who best knows what to do)
Has took this Child, thine only joy from you,
Turning thy cheerful day to dismal night,
To discipline thee in his ways aright.
Who did perhaps more value fading Dust,
Than the Almighty Father of the Just?
Or how do know, but that he this did do,
That he might to thee, and these Persons show,
The Sovereign Power he has over all
To take, and back Man's Life again recall,
That so your Faith might up to Heaven soar,
And there be fixed, and never waver more?
Then stepping to the Bier, he laid his Hand
Upon it, and the Bearers did command
Upon the Ground to set the breathless Load,
When straight, the ever-blessed Son of God
Called to the Youth, who with the fatal Chain
Of Death was bound, to rise to Life again.
Which words no sooner from his Lips did take
Their flight, but that the Dead arose and spoke
Him raised, Jesus to the Mother brought,
Who overjoyed was at the Wonder wrought,
And all much marvell'd at the Mercy shown,
And glory gave to the Almighty One:
Professing that a mighty Prophet now
His Israel had, to whom they all would bow.
And straight the Fame of Jesus ran throughout
Judea, and the Regions thereabout.
MIRACLE XIII. Jesus's Cure of a Demoniack, who was Blind and Dumb, after his
return to Capernaum; and of the difference and concertation between him and the
Scribes about it.
WEaried with Travel, and with Hunger spent,
Into a House at Capernaum went
Jesus and his Apostles, to appease
Their craving Stomachs, and themselves to ease.
Scarce were they entered in, but spreading Fame,
Throughout the City, had divulged the same:
Which brought the People in great numbers there,
Where Jesus and his fainting Servants were;
Who did the Cure of their Diseases press
Unto him, with such moving earnestness,
That neither he could so much leisure get,
Nor his Apostles, as to take some Meat.
Among the rest, who did to Jesus come,
There was a poor Demoniack Blind and Dumb.
Whose Friends did in an humble manner crave,
That the poor Wretch his Sovereign help might have.
Jesus beholding with a tender Eye
The sad Estate, in which the man did lie,
Cast forth the Devil by his powerful word,
Unloos'd his Tongue, and his lost sight restored;
So that the blind and dumb man now was known
To see, and talk to admiration.
This wonder Jesus had no sooner done,
But the amazed Multitude begun
To entertain within their Breasts a thought
Of just suspicion that the man, who wrought
Such famous Deeds, deserved no less a Name
Than the Messiah, that he was the same,
The Son of David who was long foretold;
And most there present this Belief did hold;
But when the env'ous Pharisees, who were
Haters of Jesus, did this saying hear,
They then resolved their utmost skill to use,
Behind the Back of Jesus, to traduce
His Glorious Name, thinking thereby that they
Might from him draw the peoples hearts away:
But on himself they did not dare to set,
Conscious that he would by the Contest get.
Therefore, to bring their Hellish Plot to pass,
(The rend'ring Jesus worthy of disgrace)
They knew no better and no surer way
Than this, to take -- it cannot be (say they)
That this same Fellow should be David's Son,
(As ye suppose) who is of low Birth known:
The Son of David, as ye all do know,
Shall be a mighty Prince, shall great things do,
Here in a Glorious Manner shall Command,
And over us bear Rule, from whose strong hand
We must expect deliverance from those
Who are our potent and our deadly Foes;
Whereas this Fellow is so mean a thing,
So far from being such a Glorious King,
That he deserves not to be thought on more,
Being a Wretch so despicably poor.
Besides, his Deeds most inconsistant are
With the high Birth of David's Son and Heir;
For he with such a Train goes up and down
As is of no repute, (as it is well known)
Teaching such Doctrines which no Mortal Ear
Before his coming did the like e're hear;
Curing Diseases, in their Natures such
As the most Sov'raign'st Drugs could never ^ouch.
And casting Devils out of the possessed,
By that Infernal Prince who sways the rest.
Thus they asperst his ever-Blessed Nam^,
And by this means thought to Eclipse his Fame;
But what he did, or to his Charge was laid,
His Friends, as yet, no Intimation had:
Till at the length, unto their Ears was brought
Both what he did, and by what means he wrought,
And being then so generally known
And talked of, they so credulous were grown,
As to believe it true, and so instead
Of clearing his good Name, they thought him mad,
And out they went, with a resolved mind,
Him, as one Frantic, with strong Chains to bind:
But Jesus, who as they supposed was mad,
Far other thoughts than his Relations had,
Of what the Pharisees did go about,
And had of him in secret given out:
He knew they had in a most high degree
Injured his Father, and notoriously
Himself had slandered, telling it about,
The Power, by which he cast the Devils out,
Was to the Prince of the Insernal Club
To be ascribed, The mighty Be'lzebub.
Whereas the Power by which he this did do,
Did solely and of right belong unto
His Father, who in Justice ought to have
That Honor, which to Be'lzebub they gave.
Calling therefore the Pharisees to him,
Who to his Charge had laid so foul a Crime;
And intimating to them, that he knew
Their thoughts, and how behind his Back as true,
They had reported that he went about,
By Beelzebub casting Devils out;
He plainly told them, that it could not well
Be thought that he should those damned Fiends expel
In such a manner as they said he did;
Since Reason needs must such vain thoughts forbid:
Because it could not in the least consist
With Hell's Imperial Monarch's Interest,
Herein to help him; for suppose he should
Lend his Infernal Aid to him, it would
Among his Subjects a division make,
And the Foundation of his Empire shake,
Laying the Pillars of his burning Throne
In Fatal Ruin and Destruction.
Herein his Kingdom being like unto
Our Earthly Princes Kingdoms, which we know
Cannot subsist, unless upheld they be
By Concord, and among themselves agree.
Again, those Men who do the Titles bear
Of my Apostles, and your Children are,
Do cast out Devils in my Name, and yet
From you they meet with no reproof for it:
If they such Wonders do, and in my Name,
And by my Power, and receive no blame,
Why then do ye so basely go about
To censure me, for casting Devils out?
Since in God's Name, and for his Glory too,
And your Relief and Comfort this I do?
Were ye but with ingenious Souls possessed,
Not Slaves to Envy or Self-Interest,
You would not thus defame me as you do,
But would ascribe my Miracles unto
The power of God, and by thus doing show,
You own his Kingdom is now come to you.
That this the time of the Messiah is,
Whose Mission God has testified with these
Amazing wonders, which he would never have done,
Had I not been his true but feigned Son.
Besides I do not (as ye fancy) stand
In need of Hells black Monarch's helping hand
To cast out Devils, for let Reason sway,
You must me free from this unlawful way;
For I am stronger than he is, and so
Into his closest dewlling place can go,
Bind him, and spoil his goods, when ever I
Shall think it fit his sturdy force to try.
His power I know, compared to mine is so small,
That let him use his utmost force, it shall
Not hinder me from turning of him out
Of them, he has into's possession got.
Once more, ye most ungrateful Wretches, I
Declare unto you, that I work not by
That Stygian Prince, for he is my mortal Foe,
And truly merits to be reck'ned so:
For who is not for me, must against me be,
He being therefore so implacably
Mine enemy, and no way to be brought
And reconciled to me, it cannot be thought
Worthy of credit, that he ever should
Help me to cast the Damned from their hold.
So that, what ever Miracles I do,
Must needs be owned the work of God by you,
And by his power wrought, who thinks not this,
Thinks both of God and of my works amiss.
Wherefore the causeless malice which you bear
To me your Friend, let me no more often hear,
And don't, against your Consciences, defame
My famous deeds, and my immortal Name;
For seeing they were by the Spirit wrought
Of the Eternal one, to go about
To slander and oppose them, is a Crime
So horrid, and so odious unto him,
That if 'till death with an obdurate heart
It meet, there can be no forgiveness for it.
And ye most justly merit to receive
This rigid doom, since sland'rously ye have
Imputed these my Miracles unto
Man's restless Foe, and have affirmed too
I work them by his Spirit, whereas I
Do by his Spirit work, who is throned on High.
For by so doing, if we must the Tree
Judge by the fruit it bears, then surely ye
Imply, that the eternal-Holy-Ghost,
A Spirit is of the Infernal Host,
Which is the highest blasphemy I know
Can be immagin'd to affirm him so.
Shall I (ye whited Sepulchers) declare,
That ye a wretched sort of people are,
And an infectious brood of Vipers? truly less
I cannot, must not say of you than this,
For what you are, your Language does relate,
Men of unhallowed hearts and reprobate.
Your words, which issue from them as the stream
Does from the Fountain, verify this same.
And as your words (which the true Tables are
To show your hearts and all that is treasured there)
Are highly sinful, so by you they ought
To be esteemed as such, and think them not
Too light or worthless (as ye seem to do)
To be accounted for one day by you.
For I declare, that every idle word
That men shall speak, before the dreadful Lord
Shall be computed for in that great day
Of Judgment, when he will their Sins display;
Much more shall they be to a reckoning brought,
Who have such words, as yours are, given out;
Words full of Defamations and of Lies,
Great slanders and notorious Blasphemies:
For these they shall the dreadful doom receive
Of the damned Spirits, and their Torments have,
As they shall cleared and rewarded be
For words that good are, to Eternity.
Then, when the Scribes and Pharisees had heard
These stabbing truths, which Jesus had declared,
Dissembling in their hearts the deadly hate
They bore unto him, humbly did entreat
That he a Token would from Heaven give,
Whereby they might upon good grounds believe,
That the undoubted Christ of God he was,
Sent from him to instruct them in his Laws.
But Jesus, who did never guess amiss,
Knowing they had a different end in this,
That notwithstanding all their fair pretense,
'Twas but a snare to trap his innocence,
That their chief cause in asking such a Sign
Was but to take occasion to begin
A quarrel with him, which with much more ease
They might commence about such things as these,
Than about them, which in their natures are
Unto the outward Senses much more near.
Thus said -- A vile and wicked People call
And seek for Signs, but there shall none at all,
But that of Jonas, granted to them be,
Who is a true and lively Type of me.
For as three days and nights the Prophet lay
(Excluded from a life-infusing Ray)
Within his moving Scaly-Tomb shut fast.
And was by God restored alive at last;
So shall the Son of Man (of heavenly Birth)
Almost three days and nights within the Earth
Entombed lie, and then again shall rise
The third day, crowned with lasting Victories;
And they who by this means will not be wrought,
And to conviction and repentance brought,
Nor to the preaching of my Follo'wers give
A willing ear, and what they teach believe,
Shall by the Ninivites adjudged be,
Because though they were in a high degree,
Sinful, so sinful, that before the Face
Of the great God came up their wickedness,
Crying aloud, on them to shower down
His dreadful vengeance from his sacred Throne:
Yet, from the Prophets freedom from his Goal,
The slimy Belly of the monst'rous Whale,
And Preaching to them, they in Sackcloth went,
And did sincerely of their Sins repent.
Whereas against my Preaching you are now.
So stubborn, and so stiffly bent, that though
I am by much a greater Prophet known,
Than Jonas, being the Eternal Son,
God having testified of me this same
By a loud Voice, which from the Heavens came;
Yet to my Resurrection you will not give
Credit, nor be persuaded to believe
What my Apostles by my Spirit shall
Instruct you, so as to repent at all.
That Famous Ethiopian Queen likewise,
Shall up in the Judgment against this Nation rise,
And it condemn, because she came from far,
The Wisdom of King Solomon to hear:
Whereas against me you have entertained
So great displeasure, that you will not be gained
To come and be informed of me, although
To do it, you need no tedious Steps to go.
And sure to most of you it must be known,
That I am greater much than Solomon,
And highly him in Wisdom do surpass,
And therefore abler am, than e're he was,
To give you both instructions, and advice,
How to attain to be divinely wise.
His Wisdom being in such things as here
Occurred, and Natural and Humane were;
Not such a Wisdom as was like to mine,
Perfect in matters Sacred and Divine,
And such a Wisdom, that would you but be
Persuaded to embrace it heartily,
Would mrke you wise, and so direct your feet,
That you at last with endless Joys should meet.
But as for you, and likewise for the rest
Of this your Nation, who have been so blessed
With all-sufficient means to bring you to
A timely Sorrow for your Sins, and who
Have had so many Wonders among you wrought,
So many Fiends of the Possessed cast out,
And yet so far have hitherto been known
From walking worthy of these Mercies shown,
That ye the God of Love blasphemed have,
By whom I Work, and who me Power gave,
That let me tell you, ye are highly in
A sad Condition through your wilful Sin,
And that your State is much more hopeless now,
By Satan's second coming into you,
Than 'twas before I lived among you here;
Or than it would have been, if I had never
Cast Satan out, for now he will with him take
(That he may safe his regained Conquest make)
More, and worse Spirits, than he did before,
To tempt you unto Sin, and make you more
Wicked each day than other, until he
Has you involved in endless Misery.
Many more Wonders than we here do write,
Jesus performed in his Disciples sight:
These are recorded, that you all might know
Him, the Messiah, which was promised you;
And that, believing him to be the same,
You might have Life, through his Eternal Name.
The Prayer of the Most Holy Jesus, before his Apprehension. Saint John.
1.
NOw when the great and glorious Son of Love
Who for our Bliss forsook his own above,
Had ended his Discourse, with lift up Eyes,
And elevated Hands, to Heaven he cries,
2.
Father the hour of my Death draws on
For all Mankind, now glorify thy Son,
That I may be enabled to go through,
The weighty business which I come to do.
3.
And as my Power does extend to All,
To give Eternal Life, permit the fall
Of none of those whom I came down to save,
Let them the Merits of my Passion have.
4.
All thou requirest to Enthrone Men there
Where Joys most perfect and Eternal are,
Is this, to own thee as the Supreme One,
Thy Laws obey, and to embrace thy Son.
5.
This I have published since I came below,
I have not failed thy sacred Will to show,
Having now finished what I came for here,
Attend, O heavenly Father, to my Prayer.
6.
When I have suffered what is due to Man,
Receive me up unto thy Joys again,
Give me that Glory which I had with Thee,
Before the World was, from Eternity,
7.
As for those Men, whom from their Callings thou
Gav'st to attend me hear, thy Will they know;
From thee I did receive them, thine they were,
My Will, as thine they have obeyed with care.
8.
Those glorious things for which I did come down,
I have not secret kept, but made them known,
They have embraced that Message brought by me,
Firmly believing that I came from thee.
9.
For these peculiar Men to thee I pray,
Confirm their Faith that no Temptation may
Seduce their hearts, nor Terrors e're withdraw
Their skilful Tongues from publishing thy Law.
10.
For the impenitent I no mention make,
Let them the fruit of all their Sins partake;
For them I pray, and for their constancy,
Who are thy Gift, and who have served me.
11.
These I commend unto thy gracious care,
Now I am going hence, protect them here:
I come to thee, O holy Father, keep
From the devouring Wolves these harmless Sheep.
12.
O let no Error in their Doctrine be,
Make them in that, as thou and I, agree,
That in the end when they their course have run,
They may sit down with an Immortal Crown.
13.
While I was with them I have lost not one,
But that same Rebel of Perdition,
Of whom the Prophet Prophesied to be
Ordained of Old, for this Apostasy.
14.
But now I come to thee, yet, Lord, before
I leave this World, I publicly implore
That they may always, in my absence, have
That joy and courage which my Presence gave.
15.
They Will be exposed, because they heavenly are,
To Perils and Afflictions, every where,
Where they shall Preach that Faith they had from me,
They Will find the World their mortal Enemy.
16.
Yet I entreat thee not to take them hence,
But keep them safe, and be their sure defense,
That the approaching danger may not be
Of force enough to shake their Constancy:
17.
The World to them, as well as me, they will find
Will always prove most envious, and unkind;
Yet sanctify them so to Preach thy Word,
That it may fruitful prove where-e're it is heard.
18.
To preach thy Will into the World I came,
I have empowered them to do the same;
For them I intercede, and give to thee
My Self, to fit them for the Ministry.
19.
Yet pray I not for these alone, but all
Who by the power of their Preaching shall
Conform unto thy Word, that they, as we;
May here be one, and in thy Faith agree.
20.
That all who yet are unconverted, may
Acknowledge thee, and all thy Laws obey,
And of their gross Idolatries repent,
And be convinced that I from thee was sent.
21.
That Power, Father, which thou gav'st me here,
Of working Wonders, my Disciples are
Invested with the same, grant them to be
No whit inferior in their Works to Me.
22.
That by those mighty Deeds which they shall do,
When I am gone, the stubborn World may know
I came from thee, that thy affections are
To them as great, as unto me they were.
23.
Father, I will that all my Servants may
Be where I am, for ever to enjoy
Thy gracious Love, that they may all behold
The Glory which I had with thee of Old.
24.
O Righteous Father, though the Worldly-wise
Dis-own my Message, and thy Love despise,
I know thy Will, my Servants know the same,
From thy Eternal-Self they know I came.
25.
Therefore those glorious Attributes of thine,
And Will, I have, and will declare to mine;
All things I Will give them which thou gav'st to me,
Both Wisdom, Power, and Fidelity.
On Jesus his Apprehension, Examination, Death, Resurrection and Ascension.
WHen the Eternal Son these words had spoke,
Unto the Mount of Olives over the Brook
Of Cedron, with his Followers he went,
Where was a Garden, which they did frequent.
Jesus, who knew the Tragedy of Sin,
Must in that hallow'd-Plot of Ground begin,
Bid his Disciples at the Door to stay,
And thence not move, while he went in to Pray.
Then taking with him Peter, James and John,
(The three which once beheld the Eternal Son,
Clothed with a dazling-Cloud of shining Light
Upon the Mount, that they the dismal Night
Might see of Sorrow, which his Soul for Sin
Was in that instant to be clouded in)
Came to the place which he designed should be,
The doleful Theater of his Agony.
When to three he freely did impart,
What pungent Sorrows did assail his Heart,
Commanding them upon their Guard to stand,
And pray against the threatening Storms at hand;
Not suffering Sleep upon their Eyes to creep,
But a strict Watch over their Souls to keep,
While he the troubles of an Innocent,
And spotless Soul, in Prayer to Heaven sent.
Sad unto Death he found himself now brought,
When he beheld the deadly bitter draught,
The Cup of Vengeance, flowing to the Brim,
Filled by the Hand of God, and reached to him.
Then did the pressures of that monstrous Load,
Our crying Sins, and the fierce Wrath of God,
Cause his most guiltless Soul to groan and bow,
Under the weight, and purple drops to flow
Down his most sacred Body, through each Pore,
Dying his Garments, and the Ground all over.
On which he thrice did fall, and thence sent up,
As often this Prayer -- Father remove this Cup --
With such an humble Resignation still,
That he submitted to his heav'ny Will.
The careful Shepherd, whom no Sorrows could
Withold from looking to his little Fold,
Betwixt the intervals of fervent Prayer
Went, and awoke them, who fast sleeping were.
And twice the Three he gently did reprove,
That they for him should show no greater Love,
Amid'st his troubles, than they had expressed,
Sleeping, while he with Sorrow was deprest.
But at his third return, their fill of Sleep
He bid them take, in vain it was to keep
A Watch, since now what he had often foretold
Was come to pass, the Son of Man was sold
Into the hands of Sinners, who were now
Entering with that bold-Wretch, who this did do,
His Apprehension.
When lo, the Traitor to the Garden Door
Was come, and entered with a number more
Of armed Men, who by the Sanhedrim
Were ordered as a Guard to wait on him.
Jesus, who this, and all things else foreknew,
Instead of flying meets the armed Crew,
And boldly asks them, wherefore they came out
With Lights, and Weapons, whom it was they sought?
Straight as one Voice the servile Slaves do cry,
Jesus of Naz'reth; Jesus made reply,
I am the Man ye seek; no sooner he
Had this confessed, but they immediately
Fell to the Ground, as if with Lightning struck
At his Almighty Voice, and dreadful look;
Groveling upon the Earth they speechless lay,
Till he again the second time did say,
Whom do ye seek? At this they all arise,
With trembling Limbs, and with distorted Eyes,
And told him Jesus, Jesus, was his Name
Who preached Sedition, and for whom they came.
Lo, said the Holy Jesus, I am he,
If you seek me, give these their liberty:
Then had that saying of his, I lost not one
Of all thou gav'st me, its completion.
Now Simon Peter, all enraged drew
His long-sheath'd-Sword, into the Crowd he flew
With a most zealous Courage, void of fear,
At the first stroke he cuts off Malchus Ear,
And while his sturdy Arm was dealing blows
On every hand amid'st his Masters Foes,
Jesus calls out, and bids him sheath his Sword,
His Fury stopped at his commanding Word,
Peter, said he, shall I not drink the Cup
Sent by my Father, yes I Will drink it up.
Since it is determined, Soldiers come away,
What Heaven commands, I must, and will obey.
Then came the Soldiers, and the sacred Hands
Of Jesus bound, with their thrice-twisted-Bands.
Unto the house of Annas (who then was
Prince of the Sanh'drim, and to Cajaphas
Father in Law) immediately they go,
And with big looks their willing Captive show.
His Examination.
Forth of the env'ous-Crowd the Judge calls out
The blessed Jesus, questions him about
His Servants, and his Doctrine, why he taught
In Corners, that which such dissension wrought.
Jesus replied, what from my Lips has fell,
Most of this Nation can inform thee well,
In the Assembly of the Jews have I
Published that Faith, for which I now must dye.
Never in forbidden Corners did I sneak,
But in their Temples publicly I spoke;
If these my Words no Credit can command,
Ask them the Truth of this who here do stand.
At this a Sergeant who was standing near,
Up with his impious Fist, and on the Ear
Gave him a rude Salute, asking him why
Unto the Judge he talked so saucily!
Jesus replied, if I have spoken ill,
Prove then the Crime, but if no words have fell
Which do deserve such a rebuke from thee,
How comes it then to pass thou smitest me?
Now Annas, who no Power had to declare
Judgment, except the Sev'nty present were,
Fast bound unto the House of the High Priest,
To be examined, sent the ever-Blest.
Him follows Peter, and his dearest John,
The rest were trembling to their Houses gone,
This last Disciple was to Cajaphas known.
He with his Fettered Master amongst the rest,
Enters the Palace of the Jews High Priest,
But missing Peter in the numerous Rout,
Who at the Door stood Sorrowing without,
Unto the Maid he goes, at his request,
Simon admittance had among the rest.
It being cold, within the Palace-Hall
A Fire was made, the Soldiers round it all
Stood warming of themselves, by the Hearths side,
The pensive Peter stood while Christ was tried.
By a Divine-Impulse a Damsel goes
And Simon asks, Art thou not one of those
Who served this Jesus, whom they here have brought?
The daunted Servant said he knew him not.
He who but even now had drawn his Sword
In the Defense of his beloved Lord,
That matchless Courage, by a Maid alone,
Was made to tremble, and his Lord disown.
The Lamb of Life, who a long time had been
Under the snaring Test of the Sanhedrim,
When they perceived from his own Mouth they could
Not force the least unwary word that would
Give a pretense to bring his Death about,
False Witnesses the murderous Villains sought.
Several there came, who sundry things did bring,
But none of weight, nor two that vouched one thing.
At length a Pair of daring-Rogues were found,
Whose Souls never felt a penitential-Wound,
That said, This Man affirmed -- Do you destroy
The Temple which is now all Isr'els Joy,
And from the Ground again I Will easily raise
Its Head (as now it stands) within three days.
Then from his Seat arose the Jews High Priest,
With Eyebrows knit, and Eyes which Rage confessed,
Demanding sternly what his Silence meant,
Whether he Guilty was, or Innocent?
But Jesus held his peace; which when he saw
That from his Mouth his Threats could nothing draw,
Clothing his Face with a more peaceful Look,
To a more cunning Wile himself betook;
Adjuring him by a most sacred Oath,
The living God, to tell the naked Troth,
Whether the Christ he were, the Great God's Son,
Who from the Clouds in Glory should come down.
Jesus whose Tongue was never used to Lie,
Knowing the hour of his Death drew nigh,
Confessed he was the same, and likewise told,
That he whom now they did with Scorn behold,
They Reassumed into the Heavens should see,
And Throned on the right Hand of Majesty,
As visibly as at the Gen'ral-Doom,
By those dire Judgments which on them should come.
Then Cajaphas his Clothes with Fury rent,
And to's embosom'd Hellish-Flames gave vent;
What farther need is there of Proof, said he,
Since we have heard this horrid Blasphemy;
Your Judgments, Sirs; Does he deserve to Die?
The Vote was Death, and that deservedly.
Then Jesus forth into the Hall was brought,
Unto the Soldiers, to be set at naught;
Upon whose Face the devilish Monsters spit,
And on his sacred Sides their Cudgels split.
Hood-Winck'd, they Beat him, on the Muffled-Face,
And bid him Proph'cy who the Smiter was.
All the out-ragious Cruelties that Men
Could Muster up, were Executed then
On the most inn'cent Lamb, until the Light
Drew back the Curtains of that grizly-Night.
Peter, who boldly once resolved to Dye
The worst of Deaths, rather than Christ deny,
Who once already, by the Fireside,
The ever-Blest had cowardly denied;
And still there senseless stood, and saw the Jews
The Worlds great Ransom barbarously abuse,
Was by a Maid again, amid'st the Throng,
Asked if he did not unto Christ belong;
But he although forewarned, disowned once more
His lovely Service; as he did before.
One of the Highpriests Servants, who was near
Relied to Malchus, that had lost his Ear,
To the forgetful Peter came, said he,
Art thou not one of those which I did see
With this Man in the Garden, tell me now?
Simon for-swore it, then the Cock did Crow.
When at that instant Jesus cast an Eye
Upon his Servant, who immediately
Struck both with Shame and Sorrow, forth did go,
And by his Tears his true Repentance show.
Thirsty for Blood, just at the dawn of Day,
The Sanhedrim triumphingly away
Their Prisoner Led unto the Pretor's Hall;
Come to the Door, they did for Pilate call;
Within the Hall they would not set a Foot,
Fondly conceiting that they should pollute
Themselves, in mingling with the Heathen there,
Being they were to eat the Passover.
Pilate informed that at his Palace-gate,
A great Convention of the Jews did wait,
To speak with him, that they had Jesus brought,
Straight he arose, and to the Jews came out.
Jesus presented, Pilate asked the Jews,
What was the Crime, for which they did accuse
Him whom they brought, what evil he had done?
Moved by a furious Zeal, the Scribes begun
To tax him of Sedition, and that he
Stirred up the People to a Mutiny.
How that his Doctrine was against their Laws,
And that no Tribute due to Caesar was;
That he declared himself the Christ to be,
And saying so spoke horrid Blasphemy.
He proudly vaunted that he was their King,
And Death did merit for that only thing;
Therefore they all made it their earnest Suit,
That this Seducer he would Execute.
Pilate perceiving more of Rage to be
In their request, than ought of Piety;
Take him, said he, and by your own Law try,
Whether he does deserve to Live or Dye.
Thou know, said they, the Romans of this Right,
Which once we had, have now deprived us quite,
Leaving no power in us to punish those
With Death, who have transgrest against our Laws;
To thee we come, and e're we'll stir from hence,
We do expect thou wilt Judge this Man's offense.
Back to the Judgment-Hall the Praetor went,
Seated within the dreadful Chair, he sent
One for the Prisoner, who was straight brought in,
With whom the imperious Judge did thus begin.
Tell me, said he, art thou the King of the Jews?
Jesus replied, do they without accuse
Me of this Crime, or does this Question spring
From thy own Brain, to say I am a King?
Am I a Jew, said Pilate? Do I read
Their Books, to know what they are promised,
Or whom they do expect? Not I, but they
Who are without, charge thee with what I say.
Tell me the great Offense which thou have done
To make them bring this Accusation.
The blessed Jesus, not at all dismayed,
At this their Charge, unto his Judge thus said,
As for an earthly Kingdom, I never sought,
Had I done this, my Servants would have sought,
And not have suffered what you see, these Bands,
But rescued me from my Oppressors Hands.
Now since they did not Fight in my Defense,
You may conclude my Kingdom's not from hence.
What do thou own, said Pilate, unto me
Thou art a King, and have Authority.
Jesus replied, it is true, a King I am,
To be a Witness to the Truth I came
Into the World, the Pious do submit
Unto my Rule, and never question it.
Then Pilate asked him, what by Truth he meant,
But waited not his Answer, out he went
Unto the Jews, and asked them why they brought
This Man to him, in whom he found no fault.
You know you have a Custom every Year,
When you do celebrate your Passover,
That I release a Prisoner, whom ye choose,
Will ye that I set free the King of the Jews?
Enraged at this, they all Barabbas cry,
Barabbas we will have, let this Man dye.
Now this Barabbas was a Robber known,
And cast in Prison for a Murder done.
Pilate much fearing that the stubborn Jews
Would make an uproar, if he should refuse
To punish Jesus, forthwith gave command
Unto a Soldier of the Roman-Band,
To Scourge the Prisoner, hoping they would be
Appeased with this, and Vote his Liberty.
From Head to Foot the Villain strips him bare,
And with his Scourge his tender Flesh does tear,
A Crown of Thorns the Soldiers wreath, which done,
Upon his sacred Brow they crush it on.
Pierced to the Skull, down trills the purple Goar,
In trembling drops upon the blushing Floor.
A purple Robe of Tyrian-dy they throw,
Upon his Shoulders, with the Knee they bow,
And thus salute him, -- Hail great King of the Jews,
His tender Sides with cruel Rods they bruise,
Thus rudely used, Pilate goes forth again,
And tells the Jews he finds no fault in the Man.
Him follows Jesus with their marks of Scorn,
A purple Robe, and Diadem of Thorn.
Pilate presents him to them, lo, said he,
What Is here of Terror, or of Majesty?
Neither his Wounds, nor Tears of Blood, could move
Their Savage-Breasts to show one spark of Love.
The sight of them encreast their Thirst the more,
After his Death, the Soldiers over and over,
With the Chief Priests importunately cry,
To have him judged to Death immediately.
When Pilate found that nothing would assuage
But Death, the burning Passion of their Rage,
Take him, said he, for I profess I find
No fault in him, and if you have a mind
To have him dye, do you your selves the deed,
I dare no farther in this Case proceed.
We have a Law, and by that Law you may,
Reply the Jews, the great Blasphemer slay;
Who makes himself the Son of the Most High,
As he has done, ought by our Laws to Dye.
The Son of God, the Jews no sooner said,
But Pilate trembled, and was sore afraid;
With hasty Steps unto the Judgment-Hall
He goes again, and does for Jesus call.
The tortured Prisoner was no sooner come,
But he demands what Lineage he came from.
To him no Answer Jesus does afford,
Long he expects, but does not get one word.
Will thou not speak, said Pilate, unto me,
Who have the power to kill, or set thee free?
I own thy power said Jesus, and submit
Unto the Cross when thou shall sentence it.
Yet know, the power thou have over me
From God proceeds, it is he who gives it thee.
Therefore the greater Sins the Jews commit,
Who make thy power to their Wills submit,
To crucify the great Creator's, Son,
Merely because they will it should be done.
Appalled at this, from henceforth Pilate sought
To free his Prisoner, but the Jews cried out,
Thou art not Caesar's Friend, nor do discharge
Thine Office truly, should thou him enlarge;
Who makes himself our King; and he does so,
Deserves to Dye, for he is Caesar's Foe.
Then Pilate hearing what the Jews did say,
Into the place he went called Gabbatha.
Down on the Seat of Judgment straight he sat,
Commanding Jesus forthwith to be brought,
This on the Preparation-day was done
Of their great Feast, and 'twas toward the Noon;
Behold your King, said Pilate, they all cry,
Away, away with him, and let him Dye.
Will ye consent unto so foul a thing,
Said Pilate, as to Crucify your King?
Caesar's our King, no other King we'll own,
For this bold Wretch who claims a Sovereign Throne,
Replied the Jews, we know his Father's Name,
And the despised Town from whence he came;
And scorn to yield our Necks to such a One,
Who a Blasphemer is, and Rebel known.
His Death.
Pilate, with this their Envy overcome,
Past from his trembling-Lips the final Doom,
Decreed by the great God, to drink the Cup,
And then most vilely gave his Prisoner up
Unto their Rage, who to the Slaughter goes,
Dumb as a Lamb midst his insulting Foes;
Bearing his Cross, most of that tedious way
As he ascended unto Golgotha.
Where being come, and nailed upon the Wood
Through both the Hands and Feet, these Monsters stood,
And with reproachful Terms did him revile;
Though for their Sins his Wounds did bleed the while.
Two guilty Villains one on either side,
Of this most spotless Lamb they Crucified.
Such an inglorious End to him they gave
Who had no Sin, but Sinners came to save.
Over his Cross after the Roman Rite,
Pilate his Accusation thus did Write,
Jesus of Naz'reth the King of the Jews,
In Syriack, Greek, and Latin, he did choose
To have it Writ, because the place was nigh
To Salem, where this Victim hung on high.
And many People were assembled there
To celebrate the Feast and Passover.
When the Chief Priests and Scribes the Title read
They humbly begged to have it altered,
And in the Room of it upon the Cross
To write, he said, the King of the Jews he was.
But Pilate told them what is writ, is writ,
I am resolved, I will not alter it.
Now when the Soldiers had their duties done,
And crucified the great Jehovah's Son,
Before his spotless Soul had took its flight,
From its most pure abode, they in his sight
Seized on his Garments, to division went,
And in four parts his under Vest they rent;
Each took his share, but when the seamless Coat
All of one piece, wove from the top throughout,
They had well viewed, they judged 'twould useless be
If it were torn, therefore they all agree,
That he who with the Dice could highest throw,
The whole entire Vest to him should go.
These things they did that David's Prophecy,
Which he foretold of them, fulfilled might be.
Now by the Cross of Jesus, full of grief
The ever-blessed Virgin, with the Wife
Of Cleophas were standing, and with them
The pen'tent Mary, all in Tears for him.
When Jesus midst his Tortures did espy
These three, and John lamenting bitterly,
He calls his Mother, and his dearest John,
Woman, says he to her, behold thy Son;
To the Disciple he did likewise say,
Behold thy Mother; from that very day
Unto his house she went, as if she were
His aged Mother he did treat her there,
With great respect, and tenderness of care.
Jesus consid'ring that his work was done,
Each Prophecy fulfilled, but only one,
That that might have its full completion.
He said I thirst -- well might that Tongue be dry,
Whose Soul was scorched with such an Agony.
Who bore a Burden none could bear but him,
The Wrath of God due to the World for Sin.
When lo the comfort which these Tigers yield,
Tied to an Hysop-stalk a Spung they filled,
Out of a Vessel which was standing near,
Full to the top of Gall and Vinegar;
This to his sacred mouth they put, which he
No sooner tasted, but immediately
He bowed the Head, and bowing did commend
His Soul to God, and so his Life did end.
Then did the Sun, astonished at the sight,
From twelve to three, obscure his glorious Light.
Over all the Land the affrighted Earth did quake,
And made that stately Pile the Temple shake,
So that its strong Partition Wall of Stone
Clave in two parts, with the Convulsion.
The Graves were opened, and the Saints arose
From their cold Lodgings, and appeared to those
Within the City; the Centurion,
Who guarded Jesus, seeing what was done;
Trembling confessed he was the Almighty's Son.
Yet the remorsless Jews would not relent,
At these prodigious Signs, but jointly went
To Pilate, and maliciously request,
That since the morrow was a day of Rest,
And the great day of their unleavened Feast,
He Would give command, their Legs first being broke,
Down from the Cross their Bodies might be took.
Pilate commands his Officers to do
What they desired, to the first they go,
And broke his Legs, they served the other so.
But when they came to Jesus, and perceived
How that already he his last had breathed;
They broke not his, but in his sacred Side,
One of the Soldiers broached a Wound so
That from the bloody Fountain gushing came wide,
Unmixed Water, with the purple Stream.
He who stood by, and saw these things does give
This true Relation, that ye might believe;
With this do both those Prophesies agree,
That in the Psalms, and that in Zachary.
Now when this horrid Tragedy was done,
And from the Cross the Son of God taken down,
Joseph of Arimathea, a devout
But secret Follower of the Lord, besought
Pilate to have the freedom to Inter
The blessed Jesus, in his Sepulcher.
Pilate consents, come where his Master lay,
His sacred Body he removes away
Unto a Garden of his own hard by,
Where was a Tomb hew'n for himself to lie.
Him follows Nicodemus, (who was one
That in the night to Jesus often was known
To come) into the Garden with Perfumes,
Of Myrrh and Aloes, those embalming Gums.
Which rich Perfumes were then among the Jews
For the Interment of their Dead in use.
With these in Linnen-Swaths upon the Ground,
Joseph and he, their dearest Master wound,
And then the Body both of them convey,
Unto a Tomb wherein no man yet lay,
Having no time, their Sabbath drawing near,
His Resurrection.
To hew him out another Sepulcher.
Early upon the first day of the Week
Unto the Tomb, just as the day did break,
With Aromatic Spices Mary came
The Body of her Sav^^ur to embalm.
When she perceived (what she took care to have)
The massy Stone rolled from the mouth of the Grave,
She stooping looked into the sacred Vault,
But found not him whom her Affection sought.
Seized with a dreadful fear, she nimbly run
Unto the house, where Peter was, and John,
And told them how some envious Jew away
Had stole her Master, but where now he lay
She could not tell, nor light of any one
That could inform her, who the deed had done.
Both the Disciples hearing what she said,
In haste arose, and to the Garden made;
But John the nimbler of the two did come,
Long before Peter, to the empty Tomb.
And stooping down, he looked and did espy,
Within the dreadful Grave the Swaths to lie,
Yet went not in but trembling waited there,
Till Simon came unto the Sepulcher.
Who boldly entering saw upon the Ground,
The Linnen-Swaths, which once his Master wound,
And neatly folded up, by them he found
The Napkin lying which his Temples bound.
But in no Corner, as he idly thought,
Could he perceive him in the silent Vault.
Then forth he came, and John went in to view,
Both saw, and both believed the Story true,
Which Mary told, though they had heard him say,
Often that he should rise on the third day,
Neither to him, nor Scripture did they give
So much regard, as either to believe.
But to their homes they both, amazed to see
The Body gone, returned immediately.
Now Mary Magdalene who did out-go,
In an obsequious Love, the other two;
Staid weeping at the Grave, and looking down,
Within the Tomb she saw two men unknown,
One at the Head, the other at the Feet,
Sit where her Lord had lain, clothed all in White.
Both asked the reason why she sorr'wing stood,
And from her Eyes showered down that pearly Flood.
Why should you ask me this, since him I loved,
Who here was buried, they have hence removed;
And what is now become of him, said she,
Fain would I know, but none will tell it me.
Why among the Dead, should you suppose to find
The Living, said the Angels, call to mind,
Did he not tell you he would rise again
On the third day, he has performed the same.
To his Disciples go, and tell them He
Is risen, and will go to Galilee.
As she was turning from the Sepulcher,
Doubting the Tr^^^ of what they told to her,
She saw the Person whom she weeping sought
Standing behind her, but she knew him not;
Jesus, who knew her Love, and saw her Fears;
Willing to dry them up, and ease her Fears;
Asked her why she lamented, and for whom
She was in Search into the Garden come?
Sir, if thou art the Gardener who do look
Unto this place (said she) and hence have took,
The Body, tell me now but where it lies,
And it shall never more offend thine Eyes,
For at my own expense I will take care
To find for it another Sepulcher?
Mary, says Jesus; straight the Voice she knew,
And cried Rabboni, Master, Is it you?
Prostrate upon the earth to kiss his Feet,
She threw her self, ravished again to meet
Him raised to Life, whom she thought dead, but he
Would not allow her love such liberty.
Forbear, said he, as yet I have not been
Up with my Father, to my Brethren
Haste, and assure them to my God I go,
In Heaven to provide a place for you.
Then to the place where the Disciples were,
The joyful Mary came, and did declare
How she had seen the Lord, and likewise what
He did command, but they believed her not.
When in the Evening of that day, they were
Assembled, with the Doors close shut, for fear
Of the malicious Jews, in Jesus came
They knew not how, an^^^hers sa^uted them --
Peace be unto you -- when he had so said
They trembling stood, most terribly afraid,
Concluding that it could not Jesus be,
But a delusion which they t^ere did see.
Yet when he showed his Hands and wounded Side
Those Marks which he received when Crucified,
The Souls rejoiced, and all with one accord
Acknowledged him to be their Sovereign Lord.
He therefore to confirm their Faith, begun
T'expound the Scriptures, which had long foreshown
His cruel Death, and Resurrection.
And by his Spirit made them plainly see
The full import of every Prophecy.
And now farewell, said he, yet before I go,
The same Commission I do give to you,
Which I received, to plant a Church I came,
Do ye succeed me, and complete the same.
Be of good comfort, to assist you here
I Will send you down the blessed Comforter.
But here attend ye, till he does come down
Then did he go, and breath on every one,
And by so doing did his Followers fit
For that unerring guide the Holy Sp'rit.
Which at the Feast of Pentecost came down,
And sat like flaming-Fire, on every one.
He gave the Keys of Heavens glorious Gate
Into their Hands, to Excommunicate
The stubborn Sinner, to absolve or bind
They Power had, as they just cause did find.
But Thomas, called Dydimus, the Twin,
Who was not with them when the Lord came in,
Now being come, they up and told him how
Jesus had with them been but even now.
But he declared, unless his Eyes did see,
And Hands did touch his Wounds, he would faithless be.
When his Disciples that day sev'nights were
Met at their usual Place to join in Prayer,
The Lord of Life the second time did come,
They knew not how into the close-shut Room
Thomas, said he, since you will not believe
Your Fellow Servants that I am alive,
Except your Hands do touch, and Eyes do see,
Those cruel Marks bestowed on me;
Behold my Wounds, thy Fingers thrust into
This Side of mine, and be not faithless now.
My Lord and God! said Thomas, now I know
And am convin'd, the very God art thou.
Had thou before believed what thou have seen,
Thy Faith, said Jesus, had then nobler been
Than now it is, my blessing I do give
To them who see me not, and yet believe.
His Ascension.
Full forty days the Eternal Son of God,
After he rose again, on Earth abode.
Teaching his Followers what they ought to do,
To make the World his Fathers Will to know,
And now just ready to ascend his Throne,
To take possession of his purchased Crown,
He went unto Mount- Olivet with them,
Sev'n Furlongs distant from Jerusalem.
Upon whose lofty Brow with Hands lift high,
Unto the sacred Throne of Majesty,
He blessed them, which having done, a bright
And shining Cloud conveyed him from their sight,
Up to the glorious Seat of Bliss where He,
Triumphant sits to all Eternity.
To the Eternal Three above,
Father, Son, and Spirit of Love,
By all the glorious Host in Heaven,
And Men on Earth, be Glory given.
On Christ's Sufferings.
LOrd, what is Man! that thou from Bliss,
Where Love in full perfection is,
Should send thy Son, thine only One,
To be contemned, and spit upon,
To be the abject and the scorn,
Of every Villain, to be torn
With cruel Rods, to be reviled,
And live as 'twere a live exiled;
And after all this ignomy,
To hang on the accursed Tree.
That the eternal God above
Should choose this way, to show his love
To such as we, who do return,
Instead of gratitude, our scorn;
That he his only Son should send,
To suffer an inglorious end,
And make the Innocent to be
An Offering for Impiety,
It raises wonder, but 'twas so,
Jesus did all this undergo;
Not by compulsion, 'twas his choice
He suffered, that we might rejoice.
All this he did for to regain
Lost Souls from an eternal pain.
And, Jesus, shall not we express
Our thanks to thee for happiness;
Had thou not died we had remained,
As Satan's Victims, ever chained;
No act of ours could e're have wrought
That Reconcilement, thou have bought,
With thy dear Blood; thou Heavens Rage
Did fully with thy Death assuage.
Such obligations, Lord, should move
Our stony-hearts to melt with Love,
And in the strictest duty bind
To thee the Souls of all Mankind.
CANTATE DOMINO CANTICVM NOVUM.
Praise the Lord up on the harp sing to the harp with a psalm of thanksgiving.
woodcut frontispiece

EIGHTEEN OF David's PSALMS PARAPHRASED.

By the same Hand.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1680.

Eighteen of David's Psalms Paraphrased.
PSALM 22.
MY God, my God! Why am I left
Helpless, in my distress bereft
Of that protection I have had,
Why are my Foes with Conquest clad?
I call and weep both day and night,
To thee, my God, to thee for right.
But, O my Cries and Tears are vain,
There Is no redress, no ease of pain.
All this shall not discourage me,
Since I do know thou just wilt be;
And true to every promise, Thou
Have bound thy Self to me by Vow.
And though Thou let'st mine Enemies
Insult, and deaf art to my Cries,
Yet, Lord, thou holy art, and still
Deserve the praise of Israel.
Our Fathers they relied on thee,
Thou, Lord, wast their security.
When dangers did their Souls surround,
To thee they called, and freedom found.
But I my Foes most deadly scorn
With patience hitherto have born;
The vulgar and ignobler sort
Do make my misery their sport,
In an insulting way they cry,
Let his Salvation now draw nigh,
He trusted in the Lord, that he
Would help him in adversity,
Let him stretch out his arm and save,
If either strength or power he have.
But, Lord, their scorn and cruelty,
Shall not dismay or trouble me;
Since I have always found thine arm
Able to rescue me from harm;
Since from the Womb I came, alone
Thou have been my Salvation;
And from my Mothers tender Breast,
My God, my hope were, and my rest.
Now be not far from me, but save,
Permit not the triumphing Grave,
Insa^^te as my cruel-Foes,
My Life untimely to enclose.
Redeem my Soul, there is none, I know,
Except my God, can help me now;
For I am close besieged, and brought
To that distress I cannot get out.
Like as a rav'ning Lion does,
Roaring pursue with open mouth
The helpless Creature, that he may
Affrighted fall, and be his Prey;
So do my Foes threaten, and rave,
To bring my Soul unto the Grave.
So week and feeble I am grown,
Wasted to nothing, every bone
Disjoynted, from its place does start,
Like Wax dissolved so is my Heart.
And as a Potsheard so my strength
Is dried up, my Tongue at length
Cleaves to my Jaws, my earthly-Frame
Is now returning whence it came.
For the blood-thirsty have beset
And closed me round, my Hands and Feet
They have transfixt, distended on
The shameful Cross, I every Bone
Can truly count, as if I were
A Monster, they upon me stare.
And having got me in their Toil.
They reckon all I have their Spoil.
They part my Garments, but the Lot
Is cast upon my seamless Coat;
Contented rather than it tear
The whole should go to one Man's share.
But be not far from me, O Lord,
My chiefest strength, thy help afford;
And from these bloody-Men set free
Thine only One, O rescue me!
And as in former time thine Ear
Has open been unto my prayer,
Be ready now my Life to save,
From the devouring Jaws of the Grave.
Then in the Congregation I
Will sing thy praise contin'ally,
And to thy Faithful there declare,
How great thy Love and Mercies are.
Ye Seed of Jacob spend your days
In Songs of Thanks, and hearty Praise,
For he has not despised my Prayer
When in Affliction, but his Ear
Has been attentive, and his Face
He has not veiled in my disgrace.
All my discourses Lord shall be
Of these thy Favors shown to me;
My Vows within thine House I Will pay,
Among the Faithful, that they may
Join in Devotion, and each one
Send up their thanks unto thy Throne;
Remembering that in times of want
Thou evermore art pleased to grant
Unto the poor, when they do call,
Refreshments, to rejoice them all.
Those Nations who thy Laws do scorn,
When they hear this, shall to thee turn,
And jointly yield with one accord
To worship thee, as Supreme Lord,
For thou art Governor of all,
And all must to thy Footstool fall.
Those thou have filled with good shall bow
And they who to the Pit do go,
Who none of all thy Wonders know,
Their Seed shall serve thee, they thy worth
And righteousness shall warble forth,
From age to age shall be made known
This that thou Lord for me have done.
That all men may as well as I,
Confide in thee for Victory.
PSALM 23.
1.
THe Lord my Shepherd is, whose care
Does over me preside;
No want, nor any torturing fear,
Shall long with me abide.
2.
He into flowery Meads does bring
Me, where I feed all day,
And leads me to the bubling Spring,
Where I my thirst allay.
3.
His Spirit does my Soul revive,
And for his Namesake he
Does gently lead me, while I live,
In paths of Piety.
4.
Though I should greatly be distressed,
O're-whelm'd in deep despair,
On thy protection, Lord, I Would rest,
And would no evil fear.
5.
For thou my Shepherd art, thy Sheep
Thou never do neglect,
My Soul thou will from danger keep,
And safely me protect.
6.
In presence of envious Foes,
Thou do my Table spread,
My Cup with sprightly Wine o're-flows,
Sweet Oils anoint my Head.
7.
Mercy and Truth in a full Tide
Shall ever follow me,
Within thine House I will reside,
And sing my praise of thee.
PSALM 25.
1.
MY God, in deep distress,
I lift my Soul to thee,
There Is none so timely can redress,
As thou, my misery.
2.
Since I my trust repose
In thee my sure defense,
Exalt my name, lest that my Foes
Deride my confidence.
3.
Shame none who love thy Laws,
Let the perfideous be
Clothed with contempt, who without cause
contemn thy Saints, and Thee.
4.
Each minute I implore
Thy special Grace, O show
Thy Servant how he evermore
Thy sacred Will may do.
5.
Keep me as thou have done,
In thine unerring way,
Thou God of my Salvation,
Permit me not to stray.
6.
But call to mind that love
And bounty I have seen,
A God of tender mercies prove,
As thou of old have been.
7.
As for those days I spent
In Sins of high degrees,
Remember not, now I repent
Those grand impurities.
8.
But as thy mercy's great,
Let thy compassions shine
Upon a wretched Profligate,
Who humbly now is thine.
9.
Thou art most good and just,
And it is thy glory, Lord,
To teach transgressors how they must
Conform unto thy Word.
10.
All those who humble are,
In Judgment he will guide,
From virtuous paths he does declare
Their Feet shall never slide.
11.
His mercy ever lives,
His truth does never dye,
Of these the fruits he ever gives
To his continually.
12.
Forgive me then, O Lord,
Those Sins of high degree,
Which I have wrought, O loose the Cord
Of mine Iniquity.
13.
Who dreads to disobey,
The Lord will not refuse
To teach that man the saving way,
His Soul should always choose.
14.
His Barns and Coffers shall
Enjoy the richest store,
His Seed shall here inherit all
He leaves, and ten times more.
15.
Nor will he e're conceal
Those duties he should do,
What is of moment to reveal
He shall be sure to know.
16.
So now what ever strait
Attends my wandering Feet,
On my Salvation I will wait,
Who Will free me from the Net.
17.
Thy help I now implore,
Have mercy, Lord, on me,
Make bare thine Arm as heretofore,
For I have need of thee.
18.
Free me in my distress,
The pressures of my heart
Do every minute, Lord, increase,
O show thy saving art.
19.
Forgive those Sins which are
The cause of all this hate,
Which my malicious Foes declare,
My ease commiserate.
20.
For daily they increase,
And hate mine innocence,
Unjustly they disturb my peace,
Chastise their insolence.
21.
And in thine arms infold
My Soul which trusts in thee,
Mine innocence, O God, uphold,
As thou have promised me.
22.
O free thine Israel
From troubles which enclose
His habitations, make him dwell
Secure amidst his Foes.
PSALM 31.
1.
IN thee, O Lord, I place my trust,
Bow down thine Ear, and from the Grave
Preserve my Life, as thou art just,
And show thy mighty Arm can save.
O let me never suffer shame
For my affiance in thy Name.
2.
Be thou my Rock, and Castle strong,
When any threatening storms appear,
Where I may rest secure from wrong,
Till all the Clouds dispersed are.
Direct and guide me all my days,
Through all the Lab'rinths of my ways.
3.
Into thy hands I do commit
My very Soul, redeemed by thee,
Enlarge my Feet, from out the Net
In secret laid to mischief me.
Thou know, O Lord, thou God of truth,
Thine I have been up from my youth.
4.
In thee the Savior of the Just,
Not in the Gentile Vanities,
I have reposed my chiefest trust,
Lord I abhor their practices;
And always thought their Auguries,
And Divinations to be lies.
5.
All my delight and joy shall be
To reckon up thy mercies shown,
In Troubles thou have thought on me,
And set my Feet in a large room,
Free from the rage of all my Foes,
Whose malice did my Life enclose.
6.
Yet I no end of trouble know,
I sigh, and mourn, my years away,
My Sins have brought me very low;
For want of Flesh my Bones decay.
Mine Eye it is consumed with grief,
Have mercy Lord, and send relief.
7.
For I am made the mirth and scorn
As well of Friends, as Enemies,
They count me as a man forlorn,
Because thou deaf art to my cries;
Strangers and Friends, as men afraid,
Fly from me, and withdraw their Aid.
8.
Like as a man that is dead and gone,
Or as a Potters broken Pot,
Fit for no use I Am looked upon,
Thrown out of Doors and quite forgot;
But show thy skill, and save my Soul,
As thou have broke, so make me whole.
9,
Lord I have heard the slaundrous lies,
And scoffs of my invet'rate Foes,
Up in Rebellion they devise
To cut me off, but interpose,
For I have put my trust in thee,
Thou art my God, O rescue me.
10.
Thou better know, O Lord, than I
When is the fittest time to send
Thy ready Succors, then draw nigh,
To all my troubles put an end;
Upon me make thy Face to shine,
And save him who was ever thine.
11.
For since I have addressed my Prayers
To thee, thine honor lies at stake,
To set me free from all my fears.
The Wicked who thy Laws forsake
Cut off, but Lord my Life defend,
And let confusion be their end.
12.
Silence the lying Lips of those
Who in a proud and scornful way,
Asperse thy Saints, the righteous,
Before the Sons of Men, one day
Thou will their injured Fames restore,
To their full Shine they had before.
13.
Under thy Wings they shall abide,
Secure from the Oppressors wrongs,
In thy Pavillion thou shall hide,
And keep them safe from strife of Tongues.
Blessed be my God, whose help I found,
When numerous Foes begirt me round.
14.
Yet I was tempted in my flight,
To think I should a Victim fall,
Though thou had often shown thy might,
Unto the furious Rage of Saul;
But I no sooner did address
My Prayers to thee, but found redress.
15.
Let all his Saints with me adore,
And love the Lord, who does preserve
The faithful, but does evermore
Reward the proud as they deserve;
Courage like Men, but act your parts,
And God shall strengthen all your hearts.
PSALM 40.
3.
FUlly resolved with patience to attend,
Until the Lord had granted my request,
I found at length my Prayers obtained their end,
He calmed those fears which gave my Soul no rest.
2.
And brought me safe out of that dreadful Pit
Of misery wherein I long was held,
As on a Rock he firmly set my feet,
And all my goings afterward upheld.
3.
For these his Mercies I Will extol his Name,
And will from day to day extol his praise,
Many shall fear him when they hear this same,
And render true obedience to his ways.
4.
That Soul is blessed who wholly does rely
Not in the strength of Man, whose frame is dust,
Who dis-regards the Proud, and those that lie,
Contemns their aid, but in the Lord does trust.
5.
Those gracious works which thou for us have done,
Should I endeavor to recount them all
In order, Lord, I cannot set them down,
Not the one half to my remembrance call
6.
I know full well thou do no pleasure take
In Sacrifices, or Burnt-Offerings,
These are but Shaddows and will prove too weak,
To take away the guilt of all our Sins.
7.
Thy Son must come, and then our sins they shall
By an Oblation of himself, Lord, be
For ever pardoned, and thy Servants all
From the observance of these Rites set free:
8.
Lo he will come, O God, to do thy Will,
To live a life most spotless in thine Eyes,
Thy Laws he will most perfectly fulfill,
And then give up himself a Sacrifice.
9.
Thy Righteousness and Truth, as thou can tell,
And thy Salvation, I have published forth,
To all thy Saints who in thy Courts do dwell,
I have not hid but magnified thy worth.
10.
Do thou, O God, my fainting heart preserve,
Against those Foes who seek my overthrow,
And though I justly for my Sins deserve
Thy greatest Plagues, yet, Lord, thy mercies show.
11.
Confound with shame all those who lie at watch
To take away my life, do thou afford
Thy timely succor, and their own lives catch
In those same snares, which they have set, O Lord.
12.
As for the bitter scoffs they have thrown at me,
Return them on themselves, as their reward;
Let me, O God, their speedy ruin see,
And when they call let not their cries be heard.
13.
Then shall those pious Souls who trust in thee
Rejoice, that thou art just in all thy ways,
Inflamed with love they shall contin'ally
Applaud thy Mercies, and sing forth thy Praise.
14.
When I am low and in great misery,
Thou art my Help, my Fortress, and my Stay,
To thee, O God, for succor do I fly,
To my Salvation haste, make no delay.
PSALM 41.
1.
Blessed is the Man who takes a tender care,
Of those who on the Bed of Sickness lie,
He need not in his Visitation fear,
But to find favor, and that speedily;
In all his troubles God will interpose,
For his relief, and bless him from his Foes.
2.
When that Diseases on his Body seize,
And on the Bed of Sorrow he is cast,
Where others tumble, and can find no ease,
Racked with tortures of their actions past,
Then will the Lord for mercies he has shown
Soften his Bed, and strengthen him when down.
3.
I humbly therefore at the Throne of Grace,
Beg that the guilt of all my Sins may be
For ever pardoned, hide not, Lord, thy face,
But heal my Soul as thou have promised me;
Though I deserve thy Wrath, yet love express,
And every thought and crooked act redress.
4.
My Foes a thousand ways my ruin plot,
Concerning me they speak maliciously;
When will he dye, say they, and be forgot,
Let his name perish to Eternity;
Before my Face none more obliging are,
Behind my back their hatred they declare.
5.
Thus underhand they secretly combine
To make me odious in the Eyes of all,
Invention's racked to compass this design,
And Slanders are contrived to work my fall;
Defamed they think my Name shall never rise,
Under the load of all their Calumnies.
6.
My own familiar Friend who always eat
At my own Board, and in my Bosom lay,
Whom with the great'st endearments I did treat,
My most retired Counsels did betray;
But, Lord, restore me to my Throne, and Right,
That their perfidious acts I may requite.
7.
By this I guess thou have a love for me,
Because I find thy watchful Providence,
Has disappointed them of Victory,
And hitherto preserved mine Innocence;
For which both I, and all with one accord
Will sing Eternal Hymns to Isr'els Lord.
PSALM 51.
1.
CLeanse me, O Lord, from that most horrid Sin
Of guiltless Blood, which Lust has brought me in,
And from the boundless Ocean of thy Love,
Let not my other sins my ruin prove;
To such an high degree I have transgrest,
That wheresoever I go I find no rest.
2.
And though no earthly Judge can claim a right
To punish my Transgressions in thy sight,
I stand arraigned, and to thy Sentence must
Or stand, or fall, as to a doom most just.
If to eternal Flames, I must obey,
No rescue thence, though I a Scepter sway.
3.
Thou better know O Lord my frame, than I,
How I was shapen in iniquity,
When in my Mothers Womb I then put on
The spotted-Garment of Corruption;
But this is no excuse for this foul fact,
Which my unbridled Lust has made me act.
4.
Full well I know, that in the inward-part,
Thou love a spotless, and a sincere heart;
I have suffic'ent Grace from thee to know
What to forbear, and what I ought to do;
Yet into wilful Sin I headlong run,
Against a clear and full Conviction.
5.
Purge me with Hysop and I shall be clean,
Whiter than is the purest Snow from stain.
Let not Vriah's blood, which to thee cries
For vengeance, Lord, to my confusion rise:
But be thou reconciled, release from pain
My tortured Soul unto her joys again.
6.
Return once more unto thy wonted Love,
And from thy sight for evermore remove
My weighty Sins, and by thy work of Grace
Within my heart each lustful thought deface,
That I may never by a wanton glance
Offend again, and so my Crimes enhanse.
7.
Should thou for ever banish me thy sight,
And from my Soul withdraw thy saving Light,
I were undone, but Lord afford thy Grace,
And vail not from mine Eyes thy glorious Face;
With thy free Sp'rit me to those Joys restore
Which once I had, and let me fall no more.
8.
Then shall I Sinners by thy Grace convert,
And make Transgressors in thy ways expert,
Then shall my Tongue, when once my Soul is
From the pollutions of this bloody deed,
Declare thy Truth, my Lips and Mouth shall be freed
From day to day employed, in praising thee.
9.
Did thou a legal Sacrifice desire,
Thousands of Bulls and Rams consumed with Fire,
Upon thy flaming-Altar thou should see
These offered up for my Adultery;
A broken and a contrite heart for Sin,
Is the burnt-Off'ring thou delightest in.
10.
Do good to Sion, show thy Love to all
Who tread her Courts, and on thy Name do call;
Then shall the smoke of Bulls which we consume,
Upon thine Altar yield a sweet Perfume,
And with our Prayers and Praises reach thy Throne;
And Blessings thence upon our Heads pull down.
PSALM 55.
1.
ALmighty God, who evermore art near
With thy Relief to those who injured are,
Give ear unto my Prayer, hear how I mourn,
Thrust from my Kingdom, and pursued with scorn.
2.
My Son and Subjects on my ruin bent,
Tax me as guilty of mis-government,
They do complot my final overthrow,
With all the rancour that their hearts can show.
3.
At this I tremble, and the dismal thought
Of my apparent danger, Lord, has brought
Such apprehensions to my troubled mind,
That all the Terrors of the Grave I find.
4.
O that I had but Wings, then would I flee
Into some desert place, where I might be
Safe from the Storms and Tempests which my Son
And Subjects raise, by their Rebellion.
5.
But thou, O Lord, who always do deride
The Wisdom of the Wise, do thou divide
Their Consultations, make them disagree
In their rebellious projects against me.
6.
I have heard from a most faithful Friend,
(...) the Archite, whom I back did send,
(...) strife and violence is their whole discourse,
(...) Tutelars to whom they have recourse.
7.
^^e guard the City day and night, the round
(...) walk about the Walls, within is found
^^^ief and Wrong, and all the Cruelties
(...) Villainy can act, or wit devise.
8.
(...) my reproach and all this misery
(...) ^^eded from an open Enemy,
(...) have born it, sure I had foreseen,
^^so prevented this I now am in.
9.
(...) was thou whom I esteemed above
^^ther men, and as my Soul did love;
(...) who did all my secret Counsels know,
^^ith me to the house of God did go.
10.
^^^s persidious act of his he shall
(...) to perfect his designs, but fall
(...) all his horrid Crimes down quick to Hell,
(...) wickedness in all his thoughts does dwell.
11.
(...) for me, I Will call in my distress,
(...) every day my Prayer I will address,
(...) is Mercy-Seat, and he shall hear.
^^om the danger save me which I fear.
12.
Though this Rebellion with great strength ^^
Is managed and contrived, God takes my pa^^
Who will in peace restore me to my right.
Maintain my Cause, and all my Battles fig^^^.
13.
He will afflict them, and my Feet uphold,
Even that God who does abide of Old;
But they despise his Rod, because they are
Successful in the courses which they steer.
14.
The Laws of their Allegiance they have (...)
They make, and at their pleasure Oaths re^
Words smooth as Oil were dropped, when a (...)
They were inventing how to do me wro^^
15.
But let their base designs be what they will
Never so wicked, my concerns shall still
Be cast upon the Lord, who will no doubt
Restore me to my Throne, though now (...)
16.
But the Blood-thirsty, and the Perjured (...)
In their full strength into destruction fall,
As for my self I Will put my confidence
In thine Almighty-Arm for my defense.
PSALM 73.
1.
ALL who are sincere shall find
God most gracious, just, and kind,
Ever ready to reward
Those who do his Laws regard.
2.
Yet my Faith was well-nigh gone,
When I saw the Wicked run
In forbidden Paths at will,
And escaped unpunished still.
3.
When as those who do obey
Thy Commands, and seldom stray,
Thine afflictive Rod do bear,
While these Wretches prosperous are.
4.
Full of Health, and likely long
Here to live, of Body strong,
None of all those Plagues they know
Which others feel and undergo.
5.
Rapine and Oppression
As a Garment they put on,
In such base unlawful means
They more Pride, than in just gains.
6.
They in Wealth and Grandeur grow
Suddenly, and know not how,
And are Masters of a Mine
Which they never did divine.
7.
To oppress is all their talk,
Those who piously do walk,
They profanely take a pride
God and goodness to deride.
8.
Therefore when the godly see
This their horrid Blasphemy,
And those evils which they do,
Some their Eyes with Tears o're-flow.
9.
Thus they argue, can God see
And permit such Sins to be
Here unpunished, sure his Eye
Cannot discern Iniquity.
10.
These in worldly-wealth increase,
Flourish here, and are at peace,
In an even course they run
Till their Web is almost spun.
11.
But each Morning when I rise,
Thou, O Lord, do me chastise;
Under pressures sore I live,
While the Wicked grow and thrive.
12.
Wherefore then have I in vain,
Kept my hands from unjust Gain,
Been in all my ways exact,
As to Thought, as well as Act?
13.
Such sad thoughts did me confound,
But I soon mine error found,
That it was a grand Offense
To distrust thy Providence.
14.
Yet I was perplexed in mind,
That the Wicked, Lord, should find
So much favor, this to me
Seemed at first a Mystery.
15.
Till I with my Feet drew high,
Lord, unto thy Sanct'ary,
Then I understood thy ways,
And the end of these Men's days.
16
Sure on High thou do them set,
That their fall may be more great,
In a moment they come down
Headlong in destruction.
17.
O, those Horrors that possess
Their sad Souls, who can express!
Sins like Furies on each hand
In most dreadful Forms do stand.
18.
Thou shall make their Shadow fly
In the twinkling of an Eye,
Riches, Pleasures, and their All
Vanish, and to nothing fall.
19.
Then what Folly was it in me
To conceive a slight from thee;
Like a Beast to show dislike
When thy Rod did friendly strike?
20.
For thou had a careful Eye
Over me partic'larly,
Free from danger did I stand
By thine All-protecting hand.
21.
Thou shall me most safely lead
Through those troubles which I dread,
Bringing me to great Renown,
And a never-fading Crown.
22.
Than thy Self I do not know
Any God that can do so,
Thou the God art whom I love,
Other Gods I don't approve.
23.
For I find thou ever art,
When Afflictions seize my Heart,
Always to me a strong Fort,
Whereunto I may resort.
24.
As for those who put their trust
In another, it is but just
That they should for ever dye,
For their base Apostasy.
25.
But for me I will adhere,
Lord, to thee while I am here,
And excite Men to a Sense
Of thy gracious Providence.
PSALM 49.
HEar all ye People; my Discourse will be
A Meditation fit for each degree;
I Will treat of Wisdom, that both Rich and Poor,
May gather Knowledge from her immense Store.
When Death and the Distempers of old Age,
Knock at my Door to leave this earthly Stage,
Wherefore should I repine, and show more Love
To this low Mansion than that blessed above;
Where I shall far more lasting Treasures find,
In value greater than those left behind?
They who in Riches trust, and do adore,
Within their Iron-Shrines, their Idol Oar,
Cannot with it themselves or others save,
From the close Hug of the respectless Grave.
Riches were never known to have that strength
To rescue Men from Death, they must at length
Turn to their Mother Earth, from whence they all
Had their first Birth, and back again must fall.
The Wise this Fate as well as Brutish have,
Death takes not one, and does the other leave;
Yet do these Wretches live as if they were
Exempt in this same Doom to bear a share;
They heap up Riches, but their Treasures will
Fly from their own, and others Coffers fill.
For dye they must, and when they dye who knows
But all their Stores go to enrich their Foes;
Yet their Possessions by their Names they call,
And fondly think their Dwellings firmly shall
Last while the World remains, their Heirs we see
Have the same thoughts of their Posterity;
But Death will come, where in the Grave, that hold,
They all must lie, as Flocks together fold,
Until the Resurrection of the Just,
Who with the Lord that day in Judgment must
Help to condemn them; Lord, I hope that Morn
Thou will my Temples with a Crown adorn.
As for the Honors, and the large increase
Of the Ungodly, and his short-lived peace,
None should be troubled, for that dismal night,
In which he sets, his Glories take their flight.
Though while he lived he thought himself most blessed,
And said unto his Soul, 'Soul take thy rest,
'For I have laid me up a lasting Store
'Of Wealth and Honor, which the World adore;
'These high will raise me on the Wings of Fame,
'And give me here a never-dying Name.
'But when Death comes (in that same needful day)
'These, like deceitful Friends, will slip away:
'Nor can they (as thou think) an Arch of praise,
'Upon their Airy-Bottoms for thee raise.
'Nothing but heavenly Wisdom can ensure
'Praises unto thy Name, which shall endure.
'Wisdom, which for the future does take care,
'And seeks for Treasures which immortal are.
'Man that in Honor and in Wealth does grow,
'And understands not whence these Blessings flow,
'Than the dumb Beasts does no more Wisdom show.
Such Fools as he shall never have a sight
Of those eternal Joys of the upright.
PSALM 78.
ATtend ye Sons of Jacob, I Will unfold
To you those Parables, our Fathers told
To us, that we should to our Children show
What mighty deeds God did for Israel do.
That all succeeding Ages may sing forth
His noble Acts, the greatness of his Worth.
This duty God did lay on Israel,
And strictly charge they should their Children tell,
That Generations, which were yet unborn,
Might know the wondrous-Work of their return,
And not his Mercies and his Judgments scorn:
And like their Fathers slight his easy Yoke,
Contemn this God, and other Gods invoke.
The Ephramites, well Armed with Swords and Bows,
Able to Conquer, fled before their Foes;
And why, they did forsake their chiefest stay,
Forgot the Wonders done the other day.
How God had brought them out of Pharoah's Land,
From their hard Tasks by his All-conqu'ring hand;
The Sea divided, and the Waters round
As Bulwarks stood, they past through on dry ground:
A Cloud did Vail them as they walked by day,
In The night a Firy-Pillar showed the way.
He watered them, as Shepherds do their Flocks,
Not in hew'n-Cisterns, but from unhew'n Rocks;
Streams from those craggy-Pyramids did flow,
And step by step did with his Israel go.
Yet still they murmured as they did before,
And with fresh Sins provoked him more and more;
They quarreled God, and did his care distrust,
They asked for Meat, not for their wants, but Lust.
Can God, say they, here furnish us a Table
Of Flesh and Bread? he cannot, he is not able;
It Is true he quenched our thirst from yonder Rock,
But where is the Flesh to feed his hungry Flock?
When God heard this, his wrath like Fire did burn,
His long-try'd Mercy did to anger turn,
Because they disbeliev'd what he had done,
And gave no credence to's Salvation.
Though he had shown such tokens of his Love,
By opening all the Clouds of Heaven above,
And raining Manna that they all might eat,
That heav'nly-Bread he gave them for their Meat;
He filled and fed them with the Angels Food,
And as the Waters when they make a Flood
Come tumbling down, so Flesh showered on the ground
Vast heaps of Quails, did all their Camps surround.
Yet though at their requests he sent this Meat,
They disbelieve him still, and murmuring eat,
Then was his Anger kindled, and the Chief
Of all their Tribes he slew for disbelief.
Though Plagues throughout their Camps like Lightning run,
Their hearts were stubborn, and they would not turn;
But still they Sinned, and sinning did declare
They Would not believe, in vain his Wonders were;
Therefore their Rebel-lives he made them waste
In that same place, but two escaped at last.
But when exemplar punishments did fall,
They then returned, and on their God did call;
Then they acknowledged that they were his Flock,
He was their Savior, and their mighty Rock;
Their Tongues did this declare, their Hearts the while
Were as before as hollow, and as vile.
But God being full of Mercy did forgive
Their feigned Repentance, willing they should live;
His Justice to his Mercy did give way,
Unwilling to consume them in one day:
For he remembered what they were, alas,
But as a Wind which soon away does pass.
Ten times their diffidence they did express,
And longed for Egypt in the Wilderness.
So senseless were they that they never thought
What there they suffered, nor how God had brought
Them forth from thence, and by their Moses hand
Destroyed the Pride and Glories of that Land.
He turned their wholesome Rivers into Blood,
Vast Swarms of Flies, and Frogs devoured their Food.
The fruitful burdens of the Earth were lost,
Their Vines with Hail were killed, their Trees with Frost.
Their Cows, their Sheep, their Asses, and their Colts;
Either with Hail were slain, or Thunderbolts.
So great his Anger was, his Wrath so fierce,
He did his Plagues throughout the Land disperse.
But while poor Egypt was thus fore oppressed,
To have their firstborn slain of Man and Beast;
His Mercies and his care did still attend
On Israel, he did their All defend.
He led them through the Sea as on dry ground,
In which proud Pharaoh, and his Hosts were drowned.
He led them all along, and Wonders wrought,
Till at the length he them to Sion brought.
Then dreadful Fears upon the Heathen fell,
These Tribes o'recame them, in their Tents did dwell.
They had not long possessed, but soon were cloyed,
They wanted something, though they all enjoyed;
And as their Fathers did Apostatize,
So they to Idols offered Sacrifice.
When God heard this, he suffered Ark and all
His chosen Ones in Heathenish hands to fall.
So sore displeased, and angry was the Lord,
He gave them up to the devouring Sword;
Their Young Men were destroyed, their Virgins now
Lived single lives, by force, and not by Vow.
Their sacred Priests did perish by their Swords.
Their Wives expressed no sorrow by their words;
But Grief sat lively painted on each Face,
Such consternations were in every place;
That God took pity, and arose at length,
Gave their enfeebled-Hearts, and Arms fresh strength,
He smote with Botches in their hinder parts
The Philistims, and gave them timorous Hearts;
Their Dagon-God, they in their Temple found,
Before the Ark, lie shattered on the ground.
So what they got they durst not now defend,
But richly laded back again it send.
Moreover Judah of all Jacobs race
God chose, and Sion for his resting place.
And this conspic'ous-Hill 'bove all he blessed,
Decreeing here his Ark should ever rest.
He lowly- David from his Sheep did take,
From that Employ, he made him undertake
The care of all his People, which with skill
He did perform, according to his Will.
He governed them with Wisdom, and with Art,
Walking before his God with all his heart.
PSALM 90.
1.
THou who art God from all Eternity,
Long before this Globe of Earth was formed by thee.
Thou who have since, blessed be thy glorious Name,
Upheld both us, and this same earthly Frame,
Hear thou the fervent Prayers, the hearty-Groans,
That are sent up by thine afflicted Ones.
2.
When Man, thine Image which thou did create,
Apostatized from his first happy State,
Unhappy we by our Forefathers deed,
Have an entail of Death upon our Seed;
Our times are in thy Hands, and it is but just
When thou command'st, we should return to dust.
3.
Should we be suffered, Lord, to linger here
A tedious Life, as our Forefathers were,
That length of time Methusalah did see,
What is it, Lord, to thy immensity?
A thousand years are nothing in thy sight,
As yesterday, or as a Watch in the night.
4.
Death as a Torrent sweeps us clean away,
And in a moment all our Joys decay,
Like as the Grass in the Morn, so every one
Does flourish then, but is at Noon cut down.
So vain are we, and of so short a time,
That all our Glories wither in their Prime,
5.
Thus are we snatched from off this worldly-Stage,
In the full strength and verdure of our Age;
For thou have set before thy searching Eyes,
As well our close, as known Apostacies;
In thy displeasure all our days we spend,
And as a Vapor so our Lives do end.
6.
Threescore and ten is the computed length
Of our Terrestrial Lives, but if through strength
We do attain unto the fourthscore year;
Then they are interwove with Grief and Care;
Like as a Dream so soon they pass away,
So fading are our Joys, so short's our stay.
7.
And though thy Wrath is equal to our fear,
Yet we so sensess are, and void of care,
That we contemn thy Rod, and think we shall
Inhabit here, and never dye at all;
But teach us so to number all our days,
That we may hate the Follies of our ways.
8,
Return, O Lord, at length; how long will thou
Look on thy Servants with an angry Brow?
O give us now thine everlasting Love,
And from our harrass'd-Souls do thou remove
The sentence of Excision, long have we
Expected, Lord, thy promis'd-Land to see.
9.
Give days of Joys so many as may last,
Longer than all those years of Sorrows past,
Now magnify thy glorious work of Grace,
Not only unto us, but to our Race;
Thy gracious Favor and thy Mercy show,
And frame our Wills, thy sacred Will to do.
PSALM 91.
1.
He who his whole concern entirely flings
Under the Shadow of the Almighty's Wings,
Shall find a powerful God, a faithful Friend,
A certain Refuge to his Journeys end.
2.
This never-failing Axiom makes me go
To him, as to a Fort in which I know
No bloody-Wars, nor sweeping Pestilence,
Nor wit of Man, can snatch my Life from thence.
3.
For as the stately Eagle guards from wrong,
Under her spreading Wings, her helpless Young;
So will the God of all the Earth be sure
Under his care that I shall live secure.
4.
Though Deaths empoyson'd Arrows take their flight,
And slaughter thousands both by day and night,
Not one of all these deadly Shafts shall be
So rightly levelled, as to mischief me.
5.
Yet I shall see the Wicked's just reward,
Vast piles of those who did not fear the Lord,
(...) in these heaps my Carcass shall not lie,
Because I did upon the Lord rely.
6.
For he his holy Angels shall command,
When heavy Judgments post throughout the Land,
That neither I, nor those within my Wall,
Shall taste those evils on the Wicked fall.
7.
The Lion and the Adder, without dread,
I shall encounter, on their Necks shall tread;
The ravenous Beasts like tame ones shall submit,
And yield themselves as conquered at my Feet.
8.
Because my whole delight was to fulfill
The Laws of God, and to obey his Will,
Because I did respect his glorious Name,
With honor he will exalt me for the same.
9.
I shall no sooner call but he will hear,
And free me from those Judgments others bear,
He Will crown my Life with length of days below,
And me above will his Salvation show.
PSALM 111.
1.
I Will ever bless the Lord, and praise
His Name in secret with the upright,
And in his Courts extol his ways,
Those Wonders done in Isr'els sight.
2.
His Works so great and many are,
They are a Meditation fit
For the most Pious, and by far
Than other studies, benefit.
3.
He great and glorious things has done,
His Truth for ever shall abide,
He made us, and to every one
Has been a Fort, and constant guide.
4.
Those worthy deeds which he has wrought
Within each breast, have left behind
Impressions, time can never blot,
The Lord is merciful, and kind.
5.
VVhat-e're it is the Faithful want,
They never fail of a supply,
He will perform his Covenant,
To all his Servants faithfully.
6.
The Virtue of his Works were shown
Unto his People, in their sight
The Heathen from their Lands were thrown*
And Israel enjoyed their Right.
7.
His Actions just and righteous are,
All his appointments stand so fast,
And that exact uprightness bear,
They never alter to the last.
8.
From the Egyptian-Yoke he freed,
As he did vow to Abraham,
The Jews his own peculiar Seed,
Holy, and Reverend his Name.
9.
Then let us all his Laws obey,
And of his Judgments stand in dread,
These teach us Wisdom, and the way
To our eternal Joys they lead.
10.
And while we here a Being have,
Let Us celebrate our Makers praise,
Translated hence we never leave
To chant above the self same Lays.
PSALM 134.
HAd not the Lord in a most signal way,
Stood up against our Foes, may Israel say,
Had not the God of Jacob set us free,
When held in Fetters of Captivity,
The Torrent of their Fury had o're-run
Our Souls, with ruin and destruction.
But now his glorious Name be ever praised,
He to renown our abject State has raised;
And has preserved us from their cruel Rage
Which nothing, but his Power, coule assuage.
Safely at length our Souls escaped are,
Though late entangled, from the Fowlers Snare;
Yet not our Strength, nor Merits do we own
To be the Cause of our Salvation;
It was the Arm of the Almighty Lord,
Who Fought, and Conquered, and our Joys restored.
PSALM 125.
1.
Whosoever on God relyes, stands fixed and sure,
As Sions holy Mount, which shall endure,
Upon whose sacred Top the Lord declares
He will reside, and hear his Servants Prayers.
2.
As Salem's safe from storms on every hand,
Fenced with those lofty-Hills which round her stand,
So are the Faithful, in the Almighty's Arms
Impail'd secure from all destructive harms.
3.
Yet for a while Oppression may take place,
And prosper here, disturbing Isr'el's peace,
But the ungodly shall not long bear sway,
Lest that the Righteous prove as bad as they.
4.
For God is good, his care is over those
Who are sincere in heart, who do repose
Their confidence in him, he will Crown their Love
With all those Joys the Blessed reap above.
5.
As for those Souls who basely turn aside
From all his Laws, and wont his Yoke abide;
Whom none of all his Judgments can forewarn,
In endless-Flames they shall for ever burn.
While in perpet'al peace his Israel,
That Her'tage of his own, shall ever dwell.
PSALM 133.
1.
Lord,
How glorious in thine Eyes do those appear
Who follow peace, and as Religion binds,
In perfect union, communion are,
Having no discords in their ways and minds.
2.
Such happy concord yields a fragrant smell,
Like to that precious Ointment which was shed
Upon thy High Priests Crown, and downwards fell
Upon his Beard, and over his Garments spread.
3.
As the refreshing-Dew did gently fall
And cherish Hermon, and bless Sions Hill,
So on the peaceful Heads of such Men shall
The blessings of the Lord, each Morn distill.
PSALM 140.
1.
DEfend me, Lord, from Malice and Deceit,
From all those Snares, the Proud have laid in wait
To catch my Soul, my ways they have beset
With treacherous Gins, and Nets my Life to get;
But, Lord, their VViles, without thy leave I know,
Cannot effect my wished for overthrow.
2.
Like as a Serpent from his poisonous Tongue,
Darts forth his Venom, so they all day long
From their destructive Tongues, without just ground
With slaund'rous Lies, my spotless Life do wound;
But thou my Shield art, under whom I dwell
Secure, or in this Conflict I had fell.
3.
Yet, Lord, lest these Men should exalted be,
As sure they will, if that they should go free,
Let their Device take no effect at all,
Wherein they thought to make me, make them fall,
And rise no more, let them in Flames expire,
And with thy burning Wrath, Lord, Fan the Fire.
4.
This fatal Doom let it for ever be
The VVicked's Portion, that the Just may see
Thou will maintain their Cause, and from thy Throne
Confound the lying and backbiteing-Tongue;
Then shall the Righteous flourish in thy sight,
And Laud thy Name who do defend their Right.
The end of the Psalms.
THRENODIA: OR, THE LAMENTATIONS OF Jeremiah.

PARAPHRASED. WITH A PRAYER FOR THE CHURCH.

By James Chamberlain.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1680.

LAMENTATIONS.
CHAP. I. 1. The miserable estate of Jerusalem by reason of her Sin. 12. She
complains of her Grief. 18. And confesses Gods Judgment to be Righteous.
1.
HOw does the City, she that once was known
To have her Temples circled with a Crown,
Sit with a mournful Wreath of Cypress now,
Like a forsaken VVidow, on her Brow?
She that was once among the Nations great,
And as a glorious Princess ruling sat
Among the lesser Provinces, is made
Unto the Foe to bow her stately Head.
2.
Down her pale Cheeks the pearly drops do trill
Both Day and Night, which from her Eyes distill,
Amongst her Lovers she has found not one,
That does the troubles of her Soul bemoan,
And that which adds fresh Fuel to her Woes,
Is, that her Friends are now become her Foes.
3.
Judah, for all those Cruelties which She
Has done, is gone into Captivity,
She dwells among the Heathen, where her mind
Does no repose from all her Trouble find,
All her Pursuers, who did for her look
Have in the narrow ways her overtook.
4.
The Ways of Sion mourn, because no Guests,
As they were wont, approach her solemn Feasts:
All her frequented Gates forsaken are,
No more Oblations in her Courts appear:
Because these fail, her Reverend Priests do grieve,
Her lovely Virgins do in Sorrow live,
And She who once an undisturbed Peace
And plenty had, sits now in heaviness.
5.
Her Foes the only Chief are, who command
Within her Gates with an imperious Hand,
They prosper, happy and successful are,
While She the Judgments of the Lord does bear,
For her Transgressions, are her Children gone
Captives before her Foes to Babylon.
6.
From Sions Daughter all the lovely Grace
Departed is, that once adorned her Face;
Her Princes are with Hunger almost pined,
Become like Hearts that can no Pasture find;
Vainly they think with fainting Limbs to fly
Before the Hunter, but fall down and dye.
7.
Jerusalem did to remembrance call
When she afflicted was and made to fall,
Those pleasant and delightful things which she
Lost, when she went into Captivity.
Her jeering Foes upon her Sorrows played,
And May-Games at her sacred Sabbaths made.
8.
Jerusalem has sinned grievously,
And is removed for her Impiety.
All that adored her, do her now despise
Having beheld her lewd Adulteries:
Sighing she turns her mounful Face aside,
And vents her Sorrows in a Briny Tide.
9.
Filled with Pollution, in her wanton mind
Her fearful end could no admittance find:
Therefore, when least she did of Judgment dream,
Down from her fancied Bliss she headlong came
In a most fearful manner, and no Eye
Let fall a Tear at her Calamity.
Behold, O Lord, the troubles of my Breast,
And how they are by a proud Foe encreast.
10.
His impious hand has from her Eyes removed
Those sacred things, which she so dearly loved:
Within her Courts the Heathen have been seen,
Who were forbad by Thee to enter in.
11.
Her starving People for the want of Bread
Do sighing sit, not to be comforted,
All their delightful things they given have
For Food, to save them from the noisome Grave:
Behold, O Lord, consider how I now
Am held in no esteem, and made to bow.
12.
Have ye no sense of my afflicted case,
Ye savage Monsters, who this way do pass?
Stay but a while, and tell me if your Eyes
Have seen such sad amazing Miseries,
As my incensed God is pleased to lay
Upon my Soul, in this his wrathful day.
13.
He from above into my Bones has sent
Consuming-Fire, as a punishment:
He for my Feet an unseen Net has spread,
Amid'st those sinful Paths I used to tread,
And backwards turned me; so that now I lie
Wasting, and fainting in my Misery.
14.
He round my Neck has put the heavy Band,
Of my Transgressions with his angry Hand:
And my Herculean Strength has weakened so,
That I am captived by a feeble Foe;
Nor shall I ever able be again
To burst asunder my uneasy Chain.
15.
The Lord has trampled under foot the strong
And valiant Men, which did to me belong:
In fury he has sent an armed Host
To slay my Youth, and spoil my fertile Coast:
As in a Wine Press, the Almighty has
Trod Judah's Daughter, in his burning Wrath.
16.
No downy Sleep can on mine Eyelids creep,
For these Afflictions day and night I weep;
Adown my Cheeks the briny Tears do roll,
Because the Lord, who should relieve my Soul,
Is far from me; my Children des'olate are,
And Prisoners made unto the Foe in War.
17.
Sion for Succor has her Hands stretched out,
But all in vain; the Lord has round about
Girt Jacob with his Foes; Jerusalem
Is as a menstr'ous Wretch, abhorred by them.
18.
The Lord is Righteous, and his Judgments all,
For my notorious Sins, do justly fall
Upon my wanton head: I all my days
Have been a Rebel to his sacred ways:
Hear, I beseech you, all ye passers by,
Look how forsaken I in Sorrow lie:
My Maids, and young Men by a conq'ring-hand
Are Captives led, into another Land.
19.
I called on those, whom I my Lovers thought,
To come and help me, but they helped me not:
My Priests and Elders in the Streets fell Dead;
Famished with Hunger for the want of Bread.
20.
Behold, O Lord, the Judgments of my Sin;
My Bowels work, my heart cannot rest within;
Sad and dejected in the midst of Woes
I trembling sit, to see the slaughtring Blows
Of the devouring Sword abroad; the while
Within my Gates pale Famine makes a spoil.
21.
My treacherous Friends have heard how sadly I
Have mourned, but none would to my help draw nigh:
My Foes have likewise all my Trouble known,
And greatly joy at what thy Hand has done:
But thou will bring their stablish'd day at last,
And plague them sorely, who have laid me waste.
22.
Then let their Sins in their full measure come
Before thy Face, and let them have their Doom;
A Doom as sharp as I have found from thee,
Do unto them as thou have done to me:
It Is time, O Lord, that thou should take my part,
And ease the Pains of my afflicted Heart.
CHAP. II. 1. Jeremiah lamenteth the Misery of Jerusalem. 20. He camplaineth
thereof to God.
1.
HOw has the Lord forsaken his delight,
And masked his Sion in the Shade of Night,
Took from her lovely Brow the awful Crown,
And has from Heaven to Earth her Beauties thrown,
Rememb'ring not in this his wrathful day
The sacred Temple, where we used to Pray.
2.
He ruined has, and utterly destroyed
Those pleasant Tents, which Jacob long enjoyed:
Thrown down the Holds of Judah's Daughter round,
And razed, and made them level with the ground:
Yea as a thing unclean has made the Land,
And all her Princes in his Eyesight stand.
3.
He in his Fury Isr'els Strength has quelled,
And his all-sisting-Arm from him withheld
Before the Foe, in his consuming Ire
Has Jacob wasted with devouring Fire.
4.
To its full bent, like a revengeful Foe,
His sin'wy-Arm has drawn the fatal Bow;
And slew whatever in Sions Tent was known
To be with pleasure, and delight looked on,
5.
He, as a Foe, has Isr'els Land laid waste,
And all his Forts, and Palaces defaced:
In universal sorrow Judah lies,
Rending the gentle Air with mournful Cries.
6.
He from his Temple has his presence took,
Like an unfruitful Garden it forsook:
In Rubbish laid his hallowed House, and those
Scattered, who there to serve in Course were chose:
Has caused the solemn Feasts, and Sabbaths too
Of Sion to forgotten be, and go
Without their due observance; and in's Wrath
The sacred King and Priest, despised has.
7.
No mounting Flames upon his Altar rise;
His Temple hateful is unto his Eyes:
Her Walls within whose Guards we used to stand,
Are given up into the Heathens Hand:
As in a solemn Feast, their Voices are
Heard in our Courts to rend the sounding Air.
8.
The Lord has purposed level as the ground
To lay the Walls that compass Sion round:
And has stretched out a Line, resolved on
Her utter Ruin and Subversion:
Therefore the shielding-Rampart, and the Wall
Together sunk, and to the ground did fall.
9.
Her Brass-Ribb'd Gates, (which none could ever wound,)
And Iron-Bars lie broken on the ground:
Her Kings and Princes, who in Purple sat
Dispencing Justice in her peaceful Gate,
Are Captives now among the Heathen gone;
No Law nor Justice in her Gates are known,
Her Prophets find no Vision from the Lord,
Nor in his House sounds forth the sacred Word.
10.
In a deep silence on the dusty ground
The Elders sit, with Woes encompast round;
With fulsome Dust strow'd on each hoary-Head,
And with repenting Sackcloth covered:
The lovely Maids of Sion, who would not
Within their Breasts admit a ruffling thought,
Pressed down with sorrow like the Aged go,
With palsi'd Limbs and Heads that downwards bow.
11.
My spungy Eyes, which from their Channels never
Failed to assist me with a moistning Tear,
Keep back their kind asswaging Dews from me,
Now I should use them in my Misery:
My Bowels tremble to behold the Fall,
And fatal Ruin of my People all,
To hear the little Sucklings make complaint,
Seeking for Food, and as they seek it faint.
12.
They to their Mothers say with mournful Voice,
O where is the Corn and Wine that should rejoice
Our drooping Souls? In vain for Food they cry,
Fainting they sink within their Arms and Dye.
13.
Tell me, forsaken Sion, tell what thing
Shall I to Witness take for thee, or bring,
That can with thee compare? O how shall I
Think on a way to ease thy Misery?
No it is beyond my Art thy Wound to reach,
For like the Sea, so wide and deep a Breach
Thy Sins have made, that to close up thy Wound,
And make it whole, no Balsome can be found.
14.
Thy Prophets have been busied with the Wind,
Taught thee according to thy wanton Mind,
They have not as they ought displayed thy Sin,
To turn thee from the Bondage thou art in;
But have pronounced instead of Truths false Lies,
Which have ensnared thee in these Miseries.
15.
All that pass by, insulting over thy Bands,
Do hissing wag their Heads, and clap their Hands;
Saying, is this the City that Men call,
The joy of the whole Earth, and chief of all?
16.
Thy hellish Foes, joyful to see thy day,
As they walk by, do gnash their Teeth, and say,
What we have looked for long, proud Sions Doom,
Is on her now in all its rigor come:
Now we her Judgments have both seen and found,
Sion destroyed, and levelled with the ground.
17.
What God has purposed in the days of Old,
And by his Prophets long ago foretold,
He has fulfilled: unto the Earth has thrown
Thy stately Buildings without pity shown:
Nay, he has made thee to thy Foes a scorn,
And over thee exalted has their Horn.
18.
They cried unto the Lord, O Sions Wall,
How art thou ruined and forsook by all?
Let Tears, like an o'reflowing River, roll
Down from thy weeping Eyes, and to thy Soul
Give no repose, no respite to thine Eye,
Let it for ever flow, and never be dry.
19.
Arise, and cry in the first Watch of the Night:
Pour out thine Heart like water in the sight
Of the Almighty; and with Hands lift high,
Implore thy Sucklings Lives, that fainting lie
With Hunger in the top of every Street;
Beg till thou can with his Compassion meet.
20.
See and consider, Lord, on whom it is,
That thou have laid so great a Plague as this:
Shall Women eat the tender fruit of the Womb,
Their Span-long-Children? Shall thy House a Tomb
Both to the Priest and Prophet now become?
21.
In every Street the youthful Heads are found,
With the Gray-hairs to kiss the flinty ground:
Thou have my Virgins and my Young Men all
Slain, and made pit'less by the Sword to fall.
22.
As in a Solemn Day thou have called out
Thy Terrors, and beset me round about,
So that not one in this thy wrathful Day
Remained, or could by Flight escape away:
Those that I swadled, and brought up, the Foe
Has now, O Lord, consumed to my VVoe.
CHAP. III. 1. The Faithful bewail their Calamities. 31. They acknowledge God's
Justice.
1.
I Am the Man that has Afflictions known,
By that smart Rod which he has sent me down.
2.
Into sad darkness he my Soul has brought,
And from mine Eyes the cheerful Light shut out.
3.
Has me forsaken, and has turned his Hand
Against me, that I now do trembling stand.
4.
He has my tender Flesh, and Snow-white Skin
Shrivelled; and broken all my Bones within.
5.
He has Besieged me, that I cannot get free,
Walling me round with dreadful Misery.
6.
In dark and hideous places has me put,
As are the Dead, who in the Grave are shut,
7.
Has round about me made so strong a Fence,
So weighty made my Chains, I cannot get hence.
8.
When I with a loud cry assail his Ear,
He shuts my Prayer out, and will not hear.
9.
He has blocked up my ways, made me forsake
The beaten Road, and unknown Paths to take.
10.
Like as a rav'ning Bear, he was to me,
Or as a Lion lurking secretly.
11.
He stopped me, and in pieces did me Tear,
And left me mangled and unpityed there.
12.
He bent his murdering Bow, and made me stand,
Like a most certain Mark to guide his Hand.
13.
He caused the winged-Darts from's horned-Bow,
With a swift flight into my Reins to go.
14.
I was a scorn to all my People, they
Made me the Subject of their Mirth all day,
15.
He has me filled with bitter things, and me
Made drunk with Wormwood, to my Misery.
16.
He has me wounded with afflictions sore,
And me with Ashes covered all over.
17.
He also has my Soul removed from peace,
And I forget my former happiness.
18.
And said my Courage, and my strength is fled,
And from the Lord my hope is perished.
19.
When I remember all those Sorrows I
Have undergone, and under which I lie.
20.
My Soul keeps them in mind, and for all this
She in my Bosom truly humbled is.
21.
This gives me hopes, that the Almighty will.
Be my Defense, and my Preserver still.
22.
And this must say, that of his Mercy it is,
That we are not consumed, because that his
23.
Compassions fail not; daily they increase,
And great's to us his Love and Faithfulness.
24.
The Lord my Portion is, and therefore I
Will hope in him in all my Misery.
25.
Good is the Lord, and gracious to those
Who seek him, and their Trust in him repose.
26.
It Is good for Man to wait the leisure time
Of Gods Salvation, and to trust in him.
27.
It Is good for Man, in's Youth his Neck to fit
Unto the Yoke, and to Gods Laws submit.
28.
Used to the Yoke, he does no murmurs vent,
But bears with patience Heaven's punishment.
29.
Humbles himself, and does with hopes attend,
When the Almighty will his succor lend.
30.
Reproached by those, who do his Ruin seek,
Unto their Strokes he gives his tender Cheek.
31.
Knowing that God wont him forsake, but be
A just Avenger of his Injury:
32.
That though he send Afflictions, yet at last
They, who them suffer, shall his Mercies taste.
33.
He takes no pleasure to chastise at all,
Or let Afflictions on his Creatures fall.
34.
To crush the Fettered Prisoner of the Earth
Under his Feet, to whom he did give Birth:
35.
To turn aside the Right of any one,
That craves admittance to the sacred Throne:
36.
To overthrow the Cause, that righteous is,
The Lord does not, nor will approve of this.
37.
Who is it that says a thing, and when it is brought
To pass, dares say, that Heaven willed it not?
38.
Out from the sacred Lips of God cannot come
Both Good and Bad, he gives a righteous Doom.
39.
Why then does Man repine, when struck by God?
Were not for's Sin, he would never feel his Rod.
40.
Let Us search and try our ways, let us turn unto
Our angry God, and see what he will do.
41.
Let Us, with our Hands, lift up our Hearts on high,
And thus bespeak the dreadful Deity;
42.
We all have sinned, we all have Rebels been,
Therefore thou have us plagued for our Sin.
43.
With Wrath thou have overwhelmed, and closed us all;
And made us pit'less to thy Fury fall.
44.
In a thick Cloud thou have thy self inshrin'd,
That through't our Prayers should no passage find.
45.
We are by all men the Offscouring deemed,
And looked on as unfit to be esteemed.
46.
With open Mouths our Foes their Joys express,
Glad to behold us plunged in deep distress.
47.
Fear, and a Snare are come on us, and we
Destroyed are with great severity.
48.
Mine Eyes with Rivers of salt Tears, gush out,
For the Destruction on my People brought.
49.
Adown my Cheeks they glide, and will not cease
Till from my troubles he does me release:
50.
Till that the Lord in mercy will look down,
They Will never stop, but Day and Night will run.
51.
My very Heart with grief within me's torn,
To hear the Daughters of my City mourn.
52.
Like as a Bird, so am I chased by those,
Who are, without just cause, my mortal Foes.
53.
Into a Dung'on dark they have me thrown,
And overwhelmed me with a Massy-Stone.
54.
Billows of Sorrows over my Head did pass;
Then I concluded that I ruined was.
55.
I called upon thy Name, O Lord most high,
Out of the Dung'on in my Misery.
56.
Unto my Voice thou have inclined thine Ear,
Withold not now, and be not deaf, but hear.
57.
Thou, in the day when I did call, drew'st near,
Did answer, and command me not to fear.
58.
Thou, and thou only, Lord, maintain'st my Cause,
And did my Life redeem from Bloody Paws.
59.
And now, O Lord, since thou have seen my wrong,
Judge thou my Cause, it does to thee belong.
60.
Thou have with watchful Eye their Vengeance seen,
And all their thoughts, that have against me been.
61.
Thou have, O Lord, both heard their Scoffs and known
All, that against me in their hearts is done.
62.
Unto those Lips, who do against me rise,
Thou art no Stranger, nor to their device.
63.
When they uprise, or when they lie along,
I am the Subject of their mirthful Song.
64.
Give them, O Lord, their due, and speedy Doom,
Full Cups of Vengeance, let them flowing come.
65.
Let killing Sorrow sit on every Heart;
Let not thy Fatal Curse from them depart.
66.
Pursue; and chase them in thine anger, Lord,
And from the Earth destroy them with thy Sword.
CHAP. IV. 1. Sion bewaileth her pitiful estate. 13. She confesses her Sins.
1.
HOw is the beamy-Gold grown dim as Night?
How is the pure Gold changed, which was most bright?
How are the Temple-stones with dirty Feet
Defiled, and scattered into every Street?
2.
The Noble Men of Sion, lik'ned to
The most fine Gold, how are they looked on now?
But as the Potters handiwork of Clay;
No other Honor, or esteem have they.
3.
The watry-Monsters never deny the Breast,
But give their Young the Teat, when they request:
My People cruel to their Young Ones are,
Like the unnatural Ostrich, void of care.
4.
With scortching thirst the tender Suckling's Tongue,
Cleaves to the vaulted Roof of's Mouth: the Young
And harmless Infants, that can scarcely speak,
Ask of their Parents Bread, but none they break.
5.
They, who did use on choicest Food to feed,
Perish in the Streets, and none their cries do heed:
They who were Robbed with Cloth of Tyrian-Dy,
Naked upon a loathsome Dunghill lie.
6.
My People for their Sins more chast'ned are,
Than e're the People of lewd Sodom were:
Their City soon consumed was to the Ground,
And no appearing Foe Encamped it round.
7.
Her Nazarites, who were more purely White
Than is the Fleecy Snow, and Milk to sight,
More Ruddy than the Rubies ever were,
And than the polished Saphyr, shined more clear;
8.
So changed are, as to their Faces, now
That one them cannot for their Blackness know:
Close to their Iv'ry-Bones their Skin is shrunk,
And withered like a dead Trees Sapless Trunk.
9.
Those, who are killed by the Sword, are far
Better, than they, who slain by Famine, are:
For these, when stricken by it, lingering lie,
And by degrees do pine away, and Dye.
10.
The half starved Mothers forced were to Eat
The Fruit of their own Wombs, for want of Meat,
So much distressed, and to this dismal pass
Were they reduced, when Sion ruined was.
11.
The Lord his furious Indignation has
Accomplished, and poured out his burning Wrath;
He such a Fire has in Sion made,
As has in Rubbish her Foundations laid.
12.
The Crowned Heads, and those of meaner Birth,
That trod the globous-Surface of the Earth,
Would not have thought, that ever any Foe
Should have on Sion seized, and brought it low.
13.
For the notorious Sins of those, who were
Her Priests and Prophets, all these Judgments are
Upon her brought, they are the Cause of all
The Purple Blood, that in her Streets did fall.
14.
Defiled with Blood, which in the Streets they shed,
Like Blind Men up and down they wandered,
And were so foul, that Men did them detest,
And durst not come to touch their sacred Vest.
15.
The Rabble with a loud Stentorean cry
Called to the Priests, and bid them thence to fly;
Depart, depart, ye are unclean, said they,
Therefore they fled, and roved Night and Day:
The Heathen followed with a dreadful Yell,
And said they should no more in Sion dwell.
16.
The Wrath of God has them dispersed quite,
He will no more abide them in his sight:
Because they neither to their Priests did give
A due respect, nor did their Age relieve.
17.
Whilst we expecting looked toward the Coast
Of Egypt, waiting for a succ'ring Host,
Our gazing Eyes were dim and weary grown,
Looking for help, from whence we could have none.
18.
From Street to Street they did pursue us so,
That we could no where from their Fury go:
Upon our Lives is past the fatal Doom,
Our Days are finished, and our End is come.
19.
Our deadly Foes in Flight much swifter are
Than is the quick Winged Eagle of the Air:
They have pursued us on the Mountains, and
Have waited for us in the Desert Sand.
20.
The Lord's Anointed in their Nets are taken,
In whom we hoped, and by their Hands is Slain;
Of whom we said, under his Shadow we
Shall live secure, and from our Fears be free.
21.
Rejoice, O Edom's Daughter, be thou joy'd
Who did insult, when Sion was destroyed:
Thou shall e're-while the Cup of Fury taste,
Be shamed, as She was, and like her laid Waste.
22.
Thy Woes, O Sion, are fulfilled, no more
Shall thou be Captive made, as heretofore:
But, O thou Edom, Heaven will begin
To visit thine Offense, and show thy Sin.
CHAP. V. A pitiful Complaint of Sion in Prayer to God.
1.
BE mindful, thou, of all our Woes, whose Throne
In Heaven is: on our reproach look down.
2.
The Land, thou gav'st us to Possess, is Tilled
By Heathens, and our Houses with them filled.
3.
No King we have, our Cities all are left,
As mournful Widows, of their Loves bereft.
4.
We cannot fetch Water from the Crystal Spring,
Nor Fuel get, unless its price we bring.
5.
Our Necks are with a grievous Bondage pressed,
Wearied we are, and can obtain no rest.
6.
We have for Bread implored Egypts Aid,
And a firm League with wicked Ashur made.
7.
Our Fathers have transgrest, and are no more;
We their Transgressions, and our own have bore.
8.
Servants have ruled, and had over us command;
None would us free from their imperious Hand.
9.
We ran the hazard of our lives for Meat,
Because the Sword around did for us wait.
10.
Our Skin did black (as is the Oven) look,
Because lank-Famine raged in every nook.
11.
They forced the Wives in Sion, and in wild,
And burning Lust their lovely Maids defiled.
12.
They hanged our Princes up, and had no care
To honor them, who Priests or Aged were.
13.
They made the Young Men labor at the Mill,
With weighty Burdens did the Children kill.
14.
No Law-dispensing-Elder now does sit
In Sions Gate, nor's Music heard in it.
15.
The Joy and Pleasure of our Heart is fled,
Our Dance we now in mournful Measures Tread.
16.
The State and glory of our Realm is gone,
Woe to us, for our Sins have it undone.
17.
For this our Hearts are Faint, our Griefs increase,
And for these things our Eyes never Weeping cease.
18.
But chiefly for that Sion (famed of Old
To be thy Joy) is now the Foxes hold.
19.
But why, O Lord, thou sole Eternal One,
Who have an everlasting settled Throne,
20.
Do thou so long forget, and leave us here;
And to our Outcries wilt not lend an Ear?
21.
Turn thou, Lord, and we shall turned be,
And let us have the Days, we once did see:
22.
But thou have cast us off; thine angry look
Shows, that thou have thy Sion quite forsook.
CONCLUSION.
THus has my Pen through various Troubles past,
Traverst the Woes of Sion, and at last
Unto the end of her Complaint is come:
Grant that our Sion may not find her Doom.
In Thee we hope, in Thee we Trust alone,
To thee we fly, save us, Thou Mighty One:
This Favor from our Princes cannot be had;
Thou only can preserve, and make us glad.
A Prayer for the Church.
ETernal God, to whom all Knees shall bow,
Unto whose goodness we our Beings owe:
How have we all from thy Commandments
Following our vain Imagination?
Have thou not seen thy Mercies slighted, all gone,
Thy Laws and Judgments in contempt to fall?
And heard how we, with impious Mouths, have said,
There is no God, no God who has us made?
I cannot, Lord, but tremble, when I muse
On these our fearful Sin; nor can I choose
But burst into a sad and doleful Cry;
What merit we for our Impiety?
We here deserve to feel thy heaviest Doom;
And those eternal Flames in the World to come.
But thou, who art an ever gracious God,
To anger slow, unwilling with thy Rod
To grieve the Sons of Men: who ready art
Fully to pardon the returning heart,
But a consuming Fire, that will burn
The Soul that will not be induced to turn;
Make us sincerely sorrowful for all
Make us sincerely sorrowful for all
Our crying Sins, that for thy Vengeance call.
Forgive us all our secret, and our known
Transgressions, which we against thee done:
And grant, that we may willingly no more
Provoke thy furious Wrath, as heretofore.
And since our Hearts are in thy Hands, O Lord,
Make them obed'ent to thy Will and Word:
Send into every Breast that peaceful Dove,
Thy holy, and eternal Sp'rit of Love,
To rule and lead us in the way of Peace;
Whose end is everlasting Happiness.
That, for the future, there may not arise
Amongst us, baneful Animosities.
Be gracious to thy Church, and scatter all
That daily seek and Plot to make her Fall.
Make them to perish in their strange device,
And never rise to work her Miseries.
But let thy Goodness, and thy Mercies flow
Upon her Head, and with her always go.
And since a dismal Cloud with frowning Brow,
Hovers over thy despised Sion now;
O let thy Goodness, a quick-piercing-Ray
Send down, and chase this direful Cloud away;
That it upon her may not fall, and we
For our Offenses thereby Ruined be.
But chiefly, Lord, we here do thee invoke,
To save her from Romes hateful hellish Yoke.
Let not that Man of Sin, wh' exalts his Throne
Above the Powers that on Earth are known,
Subject her to his most imperious Sway,
And make her to his Avarice a Prey.
Infat'ate his Designs, and on him lay
The Mischiefs purposed to Her day by day.
Cover with thy outstretched Wings the Great
And Gracious Sovereign of our Church and State:
In spite of those, who rage, and cursing stand,
To see the Scepter flourish in his Hand;
Preserve his sacred Life, and make them all,
Who seek his Ruin, by his Hand to fall.
Here Crown him with a long and blessed Peace,
And, when he Dies, with endless Happiness.
Bless likewise those, who at thy Altar serve;
Grant that their Lips may right'ous Truths preserve:
Let both their Lives and Doctrins be sincere,
And let them, like the Stars, shine bright and clear.
Bless all inferior Ministers of State,
Fill them with wholesome Justice in the Gate;
Let well weighed Judgment from their Mouths proceed,
And not the name of Friend or Foe to heed.
Be good to all thy People every where,
And keep them in thy Faith, and in thy Fear;
Convert the unconverted; make us all
To own one Shepherd, and to know his Call.
Then we thy People, who to thee belong,
From day to day will with a thankful Song
Set forth thy Praise, and to the World declare
How great thy Goodness and thy Mercies are.
POEMS ON SEVERAL Occasions.

By the same Hand.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1680.

Poems on several Occasions.
The Sinners Wish.
AH could I, Lord, at thy blessed Hands,
Receive a Freedom from my Bands,
From killing Sins and worldly-Cares,
From future Torments, dismal Fears,
Were I as certain of thy Love,
As Angels that enjoy't above,
Beauty with her bewitching-Smiles,
Which Fetters Millions with her Wiles,
Should never embrace me in her Arms,
I Would stand unconquered at her Charms;
Those wealthy Treasures of the Shore,
The costly Gems, the glittering Oar,
These I Would contemn upon this score;
That I might Heavens Treasures know,
And when I dye may thither go,
Say, Lord, the Word and 't shall be so.
On Lazarus raised.
Lord!
THe Grave obeyed, Deaths Bands did fall
Asunder, at thy powerful Call,
And all those faithless Lookers on,
Beheld his Resurrection,
Such charming Rhet'rick's in thy Voice;
The Dead Revive, the Sad Rejoice,
And the loved Laz'rus did return
From the close Prison of his Urn.
As thou was pleased to raise from dust
His senseless Carcass, so I trust
Thou Wilt call my Soul from every trust
And from this earthly Prison free
It, to a glorious Liberty.
To Death.
1.
SInce Adam sinned, and by that fatal Fall,
Gave thee a Sovereign Power over all,
It is decreed, we must obey thy Call.
2.
To thy dark Cell when thou command'st I Will go,
Since my dear Lord, has trod that Path, I know
No Terrors I shall meet in the Shades below.
3.
Pale Fear adieu, go find some other Breast
For thine abode, never think that thou shall rest
Within my Bosom, I Will have no such Guest.
4.
And since it is decreed my Body must
Return from whence it had it is Birth at first,
Pronounce thy Sentence, and discharge thy Trust.
5.
But know thy conq'ring-Dart in time will fly
Into thy cruel-Heart, then thou shall dye,
But never with me enjoy Eternity.
6.
Yet I declare thou art my real Friend,
Since from this earthly Prison thou do send
My Soul, unto those Joys which have no end.
The Morning Sacrifice.
1.
NO sooner does the cheerful Light
Dispel the Horrors of the Night,
But like the Lark my Soul aloft
Mounts to her God, in Notes most soft
Recounts to Him with great delight,
All her past Mercies of the Night.
2.
And since thou, dearest Lord, do prize
A thankful Heart, since in thine Eyes
It is of value every day,
This grateful Tribute I will pay,
And 'twere a madness since no more
Thou do exact, to run of the Score.
3.
For, O my Soul, what more befits
Thee to return for benefits,
Than what the Angels do always?
Chant forth his most deserved Praise,
Who every dawn does give new Birth
To all thy solid Joys on Earth.
On Reprobation.
1.
I Cannot think my God thou did create
Some Men on purpose for no happier State
Than endless Torments, which shall know no date.
2.
Nor dare I own a thought that Christ did dye
Only for Some, not All intention'lly,
These Doctrines I abhor most perfectly.
3.
That Man the noblest of thy Works should be,
By thee designed for endless Misery,
To show thy Justice, and thy Sov'raignty.
4.
My Soul shall never entertain a thought
Of so much horror, of that God who sought
Our Restoration, and redemption bought.
5.
When all along thou promises do make,
To all Mankind who will their Sins forsake,
Thou will forgive, shall I thy Word not take?
6.
Yes, Lord, I will; though boldly some declare,
Thy known and secret Will so different are,
When thou say live, thou never intend'st to spare.
7.
It Is strange they should some few dark places wrest
To speak their Sense, when, Lord, thou do protest
Such thoughts were never harbored in thy Breast.
8.
How vile's that Man whose heart does not agree
With His Tongue, good God and just! how is it that we,
What Man's ashamed of, attribute to thee?
9.
What in my heart I think, to All I Will tell,
Such contradictions sure can never dwell,
With perfect Purity, their Mansion's Hell.
10.
Were I to represent to the publick-View
A Devil, Hypocrite, or Trayt'rous Jew,
I would delineate them, as these do you.
11.
What strange presumption do these Gnostics show,
To make as if they did thy Secrets know,
Which none can tell, who does converse below?
12.
In thy most sacred Writ it is manifest
There Is none excluded, all Men may be blessed,
If they are willing, with eternal Rest.
13.
For thou art good and gracious unto all,
Long-suffering to us Sinners, and do call
All to repentance, would have none to fall.
14.
And for this purpose Christ for all did dye,
He has affirmed this Truth who cannot lie,
To doubt of which confronts Divinity.
15.
Most safe it is to rest on this belief,
Most satisfactory, it eases Grief,
And yields a poor desponding Soul relief.
A Meditation on Man's Folly.
LOrd, what a foolish thing is Man,
How fond is he of Toys?
How does he spend that little Span
Of his, in empty Joys?
But for that precious Soul of his
He takes no future care,
To fit it for immortal Bliss,
Such thoughts too serious are.
Himself to every pleasure gives,
And drowns his Soul in Lust,
In all destructive Sins he lives,
Till levelled with the Dust.
Give me, O Lord, that pious care
And that obsequious love,
That all my Actions may declare,
I seek that place above,
Where we from Sin exempt shall be,
From Sorrow, and from Tears,
And where no Trouble we shall see,
Nor frighted be with Fears.
A Vow.
I Vow, Lord give me grace, no beauteous smile,
No Wedg nor Honor shall my Soul beguile
From strict obedience, no not all the art
Of the seducing Fiend shall tempt my Heart,
Though all the Glories of the World should be
Amassed together in one Treasury,
And by him tendered, yet I would not bow
To his damned Scepter, but I Would keep my Vow.
Deus mi.
BLess me with peace of Conscience,
And in my Soul with innocence,
Love of my God, and dearest Friends,
And my Ambition has its ends.
This, Lord's the All, I must confess,
I dare on Earth call happiness,
I limit not thy Providence
To act according to my sense:
Dispose of me as thou think fit,
And make my Will to thine submit.
Domine Jesu.
1.
THe Virtue of that Balm which did distill
From thy pierced side, infuse into my Will,
That thy good pleasure here I may fulfill.
2.
Make me to Thee as to the Center move,
Each thought and act refine, inslame my love
To all thy ways, that I may faithful prove.
3.
And since to thee, the Cross must be my guide,
That joy which made thee, make me to abide
Its weight, till I in Paradise reside.
To a young Person that was about to Vow Celibacy.
1 Timothy Chap. 5. Ver. 14. I will therefore that the younger Women marry, bear
Children, guide the House, give none occasion to the Adversary to speak
reproachfully.

SHe who her Reason lays aside,
And Superstition makes her Guide,
Can never hope by that false Light,
To do an action that is right.
In all religious Duties know,
Most principally, e're we Vow,
Right Reason should be sought unto.
Those which endure her rigid Test,
Them to embrace and leave the rest.
Then must thou love that state as best,
Which God in Paradise has blessed,
There Marr'age took its early Date,
There they began to Procreate. Genesis 2.18. 1.21.

A single Life He did foresee
Was inconvenient, Multiply
The great Creator did command,
And what he Wills none should withstand.
Had not his Wisdom liked by far
The married Life, though linked to care,
As tending to a nobler end
Than Celibacy can pretend,
Thy Sex had never had its Birth,
Thy Being was to Man the Earth,
And not to live a strict Recluse
Neither to God or Man of use.
Is it in thee a pious part,
The great Design of Heaven to thwart,
To vow a Virgin cloistered Life,
Since thou art fit to be a Wife?
No, it is an impious act in thee,
Being young, to vow Virginity;
It Is, though Devotion's the pretense,
Against God and Nature an offense.
For, whatsoever thou think, sure
Destructive Vows God cannot endure;
And none can more destructive be
Than those of Cloistered Chastity.
Should all thy Sex be of this mind,
The Peopled Earth would quickly find
Its self bereft of either Kind.
Of Millions now, a He, or She,
In one short Age there would not be.
Then think not on so rash a Vow,
Which aims at Ruin, quickly now
Be thou a Pros'lyte to that state,
For which God did thy Sex create,
And be not tempted to do ill,
By a misguided Zeal, or Will,
To undertake what cannot be
Safely resolved on by thee.
Perchance thou fondly think that they
Who married are want time to Pray,
And exercise their Piety;
This is a great mistake in thee,
They have their times of Vacancy.
It Is true, so long they cannot be
As Sanctimon'alists on the Knee,
Because attended with more care,
And business than the Cloistered are;
Yet this their care their duty is,
Time so employed does lead to Bliss,
And is no bar to Happiness.
Reiigion's active, hates a Drone,
Who buzzing spends each day alone
In Prayer and Contemplation.
Both fitting duties to be done,
Great Pillars of Religion,
But she who wholly rests on these,
Though she may fancy what she please,
Spends but her days in idleness.
So lives the lazy Nun, the Wife
Who truly virtuous is, a Life
Devouter leads than any she
Who vows Recluse Virginity.
No sullen humor clouds her mind,
Nor superstitious Zeal does blind
Her Reason, so much to despise
That state, which Heaven dignifies.
Her God she honors, honors too
Her Husband, as she ought to do.
Hazards with an undaunted mind,
Her Life to propagate her kind.
Shuns not the World, nor business here,
But walks in both with so much care.
That neither proves her Conqueror.
And though Temptations do around
Beset her Soul, she keeps her ground.
Sure such a courage bears away
The Palm from her who shuns the fray,
And out of fear to be overcome,
Within close Walls her Life does doom.
Too tedious 'twere to tell the ways,
And pious actions of her days,
She loves, industrious is, obeys,
Each morn she brings a Sacrifice
Of Prayer and Thanks, before her Eyes
Close up at Night a holy Flame
Dissolves her Soul in Prayer again.
Nor does the duty of the day,
From Heaven steal her heart away;
For while her hands most busied are,
In managing her house-affair,
She breaths a short, yet grateful Prayer.
Such grapple Blessings, prove more strong
Than cloistered Prayers a whole day long,
They mount, and with a quicker Wing
To all her Wants fresh Succors being
Than a more tedious Offering.
And for the good of all Mankind,
As full and quick returns do find.
Thus lives the virtuous Wife, and so
Thou, being young, should marry too,
And live, as she is described to do.
For, it is not good to live alone, Eccl. ^.9, 10.

Two being better much than one
In Health, or sad Affliction.
In the chaste, blessed Nuptial Twine,
Women gives much a brighter shine,
More good Examples in that State
Shows, than the fruitless Celibate.
To God more grateful presents gives,
Holy'r, and full as chastely lives
(If not much more) than any She
Immured within a Nunnery.
I Will say no more -- but choose that Life,
Which God approves off, be a Wife.
Justice.
JUstice should all our Actions steer,
It our embodied Souls will rear
Above the reach of anxious Fear.
When Death our earthly-Frame destroys,
'Twill crown our Souls with perfect Joys,
'Twill free our Bodies from the Grave,
That they a Resurrection have,
And safely seat us in that Bliss
Which fades not, but eternal is.
The Prodigal Son.
1.
WHile liberal Fortune did dispense
Her Favors, in great affluence,
And his beloved God, his Chest,
Denied his Ryots no request,
He like a frantick-Beast did run
The Stages of Destruction.
2.
But when a total emptiness
Did his consumptive Bags possess,
His Belly pinched, his Treasure gone,
He then considered what he had done,
And to his Father goes in haste,
Implores forgiveness for what is past.
3.
Thus want a reformation wrought,
And the luxurious Youth was taught,
To choose the good, with care to shun
Those Follies he so doted on.
O happy change! which made him know.
The danger which he ran into.
Thou did hide thy Face and I was troubled.
WHen from my sinful Soul that glorious Sun,
Thy blessed Spirit, Lord, was forced to run,
Soon did the actions of my Life betray
The want of that pure Light, then did I stray
In those dark Regions, where no heavenly Ray
Affords one lightsom glance to guide my way.
Immortal God! in what a dismal case
Was my poor Soul, when thou withdrew'st thy grace?
As in a Garden the enameled Flowers,
When the Sun's masked with sullen Clouds or Showers,
Close up their Leaves, and sad and pensive look
To miss that warmth which from his Beams they took,
Till he again does dart a liv'ning Ray,
Their Beauty fades, and sweetness does decay;
So when thy Beams of Mercy thou did quite
Vail from my Soul, what an Egyptian-Night
Did cover it, how did its Beauty fade
And Glory wither in that dismal Shade?
But when again that Sunshine did appear,
Which does inspirit all our actions here,
My Soul forthwith revived, and vows to sing
Perpet'al Hallelujahs to my King.
On Mary Magdelene weeping.
THe Scene is changed, that lovely Grace
Which sat triumphing in her Face,
Which whosoever beheld, straight found
The Darts of Love his Soul to wound,
Grief has o're-cast; those wanton Eyes,
Whose Glances challenged Victories,
Shed penitent Showers, and that Hair,
Each Curl of which did prove a Snare
To fetter Youth, disheveled lies,
And serves for Towels to those Eyes,
Which overflow with happy Tears,
Whose drops gained Heaven, and calmed her Fears.
On the ten Lepers made clean.
THe ten were healed, and all but one
Unthankful proved, for what was done,
You may as well confine the Wind
To constancy, as think to bind
With kindness an ungrateful Mind;
Yet when afflictions pressed them sore,
How ready were they to implore
Their Savior's help, his Cross once over
They never thought upon him more.
Good God! that mercies often should prove
Destructive Rocks to Shipwreck Love!
Riches and Beauty are deceitful, but a faithful Friend is the Medicine of Life.
1.
THat glittering Idol most adore,
Within her Temple others may
Pay their Devotions; I never more
Will Idolize what will destroy;
What though she wealthy Treasures plead,
Gold-Chains will unto Torments lead.
2.
Beauty shall never my Soul debase,
Under that form there often do ly
A rotten Soul, though lovely Face,
Full of mis-shap'd deformity,
Scarce one of thousands can we find
Who lovely is, in Shape, and Mind.
3.
It Is not a Fabric reared on high,
Nor Riches that can ease the Mind,
It Is not a lovely Face, nor Eye,
Wherein we can contentment find,
It Is none of all these things, that can
Yield solid comforts to a Man.
4.
It is a faithful-hearted-Friend,
Whose kindness to me knows no date,
Though Poverty should be my end,
Scorns to convert his Love to hate,
Who when I sin will always be
A Faithful Monitor to me.
5.
Unto whose breast I dare commit
A secret, safe as in my own,
Who never will in angry fit
Betray his Trust to any One,
Nor from my Interest will be
Withdrawn by Frowns or Flattery.
6.
If such a Friend I chance to find,
I Will Center all my Joys in this --
I have a Jewel to my mind,
There Is not on Earth a greater Bliss,
Ambition may eck on desire,
Mine here shall rest, and soar no higer.
The Sensualist.
ALL that below this heavenly Orb does move,
For Man was made, and so ordained above.
What reason is there that he should deny
Himself the Pleasure, to content his Eye?
Woman that lovely Creature here was placed,
For his delight to gaze on, and to taste
That fragrant Balm which on her Lips does grow,
For him to wanton in her Vale below.
All those rich Treasures both of Sea and Land,
Were they not made to bow to his Command?
And whatsoever his vast mind does crave,
Was he not freely his desires to have?
Then where is the Sin, or how does he amiss,
If he does use them as his pleasure is?
Sure Man, by God, above the Brutes was graced
With Reason, and for nobler ends here placed,
As Sovereign over all, than to allow
His Reason should to's Will and Passions bow:
This never could be the Creator's thought,
When out of Clay this curious piece he wrought;
And none but Folly will pretend to own,
This he designed in his Creation.
It Is true, that Woman by the liberal hand
Of Heaven was framed to be at Man's command,
So as to make a loyal, loving Wife,
And prove a Comfort in his tedious Life,
But not to gaze on with a lustful Eye,
Much less unmarryed in her Arms to lie.
And though the Treasures of the wealthy Shore,
And Sea are subject to Man's lordly Power,
Yet cannot he without yielding up his sense,
And proving guilty of an high offense,
Claim (as a Sovereign) with a wanton Hand,
At will to rifle both the Sea and Land,
And make them bow unto his boundless Lust,
Then own the action not to be unjust.
He had not his Dominion to abuse
The things created for his needful use,
But was to have a most regardful Eye,
Not to enslave them to his Luxury.
If so there is no Man but a Fool will say,
He, as his pleasure is, may them enjoy.
A Prayer.
1.
GReat God! whose providential Care
Is over all, bow down thine Ear
Unto my Prayer, permit not Thou
The Devil, my invet'rate Foe,
To work my final overthrow.
2.
So closely on our Souls he waits,
With his bewitching-tempting-Baits,
That straight our Sensual parts we please,
Embrace a short and transient ease,
And hazard all than Flesh displease.
3.
Withold not then thy saving-Grace
From me, my God, one Minutes space,
Lest this my brittle House of Clay,
With my immortal Soul, a Prey
Becomes to him the damned obey.
4.
O let thy Love procure for me
An easier Fate, than Misery,
It Is just in thee, my God, I know,
Since unto Satan's Lure I bow,
Not to exalt; but cast me low.
5.
Low as that Pit of Horrors, where
The Damned Howl, and tortured are,
Where 'midst those Flames which them torment,
Which ever Blaze, but never are spent,
They day and night their Curses vent.
6.
Although my Sins these Flames deserve,
Yet from their lasting Heats preserve
My trembling Soul, this I implore;
Except the same thing over and over,
I know not what to ask Thee more.
God's Goodness and Man's Folly.
WHen trembling Dust with awful fear
Unto thy Throne of Grace draws near,
And in an humble posture brings
To Thee his Catalogue of Sins;
No sooner he imparts his Grief,
But thou afford'st thy quick Relief,
And with forgiveness ready art
To ease the Sorrows of his Heart.
Yet rather than we will forgo
Some short-liv'd-Pleasures, endless Woe
We fondly Court, and slight that Love
Which will at length our Ruin prove.
Whereas would we obey thy Will,
Not suffering ours to have their fill;
If we thy Laws would not refuse,
Nor Favors willingly abuse,
We should enjoy that happiness,
The glorious Saints in Heaven possess.
An Admonition.
1.
SOul let thy Contemplation be
On Heaven and Eternity,
To fix thy thoughts on this base Earth,
Becomes not Thee of heavenly Birth.
2.
Since all these worldly-Glories quite,
Will (like thy empty Dreams in the Night)
Vanish e're thy bright Morn does break.
Why should thou pleasure in them take.
3.
When the last dreadful Trump shall all
(With its shril Voice) to Judgment call,
Those who their God this World did make,
Must not of heavenly Joys partake.
4.
The Crown of Glory only shall,
As a Reward to Virtue fall,
It never shall the Temples bind
Of those, who earthly things did mind.
The Penitent.
1.
I Who that precious time which thou have lent,
Have, dearest God! in sinful courses spent;
I, who have chose to feed on Husks with Swine,
Rather than live under thy Rules Divine;
I, thy ungracious Son, unto thee, home
With bleeding heart and weeping Eyes do come,
Ashamed that I so miserably have
Misspent those Favors, which thy bounty gave.
2.
And yet what reason have I to presume,
That e're thy Lips will pass a gentle Doom
On my rebellious Life, since it has been
wholly devoted to the ways of Sin?
No, I in Justice cannot think thou wilt own.
Such an ungrateful Wretch to be thy Son,
Whose wanton Ear would never yield to hear,
The wholesome counsels of a Parent dear.
3.
But, O my Father! by that powerful word,
Look on thy humbled Creature, and afford
Some glimps of Comfort to my troubled mind;
And as thou stil'st thy self to be a kind
And gracious Father, be thou so to me,
Forgiving him who truly turns to Thee.
Look not upon me with a rig'rous Eye
Of Justice, but of Mercy, lest I dye.
A Prayer before the Sacrament.
THou, God, who always take delight to be
Conferring good on those who trust in Thee;
Who from thy Bosom (by eternal Doom)
Did send thy Son (from whence all Joys do come
To take our nature on him, and to die
The accursed death for our Impiety,
Let me adore Thee for this mighty Love;
For this, my Soul, do thou obedient prove.
And grant, dear Lord, that I, who humbly now
Approach thine Altar, to remember how,
And what Christ suffered, may of Thee obtain
Those dear-bought Mercies, which his Death did gain.
I must confess, when I consider, Lord,
How I have sinned against thy sacred Word,
How often I have refused to come and eat,
When I was summoned to this heavenly Treat,
I have not left within my troubled Breast,
A glimmering hope to be a welcome Guest.
Yet should I still absent, should I forbear
TO approach thy Table, where such offers are,
How can I ever hope, dear Christ, to be
Partaker of thy Love and Victory?
No I must never think, thou wilt own me, when
Thou sits in Judgment on the Sons of Men.
Therefore to thee, my God, I come, and bring
My Soul and Body, for an Offering.
Vouchsafe that at thy Hands they may a kind
And gracious entertainment this day find:
And be enabled by thy Grace to move
In the delightful Steps of holy Love.
Let not my Sins of Youth, or riper Years,
Engage thee to forsake me, to my Tears
Have some regard, and let me now partake
Of thy Sons Mercies, for his merits sake.
Amen, and Amen.
A Farewell to the World.
THou glorious Nothing, now adieu,
I Will be no more a Slave to you:
Hence-forward all my time will I
To a more serious Court apply.
Heaven and all its Joys above
Shall be the Object of my Love,
And study of my Life each day,
Till I my borrowed Earth repay.
And thou immortal God, who art
The rightful Sovereign of my Heart,
Dispose my Thoughts and Actions now,
Strictly to keep this sacred Vow.
Thou know what mighty Foes they are.
I must engage with in this War:
The World, on one hand, will be sure
To bring its Glories to allure;
And its Temptations will combine
To shake this firm Resolve of mine.
My Flesh will all its vigor show,
To make me to its Dictates bow.
And the industr'ous-wily-Fiend,
Against me all his Powers will bend.
Forces too great to be withstood,
By a Compound of Flesh and Blood.
Needs must I Faint, and be subdued,
Unless with heavenly force indu'd.
Yet I am fully bent to try
Their Strength, and Fight them till I dye,
And do not doubt but at my Death,
To have the never-fading-Wreath.
SOLI DEO GLORIA.
FINIS.

