Certain seasonable CONSIDERATIONS AND REASONS HUMBLY OFFERED, AGAINST Reviving
the Act, Entitled, An Act for the better Propagation and Preaching of the
Gospel in Wales, and redress of some Grievance there.
Presented to the Supreme Authority the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND. WITH Wholesome PROPOSALLS, touching the future disposal of the powers
given by the said ACT.
THis Act vesteth in the Commissionere named in that Act, a double power, 1.
Ecclesiastic. 2. Civil.


Ecclesiastic; To amove from, and confer Ecclesiastical promotions, etc. and
to dispose of the Church Revenue.

Observation. 1. Wales having been many ages sithence happily incorporated with
England, and governed by the same Laws, as well those of the Church, as Civil,
by this Act are governed by distinct Laws, which in this conjunction of time
may not give that public satisfaction. 2. If this Act is for the better
Propagation of the Gospel in Wales, than the general Act for all England is,
it must be either because of the matter of this Act, or the manner of
proceedings thereupon, or some other peculiar Circumstances.

The matter thereof is, To amove from, and confer Ecclesiastical promotions,
etc.

3. The very same matter is vested in the honorable Committee for Plundered
Ministers at Westminster, for the disposal of promotions in England; and the
persons of that Committee are all Members of Parliament. The greatest part of
the Commissioners in the aforesaid Act for Wales, yea, all that meet to act by
virtue thereof, except two persons, are not members of Parliament, and in
regard of their several relations and Interests, if not Judgments, are the
rather subject to partialities. 4. Neither is their meeting in Wales a
lessening of Charge; their meeting in Southwales being at Swanzey, in
Northw^les at Wrexam, 70 miles distant from the persons that are many times
summoned to attend them; The Committee for Plundered Ministers being far more
certain, and quicker for their dispatches, and more moderate for Fees allowed
to their Officers. 5. It is unusual in the English Government to make Natives
Judges in their own Counties, and (under favor) at this time most
unseasonable, the late differences having rendered Neighbors and Countrymen
less affectionate to each other than formerly, and such power may occasion
private vindication more than discharging public Trust, especially (as it is
observed) in many of the Welsh Nation, so empowered. 6. The Commissioners named
in the said Act are to act in any part of Southwales and Northwales, so, that
it iss possible that those Commissioners living in the remotest place of
Southwales may summon persons living in the remotest parts of Northwales, and
so those of Northwales the Inhabitants of Southwales. 7. The persons of
Southwales nominated Commissioners in the said Act, are for the most part from
two Counties, (1) Brecknock, Caermarthen, Pembrook and Cardigan having but 5
Commissioners inhabiting in them.


The manner of proceeding directed by the Act is 1. That 5 Commissioners may
examine and eject, etc. 2. That 12 (upon the Ejecteds complaints) might review,
and determine. 3. That 12 (upon the Ejecteds appeal) are to transfer, and
certify the proceedings to the Committee for plundered Ministers.


It is humbly observed, 1. That 12 did very rarely meet, the time and place of
meeting not usually published, nor generally known, the propagators living very
remote one from another, and the Itinerants residence appointed for approvers
altogether uncertain, one while in one Country, another while in another
Country, and in no place certain. 2. If they meet, it is probable that the same
12 that adjudged a Cause, would not transfer and certify against their own
Judgments: And in case of refusal there is no provision in the Act to enforce
them, and during the three years time this Act continued, notwithstanding the
many hundreds that were ejected, we find few or any cause upon an appeal
(though importunately desired) certified by the Commissioners. 3. In Case the
Commissioners did transfer and certify the proceedings before them to the
Committee for plundered Ministers; yet the Act disabled the Appellant to examine
any more witnesses; and it is possible, that, the depositions so transferred
and certified were not laid down and certified according to the Examinants
intentions, many, if not most of the persons examined against ejected
Ministers, being illiterate men, ignorant of the English tongue, whereof many
do complain, and thereby may be incapable to make their just defense: and if
any did appeal whether the remedy may prove worse than the disease, considering
how difficult it will be for a poor man (disabled of means to defray necessary
charges incident thereto) to recall and annihilate that sentence or judgment
given be it never so injurious, the very Fifts allowed the ejected Ministers
Wives by the Act of Parliament being either denied them or allowed according to
the Sequestrators undervaluations, whereby they are so far disabled of means to
appeal that many of them are ready to perish for want of bread. 4. That these
triennial powers are of dangerous consequence, if the persons entrusted misuse,
non-use, or abuse their power, and those several powers continuing for three
years may prove a temptation for honest men to act contrary to their
Principles: wherefore it has been the wisdom of Commonwealths to prevent
those inconveniences by changing their powers often, and not giving them too
much power at once, or giving them but a short time to act, the better to mind
them that their power is not perpetual, and that they must shortly give an
account of their stewardships, for at the the third years end the oppressor may
be so rich and powerful, It is worthy to be remembered that these 3 latens od^um
juvenile concilium, and P^^vatum lucrum, ove^threw the flourishing estate of
the Roman Empire.
and the oppressed so poor and unable, that the party injuring may easily
suppress and silence the cry of the party injured, whereras Judges have their
Commissions but qua^ diuse been gesserint or durante been placito; the Council
of State continues but for a year without new election; and all Mayors,
Sheriffs, and Bailiffs, are annually chosen and appointed, and liable to give
an account of their actions in the precedent year of their power, and it is
likewise desired to be considered that oppression and the abuse of powers have
been the great billows of the several wars and commotions not only in Wales
but also in this whole nation.


The Civil power by the said Act vested in the Commissioners is a Power 1 To
be Arbitrators. 2 To be a Committee of Indemnity.


Arbitrators in these words, A power to inquire and redress high misdemeanors,
oppressions, and injuries, often escaping unpunished, because of remoteness
from London, and want of means in the party Complaining to be redressed by due
course of Law, and the persons complaining, and Complayneds submission, under
their Hands and Seals to determine the same.

It is humbly observed, Quicquid ^gas prudenter agas and respice finem sapiens
incipit a sine
1. That upon this power of inquiring and redressing, the party complained on,
may by this power be compelled to submit, or not; if not, this power is for no
other use than to occasion expense of time and moneys, in attendance upon
summons; and in case the Commissioners therein named, have no power to try any
matter by bill, indictment, information, or original writ, or by verdict,
demurrer, or examination of Witnesses on oath, or to force the performance of
their Adwards; this power must needs prove useless, troublesome, and
chargeable; and that which can attain to no reasonable end, the Law rejects as
a thing inutile and useless. 2. If the party complained upon may by this act
be compelled to submit, then the Justices of Assize, and of Peace, offices are
swallowed up by this power, and without verdict, causes always determinable by
verdict are adjudged; which brigeth a contest betwixt the Judges and Justices
power and the Commissioners, Vide the Lord Cooks Exposition of the 29th Chapter
of Magna Charta in his 2 part Insti^utes fo. 51 concerning the arbitrary
proceeding of Empson and Dudley who were justly executed for it.
their jurisdiction being not distinguished, and suitors thereby confounded, and
liable to unnecessary charges and trouble; and by such a power, an Arbitrary
power of a Star Chamber might probably be exercised, judgments and decrees
attained, and the ancient way of trials by jury destroyed; the Commissioners
(those that act) being not bred in the Laws, and therefore not so competent to
judge of Adwards, and penal Laws, as Judges are, neither are the
Commissioners (as ludges be) upon their Oaths, in discharging this great
trust, for any thing appearing in the said act; and by the Law all Arbitrators
ought to be indifferently chosen: the persons named in the said Act were not
chosen by the Countries, who were ignorant thereof until the Act was
published, most of the Counties having no Representatives in Parliament to
speak for them at the passing thereof, who have since declared their dislike of
the execution thereof.


It is observed, 3 That remoteness from London is not much more from any parts
of Wales, than from some parts of Wales to those places where the Commissioners
meet, and the uncertainty and unfrequency of their meetings, extraordinary
delays and excessive fees, have given cause for many to believe that this
course is the remotest and most chargeable way for redressing of grievances.


As to their power of Committee of Indemnity, it is likewise humbly observed,
1 That the party Complaining, upon the Complayneds refusal to submit to the
Commissioners Arbitration, may receive encouragement to implead the party
Complained before the Commissioners as Committee of Indemnity, who may as
Committee of Indemnity (though not as Arbitrators) enforce submission and
obedience. What has happened there this three last years of that nature, is
not proper to be here incerted, since the Act of Oblivion has pardoned both
the offenses and offenders. Qui facit per alium facit per se. And Act of
Parliament that a man shall be Judge in his own cause is a void Act.
2 The Act of Oblivion having ended most matters properly determinable by the
Committee of Indemnity there, the continuance of that power can prove for no
other use, than to inincourage litigious persons to molest their neighbors;
and indeed nothing is properly determinable before them but what must relate to
those that now act under them, by color of their several powers, Military,
Civil, and Ecclesiastical. 3 Those of Southwales have the command of the
Military power now on foot there; the power of Justices of Peace, Commissioners
for Propagation, for Arbitration, and Indemnity; Commissioners of monthly
Assessments, and of Sequestrations of Papists and Delinquents Estates, and for
the most part of very near kin and alliance to each other; Lessors and Lessees
by their near friends and agents of the most and best Ecclesiastic Promotions
and Sequestered Estates there, the power Civil, Martial, and Ecclesiastic, in
the same persons, subservient to one another, to the too hasty and visible
improvement of particular men's fortunes; and how these ways of accumulating
all these powers in thirteen Counties, into the hands of a few particular
persons (upon any pretense whatsoever) are consistent with the wisdom and
policy of a State, and the welfare of Wales, is humbly left to your honors
grave consideration. 4 It is worth the taking notice of, that those persons
from Wales, that appear in soliciting the continuance of this Act, are (for the
most part) either persons formerly nominated in the said Act, or Perners of the
profit of the Ecclesiastic revenue, or having relation to those that enjoy the
same. And it is humbly desired, that the worthy Members of Parliament will take
notice of the carriage of three of the itinerant Approbationers at the
Parliament Door, Friday the 25 of March instant, to beg the renewing of the
Act, and whether it better becomed them to be preaching the word in Wales,
where there is a scarcity of Preachers, than to spend their time in London, to
solicit the continuance of their former power and advantage.


Touching the ecclesiastical powers.
It is humbly prayed it may be considered whether the Commissioners named in the
said Act walked with such rigidness in the ejecting of the former Ministers,
and Schoolmasters, that small offenses of 10 or 20 years standing were freshly
arreigned as Capital crimes and small crimes unpardonable, without respects to
their abilities, parts, and readiness to conform, and become more serviceable
for the future to the Church and State under the present established
government, and whether humane prudence, if not Christian Charity should have
induced them to continue the most able, conformable, and best qual^fied of
them, that never personally acted against the Parliament, at least wise, until
they could provide better in their rooms, and not to leave the Country naked,
and not above three or four to supply some Counties, and whether there be 700
parishes besides Chapels of ease in Southwales, and above 600 of them
unsupplied, to the famine of the word of God, and that many of the Itinerants,
and Schoolmasters, now employed and suffered to officiate, be not more
scandalous than some of those ejected, and some that bore arms against the
Parliament, and a Papist in the town of Brecknock that keeps school, and
whether Jesuits and Seminary Priests were not discharged in Monmouthshire,
without being proceeded against according to the Law of the Land.

Southwales and County of Monmouth lodged with the Honorable Committee of
Plundered ministers may more fully appear.

John Gunter reported before he was summoned to answer the same, or had a Copy
thereof. The particulars and Reply lodged by the Petitioners with the honorable
Committee, (whereupon the Petitioners craved a Commission to examine Witnesses)
left out of the Report, though once ordered to be reported; And this Report
made before any one Witness examined, or Commission issued forth. And until
Commissions be issued forth, and Witnesses examined, whereby matter of fact may
appear, It is humbly lose to your Honors consideration, whether your Honors
will think fit to continue the same powers on the same persons, since their
proceedings for the last 3 years have given so little satisfaction to the
Country and the State, in relation to the vast revenues there received.

Proposalls humbly offered touching the future disposal of the power given by
the said Act.
1. It is therefore humbly offered to your Honors grave Consideration, whether
or no it be not more of public convenience, That the power Ecclesiastic
given by the said Act be vested in the honorable Committee for Plundered
Ministers, the Lords Commissioner^ of the Great Seal of England for the time
being, and Sir John Thorowgood, and other the Trustees named in an Act of the
8th of June, 1649. Entitled, An Act for providing Maintentanance for Preaching
Ministers, and other piou^ uses, in the same manner as it is already in England
versted upon the said honorable persons, being persons of known integrity and
honor, and not of such personal relations in Wales, with such special power
and direction therein for the better carrying on and managing of so great and
weighty a work, as to your Honors wisdom shall seem meet. 2. That as to the
power given by the said Act to the Commissioners therein named to Act as
Committee of Indemnity, for as much as the Parliament have by their several
Acts of the 23. of June, and the 8. of October 1652. vested the same in Samuel
Moyer Esquire; and other the Commissioners therein named, as well in England as in
Wales; It is humbly left to consideration, whether the same power may not be
still continued in the said persons. 3. As to the power given by the said Act
for Arbitration, For as much as the Parliament have appointed Judges, Justices
of Peace, and other Magistrates in Wales, and elsewhere, to execute the Laws of
the Land by safe and settled rules, entrusted in discreet persons bred in the
knowledge of the Law; It is likewise left to consideration, whether the same
power may not still continue in them, and no otherwise, in the same manner of
formerly.


FINIS.

