Certain Quaeres propounded, and sent by the Divines of Oxford to the Synod
now assembled at Westminster, desiring their Resolutions upon them, concerning
the Oath published now to be taken.
I. WHether the imposing the second clause in this Oath upon a man's Consciencc
concerning the Plot lately discovered do not very much resemble the damnable
Inquisition, seeing it compels a man to be his own Acouser?

II. What is meant by that equivocating term, namely, According to my
vocation, in the fourth clause?

III. Wether I may lawfully, and with a good Conscience swear that the two
Houses have taken up just and lawful defensive Arms? whether (according to
their Protestation lately taken) they do endeavor to defend the Protestant
Religion according to the Law established seeing that there amongst them some
part of it is reviled and scoffed at without reproof, and also a Synod of
Divines called to alter the frame of this Church government (and using the
Parliaments own words) to frame it nearer to the Discipline of the Kirk of
Scotland?

IV. Whether by taking this Oath, we do not renounce our former Oath taken in
the late Protestation, namely, to maintain, His Majesty's now endangered
Person, His decaying Honor, and His despised Prerogative, seeing we swear to
fight against the Company where His Person is, and against those raised by His
Authority?

V. Whether all the Kings Army be Papists, or what part of it, or where the
Popish Army is that we must see disbanded before we lay down our Arms?

VI. Whether the King do declare himself ready to maintain the Popish
Religion, or the Protestant Religion establisbed by Law in this Kingdom, and
why we may not believe him?

VII. Whether the Protestant Religion now established by Law in this Kingdom,
be the true Protestant or no, and what Protestant Religion it is that I must
swear to maintain?

VIII. Whether I may lawfully and with a safe conscience swear that clause in
the Oath That to the utmost of my power I will assist all other persons that
shall take this oath, in whatsoever they shall do in pursuance of it?

All these Quaeres being fully answered, and our consciences being well
satisfied by sufficient Reason and Scripture, we shall be as willing as any
other to take this Oath, or any other that may conduce to the good and
happiness of this Kingdom.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, 1643.


