A SERMON Preached at the CHURCH OF St. Mary in Nottingham: TO THE SOCIETY FOR
Reformation of Manners. On July the 6th. being the usual Lecture-Day. By DANIEL
CHADWICK Vicar of Arnhall, and one of the Lecturers there.

Malachy 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another.
London: Printed for John Richards Bookseller in Nottingham, School.

To all that were Auditors; But more especially to the Gentlemen of the Society
for Reformation of Manners, in the Town and County of Nottingham.
THOUGH I must, and I Hope ever shall, readily own my Self an Encourager of
this Happy Work of Reformation; yet durst I never think my Self Worthy to be a
Leader as to this weighty Affair in this Place.

BUT as GOD has been pleased to Honor You, by Calling You forth to Engage in,
and Manage this generous, and difficult Undertaking; so it is You who (under
GOD) called Me forth (though very unworthy) to this (more than ordinary)
Employment. And I acknowledge my Self much bound to GOD, and You all, for doing
Me this Honor; as also for Your kind Acceptance of this Mean Service.

AND as it was at Your Request that I Preached, so that I now Publish this
Discourse; not that I think my Self able to add any Thing to the Labors of
those Worthies who have gone before Me in this Way; but to satisfy You, and to
let them and the World know, That there are others (as well as themselves
(though an Hundred Miles distant from them) who are hearty Well-wishers to that
Blessed Design, which they of that Renowned City have set on Foot; and even, to
Admiration succesfully managed and promoted; I say promoted;

SINCE it must be thankfully acknowledged, That it was some Sparks from their
Holy-Fire, which have warmed, and inflamed us in this colder Climate.

AND if this Mite may signify any Thing as to this Sacred Treasury, I humbly,
and thankfully offer it, and the Lord Almighty accept, and prosper it,

NOW Sirs: That GOD would stand by, and strengthen your Hands, and Hearts; may
increase Your number; may stir up all Sorts, and Orders of Men to help at this
dead-lift: May all Prejudices be laid aside, our Differences Composed, our
Hearts, Heads, and Hands United against this common, and dangerous Enemy to
GOD, and His Church ( viz. Looseness, and Profaneness) may Holiness,
Righteousness, and Sobriety be Encouraged and Practiced by us all, is the
Earnest Request of,

SIRS, Your affectionate Friend, and faithful Servant Daniel Chadwick.

A SERMON FOR Reformation of Manners, etc.
PSALM 144. Latter Part of the Last Verse. Yea, Happy is the People, whose GOD
is the Lord.


DAVID in the beginning of this Psalm, having praised GOD for the many Favors
vouchsafed to his Person; does in this Latter Part, Pray for further Favors,
not toward Himself only, but His People also, Ver. 11, etc. And having
enumerated diverse Temporal Blessings contributing thereunto; He, in this last
Verse, concludes by way of Epiphonema, or Acclamation: Happy is the People that
is in such a Case.

AND the Truth is, That though the Blessings forementioned are not necessary to
render a Person Happy, yet are they requisite to make a People Happy; since
it is apparent, That a Person, if truly Holy, may be truly Happy, although he be
Poor, afflicted, and despised; but so cannot a People be said to be, unless
they be flourishing, and prosperous, and blessed with Peace, and Plenty, with
Grandeur, and Renown.

BUT yet that David might not seem altogether to forget GOD, and Himself in
this Matter; He tells us further; That though this be a great, yet not the
greatest; no, nor the only Happiness; and though a People enjoy these good
Things, yet are they not to acquiesce here, but should look further, and
higher, and that is, to have GOD to be their LORD: Yea, says He, Happy is the
People, whose GOD is the LORD.

WHICH Words are spoken by way of Correction, or Revocation; yet not absolutely
(as flatly denying any Happiness in those forementioned Temporals.) But rather
Comparatively; that is, That there is somewhat before them; not unlike that
Expression of our Savior in the Gospel, Luke 11.28. Yea rather, blessed are
all they, who hear the Word of GOD, and keep it. Whence this Conclusion offers
it self.

THAT the Enjoyment of GOD as our GOD, is that, and that only which renders a
People truly and completely Happy: Temporals conduce much toward a Peoples
Felicity, and ought therefore thankfully to be acknowledged; yet Temporals
without Spirituals, cannot Effect it; but where Temporals, and (especially)
Spirituals meet together, that Nation is blessed indeed, as Moses tells us, Deuteronomy.
4.7, 8. For what Nation is there so great, who has GOD so nigh unto them, as
the LORD our GOD is in all Things that we call upon Him for? And what Nation is
there so great, that has Statutes, and Judgments, so Righteous as all this
Law, which I set before you this Day? And David also, Psalm. 33.12. Blessed is
the Nation whose GOD is the LORD; and the People whom He has chosen for His
own Inheritance.

BY Way of Explication, we shall briefly Enquire,

1. WHAT this true, and complete Happiness is? Ans. It Is an Aggregation of all
good Things: It consists not in any, nor in many, nor in any sort of Good; but
in an Affluence of all, and every good Thing so far as the Nature, or State of
a Person does require.

2. WHAT is it to enjoy GOD, or to have GOD to be our LORD? Ans. He is in a
Sense, the LORD of all Men and Creatures, in general; Acts 10.36. But of some
in Particular; and more especially, of those in Covenant with Him; whom Moses
calls a separated People, Exoch 33.16. And a People nigh unto Him, and to whom
GOD is said to be nigh: As Deuteronomy. 7.4. The one by those Signs of His Presence;
His Holy Word, and Ordinances; and the other, by a suitable, and becoming
Conversation.

3. WHAT is that Happiness, which is thus Transcendent? Or wherein does it
exceed all other Happiness? Ans. This is that Happiness which reaches the
Church, as well as State; nay this is the Defense of the one, and the other,
the Palladium of a Kingdom: The very Heathens judged themselves safe, whilst
they kept their Tutelar Gods among them; and what need that People fear, who
can engage the LORD to be their GOD? Consult at your leisure, Isa. 33.16. Ezekiel.
35.10. Psalm 46.5, 6, 7. Zech. 2.5. for this Purpose, Yea,

THIS does extend to Men's Souls, as well as Bodies: A Nation, or Person, may
have Peace, and Plenty; and yet, if not Peace with GOD, and Peace in their own
Souls, they are far from this Happiness; nay

THIS will fetch in all other Blessings so far as shall be convenient for that
People: Godliness is profitable to all Things, having the Promises of this
Life, and of a better: 1 Timothy 4.8. And our Savior gives us his Word, That if
we seek the Kingdom of GOD, and His Righteousness, in the first Place, all
other Things shall be added, Mat. 6.33. Yea, further

THIS will engage GODS secret, and effectual Blessing upon all we are, and
have, and do, without which Prosperity is not useless only, but Pernicious;
being one of those four Evil-daughters brought forth by good Mothers: Truth
begets Hatred, Security Danger, Familiarity Contempt, Prosperity Pride, and
forgetfulness of GOD, and our Selves. And lastly,

THIS is that Happiness which will render us not only completely, but eternally
Happy; and when the shining, and dazzling Glory, and grandeur of this World
shall be in its Wane, This shall be in its Full: As David's assures us, Psalm
73.22, 23.

4. HOW comes this to pass, That a Religious Person or People are thus Happy
above all others? Ans. It Is partly from the Blessed Nature of GOD; and partly
from the Happy Nature, and Tendency of Religion.

FROM the Nature of GOD, and more particularly from His Holiness, and Justice:
From His Holiness, GOD loves every thing that is GOD-like: Psalm 11.7. The
Righteous LORD loves Righteousness: And His Justice calls for it, He has
promised a Reward to every good, and virtuous Person, and People.

NOW as to Persons, their Reward is not always given in to them here; because
(as was hinted) there is another Life which will be a more proper Season for
Rewards: But as to People, or Societies, they must be either rewarded in this
Life, or not at all, since they shall be dissolved, as such, in this World, and
are therefore incapable of a Reward in the other World: And

FROM the Nature of Religion: Solomon tells us, That Righteousness exalts a
Nation, Prove. 14.34. This is the true Interest, and Glory of a People, 1 Samuel
4.21. And should GOD have no Respect or Reward for Virtue, yet must that People
be Happy; since every Virtue, and Branch of Piety does apparently conduce to
their Welfare, and Prosperity: But I hasten to Application.

WHICH shall be directed to all in General; but to you Gentlemen of the Society
for Reformation in particular: GOD has made us an Happy People, as to
Temporals; We have (the Lord be praised) a good, and gracious King; a renowned
Hero for his Valor, and Virtue; a Real, (not only a Titular) Defender of our
Faith. We live under, and are blessed with as Happy a Government, as any Nation
under Heaven (did we but know our own Happiness;) we are ruled by Laws, and not
the Lusts of Men: We have Peace abroad, and Peace at home; our Swords are
beaten into Plow-shares, and our Spears into Pruning Hooks, and England is like
Israel in those Halcion Days of Solomon, 1 Kings 4.25. Every one sitting under
his own Vine, and eating the Fruit of his own Fig Tree, Eating, and Drinking,
and making Merry: No leading into Captivity; nor any just complaining in our
Streets: Our Coin is (almost to Admiration) rendered Current: Nor is it wanting,
upon any good Occasion: Our Trade is open, and Thriving; our Church and State
Prosperous and Flourishing.

GOD has sent us Primitive Bishops, our Judges are restored as at the first,
and our Councellers and Senators as at the beginning: Our Holy Religion (as
Reformed) together with our Liberties, and Properties, are secured: Immorality
and Profaneness is disowned and disgraced: Piety and Virtue countenanced and
advanced: And we have not only a Freedom, but Encouragement to be as good and
virtuous as we Will: And is not that People Happy, that is in such a Case?

IT has been a common Saying, That if a Bridge was made over the Sea, all the
Women in Europe would come over into England; and I am apt to think that the
Men would not be long after them, in regard of those many singular Privileges,
and advantages we (both Men and Women) in this Happy Kingdom are Partakers of
as well for Souls, as Bodies, above all other People and Countries in the World.

BUT, Sirs, Though this be a great Happiness, and such Blessings (whether
National, or Personal) are thankfully to be acknowledged by all who enjoy them;
yet is it not the greatest Happiness, or that wherein we are to acquiesce;
since the Text informs us, That there is somewhat more, and better to be looked
after than all those amount to: Yea, Happy (says the Text) is the People,
whose GOD is the LORD.

AND therefore, if we would be truly and completely Happy: And would secure
this Happiness to our Selves, and entail it on our Posterity; let us, by all
Means, engage GOD to vouchsafe his most gracious, and favorable Presence in
the midst of us: For which Purpose great Care must be taken for the removal of
whatever may Occasion his Departure from us; may stop the Current of his
Favors toward us; or draw down his Frowns upon us.

THIS is a great Truth, That GOD never leaves a Person, or People, till they
first leave Him: Nor will He ever Commence Suit against them, till He be
apparently wronged by them: And if the LORD have a Controversy with any, it is
not for any Trivial Matter, Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. The LORD has a Controversy with
the Inhabitants of the Land: Why? Because there is no Truth, nor Mercy, nor
Knowledge of GOD in the Land: But Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and
Stealing, and Committing Adultery, and Blood touches Blood; therefore shall
the Land mourn.

SIN is of a separating Nature, Isa. 59.2. It Is that dark, and thick Cloud
which eclipseth the light of GODS Countenance from us; and Wall of Partition
which interrupts all comfortable Correspondences between Heaven and Earth, Jer.
5.25. This has ever been the only Make-bait, and most destructive Thing since
the World began; and we may take it for granted, That there is some Accursed
Thing in the midst of us; when either GODS Blessings are withdrawn from us, or
His Judgments sent down upon us, Josh. 7.13.

LET us therefore, by all Means, rid our Hands of Sin, (at least, of all
crying, clamorous, ruining and scandalous Sins) and let us do it with what
Speed we can; since though we may be secure, yet shall we never be Safe, till
this be effected: And the only way to accomplish it is, By true Repentance for
Sin past; and a thorough Amendment as to what is amiss for the Future: Nor will
the one without the other, answer our Design: We must look back-ward, and we
must look forward also, if we expect that GOD should look favorably upon us,
and become our LORD.

1. LET us look back, and consider how we, and our Forefathers have carried
it, and we shall find Matter enough for Repentance: Since it is too apparent
that both they, and we have greatly offended, and provoked GOD: And, indeed,
all Men, and all sorts of Men amongst us must cry guilty, and have Cause to
join in that acknowledgment, Dan. 9.7. O LORD, to us belongs Confusion of
Face; to our Kings, Queens, Princes; yea, to our Counselors, Senators,
Ministers, Magistrates, Judges, Gentry, Officers and People, because we have
sinned against Thee: Yea, all Parties will be found Transgressors on this
Account.

FOR whatever we have pretended, professed, or promised to the Contrary; yet
when once we are gotten uppermost, we have shamefully forgotten GOD and our
selves: And though we have been ready enough to complain of others, and to cry
out, what have such, and such done? Yet would it have been far more becoming
the very best of us to have looked nearer Home, and to have said, LORD, what
have we done? Since as our Savior says, in the like Case; Let him that is
without Sin (whether Person, or Party) cast the first Stone, John 8.7.

AND therefore, there is great occasion of Praying (over and over again)
according to that Petition in the Litany: Remember not, O LORD, our Offenses,
nor the Offenses of our Forefathers; neither take thou Vengeance of our Sins,
but spare us, O LORD, etc.

AND this, Sirs, is the most likely way to lay a good Foundation upon which we
may build our Future Hopes and Expectations of further Blessings, viz. The
Evening of all our old Accounts between GOD and us: Being well assured (as our
late most Rd. Tillot. v. 1. p. 131.
Father in GOD tells us) That general and crying Sins of a Nation, if not
prevented by a serious and general Repentance, never escape public Judgments:
GOD may, says he, defer His Wrath for a Time, and give a People longer Space
for Repentance: He may stay till the Iniquities of a Nation be ripe, and full,
but, sooner, or later, His Vengeance will overtake them; and usually, the
longer Punishment is deferred, it is the heavier when it is Executed: And as we
are to look back: so

2. WE are to look forward toward a Reformation: As we are to consider what we
have done in Order to the making of our Peace as to Sins past; so must we, no
less, consider, what we are to do in Order to the maintaining of that Peace for
the Future: And this is what I especially aim now at; In Order to the dispatch
of which, I shall endeavor, with what Brevity I can, to give Satisfaction to
these Four Demands.

1. WHO must Reform?

2. WHAT should be Reformed?

3. WHAT Inducements are there to this Work? And

4. WHAT Means are proper for this Purpose?

1. WHO, in this Case, are to become Reformers?

Ans. All in general; though some, in particular, are more concerned; and
therefore, what they said to the Men of Israel, Acts 21.18. I say, in GODS Name
to You all, Men of England, Help; Magistrates, Help; Ministers, Help;
Gentlemen, Help; Officers, Help; yea, all good People, Help: For, as there are
not any among us, but we are more, or less concerned; so neither is there any,
but may, one way or other, become serviceable on this Account.

MAGISTRATES by their Power, and Authority, becoming Terrors to Evil doers, and
a Praise to them that Do well: Ministers, by their exemplary Lives, and sound
Doctrine; when the one is Lightning, and the other Thunder (as was said of that
great Nazianzen). Gentlemen, by their good Examples, and the laying out
themselves, their Parts, their Estates and Interest, for GOD, and the good of
others. Officers, by being Vigilant, and Industrious to detect, and delate
Offenders, and bring them to Condign Punishment: (And what might not a
Constable, or Churchwarden do, if faithful to GOD, and to their Trust, or made
any Conscience of their Oaths, and Obligations?)

NOR may Private Persons stand out, or be Excused, since even such also may
Help by their earnest Prayers; by their convincing and gaining Conversations;
by the well-ordering of Themselves and Families; by comforting, and
strengthening the Hearts and Hands of each other, by Christian Reproof, Mat.
3.16. 1 Pet. 2.12. Ephesians. 5.11.
wholesome Instructions, and friendly Admonitions; and in some Cases, and at
some times, by Information against notorious and obstinate Offenders.

NOR let any be shye of, or boggle much at that Word or Work of Information on
such account as this; since, however scandalous, and infamous, that Term has
appeared in these late Days, whilst some have been Agents for the Devil, and
made it their Design to Ruin Men, and enrich themselves: Yet it is no less
honorable, and commendable, to Act for GOD, and for the Salvation of Men; nor
are we without very good Warrant from GODS Word, in so doing; Having both
Precepts and Examples in this Matter.

Matthew. 18.17. Tell it to the Church; If He be stubborn, make his Offense
Public: Yea, not to the Church only, but to the State also; not inform the
Minister only, but the Magistrate too: Deuteronomy. 13.8. Thou shall not Consent unto
him (that is, to any who should entice thee to Idolatry) nor hearken to him;
neither shall thine Eye pity him (though a near; yea, the nearest Relation)
neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou conceal Him: To the End that fit
Censures, and temporal Chastisements may be seasonably applied for the
seasonable Prevention of his Eternal Ruin: Nay, though Estate and Life of a
Son lay apparently at Stake, yet were the Parents themselves (among the Jews)
obliged to this Office of an Informer, Deuteronomy. 21.19. Which how severe soever it
seemed to be to the Person; yet was it a kindness to the People, as ver. 21.
That all Israel may hear, and fear. And as we are not without Precept; so nor
without Example.

SINCE we find some of no mean Rank or Quality; either for Greatness, or
Goodness, who have gone before us in this way, Ezra 9.1, 2. We read that some
of the Princes themselves (not the common Rabble, but Men of chief Note among
the Jews) did not think it unworthy of, or below themselves to turn Informers
in a Case of this Nature; when the Honor of GOD, and the Welfare of his Church
and People called them forth thereunto.

NAY, and what is further observable; their great Impartiality and undaunted
Courage; for they spared no Sort, nor any Persons of any Sort, of what Rank or
Quality soever: They balk neither Priest nor Levite; no nor Princes, nor
Rulers; but accuse them as chief among the Transgressors: Which minds me of
what is Reported concerning that great Captain Epaminondas.

THAT when his Enemies envied his Greatness and Virtues, they resolved to
humble him, by thrusting an Inferior and mean Office upon him, to which he
readily submitted, declaring, That before he quitted it, he doubted not but
(through his well-management of it) to render it as honorable, useful and
commendable as any other Office in that Commonwealth; and the Application
thereof is very easy: But

2. WHAT must we thus endeavor to Reform?

Ans. Whatever is contrary, and destructive to sound Doctrine, or good Manners:
Whatever apparently opposes the Laws of GOD or Man: Whatever is notoriously
dishonorable to GOD; a reproach to our Religion, and destructive to our Church
or State, whether they be Matters of Opinion or Practice, should be amended.

IF any Opinions have a direct or indirect tendency, either toward shaking the
Foundations of Christianity; or to debauch the Lives of those who profess it;
we are, in our respective Places, strenuously to oppose them; as ever we hope
to enjoy this Happiness in the Text: And more Particularly,

IF any shall be so bold as to declare, That there is no such Thing as
Religion; but that it is a mere Fancy and Conceit, a State-Trick, or a piece of
Priestcraft: Or that Men may be saved by any Religion, and that therefore it is
no Matter what Religion any Man is of, as some have done.

IF any shall decry our First-Principles, and ridicule our Profoundest
Mysteries of Christianity, attacking the Holy, and Blessed Trinity: The
Divinity, Eternity, the Incarnation and Satisfaction of our only Lord and
Savior (the very Basis of all our Hope, and Comfort in this World, and that to
come) denying (as St. Peter says, 2 Epist. 2.1.) The very LORD that bought
them; as others have done.

IF any shall (on any pretense whatever) advance, and justify that Impostor
Mahomet; and shall vilify or degrade our Holy Jesus; telling us, That many
Historians (but Names not one) assures us that Mahomet was an honest Man; and
that his Design of pretending himself to be a Prophet was only to Restore the
belief of the Unity of a Godhead, which, at that Time, was extirpated and lost
among the Christians by their new, upstart Doctrines of the Trinity and
Incarnation; as some now do. Once more,

IF any shall cry up Natural Religion in Opposition to all Revealed Religion;
or tell us, That we must be guided by the Light within us, and not the Word
without us; and that we are to walk by Reason, and not Faith: If they shall
dispute the Divinity or Authority of the Sacred Scriptures, or any Part
thereof; if they shall Preach any other Doctrine than what is fetched from
thence, we must Reject them (says St. John 2 Epist. ver. 10, 11.) Let him be
accursed (says St. Paul, again, and again, Gal. 1.8, 9.) Pool.
Which Text (says an Expositor) looks dreadfully, not only upon the Jew, or
Papists; but on many called Protestants amongst us at this Day: And Oh that
ever these Things should be told in Gath, or published in Askelon; and that
there should be found amongst our selves such filthy Birds, as thus shamefully
to defile their own Nests!

BUT shall these be so bold as to belch forth these most horrid and abominable
Blasphemies against our most excellent Religion, and shall we hold our Peace?
Oh how shall we answer it to our great LORD and Master?

WOULD Turks, Pagans, Infidels endure such Affronts as to their False-Worship,
and Dung-hill-Gods; and shall we be unconcerned? Or if we can, will GOD endure
it? No sure; He commends the Church of Ephesus for withstanding; and condemns
the Church of Pergamos for tolerating such dangerous Persons, and pestilent
Doctrines as these, Rev. 2.1, 2, 3. and ver. 14, etc.

AND as these Doctrines, so all loose and immoral Practices are to be
redressed: Oh how Epidemical, how impudent and brazen-faced are all sorts of
Vices, yea, even of the most enormous, among us? Not acted in Corners only, but
on the Housetop, nor in the Dark, or in the Night only; but at Noonday, and in
the Face of the Sun; into what Places, or Houses can we go; or into what
Company can we, ordinarily, fall, where we do not probably, see, or hear
something of this Nature?

HOW commonly is that most Holy and Fearful Name of GOD blasphemed by Swearing
(and perhaps by Forswearing too) by horrible Cursings and hellish Execrations?
How is His Holy Day openly profaned, by Buying and Selling, Tippling and
Drinking; Idle-visiting, and needless Traveling: How grossly do Men abuse
themselves, and GODS good Creatures by Rioting and Drunkenness; by Chambering
and Wantonness, against the known Laws of GOD and Man? And how rarely are these
Offenders enquired after, or laid hold upon? Oh that these Matters wanted
Proof. But,

3. WHAT Inducements are there to excite to this difficult and weighty Work?

Ans. WE have an unquestionable, and a loud Call thereunto;

1. FROM GOD himself, and that both as to his Word and Works: This is the
Language of his commanding, promising, threatening Word, this is the Tenor of
Law and Gospel, to Repent and Amend: And if we expect his Blessing, we must
hearken to his Word: And his faithful Ministers have been Calling, and Crying
aloud in GODS Name; yea warning, and beseeching Men (sometimes with Tears) to
break off from Sin, to be reconciled unto GOD that they may be saved.

AND as by his Word, so by his Works: Sometimes by very dreadful Judgments;
Fire, Plague, War at home and abroad, and his Rod, as it has a voice, so this
is its especial Errand, Reformation, Lev. 26.23, etc. Amos 4.6, etc.

AND sometimes again by signal, and singular Mercies and Deliverances, formerly
and lately; How often, Sirs, have we been as Brands snatched out of the Fire?
And wherefore is all this? Surely, not that we should grow Loose and Wanton,
and Profane; such a return is most abhorrent, Jer. 7.10. Should we make no
better Improvement of his Blessings than such; we may justly expect the like
Measure from GOD which we find threatened against that untoward People, Judge.
11.12, 13. That He will deliver us no more: Let us rather consider those Words
of Ezra 9.13. Shall we again break GODS Commandments after such Deliverances as
these?

2. THE King, and our Late Queen of Blessed Memory (who being Dead, yet
speaks) call by those Pious and Strict Injunctions to put the Laws in
Execution against all scandalous Offenders, and more particularly against those
crying Abominations of Cursing, and Swearing, of Sabbath-breaking, Uncleanness,
Common-Tipling, and Drunkenness: And surely all Loyal Subjects will obey the
Laws, and Commands of their Superiors, especially when so apparently for the
good of all in general, and of every one in Particular: Yea, since these things
have been inculcated by an especial and moving Proclamation, at the Instance of
the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled.

3. THE Welfare of Church, and State calls for it; since neither the one, or
other; neither King nor Kingdom, can be long in Safety, unless this Work be
promoted: Sin will prove a Worm at the Root of the most flourishing Kingdom;
and the Experience of all Ages, as well as Scripture, has made this Good: All
along the Old Testament, we find the interchangeable Providence of GOD toward
His People Israel ever-more suited to their Manners; and they were constantly
Prosperous or afflicted, as Piety and Virtue flourished, or declined among them.

NOR did GOD use this method toward His own People only, but other Nations
also: The Roman Empire, whilst the Virtues of that People remained firm, was
as strong as Iron, according to that Representation, Dan. 2.33. But upon the
Dissolution of their Manners, the Iron began to be mixed with miry Clay.

FROM whence we may Collect (as our forementioned Reverend Author Observes)
That GOD will evermore Bless a virtuous, and Blast a vicious People; and
therefore if any shall ask that Question, 2 Kings 9.18. Is it Peace? The same
Answer may be returned, which we find ver. 22. What have thou to do with Peace,
so long as Sin is abetted, and allowed of by us?

AND as the Kingdom in general, so the King in Particular is endangered: Nor is
that Threat which looks this way, to be despised, 1 Samuel 12.25. But if ye will
not cease to do wickedly, ye shall be Consumed both ye, and your King; nor is
it all his Guards that can interpose and Defend him from those Dangers which
our Sins expose him unto: And how much the Welfare of these Kingdoms is wrapped
up in the Welfare of our King, I Hope we are not to Learn.

ITS too true, that some may be of another Opinion; and may Conceit that we may
be as well, if not better, without Him: But even these will find that true,
which the Philosopher said on the like occasion, when the Sun is set, it will
be Night notwithstanding all the Stars: Yea,

4. OUR Religion calls: It Is fallen among Thieves, is sore wounded, and in no
small Danger; Her beautiful Face is so defaced, that She can scarcely be known;
exposed to much Contempt, and is dwindled into Froth and Foam: There is indeed,
among some of us, Vox and praeterea nihil; or, as we say, A great Cry, and
little Wool; Forms, and Shows, but little of the Power of Godliness: But as to
the Generality of us, there is neither the one, nor the other; neither Fruit
nor Leaves of Profession to be found.

RELIGION stands on TipToes (as one of our Worthies long ago complained) and
the Glory of this our Israel seems to be on the Threshold, Herbert.
and upon its Departure ( Ezekiel. 9.3.) And woe be unto us, if GOD depart from us,
Hos. 9.12. Nay further,

5. CONSCIENCE Calls: The Vows of GOD are upon every one of us; and as GOD has
obliged us, so have we obliged our selves; and thoughsome of us lie under more
Oaths and Obligations than others; yet have we all solemnly engaged at our
Baptism (which many of us have as solemnly renewed at the Lords Table) not only
to Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, as to our selves: But to Fight under
his Banner, as his faithful Soldiers, against the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil: And how shall we answer the neglect hereof unto GOD?

6. THE present Season, and juncture of Affairs Calls: And that as it is a Time
of great Provocation, as also of great Expectation.

SINS of all Sorts cry aloud from all Corners and Quarters, for Vengeance
against us, and shall we be silent? The Devil and his Agents are exceeding
busy, and shall we sit still? Sleidan in his Commentaries, tells us, That the
Munster Devil was a foolish Devil, because he tempted Men to Looseness and
Uncleanness; whereas, says he, he should rather have tempted them to
Hypocrisy, and shows of Holiness: But had Sleidan lived in our Days, he would
perhaps have changed his Opinion; since the Devil seems to have taken a more
effectual Course for the Advancement of his Kingdom.

FOR though Hypocrisy be a great Sin (as our forementioned Rd. Author
observes) and very odious unto GOD, yet is it not of so pernicious Consequence,
as Profaneness: For Hypocrisy is a more modest way of sinning; it shows some
Reverence to Religion, and does so far own the worth of it, as to acknowledge
that it deserves to be Counterfeited; whereas Profaneness proclaims open War
against it, and endeavors to make a Party to drive it out of the World; so
that the Knife seems to be at the Throat, and therefore speak now, or for ever
hold your Peace.

AND a time of no less Expectation, as it is a Time of Peace, wherein we have
little else to do, but to serve GOD, and our Generation: Inter Arma silent
leges, Wars render Laws unpracticable; but now a Price is put into our Hands;
and GOD forbid that we should become Fools in not knowing and considering it:
Nay, rather let us imitate the Men of Issachar, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. Who were wise,
and had Understanding of the Times, and knew what Israel was to do: And
certainly, as the LORD on this account, has done great Things for us; so GOD,
and good Men expect some return of this Nature from us at this Day: And

7. CHRISTIAN Charity calls: And as to the Souls of Men, exposed manifestly to
utter Ruin by these profligate, and profane Courses: How many wretches are
Posting toward Hell, and there is no visible way, or probable, (excepting
this) to prevent or restrain them? A Minister of the Sword Preaches,
ordinarily far more effectually, than a Minister of the Word. And also

TOWARD many distressed Families, who might live much more quietly and
comfortably, if such Prodigal Husbands (who Riot away abroad, what should
Maintain their Wives and Children at Home) were curbed and restrained. Yea, And
this Charity might reach and relieve the Poor also, who might fare much the
better by the very Penalties, if duly inflicted, on all common Offenders, as
Swearers, Drunkards, Sabbath Breakers, etc.

AND consequently our Towns and Parishes hereby eased (as to some part at
least) of those Burdens and Taxes, which for their Relief, are imposed: And
it is observable (even to admiration) what a short time, in some places, has
effected in this matter: I shall conclude this Particular with what a Reverend
Author says to this purpose, Dr. Ashton.
not unworthy of Consideration.

IT IS a great Sin and Shame, and worthy of the Correction (as well as
Consideration) of the Magistrate; That a Workman or Labourer should be so
extravagant, as to spend the fruits of their Six Day Labors, upon the Seventh
Day, for which the poor Wife and Children must pinch and starve all the Week
after: And when he (whose Duty it was by his honest Labor to provide for his
Charge) has either drunk himself to Death, or for Debt is thrown into Prison,
or by Disorder has disabled himself, then the Parish must bear the burden,
and his honest industrious Neighbors must Cark and Care, be Taxed and Assessed
for his Extravagancy. But

4. WHAT Ways and Means are proper for the promoting of this good Work?

Answ. 1. LET us begin this Work at Home, according to our Savior, Matthew. 7.5.
Let us cast out the Beam out of our own eyes, before we meddle with the Mote in
our Brothers Eye. Let all, but especially Magistrates and Ministers, be careful
to amend what is amiss as to Themselves and Families in the first place:

FOR can a Minister Preach heartily, and without blushing, against that Sin,
which he knows himself (yea, and all his Neighbors also, know him) to be
Guilty of? Romans 2.21. Or, Will a Magistrate break his Shine for haste, to lay
hold on a Drunkard, a Swearer, etc. if he indulge the same in himself?

BUT besides all this, If ever we expect a National Reformation, it must take
its first Rise from our Persons and Families: Since we all know, That Kingdoms
consist of Towns; Towns of Families, and Families of Persons.

2. UNION; Many hands, we say, makes light work; and two, says Solomon, are
better than one, and a threefold Cord is not easily broken, Eccl. 4.12. This
Trade is not to be driven on but by a Joint Stock. It Is not a Work for a few
single Persons; no, nor for some particular Party to Undertake, since it is both
weighty and difficult; and therefore all, whose GOD is the LORD, should join
their Hands, Heads and Hearts together in this matter: And tho we may disagree
in some smaller things, as to matters of Discipline or Modes of Worship, yet is
there no reason why, in this, we should not be unanimous.

VIS unita fortior: Even weak things joined together become strong; and strong
things, without Union, become weak: Satan's Kingdom is not divided; The Devil
and his Agents stick together, Psalm 83.3. etc. Those several Nations, and
different Inteterests, lay aside their private Quarrels and Animosities, and
Confederate against GOD and his People, and so they do at this day: And is it
not high time for us to consult how we may withstand them, as they did on the
like occasion? Mal. 3.16.

AT this Backdoor of our Un-natural Divisions, have all these Mischiefs of
Atheism, Blasphemies, Looseness, and all sorts of Baseness broken in upon us;
and if these Devils be Cast out, it must be by an United Force: Come therefore,
and in pursuance of our Baptismal Covenant, let us, as Christians, join
together; and instead of fighting one against another, let us fight against
these Common Enemies of GOD and his Church, The World, the Flesh and the Devil.

IT was a rare Example which the Poets tell us of, concerning Castor and
Pollux: These Two being Twins, (as they feigned) and the one Born Mortal, and
the other Immortal; Pollux to show his love to his Brother, yielded so far as
to take to himself a part of his Brother's Mortality, and to impart to him as
much of his own Immortality; being better satisfied to enjoy one half
Immortality with the good of his Brother, than a whole one by himself: And was
there but somewhat more of this Brotherly Affection, Self-Denial, and Christian
Condescension, how would this Work of Reformation prosper!

3. RESOLVTION; Such as once put their hands to this Plough, must not think of
looking back: Let us remember the Work is GOD'S, and let us therefore be
neither afraid nor ashamed: Let us (as we may be concerned) mind our Business,
and conclude with Esther, chap. 4. ver. 16. If we perish, we perish: Since as
Luther said (when engaged about the like Work of Reformation); It Is better to
fall with Christ, than to stand with Caesar. And for your encouragement, Ponder
what GOD himself says, Isai. 51.12. I, even I am he, says the LORD, that
comfort you; who art thou that thou should be afraid of a Man that shall
die, and of the Son of Man which shall be made as Grass?

AS also what he said to Ezekiel, chap. 2.6. Son of Man, be not afraid of them,
neither be afraid of their Words, though Briars and Thorns be with thee, and
thou dwell among Scorpions; be not afraid of their Words, neither be dismayed
at their Looks, though they be a rebellious People: And therefore,

4. THERE must be due Consideration as to this Matter; and according to our
Saviors Advice, Luke 14.28. Let us sit down, and think beforehand what this
Undertaking will cost, and let us accordingly lay-in an extraordinary Measure
of Faith, Patience; of Meekness and Self-denial; since this very probably, may
be a Time of great layings out: Such must expect (with the blessed Apostles) to
go through good Report, and bad Report, 2 Cor. 6.8. Frowns, Threats,
Brow-beatings, Scourges of the Tongue (if they escape those of the Hands) yea
whole Loads of Calumnies, and Vollies of hard Names; as Hypocrites, Proud,
Rude, Factious, Singular (and what not) shall certainly attend them.

5. SINCERITY: Be not only Hearty and Resolute, but Upright in your Ends, as to
what you thus do; let the Glory of GOD, the public Welfare, and the Salvation
of Souls be in your Eye: As we must not do the Work of the LORD negligently, so
nor foolishly: Let there be no mixture of Pride, Passion, Hatred, Malice,
Faction or Partiality; The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of GOD,
James 1.20. Nor our own Comfort: But Sincerity (whatever befalls us) will keep
up our Heads and Hearts from sinking, and will readily answer for us before GOD
and all the World, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our
Conscience, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity; not with fleshly Wisdom,
but by the Grace of GOD we have had our Conversation in the World.

6. DISCRETION: The Wisdom of the Serpent must accompany the Innocence of the
Dove: As we must not under-do, so nor over-do, our Christian Work: Solomon's
Caution is not unseasonable, Eccles. 7.16. Be not Righteous overmuch, neither
be thou over-wise; not too severe, inquisitive, or rigid in Censuring, or
punishing beyond Rules of Equity; without due allowances of humane Frailty,
Temptations, or other Circumstances, as to Men's Persons, as to the Places you
inspect, etc. considering that

MEN (especially in Matters of Religion) are very apt to run into extremes; and
as some are too Cold, so others are too Hot: Some drive on heavily, others
furiously: Nor is there any thing (says one) more natural than for extremes in
Religion to beget one another; like the Vibrations of a Pendulum, which the
more violently you swing it one way; the farther will it return to the other:
Oh let Zeal, and Discretion go together!

7. PRAYER and Supplication unto GOD, that great Wheel which sets all the rest
going: In whose Hand are the Tongues, Hands and Hearts of all Men from the
highest to the lowest, together with the Issues of all our Undertakings: And
three Things should we especially crave on this Account.

1. THAT He will vouchsafe more of these stout Champions to assert the Truth,
and to maintain the Principles of our Religion against all who assault, or
undermine it: Hornock.
It Is to be acknowledged (says one) as an especial Act of GODS Providence and
Goodness toward his Church; that in all Ages, as Weeds have sprung up, some
Worthies have been raised, who have not slept but have observed, and choked
them, opposing the spreading Infection by the speedy Application of suitable
and proper Antidotes.

AND the same GOD (his Name be praised) has not left himself without a Witness
in our Days: And therefore, let us Pray, That GOD will send forth more of these
vigilant Laborers into his Vineyard; more burning and shining Lights to dispel
those Fogs, and Clouds of Darkness.

2. THAT He will stir up the King, his Counselors; our Senators, and all in
Authority under him, together with all others (as they may be concerned) to
exert their Power in Order to the restraining of these threatening Disorders in
Church and State; all dangerous Opinions, destructive to true Piety and Virtue;
and all Immoral and Scandalous Practices utterly unbecoming Men, and much more
Christians: As the Apostle directs, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort that first of all,
Prayers and Supplications, and giving of thanks be made for all Men: For Kings
(more particularly) together with all in Authority, that we may lead peaceable
and quiet Lives in all Godliness and Honesty.

3. THAT GOD will vouchsafe an extraordinary measure of his Holy Spirit, and
Presence to direct, assist, and prosper you in this weighty and worthy
Undertaking: What Luthers Friend advised him at the Time of his engaging in
that dangerous and difficult Work of Reformation; I say (in the Name of GOD) to
you of this Society; Abi in Cellam, and dic miserere mei; Implore GODS especial
Mercy and Blessing upon your Persons, Consultations and Endeavors: I shall
conclude with those encouraging Words of David to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22.16.
Arise therefore, and be doing, and the LORD be with you: Amen, Amen. So be it,
O LORD!

FINIS.
Books Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in Cheapside near
Mercers-Chappel.
THe Fountain of Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial Glory; containing Forty Two Sermons on various Texts.

A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine Original, excellent and
immortal Nature of the Soul are opened; its Love and Inclination to the Body,
with the necessity of its Separation from it, considered and improved.

The Method of Grace in bringing home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by the
Father, and accomplished by the Son, through the Effectual Application of the
Spirit unto Gods Elect, being the second Part of Gospel-Redemption.

The Divine Conduct or Mystery of Providence, its Being and Efficacy asserted
and vindicated: All the Methods of Providence in our Course of Life opened,
with Directions how to apply and improve them.

Navigation spiritualized, or a new Compass for Seamen, consisting of Thirty
Two Points of pleasant Observations, profitable Applications, serious
Reflections, all concluded with so many spiritual Poems, etc.

Two Treatises, the first of Fear, the second the Righteous Man's Refuge in the
evil Day.

A Saint indeed, the great Work of a Christian.

A Touchstone of Sincerity, or Signs of Grace, and Symptoms of Hypocrisy,
being the second Part of the Saint indeed.

A Token for Mourners, or boundaries for Sorrow for the Death of Friends.

Husbandry spiritualized: Or the Heavenly use of Earthly Things. All these Ten
by Mr. John Flavel.


