CABALA: SIVE SCRINIA SACRA.

MYSTERIES OF State and Government: IN LETTERS Of illustrious Persons, and
great Agents; in the Reigns of Henry the Eighth, Queen Elizabeth, K: James, and
the late King Charles.

IN TWO PARTS.

In which the Secrets of Empire, and Public manage of Affairs are contained.

With many remarkable Passages no where else Published.

LONDON, Printed for G. Bedel, and T. Collins, and are to be sold at their Shop
at the Middle-Temple-gate in Fleetstreet, 1654.

two figures with a shield between them above an emblem MVNIPICENTIA REGIA 1715
GEORGIV 5 D.G. MAG. BR. PR. ET HI^. REX P.D.
J.P. Sc.


Cabala, Mysteries of State, IN LETTERS of the great MINISTERS of K. James and
K. Charles.

WHEREIN Much of the public Manage of Affairs is related.

Faithfully Collected by a Noble Hand.

LONDON, Printed for M. M. G. Bedell, and T. Collins, and are to be sold at
their Shop at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet, 1654.

The Preface to the Reader.
HEre is published a Piece, not to be matched in Antiquity; a Collection, not
so much of Letters, as of the mysteries of Government, the wisdom, and manage
of Public businesses in the late Reigns, where the great Ministers of State
are presented naked, their Consultations, Designs, Policies, the things done by
them, are exposed to every man's eye, as they were brought forth by themselves.
The most famous of all Modern Historians glories in the helps and advantages he
had above all men else to write; He came (so he tells us) prepared and
furnished from the Cabinets of Princes, Strada.
he had seriously perused, and sifted their Letters and Orders; the Letters of
the Illustrious Persons employed by them, the private Commands, Dispatches, and
Instructions of Embassies; Debates, and Resolutions of Councels, without which
all History must be lame and imperfect.

This was the way to make the causes of actions as visible as their effects,
and without which all Diligence and Faithfulness else will do little. Much of
the History of the last years of King James, and beginnings of King Charles may
be here read. Here the height of the mighty Favorite the Duke of Buckingham
may be taken; The Arts and Subtleties of Spain, of the Conde Gondomar, and the
English-Spanish Party are discovered; the Journey into Spain, breach of the
Spanish, overtures for the French Match, for the renewing Leagues with the
enemies of the Spanish Pride and Universality; the carriage of the
Imperialists, French, Netherlanders, and other Concurrents of those Reigns, are
exactly Related: with the Practices of our home Roman Catholics, and growth of
those who were here called Puritans then; the Secrets of the Court and State;
without any false gloss to writhe, or streighten, to deprave or extenuate,
with more truth and sincerity, then all the Annals can show; where Passion and
Interest sway oftentimes too much, and the cleanest hand makes blots and
stains, carried away with Love or Hatred, to the side or man. Here are no
snares set to catch or inveagle any man's judgment, all things are left clearly
to their own worth and Reputation.

A TABLE OF THE LETTERS Contained In this Collection.
EArl of Sommerset to King James, Page 1. Lord Chancellor Bacon to the King,
31. July, 1617. p. 8 Lord Chancellor Bacon to the King, 2. Januar. 1618. 5
Lord Chancellor Bacon to the Lords, 5 Lord Chancellor Bacon to the Marquess
of Buckingham, 25 March, 1620. p. 10 Lord Chancellor Bacon to the King, the
25. of March, 1620. p. 10 Lord Chancellor Bacon to the Duke, 122 Magdibeg to
the King, 11 A Letter by King James to the Lord Keeper, Bishops of London,
Winton, Rochester, St. David's, and Exeter, Sir Henry Hubbard, and others, 30.
October. 1621. 12 The Archbishop of York to King James. 13 A Letter from Spain
concerning the Princes arrival there, 30. September. 1623. Madrid. 17 The Earl of
Bristol to the Prince touching the Proxies, Madrid. 24 The Earl of Bristol to
Secretary Cottington, April the 15th. 1623. 28. The Earl of Bristol to the
Bishop of Lincoln, August the 20. 1623. p. 20. The Earl of Bristol to the
Bishop of Lincoln, 24. September. 1623. Madrid. 22 The Earl of Bristol to the
Prince, September 24. 1623. Madrid page 26. The Earl of Bristol to the Duke,
the 6. of December, 1623. Madrid, 28 The Earl of Bristol to King James, the 27.
of July, 1624. London. 30 King Charles to the Earl of Bristol, Jan. 21. 1625.
17 The Earl of Bristol to the Lord Conway the 4. of March, 1625. Sherborn. 19
The Lord Conway to the Earl of Bristol, March 21. 1625. 19 Sir Walter Aston to
the Duke. 30 Sir Walter Aston to the Duke, 15. November. 1623. 34 The Duke of
Buckingham to Sir Walter Aston. 34 The Duke of Buckingham to Sir Walter Aston.
36 Sir Walter Aston to the Duke of Buckingham, December 22. 1623. 37 A Memorial
pressing for the Palatinate, etc. given to the King of Spain by Sir Walter
Aston, 19. Jan. 1623. 38 Sir Walter Aston to the Duke, 22. Jan. 1623. 40 Sir
Walter Aston to Secretary Conway, the 22. of January, 1623. 40 Sir Walter Aston
to the Lord Conway. 44 Sir Walter Aston to the Lord Conway, 5. June, 1624. 46
Sir Walter Aston to the Lord Conway, 17. July, 1624. 58 Sir Walter Aston to the
Duke, 20. of October. 1624. 52 Sir Walter Aston to the Duke, the 10. of December,
1624. 165 Sir Walter Aston to the Duke, 10. of December. 1625. 53 Dr. Williams to
the Duke, 54 Williams Lord Keeper to the Duke, 27. July, 1621. 55 The Earl of
South-hamptons Letter to the Bishop of Lincoln, 57 The Lord Keeper to the Duke,
22. July, 1621. 61 The Lord Keeper his answer to the Earl of South-hampton, 2.
August, 1621. 58 The Lord Keeper to the Duke concerning the same Earl of
South-hampton, 2. Aug. 1621. 59 The Lord Keeper to the Duke concerning the Lord
of St. Albans, October. 27. 1621. 60 The Lord Keeper to the Duke concerning the
Earl Marshals place, 1. September, 1621. 62 The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 16.
December. 1621. 65 The Lord Keeper to the Duke about Mr. Thomas Murrayes
Dispensation, etc. 23. Febr. 1621. 66 The Lord Keeper to the Duke about the
Liberties of Westminster, the 6. May, 1621. 68 The Lord Keeper to the Duke,
Aug. 23. 1622. 69 The Lord Keeper to the Duke about the Lord Treasurer,
September 9. 1622. 70 The Lord Keeper to the Duke of Buckingham, the 14. of
October, 1621. 82 The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 8. Aug. 1623. 83 The Lord Keeper
to the Duke, the 21. of September, 1622. 93 The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 12.
October. 1622. 75 The Lord Keeper to the Duke. 78 The Lord Keeper to the Duke. 84
The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 6. Jan. 1623. 86 Mr. John Packer to the Lord
Keeper, the 21 of January, 1623. 86 The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 2. Febr. 1623.
88 The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 24. May, 1624. 93 The Lord Keeper to the Duke,
22. Aug. 1624. 95 The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 11. October. 1624. 95 The Lord
Keeper to the Duke concerning the Countess of South-hampton, 17. November. 1624.
96 The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 24. December. 1624. 99 The Lord Keeper to the
Duke concerning Dr. Scot, the 4. of Jan. 1624 100 The Lord Keeper to the Duke,
2. March, 1624. 101 The Lord Keeper to the Duke about Sir Robert Howard, 11.
March, 1624. 103 The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 13. March, 1624. 104 The Lord
Keeper to the Duke, 22. March, 1624. 106 The Bishop of Lincoln to the Duke, the
7. of January, 1625. 107 The Bishop of Lincoln to his Majesty, 108 The Lord
Keeper to the Viscount Annan, the 17. of September, 1622. 109 The Bishop of St.
David's to the Duke, the 18. of November, 1624. 113 The Bishop of St. David's to
the Duke. 114 The Bishop of Chichester to the Duke. 114 The Bishops of
Rochester, Oxford, and St. David's to the Duke, concerning Mr. Mountague. 2.
Aug. 1625. 116 Dr. Field Bishop of Landaffe to the Duke, 118 Bishop of Landaffe
to the Duke. 119 Dr. Corbet to the Duke. 121 Earls of Worcester, Arundel and
Surrey, and Montgomery to the King, 121 The Earl of Suffolk to his Majesty,
122 The Earl of Suffolk to the Duke. 123 The Earl of Suffolk to his Majesty.
124 The Lady Elizabeth Howard to the King, 126 The Lady Elizabeth Norris to the
Duke. ibid. Sir Edward Cecyl to the Duke. 128 Sir Edward Cecyl to the Duke. 129
Sir Edward Cecyl to the Lord Conway Secretary, 2. of June, 1625. 130 Sir Edward
Cecyl to the Duke, 3. June, 1625. 132 Sir Edward Cecyl to the Duke, 19. July,
1625. 134 The Lord Wimbledon to the Duke, 28. April, 1626. 135 The Lord
Wimbledon to the Duke. 137 Sir John Ogle to the Duke, 3. June, 1625. 138 Sir
Robert Mansel to the Duke, 9. June, 1621. 140 Sir Robert Mansel to the Duke,
10. July, 1621. 143 Sir John Pennington to the Duke, 27. July, 1625. 144
Captain Pennington to the Duke, 150 Mr. Trumbal to the Secretary, 31. March,
1619. 151 Mr. Trumbal to the Secretary, 23. October. 1619. 156 Sir Thomas Roe to
the Marquess of Buckingham Lord Admiral, 17. December. 1621. 158 L. R. H. to the
Duke of Buckingham: 159 Sir George Carry to the Marquess of Buckingham, the 8.
of December. 1619. 162 To King James, ab ignoto. 163 Archbishop Abbot to Secretary
Nanton, 12. of September, 1619. 169 The Lord Brook to the Duke, 11. November.
1623. 170 Dr. Belcanquel to Secretary Nanton, 26. March. 173 Sir William
Beecher to his Majesty, 4. Febr. 176 To King James ab ignoto. 178 Sir Isaac
Wake to the Secretary, the 27. of September, 1619. 180 Sir Isaac Wake to the
Secretary, the 5th. of October, 1619. 184 Sir Isaac Wake to the Duke, 13. Febr.
1621. 188 Sir Isaac Wake's Proposition for the King of Denmark. 190 Sir Henry
Wotton to the Duke, 25. Jan. 1619. 192 Sir Henry Wotton to the Duke, 29. July,
1622. 193 Sir Henry Wotton to the Duke, the 2d. of December, 1622. 194 Sir
Henry Wotton to the Duke. 196 Sir Henry Wotton to the Duke. 197 Sir Richard
Weston to the Duke, 26. June, 1622. 200 Sir Richard Weston to the Duke. Bruxels
3. of September, 1622. 201 Sir Richard Weston to the Duke. 17. July, 1623. 202
Sir Richard Weston to the Duke, 20 May, 1624. 203 Sir Richard Weston to the
Duke. Chelsey, the 23 of July, 1624. 204 Sir Richard Weston to the Duke.
Chelsey, 12. of August. 1624. 206 Sir Francis Cottington to the Duke. Madrid,
1. October, 1616. 206 Viscount Rochfort to the Duke of Buckingham, 209 King
James to Pope Gregory the 15. the 10. of September, 1622. 211 Pope Gregory the
15. to the Prince of Wales. Rome, 20. of April, 1623. 212 The Prince of Wales
his Reply to the Popes Letter. 214 The Pope to the Duke of Buckingham. Rome,
the 19 of May, 1623. 216 To King James ab ignoto. 217 To King James ab ignoto.
222 Mr. Chapter Th. to the Duke. 228 To Count Gondomar. 233 Conde de Gondomar to
the Duke. 13. Febr. 1625. 237 Padre Maestre at Rome to the Spanish Ambassador
in England. 12. June, 1621. 238 Don Carlos to the Lord Conway. 3. Septem. 239
Marquess Ynoiosa to the Lord Conway, 5. of September, 1623. 242 Collections of
Passages and Discourses betwixt the Spanish Ambassadors and Sir Arthur
Chichester, 18 Jan. 1623. 244 Sir Arthur Chichester to the Duke, 25. Jan. 1623.
243 Passages betwixt the Lord Nithisdale and the Spanish Ambassadors, 22. May,
1624. 247 The Lord Nithisdale to the Duke. 22 June, 1624. 249 Sir Tobie Matthew
to the King of Spain. 251 Sir Tobie Matthew to the Duchess of Buckingham. From
Bulloign, 9. June, 1625. 253 Dr. Sharp to King James. 255 Dr. Sharp to the Duke
of Buckingham. 257 The Lord Cromwell to the Duke, 8. Sept. 1625. 262 Sir Robert
Philips to the Duke of Buckingham, 21. of Aug. 1624. 264 The Earl of Middlesex
to the Duke. 266 The Earl of Middlesex to his Majesty, the 26. April, 1624.
267 The Earl of Carlisle to his Majesty, 14. Febr. 1623. 269 The Lord
Kensington to the Duke. 273 The Lord Kensington to the Prince, the 26. of
February, 1624. 276 The Lord Kensington to the Duke. 274 The Lord Kensington to
the Prince, 26 Febr. 1624. 276 The Lord Kensington to the Duke. 278 The Lord
Kensington to the Prince. 280 The Lord Kensington to the Duke, 4. March, 1924.
282 The Lord Kensington to the Secretary Lord Conway, 284 The Lord Kensington
to the Duke. 288 The Lord Kensington to the Duke. 291 The Lord Kensington Earl
of Holland to the Duke. 292 The Earl of Holland to his Majesty. Paris, 13
March, 1625. 294 The Earl of Holland to the Duke. 296 Mr. Lorkin to the Duke,
30. August, 1625. 299 Mr. Lorkin to the Duke, 17 Sept. 1625. 301 The Lord
Herbert to his Majesty. From Merton Castle, 13 October. 1623. 304 Mr. Edward
Clerk to the Duke. Madrid, 6. Sept. 1623. 306 Mr. Edward Clerk to the Duke.
Madrid, the 1. of October. 1623. 307 Sir Anthony Ashley to the Duke, 12 May.
1621. 307 Sir Walter Rawleigh to the Duke, 12. Aug. 308 Sir Henry Yelverton to
the Duke, the 15. of March, 1623. 310 Sir John Eliot to the Duke, 8. November.
1623. 311 The Earl of Oxford to the Duke. 311 The Lady Purbeck to the Duke. 313
Dr. Done to the Marquess of Buckingham, 13. September, 1621. 314 Dr. Done to
the Duke. 315 Sir John Hipsley to the Duke. London, the 1. of September, 1623.
316 Sir Dudley Carleton to the Marquess of Buckingham. Hague, 24. Febr. 1616.
317 Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke of Buckingham. Hague, 10. June, 1620. 322
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke. Hague, 31. of January, 1622. 325 Sir Dudley
Carleton to the Duke. Hague 23. of August, 1622. 327 Sir Dudley Carleton to the
Duke. Hague, 9. of December, 1623. 334 Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke. Hague,
13. December. 1623. 334 Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke. Hague, 18 of December,
1623. 337 Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke. Hague, 24. of January, 1625. 340 Sir
Dudley Carleton to the Duke. Hague, 16 of February, 1625. 342 Sir Dudley
Carleton to the Duke. Hague, 16. of April, 1624. 343 Sir Dudley Carleton to the
Duke. Hague, the 20. of June, 1625. 345 Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke. Hague
20. of August, 1625. 346
Read the Letters according to the Order of this Table.

E. of Sommerset to K. JAMES.
BY this Gentleman your Majesty's Lieutenant, I understand of some halt you
made, and the Cause of it, at such time as he offered to your Majesty my
Letters. But soon after, your Majesty could resolve your self and behold me
nothing so diffident of you, but in humble language petitioning your favor;
for I am in hope, that my condition is not capable of so much more misery, as
that I need to make my self a passage to you by such way of intercession. This
which follows after, I offer your Majesty, though not as to your self, for
upon less motive you can find favor for me: Now I need only move, not plead,
before your Majesty, as my Case does stand, for what I seek to have done,
follows upon what you have already done, as a Consequence and succeeding
growth of your own act. But to the effect, that your Majesty may see that
there is enough to answer those (if any such there be) as do go about to
pervert the exercise of your Power, and to turn it from its own clear
excellency, for to minister unto their passions: I have presumed to this end to
awake your Majesty's own Conceit upon this subject, which can gather to it
self better, and more able defenses in my behalf upon this view; for though the
acts of your mercy which are not communicable, nor the Causes of them with
others, as derived from those secret motives, which are only sensible and
privy to your own heart, and admit of no search or discovery to any general
satisfaction, and that under this protection I might guard my particular
sufficiently; yet my Case needs not hide it self, but attend the dispute with
any, that would put upon it a monstrous and heavy shape. For though that I must
acknowledge, that both life and estate are forfeit to you by Law, yet so
forfeited, as the same Law gives you the same power to preserve, as it does to
punish, whereby your Majesty's higher prerogative does not wrestle with it, nor
do you infringe those grounds by which you have ever governed; so as the
resistance is not great that your Majesty has, for to give life, and which is
less, in the gift of estate, for that the Law casts wholly upon your self, and
yields it as fit matter for the exercise of your goodness. Once it was your
Majesty's gift to me, so it may be better not taken then a second time given;
for it is common to all men for to avoid to take that which has been once
their own. And I may say farther, that Law has not been so severe upon the
ruin of innocent posterity, nor yet Cancelled, nor cut off the merits of
Ancestors, before the politic hand of State had contrived it into those
several forms, as fitted to their ends and government. To this I may add, that
that whereupon I was judged, even the Crime it self might have been none, if
your Majesty's hand had not once touched upon it, by which all access unto
your favor was quite taken from me. Yet as it did at length appear, I fell,
rather for want of well defending, then by the violence or force of any
proofs: for I so far forsook my self, and my Cause, as that it may be a
question whether I was more Condemned for that, or for the matter it self which
was the subject of that days Controversy. Then thus far nothing has
appeared, wherein your Majesty has extended for me your power beyond the
reasonable bound, neither does any thing stand so in the way of your future
proceedings, but rather make easy the access of your Majesty's favor to my
relief.

What may then be the cause, that Malice can pitch upon, wherefore your
Majesty should not proceed for to accomplish your own work? Aspersions are
taken away by your Majesty's letting me become subject to the utmost power of
Law, with the lives of so many of the offenders, which yields the world
subject of sorrow rather then appetite to more blood, but truth and innocence
protect themselves in poor men, much more in Kings. Neither ever was there such
aspersion (God knows) in any possibility toward your Majesty, but amongst
those who would create those pretenses to mislead your Majesty, and thereby
make me miserable. If not this (whereof the virtue, and use, was in the former
time and now determined) there is not any but your pleasure. It is true, I am
forfeited to your Majesty, but not against you by any treasonable or
unfaithful act. Besides, there is to be yielded a distinction of men as in
faults; in which I am of both under the nearest degrees of exception; yet your
Majesty has pardoned life and estate to Traitors, and to strangers, sometimes
the one, sometimes the other; Nay to some concerned in this business wherein I
suffer, you have pardoned more unto, then I desire; who as (it is reported) if
they had come to the test, had proved Copper, and should have drunk of the
bitter Cup as well as others. But I do not by this envy your favors to any
person, nor seek I to draw them in the yoke with my self, but applaud your
Majesty's goodness, m. Sir W. Elvish.
being in that respect in a nearer possibility to come at me. Besides this, to
Elvish your Majesty has given estate, which is a greater gift then life,
because it extends to posterity, who was the worst deserver in this business;
an unoffended instrument might have prevented all after-mischief, who for his
own ends suffered it, and by the like arts afterward bewrayed it. To this I
may add Tresham in the Powder Treason, Sir Lewis Tresham.
upon whose successors I do not cast any of his infamy, yet he preserved
himself to posterity, so as what he, or others such as he, have defrauded by
the arts of Law, and whom their own unfaithfulness made safe, I have much ado
to hold by ingenuity, and Confidence. How may it be that because I distrusted
not your Majesty, or because it returned in your power from whom I had it, it
is in danger to be broken or dismembered. Let me hope that there is nothing
which by favor may be excused, or by industry might have been avoided, that
will fail me, where your Majesty is to determine. It is not I who thus put
your Majesty in mind importunely: It is he that was your Creature, it is
Sommerset, with all your honors, and envious greatness, that is now in
question. Kings themselves are protected from the breach of Law by being
Favorites and Gods anointed, which gives your Majesty the like privilege over
yours; Dr. Dunne.
As I took from Dr. Dunne in his Sermon, that the goodness of God is not so
much acknowledged by us in being our Creator, as in being our Redeemer; nor in
that he has chosen us, as that nothing can take us out of his hands, which in
your Majesty's remembrance let me challenge, and hope for: For the first
accesses of favor, they may be ascribed to ones own pleasing themselves, but
that appears to be for our sakes and for our good, when the same forsakes not
our civil deserts. This redemption I crave, not as to my own person, but with
your benefits once given; nor do I assume them very deep, for I have
voluntarily departed from the hopes of pension, place, office; I only cleave to
that which is so little, as that it will suffer no pairing, or diminution.

And as in my former Letters, so by this I humbly crave of your Majesty not to
let the practices of Court work upon your Son the Prince, not fearing your
sufferance of my loss in that particular so much, (for I cannot lose it, but
willingly all with it) as for to take off the Stage, that which in the attempt
may prove inconvenient. And consider I pray your Majesty, that my hope in
desiring to pass these bad times, was to be restored to my fortunes; others
are made unhappy by me, if otherwise, and then I lose my end. I speak of
impairing, of changing, or supplying, as of any other way, all such
alterations, and ruin, are alike, without I be worthy of your gift, and that I
can be worthy of all, that Law can permit you to give, or cast upon your
Majesty by a more nearer title, as it does by this; I shall account them equal
evils, that leave nothing, or a patched and proportioned one, changed or
translated from one thing to another.

But if your Majesty have any respects to move you to suspend your good
toward me; let that which is mine rest in your own hands, till that you find
all opposite humors conformed to your purpose. I have done wrong to my self,
thus to entertain such a doubt of your Majesty; but the unrelenting of
adversaries, which when you will have them, will sooner alter; and that all
this while I have received nothing of present notice for direction, or to
comfort me, from your Majesty, has made me to expostulate with my self thus
hardly. For God is my judge Sir, I can never be worthy to be; if I have these
marks put upon me of a Traitor, as that tumbling and disordering of that
estate would declare the divorce from your presence, lays too much upon me,
and this would upon both.

I will say no farther, neither in that which your Majesty doubted my aptness
to fall into, for my Cause, nor my Confidence is not in that distress as for
to use that mean of intercession, nor of any thing besides, but to remember
your Majesty, that I am the Workmanship of your hands, and bear your stamp
deeply imprinted in all the characters of favor; that I was the first plant
ingrafted by your Majesty's hand in this place, therefore not to be unrooted by
the same hand, lest it should taint all the same kind, with the touch of that
fatalnesse; And that I was even the Son of a Father, whose services are
registered in the first honors and impressions I took of your Majesty's favor,
and laid there as a foundation stone of that building; These and your Majesty's
goodness for to receive them, is that I rely upon. So praying for your
Majesty's prosperity, I am in all humbleness

Your Majesty's loyal servant, and Creature, R. Sommersett.

The Lo. Chancelour Bacon to the Lords.
If it may please your Lordships,
I shall humbly crave at your Lordships hands a benign interpretation of that
which I shall now write; for words that come from wasted spirits, and an
oppressed mind, are more safe in being deposited in a noble Construction, then
in being Circled with any reserved Caution. Having made this as a protection to
all, which I shall say, I will go on, but with a very strange entrance (as may
seem to your Lordships at the first) for in the midst of a state of as great
affliction, as I think a mortal man can endure, (honor being above life) I
shall begin with the professing gladness in some things.

The first is, that hereafter the greatness of a Judge or Magistrates, shall
be no Sanctuary, or protection to him against guiltiness, which in few words
is the beginning of a golden world.

The next, that after this example, it is like that Judges will fly from any
thing in the likeness of Corruption (though it were at a great distance) as
from a Serpent, which tends to the purging of the Courts of Justice, and
reducing them to their true honor and splendor. And in these two points God
is my witness (though it be my fortune to be the anvile upon which these good
effects are beaten and wrought) I take no small comfort. But to pass from the
motions of my heart, whereof God is only Judge, to the merits of my Cause,
whereof your Lordships are only Judges, under God, and his Lieutenant; I do
understand, there has been expected from me heretofore some justification, and
therefore I have chosen one only justification instead of all others, out of
the justification of Job, for after the clear submission and Confession, which
I shall now make unto your Lordships, I hope I may say, and justify with Job
in these words, I have not hid my sin as did Adam, nor concealed my faults in
my bosom. This is the only justification I will use. It rests therefore that
without fig leaves, I do ingenuously confess and acknowledge, that having
understood the particulars of the charge, not formally from the house, but
enough to inform my Conscience and memory, I find matter both sufficient and
full, to move me to desert the defense, and to move your Lordships to condemn
and censure me. Neither will I trouble your Lordships by singling out
particulars, which I think may fall off. Quid te exempta juvat spinis de
millibus una? Neither will I prompt your Lordships to observe upon the proofs,
where they come not home, or the scruples touching the Credit of the Witnesses:
Neither will I present unto your Lordships, how far a defense might in diverse
things extenuate the offense, in respect of the time, or manner of the gift, or
the like circumstances, but only leave these things to spring out of your own
noble thoughts, and observations of the evidence, and examinations themselves,
and charitably to wind about the particulars of the charge here and there, as
God shall put in your minds, and so submit my self wholly to your piety and
grace.

And now that I have spoken to your Lordships, as Judges, I shall say a few
words unto you, as Peers, and Prelates, humbly commending my Cause to your
noble Minds, and magnanimous affections.

Your Lordships are not only Judges, but Parliamentary Judges, you have a
farther extent of arbitrary power, then other Courts: and if you be not tied to
the ordinary course of Courts, or presidents, in point of strictness and
severity, much more in points of mercy and mitigation. And yet if any thing I
should move might be contrary to your honorable and worthy ends to introduce a
reformation, I should not seek it. But herein I beseech your Lordships to give
me leave to tell you a story. Titus Manlius took his sons life for giving
battle against the prohibition of his General. Not many years after the like
severity was pursued by Papirius Cursor the Dictator against Quintus Maximus,
who being upon the point to be sentenced, was by the intercession of some
principal persons of the Senate spared; whereupon Livie makes this grave and
gracious observation, Neque minus firmata est disciplina militaris periculo
Quinti Maximi, quam mirabili supplicio Titi Manlii, The discipline of War was
no less established by the questioning only of Quintus Maximus, then by the
punishment of Titus Manlius. And the same reason is of the reformation of
Justice; for the questioning of men of eminent place has the same terror,
though not the same rigor with the punishment. But my Case stays not there,
for my humble desire is, that his Majesty would take the Seal into his hands,
which is a great downfall, and may serve I hope in it self for an expiation of
my faults.

Therefore if mercy and mitigation be in your Lordships power, and do no ways
cross your ends, why should I not hope of your favors and Commiserations?
Your Lordships may be pleased to behold your chief Pattern the King our
Sovereign, a King of incomparable Clemency, and whose heart is instructable
for wisdom and goodness. You well remember, that there sat not these hundred
years before in your House a Prince (and never such a Prince) whose presence
deserves to be made memorable by records, and acts, mixed of mercy and justice.
Your selves are either Nobles (and Compassion ever beats in the veins of
noble blood,) or Reverend Prelates, who are the servants of him, that would not
break the bruised reed, nor quench smoking flax.

You all sit upon a high Stage, and therefore cannot but be more sensible of
the changes of humane Condition, and of the fall of any from high places.
Neither will your Lordships forget that there are vitia temporis, as well as
vitia hominis, and that the beginning of reformation, has a contrary power to
the pool of Bethesda; for that had strength only to cure him, that was first
cast in, and this has strength to hurt him only, that is first Cast in; and
for my part, I wish it may stay there, and go no further.

Lastly, I assure my self, your Lordships have a noble feeling of me, as a
member of your own body; and one, that in this very Session, had some taste of
your loving affection, which I hope was not a lightning before the death of
them, but rather a spark of that grace which now in the Conclusion will more
appear. And therefore my humble suit to your Lordships is, that my voluntary
Confession be my sentence, and the loss of the Seal my punishment, and that
your Lordships will spare any farther sentence, but recommend me to his
Majesty's grace and pardon for all that is past. And so, etc.

Your Lordships, etc. Francis St. Alban Can.

Five Letters more of my Lord Bacons.
Bacon to the King, July 31. 1617.
Lord Keeper Bacon to his Majesty.
I Dare not presume any more to reply upon your Majesty, but reserve my Defense
till I attend your Majesty at your happy return, when I hope verily to approve
my self not only a true servant to your Majesty, but a true friend to my Lord
of Buckingham, and for the times also I hope to give your Majesty a good
account, though distance of place may obscure them. But there is one part of
your Majesty's Letter, that I could be sorry to take time to answer; which is
that your Majesty conceives, that whereas I wrote, That the height of my Lords
Fortune might make him secure; I mean that he was turned proud, or unknowing of
himself. Surely the opinion I have ever had of my Lord (whereof your Majesty
is best witness) is far from that: But my meaning was plain and simple; that
his Lordship might through his great fortune, be the less apt to Cast, and
foresee, the unfaithfulness of friends, and the malignity of enemies, and
accidents of times. Which is a judgment (your Majesty knows better then I)
that the best Authors make of the best, and best tempered spirits, Vt sunt res
humanae; Insomuch as Guicciardine makes the same judgment (not of a particular
person) but of the wisest state of Europe, the Senate of Venice, when he says
their prosperity had made them secure, and under-weighers of perils. Therefore
I beseech your Majesty, to deliver me, in this, from any the least imputation
to my dear and Noble Lord and friend. And so expecting, that that Sun, which
when it went from us, left us cold weather, and now it is returned toward us,
has brought with it a blessed harvest, will when it comes to us dispel and
disperse all mists, and mistakings.

I am, etc.

Lord Chancellor to his Majesty, 2. Jan. 1618.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
I Do many times with gladness, and for a remedy of my other labors, revolve
in my mind the great happiness which God (of his singular goodness) has
accumulated upon your Majesty every way, and how Complete the same would be, if
the state of your means were once rectified, and well ordered, your people
military, and obedient, fit for war, used to peace, your Church illightened
with good Preachers, as an heaven of Stars, your Judges learned, and learning
from you, just, and just by your example, your Nobility in a right distance
between Crown and People, no oppressors of the people, no overshadowers of the
Crown, your Council full of tributes of Care, faith, and freedom, your
Gentlemen, and Justices of Peace, willing to apply your Royal Mandates to the
nature of their several Counties, but ready to obey, your servants in awe of
your wisdom, in hope of your goodness; The fields growing every day by the
improvement and recovery of grounds, from the desert, to the garden; The City
grown from wood to brick, your Sea-walls or Pomerium of your Island surveyed,
and in edifying; your Merchants embracing the whole compass of the World,
East, West, North, and South; The times give you Peace, and yet offer you
opportunities of action abroad: And lastly, your excellent Royal Issue
entayleth these blessings and favors of God, to descend to all posterity. It
rests therefore, that God having done so great things for your Majesty, and
you for others; You would do so much for your self as to go through (according
to your good beginnings) with the rectifying and settling of your estate and
means, which only is wanting. Hoc rebus defuit unum. I therefore whom only
love, and duty to your Majesty, and your royal line, has made a Financier, do
intend to present unto your Majesty a perfect book of your estate, like a
perspective glass to draw your estate near to your sight; beseeching your
Majesty to conceive, that if I have not attained to do that, that I would do
in this which is not proper for me, nor in my element, I shall make your
Majesty amends in some other thing in which I am better bred.

God ever preserve, etc.

The Lord Chancellor to the Marquess of Buckingham, 25. March, 1620.
My very good Lord,
YEsterday I know was no day; Now I hope I shall hear from your Lordship, who
are my anchor in these floods. Mean while to ease my heart, I have written to
his Majesty the enclosed, which I pray your Lordship to read advisedly, and to
deliver it, or not to deliver it, as you think Good. God ever prosper your
Lordship.

Yours ever what I am Fr. St. Alban. Canc.

The Lord Chancellor to the King. March 25. 1620.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
TIme has been, when I have brought unto you Gemitum Columbae from others, now
I bring it from my self. I fly unto your Majesty with the wings of a Dove,
which once within these seven days, I thought would have carrried me a higher
flight. When I enter into my self, I find not the materials of such a tempest
as is come upon me. I have been, as your Majesty knows best (never author
of any immoderate Counsel; but always desired to have things carried suavibus
modis. I have been no avaritious oppressor of the people. I have been no
haughty, or intolerable, or hateful man in my conversation, or carriage. I have
inherited no hatred from my father, but am a good Patriot born. Whence should
this be? for these are the things that use to raise dislikes abroad.

For the house of Commons, I began my Credit there, and now it must be the
place of the Sepulture thereof. And yet this Parliament upon the Message
touching Religion, the old love revived, and they said I was the same man
still, only honesty was turned into honor.

For the Upper House, even within these days, before these troubles, they
seemed as to take me into their arms, finding in me ingenuity, which they took
to be the true straight line of nobleness without Crooks or angles.

And for the briberies and gifts wherewith I am charged; when the books of
hearts shall be opened, I hope I shall not be found to have the troubled
fountain of a corrupt heart, in a depraved habit of taking rewards to pervert
Justice, howsoever I may be frail, and partake of the abuses of the Times.

And therefore I am resolved, when I come to my answer, not to trick my
innocence (as I writ to the Lords) by Cavillations, or voidances, but to speak
to them the language, that my heart speaks to me, in excusing, extenuating,
or ingenuous confessing; praying God to give me the grace to see to the bottom
of my faults, and that no hardness of heart do steal upon me, under show of
more neatness of Conscience, then is Cause.

But not to trouble your Majesty any longer, craving pardon for this long
mourning Letter; that which I thirst after, as the Heart after the streams, is,
that I may know by my matchless friend that presents to you this letter,
your Majesty's heart (which is an abyssus of goodness, as I am an abyssus of
mercy) toward me. I have been ever your man, and counted my self but as an
usufructuary of my self, the property being yours. And now making my self an
oblation to do with me as may best conduce to the honor of your Justice, the
honor of your Mercy, and the use of your Service, resting as

Clay in your Majesty's gracious hands, Fr. St. Alban. Canc.

Magdibeg to his Majesty.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
I Make bold after a long silence, to prostrate my self before your Majesty,
and being the Ambassador of a great King, that counts it an honor to style
himself your friend, I do beseech you to afford me that justice, which I am
sure you will not refuse to the meanest of your Subjects.

At my first arrival into this your happy Kingdom, I was informed by the
general relation of all that had recourse unto me, that one here (who had the
title of Ambassador from my Master) did vainly brag that he had married the
King of Persia's Niece, which kindled in me such a vehement desire to vindicate
my Masters honor, from so unworthy and false a report, that at my first
interview with him, my hand being guided by my duty, I endeavored to fasten
upon him a Condign disgrace to such an imposture. But the caution that I ought
to have of my own justification, when I return home, bids me the more
strictly to examine the truth of that which was told me (whereon my action with
Sir Robert Shirley was grounded) and to have it averred in the particulars, as
well as by a general voice. Therefore I humbly beseech your Majesty, that out
of your Princely goodness you will be pleased to give such order, that this
point may be fully cleared. Wherein for the manner of proceeding, I wholly and
humbly remit my self to your Majesty: And this being done, I shall return home
with some measure of joy to balance the grief which I have, for having done
ought, that may have clouded your Majesty's favor to me. And so committing
your Majesty to the protection of the greatest God, whose shadows, and elect
instruments, Kings are on earth, I humbly take my leave, and rest, etc.

The Copy of a Letter written by his Majesty to the Lord Keeper, the Bishops
of London, Wynton, Rochester, St. David's, and Excester, Sir Henry Hubbert, Mr.
Justice Dodderidge, Sir Henry Martin, and Dr. Steward, or any six of them,
whereof the Lord Keeper, the Bishops of London, Wynton, and St. David's to be
four.
IT is not unknown unto you, what happened the last Summer to our trusty and
welbeloved Counselor, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, who shooting at a
Deer with a Crossebowe in Bramzil Park, did with that shoot, casually give the
Keeper a wound, whereof he dyed. Which accident (though it might have happened
to any other man) yet because his eminent rank and function in the Church has
(as we are informed) ministered occasion of some doubt, as making the Cause
different in his person, in respect of the scandal (as is supposed,) we being
desirous (as it is fit we should) to be satisfied therein, and reposing
especial trust in your learnings, and judgments, have made choice of you to
inform Us concerning the nature of this Cause, and do therefore require you to
take presently into your Considerations the Scandal that may arise thereupon,
and to certify Us what in your Judgments the same may amount unto, either to
an irregularity, or otherwise. And lastly, what means may be found for the
redress thereof (if need be) of all which points, we shall expect to have your
Reports, with what diligence and expedition you may. Dated at Theobalds, October.
3d. 1621.

The Archbishop of York to King James.
May it please your Majesty,
I Have been too long silent, and am afraid that by silence, I have neglected
the duty of the place it has pleased God to call me unto, and your Majesty to
place me in. But now I humbly beseech, that I may discharge my Conscience
toward God, and my duty toward your Majesty. And therefore I beseech you
Sir, to give me leave freely to deliver my self, and then let it please your
Majesty to do with me as you please.

Your Majesty has propounded a Toleration of Religion, I beseech you to take
into your Consideration, what your Act is, and what the Consequence may be. By
your act, you labor to set up that most damnable and heretical doctrine of the
Church of Rome, the Whore of Babylon. How hateful will it be to God, and
grievous to your Subjects (the true professors of the Gospel) that your
Majesty who has often defended, and learnedly written against those wicked
heresies, should now show your self a Patron of those doctrines which your Pen
has told the world, and your Conscience tells your self are superstitious,
idolatrous, and detestable: Also what you have done in sending the Prince
without Consent of your Council, and the privitie and approbation of your
People: For although Sir, you have a large interest in the Prince, as the Son
of your flesh, yet have your People a greater as the Son of the Kingdom, upon
whom (next after your Majesty) are their eyes fixed, and their Welfare
defends. And so slenderly is his going apprehended, that believe Sir, how ever
his return may be safe, yet the drawers of him unto that action, so dangerous
to himself, so desperate to the Kingdom, will not pass away unquestioned, and
unpunished.

Besides, this Tolleration you endeavor to set up by your Proclamation, it
cannot be done without a Parliament, unless your Majesty will let your
Subjects see, that you now take unto your self a liberty to throw down the
Laws of the Land at your pleasure. What dreadful Consequence these things may
draw after, I beseech your Majesty to Consider.

And above all, lest by this Tolleration, and discountenance of the true
profession of the Gospel (wherewith God has blessed us) and under which this
Kingdom has flourished these many years) your Majesty does draw upon the
Kingdom in general, and your self in particular, Gods heavy wrath and
indignation.

Thus in discharge of my duty to your Majesty, and the place of my Calling, I
have taken the humble boldness to deliver my Conscience. And now Sir, Do with
me what you please.

Next of all, in order, follow the Letters that passed between the King and his
Agents, about the Spanish Transactions.

The first Letter written, per anonymum, brings news of the Princes arrival.

The Copy of a Letter sent from Spain, concerning the Princes arrival there,
etc.
I Presume his Highness being now returned, you may by Conference have such
choice, and free relations of his proceedings in Spain, that I may well hold my
Pen, (it being not privileged with that freedom that the tongue is) yet to
comply with that constant obligation I purpose still to owe you, I will write
something, and point at some passages, where others perhaps may not so
punctually inform you.

The Prince's coming hither seemed not so strange, as acceptable, and pleasing
unto all. The Common sort expressed it by extraordinary shouts, and
acclamations of joy, offering, and marrying the Infanta (as it were) presently,
by public voice, as having won and truly deserved her, by so brave an
adventure. The King and State studied how to do him all the honor that might
be: The first decree that the Council of State made, was, that at all occasions
of meetings, he should have the precedencie of the King. That he should make
entry into the Palace in the form of State, as the Kings of Spain do in the
first day of their Coronation. That he should have one of the chief Quarters of
the Kings House for his lodgings, one hundred of the Guard to attend him, all
the Council to obey him, as the Kings own person. All prisoners were released,
the new Proclamation against excess in apparel revoked, and sundry other
arguments of joy. But a wonder lasts not but for nine days.

This universal joy was grounded upon hopes, that the Prince came not only to
fetch a wife, but also to make himself a Catholic. Say you so?
The Pope incited him hereunto by Letters, which his Nuntio delivered. He sent
a charge to the inquisitor general, to use all possible diligence herein. Many
processions, and shows were made to stir him. But they soon saw how
improbable it was to win him, For which God be thanked.
how amongst all his servants there was not one Catholic about him: what
slight esteem they made of the Churches, and Religion here; some committing
irreverent, and scandalous actions in the Kings own Chapel, so that they began
to behold the English with an ill aspect, to inveigh against the Conde de
Gundomar, that he should inform the King and State, that the Prince had a
disposition easy to be wrought upon to be made a Catholic. Add hereunto the
ill offices that the Irish do, who to preserve themselves in the Spanish
pension did prejudice the business, by casting aspersions upon the English,
the misinformation of the persecution in their Country, and in England
notwithstanding being here, and the abuse of the Ambassadors servants in
London.

When the Prince came, there wanted nothing for the final consummation of all
things but the dispensation, which came two months after. And whereas it was
expected to come absolute, and full; it came infringed with Cautions and
limitations, viz. That the Infanta should not be married till matters in
England were in perfect execution; that in case the King of England could not
give sufficient security, the King of Spain himself should swear, and undertake
the oath for him. Hereupon a Junto of Divines was appointed to determine
hereof, Whether the King might do this with a safe Conscience or no. These
Divines went gravely and tediously to work; which put the Prince upon that
impatiency, that he was upon point of departure. When at last the business
came to a resolution, and so the Match was publicly declared. The Prince had
then often (though publicly) access to the Infanta, the King being still
himself present, and in hearing. After this a Ratification was sent for from
Rome, but the Pope dying in the interim, and the new Pope falling suddenly
sick, it could not be speedily procured. For want of this Ratification there
was no Contract made, and the Prince himself seemed not to desire it. A little
before his departure, the King and the Council of State, with the Patriarch of
the Indies, the Prince-Prelate, after the Bishop of Toledo, (who is under age)
swore to all the Capitulations, so that the Prince seemed to depart well
satisfied. The King brought him to the Escurial, and a little before his
departure, the King and he went into a close Coach, and had a large discourse
together, (my Lord of Bristol being in another Coach hard by to interpret some
hard words, when he was called.) And so they parted with many tender
demonstrations of love. A Trophy of Marble is erected in the place where they
parted. Many rich Presents were given on both sides. The Prince bestowed upon
the Queen the biggest Crown Pearl in the world between two Diamonds. He gave
the Infanta a rope of Pearl, and an anchor of great Diamonds, with many other
Jewels. He has been very bountiful to every one of the Kings house, and all
the Guard. Never Prince parted with such an universal love of all. He left
every mouth filled with his Commendations; every one reporting him to be a
truly Noble, discreet, and well deserving Prince. I write what I hear, and
know, and that without passion, for all he is the Prince of my Country.

My Lord of Buckingham at first, was much esteemed, but it lasted little; his
French garb, with his stout hastiness in negotiating, and over-familiarity
with the Prince, was not liked. Moreover, the Council of Spain took it ill,
that a green head, should come with such a superintendent power to treat of an
affair of such Consequence, among so many grave Ministers of State, to the
prejudice of so able and well-deserving a Minister as my Lord of Bristol, who
laid the first stone of this building. Hereupon his power was called in
question, and found imperfect in regard it was not confirmed by the Council.
Thus the business began to gather ill blood between Olivarez, and him, and
grew so far out of square, that unless there had been good heads to piece them
together again, all might have fallen quite off the hinges. He did not take his
leave of the Countess of Olivarez, and the farewell he took of the Conde
himself was harsh; for he told him, he would be an everlasting servant to the
King of Spain, the Queen, and the Infanta, and would endeavor to do the best
offices he could, for the concluding of this business, and strengthening the
amity between the two Kingdoms; but for himself, he had so far disobliged him,
that he could make no profession of friendship to him at all. The Conde turned
about, and said he accepted of what he had spoken, and so parted.

Since his Highness departure, my Lord of Bristol negotiates closely, he is
daily at the Palace to attend the Infanta, and he treats by means of the
Countess of Olivarez.

There is a new Junto appointed for the disposing of the Infanta's affairs, and
we hope here, that all things will be ripe against the next Spring to bring her
over. And so I rest, etc.

From Madrid. 30. September. 1623.
His Majesty's to the Earl of Bristol, Jan. 21. 1625.
WE have read your Letter addressed to us by Buckingham, and We cannot but
wonder that you should through forgetfulness make such a request to us of
favor, as if you stood eavenly capable of it, when you know what your
behavior in Spain deserved of Us, which you are to examine by the observations
We made, and know you will remember, how at our first coming into Spain, taking
upon you to be so wise as to foresee our intentions to change our Religion, you
were so far from dissuading us, that you offered your service, and secrecy to
concur in it, and in many other open Conferences pressing to show how
convenient it was for us to be a Roman Catholic, it being impossible in your
opinion, to do any great action otherwise; how much wrong, disadvantage, and
disservice you did to the Treaty, and to the right and interest of our dear
Brother, and Sister, and their Children; what disadvantage, inconvenience, and
hazard you entangled us in by your artifices, putting off, and delaying our
return home. The great estimation you made of that State, and the vile price
you set this Kingdom at, still maintaining, that we under color of friendship
to Spain, did what was in our power against them, which (you said) they knew
very well. And last of all, your approving of those Conditions, that our Nephew
should be brought up in the Emperors Court, to which Sir Walter Aston then
said, he durst not give his Consent for fear of his head; you replying to him,
that without some such great action, neither marriage nor peace could be had,
etc.

Lord Conway to the Earl of Bristol. March 21. 1625.
My Lord,
I Received a Letter from your Lordship dated the 4th of this month, written in
answer to a former, which I directed to your Lordship by his Majesty's
Commandment. This last Letter (according to my duty) I have showed unto his
Majesty; who has perused it, and has commanded me to write back this unto
you again. That he finds himself nothing satisfied therewith; the question
propounded to your Lordship from his Majesty was plain and clear, Whether you
did rather choose to sit still without being questioned for any errors past in
your negotiation in Spain, and enjoy the benefit of the late gracious pardon
granted in Parliament, whereof you may have the benefit; or whether for the
clearing of your innocence (whereof your self, your friends, and your followers
are so confident) you will be contented to wave the advantage of that pardon,
and put your self into a legal way of examination for the trial thereof? His
Majesty's purpose hereby is not to prevent you of any favors the Law has
given: but if your assurance be such as your words and letter import, he
conceives it stands not with that public and resolute profession of your
integrity, to decline your trial. His Majesty leaves the choice to your self,
and requires from you a direct answer, without Circumlocution, or bargaining
with him for future favors before hand.

But if you have a desire to make use of that pardon which cannot be denied to
you, nor is it any way desired to be taken from you; His Majesty expects, that
you should at least forbear to magnify your service, and out of the opinion of
your own innocence cast an aspersion upon his Majesty's Justice, in not
affording you that present fullness of liberty and favor which cannot be drawn
from him, but in his own good time, and according to his own good pleasure.
Thus much I have in command to write unto your Lordship, and to require your
answer clearly and plainly by this Messenger sent on purpose for it. And so,
etc.

The E. of Bristol to the Lord Conway, 4. March. 1625.
My Lord,
I Received your Letter of the 25. of February, and therein a Commandment from
his Majesty, and in his Majesty's name to make a clear and plain answer,
Whether I desire or rest in the security I am now in, and to acknowledge the
gracious favor of his late Majesty, and of his which now is, who have been
pleased not to question my actions, etc. Hereunto I have labored exactly to
obey, but find that a plain and clear answer cannot possibly be made, until
there be a clear understanding of the thing propounded; so that I may crave
pardon if my answer be not so clear as I could wish it: for I must freely
acknowledge, that I no way understand what is meant by the security I am now
in, whether it be by the present estate I am now in, or not: If it be so, I
conceive a man cannot be under a harder Condition; for your Lordship knows,
that by order my person is restrained, and you were pleased lately to send me
word, that you would not advise me to make use of the liberty which his late
Majesty had given me of coming to London, although that were only to follow
my private affairs, and for the recovery of my decayed health. I stand likewise
prohibited to come to the Court, or to the Kings presence, (I pass by my being
removed from all my places, and offices, and wholly depending upon his
Majesty's royal pleasure.) But being a Peer of this Realm, I have not only by
Commandment, been formerly stayed from the Parliament, but of late, my writ
has been detained, as though my honor were forfeited. And this is truly the
Condition I am now in, but I cannot imagine that this is the security intended
I should rest in; but am in hope, that the security intended is, that I may for
the future enjoy the liberty of a free Subject, and the privileges of a Peer
of the Kingdom. Which being so, I shall with all humility acknowledge his
Majesty's grace and favor, and be ready to serve him with all fidelity even to
the laying down of my life, not thinking it to stand with the duty of a Subject
to press his being questioned, since such being the pleasure of his Sovereign,
it were not in the power of any subject to avoid it. But in case his Majesty
shall be pleased to bring me to any legal trial, I shall most willingly and
dutifully submit my self thereunto, and doubt not but my innocence in the end
will be my best Mediator for his Majesty's future favor. And in that Case I
am a suitor that my Writ of Parliament as a Peer of this Realm may be sent unto
me, and that my present repair to London may not displease his Majesty; As for
the pardon of the 21. Reg. Jacobi, which you mention, I should renounce, but
that I know that the justest and most cautious man living, may through
ignorance or omission offend the Laws, so that as a Subject I shall not
disclaim any benefit which comes in the general as it does usually to all
other Subjects in the Kingdom: But as for any Crime in particular, that may
trench upon my employments in point of Loyalty, fidelity, or want of affection
to the King or State, I know my innocence to be such, that I am confident I
shall not need that pardon. I shall conclude with a most humble suit unto your
Lordship, that out of your nobleness, and that friendship that has been
betwixt us, you will use your best endeavors both with his Majesty and the
Duke, that this unfortunate business may be past over, by the renewing whereof
I can see little use that can be made but the adding to a man's misfortunes
already sufficiently humbled; For I am ready to do all that a man of honor and
honesty may do; but rather then to do any thing that may be prejudicial to me
in that kind, to suffer whatsoever it shall please God to send. And so with the
remembrance of my humble service unto your Lordship, I recommend you unto Gods
holy protection, And rest

Sherborn Lodge, etc. Your Lordships humble servant, Bristol.

Here next follow the Letters of my Lord of Bristol concerning the business of
the Match.
The E. of Bristol to the Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Aug. 20 1623.
My very worthy Lord,
I Give you many thanks for your Letter of the 23d. of July, by which I
understand your great care of me, by seconding a former motion it pleased your
Lordship to make, of having me reconciled to my Lord Dukes favor, (A thing
which I have infinitely desired) and have esteemed the good offices you have
been pleased to do therein, as a very high obligation your Lordship puts upon
me. But I con^eive your Lordship will find that any motion you have made in
that kind unto his Grace has been despised, rather then received with any
thankfulness, or that he has returned you any answer of his inclination
thereunto. For the truth is, my Lord does look down upon my poor Condition with
that scorn and contempt, that I conjecture the very moving of any such thing,
especially under the term of reconciliation, has not been pleasing unto his
Lordship. But thereof your Lordship can make the best judgment by the answer
you received from him. I do but guess thereat, by what I have heard he has
been pleased to say, and the manner wherewith he has used me. Which has been
such, that the Spaniards themselves (which most afflicted me) have out of
compassion pitied me. Yet I may with much truth assure your Lordship, that I
have not omitted toward him either any respect or service that was fit for me
to perform, either toward his person, or the high place he holds in my
Masters favor, or unto his present employment; well knowing how undecent and
scandalous a thing it is for the Ministers of a Prince to run different ways
in a strange Court, but have attended him in all his public audience, and
used in all kinds that respect and observance toward him, that I think malice
her self cannot charge me with an omission. And my Lord, this is the truth,
whatsoever may be said or written to the contrary: It is true, that some four
months since in a business that no less concerned his Majesty and the
Prince's service, then abruptly to have broken off all our Treaty, I was far
differing from my Lords opinion; And thereupon happened betwixt us some dispute
in debate of the business, but without any thing that was personal, and there
was no creature living at it but the Prince, to whose Censure I shall willingly
refer my self. In me I protest it unto your Lordship, it made no alteration,
but within half an hour I came to him with the same reverence and respect that
I was wont to do, the which I have continued ever since, so that I have much
wondered how it comes to be so much spoken of in England, that my Lord Duke
and my self should live here at too much distance. And I cannot find any other
reason for it, but that every body has taken so much notice of my ill, and
contemptible usage, that they think it unpossible for any Gentleman, but to be
sensible of it. But if any one disrespect, or omission from me toward my Lord
Duke can be truly instanced in by any man, I will be contented to incur his
Majesty's high displeasure, and your Lordships Censure.

For the present News here, it is, that the ninth of this Month, the Prince
intends (God willing) to begin his journey for England. And the day before, I
conceive the Contract will be. The Infanta is to follow in the Spring, and the
Prince has commanded my stay here. I know not how things may be reconciled
here before my Lord Dukes departure, but at present, they are in all extremity
ill, betwixt this King, and his Ministers, and the Duke, and they stick not to
profess, that they will rather put the Infanta headlong into a Well, then into
his hands. I write unto your Lordship you see with much freeness, and I
entreat you let it remain with you. And so in much haste I only entreat your
Lordship to believe, that you have not living an honester, nor a true hearteder
a friend, and servant, then

Your Lordships ever to be commanded, Bristol.

The E of Bristol to the Lord Bishop of Lincoln, 24. of September. 1623.
My singular Lord,
I Have dispatched this Bearer my servant Greislie with the draught of the
temporal Articles, which I hope will be to the King and Prince his
satisfaction, and he will let your Lordship have a sight of them.

Since the departure of the Prince, there have every day passed Letters of
extraordinary affection between the King, and the Prince; and the love that is
here generally born unto the Prince is such, as cannot be well believed by
those that daily hear not, what passes both from the King and his chief
Ministers. And to say the truth, his Highness has well deserved it; for in
the whole time of his being here, he has carried himself with the greatest
affability, patience, and constancy, and at his departure with the greatest
bounty, and liberality, that I think has been known in any Prince in our
times. And I protest unto your Lordship as a Christian, that I never heard in
all the time of his being here, nor since any one exception taken against him,
unless it were for being supposed to be too much guided by my Lord Duke of
Buckingham, who is indeed very little beholding to the Spaniards for their good
opinion of him, and departed from hence with so little satisfaction, that the
Spaniards are in doubt, that he will endeavor all that shall be possible to
cross the Marriage: Wherein certainly they are very much mistaken; For my Lord
cannot but be obliged a servant for any particular distastes of his own to
cross the advancement of his Majesty, and the Prince's service, especially in
a business of so high Consequence as this.

It may be your Lordship will hear many Complaints, and that the Match never
was, nor yet is intended; I beseech your Lordship to give little belief in that
kind, and the effects will now speedily declare the truth, if the fault be not
on our side. It is true that the Spaniards have committed many errors in their
proceedings with the Prince; but the business is now by the Prince overcome,
if we our selves draw not back: For which I confess I should be heartily
sorry, and so I conceive would most honest men; for if this match, and the
alliance with Spain has been so long desired by his Majesty, and that for it
he has heen pleased to do so much, and the Prince to take so hazardous a
voyage, if all the same reasons are yet on foot, which have ever moved the King
and Prince to wish the match; if to this may be added, that his Majesty has
overcome all the difficulties on his part, and that both he, and the Prince do
stand engaged for the performance of it, as far as Princes can be, God forbid,
that any particular distastes, or misunderstandings (which God knows have
little relation to the business) should be of power to disturb it, especially
now, when the Match is past all danger of miscarrying, the portion, and all
temporal Articles settled, and I hope to the Kings Content, and all other good
effects that could be expected by this alliance in a very fair way, I hope
there will be no cause of doubt in this kind; if there should be, I am sure
that your Lordship would put to a helping hand to keep the business from being
overthrown, since you have done so much for the overcoming of former
difficulties, and the bringing it to the pass it is now in. If there be no
cause of writing this, I beseech your Lordship to impute it to my zeal to the
business, and my freeness with your Lordship, upon whose true love and
friendship I so much rely, as I shall not forbear to tell you, any of my fears.
I hope within 3. days Sir Francis Cottington will be able to begin his journey
toward your Lordship. He will tell you many truths, being on my knowledge, as
hearty a servant and friend as it is possible for your Lordship to have. He has
told me how much I am bound to your Lordship for your love, and favor, and
truly I will deserve it the best I can, and that I think will be only by
loving you, for otherwise I conceive I am like to have little means of meriting
at any bodies hands, yet at your Lordships it may be I may, by being a man of
honesty, and honor; And such an one I will labor to be, and your affectionate
friend and servant. And so I kiss your Lordships hands.

Madrid, etc.
The E. of Bristols Letter to the Prince, touching the delivery of his Proxy
to the King of Spain.
May it please your Highness,
IN this Letter I shall only speak unto your Highness concerning that
particular whereof you were pleased to write unto me after your departure from
St. Lorenzo, and have presumed to set down exactly the case as it stands. In
what sort a woman betrothed, and post Matrimonium ratum, may before the
Consummation of marriage betake her self unto a religious life; I have likewise
set down unto your Highness all sorts of security, that may be taken before
the betrothing for the preventing of any such course in the parties, that are
to be betrothed. To this your Highness may add any other you can think of,
for that the King, and his Sister, and all the Ministers profess so really the
punctual and present performance of all that is capitulated with your
Highness; That they will refuse no kind of security, that in reason can be
demanded in this behalf: so that your Highness may set down, whatsoever you
think this King and his Sister may do with decency, and honor, and they will
be ready to perform it.

I must now crave leave to speak unto your Highness like a faithful plain
servant, which is, if your Highness pleasure be to have use made of the Powers
you have left in my hands; I no way doubt, but in this particular such
satisfaction will be given, as will appear reasonable to all the world. But if
your Highness desire, that these Powers should not be used, they may be
detained upon other just reasons which will arise in the treaty of the
temporal articles. And I doubt not but the Deposorio's may be deferred for some
few days upon other fair pretexts. But these inconveniences I conceive will
follow. First it will be of great discomfort to the Infanta, who until the
Deposorio's are past, is not her own woman, but must be governed by the
pleasure of the Junto, which I think she is very weary of, neither till then
may she declare her self to be yours, nor Comply with your Highesse in
answering of your Letters, and Messages, and giving you those respects, and
Comforts, which I know she would be glad to do. But if she should any way
judge, that the delay of the Deposorios should arise from your Highness part, I
conceive she would take it most heavily. Secondly, it will certainly raise
great jealousies in this King, and his Ministers, and retard the resolutions,
that are fit to be taken with speed for the putting in execution that which is
capitulated. I therefore offer it unto your Highness wisdom, whether upon the
satisfaction, which they will give in this particular, which will be whatsoever
you can desire; and upon the agreement of the temporal articles your Highness
would upon the coming of the Popes approbation make any farther scruple in the
delivering of your Highness powers; If I shall, I am confident they will not
press it, as not decent for the woman's part to urge the hasting of the
Marriage. But I conceive it will cast such a cloud of Jealousy and distrust
upon the business, that besides the discontent and affliction, which I know it
will give the Infanta (which most works upon me,) it will so disorder the
business, that it will make a stand in your whole proceedings, and
preparations, wherein they now go on cheerfully, and confidently, and I
conceive will punctually perform all that they have capitulated with your
Highness. I dare not so much as give my self leave once to question your
Highness intentions of proceeding to the real effecting of the match, which
makes me desirous that all things may be executed, that may any way retard or
disturb it. Only I shall like a faithful poor servant presume to say thus much
to your Highness; That for diverse years past, I know the King your father, and
your self, have held this the fittest Match in the World, and by a desire of
effecting it, your Highness was induced to undertake that hazardous journey of
coming to this Court in person. In the time of your being here, (admitting that
their proceedings have been in many things unworthy of you.) And that diverse
distastes have grown by intervenient accidents: Now things are reduced to those
terms, that the Match it self is sure, the portion, and the temporal Articles
settled (I hope to the Kings liking and yours) And all other good effects that
could be hoped for by this alliance, are in a fair way. If to these reasons may
be added, That on his Majesty and your Highness part, you have already passed
by, and overcome the main difficulties; and your Highness by your journey has
satisfied your self of the person of the Infanta, God forbid, that either any
personal distastes of Ministers, or any indiscreet, or passionate carriage of
businesses should hazard that, which his Majesty and your Highness have done
so much to obtain, and whereby doubtless so much good, and peace is to accrue
to Christendom by the effecting of it; and contrariwise so much trouble and
mischief by the miscarrying of it. Besides the individual happiness of your
Highness in such a Wife, which the World supposes you infinitely esteem for
her person. And for her Birth and Portion is no where to be matched; And
questionless for her virtue, and settled affection to your Highness deserves
you better then any woman in the World. I humbly crave pardon for writing unto
your Highness in this manner, which I hope your Highness well enough knows,
neither the benefits I have received from Spain, nor their grateful usage of me
upon occasions (nor I protest unto your Highness any other earthly respect)
moves me unto it, but the zeal, and love I bear to your service, for which I
shall ever undervalue any thing, that may concern my self. And therefore I
shall conclude by entreating your Highness, that if you would have things go
well, that a Post may instantly be dispatched back unto me, authorizing me to
deliver the said power upon the arrival of the dispensation, and having taken
fitting security in this particular point. And this I earnestly beseech your
Highness may be done with all possible speed and secrecy; and that the
Spanish Ambassadors may not know that ever there was any suspension made of
the delivery of the powers. In the interim I will find means if the
dispensation come for 20, or 24 days to allege some other fair pretexts for
the deferring of the Deposorios; But herein I desire I may know your Highness
resolution with all possible speed, etc. And so with, etc.

Bristol.
Madrid.
The E. of Bristol to the Prince his Highness, September. 24. 1623.
When your Highness shall remember, that your Highness being here in person,
it was not possible in less then a month, to get that dispatched which you
were promised Mr. Secretary Cottington should have carried with him, if your
Highness would have but stayed him 24 hours; I hope you will pardon your
servants although they sometimes mistake in the time, which they limit for the
procuring of the dispatch of business, especially if they depend upon the
dispatches, that are to be procured from them. I have these 10. days had
Greisly in a readiness to depart, having every day expected a resolution from
the Junto. First in point of the portion, and since in the days of payment,
and at last I have received their answer in them both, in such sort as your
Highness will see in the paper enclosed, which is an extract of the heads of
the temporal Articles that we have agreed, although I have only consented unto
them de been esse, until I shall receive his Majesty's approbation and yours:
In the point of the portion, I have had a tough and a knotty piece of work, by
reason that not only the Conde de Olivarez, but all the Junto were absolutely
ignorant of what had passed in the late Kings time, which I foresaw, and that
was the cause that I moved so earnestly at the Escurial, to have the Conde de
Gondomar remain here. They made many presidents to be searched, and found that
the two millions demanded was four times as much as ever was given with any
daughter of Spain in money. They alleged that it would be said, that the King
of Spain was fain to purchase the friendship and alliance of England; that this
would be such a president, as that Spain hereafter must marry no more
daughters. I only insisted that it was a thing, by the last King settled, and
agreed with me, that this King had by several answers in writing to me
undertaken to pursue the business as it was left by his father, and to make
good whatsoever he had promised. And thereupon desired that the original
Papers, and Consultos of the last King might be seen, which very honestly by
the Secretary Cirica were produced, and appeared to be such, that I dare say,
there was not a man that saw them, that doubts of the last Kings real
intention of making the Match. And questionless this had been the usefullest
occasion to have disavowed former proceedings, and I was resolved to put them
to it. But both the King and his Council upon the sight of what had been
promised by his father, presently took resolution to make good the two
millions, only to remonstrate unto his Majesty the vastness of the Portion,
and to desire him to consider how far the King had stretched himself in this
particular for his satisfaction. And therefore, that he would have
Consideration of it in such things for the future, as might be treated of
betwixt them, and their Kingdoms. As for the days of payment, I insisted to
have had half a million upon the Deposorios, half a million to be carried along
with the Infanta, and the other million at their Fleets the two next years
after by equal portions. But I have now received the Kings answer in this
particular, which your Highness will see in the enclosed paper; as likewise
what I have done therein by the Copy of the dispatch, which I now write about
it to Mr. Secretary. So not having any thing more to add concerning this
particular, I recommend your highness to Gods holy protection, etc.

Madrid.
The E of Bristol to the Duke of Buckingham, December. 6. 1623.
May it please your Grace,
THe present estate of the Kings affairs requires the concurrencie of all his
servants, and the Cooperation of all his Ministers, which makes me desirous
to make unto your Grace this tender of my service, that if there have happened
any errors, or misunderstandings your Grace would for that regard pass them
over: and for any thing that may personally concern my particular, I shall
labor to give you that satisfaction as may deserve your friendship. And if
that shall not serve the turn, I shall not be found unarmed with patience
against any thing that can happen unto me. And so wishing, that this humble
offer of my service may find that acceptance as I humbly desire, I rest

Your Graces most humble servant, Bristol.
Madrid.
The E. of Bristol to Secretary Cottington, Apr. 15. 1623.
Good Mr. Secretary Cottington,
THere is no man living knows better then your self, how zealous I have been
unto the Prince's service, and whilst I thought he desired the Match, I was
for it against all the World. Now the Treaty is ended, the world shall see I
never had, nor will have any affections of my own, but will wholly follow my
Masters, as I have written unto you in my former Letters, and have not these
four months spoken a word in the marriage. If his Majesty and the Prince will
have a war, I will spend my life and fortunes in it, without so much as
replying in what quarrel soever it be. And of thus much I entreat you let his
Highness be informed by you. And I entreat you let me know his directions,
what he will have me do, and how to behave my self, for I absolutely cast my
self at his feet, which I desire to do the first thing after my landing, to the
end that understanding his pleasure, I may commit no error. I beseech you to
dispatch this bearer back unto me withal possible speed, though it be with not
one word more, but what the Prince will have me do, wherewith I shall come muy
Consolado. I understand that I have been much bound to the Prince for the
procuring the 4000 l. to be paid, and for my Pension.

I pray present unto him my most humble thanks: and I confess I have been much
more comforted with that demonstration of his favor, then I can be with the
money. I doubt not but at this time I shall have the effects of a real
friendship from you in this particular. And so desiring to have my service
remembered to my Lady Cottington, I rest.

Poitiers. Yours, etc. Bristol.

Postscript.
I Pray move the Prince, that one of the Kings Ships may be presently appointed
to waft me over; For I have a great charge of of the Princes with me.

W. Greisly met me within 10. posts of Bordeaux, and is passed on to Madrid, I
think he shall find the Blandones for his Highness in a readiness, for Mr.
Stone takes care of them, and has the money in his hand.

May it please your most excellent Majesty.
I Hope your Majesty will not be displeased that I continue unto you that most
humble and just suit, which I have often made unto your Majesty, and your
Majesty has been often graciously pleased to promise, which was that I should
be no ways lessened, or diminished in your Majesty's favor, and good opinion,
until you should be first pleased graciously to hear me, and my Cause. And
although your Majesty for just respects, has not been pleased hitherto to
admit me into your presence, which I esteem an infinite misfortune to me: Yet I
hope that time will no way confirm those impressions of displeasure, which I do
no way doubt, but will be fully cleared, whenever I shall be so happy as by
your Majesty to be heard. For I take God to record, that I have faithfully and
honestly served you, and exactly pursued your ends to the best of my
understanding, and abilities. And I do no way doubt but your Majesty will in
the end protect so faithful a servant as I have been, and shall appear to be to
your Majesty. And in the interim my most humble suit unto your Majesty is,
that since I am neither admitted my self, nor any man else will speak any word
in my defense, or justification, your Majesty according to your Justice, will
let nothing that may be said of me redound to my prejudice in your gracious
opinion: For it shall be found, that I will in all things wholly conform my
self unto your Majesty's will and pleasure. So wishing unto your Majesty a
happy journey, and a safe return with the increase of all happiness. I humbly,
etc.

Your Majesty's, etc. Bristol.
London.
Here next of all follow diverse Dispatches and Letters from Sir Walter Aston to
the Duke.
Sir Walter Aston to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
I Have received so much comfort by the care which I see in your grace to take
all occasions to honor, and favor me, that I should be glad (if it were
possible) in my affection to your person, and in my desire to serve you, that
your grace might see something in me above what you cold find in any other
servant. What an honest thankfulness can be I am, and what an honest servant
can yield you, shall be ever vigilant in me to serve you. Since the departure
of the last post (by whom I wrote lately unto your Grace) my Lord of Bristol
has had audience with this King (taking me along with him) to whom his
Lordship represented the King our Masters desire concerning the Palatinate in
conformity to what his Majesty has commanded by his late letters, we are now
soliciting to hasten this kings answer, which we hope we shall shortly send
unto his Majesty, and there is no diligence omitted by my Lord of Bristol, nor
my self (that we can think on) to negotiate such an answer, as may be to his
majesty's good liking. The Dispatches from Rome are not yet come, but by
letters which they have lately received from the Duke of Pastrana; it is
advertized, that all things are concluded, and that he would send them away
within a few days. By my Lord of Bristols Letter to his Majesty, your grace
will understand the resolution, which his Lordship has taken concerning his
proceedings upon the arival of of the dispaches from Rome: his Lordships has
communicated with me his Majesty's Letter, and desired my opinion concerning
the resolution, which he had taken, wherein I have concurred with his Lordship,
not understanding it any way to be differing in substance from his Majesty's
directions; the altering of the day mentioned in his Majesty's letters being
only the changing it from a time when the powers are of no force, to a time
when they may be of use: the putting of any thing in execution in the one time,
or in the other, depending upon his Majesty's, and his Highnesses further
directions. I have hitherto understood, that his Majesty and his highness have
really affected this match, and have labored faithfully to second their
desires with my utmost endeavors. There is none I am sure a better witness
then my self of the affection which your Grace has born unto it, which I have
seen remain constant through many trials. And therefore until I understand the
contrary from your self, I must believe that your desires are the same, which I
have seen them. I must ever speak my heart freely unto your Grace, and confess
that upon the letter which I received from his Highness, and upon the sight of
his Majesty's to my Lord of Bristol, I have been jealous of his Majesty's heart
and his Highness, that they are not that to the match which they have been;
but these are but distrusts of my own, and not foundation sufficient to slacken
or cool those diligences which I daily perform in conformity to his Majesty's,
and his Highness Commands, and to what remains apparent of their desires. I
shall therefore humbly desire your Lordship to open mine eyesa, nd if I am out
of the way to set me straight, for I have no affections of mine own, but what
agrees with my Masters, and will ever submit with all humility my self, and my
judgment unto his Majesty's wisdom, and faithfully labor to serve him
accordingly to what I shall understand to be his will and pleasure. But until
I know by your Graces favor by what Compass to guide my Course, I can only
follow his Majesty's revealed will; and will once take the boldness to
represent unto your Grace in discharge of what I owe you these Considerations,
which my desire to serve you, forces from me. I do look upon your Grace as a
person infinitely provoked to be an enemy to this match, and believe, that you
have had represented unto you many reasons, showing how much it concerns you to
seek to break it, with all the force you have: But I can neither believe, that
the error of one man can make you an enemy to that, which brings along with it
so much happiness and content unto his Majesty, and his Highness: nor that
your Graces judgment can be led by those arguments, that under the color of
safety, would bring you into a dangerous labyrinth. Your Grace has given noble
testimony, how little you have valued your own safety in respect of his
Majesty's service, and therefore I assure my self you would contemn all
Considerations concerning your self, that might hinder the advancement of his
Majesty's ends. In the proceeding to this Match, there is the same convenience
to his Majesty, that ever has been, there is the same Lady, the same portion,
the same friendship desired, they professing here an exact complying with what
is capitulated, and a resolution to give his Majesty satisfaction in
whatsoever is in their power. From your Grace none can take away the honor of
having been the principal means by which this great business has been brought
to a Conclusion. And whatsoever others may suggest against your Grace, the
Infanta truly informed, cannot but understand you the person to whom she owes
most in this business. Your Grace, and the Conde Olivarez, have fallen upon
different ways, that which concerns the honor of the King our Master, being
different to that, which he understood concerned most his Master, your ends
were both one for the effecting of the Match, and with the Conclusion of it, he
cannot but better understand you. Would your Grace would commit it to my charge
to inform the Infanta what you have merited, and to accommodate all other
mistakes here concerning the proceeding. If your Grace would reconcile your
heart, I would not doubt, but with the Conclusion of the Match to compose all
things to your good satisfaction, and to bring them to a truer understanding of
you, and of their obligation unto you. In what a Sea of Confusions the breaking
of this alliance would engage his Majesty, I will leave to your Lordships
wisdom to consider of, it being too large a discourse for a Letter.

I will therefore only desire your Lordship to consider, that even the most
prosperous War has misfortune enough in it to make the Author of it unhappie:
of which how innocent soever your Lordship is, the occasions that have been
given you, will ever make you liable to the aspersion of it. This I write not
unto your Grace as thinking to divert you from what you are falling into; for I
am confident your heart runs a more peaceable way: but I am willing, that you
should see, that howsoever others should be inclined to carry you into this
tempest, it concerns you, in your care of their happiness, and your own, to
divert them from it. I humbly desire your Grace to pardon this error of mine
(if it be one) which I can excuse with the affection, and infinite desire,
which I have to see you ever happy and flourish.

Concerning my self, your Grace knows my wants, and I doubt not but your Care
is what I could wish. I should be glad when you have done with Peter Wych to
see him dispatched away with some supplies unto me, which I shall be in extreme
want of by Christmasse, my debts besides in England being clamorous upon me for
some satisfaction. I leave all to your Graces care and favor, Ever resting

Your Graces humblest and most bound servant, Wa: Aston.

Postscript.
THe Condessa of Olivarez bids me tell you, that she kisses your Graces hands,
and does every day recommend you particularly by name in her prayers to God.

May it please your Grace,
MY Lord of Bristol intended to have dispatched away a Post unto his Majesty
this night with the advice of the arrival of the dispensation, which came to
this Town the 12th. of this month, hoping that he should have been likewise
able to have given to his Majesty, and his Highness a clear account of all
things concerning it. But the deliverie of the Queen this morning (who is
brought to bed of a daughter) has stopped all negotiation, and I believe it
will be these two days before he can be ready to send him away. There is no
noveltie (as I yet understand) that is come with the dispensation; there will
be something desired for better explanation of his Majesty's, and his Highness
intentions, and some omissions there are which as they understand was his
Highness intention should have been in the Capitulation, they being promised
by his Highness. But I do not find that these will be any stop to the
business. For they do press my Lord of Bristol very much to proceed presently
to the Deposori^s. Your Grace shall understand all things more particularly by
the next Post. I do now make the more haste, forbearing to trouble you with
other occurrences, lest my Letters come short of the departure of the Post, as
they did of his who was last dispatched from hence.

I do most humbly desire your Grace to continue the doing me those offices that
may continue me in his Majesty's and his Highness good opinion, and I doubt
not but I shall be ever able to let your Grace see that you have not a more
faithful servant, then he which your Grace has most bound to be so, and that
shall ever remain

Yours, etc. W.A.

The Lord Duke of Buckingham to Sir Walter Aston.
IN your Letter of the 5th. of December, you desire me to give you my opinion,
my ancient acquaintance, long custom of loving you, with constancy of
friendship invites me to do you this office of good will; and to serve you
according to your request. And for your more entire satisfaction, I will
deliver the things in the past and present. You in all the beginning of the
treaty won to your self a good estimation, while you were only at large in the
treaty, and had communication of the passages from the Lord of Bristol, as by
courtesy: and in his absence handled no farther in the treaty of marriage then
by direction from him. When the Prince was there, your carriage gave his
Highness and my self all satisfaction. Now you must give me leave to put you
in mind of the freedom used with you whilst we were at Madrid, and of the
explanation, the Prince made of himself to you by his Letters from St. Anderas.
From which you might observe, the resentment the Prince had of their
proceedings with him. And by his Highness declaration to you from thence, you
might see both his care and resolution not to engage himself into the marriage
without good conditions for the Pallatinate, and Conservation of his honor
every way. My care and my intentions were to move increase of honor to you,
and to recompense by a good understanding to be laid in his Majesty toward
you, which I pursued so soon, as I came to the Kings presence. And the Princes
confidence was so great in you, as he joined you in the Commission, besides he
declared himself to you by his Letters, not leaving you thereby to guess at
his Majesty's directions to the E. of Bristol, which he was to communicate to
you. Now you may think how strange it was to the Prince, and how much I was
troubled (not being able to make your excuse) when your joint Letters made
known, how you had concurred with the Earl of Bristol, to engage his Highness
by prefixing a day for the Deposorios, without making certain the restitution
of the Palatinate and Electoral dignity, the portion and temporal articles.
Which proceeding of yours with the Earl of Bristol was so understood by the
Lords of the Committee, as they took resolution once, to advise his Majesty to
revoke both the Lord of Bristol, and you, upon those grounds, which you will
understand by his Majesty's own Letters, and Secretary Conwayes Letters
written to you with this dispatch. I was not able at first by any endeavor to
oppose the resolution of your revocation, so far had you cast your self into
misconstruction, and given stop to the progress of your own advancement. But
with constant industry and time, I have won this point, of qualifying all ill
opinion of you, and sufferance of your continuing there. So as it will be now
in your power (by your Carriage) to come off without reproof. And I shall hope
to overcome the rest with time, to to bring you again to the condition of
honor and recompense. Being confident that since you see your own error, and
acknowledge it, you will be careful by a stiff and judicious carriage to
warrant all your present and succeding actions. If you think at first sight I
press you a little hard upon this point, you may be pleased to interpret it to
be a faithful way of satisfying your request, and expression of my affection to
have you to do all things suitable to your wisdom virtue and honor, and
according to the wishes of

Yours, etc. G. Buckingham.

The Duke of Buckingham to Sir Wa. Aston.
I Had not leisure in my former dispatch, being hasty to write the reason why
I wondered at the error you committed in the last dispatch of my Lord of
Bristols and yours; for the matter is, that his Majesty having plainly
written unto you both in his former dispatch, that he desired to be assured of
the restitution of the Palatinate, before the Deposorium was made, seeing he
would be sorry to welcome home one Daughter with a smiling cheer, and leave
his own only Daughter at the same time weeping and disconsolate. And the
Prince having also written unto you, that he never meant to match there, and be
frustrated of the restitution of the Palatinate so often promised, that
notwithstanding this clear Language, you should have joined with my Lord of
Bristol in a resolution of so hasty a delivery of the Prince's Proxy, before
you had received his Majesty's answer to your former dispatch, wherein my Lord
of Bristol urged of his Majesty a harsh answer and direction, and his Majesty
cannot but take it for a kind of Scorn, that within 4. days after ye had urged
his Majesty's answer, ye should in the mean time take resolutions of your own
heads. You may do well, because there is no leisure in this hasty dispatch for
his Majesty to answer my Lord of Bristols last Letter (which will be done by
the next duplicate of this same dispatch) to acquaint him in the mean time with
this Letter, which his Majesty himself has dictated unto me. And so in haste
I bid you farewell,

Yours, etc. G. B.

Sir Walter Aston to the Duke of Buckingham, December. 22. 1623.
May it please your Grace,
I Have committed to the trust and secrecy of this bearer Mr. Clark (whom I
find your Graces faithful servant) certain advertisements to be delivered by
him unto you; which as one that shall (God willing) in all things show himself
your passionate servant, I could no way conceal from you. And howsoever your
Grace may have many advertisements from hence (the relations that come from
England giving occasion to many discourses censuring the Prince, and your
Grace) yet I hope to be so vigilant, that there shall hardly be any resolution
taken by these Ministers which may have any reflection on your Person, that I
shall not one way or other get notice of, and advertize unto you.

I have in all things with so much affection desired to serve your Grace every
way to your satisfaction, that it has infinitely afflicted me, that I should
have done any thing, whereby I might lessen your favorable opinions toward
me, but I hope your Grace has by this time set me straight both with his
Majesty, and his Highness, and restored me to the same place in your
affection, which I have formerly had. Which I am the rather confident of, since
I cannot accuse any action, or thought of mine, that has not born toward your
Grace all possible respect and love. I found by experience here, that the
favor which by your Graces means I received from his Highness, and that
which you were pleased likewise to honor me withal, had raised me many
enemies; And I have reason to fear upon this occasion, there may be some, that
well be busy to do me ill offices with you; but I trust so much upon my own
sincerity, that as I never made any second means unto your Grace, but have
ever singly depended upon the constancy of your goodness to me, finding my
self the same that I have ever been, I make no means to resist such injuries
as others may offer to do me, but continue depending wholly upon that
goodness, and justness, which I know in your Grace, and which I assure my
self will never fail me. I have not been so careless a Servant of your Graces,
as not to have debated over, and over with my self, how far the proceedings or
breaking of the present treaty here might concern your Grace, which I have
discoursed largely to Mr. Clark, thinking them of too large a body to be
contained in a Letter, but I shall in all things submit my self to your better
wisdom; And when you shall please to impart unto me, wherein his Majesty,
and his Highness shall be best served, your Grace shall find in all my
actions, that my affections with all obedience shall run the same way, and that
my proceedings, shall have those respects in them toward your Grace, as you
may expect from your faithful Servant. And so, etc.

Your G. etc. W. A.

The Copy of a Memorial given to the King of Spain, 19. Jan. 1623. Still. Vet.
Translated.
SIR,
SIR Walter Aston Ambassador of the King of great Britain says, That the
King his Master has commanded him to represent unto your Majesty, that having
received so many promises from hence to procure the entire restitution of the
Palatinate, and Electoral dignity to the Prince his Son in Law, He commanded
his Ambassador to press your Majesty with all diligence, that the said
promises might take effect, not as a condition of the marriage, but desiring
infinitely to see settled together with the marriage, the peace and quiet of
his Son in Law, his Daughter, and Grandchildren; and having understood that
this his desire has received an interpretation far differing from his
intention, has commanded him anew for the greater demonstration of the desire
which he has to preserve the good Correspondence with your Majesty, to
declare unto you, that he has not propounded the said restitutions as a
condition of the marriage, but according to that which he understood was most
Conformable with the intention of your Majesty, declared by the Conde de
Olivarez for the surest, and most effectual means to make the amity, which is
betwixt your Majesty's firm and indissoluble, and that there might not remain
any doubt or matter hereafter, that should cause dispute, he has required that
every thing might be settled under your Majesty's hand, desiring it likewise
for the greater comfort of his only Daughter, and for to make the coming of
that most excellent Princess of more esteem unto his Subjects, bringing with
her (besides the glory of her own virtue, and worth) the security of a
perpetual peace, and amity, and an everlasting pawn to his Kingdoms of the
constancy, and real performance of your Majesty's promises, with such
satisfaction to his hopes grounded the said promises, not as a Condition, but
as the fruit and blessing of the alliance. Moreover he says, That the King his
Master has commanded him to make this Declaration unto your Majesty, that you
may know the truth and the sound intentions of his proceedings, with the good
end to which it aims, having renewed the powers, and deferred the delivery of
them only to give time for the accomplishing, and settling that which has
been promised for the satisfying his expectations, and assuring the amity
betwixt your Majesty's Persons, and Crowns; the King his Master hoping that
your Majesty will likewise lay hold of this occasion, which you now have in
your hand to give him full satisfaction in that, which with so much reason he
desires, and therewithal a reciprocal, and everlasting blessing to both your
Majesty's Crowns.

Sir Walter Aston to the Duke, 22. of Jan. 1623. Still. Vet.
May it please your Grace,
HOwsoever upon the arrival of Mr. Greisley, I took the occasion of the
ordinary, the day following to acknowledge unto your Grace the Comfort which I
had received by your Letters; understanding by them the favor which you had
done me, in diverting from me his Majesty's, and his Highness displeasure: I
shall notwithstanding entreat here leave by the same means by which I received
so much happiness to renew my humble, and most thankful acknowledgment unto
your Grace. I most earnestly entreat your Grace to look upon me here as a
servant that loves you in his heart, and that shall faithfully in all things
Comply with what you can expect from such an one, and that therefore you will
be pleased to preserve me still in the way, how I may serve his Majesty, and
his Highness to their Content, and perform toward your Grace those offices of
a servant, which may be most to your satisfaction. For I am now here in a
dangerous time, in the greatest businesses, that have been treated of many
years, and the bitterest storms threatening betwixt these Crowns, that have
been these many ages. I have therefore no hope to save my self without I be
guided by his Highness, and your Graces trusts and care of me.

The Marquess of Ynoisa has lately advertised hither, That he has several
times desired to have private audience with his Majesty, and has not been
able to procure any but what your Grace assists at. It is likewise advertised
unto this King and his Ministers, that your Grace has many meetings with the
Sea Captains, and that your Counsels are how the War is to be made against
Spain. For the avoiding of unnecessarie repetitions, I do here enclosed send
your Grace a Copy of my Letter to Mr. Secretary Conway, wherein you will find
a relation of all things that are come to my hands at this present, that may
any way have reflection unto his Majesty's service. And this is the course
which I intend, and conceive most convenient to hold hereafter with your Grace,
without you command me the contrary. In the said Copy your Grace will find a
discourse of what has lately passed betwixt my Lord of Bristol, and the Conde
of Olivarez in the Pardo. Now that I may more fully discharge my duty, I have
thought fit here to acquaint your Grace, that since the putting off of the
Deposorios at a meeting that my Lord and my self had with the Conde, he did
make a solemn protestation, that if the Treaty of the Match did ever come on
again with effect, it should only be by his Lordships hands, and no other. I
then understood it, and still do, but for a frothy protestation, yet have held
it my duty to advertize it, having passed in my hearing; the truth is, that my
Lords answer was in Conformity to his last in the Pardo, every way rejecting
it, saying, That he had rather be confined to any Town in Afrique, then that
his person should be any hinderance to the Match. Thus forbearing to trouble
your Grace any farther, with my hearty prayers unto God for the continuance of
his blessings unto you. I rest

Your Graces, etc. W. A.

Sir Walter Aston to Secretary Conway, 22. Jan. 1623.
Right Honorable,
BY the return of this Bearer Mr. Greisley, you will understand of the safe
coming to my hands of your dispatch of the 30th. of the last month, with his
Majesty's Letters therein enclosed. I do now herewithal send an account unto
his Majesty of my proceedings upon his Commands, which I do entreat your
Honor to be pleased to present unto him, as also farther to acquaint his
Majesty, that I have already spoken with diverse of these Ministers, and given
them such a declaration of his Majesty's good intentions in the pressing at
this season for the restitutions of the Palatinate, and Electoral dignity unto
the Prince his Son in Law, as I have order to do by the said Letter, but do
find they are here so possessed with the ill relations they receive out of
England, that I with much difficulty can scarce give them any kind of
satisfaction. I have acquainted the Conde Olivarez with the answer, which your
honor, and Mr. Secretary Calvert had received from their Ambassadors
touching their audiences, the Conde himself having formerly acquainted me with
their Complaint. His answer now was, That he understood they had acknowledged
unto your Honors to have received from his Majesty in that point all kind of
satisfaction, but that after you were gone the Marquess of Ynoisa wrote a
Letter to Secretary Calvert, telling him, that he did not well remember
himself, of what had passed at his being there, but had since called to mind,
that he had procured some audiences with the Prince with much difficulty. To
which I answered the Conde, That it seemed the Marquess was very light of his
advertisements, to give such informations as might breed ill understandings
betwixt Princes, and esteem them of no more Consequence, then to forget what he
had advertised with so much ease. Concerning that malicious report here raised
of the Prince's treating a marriage in France. I desire your Honor to let his
Majesty know, that it is advertised hither out of England as a thing so
certain, that there is not a Minister of State (excepting the Conde of
Gondomar) that has not given some credit unto it. I have therefore according
to his Majesty's directions given such declarations touching the author and
believers of it, as your Honor in his Majesty's name has commanded me. I have
likewise received by Mr. Greisly your Letter of the 31. of the last: In answer
of which, all that I shall need to say here unto your Honor is, that my Lord
of Bristol has received your former Letter, acquainting him with his Majesty's
pleasure concerning the same business, from whom his Majesty will receive an
account thereof. This is all that I have to say to your Honor at this present
touching those particulars mentioned in your Letter; I shall now here further
acquaint you with such advertisements, as I conceive may any ways have
reference unto his Majesty's service. My Lord of Bristol, and my self repairing
some few days since unto the Pardo, having conference with the Conde of
Olivarez, his Lordship acquainted the Conde with the Letters of revocation,
which he had received from his Majesty, and withal desired that he would
procure him license to take his leave of the King. The Conde answered his
Lordship, That he had much to say unto him by order from his Majesty, the
substance of his speech was; That they had received large advertisements out of
England, by which they understood the hard measure that he was there likely to
suffer by the power of his enemies, and that the only crime, which they could
impute unto him, was for laboring to effect the marriage, which his Master
could not but take much to heart, and held himself obliged to publish to the
world the good service that my Lord had done unto the King of great Britain;
and therefore for the better encouragement likewise of his own and all other
Ministers that should truly serve their Masters, he was to offer him a blank
paper signed by the King, wherein his Lordship might set down his own
Conditions, and demands; which he said he did not propound to corrupt any
servant of his Majesty's, but for a public declaration of what was due unto
his Lordships proceedings. He said further, that in that offer, he laid before
him the Lands, and Dignities, that were in his Masters power to dispose of; out
of which he left it at his pleasure to choose what estate, or honor, he should
think good, adding thereunto some other extravagant and disproportionable
offers. My Lords answer was, That he was very sorry to hear this language used
unto him, telling the Conde, that his Catholic Majesty did owe him nothing,
but that what he had done was upon the King his Masters Commands, and without
any intention to serve Spain. And that howsoever he might have reason to fear
the power of his enemies, yet he trusted much upon the innocence of his own
Cause, and the Justice of the King, and that he could not understand himself in
any danger: but were he sure to lose his head at his arrival there, he would go
to throw down himself at his Majesty's feet and mercy, and rather there die
upon a Scaffold, then be Duke of Infantada in Spain. On the 16th. of this
month, there was declared here in Council a resolution of this King, to make a
journey to his frontier Towns in Andaluzia, with an intention to begin his
journey upon the 29. of this month Still. Vet. And as I am informed his
Majesty will there entertain himself the greatest part of these three months
following; so that his return hither will not be until the beginning of May. My
Lord of Bristol has sent diverse to the Conde for leave to dispeed himself of
the King, but in respect of his Majesty's being at the Pardo, he has been
hitherto delayed, and has yet no certain day appointed for it: But I conceive
it will be sometime this week. The Cause of the delaying of his Lordships
admittance to the King, as I understand is, that the same day that his Lordship
shall declare his revocation to the King, they will here in Council declare the
revocation of the Marquess of Ynoisa. Howsoever in respect of the Kings
departure, (at which time they use here to embarge all the mules, and means of
carriage in this Town) I believe his Lordship will not begin his journey so
soon as he intended.

All the relations which are lately come out of England do wish them to
entertain themselves herewith no farther hopes, that there is any intention to
proceed to the Match; and this advice comes accompanied with such a report of
the state of all things there, that has much irritated all these Ministers,
and let loose the tongues of the people against the proceedings of his
Majesty, and Highness. I labor as much as I can, and as far as my directions
will give me latitude, to give them better understandings of the real
intentions of his Majesty and Highness: but diverse of them clearly tell me,
That I profess one thing, and the actions of his Majesty and Highness (upon
the which they must ground their belief) are differing from it. I shall
therefore here in discharge of my duty advertize your Honor, that they do here
expect nothing but a War, about which they have already held diverse Councels,
and go seriously to work, preparing themselves for what may happen. Which I
desire your Honor to advertize his Majesty, being high time, as far as I am
able to judge, that am here upon the place, that his Majesty do either resolve
upon some course for the allaying of these storms; or that he go in hand with
equal preparations. Having observed in former times, the strange rumors that
have run in England upon small foundations; I have thought it fit to prevent
the credit which may be given to idle relations by advertizing your Honor that
I cannot conceive how any great attempt can be made from hence this year;
howsoever businesses should go. The Squadron of the Kings Fleet (under the
Command of Don Fadrique de Toledo) is come into Cadiz, and joined with that
which Don Juan Taxardo is Captain of. And as I am credibly informed, this King
will have by the end of April between 50. and 60. Gallions at Sea. It is true
that other years the number commonly falls short of what is expected, and their
setting forth to Sea some months later then the time appointed, but there is
extraordinary care taken this year, that there be no default in neither.

The chief end (that I can understand) of this Kings journey being to see the
Fleet of Plate come in, to take view of his Armado, and see them put to Sea.
That which I understand is only left alive of the Marriage here is, that the
Jewels, which the Prince left with this King for the Infanta and her Ladies,
are not yet returned, but it is intimated unto me, that if the Letters which
they shall receive out of England upon the answer they have given to his
Majesty about the business of the Palatinate be no better, then such as they
have lately received, they will return the Jewels, and declare the business of
the Match for broken. I shall therefore entreat your Honor to know his
Majesty's pleasure how I shall carry my self, if they be offered unto me, being
resolved in the mean time until I shall know his Majesty's pleasure, if any
such thing happen, absolutely to refuse them. The Princess some few days
since fell sick of a Calenturae, of which she remains still in her bed,
though it be said she is now somewhat better. I will conclude with many thanks
for your friendly advertizements concerning my own particular, which (God
willing) as far as I can, I will observe, and do earnestly entreat you, that
you will please to continue the like favors unto me, which I shall highly
esteem of. And so with a grateful acknowledgment of my obligations, I rest.

Your Honors, etc. Wa. Aston.

Sir Walter Aston to the Lord Conway.
Right Honorable,
I Have advertized by former dispatches, that the Parliament here had granted
unto this King 60 millions of Ducats to be paid in 12 years, which with 12
millions which remain yet unpaid of what was given the King at the last
Session, this King was to receive 72 millions in the 12 years next following. I
shall now acquaint your Honor, that there are only 19. Cities that have voice
in this Parliament, and that each of them do send hither two Provadores, (as
they call them here) but these have no power finally to conclude any thing, but
what is agreed on by them is to be approved of by the said. Cities or the
greatest number of them before it have the force of an Act of Parliament, and
that therefore there has been all possible art used to procure the Cities to
confirm what has been granted by their Procuradores touching the 60. millions;
and it is here thought that one of the motives of this Kings journey was,
hoping by the authority of his presence to procure the consent unto the said
gift of the 4. Cities which he is to pass by in this journey, namely Cordova,
Sivel, Joen, and Granado, it being here doubted, that the said Cities might
make great opposition to the said grant, notwithstanding his Majesty has not
had such success as was expected. But Cordova which was the first City with
which his Majesty began, has absolutely refused to give their Consent,
letting his Majesty understand, though in as fair and respectful terms as they
could express themselves, That it was a demand impossible for them to Comply
withal. What the success of this may be is doubtful, Cordova having given but
an ill example to the other Cities, and yet it is rather believed here, that
the greatest number of them being under the Command of such as are either this
Kings servants, or absolutely under his dispose, that his Majesty will be able
to overcome the business, and they are now busy how to settle the manner of
the leavie of the said sum by yearly and equal portions.

They having found here diverse inconveniences in their new Government of
Portugal by way of Governors, are resolved to place Vice-Kings again there.
And for to gratify the Emperor have elected for that charge his third Brother
Don Carlos, who is presently to make his repair thither. On the 27th. of the
last month, my Lord of Bristol took his leave of the Queen and the Infanta,
and on the Sunday following being the 29. of the said month, his Lordship
delivered unto me the Powers which his Highness left with him, and those which
have been since sent hither. His Lordship is preparing for his journey, and
says that he is already in such a forwardness, as upon the arrival here of
Mr. Greisley, or any other from England, whereby he shall receive means for the
taking up of moneys here, he will presently put himself upon the way. The Queen
here some few days since fell suddenly ill, and swooned two or three times,
but her indisposition lasted not above two or three days; Her Majesty is now
(thanks be to God) very well again. The King having received advice thereof
intended (as it is said) to come presently post hither, but upon better news,
his Majesty proceeds in his journey, and for any thing that I can understand,
it will be May before his return to this Town.

There are lately thrown abroad in this Town diverse Copies of a Proclamation
pretended to be published in Ireland bearing date the 27. of January last. It
has made a great noise here, and diverse of their Ministers have spoken with me
about it, they conceiving it to be contrary to what has been lately
Capitulated. For my part, I have been able to give them no answer, not having
yet understood from your Honor, nor any of his Majesty's Ministers, of any
such Proclamation. I have seen the Proclamation as it came printed from thence,
and do here enclosed send your Honor a Copy thereof, desiring you that you
will acquaint his Majesty therewithal, that he may be pleased to Command
therein what to his wisdom shall seem fit. To those that have spoken with me
about this Proclamation (having first disclaimed the having had knowledge of
any such thing) I have used discourses of mine own touching the abuses of those
which are called titulary Archbishops, Bishops, etc. letting them understand
here, that if those kind of people have been busy there to plant secretly
their Government, they have far exceeded the favor which was promised them,
and given his Majesty just cause to give order for the reformation.

My last to your Honor was of the 7th. of February last by Albert Rivas, whom
I dispatched with all diligence to you, since when I have received nothing from
your Honor. I shall therefore, etc.

Your Honors, etc. Wa. Aston.

Sir Walter Aston to the Lord Conway, 5th. June. 1624.
Right Honorable,
IN a former Dispatch which I lately made unto your Honor, I sent unto you the
Copy of a Letter, which I then had newly received from the Secretary Don
Andreas de Prada, by which he advertised me, That the King his Master
(according to what I had requested by memorial) had commanded, that all English
Commodities and Manufactures (which I have long since advertized were
prohibited by Prematica's published here for the reformation of abuses) should
enter into these Kingdoms. I have long since performed diverse diligences my
self, both with the Secretary, and President of Castile, for the procuring a
declaration of the said order, being careful to prevent such inconveniences as
the King our Masters Subjects might fall into for want thereof. But having been
tossed up and down between the Secretary, and the President with several
delays, the one remitting me to the other. I repaired to the Conde of Olivarez
(suspecting some novelty in the business) and acquainted him, that upon the
receipt of a Letter sent me from the Secretary Don Andreas de Prada, concerning
the free entrance of English Commodities, I had given notice by a Copy of the
said Letter unto the King my Master of what was therein Commanded, and had
likewise advertised the Merchants that reside in these Kingdoms of the said
Order. I also gave him account of the several diligences which I had performed
with the President, and the Secretary, for the procuring a declaration thereof,
and desired that he would presently command that there might be such course
taken, that there should be no further delays used therein, since I should be
loath to see the King my Masters Subjects encouraged by the said Order to
repair hither with their Merchandises, and fall into inconveniences for want
of notice given thereof unto their Ministers in the Ports. The Conde fell into
discourses far from my expectation, asking me whether it was not free for any
King, in his own Kingdom, to Command his own Subjects to wear what he pleased,
saying further, that the English were not prohibited to bring in their
Commodities, but that the King his Master might command his Subjects to spend
the Bays, and other Commodities of his own Kingdoms, and not to make use of
those that came from foreign parts, as to his wisdom for the good of his
Kingdoms should seem best. That there should be a suspension of the execution
of the said Pramatica's until St. James-tide, and no longer. To which I
answered, That I made no doubt of the power, that every King had over his own
Subjects, notwithstanding where it was articled betwixt two Kings, that there
should be a free admittance of each others Commodities unto their several
Kingdoms, and after a Command should be given prohibiting either of them unto
their Subjects the making use thereof, it could not but be understood a
defrauding and deluding of the Articles, and the true intention of them: but I
told him I came not to dispute this now, for the Secretaries Letter had desired
me to take notice of another resolution, therefore I desired, that there might
be a speedy and public declaration made of what was therein signified unto
me: or if there were any new resolution, that I might understand it. To which
he answered (pretending that he spoke it as a freedom which he used with me)
but came out with it in such a manner, as I saw he was full of it) That the
truth was, that they would proceed here, as they were proceeded withal in
England. That the King my Master had lately given leave to the Hollanders to
transport Artillery out of England, and had denied the like to their
Ambassadors having required it; which was (as he said) directly against the
articles of peace, wherein it was Capitulated, That neither should assist with
any kind of arms the enemy of the other. He said farther, That the English had
taken Ormuh, and there was no satisfaction given concerning that business, nor
appearance of any intention to do it, and concluded, That when the Articles of
Peace should be observed to them, they would do the like. I told the Conde I
had not understood any thing of those particulars which he mentioned, and
therefore could say nothing unto him; neither thought I fit to give him any
further answer, being loath in a business of this importance, where the
Articles of Peace between these Kingdoms are in question, to do any thing at
guess, but to advertise it to the King my Master, and to proceed according to
such order as he shall please to give me. I do therefore entreat your Honor,
that you will be pleased to acquaint his Majesty with what has passed,
wherein I doubt not but his Majesty will observe the distraction, and
inconstancy of their proceedings here at present, in Commanding, what his
Majesty will have found by this Secretaries Letter, and taking presently after
new resolutions. After this language which the Conde has used unto me, I
cannot expect any reason or justice here, and the Merchants have many suites
depending wherein they have received great injuries, whereof I have not
hitherto complained, because I was in continual hope of procuring redress, and
their suites proceeded on, I cannot say as I would have wished, but according
to the style here, and in such manner as they have done in former times. I
doubt not but his Majesty will therefore likewise please to consider what a
stop there is likely to be here of all businesses concerning the Commerce, and
either proceed as occasion shall there be offered, in the like manner, or take
such a Course for settling things in better order, as to his wisdom shall seem
best. I have since had some overtures made unto me, that the said declaration
shall presently come out, in the mean time I would not wish, that the Merchants
should adventure any thing trusting to their courtesy here. By my last unto
your Honor which was of the 20th. of May, I advertized the advice which was
given hither, That the Galeons, that bring the Plate, were upon the way for
these parts; Since when there is news of their arrival at St. Lucar, excepting
two of them which perished in their journey hitherward, the one sprung a leak
in a calm day, and sunk so fast, that there were only saved 52 men, the rest,
which were about 200. persons, were all drowned, neither was any of her freight
saved. The other was their Admirante, which corresponds with our Vice Admiral,
which likewise sprung a leak, but all the men aboard were saved, and a good
part of her silver. There is lost upon Register in these two Ships three
millions, and it is thought that there perished in them above a million in
silver, and goods unregistred.

Upon order that was lately sent unto the Assistente of Sevil, for the
perfecting the Grant of the Millions to the King by the said City, there being
doubt made whether it was a lawful Concession, or no; The Assistente called
together those, that had voices in the said grant of the said Millions, and
made a speech unto them, wishing a general Conformity to what his Majesty had
desired of them; but the proposition was very distastful unto the greater
number, who little expected to have heard that business revived again. And the
people having gotten notice upon the breaking up of that meeting of what had
been there propounded, in a tumultuous manner ran after the Assistente, who was
returning to his house, and hearing such a clamor behind him, thought that the
people had been disquieted by some accident, and stayed to have appeased them,
but by the curses which he heard, and the blows he received by the stones
which were thrown at him, he quickly found against whom the fury of the people
was bent, and so made all the haste he could to his own house, which at length
he recovered sore wounded, and with much hazard of his life.

The Irish Priests, and others of that Kingdom which reside in this Court,
begin to grow very busy here, and do promise great matters unto this King in
the assistance which his Majesty shall find in Ireland, whenever he shall
please to attempt any thing against that Kingdom; but for any thing I can
learn, there has been as yet so little ear given unto them, that they have not
descended to make any particular offer. But they are treated here with much
Courtesy, Tyr-Connel being made a Page to the Queen, and the rest receiving
good satisfaction. I will be as vigilant as I can to trace out their steps, and
I hope I shall be able to give seasonable advertizement of their proceedings.
Howsoever since secret Councels may be held, and resolutions taken, which I may
miss of; I doubt not but the King our Master considering the present
jealousies, and distastes betwixt these Crowns, will be vigilant to secure that
Kingdom, that there may be nothing neglected upon which they may here take any
sudden advantage. By the English Merchants that reside in Malaga I have
received advice, that 3. Scottish Masters of Ships have lately had a sentence
pronounced against them by the D. of Medina Sidona, wherein their Ships and all
their goods are confiscated, for having brought Holland Commodities to that
Port, and their persons condemned to the Galleys; which notwithstanding their
apellation unto to the Council of War here, (which ought to have been admitted
them) was presently put into execution. The same day that I received the
advice, I gave in a Memorial to the Council of State, representing the rigorous
and unjust proceeding against the said Scottish Masters, and desired that they
would send their order, that the Apellation might be admitted, and that their
persons might be presently returned off of the Galleys. I likewise repaired to
the Conde of Olivarez, acquainting him with the proceedings of the Duke, and
was able to give him some examples of diverse Hollanders that had been treated
in the like occasion with far less rigor. Whereupon there is Command given
according to what I have desired; and whatsoever shall become of their goods, I
have a promise from the Conde of Olivarez, that their persons shall be treated
with all Courtesy. It is published by the Ladies of the Palace, that the Queen
is with Child, which has filled this Court with much joy, and her Majesty
has so much better health now upon her being new with Child, then she has had
of the rest, that they are already here full of hopes that she will bring them
a Prince, etc.

Your Honors, etc. Wa. Aston.

The Abstract of a Letter from Sir Walter Aston to the Lord Conway, 17. July,
1624.
HE acknowledges the receipt of his Majesty's Letters of the 27. of June by
Mr. Wych, and is busy in preparing to put those Directions in execution, and
that being done, will give a speedy and full account. The Marquess Ynoisa
dispatched away a Post to Spain from Calice, and by him gave as malicious an
account of his usage at his departure from England, and also of all other late
passages there, as malice it self could have dictated. He omits no libels or
infamous songs, nor spares his own inventions where they may serve to incense,
The Credit they are like to give to their Ambassador, the height of discontent
they are now in, the assurance given them of the weak and mean estate of all
things in England may tempt them to offer the giving us a blow, where we are
weakest. And therefore no necessary preparations for defense to be neglected on
our part. None of their Armado stirs yet, but only 4. Gallions appointed to
accompany for some days the Nova Espagna Fleet that put to Sea the fourth of
this present.

Sir Walter Aston doubts, that the light he has received of the present state
of things in England, and the Arguments to answer their Objections will hardly
be applied to give any satisfaction. (things being in so much distemper there)
And where the best answers on both sides are recriminations, he conceives
little is to be expected but a direct falling out. The cause of their retarding
Mendoza's coming for England has been their desire to see the issue of the
proceedings with their Ambassador. All the Grandees, and principal persons of
Spain are summoned to give their attendance with their arms, which is done by
three Letters. 1. Admonitoria. 2. Apercibitoria. 3. Executoria. The two first
are already set forth. And there is order likewise given for the Battalon to be
in a readiness, which is the same as the Trained Bands in England. This is an
ancient practice there upon suspicion of foreign invasion, or domestique
Commotion. There are leavies new making according to custom, for supplying of
Garrisons; and though these Leavies are greater then usually, yet not much
worthy of note. An Ambassador arrived there for Denmark; his coming being
given out to be to negotiate the business of the Palatinate, and to make
overtures for a Peace with Holland: but if nothing be heard of this in England,
it is not like to be true. A Request presented unto the King by a Consulta from
the Inquisiter general, etc. to procure a Jubilee from Rome for expiation of the
late great Contempt done by a Frenchman to the Sacrament. The King promises to
do it, and he, the Queen, and the whole household will endeavor to deserve it
by fasting, and other duties. In his answer to the Consulta there is a passage,
that intimates his intention of looking abroad with his arms. The Frenchman
was condemned, burnt publicly, and dyed a Roman Catholic. There have been
diverse processions in expression of the general grief for that action. The
King, Queen, his Brothers and Sister, with the Grandees, and the Council went
in procession about the two square Courts of the Palace, where there were 4.
Altars built, one by the Kings care, the rest by the Queen, the Infanta,
Cardinal, Don Carlos, and Dona Maria, who joined in the care of one of them.
The greatest riches of Diamonds and Pearls that were in the Churches
thereabouts, and in the Kings store were presented on those Altars, and were at
ten millions. They intend to dispatch one Jaquesse Brones Secretary of the
Council of Flanders, by post into England to bring Don Carlos warrant to come
away, and to stay Agent in England until the arrival of another Ambassador,
which will not be long. They stay the giving out of the order for the free
admittance of English Merchandises, until they see what will be done with their
Ships in the Downs, etc.

Sir Walter Aston to the Duke, 20. of October. 1624.
May it please your Grace,
I Assure my self that your Grace is very confident, that I have not only
pursued the Complaint which I here made against the Marquess of Ynoisa with
the duty of a Minister in obedience to the King my Masters Command, but as
passionately interested against his person, who maliciously attempted to stain
(if it had been possible) the honor of the Prince his Highness and your
Graces my noblest friend. And certainly my Lord, I should be infinitely
afflicted in not having brought this business to that issue which I thirsted
after, could I accuse my self of having omitted any thing, that might have
sharpened them here against him: But the Conde of Olivarez with a strong and
violent hand has delivered the Marquess from any exemplary punishment, which
would certainly have been inflicted upon him, had he been left to the Council
of State, and without care either of the King his Masters honor or engagement,
has saved the Marquess, and left the envy of it upon his Majesty, if the
King our Master will so please to understand it.

In my last unto your Grace which was of the 24th. of the last month, I humbly
entreated you to procure me his Majesty's leave to return into England for some
few months, which suit I do here again renew unto your Grace. Howsoever in
respect of this novelty in the Marquess his business, I will forbear putting
my self upon the way until I hear of the receipt of this dispatch: since if his
Majesty shall please to give any demonstrations here of his sense of their
unworthy proceedings, I would be loath that those Commands should find me out
of the way: with the remembrance of my duty, I rest

Your Graces, etc. Wa. Aston.

Sir Walter Aston to the Duke the 10th. of December. 1625.
May it please your Grace,
THe Portugal Armado put to Sea on the 12th. of the last month Still. Vet. It
consists of 22. Ships of War, 4. Victuallers, and two small Pinnaces of Advice:
There goes in it near upon 4000. Land Soldiers. From Cadiz I have now fresh
advice, That Don Frederique is still in the Port, with the Fleet which he
Commands, but himself and his men all embarked. That Armado consists of some
35. Ships of War, and about 8000. Soldiers, and both the Fleets are victualled
for 8. months. That of Portugal had first order to expect Don Frederique at
the Cape St. Vincent, but has since received command to proceed on the
journey. It being now 27. days since the Fleet d^parted, and this remaining
still in the Harbor, does give me much cause of jealousy: especially
understanding, that they have here advice, (which they give credit to) that the
Troops lately delivered to Count Mansfelt are sent to succor Breda, fearing
(if it be so) that they laying hold of it as a breach of the Peace (which
interpretation I meet with in every discourse) should presently fall with this
Armado upon some part of Ireland. I have no farther ground for this distrust,
then what I have here represented, which your Grace weighing with the
importancy of their enterprise in hand for the recovering the Baya, and the
occasions that will be given them from England, do best know what rigid
judgment to make. Sithence I wrote my other Letter unto your Grace, (which
accompanies this) I understand the French Ambassador by order from the King
his Master, has given account unto this King of the Conclusion of the Match
betwixt the Prince his Highness, and Madam Christiene his Masters Sister.
Whereupon this King, and the whole Court put on Galas: I conceive (howsoever I
have not heard any thing thereof by any Letter unto me) that this is ground
enough to Congratulate with your Grace this good beginning which I shall
affectionately wish may in the success in all times prove a happiness to his
Highness and a particular blessing to your Grace. The Conde of Gondomar has
newly received a Command from the King his Master (signified unto him by the
Secretary Don Andreas de Prada) to put himself presently upon the way for
England, which he has answered he will obey, howsoever I believe he will keep
his Christmasse here. Mr. Butler whom your Grace left here placed with this
King meets often with such discourses in the Palace, that as a faithful servant
to your Grace, he has no patience to bear, which he has reason to believe
will in a short time throw him out of this Court, which he would be glad to
prevent, if he might have your Graces command to return, being infinitely
desirous that your Grace would dispose otherwise of him. I will conclude with
the same suit for my self, there being none that has more need of comfort from
your Grace. I best know, that I have no way deserved any change or decay in
your Graces favor toward me, having not been slow in upbraiding this Nation
with their obligations to your Grace, and their shameful ungratefulness, nor
without a constant, and passionate desire to serve your Grace every way to your
content, if your Graces Commands would but direct me what to do, I do therefore
rest confident of your care and goodness toward me. And so with my prayers to
God to continue his blessings upon you, I rest

Your Graces, etc. W. Aston.

Dr. Williams to the Duke.
My most noble Lord,
IT has pleased God to call for the Bishop of London. I am so conscious of
mine own weakness and undeservings, that, as I never was, so now I dare not be
a suitor for so great a charge. But if his Majesty by your Honors mediation,
shall resolve to call me to perform him the best service I can in that place, I
humbly beseech your Honor to admit me a suitor in these three circumstances.

First, that whereas my Lord of London has survived our Lady day, and received
all the profits, that should maintain a Bishop until Michaelmasse, I may by his
Majesty's favor retain all my own means until the next day after Michaelmas
day; this is a Petition which I shall be necessitated to make unto his Majesty
(if his Majesty by your favor shall advance me to this place) and injureth no
man else in the world.

Secondly, that whereas the Commissioners challenge from the Bishops revenues a
matter of 200. l. per annum, (this Bishopric being already very meanly endowed
in regard of the continual charge, and exhaustments of the place) it would
please his Majesty to leave in my hands (by way of Commendam) one Benefice of
mine, which falls into his Majesty's dispose upon my remove, until it be
determined by the said Commissioners, whether any part of the Bishops means be
due unto the Fabrique. My humble suit is for Walgrave, a Benefice with Cure in
North-hamptonshire, where I have laid out all my estate in temporal Lands.

Lastly, that if it be found, that the Bishop is to join with the
Residentiaries of Paul's in the repair of the Church, his Majesty would
qualify me by a commendam to hold one of my own Prebends, when it shall fall
to be a Residentiarie also; that if I be charged with the burden of
Residentiarie, I might enjoy the profits of a Residentiarie.

These three requests do (I confess) add unto me, but do not prejudice any
one else whatsoever. I submit them and my self to your Honors wisdom, etc.

The names of such Ecclesiastical promotions as I now retain, and will fall to
be disposed of by the King, if I should be removed.

1. Deanery of Westminster. 2. Rectorie of Dinam. 3. Rectorie of VValgrave. 4.
Rectorie of Grafton. 5. Prebendary of Peterborough. 6. Chaunter of Lincoln. 7.
Prebendary of Asgarbie. 8. Prebendary of Nonnington. 9. Residentiaries place of
Lincoln.
Lord Keeper to the Duke, 27. July, 1621.
My most noble Lord,
AN unfortunate occasion of my Lords Grace his killing of a man casually (as it
is here constantly reported) is the cause of my seconding of my yesterdayes
Letter unto your Lordship. His Grace (upon this accident) is by the Common Law
of England to forfeit all his estate unto his Majesty, and by the Canon Law
(which is in force with us) irregular, ipso facto, and so suspended from all
Ecclesiastical function, until he be again restored by his Superior, which (I
take it) is the Kings Majesty in this rank, and order of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. If you send for Dr. Lamb he will acquaint your Lordship with the
distinct penalties in this kind. I wish with all my heart, his Majesty would
be as merciful, as ever he was in all his life; but yet I held it my duty to
let his Majesty know by your Lordship, that his Majesty is fallen upon a
matter of great advice, and deliberation. To add affliction to the afflicted
(as no doubt he is in mind) is against the Kings nature; to leave virum
Sanguinum, or a man of blood, Primate and Patriarch of all his Churches, is a
thing that sounds very harsh in the old Councels, and Canons of the Church. The
Papists will not spare to descant upon the one and the other. I leave the knot
to his Majesty's deep wisdom to advise and resolve upon. A rheum fallen into
mine eye (together with the rumor I last wrote unto your Lordship about) has
fastened me unto my bed, which makes this Letter the more unhandsome. But I
will take nothing to heart, that proceeds from his Majesty, or from that King,
who has raised me from the dust, to all that I am. If the truth were set down,
1. That my self was the first mover for a temporary Keeper. 2. That his
Majesty has promised me upon the relinquishing of the Seal (or before) one of
the best places in this Church, as most graciously he did. 3. The year and a
halfs probation left out, which is to no purpose, but to scare away my men, and
to put a disgrace upon me. 4. That my assisting Judges were desired, and named
by my self, which your Lordship knows to be most true: Such a declaration
would neither shame me, nor blemish his Majesty's service in my person. And it
were fitter a great deal, the penning thereof were referred to my self, then to
Mr. Secretary, or the Lord Treasurer, who (if he had his demerit) deserves not
to hold his staff half a year. I do verily believe, they will hasten to finish
this act, before I shall hear from your Lordship, which if they do, God send me
patience and as much care to serve him, as I have, and ever had to serve my
Master; And then all must needs be well. I send your Lordship a Copy of that
speech I have thought upon, to deliver at London upon Monday next at the
Commission of the Subsidies: If his Majesty have leisure to cast his eye
thereupon, and to give direction to have any thing else delivered, or any point
of this suppressed, I would be directed by your Lordship whom I recommend in
prayers to Gods good guiding and protection. And do rest, etc.

The E. of Southhamptons Letter to the Bishop of Lincoln.
My Lord,
I Have found your Lordship already so favorable, and affectionate unto me,
that I shall be still hereafter desirous to acquaint you with what concerns me,
and bold to ask your advice, and council; which makes me to send this bearer to
give your Lordship an account of my answer from Court, which I cannot better
do, then by sending unto you the answer it self, which you shall receive here
enclosed. Wherein you may see what is expected from me, that I may not only
magnify his Majesty's Gracious dealing with me, but cause all my friends to do
the like, and restrain them from making any extenuation of my errors, which if
they be disposed to do, or not to do is impossible for me to alter, that am not
likely for a good time to see any other then mine own family. For my self, I
shall ever be ready (as is fit) to acknowledge his Majesty's favor to me, but
can hardly persuade my self, that any error by me committed, deserved more
punishment then I have had, and hope that his Majesty will not expect, that I
should not confess my self to have been subject to a Star Chamber sentence,
which God forbid I should ever do. I have, and shall do according to that Part
of my Lord of Buckinghams advice to speak of it as little as I can, and so
shall I do in other things to meddle as little as I can. I purpose (God
willing) to go to morrow to Tychfield (the place of mine confinement) there to
stay as long as the King shall please.

Sir William Parkhurst must go with me, who hoped to have been discharged at
the return of my Messenger from Court, and seems much troubled, that he is
not, pretending that it is extreme inconvenient for him, in regard of his own
occasions. He is fearful he should be forgotten. If therefore when your
Lordship writes to the Court, you would but put my Lord of Buckingham in
remembrance of it, you shall (I think) do him a favor. For my part it is so
little trouble to me, and of so small moment, as I mean to move no more for
it. When this bearer returns, I beseech you return by him this enclosed Letter,
and believe that whatsoever I am I will ever be,

Your Lordships most assured friend to do you service. H. Southampton, etc.

The Lord Keepers answer to the E. of Southhamptons Letter. 2. August, 1621.
My Lord,
I Have perused your Lordships Letter, and that enclosed I return back again.
And doubt nothing of my Lord Admirals remembering of you upon the first
opportunity. Great works (as I hope this will be a perfect reconciling of his
Majesty's affections to you, of your best studies, and endeavors to the
service of his Majesty) do require some time: They are but poor actions, and
of no continuance that are Slubbered up in an instance. I know (my Lord) men's
tongues are their own, nor lies it in your power to prescribe what shall be
spoken for you, or against you. But to avoid that Complacentia (as the Divines
call it) that itching, and inviting of any interpretation, which shall so add
to your innocence, as it shall derogate from the Kings mercy, which (I speak
as I would do before God) had a great cloud of jealousies, and suspicions to
break through, before it came to shine upon you. This (I take it) is the effect
of my Lords exhortation, and I know it ever has been your Lordships
resolution. How far you could be questioned in the Star Chamber, is an
unseasonable time to resolve. The King has waved off all judgment, and left
nothing for your meditation, but love and favor, and the increasing of both
these. Yet I know (upon my late occasions to peruse Presidents in that Court)
that small offenses have been in that Court (in former times) deeply censured.
In the sixteenth of Edward the second (for the Court is of great antiquity)
Henry Lord Beaumont, running a way of his own about the invading of Scotland,
and dissenting from the rest of the Kings Council, because of his absenting
himself from the Council Table was fined and imprisoned: though otherwies a
most worthy and deserving Noble man. But God be thanked your Lordship has no
cause to trouble your head about these meditations. For (if I have any
judgment) you are in a way to demean your self as you may expect rather more
new additions, then suspect the least diminution from his Gracious Majesty.
For mine own part, assure your self, I am your true and faithful servant, and
shall never cease so to continue, as long as you make good your professions to
this Noble Lord. Of whose extraordinary goodness, your Lordship, and my self
are remarkable reflections. The one of his sweetness in forgetting of wrongs,
the other of his forwardness in conferring of courtesies.

With my best respect to your Lordship and my Noble Lady, and my Commendations
to Sir William Parkhurst, I recommend your Lordship, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke concerning the E. of South-hampton. 2. Aug. 1621.
My most noble Lord,
I Humbly crave your pardon for often troubling your Honor with my idle Lines,
and beseech you to remember, that amongst many miseries my sudden greatness
comes accompanied with, this is not the least, that I can no otherways enjoy
the happiness of your presence. God is my witness, the Lord Keeper has often
(not without grief of heart) envied the fortunes of a poor Scholar, one Dr.
Williams, late Dean of Westminster, who was so much blessed in the free
accesses in that kind, as his Lordship (without a great quantity of goodness
in your self) may scarce hope for. This enclosed will let your Lordship
understand, that somewhat is to be finished in that excellent piece of mercy,
which his Majesty (your hand guiding the Pencil) is about to express in the
E. of Southhampton. It is full time his Attendant were revoked in my poor
opinion, and himself left to the Custody of his own good Angel. There is no
readier way to stop the mouths of idle men, nor to draw their eyes from this
remainder of an object of Justice, to behold nothing but goodness and mercy.
And the more breathing time you shall carve out between this total enlargement
and the next access of the Parliament, the better it will be for his Majesty's
service. Only remember this, that now you are left to be your own
Remembrancer. Of all actions forget not those of mercy, and Goodness, wherein
men draw nighest to God himself: Nor of all Persons, prisoners and afflicted
Joseph's. Celerity does redouble an act of mercy. But why do I turn a Preacher
of goodness unto him, who (in my own particular) has showed himself to be
composed of nothing else? Remember your Noble Self, and forget the aggravations
of malice, and envy, and then forget if you can the E. of Southhampton. God
bless you, and your royal Guest, and bring you both, after many years yet most
happily run over here upon earth, to be his blessed guests in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, concerning the Lord of St. Albons, October 27th.
1621.
My most noble Lord,
I Have received your Lorships expression concerning the Pause I made upon the
two Patents. The Proclamation of writing to the Kings hand, and my Lord of St.
Albons pardon. The former I have sealed this morning in duty, and obedience to
your Lordships intimation. The latter I have not yet sealed, but do represent
(in all lowliness and humility) these few Considerations by your Lordship to
his sacred Majesty, wherein let your Lordship make no question, but I have
advised with the best Lawyers in the Kingdom. And after this representation, I
will perform whatsoever your Lordship shall direct.





Albon, the stealing away, altering, rasing, and interlining of his Majesty's
Rowles, Records, Briefs, etc. which are more in a Lord Chancellors pardon, then
the imbezeling of his Majesty's jewels in a Lord Chamberlains. And yet the Lord
Chancellor Elsmore could not endure that clause in my Lord of Sommersets
Pardon, unless he would name the jewels in particular.

I see (in his Majesty's great wisdom) these are not regarded. Only I could
have wished, the Pardon had been referred to the Council board, and so passed.
I have now discharged my self of those poor scruples, which (in respect only
to his Majesty's service, and your Lordships honor) have wrought this short
stay of my Lord of St. Albons Pardon. Whatsoever your Lordship shall now
direct, I will most readily (craving pardon for this not undutiful boldness)
put in execution. Because some speech may fall of this days speech, which I
had occasion to make in the Common Pleas, where a Bishop was never seen sitting
there these 70. years, I have presumed to enclose a Copy thereof, because it
was a very short one.

Your Lordship shall not need to take that great pains (which your Lordship to
my unexpressible comfort has so often done) in writing. What Command soever
your Lordship shall impose upon me as touching this pardon, your Lordships
expression to Mr. Packer or the bearer shall deliver it sufficiently. God from
heaven continue the showring and heaping of his blessings upon your Lordship,
etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 22. July, 1621.
My noble Lord,
With my truest affections, and thankfulness premised. I do not doubt but his
Majesty and your Lordship do now enjoy the general applause of your goodness
to the Earl of Southhampton. Saturday last he came, and dined with me, and I
find him more cordially affected to the service of the King, and your Lordships
love and friendship, then ever he was, when he lay a prisoner in my house. Yet
the Sunshine of his Majesty's favor, though most bright upon others (more open
offenders) is noted to be somewhat eclipsed toward him. What directions soever
his Majesty gave, the order is somewhat tart upon the Earl. The word of
Confinement, spread about the City (though I observed not one syllable so quick
to fall from his Majesty) his Keeper much wondered at. The act of the Council
published in our names, who were neither present thereat, or heard one word of
the same: yet upon my credit the Earl takes all things patiently, and
thankfully, though others wonder at the same.

Mr. Secretary signed a Petition of one Rookwood a Papist, and prisoner in the
Fleet upon five several executions, that I should grant him his liberty. The
Kings name is used, and the mediation of the Spanish Ambassador. If I breaking
rules so foully in favor of a Papist, (which I am resolved to keep straight
against all men whatsoever) I shall infame my self in the very beginning. If
his Majesty will have any special indulgence in this kind, I expect intimation
immediately from the King, or your Lordship, and no third Person. Your Lordship
will not expect from me any account of Council business, nor the setting at
liberty of the late prisoners. Mr. Secretary is secret enough for imparting any
thing unto me, so as I must remain in a necessary ignorance.

There is a Country man of mine one Griffith, a suitor unto the Court for the
reversion of an Auditors place, recommended thereunto by his Master the Lord
Treasurer. The place is of great Consequence for the disposing of his Majesty's
revenewes. The man is unfit for this, as presumptuous and daring for any place.
Sir Robert Pie says, he has already written to your Lordship, and I doubt not
of your care thereof. Doctor Lamb (the bearer) is a very sufficient, and (for
ought I ever heard of him) an honest man. The King has employed him in
discovery of counterfeit Witchcrafts, in reforming of no ounterfeit, but hearty
Puritanes, and he has done good service therein. If his Majesty (now in our
pure air of Northhamptonshire) do not show him some favor, or grace, either by
Knighting, or by using him courteously, The Brethren (having gotten out their
Yelverton again) will neglect and molest him too unsufferably. God from Heaven
bless you. Remember your Deanerie, and Dean of Westminster, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke concerning the Earl Marshals place, 1. September.
1621.
My most Noble Lord,
I Beseech your Lordship to interpret this Letter well, and fairly, which no
malice (though never so provoked) but my duty to his Majesty, and love to your
Lordship has drawn from me: both which respects as long as I keep inviolably,
I will not omit for the fear of any man, or the loss of any thing in this
world, to do any act, which my Conscience shall inform me to belong unto that
place, wherein the King by your favor has entrusted me. I received this
morning two Commands from his Majesty, the one about a Pension of 2000 l.
yearly, and the other concerning the office of the Earl Marshal, both
conferred on the Right Honorable the Earl of Arundel. For the former,
although this is a very unseasonable time to receive such large Pensions from
so bountiful a King, and that the Parliament so soon approaching is very like
to take notice thereof, and that this pension might (under the correction of
your better judgment) have been conveniently deferred until that Assembly had
been over. Yet who am I that should question the wisdom, and bounty of my
Master? I have therefore sealed the same, praying secretly unto God to make his
Majesty as abounding in wealth as he is in goodness. But the latter I dare
not seal (my good Lord) until I hear your Lordships resolution to these few
Questions.

Whether his Majesty by expressing himself in the delivery of the Arundel,
that he was moved thereunto for the easing of the rest of the Comissioners, who
had, before, the execution of that office, did not imply, that his Majesty
intended to impart unto my Lord no greater power, then was formerly granted to
the Lords Comissioners. If it were so, this Pattent should not have exceeded
their Pattent, whereas it does enlarge it self beyond that by many dimensions.

Whether it is his Majesty's meaning, that the Pattent leaping over Essex,
Shrewsbery, and Sommerset, should refer only to my Lords own Ancestors,
Howards, and Mowbrayes Dukes of Norfolk, who clamed this place by a way of
inheritance. The usual reference of Pattents being unto the last, and immediate
predecessor, and not unto the remote, whose powers (in those unsettled and
troublesome times are vage, uncertain, and unpossible to be limited.

Whether it is his Majesty's meaning, that this great Lord should Edward Zouch
his in the Court, Sir George Reinel's in the Kings Bench, and diverse others.
All which this new Pattent does sweep away, being places of great worth and
dignity.

Whether that his Majesty's meaning, and your Lordships, that Stewards place
shall be (for all his power of Judicature in the Verge,) either altogether
extinguished, or at leastwise subordinated unto this new Office? A point
considerable, because of the greatness of that person, and his neernesse in
blood to his Majesty, and the Prince his Highness.

Lastly, Whether it be intended, that the offices of the Earl Marshal great
Lord? A power limited by no Law, or Record, but to be searched out from
Chronicles, Antiquaries, Heralds, and such obsolete Monuments, and thereupon
held these 60 years, (for my Lord of Essex his power was clearly bounded, and
limited) unfit to be revived by the policy of this State.

These Questions, if his Majesty intended only the renewing of this
Commission of the Earl Marshals in my Lord of Arundel are material and to the
purpose. But if his Majesty aimed withal, at the reviving of this old office,
A la ventura, whose face is unknown to the people of this age; upon the least
intimation from your Lordship, I will seal the Patent. And I beseech your
Lordship to pardon my discretion in this doubt, and irresolution. It is my
place to be wary what innovation passes the Seal. I may offend that great Lord
in this small stay, but your Lordship cannot but know, how little I lose, when
I lose but him, whom without the least cause in the world, I have
irreconcileably lost already. All that I desire is, that you may know what is
done, and I will ever do what your Lordship (being once informed) shall direct
as becomes, etc.

That there is a difference betwixt the Earl Marshal, and the Marshall of the
Kings house; See Lamberts Archiron: or of the High Courts of Justice in England

Circa Medium.

The Marshal of England, and the Constable are united in a Court, which
handles only Duels out of the Realm, matters within the Realm, as Combats,
Blazon, Armorie, etc. but it may meddle with nothing tryable by the Laws of
the Land.

The Marshal of the Kings Household is united in a Court with the Seneschal or
Steward, which holds plea of Trespasses, Contracts, and Covenants made within
the Verge, and that according to the Laws of the Land, Vid. Artic. Super Cart.
C. 3. 4. 5.

We do all of us conceive the King intended the first place only for this great
Lord, and the second to remain in the Lord Stewards managing. But this new
Patent has comprehended them both. This was fit to be presented to your
Lordship.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke. 16. December. 1621.
Most Noble Lord,
I Have seen many expressions of your love in other men's Letters (where it does
most naturally and purely declare it self) since I received any of mine own. It
is much your Lordship should spare me those thoughts, which pour out themselves
in my occasions: But to have me and my affairs in a kind of affectionate
remembrance, when your Lordship is saluting of other Noble men, is more then
ever I shall be able otherways to requite then with true prayers and best
wishes. I received this afternoon (by Sir John Brook) a most loving Letter from
your Lordship, but dated the 26th. of November. imparting your care over me for
the committing of one Beeston for breach of a Decree. My Noble Lord, Decrees
once made must be put in execution, or else, I will confess this Court to be
the greatest imposture, and Grievance in this Kingdom. The damned in Hell do
never cease repining at the Justice of God, nor the prisoners in the Fleet, at
the Decrees in Chancery; of the which hell of prisoners this one, for antiquity
and obstinacy may pass for a Lucifer. I neither know him, nor his cause, but
as long as he stands in Contempt, he is not like to have any more liberty.

His Majesty's last Letter, though never so full of honey (as I find by
passages reported out of the same, being as yet, not so happy as to have a
sight thereof) has notwithstanding afforded those Spiders which infest that
noble House of Commons, some poison, and ill constructions to feed upon, and to
induce a new diversion, or plain Cessation of weightier businesses. His
Majesty infers, (and that most truly, for where were the Commons before Henry
the first gave them authority to meet in Parliaments?) that their privileges
are but Graces and favors of former Kings, which they claim to be their
inheritance, and natural birthrights. Both these assertions (if men were
peaceably disposed, and affected the dispatch of the common businesses) might
be easily reconciled.

These privileges were originally the favors of Princes, and are now inherent
in their persons: Nor does his Majesty go about to impair or diminish them. If
his Majesty will be pleased to qualify that passage with some mild and noble
exposition, and require them strictly to prepare things for a Session, and to
leave this needless dispute, his Majesty shall thereby make it appear to all
wise and just men, that these persons are opposite to those common ends,
whereof they vaunt themselves the only Patrons. But do his Majesty what he
please, I am afraid (although herein the Lord Treasurer and others do differ
from me) they do not affect a Sessions, nor intend to give at this time any
Subsidy at all.

Will the King be pleased therefore to add in this Letter (which must be here
necessarily upon Monday morning) that if they will not prepare bills for a
Session, his Majesty will break up this Parliament without any longer
Prorogation, and acquainting the Kingdom with their undutifulnesse and
obstinacy, supply the present wants by some other means. Or will his Majesty
(upon their refusal) presently rejourn the the Assembly until the appointed
8th. of Feburary. This course is fittest for further advice, but the other to
express a just indignation. I dare advise nothing in so high a point, but
humbly beseech almighty God to illuminate his Majesty's understanding to insist
upon that course, which shall be most behoveful for the advancement of his
service. In our house his Majesty's servants are very strong, and increase
every day, nor is there the least fear of any Malignant opposition. God reward
all your Lordships goodness and affection toward. etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke about Mr. Thomas Murrayes Dispensation, etc. 23.
Febr. 1621.
My most Noble Lord,
I Should fail very much of my duty to his Majesty, if before the sealing of
Mr. Thomas Murrayes Dispensation, I should not acquaint his Majesty
explicitly, and freely, with the nature of this act, far differing from any
dispensation in this kind, ever granted by his Majesty, since his happy
coming to the Crown of England. For (to say nothing of the right of the
election of this Provost, which being originally not in the King, but in the
fellows, and now by their neglect devolved unto me, shall be fully and
absolutely at his Majesty's command) the place is a living with cure of souls,
and I am to institute and admit him to the cure of souls of the Parish of Eaton
by the express Letter of the Statute; without admission, it is impossible he
should receive any real or rightful possession of the same. Now that his
Majesty or any of his Predecessors, did ever dispense with a Layman to hold
cure of souls, I think will be hard for any man to show by any warrantable
president, or record whatsoever. And I know his Majesty to be as much averse
from giving any such president, as any Prince in Christendom living this day.
This is altogether differing a Deanery, or an Hospital, which being livings
without cure, have been, and may be justly conferred by his Majesty upon
Laymen with dispensations de non promovendo. If Sir Henry Savil's example be
objected, I answer, (besides that the Queen made Claim to the gift of the
place by lapse, occasioned through the promotion of the Provost to the
Bishopric of Chichester, whereas his Majesty has no such Claim thereunto at
this time) That Savil never durst take true possession of the place, but was
only slipped in by the Bishop, (who for fear of the Earl of Essex made bold with
the conscience) Ad Curam et regimen Collegii, that is, to the care and
government of the College. Whereas by the express words of the foundation, he
is to be admitted, Ad Curam annimarum Parochianoru^ Ecclesia Aetonianae, to the
Cure of the souls of all the people of the Parish of Eaton. Secondly, I hold it
no Disparagement to Mr. Murray (nor do find him all together averse from the
same) to enter into orders in the reign of a King so favorable to our Coat, as
(Gods name be praised for it) raigns now over us. This will give satisfaction
to all the Church, bring him into this place according to statute, and the
foundation of that dead King, prevent such a dangerous president for a Layman
to possess cure of souls in the Eye, and Center of all the Realm, and by an
everlasting testimony of his Majesty's Piety to the Church of England. Thirdly,
what opinion this Gentleman has of our Church government is better known to
his Majesty, then to me. If he should be averse thereunto, it were such a blow
unto the Church (the number of the Fellows and Students there considered) as
the like were never given by public authority these 50. Years. Fourthly,
howsoever his Majesty, and the Prince his Highness shall resolve thereof (at
whose feet I lie to be wholly disposed) I hope it is neither of their royal
intendments to transfer the Bishopprick of Lincoln upon the Fellows of that
house, who have rashly usurped a Power of admitting their Provost by any
example seen before. Whereas all Provosts as well the Churchmen, who come in by
Election, as the Laymen recommended by the late Queen, were (as the foundation
exactly requires it) admitted by the Bishop of Lincoln their Diocaesand and
Visitor. I hope it was Mr. Murraies inexperience, rather then neglect (never
deserved by me) that directed them to this strange course; subscription, and
other conformities, to be acted in the presence of the Visitor, are essentially
to be required before he can be admitted Provost of Eaton. Lastly, Mr. Murraie
has hitherto mistaken all his course. He must be first dispensed withal (If
his Majesty in his wisdom shall hold it fit) and then Elected first Fellow,
and then Provost of the College (if he will come in regularly, and safely)
whereas now contrary to Savils president, he is first Elected, and then goes on
with his dispensation.

All this I most humbly entreat your Lordship to make known to the Prince his
Highness, and as much as your Lordship thinks fit thereof, to his Majesty. I
will only add one note, and so end. It will be no more disparagement for Mr.
Murray his Highness Schoolmaster to enter into orders, then it was for Coxe
King Edwards Schoolmaster, a Master of Requests, and Privy Counselor, to do
the like, who afterward became a worthy Prelate of this Church. I have
discharged my duty to the King, Prince, and the Church of England. It remains
now, that I should (as I will) religiously obey whatsoever I shall be directed
in the sequel of this business. And so I rest, etc.

Postscript.
MY Lord, Mr. Murray since came unto me, to whom I showed this Letter, and told
him I would send it unto you to be showed unto the King, and the Prince. I find
him willing to run all courses, Priesthood only excepted. If the King will
dispense with him, my Letter notwithstanding, I humbly beseech his Majesty, to
write a Letter unto me, as a warrant to admit him only Ad Curam et Regimen
Collegii, instead of the other words, Ad Curam animarum. I schooled him soundly
against Puritanisme, which he disavowes, though somewhat faintly; I hope his
Highness and the King will second it.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke about the Liberties of Westminster, 6. May. 1621.
My most Noble Lord,
I Humbly beseech your Lordship to be a little sensible of those injurious
affronts, offered without any show of equity unto this poor Liberty of
Westminster. And for Gods sake let me not want that protection, which not your
Lordship only, but the two Cicils, and the Earl of Sommerset, who neither
regarded the Church, Learning, nor Honor in any measure as you do, have ever
afforded every Dean of this Church. When I had (to my thinking) given the
Knight Marshal full, and too much satisfaction, this day a Letter was offered
to the Table (in my presence) violently pursued by the Lord Steward, and the
Earl Marshal, to command this liberty, (which had stood unquestioned these 700
years) to show reason to Mr. Attorney, and Mr. Solliciter, why they prescribe
against the Knight Marshal. A Course (as my Lord President said openly) not to
be offered to any subject of England. It is our Charter, and freehold of
inheritance, to be showed only in a Court of Justice, and at the Kings Bench,
which we are very ready to do. And we may as well be questioned by a Letter
from the Council, for all the Land we have, as for this. My Lord, the
jurisdiction of this place brings not a penny to my purse, but it has brought
much sorrow to my heart, and now tears to my eyes, that I should be that
unfortunate Contemptible man, who for all the King, and your Lordships favor,
and the true pains I take in answer thereunto, must be trampled down above all
the Deans that lived in this place. Nor would it ever grieve me, if I had
deserved it from these Lords by the least disrespect in all the world. I
beseech you for the Churches sake, and your Honors sake to be sensible hereof,
and to know of the Bishop of Winchester, London, Duresme. Mr. Packer, or Sir
Robert Pie, whether ever any question has been made to this liberty in this
kind. If a Letter had been recorded to question the same, when the Lord Admiral
was Steward, and the Lord Keeper Dean thereof, judge you in your Wisdom what
would become thereof in future posterity, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, Aug. 23. 1622.
My most noble Lord,
YEsterday upon the receipt of your Lordships Letters of the 19th. of this
instant concerning the hastening of the business of the original Writs, I sent
presently for Mr. Attorney, and Mr. Solliciter, who were altogether unprovided
for their parts of the dispatch, and are casually forced so to be, because
three several Officers, in whose records they are to search, are now out of
Town, and do not return yet these 7. days. But your Lordship shall not fail to
have all things concluded 3. weeks before the Term, and I will (of purpose) put
off all general sealing until it be effected.

In the mean time (your Lordships Letter notwithstanding) it will be nothing
for your Lordships case to have Sir George Chaworth any way interested in this
office of the originals; but I hold it fitter to leave it (as it is in Law and
Equity) forfeited for non-payment of rent in his Majesty's hands; for upon that
issue I do not doubt but my Lord of St. Albons, and Sir George will be content
to hear reason.

I have received extraordinary respects, and expressions from my Noble Lord the
Lord Marquess Hamilton, which does exceedingly comfort and encourage me to go
on, with some more alacrity through the difficulties of this restless place. I
beseech your Lordship (who is Causa Causarum, the first Cause, that sets all
these other Causes of my Comforts in Going) to take notice of the same, and to
undertake this favor to be placed upon a poor honest hearted man, who would
(if he were any way able) requite it. Gods blessings, and the prayers of a poor
Bishop ever attend your Lordship, etc.

Postscript.
THe Spanish Ambassador took the alarm very speedily of the titulary Romish
Bishop, and before my departure from his house at Islington, (whither I went
privately to him) did write both to Rome and Spain to prevent it. Sir Tobie
Mathewes.
But I am afraid, that Tobie will prove but an Apocryphal, and no Canonical
intelligencer, acquainting the State with this project, for the Jesuits rather
then for Jesus sake.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke about the Lord Treasurer, September. 9th. 1622.
My most Noble Lord,
THat I neither wrote unto your Lordship, nor waited upon your Lordship
sithence my intolerable scandalizing by the Lord Treasurer, this is the true
and only cause: I was so moved to have all my diligent service, pains, and
unspotted justice thus rewarded by a Lord, who is reputed wise, that I have
neither slept, read, written, or eaten any thing since that time; until the
last night, that the Ladies sent for me (I believe of purpose) to Wallingford
house, and put me out of my humor. I have lost the love, and affection of my
men, by seizing upon their Papers, perusing all their answers to Petitions,
casting up their moneys, received by way of fees, (even to half Crowns, and two
shillings) and finding them all to be poor honest Gentlemen, that have
maintained themselves in my service by the greatness of my pains, and not the
greatness of their fees. They are most of them landed men, that do not serve
me for gain, but for experience, and reputation. And desire to be brought to
the Test to show their several books, and to be confronted by any one man with
whom they contracted, or from whom they demanded any Fee at all; The greatest
sum in their books is five pounds, and those very few, and sent unto them
from Earls, and Barons. All the rest are some 20 s. 10 s. 5 s. 2 s. 6 d. and 2
s. And this is the oppression in my house, that the Kingdom (of the Common
Lawyers peradventure, who have lost I confess hereby 20000 l. at the least,
saved in the purses of the Subjects) does now groan under.

Now I humbly beseech your Lordship to peruse this paper here enclosed, and the
issue I do join with the Lord Treasurer, and to acquaint (at the least) the
King, and the Prince, how unworthily I am used by this Lord; who (in my soul
and conscience I believe it) either invents these things out of his own head,
and ignorance of this Court, or has taken them up from base, unworthy, and
most unexperienced people. Lastly, because no act of mine (who am so much
indebted for all my frugality) could in the thoughts of a devil incarnate breed
any suspicion, that I gained by this office, excepting the purchase of my
Grandfathers Lands, whereunto my Lord Chamberlains nobleness, and your
Lordships encouragement, gave the invitation. I do make your Lordship (as your
Lordship has been often pleased to honor me) my faithful Confessor in that
business, and do send your Lordship a note enclosed what money I paid, what I
borrowed, and what is still owing for the purchase.

I beseech your Lordship to cast your eye upon the paper, and lay it aside that
it be not lost. And having now poured out my soul, and sorrow unto your
Lordships breast, I find my heart much eased, and humbly beseech your Lordship
to compassionate the wrongs of.

Your most humble and honest servant, J. L. C. S.

The Fair and Familiar Conference which the Lord Treasurer had with the Lord
Keeper after some Expostulations of his own, and the issue joined thereupon, at
White Hall, September. 7. 1622.


Sol.
Not much above the fortieth part of the money for all the dispatches of the
Chancery, Star Chamber, Councel-Table, Parliament, the great Diocese of
Lincoln, the jurisdiction of Westminster and St. Martins le Graund; All which
have resort to my house by Petitions.



Sol.
Then let me have no share in Gods Kingdom; it is such a baseness as never came
within the compass of my thoughts.

per mensem.

Sol.
As true as the other. The means of my place will reach to no more then two
months.



Sol.
Let the Cloisters at Westminster answer for me. I never to this day received
any Petition from my Secretaries, which I had formerly delivered unto them with
my own hands. This is a new fashion which my Lord has found in some other
Courts.



Sol.
I never disposed of any since I came to this place, but leave them wholly to
the Six Clarks, and Registers, to be set down in their Antiquity. Unless his
Lordship means hearing of motions in the paper of Peremptories, which I seldom
deny upon any Petition, and which are worth no money at all.



Sol.
I have never reversed, altered, explained, or endured a motion, or Petition,
that touched upon a decree once pronounced: but have sometimes made orders in
pursuance of the same.



Sol.
I have no such officer in all my house, unless his Lordship means the
College Porters; nor no locks at all, but his Majesty's business, which I
must respect above Ceremonies and Complements.

You are cried out against over all the Kingdom for an unsufferable

His Lordship (if he have any friends) may hear of such a Cry, Sol.
and yet be pleased to mistake the person cried out against.

All the Lords of the Council cry out upon you, and you are a

I am a wretched man indeed if it be so. Sol.
And your Lordship (at the least) a very bold man if it be otherwise.

I will produce particular witnesses, and make all these Charges

I know your Lordship cannot, and I do call upon you to do it, Sol.
as suspecting all to be but your Lordships envy and malice to that service of
the Kings, and ease of his Subjects, which God has enabled me to accomplish,
and perform in this troublesome Office.

J. L. C. S.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 21. of September. 1622.
My most noble Lord,
MY Lord Brook diswarning me (from his Majesty) from coming to Theobalds this
day, I was enforced to trouble your Lordship with these few lines. My most
humble thanks for your Lordships most free, and most loving Letter, I do
willingly confess my error, yet still of the mind, that your Lordship only,
who justly taxed it, has made it to be an error. If your love to me had not
exceeded all reason, and desert of mine, my complaints were not effects of
melancholy, but of a real suffering, and misery. I do confess (and rest
satisfied withal) that his Majesty's Justice, and your Lordships love are
anchors strong enough, for a mind more tossed then mine is, to ride at. Yet
pardon me, my Noble Lord, upon this Consideration, if I exceeded a little in
passion, the natural effect of honesty, and innocence. A Churchman, and a
woman, have no greater Idol under heaven, then their good name. And yet they
cannot fight at all. Nor with credit, scold, and least of all recriminate, to
protect and defend the same. Their only revenge left them, is to grieve, and
complain.

My misery I took to be this. I am one of those that labor in his Majesty's
Cole-mines under the earth, and out of sight. My pains from five a clock in the
morning to 10. or 12. at night are restless, and endless, but under earth,
and out of his Majesty's sight. What other men do (or but seem to do,) it is
ever before the Kings face, and if his Majesty will not look on it, if he has
ears about him, he shall be told of it so often by the parties themselves,
that he must hear of it whether he will or no.

And as my service (by this remoteness is hidden from the King, so is it
liable to be traduced to the King, and my relief (as in dispatching the motions
of poor men by Petitions allowable to my orders,) made to be a Grievance to the
Common Wealth. But in all these fourteen days (wherein by the voice of the
City, I have remained a prisoner in my house,) where is that one party grieved,
that has troubled his Majesty with Complaints against me? Only my Lord
Marshal has dealt with my noble Lord Marquess Hamilton, my Lord of Carlisle,
my Lord Treasurer (as your Lordship may soon know by asking the question) to
make a faction to disgrace the poor Lord Keeper, who never dreamt thereof.

Sir Gilbert Haughton has complained to my Lord Treasurer of my men for
taking, ( Hugh Holland was by and heard him;) If your Lordship do but ask him
his reason, I think it will appear how well grounded their complaints be. Upon
those two former Anchors I will therefore rest, and that so far from
Cowardlinesse, that I will either challenge them before his Majesty to make
good their suggestions, or else (which I hold the greater valor of all, and
which I confess I wanted before this check of your Lordships) go on in my
Course, and scorn all these base, and unworthy scandals as your Lordship shall
direct me.

I have sent a Copy of a Letter of mine to my Lord Anan, which his Majesty
has seen, and given his assent it should not be kept private; yet I would
humbly crave your Lordships opinion thereof (by Mr. Packer) before any Copy
goes from me.

I am ever, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke. 12th. October. 1622.
My most Noble Lord,
I Will speak with the Jesuit to morrow, and deliver him his admonition from
the King, but do send your Lordship here enclosed a Copy of the Conference
which I procured from him without his privity, only to make his Majesty, and
your Lordship merry. I have also received a Letter concerning the French
Ambassador which I will be ready to put in execution as your Lordships servant,
and Deputy but not otherwise. Yet your Lordship will give me out of that
freedom (which was wont to be well interpreted by your Lordship) to let your
Lordship understand, that I find all businesses of restitution of ships, and
goods thus taken, to have been handled before the Council in Star Chamber all
the reigns of Henry 7th. and H. 8th. without any contradiction of the Lord
Admiral for the time being. But this to your Lordship in secret. I will be very
careful of the Earl of Desmond, that neither his cause, nor your Lordships
reputation shall suffer thereby. And this is the account I can yet give of your
Lordships Letter, save that I humbly expect that answer, which your Lordships
own Luckie hand has promised in the postscript of one of them. I would ease
your Lordship in this place, but to prevent complaint that (peradventure) may
be first invented, and then presented. Your Lordship shall hear of a long
narrative of our Council Table dispatches. That passage of our letter, which
(as it now goes) does hope that his Majesty will spare to confer any suites
of moment in Ireland until the return of the Irish Committee, was a blunt
request to the King, to grant no suites there without our advice. Against this
(concluded in my absence the first day of the Term) I spoke first to the
Prince privately (who allowed of my reasons) then (when the President would not
mend it) at the Table openly, that I did utterly dislike we should tutour his
Majesty, how to grant suits especially in Letters, that are to remain upon
record. My Lord of Cantuar and the, Earl Marshal said, they had many
Presidents in that kind. I answered, I knew they had none but in the Kings
time, and that I wished them (as I do) all torn out of the book and cast into
the fire. I concealed my reasons, which now I will reveal unto your Lordship,
because this is the third time, I have expressed unto your Lordship under my
hand, my dislike of this kind of Limiting his Majesty otherwise then by word
of mouth. First if his Majesty (which we see so often done) shall dispose of
these suites otherwise, here are so many records remaining to malicious men to
observe his Majesty's averseness from following the advice of the Council
board.

Secondly, if your Lordship shall procure any suit in this kind here are
records also in time to come, that you cross and thwart the government of the
Kingdom. And I pray God this be but mine own jealousy. The passage in the
Letter with my Prating, and his Highness help was altered, and for fear of
misreporting, I make bold to relate the truth hereof to your Lordship.

My Lords proceeded very resolutely in those reformations, which concerned
other men. The Commission of fees enables the Committees to call before them
all the Judges, as well as their under Officers (which was more then the King
expressed at Hampton Court) amongst whom, the Lord Keeper is one, who from the
Conquest to this day, was never subjected to the call of any power in the
Kingdom, but the King and the Parliament. And although I have not one Penny of
Fee, which has not continued above one hundred years, yet for the honor of
the Prime place in the state (though now disgraced by the contemptiblenesse of
the Officer) I am an humble suitor unto your Lordship, that my Person may be
exempted from the command of Sr. Edwin Sandys, or indeed any man else, besides
the King my Master. Otherwise I shall very patiently endure it, but the King
hereafter may dislike it. The Justices of the Peace are also appointed, but (if
the Judges and my self be not utterly deceived) to no purpose in the world, nor
service to his Majesty. But when their Lordships came to surrender the under
Leivtenantships to his Majesty's hands, whom the Lord President, and I held fit
to be created henceforward by several Commissions under the Great Seal, it was
stiffly opposed, and stood upon, that the King should name them in their
Lordships Commissions only (according to a President in the late Queens time)
that is, the King shall have the naming, but they still the appointing of them.
And now it was pressed, that his Majesty intended not to disgrace his Lords
etc: and your Lordship is to have a Letter from Mr. Secretary to know his
Majesty's mind herein. If his Majesty shall not ordain them to be created by
several Pattents, it were better a great deal they should continue as they do.
I am very tedious in the manner and (peradventure) in the matter of this Letter
I humbly crave pardon etc.

Passages between the Lord Keeper and Don Francisco.
HE was very inquisitive if I had already, or intended to impart,

Because 1. The King had charged him and the Friar to be very secret. 2. The
Ambassadors did not know that he had imparted these things unto me. 3. The
Popes were secret instructions which they gave to the Friar to urge and press
the same points, which himself had done to the King.












Curreos, and expected large Propositions from Spain to be made unto his
Majesty, concerning the present restitution of the Palatinate. And that if
this failed, they were at an end of Treaty, and the Ambassadors would
forthwith return home.

11th. April, 1622.
The Lord Keeper to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
I Received your Graces Letter by Mr. Killegrew, so full of that sweetness, as
could never issue from any other Fountain, then that one breast so fraught with
all goodness, and virtue; Dick Win may write freely, (as he talks) but alas!
what can my wretched self perform, that should deserve the least acknowledgment
from him, to whom I owe so infinitely much more then the sacrificing of my life
amounts to? only my love makes me sometimes write, and many times fear, fondly
and foolishly, for the which I hope your Grace will pardon me. I have been
frighted more about three weeks since (about quarrels and jarres, which now
Dick Greyhams has related in part unto the King) then at this present, I am.
For Gods sake be not offended with me, if I exhort you to do that, which I know
you do, to observe his Highness with all lowliness, humility, and dutiful
obedience, and to piece up any the least seam-rent, that heat, and earnestness
might, peradventure, seem to produce. I know (by looking into my self) these
are the symptoms of good natures. And for Gods sake I beg it, as you regard
the prayers of a poor friend, if the great negotiation be well concluded, let
all private disagreements be wrapped up in the same, and never accompany your
Lordships into England, to the joy and exultation of your enemies, if any such
ungrateful Devils are here to be found: I am in good earnest, and your Lordship
would believe it, if your Grace saw but the tears, that accompany these lines.

I beseech you, in your Letter to the Marquess Hamilton, intimate unto him
your confidence, and reliance upon his watchfulness, and fidelity in all
turns, which may concern your Grace. I have often lied unto his Lordship, that
your Grace has in many of my Letters expressed as much, and so have pacified
him for the time. If we did know, but upon whom to keep a watchful eye for
disaffected reports concerning your service, it is all the intelligence he and
I do expect. His Majesty (as we conceive) is resolved to take certain oaths,
which you have sent hither, and I pray God afterward no farther difficulties be
objected. I have had an hours discourse with his Majesty yesterday morning,
and do find him so disposed toward your Lordship as my heart desires; yet
has been informed of the discontentments both with the Conde de Olivarez, and
the Earl of Bristol. Here is a strange Creation passed of late, of a
Vice-Counteship of Maidenhead, passed to the Heirs Males, who must be called
hereafter Vice-Countesse Fynch. But my Lady Duchess has the Land, and (as
they say) has already sold it to my Lord Treasurer, or shared it with him. I
stayed the Patent until I was assured your Lordship gave way thereunto.

My good Lord, because I have heard, that they have in those parts a conceit
of our church, as that they will not believe we have any Liturgy, or Book of
common prayer at all, I have (at mine own cost) caused the Liturgy to be
translated into Spanish, and fairly Printed, and do send you by this bearer a
Couple of the Books, one for his Highness, the other for your Grace. Not
sending any more unless your Grace will give directions. His Majesty was
acquainted therewith, and allows of the business exceedingly. The Translator
is a Dominican, a zealous Protestant, and a good Scholar, and I have secured
him to our Church, with a Benefice, and a good Prebend. Because we expect every
day the dispatching of Sr. Francis Cottington thitherward, I will not trouble
your Grace farther at this time, but do earnestly pray unto God to bless your
Grace both now and ever hereafter with all his favors and blessings spiritual
and temporal. And rest etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 30. Aug. 1623.
My it please your Grace,
I Have no business of the least Consideration to trouble your Grace withal at
this time, but that I would not suffer Mr. Greyham to return without an
expression of my respect and obligation. I would advertize your Grace at large
of the course held with our Recusants, but that I know Mr. Secretary is
enjoined to do so, who best can. His Majesty at Salisbury having referred the
suit of these Ambassadors to the Earl of Carlisle, and Mr. Secretary Conway,
sent (by their resolutions) some articles unto us (the Lord Treasurer,
Secretary Calvert, Sir Richard Weston and my self) to this effect.

1. To grant a pardon of all offenses past, with a dispensation for those to
come to all the Roman Catholics, obnoxious to any laws made against the
Recusants.

2. And then to issue forth two general Commands under the Great Seal, the
first to all the Judges, and Justices of the Peace, anp the other to all
Bishops, Chancellours and Commissaries not to execute any Statute made against
them.

Their general pardon we have passed, and sent unto his Majesty (from whence
it is not returned) in as full and ample manner as they could desire, and pen
it. The other general and vast prohibition, I prevailed with the rest of the
Lords to stop as yet, and gave (in three days conference) such reasons to the
2. Ambassadors, that (although it is no easy matter to satifie the
Caprichiousnesse of the Latter of them) yet they were both content it should
rest until the Infanta had been six Months in England. My reason, if it may
please your Grace, was this. Although this general favor, and connivence,
whereof there are 20. of the Prime Council know nothing as yet, must at last be
known to all the Land: yet is there a great difference between the publishing
thereof A Golpe, at one push, as it were, and that instilling of it into their
knowledge by little, and little by reason of favors done to particular
Catholics. The former course might breed a general impression, if not a
mutiny. This Letter will but loosen the tongues but of some few particulars,
who understand of their neighbors pardon, and having vented their dislikes,
when they have not many to Sympathise with them, they grow cool again, so as
his majesty afterward may enlarge these favors without any danger at all.

Secondly, to forbid Judges (against their oaths) and Justices of the Peace
(sworn likewise) to execute the law of the Land, is a thing (unpresidented in
this Kingdom et Durus Sermo a very harsh and bitter pill to be digested upon a
sudden, and without some preparation. But to grant a pardon, even for a thing
that is Malum in se, and a dispensation with Penal Laws (in the profit whereof
the King only is interested) is usual and full of presidents, and examples.
And yet is this Letter only tending to the safety, the former but to the glory
and insolency of the Papists, and the magnifying the service of the
Ambassadors ends too dearly purchased, with the indangering of a tumult in
three Kingdoms.

Thirdly and Lastly, his Majesty uses to speak to his Bishops, Judges and
Justices of the peace, by his Chancelour, or Keeper (as your Grace well
knows) and by his Great Seal; and I can signify his Majesty's pleasure unto
them, with less noise and danger, which I mean to do hereafter, (if the
Ambassadors shall press it,) to this effect, unless your Grace shall (from
his Highness, or your own judgment) direct otherwise.

That whereas his Majesty being at this time to mediate for favor to many
Protestants in foreign parts, with Princes of another religion, and to sweeten
the entertainment of the Princess into this Kingdom, who is as yet a Roman
Catholic, does hold a mitigation of the rigor of those laws made against
Recusants, to be a necessary inducement to both those purposes, and has
therefore issued forth some pardons of Grace, and favor to such Roman
Catholics, of whose faithfulness and fidelity to the state he rests assured.
That therefore you the Lords, Bishops, Judges, and Justices, (each of those to
be written unto by themselves) do take notice of this his Majesty's pardon, and
dispensation, with all such penal Laws, and demean your selves accordingly,
etc.

Thus have I been too tedious and troublesome unto your Grace, and Crave your
pardon therefore, and some directions (which you may cause Sir Francis
Cottington or some other to write, without your Graces trouble) if there shall
apeare any cause of alteration. Doctor Bishop, the new Bishop of Calcedon is
come to London privately, and I am much troubled thereabouts, not knowing what
to advise his Majesty in this posture, as things stand at this present. If you
were shipped (with the Infanta) the only Council were to let the Judges
proceed with them presently, hang him out of the way, and the King to Blame my
Lord of Cantuar: or my self for it. But before you be shipped in such form and
manner I dare not assent or Connive at such a course. It is (my gracious Lord)
a most insolent Part, and an offense (as I take it) Against our common Law (and
not the statutes only which are dispensed withal,) for an English man to take
such a consecration without the Kings consent, and especially to use any
Episcopal Jurisdiction in this Kingdom without the royal assent, and Bishops,
have been in this State put to their fine, and ransom for doing so three
hundred years ago.

I will cease to to be further troublesome and pray to Almighty God to bless
your Grace, and in all humbleness take my leave, and rest etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 14th. of October, 1621.
My most Noble Lord,
I Humbly thank your Lordship for your most sweet and loving Letter, which (as
Sir George Goring could not but observe) has much revived me drooping under
the unusual weight of so many businesses. Let God suffer me no longer to be,
then I shall be true, plain, faithful and affectionately respectful of your
Lordship, as being most bound unto your Lordship for these so many fruits, but
far more for the tree that bore them, your love and affection.

If your Lordship shall not think it inconvenient, I do beseech your Lordship
to present this Petition enclosed, either by word or writing unto his Majesty,
and to procure a speedy dispatch thereof, because we are to meet on Thursday
next. Also to acquaint his Majesty, that I stumble at the Proclamation (now
coming to the Seal) against any, that shall draw, or present any bill for his
Majesty's signature, besides those Clarks which usually draw them up, by virtue
of their places. It is most prejudicial to my place, the Lord Treasurer, and
the Judges itinerant who are often occasioned to draw up, and present to his
Majesty diverse matters, and especially pardons of Course. It is also too
strong a tie upon your Lordships hands; being intended by his Majesty against
Projectors and Scriveners only. If it shall please his Majesty therefore to
make an exception of the Lords of his Council, and Judges of Assize, it may
pass to the contentment of all men. Mr. Attorney says he meant this
exception, but I find it not sufficiently expressed in the Proclamation.

Also I humbly beseech your Lordship to meddle with no pardon for the Lord of
St. Albons, until I shall have the happiness to confer with your Lordship; the
pardoning of his fine is much spoken against, not for the matter, (for no man
objects to that) but for the manner, which is full of knavery, and a wicked
president. For by this assignation of his fine, he is protected from all his
Creditors, which I dare say was neither his Majesty's, nor your Lordships
meaning.

I have presumed to send your Lordship a true Copy of that speech, which I made
at Westminster Hall at my entrance upon this office; because somewhat was to
be spoken at so great a change, and alteration in so high a Court; And I was
never so much troubled in my life, not how, but what to speak. I humbly crave
pardon, if I have failed in points of discretion, which a wiser man (in such a
case) might easily do.

With my heartiest prayers unto God to continue all his blessings upon your
Lordship, I rest deservedly, etc.

Postscript.
MY Lord, I find my Lord Treasurer affectionately touched with removing from
the Court of Wards; and do wish with all my heart, he may have contentment in
that, or any thing else, but orderly, and in a right method. Let him hold it,
but by your Lordships favor, not his own power, or wilfulness. And this must
be apparent, and visible: Let all our greatness depend (as it ought) upon
yours, the true original. Let the King be Pharaoh, your self Joseph, and let us
come after as your half-brethren. God bless you, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, concerning Sir John Michel, 8. Aug. 1622.
My most noble Lord,
IN the cause of Sir John Michel, which has so often wearied this Court, vexed
my Lady your Mother, and now flies (as it seems) unto your Lordship, I have
made an order the last day of the Term, assisted by the Master of the Rolls,
and Mr. Baron Bromley in the presence, and with the full consent of Sir John
Michel, who then objected nothing against the same; but now in a dead vacation,
when both the adverse party, and his Council are out of Town, and that I cannot
possible hear otherwise then with one ear, he clamours against me, (most
uncivilly,) and would have me contrary to all conscience and honesty reverse
the same. The substance of the order is not so difficult and intricate, but
your Lordship will easily find out the equity or harshnesse thereof.

Sir Lawrence Hide makes a motion in behalf of one Strelley (a party whose face
I never saw,) that whereas Sir John Michel had put a bill into this Court
against him, and one Sayers, five years ago for certain Lands and Woods,
(determinable properly at the Common Law) and having upon a certificate betwixt
himself, and Sayers, without the knowledge of the said Strelley, procured an
injunction from the last Lord Chancellor for the possession of the same, locks
up the said Strelley with the said injunction, and never proceeds to bring his
cause to hearing within five years.

It was moved therefore, that either Sir John's bill might be dismissed to a
trial at the Common Law, or else that he might be ordered to bring it to
hearing in this Court, with a direction to save all wastes of Timber trees (in
favor of either party, that should prove the true owner) until the cause
should receive hearing.

Sir John being present in Court, made choice of this last offer, and so it was
ordered accordingly. And this is that order, that this strange man has so
often, of late, complained of to your Mother, and now, as it seems, to your
Lordship. God is my witness, I have never denied either justice, or favor
(which was to be justified,) to this man, or any other, that had the least
relation to your good and most noble Mother. And I hope your Lordship is
persuaded thereof. If your Lordship will give me leave (without your Lordships
trouble) to wait upon you, at any time this day, your Lordship shall appoint, I
would impart two or three words unto your Lordship, concerning your Lordships
own business. Remaining ever, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
NOw that I understand by Sir John Hipsley how things stand between your Grace
and the Earl of Bristol; I have done with that Lord, and will never think of
him otherwise, then as your Grace shall direct. Nor did I ever write one
syllable to that effect, but in contemplation of performing true service to
your Grace.

I was much abused in the Lady Hennage her Vice-Counteship, being made to
believe, it was your Grace's act, or else I had stayed it finally, (until the
Princes return) as I did for a time. If your Grace will give any directions in
matters of that nature, I can pursue them. My Lord Treasurers sons Wardship is
a thing of no moment at all, and not worthy your Graces thinking of. And in
good faith as far as getting, and Covetousness will give him leave, I do not
see, but that Lord is (since your absence) very respective of your Grace,
especially in your own person, and affairs. I never received any answer from
your Grace concerning the Provostship of Aeton, nor was it good manners for me
to press for the same, because in my Letters I did presume to name my self.
The place is mine to bestow for this time, and not his Majesty's, nor the
Colleges. But I do very willingly reserve the Collation of the same, to be
disposed as your Grace shall please. Yet this will be a sufficient answer to
any former promise, or any reasonable Competitor.

His Majesty (as your Grace best knows) promised me at the delivery of the
Seal a better Bishopric, and intended it certainly, if any such had fallen. My
Charge is exceeding great, my Bribes are very little, my Bishopric, Deanery,
and other Commendams do not clear unto me above one thousand pounds a year at
the uppermost. It has pleased God, that the casualties of my office, (which is
all the benefit of the same, and enriched my Lord Elsmor,) has not been worth
to me these two years past one shilling. It may mend when it pleases God.

I leave all these, and my self, who am your Vassal, at your Lordships feet,
and do rest, etc.

Your Graces, etc. J. L. C. S.

Postscript.
MAy it please your Grace, I troubled his Highness with a long relation of the
Consulto we had about his Majesty's taking of the Oath. Which I had written to
your Grace, and not to his Highness, but that I was frighted by great men,
that I had done his Highness a displeasure in pressing his Majesty's assent
unto the same. And I protest I was so poorly accompanied in my opinion, that I
was truly afraid I had not done well. And therefore I took occasion to write my
reasons at large unto the Prince. Which I heard by Sir John Hipsley from your
Grace was well taken. I humbly thank your Grace, who I know forwarded the same.
And so I perceive by a Letter from his Highness so full of sweetness, as I am
overwhelmed.

J. L. C. S.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke. 6. January. 1623.
May it please your Grace,
DOn Francisco being with me this night, about a pardon for a poor Irish man,
whom I reprieved from execution, at the suit of those Gentlemen of Navarra,
which are here with the Marquess, let fall by a kind of supposition (affirming
the matter to be as yet in the womb, and not fully shaped, and digested) words
to this effect.

That if the King of Spain should make a double marriage with the second
Brother of France, and his Sister, and bestow the Palatinate as a Dower upon
his sister, in what case were we then?

I answered, That we should be then, in no worse case (for ought I knew) then
we are now: but that Germany might be in a far better case. Peradventure it was
but a word let fall to terrify me withal.

But your Grace may make that use of it, as to understand the language, if your
Grace shall hear any mention thereof hereafter. I am very glad, and do give God
thanks par le mejora de su hijucla hermosissima. And do rest, etc.

Surely the French Ambassador is secret and more suspected then formerly by
the People.

Mr. John Packer to the Lord Keeper, 21. January, 1623.
May it please your Lordship,
SInce my coming hither, finding my Lord at good opportunity, I have acquainted
him in what perplexity I found your Lordship at my coming from Westminster, and
upon what reason. And though I am sorry I can make no comfortable relation of
his answer, yet because it so much imports your Lordship to know in what
terms you stand, I could not conceal it from you, being agreeable to those
reports your Lordship has already heard, saving that his Grace told me, he
does not seek your ruin (as some others had related) but only will hereafter
cease to study your fortune, as formerly he has done; and withal added the
reason, that your Lordship has run a course opposite to him, which though he
had cause to take ill at your hands, yet he could have passed it over, if it
had been out of conscience, or affection to his Majesty's service, or the
Public good, but being both dangerous to your country, and prejudicial to
the cause of religion (which your Lordship above all other men should have
labored to uphold) he thought, he could not with reason continue that
strictness of friendship, where your Lordship had made such a separation,
especially having diverse times out of his love to you, assayd to bring you into
the right way, which once you promised to follow; but the two last times you
met in Council, he found, that you took your kue just as other men did, and
joined with them in their opinions, whose aim was to tax his proceedings in the
managing of the Princes business. But instead of laying it upon him, they did
no less, then throw dirt in the Princes teeth. For either they would make him
a minor, or put the refusal of the Lady upon his Highness, and to lay an
aspersion upon his carriage there. His Lordships Conclusion with me was, that
for any carriage of his, he desires no other favor, but that the greatest
Council in England may be judge of it, and the like he wishes for other men's
actions. Yet I did what I could to persuade his Grace to expostulate the matter
with your Lordship, which he told me, he would no more do, having done it
already, but found no other satifaction, but that by your practice you rejected
what he had said, and besides, divulged what had passed between you, as he
evidently perceived meeting with it among others. Whereby you gained only thus
much, that they esteemed of you, as of a man fit, by reason of your passion, to
set all on fire, but held you not worthy of trust, because you, that would not
be true to him, would never be so to them.

My Lord, this is a part I would never have chosen, but being imposed by your
Lordship, I could do you no better service then faithfully, and plainly to
discharge it, leaving the use to your Lordships wisdom, and ever resting

Your Lordships most humbly at command, J. P.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke. 2. Feburary, 1623.
May it please your Grace,
NOt presuming to write unto your Grace being so offended at me, but resolved
with sorrow, and Patience, to try what I was able to suffer, without the least
thought of opposition against your absolute pleasure; his Highness has
encouraged, and commanded the contrary, assuring me (which I cannot repeat
again without tears) that upon his credit, your Grace neither did, nor does
conceive any such real distaste against me, but did only suspect I had
conceived his Highnesses mind in that full manner, which his Highness himself,
is now fully satisfied. I did not. In the which error, and mistake of the
Prince his resolution, for want of conference with your Grace, or some other, I
did (as I freely confessed) offend his Highness, but not your Grace at all.
Being ever resolved to stand, or fall (though diversified in opinion) Your
Graces most faithful and constant servant. I humbly therefore beseech your
Grace first to receive back this enclosed Letter of Mr. Packers, and to burn
the same, then to receive my soul in gage and pawn.

1. That I never harbored in this breast one thought of opposition to hurt
your Grace from the first hour I saw your face.

2. I never consulted (much less practiced) with any Lord of that Commitee to
vote on the one or the other side.

3. I do not know that Lord in England, that has any design against your
Grace, and when I shall know any such, whosoever it be, I shall be his enemy as
long as he continues so unto your Grace.

4. I do not know (nor do I believe,) but that your Grace stands as firm in his
Majesty's favor, and in his Highness as ever you did in all your life.

5. I never made the least show of siding with any opposite Lord unto your
Grace, and I defy any man, that shall avow it.

6. I never divulged your Graces, or the secrets of any man.

In the next place, I do most humbly and heartily crave your Graces pardon, for
suspecting (that is the utmost of my offense), so true, real, and Noble a
friend. Yet that I may not appear a very beast, give me leave once to remember
and ever after to forget, the motives, which drew me so to do. And I will do it
in the same order they came into my head.

1. Your Graces charge upon me at York house, that I was a man odious to all
the world.

2. Michels Voluntary Confession, that my Lord Mandevil showed him a Letter
from Spain, avowing, that the first action your Grace would imbarque your self
in, should be to remove me out of this place, which the least word of your
mouth unto me, is able to do.

3. A report of the Venetian Ambassador, that amongst others, your Grace
intended to sacrifice me this Parliament to appease the dislike of immunities
exercised toward the Catholics.

4. Your Graces motion unto my self concerning my place (which now I absolutely
know proceeded out of love) at White Hall.

5. A most wicked lie, that one told, he heard your Grace move his Highness to
speak unto me to quit my place, after your Graces professions of friendship to
me.

6. Mr. Secretary Conwaies and my Lord Carlile's estrangednesse from me, which
I suspected could not be (for I ever loved them both) but true copies of your
Graces displeasure.

I have opened to my truest friend all my former thoughts, and being fully
satisfied by his Highness how false they are in every particular, do humbly
crave your Graces pardon, that I gave a nights lodging to any of them all.

Although they never transported me a jott further, then to look about how to
defend my self, being resolved (as God shall be my protector) to suffer all the
obloquie of the world, before I would be drawn to the least ingratitude against
your Grace. All that I beg is an assurance of your Graces former Love, and I
will plainly profess what I do not in the least beg or desire from your Grace.

1. No Patronage of any corrupt or unjust act which shall be objected against
me this Parliament.

2. No defense of me, if it shall appear I betrayed my King, or my Religion in
favor of the Papist, or did them any real respect at all, besides ordinary
complements.

3. No refuge in any of my causes, or clamours against me (which upon a false
supposal of your Graces displeasure may be many) otherwise then according to
justice, and fair proceeding.

And let this paper bear record against me at the great Parliament of all, if I
be not in my heart, and soul, your Graces most faithful and constant poor
friend and Servant.

His Highness desires your Grace to move his Majesty to accept of my Lord
Says commission, and to procure me leave to send for him. Also to move his
Majesty that my Lord of Hartford may be in the house, accepting his fathers
place, and making his protestation to sue for his Grandfathers, according to
his Majesty's Laws, when the King shall give him leave. His Highness, and my
Lords do hold this a modest and submissive Petition.

His Highness upon very deep reasons, doubts whether it be safe to put all
upon the Parliament, for fear they should fall to examine particular
Dispatches, wherein they cannot but find many Contradictions. And would have
the proposition only to aid for the recovery of the Palatinate. To draw on an
engagement I propound it might be, to advise his Majesty how this recovery
shall be effected, by reconquering the same, or by a War of diversion. This
will draw on a breach with Spain, without ripping up of private dispatches. His
Highness seemed to like well hereof, and commanded me to acquaint your Grace
therewith, and to receive your opinion. I humbly, crave again two lines of
assurance, that I am in your Grace's opinion as I will ever be indeed, etc.

The Heads of that Discourse which fell from Don Francisco, 7. Die Aprilis,
1624. at 11. of the clock at night. This Relation was sent by the Lord Keeper
to the Duke.
Don Carlos upon the Prince and Duke in a discourse, thrust a Letter into the
Kings hand, which he desired the King to read in private; The King said he
would, thrust it into his pocket, and went on with his discourse, as if he had
received none. The effect was, to procure private access for Don Francisco to
come and speak with the King, which his Majesty appointed by my Lord of
Kelley; and he by his secrecy, who designed for Don Francisco time and place.



At the last access, which was some 4. days ago, he made a long Don Carlos,
which I do know. It was somewhat general, and very rhetorical, if not tragical
for the style. The heads of what I read were these, viz.

1. That the King was no more a freeman at this time, then King John of France
when he was prisoner in England, or King Francis when he was at Madrid. Being
besieged and closed up with the servants and vassals of Buckingham.

2. That the Ambassadors knew very well, and were informed 4. months ago,
that his Majesty was to be restrained, and confined to his Country house, and
pastimes, and the Government of the State to be assumed and disposed of by
others, and that this was not concealed by Buckinghams followers.

3. That the Duke had reconciled himself to all the popular men of the State,
and drawn them forth out of prisons, restraints, and confinements to alter the
Government of the State at this Parliament, as Oxford, South-hampton, Say, and
others, whom he met at Suppers and Ordinaries to strengthen his popularity.

4. That the Duke to breed an opinion of his own greatness, and to make the
King grow less, has oftentimes bragged openly in Parliament, that he had made
the King yield to this and that, which was pleasure unto them. And that he
mentioned openly before the Houses his Majesty's private oath, which the
Ambassadors have never spoken of to any creature to this hour.

5. That these Kingdoms are not now governed by a Monarch, but by a Triumviri,
whereof Buckingham was the first and chiefest, the Prince the second, and the
King the last; and that all look toward Solemn Orientem.

6. That his Majesty should show himself to be, as he was reputed, the oldest
and wisest King in Europe, by freeing himself from this Captivity, and eminent
danger wherein he was, by cutting off so dangerous and ungrateful an affecter
of greatness and popularity, as the Duke was.

7. That he desired his Majesty to conceal this his free dealing with him,
because it might breed him much peril and danger. And yet if it were any way
available for his service, to reveal it to whom he pleased, because he was
ready to sacrifice his life to do him acceptable service.

And this was the effect of so much of the penned speech as I remember was read
unto me out of the Spanish Copy.

His Majesty was much troubled in the time of this speech.

His Offer to the King for the restitution of the Palatinate.
TO have a Treaty for three months for the restitution, and that money was now
given in Spain to satisfy Bavaria. That in the mean time because the people
were so distrustful of the Spaniard, the King might fortify himself at home,
and assist the Hollanders with men or money at his pleasure. And the King of
Spain should not be offended therewith.

His opinion of our preparing of this Navy.
IT was a design of the Duke, to go to the Ports of Sevil, and there to burn
all the Ships in the Harbor, which he laughed at.

Speeches which he said fell from his Majesty concerning the Prince.
1. THat when he told the King, that his greatness with the Duke was such, as
might hinder his Majesty from taking a course to repress him. His Majesty
replied; He doubted nothing of the Prince, or his own power to sever them two,
when he pleased.

2. His Majesty said, That when his Highness went to Spain, he was as well
affected to that Nation as heart could desire, and as well disposed as any son
in Europe; but now he was strangely carried away with rash, and youthful
Councels, and followed the humor of Buckingham, who had he knew not how many
Devils within him since that journey.

Concerning the Duke.
1. THat he could not believe yet, that he affected popularity to his
disadvantage. Because he had tried him of purpose, and commanded him to make
disaffecting motions to the houses, which he performed, whereby his Majesty
concluded, he was not popular.

2. That he desired Don Francisco, and the Ambassadors (and renewed this
request unto them by Padre Maestro two days ago,) to get him any ground to
charge him with popular courses, or to increase a suspicion of it, and he would
quickly take a course with him.

3. That he had good cause to suspect the Duke of late, but he had no servant
of his own, that would charge him with any particular; nor knew he any himself.

The end (as was conceived) of Don Francisco's desiring this Conference.
HE had heard that the Duke had pusht at me in Parliament, and intended to do
so again, when he had done with the Treasurer, and therefore showed, that if I
would join to set upon him with the King, there was a fit occasion.

I answered, that the Prince and the Duke had preferred me into my place, and
kept me in it, and if I found them pursuing I would not keep it an hour. That
what favor soever I showed the Ambassador, or Catholics, I did it for their
sakes, and had thanks of them for it. And that I would deal by way of counsel
with the Duke to be temperate, and moderate; but to be in opposition to my
friend, and Patron, I knew he (being one that professed so much love unto me)
would never expect from an honest man. Upon the which answer he seemed
satisfied, and never replied word in that kind.

I made an end of writing these notes about two of the clock in the morning.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, concerning Sir Richard Weston, 24. May. 1624.
May it please your Grace,
I Hold it my duty to give your Grace a present account of this Patent made for
Sir Richard Weston. Having put off the sealing of the same as fairly as I could
(though not without the clamor of one Lake, a servant of Mr. Chancelours, Mr.
William Lake.
who very saucily pressed for a dispatch,) this morning, Mr. Chancelour spoke
with me himself, to whom I made answer, That I would seal his Patent, according
to his Majesty's Warrant, but would retain it in my hands (as I was directed,)
until I either spoke with the King, or received his farther Command in that
behalf. He told me he would write unto your Grace concerning the stay thereof,
and the stand of the Kings business, until it were delivered, which course (I
told him) was very fair. After I acquainted his Highness with my sealing and
retaining of the Patent, and asked him, if he knew thereof. His Highness
answered, he did know thereof, but gave no approbation of the course, and
(although he durst not speak to cross it) he hoped I should have directions
from the King to pull off the Seals again. Three hours after I went to his
Highness the second time, and asked him, if he meant really as he spoke, or
intended only to make me believe so. I desired to know his mind, lest I might
steer my course contrary to his intendment. His Highness answered, He meant
really, and would endeavor to effectuate all that he spoke. Which I thought
very sitting for your Grace to know with all speed.

But for the man himself, I must deliver unto your Grace my conscience. For
ought I ever saw in him he is a very honest, and a very sufficient man, and
such a one, as I never in all my life could observe to be any way false, or
unfaithful unto your Grace. He was brought in by your Grace sore against my
will, (as your Grace may call to mind, what I said to your Grace at Woodstock
to that effect) not that I disliked the Gentleman, but because I was afraid he
would be wholly the Treasurers, who began then to out-top me, and appeared to
my thoughts, likely enough by his daring and boldness, (two virtues very
powerful and active upon our Royal Master,) in time to do as much to your
Grace. From that time to this, I never observed in Weston any unworthiness,
or ingratitude to your Grace. Nay, craving pardon, I will proceed one step
farther, I know no fitter man in England for the office, if he come in as a
creature of the Prince, and your Grace's; nor unfitter, if he should offer to
take it, without your likings. I think your Grace will remember, that this
fortnight, this has been my constant opinion.

Upon the death of one Mr. Read, the Secretaries place for the Latin tongue is
void. The Dean of Winchester, and I moved the King for Patrick Young, the
fittest man in England for that place. And the Prince did, and will second the
motion. I Beseech your Grace to assist us, or else the immodesty of his
Competitor (that Lake I spoke of in the beginning of this Letter) will bear
down this most honest, and bashful creature.

God be thanked for your Graces recovery and still preserve it. And so etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke. 22. August. 1624.
May it please your Grace,
I Humbly thank your Grace for your favorable and Gracious remembrance, sent
by my Neighbor Sir George Goring. Though I despair to be able to make any
other requital, yet will I never fail to serve your Grace most faithfully, and
when I grow unuseful in that kind, to pray for you.

I beseech your Grace, that I may receive from the Prince's Highness, and your
Grace, some directions how to demean my self to the French Ambassador, in
matters concerning Recusants, and that Mr. Secretary may either address
himself to Mr. Atturny General in these causes, or else write unto me plainly
what I am to do.

His last letter required of me, and the Judges (who neither are, nor will be
in town these six weeks yet,) an account of this their supposed persecution,
neither so much as intimating unto me what, or when I should return an answer,
and supposes some directions his Majesty should give me therein, the which
(particularly, or dividedly from the Judges) I never received.

I adventured out of mine own head to write that answer, I imagine your Grace
has seen, whether I did well, or ill therein I know not, but conceived his
Majesty expected some answer. Yesterday the Ambassador sent unto me, to know
if I had received any order from his Majesty to stay this (as he termed it)
persecution. I assured him, there was no such matter in this state, and that as
yet, I had received no order from his Majesty of late, but was in expectation
to hear from the Court very shortly. I humbly crave your Graces directions,
what I am to say, or do in the premises, being otherwise a mere stranger in all
these proceedings. I write to no body herein besides your Grace, so as if I
receive no direction, (which upon my head, and livelihood I shall bury in all
secrecy) I shall be in a pitiful perplexity, if his Majesty shall turn the
Ambassador upon me, altogether unprovided how to answer. And so with my
hartiest prayers for your Graces health, I rest

yours, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke. 21. July. 1624.
May it please your Grace,
I Could not suffer Sir George Goring to depart without these few lines,
although the greatest matter of their contents must be this, to express unto
your Grace my sorrow, and affliction, that I have no matter or occasion at all,
wherein to show actuallie my affections and earnest desires to comply with my
bounden duty in serving your Grace, and humbly to desire your Grace to believe,
that there is no soul living shall do it more sincere-ly, and faithfully to the
utmost of my understanding, then my self will do. I add this Caution the
rather, because if ever I have offended your Grace, I take Almighty God to
witness, it was only forwant of a perfect understanding of those high
matters, and the persons bent, whom they concerned, not out of any corruption
of affections toward your Grace, or the least staggering in a conti nued
resolution to live, and die, your Graces most constant, and most faithful
servant.

This, God in heaven (who sees what I now write,) and the King, and Prince
upon earth, do perfectly know, and I (nothing doubt it) will acknowledge unto
your Grace. And thus with my most humble thanks unto your Grace for that
assurance I received, that I remain (though unimployed and unprofitablely) yet
in your Graces good affection, I beseech Almighty God to preserve your health,
and to increase your favor day, by day with God, with the King, with the
Prince, and with all good men. The daily vows of etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke concerning the Countess of South hampton 17.
November. 1624.
May it please your Grace,
I Know how few arguments I need to use to persuade your Grace to works of
Nobleness, and charity. Your fashion has been ever since my happiness of
dependence upon you, to outrun, and prevent all petitions in this kind. Yet
pardon my boldness to be an humble suitor unto your Grace to go on, as I know
you have already begun, in extending your Grace, and goodness toward the most
distressed widow, and children of my Lord of South-hampton. Your Grace cannot
do any work of charity more approved of by God, more acceptable unto men, and
that shall more recommend the memory of your Nobleness to future posterity.
Sir William Spencer (the only Solicitor this sorrowful Lady has now to
employ,) will present some particulars unto your Grace, whom God ever preserve
in all health, and happiness. And so, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 11. October. 1624.
May it please your Grace,
With my most humble and hearty thanks for all your favors extended, and
multiplied daily toward me in sickness and health, which are such, and so
many, that (although I trust in God I shall never prove so inhumane as to fail
in any service, or faithfulness to your Grace,) I must for all that ever live,
and die ungrateful. I thought fit to return unto your Grace this account of the
message received by your Grace's Steward.

I spoke with that Lord, and although he seemed to be quite off from the
business, and had (to my knowledge) disposed of his money for a great, and a
fair purchase here in London, and was resolved never to touch any more upon
VVatt Steward, (who had touched somewhat, of his,) and with whom he had agreed
for 4000 l. yet hearing the proposition to come so entirely from me, as
proceeding immediately from your Grace, whose good favors this Lord (I protest
unto your Grace) has earnestly desired, and if at any time he has straggled
aside from the Prince's desires, and yours, it was merely and solely because he
thought he was not so much relied upon as others of his rank. He promises me
sometime to morrow a reasonable answer.

His material Objections were these.
1. Quantity of the money; so as first and last he is out 16000 l. whereas
Cavendish his Countryman and neighbor got up from a Gentleman, for 14000 l. I
answered, That I observed your Grace never got by any of these bargains, but
that in this compass of a year or two, your favors exceed any gratuity
presented.

2. Precedencie before Wallingford, and especially Vane. I did promise (for
your service) to dispute the latter, but could say nothing to the former,
because he was a Viscount, and his far ancienter Baron.

3. Your Grace's favor, and reflection upon himself, (bred up in the
experience of war and peace,) and upon his sons, all of them well bred, but
most toward the War. I did answer generally, that upon his application of
himself toward your Grace, I made little doubt, but he should receive good
satisfaction in those expectances.

4. Times of payment. I told him I knew he would demand but a convenient time
therein, and that I knew your Grace would never stand upon.

If I have erred in any of these addresses, I pray let your Steward come, and
reform me therein; as also to tell me, whether if I find him coming forward, I
may not say unto him, That your Lordship upon a former motion of mine, was
willing upon the next change of the Commission for the Council of the War, to
add him unto the number.

I propose this,

1. Because it is a new thing.

2. Because he desires some excuse unto the World, by reason of some future
services, why his Majesty should receive him unto this honor. I have wearied
my self, and by this time (which does less become me) your Grace too. I
beseech your Grace to pardon the blottings and extravagancies, my head being
yet but meanly settled. I beseech God to bless your Grace. And so, etc.

Postscript.
MAy it please your Grace, this Lord has returned his answer, which in good
faith seems to be with due respect unto your Grace.

1. That although the place was offered him for 4000 l. yet because the Offer
proceeds from your Grace, (which he voweth to esteem as an especial favor as
long as he lives) he will pay to whom you shall assign 5000 l. and account it
a real obligation of service to your Grace for ever, if you shall remit him the
other thousand pound.

2. That for the time, with humble thanks for your noble favor (which becomes
not him to take in appointing the time) he returns it to your Grace to nominate
two days of payment, as your Steward, or the person assigned shall think meet
and fit for your Graces occasions, desiring some small respite for the former,
but as little as the party please afterward for the second payment: for his
Lordship will send in for his moneys forthwith. And he will give his bonds, or
(which I hold superfluous from so sure a Card) his Morgage in present for both
payments.

3. If your Grace shall make him your servant with this favor so nobly
conditioned, he hopes your Grace may proceed on with his Patent thus forward,
without any stay for any other Corrival, which notwithstanding he humbly refers.

4. But desires, if his presentment be accepted, he may have leave by me to
render his thanks unto your Grace personally sometime to morrow.

And so I leave your Grace for this time in Gods protection. And rest

Yours, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke. 24. December, 1624.
My most Gracious Lord,
I Most humbly beseech your Grace for Gods sake, and his Churches, to consider
of this motion, which I do make unto your Grace, concerning the Deanerie of
York now vacant, the Dean being struck dead suddenly, by a Letter, which one
Dr. Scot procured from his Majesty, to be his Coadjutour.

It is not for any man in particular; but against Doctor Scot, that he may not
by the importunity of any one upon your Grace be promoted to this place, being
the sixth, or seventh place of preferment Ecclesiastical within this Kingdom,
but that your Grace would be pleased to remove Doctor White, or Doctor Hall, or
whom your Grace shall please, unto this great Deanery, and bestow the lesser
Deanerie (far above his merit) upon him.

For these Reasons.

1. I know that he has sold away all his Livings which he has had in this
Church, and has at this day never an one.

2. I am credibly informed, he owes 5000 l. at the least. A vast sum for a
poor Scholar, and too much to be got up in a poor Church. And most of this
money in York.

3. I know he is a great Gamester, and of no fitting conversation for a
Churchman; but of very mean parts, either of Learning, or government.

4. I am certified at this time, that he is a man often overseen in drink; but
this I do not know.

If therefore your Grace shall be pleased, upon my Lord Mordant's importunity
to procure him any Deanerie, I do not doubt but his Lordship will be satisfied,
and that Church eternally obliged unto you for that Commutation. And I beseech
your Grace to believe him, that is no way interested herein, that it concerns
your Grace very much in credit, and reputation, that so mean a man (amongst
such a choice as the Church of England does afford,) be not by your favor
preferred to so high a dignity. God be merciful to my sins, as I have no end
herein but your Honor, and the good of that Church, and therefore I recommend
no particular man unto your Grace, but do rest

Yours, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, concerning Dr. Scott, 4. January, 1624.
May it please your Grace,
I Humbly beseech you to interpret favorably, what I said unto his Majesty or
his Highness, as intending to put off Dr. Scott from this place. And no way
(God be my witness) to cross your Grace, nor to hurt Scot, who might have
been otherways sufficiently provided for.

But I should have written or spoken unto your Grace? so I did in this Letter
enclosed, upon Christmasse Eve. But I confess I durst not send it, for fear of
offending your Grace, which I do take all possible diligence to avoid.

But, I spoke unto the King, and Prince? I did so; but with this caution,
(which I know they do remember,) that if your Grace would not upon the motion
exchange Scot to some other preferment, I did not hold it fit to press these
charges against him, but would do my endeavor to still and quiet those of the
Church of York, who (I confess unto your Grace) are the men that have written
against him.

But I recommended Dr. White, and another to the Prince, and Dr. Warner to
your Grace: I confess it, but must distinguish the times, and the manner. I
commended Dr. Warner, when I was informed Dr. White had his answer, and
denial, and that your Grace was off from Dr. Scot, and did desire to hear from
me, what Doctor Warner was, whom I recommended only in general terms upon the
suit of another. What I said of him, I believe, and know to be true, but he is
so far from being any creature of mine, that I protest before the Almighty God,
I never spoke one word with the man to this very hour in all my life. I did
conceive so meanly of Doctor Scot, that no worthy man in the Kingdom should
have failed of my recommendations in this particular.

Now I know your Grace's resolution, I do alter my opinion, and humbly crave
your Grace's pardon for my meddling therein, although I know his Highness will
bear me witness, it was with all dutiful respect unto your Grace. I shall be
very careful of giving your Grace the least cause of jealousy in this kind
again. And whereas I had put a poor suit in your Grace's hands about the
helping of my poor fortunes, I will let that, and all others fall, and desire
only to be accounted

Yours, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 2. March, 1624.
May it please your Grace,
THis heavy, and unexpected accident of my Lord Stewards death, makes me to be
troublesome unto your Grace at this time. In safety and discretion, I might
very easily spare this labor: but my obligation to your Grace is such, as if
that I conceal any thing, which but my self apprehends fit to be represented to
your Grace, whilst I affect the title of a reserved, close, and wise, I may
lose the other of an honest man, which I more esteem.

Thus much by way of preface.

I represent this office of a Lord Steward, as a place to be either accepted of
by your self, or else to be discontinued (as for many years toward the latter
end of Queen Elizabeth, and the beginning of our Masters reign it was) and in
any case, not to be placed upon another, without the deliberation of some few
years at the least. Being an office, that none but the Kings Kinsmen, or
Favorites, or Counter-favourites (raised up of purpose to balance the great
one) have anciently possessed: I could desire your Grace had it in your own
person; for these Reasons.

1. It is an office of fair, and very competent gettings, but that is scarce
considerable.

2. It keeps you in all changes and alterations of years near the King, and
gives unto you all the opportunities, and accesses, without the envy of a
favorite. I beseech your Grace pause well upon this, and call to mind, if the
Duke of Richmond was not in this case.

3. It Gives you opportunities to gratify all the Court, great and small,
Virtute Officii in right of your place. Which is a thing better accepted of,
and interpreted, then a courtesy from a favorite. Because in this you are a
dispenser of your own; but in the other (say many envious men,) of the Kings
goodness, which would flow fast enough of it self, but that it is restrained
to this Pipe and channel only.

4. There must be one day an end of this attendance as a Bedchamber man, but I
hope never of being next unto the King, as a great Counceller, and officer, and
above all others, which you cannot be, but by this office. The Master of the
horse is but a Knights place at the most, and the Admirals (in time of action)
either to be employed abroad Personally, or to live at home in that ignominy,
and shame, as your Grace will never endure to do so.

I will trouble your Grace with a tale of Dante the first Italian Poet of note.
Who being a great, and wealthy man in Florence, and his opinion demanded, who
should be sent Ambassador to the Pope, made this answer, that he knew not who
Si jo vo chista, Si jo sto chi va. If I go, I know not who shall stay at home;
if I stay, I know not who can perform this employment. Yet your Grace staying
at home in favor, and greatness with his Majesty, may by your designs and
directions so dispose of the Admiral, as to enjoy the glory, without running
the hazard of his personal employment, My Gracious Lord, if any man shall put
you in hope, that the Admiralty will fill your Coffers, and make you rich, call
upon them to name one Admiral that ever was so. As in time of hostility there
is some getting, so are there hungry and infatiable people presently to devour
the same. God made man to live upon the land, and necessity only drives him to
Sea. Yet is not my advice absolutely for your relinquishing of this, but in any
case for the retaining of the other place though with the loss of the
Admiraltie.

5. I beseech your Grace observe the Earl of Leicester, (who being the only
favorite in Queen Elizabeth's time, that was of any continuance) made choice of
this place only, and refused the Admiralty two several times, as being an
occasion, either to withdraw him from the Court, or to leave him there, laden
with ignominy. And yet being Lord Steward, wise, and in favor, he wholly
commanded the Admiralty, and made it ministerial, and subordinary to his
directions.

6. Remember, that this office is fit for a young, a middle, and an old man to
enjoy, and so is not any other that I know about his Majesty. Now God almighty
having given you favor at the first, and since a great quantity (I never
flattered your Grace, nor do now) of wit, and wise experience, I would humbly
recommend unto your Grace this opportunity to be nearest unto the King in your
young, your middle, and your decreasing age, that is to be on earth, as your
piety will one day make you in heaven, an everlasting favorite. There are many
objections, which your Grace may make, but if I find any inclination in your
Grace to lay hold upon this proposition, I dare undertake to answer them all.
Your Grace may leave any office you please (if your Grace be more in love with
the Admiraltie, then I think you have cause,) to avoid envy. But my final
conclusion is this, to desire your Grace most humbly to put no other Lord into
this office, without just, and mature deliberation. And to pardon this
boldness, and haste, which makes me to write so weakly in a theme, that I
persuade my self I could maintain very valiantly; I have no other copy of
this Letter, and I pray God your Grace be able to read this. I send your Grace
a Letter delivered unto me from Conde Gondomar, and dated either at Madrid, or
(as I observe it was written first,) at London. There is no great matter at
whither of the places it was invented. I humbly beseech your Grace to send by
this bearer the resolution for the Parliament. And do rest

Yours etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke about Sr. Robert Howard. 11 March 1624.
May it please your Grace,
SIr Robert Howard appeared yesterdy, and continues obstinate in his refusal to
swear. When we came to examine the commission for our power to fine him for this
obstinacy, we found that Sir Edward Cook, (foreseeing out of a prophetical,
how near it might concern a Grandchild of his own day) has expunged this
clause (by the help of the Earl of Salisburie,) out of the commission, and
left us nothing but the rustie sword of the church, excommunication, to
vindicate the authority of this Court. We have given him day until Saturdy
next, either to conform, or to be excommunicated. She has answered wittily,
and cunningly, but yet sufficient for the Conisance of the Court. Confesses a
fame of incontinencie against her, and Howard, but says it was raised by her
Husbands kindred. I do not doubt but the business will go on well, but
(peradventure) more slowly, if Howard continue refractory, for want of this
power to fine, and amerce him. I beseech your Grace, either to procure me the
favor to come, or to excuse my not seeing his Majesty in this time of his
indisposition, which I hear still continues. I beseech Almighty God (as in
eternal duty I am bound) presently to ease him, and restore him to his perfect
health Mr. Packers being away makes me unmannerly. I am humbly to desire your
Grace to be pleased to move his Majesty (at your first opportunity) to sign
this Commission, for the proroguing of the Parliament, and to read unto his
Majesty this paper of names here enclosed, (which his Majesty is not to
sign,) knowing his pleasure, whether he allows of them for Commissioners for
the last subside of the Lords. I have added to the former the Earl of
Montgomerie according to your Graces direction, whom God almighty ever
preserve. It is the prayer of etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke 13. March. 1624.
May it please your Grace,
FOr your Brothers business, this is all I have to acquaint your Grace with.
Sir Robert Howard appeared yesterday at Lambeth, pretended want of Council,
(the Doctors being out of town) desired respite until to morrow, and had it
granted by my Lords Grace. Most men think he will not take his oath at all; I
do incline to the contrary opinion, because (to my knowledge) he has sent far,
and near for the most able Doctors in the Kingdom to be feed for him, which
were great folly if he intended not to answer. He is extremely commended for
his closeness and secrecy by the major part of our auditors, (the He and
She good fellows of the town,) and though he refuses to be a Confessor, yet
is sure to die a Martyr, and most of the Ladies in town will offer at his
shryne. The Lady Hatton some nine days since, was at Stoke, with the good
Knight her Husband for some counsel in this particular. But he refused to
meddle therewithal, and dismissed her Ladyship, when she had stayed with him very
lovingly half a quarter of an hour.

The cause of my troubling your Grace is this. The French Ambassador is fired
with some complaints of our Recusants, who (I verily believe) work upon him
purposely, finding him to be of a combustible disposition. To morrow he is
resolved to come upon you, and our Master with Complaints, for lack of
performances to the Papists. And because I would furnish your Grace with as
much answer, as I am acquainted with, (nothing doubting but your Grace is
otherways better provided,) I make bold to present your Grace with these
particulars.

1. With a Letter from my Lord Archbishop of York in answer to another of mine;
which shows how really his Majesty's promise has been in that kind performed.
I beseech your Grace to keep it safe in your pocket, until I shall have the
honor to wait upon your Grace, when you have made use of the same.

2. If your Grace shall hear him complain of the Judges in their charges, and
of their receiving of Indictments; your Grace may answer, That those charges
are but orations of Course, opening all the penal Laws, and the Indictments
being presented by the Country, cannot be refused by the Judges. But the Judges
are ordered to execute nothing actually against the Recusants, nor will they do
it, during the negotiation.

3. Your Grace may put him in mind, that my Lord Keeper does every day, when
his, (the Lord Ambassadors) Secretary calls upon him, grant forth Writs to
remove all the persons indicted in the Country into the Kings Bench, out of the
power and reaches of the Justices of the Peace. And that being there, the King
may, and does release them at his pleasure.

4. That the Spanish Ambassador never had, nor desired more then these favors.

5. That you are informed, that Copies of Letters written from the King to both
the Archbishops are spread abroad in Staffordshire, to his Majesty's
disadvantage (for so it is) and that thereby my Lord Ambassador may perceive
the bent of the English Catholics, which is not to procure ease and
quietness to themselves, but Scandals to their neighboring Protestants, and
discontentments against the King and State.

I humbly crave your Graces pardon for this boldness, and tediousness, and
with my hearty prayers for your health, do rest

yours, etc.

The Lord Keeper to the Duke, 22. March, 1624.
May it please your Grace,
I Send your Grace here enclosed, the Kings Commission, and the Prince's
Proxy, not fairly written, (which the Ambassadors upon the place may procure
in a frech hand,) but yet legibly, and passably. The Prince's Proxy refers the
manner unto the articles, and particularly to the second, third, and fourth
Section of those Articles; which gives me occasion to beg of your Grace
pardon, to desire your Grace to think seriously upon the third Section, to
advise with the Prince, and to give Mr. Packer charge to inform your Grace
punctually what he knows, and may inform himself concerning those
particulars. That is, How the Queen Margaret of France was married to Henry the
fourth, and how Madam his sister was married to the Prince of Lorrain. For
although they are both made alike in the article, yet surely they were not
married after the same fashion. For the Duchess of Bar was married in a
closet, without a Mass, by words only of the Present tense, as I believe, I
have read in the History of Thuanus. A favor, which will hardly be granted to
your Grace. And how Queen Margaret was married, my Lords the Ambassadors will
soon learn, if your Grace will be pleased to write unto them.

I hold it (in a manner) necessary, that your Grace do carry over with you in
your company one Civilian to put your Grace in mind of the formalities
required; and if your Grace be of that mind, your own Doctor, Dr. Reeves is as
fit as any man else, who is a good Scholar, and speaks that language. Your
Grace has revived my Lord of Clare, sithence I spoke with your Grace. And I
beseech your Grace to follow that resolution, and to let Mr. Packer draw up a
warrant of 3. or 4. lines signed by the King to me to place him with the rest
of the Council of War. It will be an occasion to take up more of that time,
which he now spends with the Lady Hatton. For now I am resolved, that I was of
the right in my conjecture to your Grace, that his Lordship had utterly refused
my Lady Purbecks cause (of the which the very common peopple begin to be
ashamed) but is deeply engaged against my Lady of Richmond, Duchess of
Richmond.
in the business of that famous (or rather notorious) foeminine Contract, and
bargain, of sixteen hundred pounds by the year for a house to sleep in.

When your Grace shall draw up your Instructions, you will be pleased to use
the words, To Contract, Espouse and marry Our Welbeloved Son, etc. because
they do in those parts contract always before marriage. And your Grace will be
pleased to express his Majesty's pleasure, that this is to be done by your
self, and no other: Because although the two Earls upon the place, have some
such general words in their Commission, yet your Grace only is named in the
Prince's Proxy, and now solely employed by the King to that purpose. Although
I conceived this restraint to be fitter a great deal for the instructions, then
the Commission.

I am extreme sorry to hear what a grievous fit his Majesty had this last
night. But I hope it is a farewell of the Agues, and I pray God it be the last
fit. And now am an humble suitor again, that I may come and look upon his
Majesty, resolved to say nothing, but that which I will never cease to say,
God bless him. If your Grace holds it inconvenient, I beseech your Grace to
excuse me, and to account me as I will ever be found,

Yours, etc.

The Bishop of Lincoln to the Duke, 7th. of January, 1625.
Most Gracious Lord,
BEing come hither, according unto the duty of my place, to do my best service
for the preparation to the Coronation, and to wait upon his Majesty for his
Royal pleasure and direction therein; I do most humbly beseech your Grace, to
crown so many of your Grace's former favors, and to revive a Creature of your
own, struck dead only with your displeasure, (but no other coffeehouse in
the universal world,) by bringing of me to kiss his Majesty's hand, with whom
I took leave, in no disfavour at all. I was never hitherto brought into the
presence of a King, by any Saint, besides your self: Turn me not over (most
noble Lord) to offer my prayers at new Altars. If I were guilty of any
unworthy unfaithfulness for the time past, or not guilty of a resolution to
do your Grace all service for the time to come, all considerations under Heaven
could not force me to beg it so earnestly, or to profess my self, as I do
before God, and you,

Your Grace's most humble, affectionate, and devoted servant, Jo. Lincoln.

The Bishop of Lincoln to his Majesty.
Most Mighty, and dread Sovereign,
I Have now these four months, by the strength of those gracious speeches your
Majesty used, (when I took my leave of your Majesty at Salisbury,) and the
conscience of mine own innocence from having ever wilfully or maliciously
offended your Majesty, comforted my self in these great afflictions; to be
thus enjoined from your Majesty's presence (the only heaven wherein my soul
delighted,) having submitted my self (I hope dutifully, and patiently) to the
discharge from that great Office (for the execution whereof I was altogether
unworthy;) My required absence from the Council Table; my sequestration from
attending your Majesty's Coronation: And your Majesty's favorable pleasure
(for so I do esteem that,) to spare my presence at this next Parliament. And I
trust in God I shall most readily obey any other Command, that bears the image
and superscription of your Majesty, without any desire of searching after the
hand that helps to press and ingrave it. Yet because I suffer in some more
particulars then peradventure is explicitly known to your Majesty: And that I
have no friend left about your Majesty, that dares for fear of displeasure
relate unto your Majesty my griefs, and necessities, I humbly crave your
gracious Pardon to make some two representations, and some few Petitions unto
your most excellent Majesty.

First, I humbly show unto your Majesty, that besides my former Calamities, I
am not paid that part of my Pension, which should pay the Creditors, who lent
me money to buy the same; notwithstanding your Majesty has been graciously
pleased to order otherwise.

Secondly, I have not yet received my Writ of Summons unto the Parliament
(denied to no Prisoners, or condemned Peers in the late reign of your blessed
Father,) that I might accordingly make my Proxy, the which I cannot do, the
Writ not received; nor can I my self go into the Country, as I had done long
ere this, had not the expectation of this Writ, together with the special
service of my Lord Duke, and no other occasion whatsoever detained me.

These two particulars I present with all submission unto your Majesty, and
shall rest satisfied with what royal resolution your Majesty shall make
therein.

These petitions that follow I must earnestly beg at your Majesty's hands, and
for Gods sake, and your blessed Fathers sake, whose Creature, and most painful
servant I was.

First, that your Majesty would be pleased to mitigate, and allay the
causeless displeasure of my Lord Duke against me; who is so little satisfied
with any thing I can do, or suffer, that I have no means left to appease his
anger, but my prayers to God, and your Sacred Majesty.

Secondly, I beseech your Majesty for Christ Jesus sake not to believe news,
or accusations against me concerning my carriage past, present, or to come,
whilst I stand thus enjoined from your Royal presence, before you shall have
heard my answer, and defense unto the particulars. Those that inform your
Majesty may (God he knows) be oftentimes misinformed.

My last supplication unto your Majesty is, That in my absence this
Parliament, no use may be made of your sacred name to wound the reputation of a
poor Bishop, who besides his Religion and Duty to that Divine Character you
now bear, has ever affectionately honored your very Person above all the
objects in this world, as he desires the salvation of the world to come. But I
crave no protection against any other accuser, or accusation whatsoever. So
shall I never cease to pray to the Almighty God to make your Majesty the
Happiest and Greatest King, that ever was Crowned, and Anointed: which shall be
the continual orisons of

Your Majesty's most dutiful and most humble Vassal, Jo. Lincoln.

The Lord Keeper to the Lord Viscount Anan. 17. September. 16.
Right Honorable,
I Owe more service to that true love, and former acquaintance, which your
Lordship has been pleased to afford me, now these full ten years, then to be
sparing, or reserved in satisfying your Lordship about any doubt whatsoever,
the resolution whereof shall lie in my power. Concerning that offense, taken by
many people, both on this side the borders and in Scotland, from that Clemency
which his Majesty was pleased to extend to the imprisoned Lay-Recusants of
this Kingdom, and my Letter written unto the Justices for the reigling of the
same, which your Lordship did intimate unto me yesterday at Mr. Henry Gibbs his
house, out of some news received from a Peer of Scotland. This is the plainest
return I can make unto your Lordship. In the general, as the Sun in the
firmament appears unto us no bigger then a Platter, and the Stars but as so
many nails in the pummel of a saddle, because of the Elongement and
disproportion between our eyes, and the object; so is there such an
unmeasurable distance betwixt the deep resolution of a Prince, and the shallow
apprehension of common and ordinary people, that as they will be ever judging
and censuring, so must they be obnoxious to error and mistaking.

Particularly, for as much as concerns my self, I must leave my former life, my
profession my continual preaching, my writing, (which is instant in the hands
of many,) my private endeavors about some great persons, and the whole bent of
my actions, (which in the place I live in cannot be concealed, to testify unto
the world, what favor I am likely to importune for the Papists in their
religion. For the King my Master, I will tell you a story out of Velleius
Paterculus. A Surveyor bragging to M. Livius Drusus, that he would so contrive
his house Vt Libera a conspectu immunis ab omnibus arbitris esset, that it
should stand removed out of sight, and be past all danger of peeping, or
Eves-dropping; was answered again by Drusus, Tu vero, si quid in te artis est
ita compone domum mean, ut quicquid agam ab omnibus Conspici possit, Nay my
good friend, if you have any devices in your head, contrive my house after such
a manner, that all the world may see what I do therein. So if I should
endeavor to flourish up some artificial Vault, to hide and conceal the
intentions of his Majesty, I know I should receive the same thanks, that the
Surveyor did from Drusus. I was not called to Council by his royal Majesty,
when the resolution of this Clemency to the Lay-Recusants was first concluded:
But if I had been asked my opinion, I should have advised it without the least
haesitation. His Majesty was so Popishly addicted at this time, that (to the
incredible exhaustments of this Treasury) he was a most zealous interceder for
some ease and refreshment to all the Protestants in Europe, his own Dominions,
and Denmarks only excepted.

Those of Swithland (having lately provoked the Pole) had no other hope of
peace; those of France of the exercise of their Religion; those of the
Palatinate, and adjoining Countries of the least connivencie to say their
prayers, then by the earnest mediation of our gracious Master. And advised by
the late Assembly of Parliament to insist a while longer in this milkie way of
intercession, and Treaty. What a preposterous argument would this have been to
desire those mighty Princes (armed, and victorious) to grant some liberty, and
clemency to the Protestants, because himself did now imprison, and execute the
rigor of his laws against the Roman Catholics, I must deal plainly with
your Lordship. Our viperous countrymen the English Jesuits in France to
frustrate these Pious endeavors of his Majesty's, had many months before this
favor granted, retorted that argument upon us, by writing a most malicious
book (which I have seen, and read over) to the French King, inciting him, and
the three Estates, to put all those statutes in execution against the
Protestants in those parts, which are here enacted, and (as they falsely
informed) severally executed upon the Papists. I would therefore see the most
subtle State-monger in the world chalk out a way for his Majesty to mediate
for Grace, and favor for the Protestants, by executing at this time the
severity of the Laws upon the Papists. And that this favor should mount to a
Toleration, is a most dull, (and yet a most divelish) misconstruction.

A Toleration looks forward, to the time to come: This favor backward only,
to the offenses past. If any Papist now set at liberty shall offend the laws
again, the Justices may, (nay must) recommit him, and leave favor and mercy to
the King, to whom only it properly belongs. Nay let those 2. writs directed
to the Judges, be as diligently perused by those rash Censures as they were by
those grave, and learned, to whom his Majesty referred the penning of the,
same and they shall find, that these Papists are no other-otherwise out of
prison, then with their shackles about their heels, sufficient sureties, and
good recognisances to present themselves again at the next assizes. As
therefore that Lacedemonian posed the Oracle of Apollo, by asking his opinion
of the bird which he grasped in his hand, whether he were alive, or dead, so it
is a matter yet controversed, and undecided, whether those Papists (closed up,
and grasped in the hands of the law) be still in prison, or at liberty. Their
own demeanours, and the success of his Majesty's negotiations, are Oracles
that must deside the same. If the Lay-papists do wax insolent with this mercy,
insulting upon the Protestants, and translating this favor from the person to
the cause, I am verily of opinion his Majesty will reman d them to their
former state, and condition, and renew his writ no more. But if they shall use
these graces modestly, by admitting Conference with learned Preachers,
demeaning themselves neighbourly and peaceably, praying for his Majesty, and
the prosperous success of his pious endeavors, and relieving him bountifully
(which they are as well able to do as any of his Subjects,) if he shall be
forced and constrained to take his sword in hand, then it cannot be denied, but
our Master is a Prince, that has (as one said) plus humanitatis pene quam
hominis, and will at that time leave to be merciful, when he leaves to be
himself. In the mean while, this argument fetched from the Devils topics, which
concludes a Concreto ad abstractum from a favor done to the English Papists,
that the King favors the Romish Religion is such a composition of folly,
and malice, as is little deserved by that gracious Prince, who by word,
writing, exercise of Religion, acts of Parliament, late directions for
catechizing, and preaching, and all professions, and endeavors in the world
has demonstrated himself so resolved a Protestant. God by his holy Spirit open
the eyes of the people, that these aierie representations of ungrounded fancies
set aside, they may clearly discern, and see how by the goodness of God, and
the wisdom of their King, this Island of all the Countries in Europe is the
sole nest of peace and true Religion, and the inhabitants thereof unhappie
only in this one thing, that they never look up to heaven to give God thanks
for so great a happiness.

Lastly, for mine own Letter to the Judges, (which did only declare, not
operate the favor,) it was either much mis-penned, or much misconstrued. It
recited four kinds of recusancies only capable of his Majesty's clemency not
so much to include these, as to exclude many other crimes bearing amongst the
Papists the name of Recusancies, as using the function of a Romish Priest,
seducing the Kings liege people from the Religion established, scandalizing and
aspersing our King, Church, State, or present Government. All which offenses
(being outward practices, and no secret motions of the conscience,) are
adjudged by the Laws of England to be merely civil, and political, and
excluded by my Letter from the benefit of those Writs, which the bearer was
employed to deliver unto the Judges.

And thus I have given your Lordship a plain account of the carriage of this
business, and that the more suddenly, that your Lordship might perceive it is
not Aurea Fabula, or prepared tale, but a bare Narration, which I have sent
unto your Lordship. I beseech your Lordship to let his Majesty know, that the
Letters to the Justices of Peace concerning those four heads recommended by his
Majesty, shall be sent away as fast as they can be exscribed. I will trouble
your Lordship no more at this time, but shall rest ever

Your Lordships servant and true friend, Jo. Lincoln. C. S.

The Bishop of Menevensis to the Duke: Dr. Laud.
My most Gracious Lord,
I May not be absent, and not write. And since your Grace is pleased with the
trouble, I must profess my self much content with the performance of the
duty. I am not unmindful of the last business your Grace committed to me, but
I have as yet done the less in it, because I fell into a relaps of my
infirmity, but I thank God I am once more free, if I can look better to my
self, as I hope I shall.

My Lord, I must become an humble suitor to your Grace. I hear by good hand
that my Lord of Canterbury intends shortly to renew the High Commission. Now I
am to acquaint your Grace, that there is never a Bishop that lives about London
left out of the Commission but my self, and many that live quite absent are in,
and many inferiors to Bishops. The Commission is a place of great experience
for any man, that is a Governor in the Church. And since by his Majesty's
gracious goodness, and your Grace's sole procurement, I am made a Governor, I
would be loath to be excluded from that which might give me experience, and so
enable me to perform my duty. I am sure my Lord of Canterbury will leave me
out, as hitherto he has done, if his Majesty be not pleased to Command that I
shall be in. This I submit to your Grace, but humbly desire even against my own
ease and quiet, that I may not be deprived of that experience which is
necessary for my place. I most humbly beseech your Grace to pardon this
boldness, and to know, that in my daily prayers for your Grace's happiness, I
shall ever rest

Your Grace's most devoted and affectionate servant, Guil. Menevensis.
November. 18. 1624.
The Bishop of Menevensis to the Duke: Dr. Laud.
My most Gracious Lord,
I Am heartily glad to hear your Lordship is so well returned, and so happily
as to meet so great joy. God has among many others his great blessings (and I
know your Grace so esteems them) sent you now this extraordinary one, a son to
inherit his fathers honors, and the rest of Gods blessings upon both. So soon
as I came to any end of my journey, I met the happy news of Gods blessing upon
your Grace, and it seasoned all the hard journey I have had out of Wales
through the Snow. When I had rested my self a little at my friend's house in
the Forest (Mr. Windebank a servant of your Grace's, whom I made bold to make
known to your Honor) I came to Windsor in hope to have been so happy, as to
meet your Grace at the great solemnity: but when I came, I found that which I
suspected, that your Grace's greater joy would carry you farther. Which
journey, and the cause, and the end of it, I heartily wish, and pray may be
full of joy, and all contentment to your Grace. I made bold to trouble your
Grace with a Letter or two out of Wales, which I hope Mr. VVindebank took the
best care he could to see delivered. I have no means to do your Grace any
service, but by my prayers, and they do daily attend, and shall ever, while I
breathe to utter them. I hope though I have missed this opportunity, yet I
shall be so happy as to see, and wait upon your Grace at London. In the mean
time, and ever, I leave your Grace, and all your home-blessings to the
protection of the Almighty, and shall ever be found

Your Graces most devoted and affectionate servant, Guil. Meneven.
Windsor, 13. December. 1625.
Doctor Mountague Bishop of Chichester to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
YOur Highness vouchsafed at Windsor to let me understand, that his Majesty
my gracious Master and Sovereign, had taken me off from that trouble and
vexation, which by some men's procurement, I was put unto in the House of
Commons. They as I understand, think not so, but intend to proceed against me
so far as they can, as having returned his Majesty no other answer, but that I
was freed from imprisonment. It is true, that besides 20 l. which the Sergeant
had of me by exaction for fees, they bound me unto him in a bond of 2000 l. to
appear before them, the first day of the next Sessions. I beseech your Grace,
that as you have been pleased to tie me unto your excellent not only self, but
also most honorable Sister in that bond of obligation, as never was poor
Scholar to such Worthies; so you would be pleased to let his Majesty
understand the case, that by your means I may be absolutely discharged, with
the redeliverie of my bond from them, whom I never offended, who (under
correction) have nothing to do with me; and as his Majesty's servant be left
unto himself, especially for that which was authorized by himself, and
commanded by his Father, my late Master of ever blessed memory. If his
Majesty will be pleased to call for their accusations against me, if I do not
really and thoroughly answer whatsoever is, or can be imputed to me out of my
books, I will no further desire favor and protection of his Majesty, and your
Gracious self, but be willingly left unto my enemies. I must crave pardon for
presuming thus to trouble your Grace, the rather because through a grievous
affliction of the Colic and Stone, I am not able personally to attend your
Grace, whom according unto my most bounden duty, I daily recommend unto the
Almighty, being more obliged unto your noble self, then ever to any one. So
remaining

Most humbly at your Graces service ever, Ri. Mountague.
Petworth, 29. July.
1. IF any or all the Papists living can prove, that the Roman Church, as it
now stands in opposition to the Church of England, is either the Catholic
Church of Christ, or a found member of the Catholic Church,

I will subscribe.
2. If any or all the Papists living can prove unto me, that the Church of
England as it stands at this day, is not a true member of the Catholic
Church,

I will subscribe.


3. If any or all the Papists living can prove unto me, that any one point at
this day maintained by the Church of Rome against the Church of England, was
the received Doctrine of the Catholic Church, or concluded by any general
Council, or particular approved Council, or resolved of by any one Father of
Credit to be such, for 500. years at least after Christ,

I will subscribe Ri. Mountague.



The Bishops of Rochester, Oxford, and St. David's, to the Duke, concerning Mr.
Mountague.
May it please your Grace,
WE are bold to be suitors to you in the behalf of the Church of England, and
a poor member of it Mr. Mountague, at this time not a little distressed. We are
not strangers to his person, but it is the Cause which we are bound to be
tender of.

The cause we conceive (under correction of better judgment) concerns the
Church of England merely; for that Church when it was reformed from the
superstitious opinions broached, or maintained by the Church of Rome, refused
the apparent and dangerous errors, and would not be too busy with every
particular School point. The cause why she held this moderation was, because
she could not be able to preserve any unity amongst Christians, if men were
forced to subscribe to curious particulars disputed in Schools.

Now may it please your Grace, the opinions which at this time trouble many men
in the late Book of Mr. Mountague, are some of them such, as are expressly, the
resolved doctrine of the Church of England, and those he is bound to maintain.
Some of them such as are fit only for Schools, and to be left at more liberty
for learned men to abound in their own sense, so they keep themselves
peaceable, and distract not the Church. And therefore to make any man subscribe
to School opinions, may justly seem hard in the Church of Christ, and was one
great fault of the Council of Trent. And to affright them from those opinions
in which they have (as they are bound) subscribed to the Church, as it is worse
in it self, so it may be the Mother of greater danger.

May it please your Grace farther to consider, that when the Clergy submited
themselves in the time of Henry the 8th. the submission was so, that if any
difference doctrinal, or other fell in the Church, the King and the Bishops
were to be Judges of it in a national Synod, or Convocation, The King first
giving leave under his broad Seal, to handle the points in difference.

But the Church never submitted to any other Judge, neither indeed can She,
though She would. And we humbly desire your Grace to consider, and then to
move his most Gracious Majesty (if you shall think fit) what dangerous
Consequences may follow upon it. For first, if any other Judge be allowed in
matter of Doctrine, we shall depart from the ordinance of Christ, and the
continual course and practice of the Church.

2. Secondly, if the Church, be once brought down beneath her self, we cannot
but fear what may be next Struck at.

3. Thirdly, it will some way touch the honor of his majesty's dear Father,
and our most dread Sovereign of Glorious, and ever blessed memory, King James,
who saw and approved all the opinions in this Book, and he in his rare wisdom
and judgment would never have allowed them, if they had Crossed with truth and
the Church of England.

4. Fourthly, we must be bold to say, that we cannot conceive what use there
can be of Civil Government in the common Wealth, or of preaching, and external
ministry in the Church, if such fatal opinions as some which are opposite,
and contrary to these delivered by Mr. Mountague are, shall be Publicly
taught and maintained.

5. Fifthly, we are certain, that all or most of the contrary opinions were
treated of at Lambeth, and ready to be published, but then Queen Elizabeth of
famous memory, upon notice given, how little they agreed with the Practice of
piety, and obedience to all Government, caused them to be suppressed, and so
they have continued ever since, till of late some of them have received
countenance at the Synod of Dort. Now this was a Synod of that nation, and can
be of no authority in any other National Church, till it be received there by
Public authority. And our hope is that the Church of England will be well
advised, and more then once over, before She admit a foreign Synod,
especially of such a Church as condemns her discipline and manner of
Government, to say no more.

And further we are bold to commend to your Graces wisdom this one particular.
His Majesty (as we have been informed) has already taken this business into
his own care, and most worthily referred it in a right course to
Church-consideration. And we well hoped, that without further trouble to the
state, or breach of unity in the Church it might so have been well, and orderly
composed, as we still pray it may, These things considered we have little to
say for Mr. Mountagues person: only thus much we know. He is a very good
Scholar and a right honest man. A man every way able to do God, his Majesty,
and the Church of England great service. We fear he may receive great
discouragement, and which is far worse, we have some cause to doubt this may
bred a great backwardness in able men to write in the defense of the Church of
England against either home, or foreign adversaries, if they shall see him
sink in fortunes reputation, or health upon his book occasion.

And this we most humbly submit to your Graces judgment, and care of the
Churches peace, and welfare. So recommending your Grace to the protection of
Almighty God,

We shall ever rest At your Graces service Jo. Roffens. Jo. Oxon. Guil Meneven.

2. August 1625.
Doctor Field Bishop of Landaffe to the Duke.
My Gracious Good Lord,
IN the great Library of men, that I have studied these many years, your Grace
is the best Book, and most Classick author that I have read, in whom I find so
much goodness, sweetness, and nobleness of nature, such an Heroic spirit,
for boundless bounty as I never did in any. I could instance in many, some of
whom you have made Deanes, some Bishops, some Lords, and Privy Councillors.
None that ever looked toward your Grace did ever go empty away I, need go no
farther then my self (a gum of the Earth) whom some 8. years ago you raised out
of the dust, for raising but a thought so high as to serve your Highness.
Since that, I have not played the Truant, but more diligently studied you then
ever before. And yet (Dunce that I am) I stand at a stay, and am a
Non-proficient, the book being the same that ever it was, as may appear by the
great proficiencie of others. This wonderfully poseth me, and sure there is
some guile, some wile in some of my fellow Students, who hide my book from me,
or some part of it. All the fault is not in mine own blockishnesse, that I
thrive no better. I once feared this before, that some did me ill offices. Your
Grace was pleased to protest no man had, and to assure me no man could. My
heart tells me, it has been always upright, and is still most faithful unto
you. I have examined my actions, my words, and my very thoughts, and found all
of them ever since most sound unto your Grace. Give me leave after so long
Patience (for which virtue you were once pleased to commend me to my old Master
King James, and I have not yet lost it) now that for these 12 Months almost, I
have been not only upon the Stage, but upon the rack of expectations, even
distracted between hope and fear, to comfort my self with recordation of your
Loving kindnesses of old, when on that great feast day of your being inaugured
our Chancellor, my look was your book, wherein you read sadness, to which I
was bold to answer, I trusted your Grace would give me no cause. You replied
with (loss of blood rather,) that was your noble expression. But God forbid so
precious an effusion. (I would empty all my veins rather then you should bleed
one drop) when as one blast of your breath is able to bring me to the haven
where I would be. My Lord I am grown an old man and am like old
Househouldstuffe, apt to be broke upon often removing. I desire it therefore
but once for all, be it Eli, or Bathe and Wells, and I will spend the remainder
of my days in writing an History of your good deeds to me and others, whereby
I may vindicate you from the envy, and obloquy of this present wicked age
wherein we live, and whilst I live in praying for your Grace,

Whose I am totallie and finally, Theophilus Landaven.

The Bishop of Landaffe to the Duke.
My most honorable good Lord,
IT is meet before I beg a new, that I should first acknowledge those benefits,
and more specially give thanks for the last noble favor your Lordship did me
in standing up the last day of Parliament, and pleading my cause. Never was
poor man more bound to a gracious Lord for protecting his innocence: and it
came seasonable, like a shower of rain in the time of drouth. My very heart was
parched with grief till it came, and it had ere this been broken, had not your
Lordships speech then dropped comfort, in strength whereof it yet lives. For an
abortive thought, which never came into act, some 2. or 3. years ago conceived,
and that tending to a work of mercy, and charity, a deed of justice, and due
thankfulness, how far? how foulie have I been traduced? your Honor cannot
imagine how deeply I have been wounded in my good name, as if I had deserved
deprivation, degradation, yea to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. This can none
cure but God, or the King, Deus in monte, God has done his part in providing
an occasion. Besides London (which is too high for me to look after) and the
removes which may be thereby, Hertford the next Seat to mine, (whither my
Predecessors have often been removed) is said to be now void. Now good my Lord,
speak once more seasonably. It is a doubled, and redoubled, an infinitely
multiplied benefit, which is so given. Never had I more need of the Cordial his
Majesty gave me at my going into Wales, which was that I should not stay long
there. It would be a restorative too, not only of my Credit, so cruelly cracked
with the sharp teeth of the wide mouth of vulgar lying fame, but of my estate
also, always poor, but lately much more impoverished, and made crazie by
occasions of the Church, which drew me to London (a place of great expenses, as
the busy times were) to little purpose: And the Parliament overtaking me,
which have held me long, and longer yet are like to hold me here, even to the
undoing of my self, my wife and six children, from whom I have now lived 6. or
7. months. And what shall I carry home with me but disgrace and infamy? Yet
my good Lord, at least procure me of my Lord the King a Nunc dimittis, leave to
depart. I shall be further out of the reach of pursuing malice, there in the
Country, do his Majesty better service in gathering up his Subsidies,
praying, and teaching my children (whilst I read a Lecture to them, my self
was never yet able to get by heart) of parcimony, which must be to them instead
of a patrimony, to pray for his Majesty's long life, health, and happiness.
In which prayer shall your Lordship ever be duly remembered by

Your Lordships daily devote Beadsman, Theophilus Landavensis.

Dr. Corbet to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
TO consider my two great losses this week; one in respect of his Majesty to
whom I was to preach; the other in respect of my Patron, whom I was to visit.
If this be not the way to repair the latter of my losses, I fear I am in danger
to be utterly undone. To press too near a great man, is a means to be put by;
and to stand too far off, is the way to be forgotten: so Ecclesiasticus. In
which mediocrity could I hit it, would I live and die. My Lord, I would neither
press near, nor stand far off, choosing rather the name of an ill Courtier,
then a saucie Scholar,

From your Graces most humble servant, Rich. Corbet.

Postscript.
HEre is news, my noble Lord about us, that in the point of Allegiance now in
hand, all the Papists are exceeding Orthodox, the only Recusants are the
Puritanes.

The E. of Worcester, Arundel and Surrey, Montgomery to the King.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
ACcording to the Orders and Constitutions made and established by your
Majesty, and all the Companions of the Order at the last general Chapter held
at White Hall the 21. of May last past, we are bold to inform your Majesty,
that we having diligently viewed diverse of the Records of the said Order, do in
the black book find, that the keeping of the little Park at Windsor, next
adjoining unto the Castle, is in direct words annexed for ever to the Office of
the Usher for the said Order. So humbly kissing your Royal hands, We rest

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, and servants, E. Worcester,
Arundel and Surrey, Montgomery.
White Hall, 1. July, 1622.
The Lord Chancellor Bacon to the Duke.
My very good Lord,
MY Lord of Suffolk's cause is this day sentenced. My Lord, and his Lady fined
at 30000 l. with imprisonment in the Tower at their own charges. Bingley at
2000 l. and committed to the Fleet. Sir Edward Cook did his part, I have not
heard him do better, and began with a sine of an 100000 l. But the Judges
first, and most of the rest reduced it as before. I do not dislike that things
pass moderately, and all things considered it is not amiss, and might easily
have been worse. There was much speaking of interceding for the Kings mercy,
which (in my opinion) was not so proper for a sentence: I said in conclusion,
that mercy was to come ex mero motu, and so left it. I took some other occasion
pertinent to do the King honor, by showing how happy he was in all other parts
of his Government, save only in the manage of his treasure by these Officers.

I have sent the King a new Bill for Sussex: for my Lord of Nottingham's
Certificate was true, and I told the Judges of it before, but they neglected
it. I conceive the first man (which is newly set down) is the fittest. God ever
preserve and keep you, etc.

The Earl of Suffolk to his Majesty.
Gracious Sovereign,
IN this grievous time of my being barred from your presence, which to me is
the greatest affliction that can lie upon me; and knowing by my former service
to you, the sweet and Princely disposition that is in you naturally, together
with that unmatchable judgment which the world knows you have, is the
occasion, that I presume at this time to lay before your Majesty my most
humble suit; which is, that you would be pleased to look upon the Case of your
poor servant, who after so many faithful desires of mine to do you service, I
do not say that success has fallen out as I wished, should now not only have
suffered for my weakness, and errors, but must be further questioned to my
disgrace. I would to God your Majesty did truly understand the thoughts of my
heart, and if there you could find one the least of ill affections to you, I
wish it pulled out of my body.

Now to add to my miseries, give me leave to let your Majesty know the hard
estate I am in; for I do owe at this present (I dare avow upon my fidelity to
you) little less then 40000 l. which I well know will make me and mine poor
and miserable for ever.

All this I do not lay down to your Majesty's best judging eyes, that I mean
this by way of complaint; For I do acknowledge the reason that your Majesty
had to do what you did: neither do I go about to excuse errors to have escaped
me, but will now and ever acknowledge your Gracious favorable dealing with me,
if you will be pleased now to receive me again to your favor after this just
correction, without which I desire not to enjoy fortune of Goods, or life in
this world, which in the humblest manner that I can I beg at your Princely
feet, as

Your, etc. T. Suffolk.

The E. of Suffolk to the Duke.
My Honorable good Lord,
AT the first minute of mine, and my wives delivery out of the Tower, I had
returned such acknowledgment due for so great a favor, but that Sir George
Coring only desired to be the Messenger, as well as he was of the other, Let
not (my Lord) my late misfortunes make me or mine more unable to serve, and
thank you, then any he, that thus takes advantage thereby to wrong me in your
belief: for what I have both received in abatement of my fine, and speedy
liberty, I must confess to come from your Noble mediation to his Majesty,
whose displeasure has been more grievous to my soul, then all the rest this
world can inflict upon me.

As your Lordships kindness has begun to ease me, so now let the same hand
cure, and preserve me from a worse relapse wherein I am like to fall, if your
power prevent it not. The motion of his Majesty's for my persuading my sons out
of their places, was the grievousest sound that ever entered me, for thereby I
still breathed under the heavy weight of all my afflictions, not despairing but
their Care (charged upon them with my blessing) might somewhat redeem my
errors, and assure his Majesty, that my will was never tainted with offending
him.

I know my Lord, there is little benefit in serving against Masters minds, but
they are unworthy servants that will leave such Masters upon any conditions.
Such as make suit to chop or change for their own advantage, are better lost
then kept: But as for mine, my curse should follow them, if ever I could think,
they followed his Majesty with such indifferency. My obedience to his
Majesty was ever of more force with me, then mine own ends any way laid, nor
ever joyed I more then in running to his Commands. But this (my Lord) rends my
heart to think, that, unfortunate I, should bury my sons alive, and pronounce
that sentence, which would make me and them Scorns to posterity. Whilst I
have knee to bend, eye to lift up, or tongue to beg, I must implore his
Majesty's pardon, and mercy in this kind. As for that more drossie part of my
estate, it still lies at his Majesty's feet, and if he now please to recall,
what he remitted, without further condition, I must obey, and let his Majesty
see, no change of time or place can change me, my love, my duty, or my zeal to
him.

My Lord, here you may read me in my greatest griefs that ever did fall to me:
weigh them well, and think that one day you may be a father, and be as nearly
touched, as now I am. The favor you shall do me herein shall prove no hidden
talent, for the increase shall not only be the happiness of a good work well
done, but the hearty acknowledgment of a whole family, and all theirs, that
shall as faithfully serve and honor you, as the best of those, that would
succeed them, which I hope your Lordship will believe from me, who will ever be

Yours, etc. T. Suffolk.

The Earl of Suffolk to his Majesty.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
Your Princely favor in dilivering me, and my wife out of the tower, must, and
shall ever be acknowledged of us with all humble thanks. And now be pleased to
give me leave to be an humble suitor to your Majesty, that out of the tender
compassion of your Princely heart, you will be pleased to cast your eye upon
the miserable estate of your distressed, afflicted, and old Servant, now
brought into fear of never recovering of your Majesty's favor, and so wretced
my case is, as the little hope, that remained in me to live in your memory,
was by my two sons service to your Gracious self, and the Prince. It is now
required of me to impose upon them the resignation of their places, which with
all humility I beseech you to give me leave to say, I would sooner use my power
over them to will them to bury themselves quick, then by any other way then
enforcement to give up their places of service, which only remains to me to
be either my dying comfort, or my living torment.

Besides, they are now past my government, being both married, and have
children, only I have a Paternal Care of them, which I humbly beseech your
best judging Majesty to weigh respectively, how unhappie I must of necessity
think my self, if I should be the perswader of that misfortune to my children,
that their children within a few years would curse me for, either living, or
dead. Upon all these just considerations (most Gracious Master) give me leave
to turn my cruel, and unnatural part of persuading them to yield to that, for
which I should detest my self, to my humblest desire upon the Knees of my heart
to beg humbly of your Majesty, that whatsoever favor you have ever had to me
for any service done, that your Majesty will be pleased to spare the ruin of
these two young men, whom I find so honestly disposed in their desire of
spending their fortunes, and lives in your Majesty's, and your Princely son's
service, as if your displeasure be not fully satisfied with what I have
suffered already, that you lay more upon me, and spare them. I have written to
my Lord of Buckingham to be my mediator to your Majesty in this behalf, which
I assure my self he will nobly perform, as well as he has formerly done, in
being my means to your Majesty in obtaining this great begun favor. To
conclude with my prayer to God, that your Majesty may ever find the same zeal,
and Love to your person in whomsoever you shall employ, that my hearts
Sole-affection did, and ever shall carry unto you, which God knows was, and
is more to your Majesty then to my wife, and children, and all other worldy
things which God measure unto me according to the truth, as

Yours, etc. T. Suffolk

The Lady Elizabeth Howard to the King.
When I waited upon you at Theobalds to beseech your Majesty that my Lord of
Suffolk might not come into the Star Chamber, you protested that you loved the
man, but that you must show cause to the world why you took the Staff from
him, but for his fortune, that your Majesty would not meddle with it; the same
my Lord of Buckingham told me, with this assurance of your promise I went away
secure in that point. Sithence his cause was heard, he moved all that heard it
with much compassion to him, and the people did think, that when you sent him
to the Tower, you would have sent for him to have kissed your hand. But your
Majesty is abused, for they do not let you know, what is thought of the
proceeding against this good man, knowing how truly he loves you, with the
truth of his cause, that you would not follow him, and his children with
cruelty. Which might have been better spent.
My Lord has spent in running a Tylt, in Masks, and following the Court
above 20000. And Sir shall his reward now be to be turned out of his place
without any offense committed. Sir I am the child of your old Servant, and am
now great with child, I know it will kill me, and I shall willingly die rather
then desire life to see my unfortunate self, and mine thus miserably undone.
Sir I beseech your Majesty remember my Father that is dead, and me his
distressed child; for if he could know any worldly thing, he would wonder to
see me, and those that shall come of me, thus strangly used. But my hope is
still in your Majesty's goodness, and that you will not be carried away with
the malice of other men. In this confidence I rest with my daily prayers for
your health and happiness, as

Yours etc. E. H.

The Lady Elizabeth Norris to the Duke.
My Lord,
EVer since your Lordships first recommendation of my husband to me, I have
thought my self much engaged to your Lordship; for I must confess after he had
taken his leave of me, I did love him never the less: for immediately after my
fathers death (when in my Conscience he least expected to hear from me) I did
both send and write to him, which he might interpret an encouragement, or
rather an invitation. I did it the rather, because I did not believe those
which did him ill offices; for those which were most for him, on a sudden were
most against him. I must confess, that pity did confirm my affection, and I
trust your Lordship will commiserate his estate, as you do the fall of all
mankind, for I was the Eva, and he was the Adam: and I pray God the King and
your Lordship may forgive us, as I am confident God will pardon us. Your
Lordship may imagine my Mother was of the plot, but I take God to witness,
that she was not only against it, but contrarily. I did believe she was wholly
for your Brother: And for your Brother, my Mother recommended him to me, whom I
used like a Gentleman of high worth and quality. But I did by no means abuse
him by promise, or taking gifts, which I falsely suffer for, in the opinion of
the world. I only took a ring by my mothers appointment, which came as a token
from my Lady your mother, which was of very small value. My husband and I am
resolved rather to suffer in the opinion of the world, then contradict any
thing which shall be aggravated against us. We must both honor you, and think
our selves much engaged to your Lordship. After God, I protest you are the
only author of it: for by your means, I first settled my affection. I know
there are those which do my husband and me ill offices. I have reason to be
jealous of the Lord Montgomery, for he would have put tricks upon me in making
me deny the Contract; and when he failed in that, he went about to make me
believe Mr. Wray had denied his. And to tell your Lordship true, his violence
and over-earnestnesse made me the more averse. If my husband had not fetched
me, I would have come to him, and so I sent him word.

Thus humbly beseeching your Lordship as you are happy in your wife, that you
would be pleased to make our peace with the King; and seeing it is Gods act,
that you would honor us with your favor. We shall be both bound to join in
prayer, that you may be ever happy in your Wife, and in your Childrens
Children. And so with my humble respect to your Lordship, I rest

Your Lordships humble servant, Elizabeth Norris.

Sir Edward Cecyl to the Duke.
My very good Lord,
HOw much my affection and ambition has been to serve your Lordship before
other men, I hope I shall not need now to express, considering it has been
clear and manifest to your own trial, whereof I do bear still the testimony,
and the continuance in mine own heart. But in your nobleness it will not
appear impertinent to your Lordship, that I put you in mind, how much I
suffered in the disgrace my enemies cast upon me about the employment for the
Palatinate, when I was under your protection; whether I suffered for mine own
sake, or for your Lordship, I know not: howsoever of this I am assured, the
greatest cause I gave them, that had least reason, was because I sought not
them, but your Lordship only. And for the success, you may see by the miracles
the employment has brought forth, that it was carried another way, rather for
private malice, then for any great zeal to the advancement of the public
Cause.

Now my Lord, for your own honor, and for the upholding of your servant, make
me so happy, if there be any employment for men of my profession (as there is
opinion) that I may be the man by your Lordships means, wherein you shall make
me your obliged, as I am now your affectionate servant. For which you shall be
assured of as thankful heart, as any breathes in the whole world. In the
enjoying of which kind of service, though you are accounted the most happy
among great men, yet you cannot have too much of it. I could remember your
Lordship of his Majesty's gracious promise for my employment before any other
in the presence of the Prince and your Lordship, and that I am the first
General his Majesty ever made, and that I had no ill success in the
perfecting of that service; yet for all this, I will only trust in your
Nobleness, if you resolve to make me your Creature.

And if it shall please his Majesty to hold me worthy of this honor, I will
undertake to save his Coffers (as I have heretofore done) the sixth part of the
employments charge and cost, that any other man shall require, who makes not a
computation for the managing of it, by a sufficient expense of his own.

I will not write more at this time, but to wish your Lordship as much
happiness as your heart can desire, and that you will give me an occasion to
show how much I am, and will be

Your Lordships most faithful and affectionate servant, Ed. Cecil.
From our Army this 20. of November.
Sir Edward Cecil to the Duke.
May it please your Excellency,
THis Gentleman Sir George Blundel has now clearly quitted the service of the
States, for this especial reason (as he assures me) to be the more absolutely
employed in your Excellencies service. This I know, his friends here that love
him (which are many) are very sorry to part with him, for there is no
melancholy where he goes. And therefore considering the condition of this
place, we shall be great losers, being upon a melancholy place, and service,
ill paid, sick of all diseases in the world, in a place that is next neighbor
to hell, if the book printed say true, which says, that the Low-Countriemen
are next neighbors to the devil. And I am sure, we are now seated lower then
any part of these Countries; for the waters are above us, and about us, and we
live in more fear of them, then of the enemy; for we may be drowned at an hours
warning, if we do not continually work against it, and yet, and it shall please
your Excellency, this is the Seat for a Winter War. Many more inconveniences
we are daily sensible of, of which I have endured so much, as I dare say
without vanity, that few of my rank and fortune have suffered more, or longer
then I have done in these Countries; having served these 27. years together
without intermission; and all this for no other end (for I am 900 l. a year the
worse for the Wars) then to make me able to serve my Prince and Country when
occasion should be offered.

But since the time is come, that opinion does so govern, as strangers get the
Command, and new Soldiers employed, which was never heard of before amongst
men of our occupation, It is high time for me to retire, and wish I had been of
any other profession then this. For if long service can get no honor, nor
reward, not employment, but the contrary; it would touch a man's discretion to
be more and more unfortunate: All my comfort is, that I shall have the honor
and good fortune in my retreat, to draw nearer to your Excellencies service, if
not in my profession, (which I desire above all) yet in something whereof your
Excellency may make use of me. For I am ambitious of nothing more, then to
prove my self by action, and not by recommendation,

Your Excellencies most faithful devoted, and humble servant, Ed. Cecyl.
From our Army at Wallike the 4th of December.
Sir Edward Cecil to Mr. Secretary Conway.
My very good Lord,
IT has pleased your Lordship to write me three Letters lately: the one a
particular list of officers, that should be sent from hence; the second for Mr.
Hapton, the third an acknowledgement only of the receipt of my Letter to your
Lordship. The first I have put in execution, and have written to your son, Sir
Edward Conway to give them all notice of your Lordships Care of them. And to
let them know how welcome any one shall be to me, that you think fit to be
employed. For one of them called Ensign Rainesford, I had set him down, because
I received your Lordships direction from himself. For Mr. Hopton I have written
unto him according to your desire, with your Letter enclosed; concerning the
last, I give your Lordship many humble thanks for having expressed the
acceptance by your answer. Touching your business here: the State has been as
contrary to us, as the wind. For though they see a great action likely to be
performed to their own good, with little cost to themselves; yet they desire to
be so wise, as to make benefit, both ways, and not to balk any advantage:
which makes them stand so stiff upon the denying of us Officers, and Soulders
by election, and will yield to send none but whole companies, only to abate so
much upon the repartitions. But Sir William St. Leiger and I, have utterly
refused their offer as a proposition against his Majesty's service: for by this
ignorant winter war our Companies are grown half new men, having lost most of
our old, and of those new men the half are sick besides: So that his Majesty
should be beholden to them, rather for names, then men: And again for the
Officers, and Soulders, it is like they should be most of them the worst in the
regiment, from whence they are to come. Whereas if we might have had those
Officers we made choice of, which were but ten Captains, and other inferior
Officers to the number of thirty, they might have been fit for employment upon
a double enemy. And I could wish, that whenever his Majesty shall be once
furnished with Good Officers, it would please him to make account of them, as
these men do, who have had long experience, and known their Value.

It pleased my Lord the Duke to write to me a Letter, and to let me know he had
chosen me his Officer, to attend, and obey him this journey: an honor too great
for me, because I did never expect it, but nothing shall excuse my faults,
saving my life. And among many other directions he commanded me to provide for
the Army such necessary things as cannot be had in England. Whereof I have
thought of many, which I fear, I shall not have the time to get. In my care
belonging to these provisions, I have considered the use of our small pieces of
Ordinance here, which they call Drakes, that shoot 70. Musket bullets. They
will be of great use in this service, both in regard of the quick landing, and
of the passing of such mountainous places, as perhaps we may meet withal, and
likewise in respect of the little hope we have to get any good musketeers, or
at least any great store of them. But they are in such favor here, as we can
obtain none from hence, and so are forced by a general consent to buy ten of
them here, that were provided for the King of France. And the reputation they
carry is such, as they are ready money every where. They cost not much more
then 400. sterling, and I hope they will prove the profitablest pieces that
were ever used in the quarrel of his Majesty's Friends. We have likewise
considered of what service a company of Firelocks would be to the action, but
the time is so short, we cannot raise them. Howsoever we are promised of the
States to have leave for a company of Harquebussiers, which are of such use
upon all occasions, that we cannot miss them. And we have chose a brave and
worthy Gentleman his Majesty's Servant and Subject who is willing to leave any
service for this, being the service of the King. If they should have been
raised in England, his Majesty must have paid for the horses, arms, saddles,
and pistols, and yet not find any able to have served in that kind.

The wind (as yet) holds contrary, which has made me send this by Sir Henry
Vane, who goes a way, that I dare not pass. But (I hope) if the wind serve,
not to be many days behind him to receive your Lordships command, more
particularly which I will obey as

Your Lordships most humble Servant, Ed: Cecyl.
Hagh 2. June. 1625.
Postscript.
MY Lord, now in this time of necessity for the getting of good Musketeers,
there are many hundred to be found in England that have served in this Land,
which by proclamation and promise of money in hand, or more pay, will easily
discover themselves, whom some of the new men (to be released) will be glad to
satisfy, without charge to his Majesty.

Sir Edward Cecyl to the Duke.
My most excellent Lord,
THere are some Letters of mine, that had come to your Lorships hands, a good
many days since, had not the wind been contrary and withstood their passage.
The substance whereof was only to show you how thankful I hold my self to your
excellency for so great and infinite a favor as it has pleased your
excellency to think me worthy of. But as is it a favor that will set me on
work all the days of my life:: so is it greater then I can ever deserve.
Howsoever my resolution is to do my best. And I humbly beseech your Excellency
to believe, that with my diligence, and the best understanding I have, I will
seek nothing but to please you, and to honor you; and if God say Amen to make
the world speak of your design as much (I hope) as ever our Nation has given
cause. And for the faults of my self, and those I shall bring with me, they
shall not be excused, but with our lives, and bloods: for I hope I shall bring
none, but such as know what to do, and when they come to it will bite sooner
then bark. I do promise my self your Excellency will have no cause to doubt or
repent you of your favors, for I know what men have done, and what they can do
in my occupation. But God is God, and men are but men.

All my discouragement is, that the States answer not his Majesty's expectation
being fearful (especially since the loss of Breda) to part with any of their
old Officers, or old Soldiers; but my hope is now better, for we have put them
to another resolution, by answering all their objections. By this disposition
of the States to the keeping all their old Soldiers, I wish your Excellency
will be pleased to be as careful in your choice, as you are desirous of great
designs. For otherwise the honor, and the charge will both be cast away, as
your Excellency may perceive in some of our latter expeditions, seeing that
although there are many called Soldiers in the world, yet but a few there be,
that are so: for so long a man must live in the profession to enable him
sufficiently, that many grow unable to perform, what they know, before they
have attained to the knowledge of what to perform. The knowledge of war being
the highest of humane things that God suffers man's understanding to reach
unto.

I have according to your Excellencies command made as many provisions as I can
for the shortness of the time, of such things as cannot be gotten in England.
And I could have wished I had known of this employment but some months sooner;
for then I could have saved his Majesty somewhat, and have added many things
that would very much have advanced the service. For in our profession the
preparing of things belonging to the war, does more show a man's experience and
judgment, then any thing else, by reason the first errors are the begetting of
many more, that afterward cannot be avoided. Your Exellencie may be pleased to
inform your self of all the exployts, and undertakings of our nation, that none
of them has suffered (for the most part) more then through the negligence of
provisions, as in victual, munition, boats for Landing, and for the receiving
of sick men, to keep the rest from infection. In this point of provision, it is
not good to trust upon a particular man, for gain is a corrupter where the care
is not public. And in so great an expedition, one must do with living men, as
they do with the dead, there must be overseers and executors to have a true
intent well performed.

I have presumed to write thus much, to show my thankfulness to your
Excellency, and my great affection to his Majesty's service, whereof I am
infinitely possessed. I hear your Excellency is in France, but my prayers to
God are to send you safe, and happy home, for the World holds you the soul of
advancing his Majesty's affairs, wherein his Honor is engaged as it is,
especially in this action, being the first, and a Great One.

And as for my self, who am now a creature you have made, I know not what I
shall do when I come to England, being your Excellencies shadow only.

I have here attended the wind, and since I cannot force it, I am glad of the
opportunity to send the Letters by Sir Henry Vane, who goes over Land, a
Passage I am not capable of, having been so long their enemy. But I hope God
will send me soon after, leaving Sir William St. Leiger here for the dispatch
of that which remains. I have written more particularly to my Lord Conway which
I dare not set down here for fear of being tedious, and knowing his Lordship
will give your Excellency an account of it. And so in all humbleness and
duty, I pray God send your Excellency honor, and length of life for his
Majesty's affairs, and for the happiness of

Your Lordships most humble, faithful and obedient servant, Ed. Cecill.
Hagh the 3d. of June, 1625.
Sir Edward Cecil to the Duke.
My most Excellent Lord,
THe occasion of my boldness in presenting your Excellency with these lines,
is for that, contrary to my expectation, I hear that there is a Commission a
drawing to make Sir Horace Vere a Baron of England. It is strange to me at this
time to hear it, for that I know not what worth there is more in him, then in
those, that are equal in profession, and before him in birth. If your
Excellency have made choice of me to be your second in this journey of so much
charge, and expectation, and to make me less then I was, what courage shall I
have to do you service? or what honor will redound to your Excellency? But
although I write it, yet I cannot believe it, for that I know you of that
judgment and nobleness, that you will rather add to your faithful servants,
although they beg it not, then to disgrace them, and make them less. Therefore
I will continue my belief, and rest

Your Excellencies most humble, and devoted servant, Ed. Cecill.
19. of July, 1625.
My Lord Wimbledon to the Duke.
My Gracious Lord,
IT has not a little troubled your faithful servant at my last being with your
Excellency in White Hall Garden, to understand (after I had attended so long)
that I had ill offices done me to his Majesty, and yet the World is of
opinion, that I have your Excellencies favor. I presently went home, and ever
since I have mused and considered, and can find no reason or policy for my
being kept from his Majesty's presence, which makes me and my near friends
astonished. For hitherto I have received no favor, but rather the most
strictest proceeding, that ever was used (and without example) to any man, that
had such a charge.

And whereas there is no Commission of any force, or validity, without the
assistance of the State, and Prince he serves, for he that Commands is but
one man, and the rest are many thousands, which are great odds, yet I have
been publicly heard before the whole body of the Council (my adversaries
standing by) so curiously, as no inquisition could have done more.

For first, I was examined upon mine instructions, then upon my acts of
Council, then upon my journal, then upon a journal compounded of by ten sundry
persons, which were under my Command both Landmen and Seamen, which was never
heard of before, and I did not only answer in particular to all points that
were demanded, but by writing which is extant: yet cannot I get any judgment or
report made to his Majesty, but rather time is given to my enemies (as I hear)
to make an ill report of me and my actions to the King. But when I was to be
accused, there was no time delayed nor deferred, and such men as I have proved
guilty, and failed in the principal point of the service, to have fired and
destroyed the Shipping, are neither examined, or any thing said against them,
which is strange, especially Sir Michael Geere. So that I know not how my Lord
of Essex can take any thing ill from your Excellency, unless it be to have
you do injustice, or against all reason. He may rather give your Excellency
many thanks, that his Lordship is not called into question for letting pass
the King of Spain's ships, that offered him fight, which would have been the
chief service, having instructions not to let any fly, or break out, without
fighting with them.

Now (my Lord) I humbly beseech your Excellency to consider my Case, that has
been so severely examined, and no body else, and that after my Examination, I
have lingered so long in my wrongs and disgraces, and by the ill offices your
Grace does see are done me to his Majesty, which will rather increase then
diminish, so long as I shall be kept from the presence of his Majesty, that is
I know of himself the justest Prince in the world, and yet to be in your
Excellencies favor.

And I hold my self clear of all imputations in despite of all malice and
practice, that has been against me, to obscure all my endeavors which my
adversaries in their consciences can best witness, that when they slept I
waked; when they made good cheer, I fasted; and when they rested, I toyled. And
besides, when they went about to hinder the journey at Plymouth, by railing on
the beggerlinesse of it, and discrediting of it, I was content to take it upon
me, though against my judgment, as I did secretly deliver both to his Majesty
and your Grace, before I departed from the Coast: Nominating in my Letter to
his Majesty all the inconveniences that did after happen unto the Fleet: for
had it not been in my obedience to his Majesty, and my good affection to your
Excellency, (that I did see so much affect it, and was so far engaged) I would
have been rather torn in pieces, then to have gone with so many ignorant and
malicious people, that did show so little affection or courage to his Majesty's
service, or any affection at all to your Excellency. Yet for all this, all
has been laid upon me, having had rather hard courses taken against me, then
any way maintained in my Commission which was given me, which no State, that I
have ever heard of, did before. I pray God his Majesty's future service do not
suffer for it; for where his Majesty's Officers are not obeyed, he can never be
served.

Wherefore my suit is, that if I have any ill offices done me to his Majesty,
that I may clear my self before him by your favor, which I have so long
attended after; or by way of Petition, which the meanest Subject is not to be
hindered in; for as I continue now, I have not only wrong done to me, but I
suffer as much punishment (without any fault) as if I had been condemned.

And that your Excellency will do me the favor to deal plainly with me, to
let me know, why I am deferred from his Majesty's presence, which is not denied
to any, having received so much wrong.

If my suffering be to add any service to your affairs in these troublesome
times, let but this honest friend of mine know so much, and I will suffer any
inconvenience, as I have, misery, danger, and decay of my fortunes for your
Excellencies sake. And so I rest

Your Excellencies most devoted, and faithful and thankful servant and
Creature, Wimbledon.
28th. Apr. 1626.
My Lord Wimbledon to the Duke.
My Gracious Lord,
I Understand that it pleased the Lords to grant the Colonels leave to accuse
me a new, and they have taken to them the most discontented Seamen they could
get to help their malice forward. I had thought, that before my coming, they
should have had time and advantage sufficiently to have shown all their envy.
And I was persuaded, that they could not have desired more, then to have been
present when I should be examined, and my journal read. At the reading whereof
they took all the exceptions that might be, and I did answer them all in your
Excellencies presence, as I thought fully, whereupon they seemed to be so
content, as they had no more to say; neither did they at that time desire to
make a journal, or to say any more.

Then the Lords resolutions were only to hear the Seamen speak, upon whom all
the business did lie. If they may be suffered upon new Combinations, to bring
new slanders upon me, I cannot tell what to think of it. But this I can say,
that if this course be taken, his Majesty will never be without a mutinous
Army. (which all States in policy do shun) For when the Common Soldiers shall
see their Chiefs give them such examples, they will soon follow, being that all
Armies are subject to it, especially a new Army. I had thought that one Trial
had been sufficient, being it was before such an Assembly. But if I should be
accused, I should desire to have new accusers, and not the same that have
already accused me, (for so there would be no end) and that upon their
Petition, I might have been heard what I could justly say, why they should not
have leave to make a journal, and not to give them leave before I were heard. I
am afraid there was never any such president before, and what inconveniences
may come of it time will show.

I have sought to none of the Lords as I fear my enemies have done, (I know not
whether I shall suffer for it or no) but my trust has only been in your
Excellency and the justness of my Cause. I have been your Excellencies
Officer in as difficult and as miserable an action as ever any one has
undertaken, and with as little assistance as ever any one had. For many of
those that should have assisted me, were more careful in betraying me, then in
forwarding his Majesty's service. And if this course be held to encourage them,
there is no man shall suffer more then his Majesty's service will. For it will
be folly for any man to look to his Majesty's service, or to take any pains to
prevent, or hinder that which may be committed against it; But to let every man
do what he will, so all will be pleased, and he that Commands shall have no man
to slander him, which is the way to live in quiet.

Thus much I thought was fit for me to let your Excellency understand, and
withal, that I held it a great unhappiness for me (that have taken such toil
and pains, and suffered so many slanders) to be kept back by my enemies from
that honor, that never any one of my rank and place was hindered in, which is
from kissing the hand of my Sovereign Lord the King All Power is in your
Lordships hands; whether you will uphold me in my just cause, or no, or let me
be ruinated for want of it. So that I can say no more, but that if I suffer, I
shall be your Excellencies Martyr, if not, I shall all my life rest

Your Excellencies most humble, and most thankful servant and Creature,
Wimbledon.

Sir John Ogle to the Duke.
Right Excellent and most Gracious Lord,
ANd because you are so, why should not I put my soul in your hand? that I have
not done it sooner was not through want of will in me, but it has been the
will of God, that mine acknowledgment should be the fuller, your goodness the
greater. Your Grace cannot be ignorant of the many motions I have had thereto,
but my judgment has been made irresolute by several distractions. I lay now my
self, and the fortunes of me and mine at your Graces feet. Take me up then
(noblest Lord) as becomes the fame which you have, and the confidence which I
have of you with a hand of goodness. If I had wilfully sinned against you
(when I was wickedly ensnared and beguiled by that wretch at Vtrecht, to whom I
gave some Extract out of your Letters, as also out of the Lord Ambassadors,)
or did yet with obstinacy maintain such indiscreet proceeding, your Grace
might in justice reject me as unworthy.

But since you have long discerned in me a propension to crave your pardon,
though still unhappily diverted till this time; I trust your true Nobleness,
generousnesse and goodness to be such, as you will not only not turn this
hearty submission to any disadvantage on my part; but looking upon mine
ingenuitie, with a right eye of gracious inclination, both pardon my fault, and
folly toward your self, and also (to bind my prayers to be offered in the
greater zeal for you, for I shall not be able to do you better service then in
prayer) be a strong mediator to his gracious Majesty, that my errors of
weakness, and want of discretion, committed then toward his late Majesty of
ever blessed memory, and his Ambassador, with what other oversights may have
been gathered up since, may be freely and fully forgiven and remitted, that so
my soul being discharged of all fear of displeasure against me, I may with a
cheerful heart and quiet conscience, go on in such a vocation as the Lord shall
have appointed for me. My Lord, this wound has long festered near my heart,
and though false skins have been drawn over it sometimes by unskilful hands,
yet have I ever judged it the surest cure to rip it up by Confession, and heal
it by Contrition. And sure I judge that it favors more of a right generous
spirit to confess a fault, then to conceal it, especially when the party
offending is free from malice, and the party offended of a nature so noble and
full of goodness, as nothing can be wished to be added unto it, and which is
yet more; and this have you graciously done to me, (my Lord) signed himself
with his own hand a true and faithful friend unto him, the more to invite him
to trust him. And trust you I do my Lord, and in you (next my Gracious
Sovereign) as much as may be in any arm of flesh. The God of Heaven (I hope)
will speak peace to my soul, if the King, and your Grace will send peace to my
heart. I trust you will, and will pray to God you may, that I may in all
cheerfulness and thankfulness ever remain

Your Grace's most humble, and faithful, and obliged servant Jo. Ogle.
Exester 3. June, 1625.
Postscript.
I Beseech your Grace to send some other man to take this Charge which I too
weakly for fear of offending by denial have thus far undergone, but upon hope
of being withdrawn. Yet still submit my self to your Graces good pleasure.

Sir Robert Mansel to the Duke.
Right Honorable and my singular good Lord,
HAving used all the possible speed I could to repair to Algier, where I should
have been by the 15. of March last, I held it my duty humbly to present unto
your Lordship the particular account of my proceedings.

Before my arrival I furnished the two Prizes, three Brigandines, and a fourth
Boat with Firelocks, and combustible materials for the burning of the Pirates
ships within the Moal, and had trained my men in the execution of their several
duties, and likewise appointed a squadron of boats with small shot to rescue
the vessels of execution in their advancement and retreat.

The first night of my arrival being the 21. of May last, the vessels of
execution were all advanced, but by reason of contrary winds they were
commanded to retire.

The second and third nights they were also in a readiness, but were withheld
with calmes.

The fourth night it pleased God to bless us with a fair Gale, and they being
advanced again, and the two ships with the fireworks, having almost recovered
the mouth of the Moal (the wind to our great grief) turned to the opposite
point of the Compass.

The boats performed their directions in towing of the ships, but considering,
that by the continuance of the course, they should expose their principallest
men to hazard, by reason of the great store of Ordnance and small shot, which
plied upon them, they debated amongst themselves what to do, Capt. Hughes (who
commanded one of the Brigandines) replied, Go on, and give the attempt with the
boats, which they cheerfully pursued, crying out without cessation, King James,
King James, God bless King James, and fearlesse of danger (even in the mouth
of the Canon, and small shot, which showred like hail upon them) they fired
the ships in many places, and maintained the same to the great comfort of us,
that were spectatours, so long as they had any powder left in their bandileers,
striving in the end who should have the honor to come off last, the which at
length, as a due to his former resolution and courage, they left to captain
Hughes, and so retired, all the ships continuing still their cheerful cry,
King James, with the loss of 20. that were slain, and hurt, and leaving the
fire flaming up in 7. several places, which continued in some of them long
after their retreat, and being aboard his Majesty's ships.

The cowardly Turks, who before durst not show themselves to so weak a force,
but from the walls or the tops of their houses, so soon as they perceived all
the boats retired, opened their ports, and Sallied out in 1000. and by the help
of so great multitudes, and a sudden shower of rain, seconded with a calm
which then happened, the fire was after extinguished, without doing any more
hurt then making two of their ships unserviceable.

During that Stay, there there came out of the Moal only one Frigot, which we
forced to run on shore.

Other service by us there performed, was the sinking of one of their best men
of war by Sir Thomas Wilford, and Captain Chidleigh, she was manned with a 130.
Turks and 12. Christians, whereof 12. only escaped, the rest were either slain
or drowned, which appeared both by the relation of diverse Christians which
nightly escaped aboard us, and by diverse of the dead bodies that floted upon
the water by our ships. We took likewise before their faces in the Bay a
Fly-boat, which the Pirates had formerly taken from the Christians and sold to
Ligorn. In her Merchandise to be exchanged for Pirates goods, and some money
amounting to 2000. and odd pounds, the exact account whereof I shall not fayl
to address to your Lordship as soon as the same is perfected by the council of
War.

The Turks hereupon presently manned out three Gallyes to reskue here, but
Captain Giles, and Captain Herbert, with the help of three Brigandines, which
I sent out to second them, soon fetched her up, and brought there unto me, and
the Galleys were put to flight by Sir Thomas Wilford, Captain Pennington, and
Captain Childlegh.

During the time of my abode there, after the attempt made by the boats, I
attended ten days for an opportunity to send in the ships with the fire
works, to finish the service begun by the boats; but in all that time there
happened not a breath of wind fit for their attempt, notwithstanding the ships
were always ready at the instant, that they should receive my directions to
advance. But at last understanding by the Christians (that escaped by swimming)
aboard me, how the Pirates had boomed up the Moales with Masts, and Rafts, set a
double guard upon their ships, planted more ordnance upon the Moale, and the
walls, and manned out twenty Boats to guard the Boome, and perceiving likewise,
that they had sent out their Galleys, and boats both to the Eastward and
Westward to give advce to all the ships upon the Coast, that they should not
come in during my abode there, and so finding no hope remaining, either by
stratagem to do service upon them in the Moale, or to meet with any more of
them, in the regard of the daily complaints brought unto me, both from some of
the Kings ships, and most of the Merchants of their want of victuals, I
resolved by the advice of the Council of war to set sail, whence I made my
repair to this place, where I met my Brother Roper with your Lordships
dirrections which I have received, and at the instant obeyed, by signifying his
Majesty's pleasure declared by your Lordships Letter unto the worthy
Commanders of those four ships whom his Majesty has pleased to call home.

But my Lord, in the duty I owe your Lordship, and my zeal to his Majesty's
honor and service, I humbly beg your Lordships pardon to advertize your
Lordship, that seeing we have now made this attempt upon the Pirates, and that
they perceive that our intent is to work their utter ruin and confusion, the
recalling of these his Majesty's Forces before the arrival of others in their
stead, and the bereaving us of so many worthy and experienced Commanders, I
fear may prove more prejudicial to the service, then upon one days
consideration I dare presume to set down in writing, by encouraging the Pirates
to put in execution such stratagems upon us, as to my knowledge they have
already taken into their consideration. My reasons for the same, I shall be
bold upon more mature deliberation to offer in all humbleness unto your
Lordships judicious view, either by the Commanders that are to return unto your
Lordship, or by a messenger which diverse of the Council of War advise to be
addressed over land on purpose with the same.

And so being ready (so soon as we have received in our water, and dispatched
diverse other businesses, which of necessity must be ordered in this place) to
set fail for Malega, there to receive in our remainder of Victuals, and to take
my leave of these 4. Ships, and such other of the Merchants as cannot be made
serviceable in these parts. With my endless prayers for your Lordships
increase of all honor, I cease your Lordships farther trouble for the present;
And rest

Your Lordships most humble, most faithful and sad servant, Robert Mansel.
From aboard the Lion in Alegant Rode. 9th. June. 1621.
Sir Robert Mansel to the Duke.
Right Honorable and my singular good Lord,
IT is not unknown unto your Lordship, that Sir Thomas Button before his coming
out, thought himself much wronged in that he did not hold the place of Vice
Admiral in this Fleet, whereof I must acknowledge him very worthy, and that for
my part I had engaged Sir Richard Hawkins, a very Grave, Religious, and
experienced Gentleman, before I was assured whether Sir Thomas Button would
leave his employment in Ireland, or no; and that afterward Sir Thomas Button
by your Lordships mediation, was contented to undertake the charge he now
holds, which God knows I labored for no other end, then for the security
and advancement of his Majesty's service, by reason of the experience I have
had of his sufficiency and ability.

Since that time, I have doubled that injury. A wrong was done unto him which
cannot be denied, he patiently appealed to me for justice, which I must
confess I denied him. But the name of the person that offered the wrong, and
the reasons why I denied him Justice, I must leave unto Sir Richard Hawkins and
Sir Henry Palmer to relate unto your Lordship, and if that will not give your
Lordship satisfaction, I must humbly submit my self to your Lordships Censure.

Notwithstanding the impression that these injuries took with him, yet thus
much I must truly confess in his behalf, That there was no man more zealous to
advance his Majesty's service, nor more forward to undergo any danger or hazard
then himself, whereof he has given assured testimony to the World in these
three particulars.

First, in the service performed by him on a Christmasse day at night, whereof
I have formerly advertized your Lordship at large.

Secondly, Then in going over to Algier cheerfully, without complaining, when
his Ship was so grievously infected, that he had not able men in her to manage
her Sails.

Also in employing the most choice men in his Ship under the command of his
Nephew, for the firing of the Pirates ships within the Moale of Algier.

And lastly, in his joining with Sir Richard Hawkins in the towing off one of
the Prizes, when she was becalmed within musket shot of the Moale.

My Lord, I must protest unto your Lordship, that I had no ends of mine own for
the injuries done to Sir Thomas Button, and therefore your Lordship cannot cast
a greater honor upon your poor servent then in repairing him, which I humbly
beg of your Lordship.

If Sir Richard Hawkins do return unto me, then I shall be an humble suitor
unto your Lordship in the behalf of Sir Thomas Button that he may return to his
employment in Ireland, from whence in my earnest desires to enjoy his company
and assistance, I was the only means to withdraw him, and that he may receive
such allowance and entertainment as was formerly usually paid unto him, by
which means your Lordship will take away the Curses of his children, whose
bloods are near unto me, and oblige me with my continual prayers for your
Lordships increase of honor, ever to remain

Your Lordships most humble and faithful servant, Robert Mansell.
From aboard the Vantguard the 10. of July. 1621.
Captain John Pennington to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
MY last to your Lordship was of the 18. of this present from Stokes Bay, since
which time I have received two from your Grace, at Deep one by your Secretary
Mr. Nicholas, whereby your Grace commands me to deliver up his Majesty's Ship,
and the rest under my Command, to the hands of such Frenchmen as his Christian
Majesty shall appoint, according to his Majesty's pleasure signified by my
Lord Conway. And that I and the rest of the Masters take security of them for
our ships severally according to the true valuation. And to see this put in
execution, you sent your Secretary Mr. Nicholas. And the other by Mr. Ingham
in answer of mine written from Stokes Bay. The former part whereof being only a
command to put your former in practice, and the latter a denial of my humble
suit for my being called home from this Service. Which said part confirms
absolutely, that it was not your Graces pleasure that I should yield up the
ships into their hands, and disposesse my self and company of them: for I
trust your Grace had no such unjust thought as to continue me here alone after.

The French had possession of her to be their slave, as I am sure they would
have made me if they had their wills. To give your Grace an account of what I
have done since I came to Deep (which was the 21th. at this instant about nine
of the clock at night) would be too tedious for this time. The 22th. in the
morning Early I sent my boat ashoare with my Lieutenant to find out your
Graces Secretary, to receive my Letters, whereby I might know your Graces
pleasure, and to kiss my Lord Ambassadors hands from me, and to let him know
I was come with his Majesty's ship to do him service, but could not command the
rest to come along with me, their Masters not being there, and all their
companies in a mutiny. But his jelousie was such, that he would not suffer your
Graces Secretary to come aboard, or to send me your Letters, or that my
Lieutenant should speak to him, but in his presence, but presently sent a
Gentleman aboard to me, commanding me to come ashore to him, which I confess I
was very loath to do, in regard my people were much discontented, and ready
daily to mutiny, being all wondrous unwilling to go against Rochel, or those
of their religion. And besides, I never having been a shore, since I came into
my command, neither on our own Coast, or else where. (It being not my use) yet
notwithstanding these particulars knowing his Greatness, and your Graces
pleasure, for the giving him all due respect, I presently went to him, where he
taking me into a room apart with your Graces Secretary, he first delivered me
my Lord Conwaies Letter, or rather a warrant, (for so he terms it himself) for
the delivery of the ship into their hands (as they interpreted it) and then
your Graces Letter, commanding me to see his Majesty's pleasure (signified by
my Lord Conwaie) put in execution. And lastly a letter from the King of France,
thereby willing me to receive his Soldiers aboard that he had provided, and
his Cousin the D. de Mommorencie, and to go presently, and to join with his
Great Fleet against his rebellious subjects. This is the effect of that Letter.
Having read all these letters, he would presently have possession of the ship
that night, for that he could not stay longer. I told him, that I did not
understand it so, but that I was torender all service to his most Christian
Majesty; but nothing would serve him, save the present possession, which
because I would not yield unto, he grew into a strange fury, telling me, that
your Grace had sent your Secretary to see her delivered, and security to be
taken for her. My answer was, that I was ready to obey, according as I
understood the warrant, which was to do his Christian Majesty service, and to
receive a convenient number of Soldiers aboard me. But to dispossess my self
of my command, I had no such order: but still nothing would satsfie him but the
shipe, telling me, he would not entertain at the most (if they were willing)
above 60. or 80. of our people. My answer was, I had no order to discharge a
man of them, neither could I, but if they were discharged, what they should do,
or how they should get home, having neither meat, money, nor clothes, I know
not. To the first of these, he told me, that Mr. Nicholas had order by word of
mouth from your Grace to discharge us, which Mr. Nicholas confirmed, as also to
see the ship delivered, which he commanded me to do. But with your Graces
pardon I durst not do it upon words, it being a business of too high
consequence, neither if I had been willing, would my company ever have
condescended to it. To the second, for our passage, he promised to have
provided barques for us; but to conclude this, and not to insist upon the rest
of the particulars (they being too tedious) his rage and fury was such, that I
must of necessity give a little way thereto, or else I think he would have kept
me ashoare, so as I told him I was content if my company would yield thereunto,
and therefore desired to go aboard to speak with them, and to give order for
the drawing up of the inventorie. And upon this he suffered me to depart, but
not without promises of a large sum of money which should be given me at the
surrender, besides a royal pension during my life, he sending his Secretary,
and many others aboard with me to see all things put in execution, and your
Graces Secretary to persuade me to do it. But when I had them aboard, I told
them it was a thing not presently done, neither was my company willing to
deliver over the ship without a more ample warrant, yet I would do my best to
bring both to pass so soon as I could. So using them with the best respect I
could, and fair promises, that I would use all diligence for the accomplishing
of their desires; though I must confess I never meant it, till I should hear
further from your Grace, and have an especial Warrant from his Majesty, or
your Grace for it, it being a business of so high a nature. Upon these hopes
they departed, and went a shore, where they had not been long, till some of
them returned back with a strange allarum from his Lordship, that he would
presently have possession of her, or my resolution to the contrary. And althoug
I alleged that the inventory, and other business would not be dispatched in
two days, it would not suffice, except I would receive 400. Soldiers aboard
in the mean time till things were perfected.

Thus seeing I could not delay him till I heard farther from your Grace, I was
forced to give him this resolute answer, That upon this Warrant, I would not
deliver over the ship unto him, neither if I would, would the company give way
unto the same, we not holding it a sufficient discharge for us: But that we
were ready to receive a competent number of Soldiers aboard, with a chief
Commander, and to go upon such service, as his Christian Majesty should direct
us, according to the agreement with the King my Master; but nothing would
satisfy him but to have her delivered over to him, which if I did not
presently, my head should pay for it. I desired his patience for two or three
days, till I had written and sent to your Grace, and that he would let me have
a Shallop for that purpose; but he denied both the one and the other;
notwithstanding sent away a Barque himself with one to your Grace, but would
not suffer me to send thereby, which made me the more jealous of the real
intent of the business. The 23. he sent your Lordships Secretary aboard to
work and persuade me, but I could not give other answer, then I had done
formerly, only that I would attend until I heard farther from your Grace;
though I must confess I had much ado to persuade my Company, who were very
unwilling to it. But I had hope still to have a more ample Order how to proceed
in this great and weighty business. And upon the 24. at two of the clock in
the morning, Mr. Ingham (whom I sent from Stokes Bay to your Grace) returned
unto me with two Letters, one from your Grace, and another from my Lord Conway,
the former part of both commanding me to put your former Commands in execution:
but the latter part prohibiting me to depart with my charge, gave me the more
courage to stand upon my former terms.

This day your Graces Secretary came aboard me again, after I had sent your
Graces Letter to him, being sent by the Ambassador to prosecute the business,
for the deliverie of the ship unto them. But after I had showed him, that part
of your Graces Letter, he knew not what to say to it. I willed him to tell the
Ambassador, that this Letter was nothing but an answer of mine written from
Stoken Bay, concerning the not coming of the rest of the ships. I further
offered his Lordship this day for the more expedition of the business, to take
150 of his men aboard, and to run over for the Coast of England, and to send
presently to your Grace, that we were ready to surrender over there, upon an
authentic Warrant from his Majesty, or your Grace. His answer to this was,
That he would not put his men in to be prisoners, nor that we should be the
major part. I then offered him to take in as many French as I had English man
for man, but without arms, yet nothing would satisfy him, but the possession
of the Ship, either by delivering of her over into their hands, or by receiving
400 armed men aboard, wherewith they would quickly have taken her from us, as
you may plainly see their intent by their proceeding. Which I refusing to do,
this night about ten of the clock, he sent his Secretary aboard with three or
four others to make a protestation against me, as a Rebel to my King and
Country, as you may perceive by the Copy of it, which I send your Grace
herewith, and this he said was the last he would have to do with me, for that
on the morrow, he would away for Paris. Whereupon the next morning I sent this
Gentleman Mr. Ingham unto him to know, what farther service he would command
me, and whether he would have me attend his pleasure longer here, for that I
was ready to go upon any service they would command according to the former
agreement, and to receive as many men aboard as possibly I could; but he said
he had nothing to do except I would either deliver up the ship, or take in the
400. Soldiers. In the interim came his Secretary, with the same company he
had before, and made another protestation against me, in regard I would not
take in his 400. men, and therewithal brought me a Letter from your Graces
Secretary, (for he is so jealous that he will not suffer him to come aboard
but when he lists) which Letter was, That the Ambassador would stay till
Thursday next, if I would give it him under my hand to deliver up the ship
then, if I had not order to the contrary before, which I had as good have done
at the present; for I expect no Letters from your Grace, in regard they would
not suffer me to write to you, as I desired. And if your Grace should write to
me by his messenger, they would be sure not to deliver them, till the day were
past, except such as were for their turn.

In all which your Grace may see their intents, that there has been no slights
or ways left unassayed to bring their purpose to pass: first by fair words,
then by seeking to get me become the French Kings servant, with promises of a
great Pension, and brave employment, with offers of good sums to be laid down
upon the surrender of the ship as aforesaid. And when none of these courses
could prevail with me, then followed their threatenings of having my head, and
such like. All which (I thank God) I have withstood; for I had rather live all
my life with bread and water, then betray my King and Country of so precious a
Jewel as this; and had rather the King should take my life, then to have a hand
in the surrender, or valuing of such a Bulwark of the Kingdom.

Upon the making of the last Protest, and with the threats they gave us, my
Company grew into such a fury and tumult, that they got up their Anchors, and
set sail for England, without acquainting me with it, or order from me, saying,
They would rather be hanged at home, then surrender the Kings Ships, or be
slaves to the French, or fight against those of the Religion. But I must
confess, I heard what they were a doing, but let them alone, because I saw
they had reason; otherwise, I should rather have died amongst them, then to
have suffered it.

And thus I have related the principal passages unto your Grace, wherein, if I
have offended his Majesty, or your Grace, it has been for want of discretion,
and not of true zeal to do his Majesty, your Grace, and my Country service,
which if it be found to be an offense, I humbly crave pardon.

I am now come to an anchor in the Downs, where I shall attend your Grace's
farther pleasure, to be disposed of as his Majesty, and your Grace shall
please. But to return again to France, I can assure your Grace, that all the
people in the ship will rather be hanged then do it, they have been so well
used there. Thus praying for your Graces many happy and prosperous days, I
humbly rest

Your Graces most humble, and faithful servant, Jo. Pennington.
From aboard the Vanguard in the Downs, 27. July. 1625.
Captain Pennington to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
TO take into your Consideration these particulars following:

First, That there is no clause in the contract for our quiet enjoying, and
celebrating our Divine service to God morning and evening, according to the
ancient order of the Seas.

Secondly, That they may bring as many of their own Nation aboard as they will,
and they speak of putting in as many French as English, which will amount to
500. in all, which the ship is neither able to carry, neither will it be for
the health of those that go in her, or safety of the ship to his Majesty. All
which I desire may be considered of, and a course settled with the Ambassador
of the just number I shall receive aboard.

Thirdly, That we are bound to fight against any Nation, that they command us,
except our own; which you may likewise please to consider of.

Fourthly, That there is no Clause for the supply of the Victuals, and other
provisions before the six months be expired, so that they may keep us till
that time, and then turn us off naked and destitute of all provisions to be a
prey to our enemies.

Fifthly, That we may know where we shall receive our supplies of powder, and
other munition from them, for that the three last, which we have in here, with
the appurtenance, is not sufficient to maintain a fight of three hours.

The former five Articles I humbly desire your Grace judiciously to consider
of; and what your Grace will have me therein perform, may be inserted in my
instructions.

Now further I humbly desire your Grace;

First, That all we English may be of a squadron, and not separated upon any
occasion, the accidents of the Sea excepted, and that we may be ready at all
times to aid and assist one another.

Secondly, That I may have power in my instructions, or otherwise, for the
command of the rest of the English that go along with me, if not, every man may
take his course, and do what likes him best, which may prove prejudicial to
the service, dishonorable to the State, and dangerous for the safety of his
Majesty's ship.

Lastly, I humbly desire, that your Grace will be pleased to give order, that
there may be some provision of Clothes laid in for naked men, (whereof there
are many in the ship) as hose, shoes, and shirts (at least.) As also some
provision of store for sick men, of Oatmeal, Rice, Sugar, and fruit, and some
little stock of money, to relieve them if necessity require it. It may
afterward be deducted out of their wages, if your Grace will have it so.

Your Graces Loyal, and faithful servant ever to be commanded, Jo. Pennington.

Mr. Trumbal to the Secretary.
Right Honorable,
With my former dated the 11th. of this month, I sent your Honor two Letters
for his Majesty, and promised by my next to write unto your Honor at large,
about the matter they did contain.

In performance whereof, and for the discharge of my duty, I will now desire
permission hereby freely to deliver my mind, for so much as is yet come to my
knowledge, and I judge meet to be committed to paper concerning the same. And
seeing this Packet is to be sent by an express Messenger, and a Mr. Carry.
person of trust, I will for your Honors greater ease abstain from the use of
a Cipher.

After I had been at Lovain, and Antwerp to take some depositions for the
discovering of the authors and correctors of that most pernicious Libel,
Corona Regia, (as by a dispatch to the late Mr. Secretary Lake I did advertize
his Majesty,) there came unto me a certain person, living about this Town,
going by the name of Nicholas de Laken, and brought me the Packet, which a good
while since I sent to your Honor. Amongst other things, he told me, that
heretofore by accident, he fell into the company of a Cannon of Lovain, with
whom he had some speech about that divelish book, and that if I would send
thither, he was very confident, he should penetrate farther by his private
industry in the space of a few days into the mystery then I had been able to
do in the compass of diverse years, with my public information.

Here upon to make a trial, and desiring to employ Le see et Le verd, for the
manifesting of a truth, which I knew his Majesty so much longed to understand,
I furnished him with money, and some instructions, and sent him to Lovain. At
the end of six or seven days, he returned from thence, and as his own letters
do testify, and (he has protested with many oaths) he avouched to me, that he
had discovered that secret to the very bottom. I inquired of him, by what
means? He made answer by the help of the said Canon, and some young Scholars
his country men, Students, in that university, who had brought him to the
acquaintance of a certain Italian living there, that had served the author of
the book both while he did compose it, and while it was in printing. He
averreth also that Puteanus, and some others, had their fingers in that
unsavorie Pie. And he says, that when I began to make search for those
persons, which had done his Majesty that intolerable wrong, that the
principal author, and Flavius the Printer were secretly warned, to get them
out of this country, and had some means given them to maintain them abroad. He
affirms likewise, that both of them ever since that time have remained, and
are at this present remaining out of the territories of the Archdukes. That he
has often seen the said author in this City, and knows his name, and
Surname, and his person so well, as no change of his apparel, nor disguising
of his body, can cause him to mistake or be deceived. By his report, that party
is no Clergy man, though he be a good Scholar, and reputed to have an
excellent Latin pen. But those commendable quallities, are drowned by his
greater vices, he being much addicted to lewd women, and unsatiable drinking.
He is now (by this man's information) resident in a town upon the Frontiers of
Germany, And as for Flavius, he can (if he truly) declare where he lurketh, and
assures me, that his wife is at a place within ten leagues of this town. The
Cannon that did oversee the press, and withdrew the leaves of this book, as
they were printed, is called (as he heard) Mr. Claud. and dwells at Nostre
Dame de Halles, whither I purpose to send him this Easter holidaies to make
farther inquiry. More then these, and some other particulars (which are so
transcendent, as I dare neither believe, nor set them down in writing) he will
not impart unto me, until he be assured of his Majesty's protection, by a
Letter under his hand, and a competent reward for his labors. And the reason
he alleges therefore is, that if once it be known, he did meddle in this
matter, there can be no more safety for him to continue in these provinces. He
does further undertake, that in case his Majesty will be pleased to grant him
his demands, allow money for the expenses of the journey, and give him two
persons of courage, and fidelity to accompany him, he will either lose his
life, or put the said author into their hands who may carry him (as he
thinks) with little danger, either into the Pallatinate, or the united
Provinces. Hereupon I guess, that (if this report be well grownded) that
wicked fellow must be in, or near about the town of Cullen. I cannot amongst
all those of my acquaintance, and his Majesty's subjects here call to mind any
one so fit for this interprize, as the Gentleman whose name is written in
Cipher in my letter to his Majesty. For he is universally well spoken of for
his honesty, and other good Parts, and in sundry occasions has given good
testimony of his ardent desire to do his Majesty some remarkable and
meritorious service. And his sufficiency being better known to his Majesty
then to my self, I will not commend it any further. The want of employment and
some disgustes he received in Holland, while he served there, compelled him by
necessity to look for preferment under the King of Spain. But hitherto his
religion, the respect he bears to his Majesty, and my persuasions, have
detained him from those Courses. By him I am told, that he has heard out of
the mouths of one Captain Carpentine, and his son in law Captain Hamilton,
pencioners to the King of Spain (but subjects to his Majesty, that they being
one day walking in a street at Antwerp called the Major Brugg (where they
reside) with 4. or 5. others in their company, and there happening some speech
amongst them, about a book his majesty had then published against the Pope, it
fell out that one of them apprehending that opportunity said, that he had
subject enough to furnish a book which should more vex the King of great
Britain, then his Majesty's book could offend his Holiness, and if he could
meet with a Scholar, that were able to put it into a method, and good latin,
he would be ready to perform his word. Another of the troop made answer, that
he would undertake the work upon that condition, and they both (for a great
whiles after) were absent at Lovain, even about the same time that the Libel
was forged. Perhaps some part of this, may draw near to the verity. But they
both depending upon the King of Spain (as is before mentioned) and being averse
in religion, I am much afraid, I shall do little good upon them by examining
then before the Arch Dukes Commissioners, seeing they may delude me, and the
truth with equivocation, and mental reservation. Although he conceives, that
if they were called before a judge, and summoned upon their oaths to speak
the truth, they would not refuse to discharge their consciences. I have
seriously entreated him to bestow his best endeavor in attempting what he can
further learn about this relation, and he has accepted to perform my request.
The said Gentleman from whom I had it is not willing to be brought publicly
upon the Stage, for this business, lest thereby he should incur the note of
an informer, then which nothing is, or can be more odious in these parts.
Nevertheless he has promised (if his Majesty like to have it so, and will be
pleased to give commandment for it) to justify what is before rehearsed to
their faces.

Whether both these parties encounter upon one, and the same author, or
understand them to be diverse men, I can neither judge, nor fortell: yet it
seems that one of them may hit on the right. And as I will not spare any
pains, charges, nor peril whatsoever to bring the parent of this child of
darkness into the light, so I hope his Majesty (whose cause it is) will not
refuse to hazard a little money to give himself satisfaction.

These things having passed in this manner, I humbly beseech your Honor at a
fit opportunity, when the King is alone to acquaint him with these particulars,
and entreat his Majesty to keep them secret; for I am of opinion (being spoken
under humble correction, and without offense) that had not his Majesty by
communicating this business at the first to Mounsieur Borschot, given him
means to advertize it to his wife (who by tatling divulged it, and foiled the
way) we had never been put to half this trouble, but had taken Flavius, in the
form, and by him discovered the author. My intention is not, that his Majesty
should be induced to put 2000. Pistols (or the sum that shall be allotted
Laken) into his hands, before the service be done; but that his Majesty would
vouchsafe (if he approve the project) to cause so much money, as in his profound
wisdom, he shall think meet for this occasion to be forthwith remitted to me by
Mr. John More, by the meaner of Mr. Ducket, a Merchant dwelling in Milk-street
in London, to be repayed at Antwerp by Mr. Lionel Wake trading there, or by the
company of our English Merchants at Middleborough in Zealand in the name of
reward for service done, or to buy Tapestries, or linen for his Majesty. And
I will either return it back again by exchange, if this design cannot be
effected, or defaulk the remains thereof upon my entertainment. All that I
would venture in this case, should only be for those men's necessary expenses
that are to be employed therein; and that also I would have not to exceed, but
to be limited within the compass of 200. pounds sterling.

By apprehending these men, the Archdukes cannot take any just occasion of
offense against his Majesty or his Ministers, seeing one of them is not their
Vassal, and both are out of their Dominions.

It may (for these Considerations) please your Honor to advise with his
Majesty, whether it be fitter to proceed herein Via facti, or Via Juris: to
send Laken to seek out the Author and others to apprehend him, or the Printer,
or upon promise of a reasonable recompense for his pains, to deal with him
effectually to declare their names, and habitations, and afterward leave it to
his Majesty's gracious and Princely pleasure to prosecute or let fall his
action. In either of which kind, I will yield humble obedience to his Majesty's
Commands, and your Honors directions, as things to my self indifferent. But I
am doubtful, that by continuing of the course formerly holden in the carriage
of this business, we shall never attain our desired ends. I am not so slight
as to give credit to all reports, nor so prodigal as to part with money for
nothing.

My most humble and earnest suit is, that his Majesty, and your Honor after
mature deliberation upon the several points of this Letter, will vouchsafe to
send me by my servant Marsham (who is now at London) particular, and distinct
answers for my better direction. I have been the more prolixe upon this
subject, in hope that this I have written shall serve once for all.

In that matter concerning the Countess of Argile, which it pleased your
Honor to recommend unto my Care, I have done as much already as I can for the
present. We must of necessity with a little patience expect the success,
whereof your Honor shall in due time be punctually advertized. In the mean
while, I do with all reverence, desire your Honor to excuse the tediousness
of this Letter; And so take my leave,

Your Honors very humble, and ready to be commanded, W. Trumball.
Bruxels 21/31. of March, 1618/1619.
Mr. Trumball to the Secretary.
Right Honorable,
THose that are employed in such place as I am, must admit all manner of men
into their company. And the Oath I have taken to his Majesty, will not permit
me to conceal any thing from his knowledge that comes to mine, and may in any
sort have relation to his Royal service. For these Considerations I assume the
boldness so soon to renew your Honors trouble, after the dispatch of those
Volumes of Letters which I sent you yesterday by one of my servants.

This Bearer de la Forest is better known to your Honor, then to my self,
although I remember many years ago to have seen him in England. During his stay
in this Town, he brought unto me a certain French Gentleman, calling himself
the Viscount of L'orme, and Sir De la Pommeraye; who has (by his own relation)
been a great Navigator, and been authorized by 18. of the chief Pirates in the
Levant, to search for their pardon, and retreat into some Christian Country,
being sorry for the ill they have done, and desirous to spend the rest of their
days in peace. With this Commission he came into France, and there traveled
so far with the King and his Ministers, as he obtained a general abolition for
the said Pirates, a safe Conduct to bring them into his Dominions, and a
procuration (which I have seen under the great Seal of France) to treat, and
conclude with them upon certain conditions. But he being envied by some
Grandees of that Kingdom, and by misfortune happening to kill a man, he was
forced (as he pretends) for the safety of his life to fly into these
Countries, before he could bring that work to perfection.

And being now disinabled to return thither again, he desires to make a trial,
whether his Majesty will vouchsafe to lend his ear to that Treaty, and grant
unto the said Pirates a general Pardon. To which effect, he sends over La
Forest, and has entreated me to accompany him with my Letters to my Lord
Admiral, your Honor, and Mr. Secretary Calvert. For retribution of this grace,
the said Pirates offer to give 45000 l sterling to be shared amongst you three,
or to be disposed of as his Majesty shall appoint. But your Honor may see the
Conditions proposed to the French King were more advantageous. For they were to
give him their Ships, Artillery, and Munition, and to furnish means to set out
some men of War for his service.

And I see no reason (in case his Majesty should incline to such capital
offenders, and common enemies) why he should not have as much, or more benefit
then another Prince, the greatest part of them being his Vassals.

Your Honor if you please may peruse these adjoined Papers, and impart the
contents of them to my Lord Admiral. They agree with their Originals; and if
his Majesty do not taste this overture, there is no more harm done (for any
thing I can perceive) then the loss of my labor to peruse and subscribe them.

There remains only two points, wherein I should speak to your Honor, the
one is, that this matter may be concealed from the French Ambassador Mounsieur
le Count de Tilliers, for fear of ruining de L'Orme. The other with gratifying
La Forest with the pay of a Packet (if your Honor shall think it meet) for
the carrying of these Letters, who says your Honor is his great Patron, and
has promised him a good turn.

Mounsieur de L'Orme has given him power to solicit this business, and
procure him an answer; wherein I join my humble prayer, that the poor man may
not here languish in hopes, and spend his money to no purpose.

When I shall know whether his Majesty will relish this overture, or not, I
will write thereof more largely (if there be cause) otherwise let it remain as
it was before. In the mean while, I humbly take my leave; And rest

Your Honors In all humbleness to be commanded, W. Trumball.
Bruxels 23. of October. 1619.
Sir Thomas Roe to the Marquess of Buckingham Lord Admiral.
My Lord,
I Can give your Lordship no great account of any thing that has occurred
since my departure. I was bold to write to Mr. Secretary Calvert from Maliga
of the great increase of the Pirates in those Seas, and of the danger of the
Merchants; with my own thoughts, if his Majesty have any farther purpose to
attempt their destruction, which is both honorable and necessary; if these
Trades, or the other of Spain to the South of the North-Cape be of any
consequence to his Majesty's Kingdoms: if they be suffered to increase, they
will brave the Armies of Kings at Sea in a few years, and attempt even the
Coasts and Shoares with peril. And because they carry the name only of Thieves,
they are yet contemned, or neglected; but they will become a dangerous enemy,
when they shall rob with Fleets, and therefore would be in time considered. The
Spaniards now make great offers to continue the Contract, though their
performance be slow, and their own Estates chiefly interessed, yet besides the
danger and ruin of the Merchant it is considerable, that this Army increasing
is at the obedience of the Grand Seignior the common Enemy, who has no
strength but Galleys. I know your Lordship will collect enough out of this
without further pressure. The Armado's of Spain, Naples and Sicily, have been
in the Archipelago, the Turks Forces absent in the black Sea. Yet they have
done nothing of consequence, taken a few Carmisales and slaves, and are
returned to the Port, where Don Philibert of Savoy Generalissimo is present,
who is made Viceroy of Sicily, with absolute power to dispose of all offices,
without attendance from Spain, which is more then Vice-Re. He has used me for
his Majesty's honor with very great respect, as I have in particular advised
Mr. Secretary. Among many courtesies, finding 13. English Captives in the
Galleys, I thought it my duty to succor them. His Highness at the first
instance, to express his good affection to my Master, gave them to me all
free, which I think is a good work, and not ordinary. I beseech your Lordship,
that his Majesty may be pleased to take knowledge of it into Spain for the
Princes honor, that he may in the like occasion, not think himself neglected.

The advice from Constantinople is seconded of the overthrow of the Turk. God
grant it be true, and yet the pride of the Grand Seignior is not assuaged, but
he threatens a new attempt in the spring. I hope I have hitherto done his
Majesty no dishonor, nor can I boast of services; but being under your
Lordships protection, I will hope for a good interpretation, beseeching you to
present my name to his Majesty, that I be not forgotten in these great
distances, wherein my humble fortune has kept me, and as I have observed your
Lordship to be the Amparo of those that pretend to virtue and honor, and not
to desert them till they have forsaken themselves: So I beseech you take me
upon those conditions which cannot shame you, and leave me, when I am other,
then

Your Lordships faithful, and honest servant, Tho. Roe.
Messina, 7/17. December. 1621.
L. R. H. to the Duke of Buckingham.
My dear Lord,
I Have since my departure from you used all diligence in the Princes service,
and punctually observed all his Commands. Only with the King I have dealt so
freely in my relation of the Prince his carriage, and your extraordinary care
of working his content in all points, that I did move him to shed tears in
expressing his happiness for such a son, and likewise his good fortune in
having a Favorite, who is framed according to his own heart in all points.
Neither have I pressed any thing to injure any farther then my duty bound me,
and my faithful love to your service, which shall always have a prime place in
my heart.

My Lord, there are contrary opinions in Court and City, by the one you are
much admired for your noble expressions of true honor, and love to your King,
Prince, and Country, with many observations of your special care and zeal to
Religion, and your immovable resolution to Contest with all oppositions to the
contrary. By the other you are maligned, and they give it out, That you have
with your wilfulness occasioned these delays, by diverting and changing their
ways wherein they had begun to treat: but the falsenesse hereof has been
shown, and it appears malice without ground, the which, (though heretofore I
have told you) not out of any other end then to do you service, yet have you so
slightly regarded me for it, and so much respected those ill-deserving Great
ones, (as if you had intended to receive your enemies into your bosom, and to
cast off your faithfullest friends;) yet shall not any usage discourage me from
discharging the office of a most loving and zealous affected friend, and
servant, yea insomuch, that I will rather displease you, in doing you that
faithful service, that both my honor and love obliges me to, then be silent,
and they let you run into apparent danger.

My Lord, amongst the protestants your are divulged (as much as ill disposed
ones dare) a Papist. Among the Papists, it is avowed you are the greatest enemy
they have. For which reports, I am not troubled, for they have made you the
much more pittyed, and as highly esteemd, and honored amongst the most
juditious, and best deserving subjects, as any thing could do. And I dare
assure you, that since your being at Madrid you are much better beloved of all
people (who have not ends) then you were before. Noble Lord, I find the King
both resolute, and courageous, but wise, and secret, to my own hearts joy, and
not to be won upon by the subtle and false policy of any I made it my humble
suit upon my knees, that he would consent to no proposition of this Spanish
Ambassador concerning peace or war, till the Princes return. Which suite he
took well at my hands, and granted. I have told him freely what I observed in
Spain, both of their manners, usage, and honesty, and left it to his wisdom
to make what use he pleased. His Majesty longs to see the Prince, and you, and
so do all the subjects, and will not be satisfied with any thing, but your
speedy return. Except you have jelousies put into the Spaniards heads, and
prevent the danger, which will be by hasting the marriage with all possible
speed; for there are some whose buttons break with venom, that you have got so
much honor, and so well deserved of the King and Prince. But you believe me
not, but think I speak of Spleen, when God knows I never bore any to any man,
but for your sake. Your most virtuous lady mourns for your absence, and will
not be comforted. Your fair Daughter deserves your staying withal, and your
faithful friends and the good of the Kingdom want you most of all

And for your greater comfort, the King is so reserved in the Princes affairs,
as that he neither imparts the businesses of Spain, nor his intents therein to
any of hit privy Council, Since your pattent, the Earl Marshal is become a
great stranger at the Court. But all men find you so fast revited into the
Kings, heart that they see it is an impossibility to work you any way
displeasure in your absence, and therefore forbear to express, what willingly
they would effect, but find it in vain to go about it. But let not the Kings
love to you or their small ability to do you harm, make you too careless, or
too credulous of those your enemies, last it give too great encouragement to
them, and too great dishartning to your faithful friends. I am sorry at my
being with you at Madrid that you durst not impart those secrets, wherein I am
sure my faithfulness, and love unto you, would have done you all service (as
the thing I most desire) but I see the zeal of my heart to you, is not rightly
considered, yet am I confident that time will make me best known, and better
esteemed by you as one whose true heart, is always watchful of taking all
opportunities to do you service. My Lord, you shall find me not only a
word-friend, but an active, who never am better pleased, then when I find most
opposition. And for conclusion, I am so far from shunning dangers to do you
service, as that I would willingly wade in blood at any time to manifest my
self yours. And therefore) I should receive great content, if you knew, how
truly I were yours, because then I am sure in the Nobleness of your nature, it
would be impossible for any to be able to do me wrong in your Honorable,
thoughts. My dear Lord, pray suffer no longer delays in Spain, but either
dispatch, what you went for quickly, or else return speedily; for assure your
self, their desire to have you continue there, is for no love to you, but to
further thereby their own designs elsewhere. Nay I dare justify it out of my
own weak judgment, that the longer you stay, the farther off you shall be from
obtaining, what you desire. And if you resolutely purpose your return with
speed, you will force them out of their dull pace, and put them upon the rock,
from which they cannot escape, except they fulfill your desires. Besides, your
presence is most necessary here for home-affairs, for your absence has caused
too great insolency in the Court, by such as bear themselves very loftily, and
insu^ very much over yours, especially your poor servant Mewtis is much
threatened as being yours, and must suffer till you come back. Some other things
likewise are otherwise carried in your absence, then would be in your presence,
therefore for Gods sake return, but with the Prince, and count delays,
denyals. And the longer you stay there, the stronger you make them and your
selves the weaker. My Lord of Bristol has a great, and more powerful party in
Court, then you imagine, in so much, that I am confident were the King a
newter, he would prevail, and I do not much marvail at it, for you trust upon
the honor, and justification of all your actions, desirous to make no friends,
because you need none, but he deals with a great deal of cautelous wisdom,
and as he has wrought into the Kings opinion, by reason of some pleasing
services, so has he into all those, who are about the King, or powerful, that
they may better his good services, and smother his bad. Besides the man who is
suspicious (as he must needs be) has far greater care of after-reckonings, how
to make fair glosses, then he who does all things with the avowment of all
honor, and the only intent of service to his King, and Country. It grieves me
I am not thought worthy to hear from you any word by these last messengers,
especially being promised the employment, from which I was put. Farewell (dear
Lord) and the Almightes protection be upon our unmatchable Prince, upon whose
worth, and brave achievements all eyes are fixed, and the same protection
light upon you his right hand, and give you the good fortune, to make as brave
a return, as you did voyage thither, to the eternal praise of your future
memories. And upon these hopes, I rest happy to think my self

Yours H. R.

Sir George Carry to the Marquess of Buckingham. 8. December, 1619.
Your Lordship
Will be satisfied, before this of mine will have the happiness to kiss your
noble hands, that the great Mystery of iniquity in the Star Chamber is now
revealed, and as many as could be discerned to have the mark of the beast upon
them, have undergone their censure. Some I must confess, and great fishes too,
have broken out of the nett. But that escape must be objected to the errors of
some of the pursuers, whose courses in some things were not enough direct to
warrant, what otherwise might have been done. And your Lordship who is a good
Woodman well knows, unless the Wind-lace be well carried, the Bows which
stand up can never shoot.

Notwithstanding all the defaults of the meaner Agents, the Court maintaining
the honor of their own uprightness, and integrity has with moderation too,
(yet such as leaves subject to his Majesty's mercy to work upon some
particulars,) raised in Fine some 130000 l. or thereabouts. If no errors had
been committed, (whereupon those Defendants, which escaped, took advantage to
be safe) by this which is done, you may imagine what it would have amounted to.
For my part, I rejoice to conceive, how with the shortest of the days, we are
at the worst of our estate, hoping by this means with the return of the Sun, to
see some such return of the money, (the riches of his Majesty's Treasury, and
blood of the Commonwealth) as that the Exchequer may flow, and the Veins of
the State may fill again, and both with the Spring renew their strength,
luster, and complexion. I have now stayed here so long attending this
business, that I hold it too late to wait upon you at Newmarket, That gives me
cause to crave your pardon for this presuming imperfect Account of this days
action, and withal to desire the assurance, that I live in your estimation, the
same, I will ever be

Your Lordships Most sincerely honest and humble servent, G. Carry.

To King James, ab ignoto.
Your Majesty,
BOth in the eminency of your regal dignity, and in the excellency of your
judgment, does truly represent the common sense, whose part it is to judge and
discern of all things; whereas the other senses do but report their particular
objects. And in that manner do I humbly offer to your Majesty's Consideration
in this importune Chrisis of the affairs of Christendom, so much as I have
observed in France, that may now concern your service, in which place I have
been heretofore employed in your affairs.

And first considering the present estate of things in France, and weighing
against it, the seizure made of the Valtoline by the King of Spain, the late
invasion of the Palatinate, and now this new defeat arrived in Bohemia, I do
put this for an infallible ground, that either the King of France will resolve
out of jealousy of the progressions of the house of Austria effectually to
succor the Palatinate, or else abandoning the affairs of Germany to their own
success, and neglecting the increase of the house of Austria on that side, he
will think more then to recompense himself, by taking this opportunity to
extinguish the body of those of the Religion in France. And as undoubtedly he
will resolve on one of those two points, so on both of them for sundry reasons
he cannot. To move him to the succor of the Palatinate, the main motive will
be, the jealousy between those two Monarchies, which can never die, so long as
they do both subsist in no greater a disproportion of strength and power; As
also that France shall by their usurpation of the Palatinate, be on all sides
Circled by the house of Austria, and particularly on that part where France
has before usurped on the Empire; in which regard his interest of estate is
greater then your Majesty's in the Conservation of the Palatinate, though your
personal interest be incomparable with his. Then he cannot but think of the
loss of his Correspondencies, and breach of his Confederacies in Germany,
which have been very ancient, and very particular with the house of the
Palatine. And if the reason of mutual gratitude, and vindication of injuries,
may move Frenchmen, there are plentiful arguments on both kinds to move them to
defend the House of the Palatine, against that of Austria. But now on the other
side to move him against those of the Religion at home, first does present it
self, his successeful beginning against them in the business of Bearn, then
which nothing could be more unjust, both in regard of the matter it self, and
of his own faith, and promise, and of the desert of those of the Religion
toward him, in these late troubles, nor could any thing be more suddenly, or
violently (I do not say cruelly) executed, then that was. And again the present
terms, wherein that King, and those of the Religion do stand, will push him
on. Then there will not want to this purpose, the powerful persuasions of the
Pope, and his adherents, both by propounding overtures to lay asleep the
jealousies of the house of Austria, and offering huge sums toward the charge
of the War, which if he should attempt, and prevail therein, it would prove of
far greater prejudice for many reasons that may be given in the interest of
Estate, to your Majesty, though not in the interest of your affection, then
the loss of the Palatinate.

What may in France be resolved upon these motives, is uncertain.

But I do conceive hereupon, that it may be useful for your Majesty's service
effectually to propound in France, a Confederacy for the Conservation of the
Palatinate, to which if they do hearken, your Majesty shall proceed in that
design with greater strength and reputation, and occasion the King of Spain to
proceed with greater remissness, or else absolutely to relinquish the
Palatinate by a Treaty. But if in France it be not hearkened to, your Majesty
may take it for an assured argument, that they mean to proceed against those of
the Religion, in which case your Majesty may make use of the same Embassage to
revive again some of their factions in the Court, whereby those of the Religion
may be strengthened in their defense, and it will not be hard to effect, if it
be well proceeded in. And herein does properly offer it self the person of the
Duke of Bovillon, who for his great experience and wit, and intelligence in
that Court, is best able to guide and further your Majesty's intentions; and
for his interest in the person of the Palatine, and in the conversation of
those of the Religion, does precisely square with your Majesty's ends, whose
advice you may first suddenly and secretly enquire.

etc.

Sir Walter Aston to the Duke, 10. December, 1624.
May it please your Grace,
THe Archduke Don Carlos, brother to the Emperor, made his entry into this
Town on the 15th. of the last month, Still. Vet. He was met by the Almirante of
Castile two days journey from this place, who went from hence well
accompanied, and attended by many Liveries richly set forth. Some 400. paces
without a Gate of this Town called Alcala, the Archduke was received by the
two Infants Don Carlos and the Cardinal, and about 200 paces without the said
Gate by the King himself, who came attended with the greatest part of this
Court, and in his Coach accompanied with the Duke of Newbergh, and the Conde of
Olivarez: The King lighted out of his Coach to receive the Archduke, and some
complements being past between them, returned into his Coach, and set the
Archduke by him on his left hand; in the other end of the Coach set the two
Infants; in one boot the Duke of Newbergh, and the Conde of Olivarez; and in
the other the Emperors Ambassador, and the Almirante; the Almirante taking
place of the Ambassador. Being come to the Palace, the King accompanied the
Archduke to the Queens Quarter, where his Majesty left him to be conveyed
from thence to his own Quarter (which is the same was given to the Prince his
Highness at his being in this Court,) by the Infants his Brothers, as he was,
having finished his complements with the Queen, and the Infanta Dona Maria.
There were preparations here making for the honoring his reception with
several feasts, and entertainments after their manner here. But these have been
stopped by the Archdukes sickness, who felt himself indisposed the day after
his arrival, and applying some Physical remedies by the advice of a Physician
which he brought along with him, his distemper increased, and as it is
pretended by these Physicians by a wrong course held with him. What has been
the true cause of his infirmity, I leave to be disputed by them; He has been
held diverse days with a terrible Calenture, which proved at last a Tabardillo,
whereupon there was little hope conceived of his life; but he has since
received some ease, and is now in a good way of amendment. In respect of the
Emperors unworthy proceedings with the King our Master, I have not dared to
visit him, until I shall have notice of his Majesty's pleasure therein, which
I shall be glad to understand from your Grace.

Since the expiring of the Truce betwixt this Crown and the Hollanders, this
King has given License to diverse Port Towns on the Coasts of Biscay to arm out
what ships they shall think good, and to make prize to their own particular
benefit of what they shall light upon belonging to the enemies of this Crown:
by which means it is here hoped, That these Coasts will be much the better
secured from the daily pillages of the Holland men of War, and the Turkish
Pirates. For the advancing whereof upon request made of those of Sevil, there
is License given unto them to arm what men of War they can find means. The Duke
of Maqueda likewise with leave has lately set forth six ships which are abroad
in Pyracie.

There is advice given hither, that the Duke of Brandenbergh has given his
consent to the conferring of the Electoral dignity upon the Duke of Bavaria,
which I can hardly believe, though I find it assured from very good hands.

The Duke of Newborgh remains still in this Court, and presses to carry a clear
resolution in his businesses from hence; but for any thing I can yet learn his
negotiation remains in the same estate as I advertised in my last to Mr.
Secretary Conway.

The Armada prepared in Portugal for the recovering of Brasil is gone to Sea,
and whereas, they were to have stayed at the Cape St. Vincent for the Armado of
Castile, upon advice, that is given hither, that the Hollanders in Brasil are
not able to make any resistance of consideration, they have order to proceed in
their journey. Twenty ships of war, and 4000. land Soldiers (which is the
force of that Fleet) being here held sufficient for that enterprise. The Armado
in Cadiz is not yet departed, but has her men aboard, and there is daily
expectation of news that it is gone to Sea. The Duke of Saxony having
received letters from the King our Master, and the King of Denmark, sent
presently coppies of them unto the Emperor, with his answers unto their
Majesty's, and accompanied them with a letter of his own unto the Emperor. All
which the Emperor sent unto the King. The carriage of the Duke is much
esteemed here, for having given (as I am informed) by his Letters unto the King
our Master, and the King of Denmark such an answer as they are here much
satisfied withal. Nothwithstanding in this Letter to the Emperor with many
reasons, and much instance, he advises him to apply himself to the settling of
the peace in Germany, and expressing much affection to the composing of the
affairs of the Prince Palatine does earnestly entreat his Majesty not to
destroy that ancient house. In the mean time the Duke of Bavaria uses all
diligence to combine himself with this Crown, and now does offer to cast off
all other thoughts of leagues, and to depend wholly upon Spain, so that this
King will protect him in his Electoral dignity, and what he has lately
possessed himself of in those parts. This offer of the Dukes has been several
days debated in Council, where the Marquess Ynoiosa has been busy in the
behalf of the Duke: but the wiser part of this Council seeing how prejudicial,
the increase of the Dukes greatness may prove to the Empire, do no way favor
his pretentions. They likewise hold fit to continue the state of things in a
possibility of an accommodation without our Master.

The Archduke Don Carlos has brought power from the Emperor to proceed to
the consummation of a marriage betwixt the Emperors son and the Infanta Donna
Maria, wherein he says, he has nothing to Capitulate, but brings them a
blanck paper, and has power, and order to confirm what conditions they shall
here set down. The Emperor's Ambassador does much press to proceed to the
Capitulations, but there is yet nothing done. The Infanta of Brussels has
lately written hither, importing this King to admit of a treaty of marriage
betwixt the Prince of Polonia, and the Infanta his Sister, extolling with many
expressions the worth, and parts of that Prince.

There has been some months a general stop of their proceedings here in all
suites of English Merchants depending in this Court; but I have at last
procured a Junto to be assigned for the hearing of all English Causes, wherein
I am promised there shall be a speedy Resolution taken of whatsoever is at
present in Question.

The Duke of Feria has lately advertised hither from Millain, that the French
King, and the Duke of Savoy do minister much occasion of jealousy, that they
intend to attempt some novelty in those parts, and does therefore desire, that
his Troops may be augmented; whereupon (above the ordinary charge) there was
instantly remitted unto him 2000. Ducats.

The great annual Assiento which this King makes with the Genoueses is newly
concluded, it is for 7. millions, whereof 4. are remitted for Flanders, to be
paid by monthly portions.

In a late meeting of the Council of State upon a discourse that passed amongst
them, taking into consideration this Kings wants, and the present distemper of
his affairs, the Inquisidor General expressing how necessary a time it was for
his Majesty's Subjects to assist his present occasions, made offer of 100
Ducats for his part, which the Conde of Olivares followed with a tender of
300; the Conde of Monterrey of 100; all the rest of the Council of State
following their example gave according to their quality. Notice being taken of
this abroad, the Condestable wrote a Letter unto this King, wherein he made
tender of 200 Ducats, the Marquess of Castle Rodrigo of 100, the Marquess of
Carpio of the like sum. Diverse others have likewise declared themselves in
this donative, and it is hoped that it will go over the whole Kingdom, and
bring in an extraordinary Treasure into the Kings purse. Thus with the
remembrance of my duty, I rest

Your Graces, etc. W: A.

Archbishop Abbots to Secretary Nanton, 12. September. 1619.
Good Mr. Secretary,
I Have never more desired to be present at any Consultation, then that which
is this day to be handled, for my heart, and all my heart goes with it. But my
Foot is worse then it was on Friday, so that by advice of my Physician, I have
sweat this whole night past, and am directed to keep my bed this day.

But for the matter, my humble advice is, That there is no going back, but a
countenancing of it against all the world; yea so far as with ringing of Bells,
and making of Bon-fires in London, so soon as it shall be certainly understood
that the Coronation is past. I am satisfied in my Conscience, that the Cause is
just, wherefore they have rejected that proud and bloody man, and so much the
rather, because he has taken a course to make that Kingdom not elective, but
to take it from the donation of another man. And when God has set up the
Prince that is chosen to be a mark of honor through all Christendom to
propagate his Gospel, and to protect the oppressed, I dare not for my part give
advice but to follow where God leads.

It is a great honor to the King our Master, that he has such a Son, whose
virtues have made him thought sit to be made a King. And me thinks I do in
this, and that of Hungary foresee the work of God, that by piece and piece the
Kings of the earth, that gave their power unto the beast, (all the Word of God
must be fulfilled) shall now tear the Whore and make her desolate, as St. John
in his Revelation has foretold. I pray you therefore with all the spirits you
have to put life into this business, and let a return be made into Germany
with speed, and with comfort, and let it really be prosecuted, that it may
appear to the World that we are awake when God in this sort calls us.

If I had time to express it, I could be very angry at the shuffling which was
used toward my Lord of Doncaster, and the slighting of his Embassage so, which
cannot but touch upon our Great Master who did send him, and therefore I would
never have a Noble Son forsaken, for respect of them who truly aim at nothing
but their own purposes.

Our striking in will comfort the Bohemians, will honor the Palsgrave, will
strengthen the Union, will bring on the States of the Low Countries, will
stir up the King of Denmark, and will move his two uncles the Prince of
Orange and the Duke of Bovillon, totogether with Tremoville (a rich Prince in
France) to cast in their shares. And Hungary as I hope (being in that same
cause) will run the same fortune; for the means to support the war, I hope
Providebit Deus. The Parliament is the old, and honorable way, but how assured
at this time I know not, yet I will hope the best; certainly if countenance be
given to the action, many brave spirits will voluntarily go. Our great Master
in sufficient want of money, gave some aid to the Duke Savoy, and furnished out
a pretty army in the cause of Cleve. We must try once again what we can be
done in this business of a higher nature, and all the money, that may be spared
is to be turned that way. And perhaps God provided the Jewels that were laid up
in the Tower to be gathered by the Mother for the preservation of her Daughter
who like a noble Princess has professed to her Husband not to leave her self
one Jewel rather then not to maintain so religious, and righteous a cause. You
see that lying on my bed I have gone too far, but if I were with you this
should be my language, which I pray you humbly and heartily to represent to the
King my, Master telling him, that when I can stand, I hope to do his Majesty
some service herein. So commending me unto you I remain

Your very loving friend, Geo. Cant.

The Lord Brook to the Duke, 11. November, 1623.
May it please your Grace,
OUt of Spain we hear, the world comes so fast after you (since your
departure,) as we assure our selves this great work is at a good end, with
contentment to our blessed Prince, and like a Princely treaty, with addition of
honor to the Monarchy, he intends to match with.

But Sir, we hear of a new treaty sprung up between the Palsegraves Eldest son
and the Emperors youngest Daughter. A Labrynth into which, what hope soever
leads us, I fear no one thread will be able to guide us well out. Because in
the passages between these for distant Princes education of children seems
like to be demanded, Ballancing of Councels to the jelousie of friends,
Question whether the Palatinate shall be delivered in the Nonage before
marriage, or after. Then whether sequestered into a Catholic, or Protestants
hands. If into a Catholic, a probable argument that both it, and the
Valtoline are equally reserved free to fall with associated forces upon our
ancient Bulwark the Neither Lands at pleasure Lastly whether the Myter, and the
Scepter thus united, with their advantage in number of swords, and Deskes
aboard, their new springing party at home, strengthes by sea and land,
Constant ambition of adding Crown, to Crown, and perfect Auditt of their
neighbors powers, and humors (even while the second Heir male of this Kingdom
shall live in the hands of enemies, and strangers) I say whether these will not
prove fearful in equalities, casual to the lives of our King and Prince,
dangerous to the Crown by changing successive rights into tenures of Courtesy,
and charging of the peoples consciences with visions of confusion or bondage.

Against (Sir) admit this new project should vanish into smoke as undigested
vapors use to do, yet give me leave to question, whether to your Grace you
have overtlie protested against the intricate Courses of the Spaniard, even the
specitious issue of the Palatinates delivery before consummation of marraiage,
but not like to prove Mother of many Colorable and unavoydable delays.
Because, suppose the proposition should be granted, yet who sees not that the
effecting of it will prove an act of so many parts. Viz: the Pope, Emperor,
King of Spain, Duke of of Bavaria etc. and of so great consequence joyntlie,
and severally to them all, and must of necessity require diverse assemblies,
commissions, perchance Dietts etc. And then what time the execution of the
Minutes under these Heads will demand, he that knows the diverse natures of
Nations in treating may easily conceive.

To begin with the least; what money or other conditions can be offered like to
satisfy the honor, humor, and huge expense of the Bavarian, for quitting his
Conquest to so unreconcileable a neighbor: and if there be possibility, yet
out of whose estate or treasury are these conditions, or large proportions of
Dowry probably to be expected? touching the Emperor? Is there any foreign
alliance able to persuade this Prince, who having by an untimely war, changed
all tenures of Election into succession, and thereby shaken the ancient freedom
of our Germany Princes, what I say can in likelihood winn him to restore these
dead forces of his Enemies, to the prejudice of all he injoyes, or aspires.
Besides what shall move this Emperor to take away the Bann from the
Palsegraves person, who has so desparately hazarded not only his own private
Kingdoms, and Provinces, but by his undertaking, waved the main ambition of of
the Austrian family. For the Spanish King if he be pressed, his answer will be
ready and fair, that he has no right in him (but mediation) as appears by the
divisions already made. Notwithstanding how little right soever pretends, yet
his Council, his instruments, his charge, by diversion, Overt Aid, insensible
succors (the world sees) have been used in all these wars; so as this together
with his right by strong hand gotten (and kept by arts of depositing) upon the
Voltaline may lead us to discern clearly, that he finds the passage of his
forces through them, equal, and so resolves both, to overrun the Low countries
when he please. Against which little State (whether out of revenge, or ambition
of greater conquests by them, he will constantly carry a warchfull and Griping
enemies hand.

Concerning the Pope, who knows not that his universal affected supremacy
(howsoever dissembled) yet has, does and ever will urge his Holiness to stir
up colorable Wars of Religion. Since Wars, Contentions, and tumults among
Princes have been his old way of adding more wealth, and power to his
sanctified Sea. How I say this new fashioned Monarch, shallbe won to suffer
Heidelberg (the most dangerous nest of Heretics after Geneva) to return to
her former strength is a point beyond my Capacity.

By these short, hasty and imperfect images your Grace may yet judge, that
except the restitution of the Palatinate be instantly pressed (and like a work
of Faeries either furnished, or broken off at once) we may easily be over-shot
in our own bows, by having the strengths and free Councels of England,
Scotland, and Ireland during this treaty kept under a kind of Covert-baron, and
so long made a forge for other Princes ends, as my Blessed Sovereigns trust may
perchance find it self compelled to play an After-Game, amongst discouraged
friends, and combination of powerful enemies, such as under characters of
Alliance will think they have won one great Step toward their inveterate
Ambition of a Western Monarchy.

Noble Duke, If you find me lifted above my earth, in handling a subject to
which I am utterly a stranger, yet bear with a Monks humor, in a man that is
prisoner to old age. Hide my folly from the eyes of Critiques. And pardon my
freedom that has wearied you, with a mind ever to remain

Your Graces loving Grandchild and humble servant, Tho. Brook.

Dr. Balcanquel to Secretary Nanton, 26. of March.
Right Honorable,
THe reason why I have not of late written to your Honor, is the
discontinuance of our Sessions of the Synod this great while; but since my last
unto your Honor, we have thus spent our time. The public reading of all the
Collegial judgments upon the 5. Articles was made an end of. In which (God be
thanked for it) there was a greater harmony and consent then could almost be
hoped for, in such variety of learned men, who did not know one of another
judgment. The only difference was in the second Article. After that the
President, (never asking advice from the Synod) took upon him to conceive, and
dictate the Canons himself to us; but we who were sent by his Majesty,
conceiving that course to be altogether against the dignity of the Synod,
consulted with some of the Delegates, who approved our Counsel, and thought it
fit, that there should be some deputed by the Synod, and joined to the
President for conceiving of the Canons, that so whatsoever was done, might be
done by public authority. This motion did trouble the President not a little,
who has all the Provincials at his beck, and some of the foreign Divines too,
but especially the Palatines. Yet there was a public Synod called for this
purpose, where the President of the Delegates did make a speech, desiring the
Synod to depute some who joined with the President and the Assessours, might
take pains for moulding of the Canons. In the delivering of the voices most
testified their dislike of this course, and their singular respect to the
Presidents Credit; but Scultetus did by many reasons approve the course which
the President had begun, and disprove this new course, which was suggested, yet
he taxed no man personally. But Sibrandus (when he came to deliver his voice)
like a madman did inveigh against those, who were the suggesters of this
change, and said, That strangers should not take upon them to prescribe what
was good for the estate of their Church, and that some others who had joined in
that, were worthy to be noted Censura Ecclesiastica: therein he aimed at the
South Holland, who did likewise much dislike the President his Course.
Sibrandus spoke so furiously, that both the Praeses Politicus, and the Praeses
Ecclesiasticus, desired him either to hold his peace, or else speak that which
might not disturb the peace of the Synod. Yet since it was the Delegates
pleasure, the whole Synod added to the President, and the Assessours three
foreign Divines, viz. my Lord of Landaff, Scultetus, and Deodatus; 3.
Provincials, viz. Poliander, Vallaeus, and Triglandius; who should mould and
conceive the Canons upon every Article, and then send a Copy of what they have
done to every College, that they may add power, and change what they will,
the Colleges observations being considered by them, and the Canons according
to them amended, they are to be returned to the Colleges, and the Colleges to
return them again, and so to keep the course ever till there be no exceptions
against them. When they are thus agreed upon by all several Colleges, they
shall publicly be concluded, and approved by the Synod.

We are now hard at polishing the Canons, which these Deputies send us. All our
trouble is in the second Article: The most part of the Synod would cry us down
with voices for the restriction of the general propositions in Scripture, and
the Confessions of the Reformed Churches concerning Christ's death, ad Solos
Electos. We stand for leaving them unexpounded, and unrestricted as we found
them, and rejoice exceedingly, that the Directions which my Lord Ambassador
sent us from his Majesty concerning this point, agrees so fully with our
judgment subscribed with our hands, given in to the Synod, upon the second
Article. By this doing we first leave a found and sufficient ground for
preaching of the Gospel to all men. Next we shun a great deal of offense, which
otherwise we must needs have given to the Lutheran Churches. Thirdly, we retain
the same phrases, and forms of speaking which those Fathers did, who wrestled
with the Pelagians in the same point. If this Article be well looked into, I
hope there shall moderation enough be observed in all the rest. If it were not
for the moderation of the foreign Divines, we should have such Canons as I
think have not been heard of: for there is never a Provincial Minister here,
who has delivered any rigid Proposition, and has been taxed by the
Remonstrants for it, but he would have that Proposition thrust into one Canon
or another, that so he may have something to show for that which he has said.
As soon as the Canons are agreed upon, I shall by Gods grace with all
expedition send them unto your Honor. Our next work will be Vorstius, whose
book they would censure, without citation of himself. The President wrote to
our College in the Delegates name to know, whether we thought it fit to have
him personally cited; but especially to know what we thought would be most
agreeing to his Majesty's mind.

To the latter, concerning his Majesty's mind, we answered, That we thought my
Lord Ambassador could give them the best resolution for that point.

For the former, we thought it would be evil taken, If any man should be
condemned, not being first heard. But because they, that Vorstius would keep
them as long as the Remonstrants had done; We told them, That we desired they
would not suffer him to make any defenses, or explications of his blasphemous
propositions, but simply to answer per ita vel non, whether he would plainly
abjure them, or not; And so accordingly proceed against him, and so we should
make no great loss of time; so I think he shall be personally cited.

This is all, for we have had no Synodical meetings these 12. days. I can see
no end of the Synod before Whitsontide. With my best prayers for your Honors,
and the remembrance of all my faithful respects. I take my leave; And am

Your Honors In all true observance and service, Walter Balcanquel.

Sir William Beecher to his Majesty, 4th. of February.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
BEsides the relation of the appearance of change in the affairs of the Court,
wherewith my Dispatch to Mr. Secretary Lake will acquaint your Majesty: I
thought it my duty to give you particular account, that being yesterday with
the Prince of Jain ville, after some earnest protestations made to me of his
desire to do your Majesty service, falling into discourse of those
occurrences, he grew into these terms. That the complaints of the Queen Mother
were founded upon good reason; that if she had offended the King, or the State,
why did they not make her process? if she had not offended, why should she not
see the King, and her children? that when the Queen fell upon these Complaints,
they thought to fright her, by Pretending to bring forth the Prince of Conde;
but that the Queen had astonished them, by telling them, That she was so far
from opposing, as she desired the liberty of the Prince. That the Queens
friends would be glad of his liberty, for that it could not be prejudicial, but
rather advantageous, at the least, it would be honorable for them, if his
liberty were wrought, if not by their intercession, at least by their occasion;
further he told me, That he was confident, that the Queen would not be gained
by their fair words, but would persist in her resolution. Which discourse of
his with some other advertisements, does persuade me, that this matter has a
farther root, and is likely to bring forth some great alteration here, in no
long time. And I doubt not but that Monsieur de Luine will find with
repentance, how much better it had been for him, to have furthered your
Majesty's advice for the delivery of the Prince, whereby he might have acquired
to the King a reputation of Justice, and to himself an obligation of a powerful
friend in the Prince, rather then to leave him to the adventure of the changes,
that time may produce. But if your Counsel did prove fruitless to them by
their misconceit of it, yet it does, and will every day prove more honorable
to your Majesty, who by your wisdom have foreseen, and by your goodness have
premonished all your neighbors of the mischiefs that threatened them.

Peradventure they may overcome this effort of the Queens by fair words to her
Person, and threats signified afar off, and continue the state of affairs in
the same condition that now it is, which is in few words extremely Romish,
Jesuitish, and by consequence Spanish.

Mounsieur de Luine seems to me a man in himself capable of reason, and by
the death of the Marshal d'Anchre, eternally bound to be a good Patriot, but
that he applies himself wholly to the Kings person, and that distrusting his
own judgment, relies upon the judgment of the Ministers of the State, and
principally Du Ageu.
Du Augen the Chancellor, and the Gardeseaux.

They utterly neglect all the Alliances of our Religion abroad, and care not
how inconsiderately they oppress it at home. Only they seem desirous to
entertain themselves well with the King of Spain, by the intervention of the
Nunce, and do think that no advantage which they can give the Spaniard by this
proceeding in other parts, can equal that which they pretend to receive at
home, by suppressing the State, and doctrine of those of the Religion.

If they proceed long in this train, it will undoubtedly breed mischievous
designs, which there is no so ready way to prevent, as to let them generally
perceive, that they are discovered, whereby the proceedings of the Ministers of
State will grow so detestable to all those here, that have any sense of the
love of their Country, that it will produce either a change of their persons,
or of their Councels.

But I do humbly submit the Censure hereof to your Majesty's most exquisite
judgment, whom I do beseech the Almighty long to preserve in health, and all
perfect happiness.

Your Majesty's Most humble Subject, and Loyal Servant, Will. Beecher.

To King James, ab ignoto.
Most wise, and Glorious Prince,
BEcause the departure of your Majesty does not permit me to hope for the
honor of seeing you, and that the advertisements, and orders which I have to
communicate unto you, do merit your speedy review and magnanimous resolution, I
have presumed to trust them unto this paper, which I do humbly desire may rest
in the hands of your Majesty alone.

The treaty of restoring all that had been taken by Sea (which by a motion from
Spain, was put into the hands of some Ministers in Rome) is accompanied with so
little hope of obtaining the end, that was pretended, that by reason of their
continuing at Naples to dissipate, and waste such goods as they had taken in
our ships, and the Cardinal Borgias reservednesse to promise any thing, that
negotiation may be held as vain, and as an insidious invention to gain time.
Nevertheless my Masters marching still with a constant desire of purchasing
the public tranquillity, have been content to render all such vessels as they
had taken within their Gulf, in hope that having gotten the advantage of the
cause by this honest proceeding, they might prevail in which they had made at
Naples, for the restitution of their Galeasses, and of the ship called Rosse.

But the actions and operations of the Spaniards do not answer unto what is
desired, and hoped. For in the Kingdom of Sicilie Naples, and Calabria, they
do muster new Soldiers, and they make great preparations for a war by the Sea.
The subjects of those Kingdoms are taxed with extraordinary Contributions of
money, and in daily councels held by the duke of Ossuna, the Marquess Santa
Croce, and other ministers they do consult of the means of making war, and
doing hurt. But that which is most important is, that in the conjuncture, there
is likewise in diverse parts of Spain a terrible concourse of great provisions.
For they have put in a readiness armor for 30000. men, they have engrossed
all the ammunition that could be purchased, and have put in good equipage 60.
tall ships which being added unto those they have already in the Streights make
80. at Naples they have 20 ships more besides all their own Galleys, and an
order they have obtained for the Galleys of Malta, Florence, and the Pope to
join with them.

All the Italian Soldiers are quartered along the Coast of Apulia, which is
opposite to our Gulphe, and they have 14000. foot of Walloons, French, and
Spaniards lodged within the Kingdom of Naples. In Flanders at this present,
they make a new Leavie of 6000. foot, and a 1000. horse. And in the state of
Millan, they do retain still 3000. horse supernumeraries. All which forces, and
provisions, as they do deserve for their greatness to be regarded, and looked
upon with a jealous eye of every one; so those, who do suffer at the present
many jnjuries and acts of hostility at the hands of the Spaniards, and in
particular the State of Venice, which is betrayed by their fraudulent treaties,
cannot choose but fear, and doubt more then any other. Neither can any pretenses
of enterprises or designs against the Turk secure those, who set the sword
bended against their breasts, and the fire kindled in their own houses.

Whereupon your Majesty is humbly desired that you will be pleased to consider
seriously of what has been remonstrated, and to take such a resolution, as may
best befit your wisdom, and Greatness, and the safety, and indemnity of a
State so observant of your Majesty as ours is, and of a member so important of
the liberty of Italy, and of Europe. There is not, at this day (Invincible
Sir) any Prince in the whole world upon whom the Conservation of the public
tranquillity does more rely then upon your Majesty. For there being none that
does equal your Majesty in wisdom, and experience, possessing your Kingdoms
in perfect peace, quietness, and plenty, to the infinite praise of your name,
and being free from the molestation of all storms and tempests, it seems
that the eyes of all men are turned toward your Majesty as toward a Sun,
that ought to clear the Sky, and that they expect deliverance only from your
hand. These resolutions (oh most wise King) will be the strongest walls upon
which your eternity can be reared. These will be the Jewels, and the crown,
which will adorn you in earth, and in Heaven. These will be the immortal Glory
of your powerful name.

The resolutions in cases of such weight, and danger ought to be magnanimous,
quick, and powerful. The very noise of your putting in order your royal Navy,
the sending a person of quality to the place, from whence the danger is feared,
and the declaring your self in favor of those, whom you shall find to have the
right on their side, may perhaps prove sufficient to procure a peace. If words
will not prevail deeds must follow, and such a resolution will prove the true
Antidote to all their poisons. For the better effecting whereof the world does
attend with great devotion to see a good correspondencie renewed betwixt your
Majesty and the French King; and for the disposing your Majesty's heart
thereunto, the State of Venice does join her humble prayers unto the earnest
entreaty of many others.

In the mean time, I am to request your Majesty, that you will be pleased to
forbid the exportation of Artillery, ships and Mariners out of our Kingdoms
for the service of the Spaniards, it being neither just nor agreeable to your
Majesty's Piety, that your Arms should be stained with the blood of a State,
and Prince, that has no equal in love to your Royal Crown, and that will ever
testify to all the world by effects of their observance, the pure, and sincere
devotion that they have to your Glorious name. For my own particular, I humbly
crave leave to kiss your royal hands.

Sir Isaac Wake to the Secretary.
Right Honorable,
I Have safely received the Letter, wherewith your Honor has been pleased to
favor me, dated at Theobalds the 19th. of July Still. Vet. and have to my
singular comfort understood, that you have been pleased not only to give
favorable acceptance unto such weak dispatches as I have made bold to address
unto you, but done me the honor likewise to acquaint his Majesty with the
contents of them, and to direct my proceedings in in this intricate business,
which instructions dictated by his Majesty's wisdom, this light will be
sufficient to direct my steps in the midst of an Egyptian darkness, which
does not only obscure the Horizon of this Province where I reside, but almost
the whole face of Europe, by reason of the great mists, which are cast
artificially in all men's eyes to cover the designs of those, who do presume,
that they have in all places arbitrium Belli et Pacis.

I most humbly crave pardon of your Honor, if you do not receive my answer so
soon as perhaps you might expect. For yours having stayed upon the way a month
and a day, did not come to my hands until the 20th. of August Still. Vet. At
which time it was brought unto me by Mr. Rowlandson, whom I had dispatched into
Germany, to advertize those Princes of the motion made to the Duke of Savoy for
the passage of Spanish forces through his State. My Lord of Doncaster under
whose Cover I received that Letter, did not think fit to send it to me by an
express messenger for fear of increasing the suspicion of some in those parts,
who are jealous that his Majesty does favor the Duke of Savoy more then they
could wish. And I must confess, that the same reason induced me likewise to
send that Gentleman of the Duke of Savoy's into Germany, rather then any
servant of mine own, for fear least allees, and vennes of messagers betwixt my
Lord of Doncaster, and me in these doubtful times might so far injealous the
contrary party, as might prejudice the service of his Majesty in that
Negotiation.

The instructions that your Honor has been pleased to give me from his
Majesty, concerning my treating with 52. 52. c. the Duke of Savoy. 93. a. the
Bohemians. 95 a. the Emperor Ferdinand. 51. a. the King of England. 97. a.
Germany. 99. a. the King of the Romans. 71. c. the Agent of England. 51. b. the
Prince Palatine. 52. b. the Marquess Brandenbergh. 54. b. the Marquess
Auspach. 50. b. the Princes of the Union. 56 b. Count Ernest Mansfelt.
c. in favor of 93. a. having reference unto the inclination of 95. a. to
peace, or the probability of defense to be made by 93. a. I held it more safe
for me to govern my self by such informations of the state of those affairs as
I have received from the favor of the 1. 32. 7. 5. 47. 48. 2. 10. 40. 45. of
51. a. in 97. a. And for the better justification of my proceedings, I send
your Honor here enclosed the Copy of his Letter unto me, wherein you will
see, that I have no reason as yet to spend the name of 51. a. in favor of 93.
a. nor to imbargue 52. c. in a business, which may draw a great charge, and
envy upon himself, and not much advantage the 93. a. I must confess that the
50. b. in general, and particularly the 54. b. and the 41. 45. 23. 34. 9. 12.
of 5. 35. 22. 4. 30. 50. have represented the state of those affairs at this
present unto 52. b. in a manner not only different from the advertisements
sent me, but almost contrary, and they do seem not only to be confident of the
prevailing of 93. c. but likewise they continue to give hope that the 10. 51.
29. 15. of 48. 3. 59. 15. will concur with 51. b. and 52. b. in the 12. 30. 13.
9. 50. 27. 40. 35. of 99. a. But because I have reason to suspect that they
make relation of those affairs, rather as they wish they were, then as they be
indeed, and that their intention to draw somewhat from 52. c. toward the
succors of 93. a. I will forbear to join with them therein, until I can have
some better ground then their advertisements, which may be thought to savor of
partiality, and I have reason to be backward therein, because I know that 5^ c.
would presently take me eu mot, and put to the account of 51. a. that which he
is most willing to do of himself. I do not affirm this out of conjecture, but
upon good ground; for besides, that he did signify so much unto me at my
return out of England, I do know that within this fortnight he has sent unto
56. b. 3000. 41. 24. 48. 49. 40. 30. 47. in part of 42. 2. 60. 32. 15. 35. 50.
and in the conveyance of this 33. 39. 34. 35. 61. there was extraordinary
diligence used to conceal it from the knowledge of the 71. c. whereof no other
construction can be made, but that 52. c. would fain be entreated by 71. c. to
do that, which he has already a mind to do.

If upon more fresh Letters, which I expect from my Lord of Doncaster, I shall
find that the affairs there have changed face since the writing of his last
unto me, I will govern my self accordingly, as I shall receive warrant from him.

We are here at a stand, expecting with devotion the issue of the affairs of
Germany. The Army in the Kingdom of Naples is still retained, and no order
given, either for the dismissing of those Troops, or the employing them in any
service. Prince Philibert is at Messina with the Galleys, and has with him 10.
or 12000 men. The Ships and Gallions remain at Naples, and the Walloons,
Lombardes and Neapolitanes which should have come to Vado, are since their
disimbarquing again, quartered round the City of Naples. It is impossible to
guess what they mean to do; but the most probable conjecture is, that under
the color of suspecting the Duke of Ossuna, the Spaniards will keep their
potent Army on foot, and by that means keep all Italy in awe, and as it were
sub Ferula, and delude the reiterated promises and oaths that have passed by
them, to assure the Duke of Savoy and the Venetians, that they would dismiss
those Forces. The season is now past for any enterprise by Sea, so that Prince
Philibert must be forced to return without doing any thing. And many are of
opinion, that the Duke of Ossuna had secret order to counterfeit madness, and
to cross the Kings Commandment expressly to deprive Prince Philibert of the
honor which would have redounded unto him, if he had been possessed of the
absolute Command of so potent an Army. The Duke of Savoy on the other side,
would fain make you believe, that undoubtedly Ossuna has entertained
rebellious thoughts, and that if Don Octavio D'Arragona do not bring a good
answer out of Spain, he will break out into open contumacie. His demands of the
King of Spain are these:

First, That he may be continued in the Government four years longer.

Secondly, That he may be permitted to enter with his Fleet into the Gulf of
Venice, and to dispute his Majesty's Title to that Sea by the force of Arms.

Lastly, That in case the King of Spain will not let him Contest so far with
the Venetians, that there may then be sent him so much money out of Spain as
may license his Army, considering that the Kingdom of Naples is so far
exhausted, as that they cannot contribute any longer either to the maintaining,
or to the dismissing of those Forces.

The Venetians did lately chase a small Gallie of the Vicocchi, which was
entered into the Gulf to rob and spoil, and followed her unto the shoares of
Apuglia, where Ferlitick the Captain of those Thieves saved himself and the
most part of his fellows by flight into the mountains, but Signior Filippo
Belegno recovered the Gallie, and carried her away as a prize, having found two
banners displayed, the one with the arms of Spain, the other with the arms of
Ossuna; And not only a formal Patent and Commission to take any thing, that he
could from the Venetians, but some Letters likewise from some principal
Ministers of Ferdinand, wherein this Capo di Banditi is encouraged, and
requested to do the Venetians as much hurt and damage, as he might be able.
Now the Duke of Ossuna is fallen into a great rage with the Venetians, quod non
totum telum corpore acceperunt, and he does threaten to be revenged upon them
for not suffering these Vicocchie to rob and spoil their subjects.

The Duke of Savoy has done me the honor to entreat my company with him into
Savoy, whither he does purpose very shortly to go, that he may receive at the
confines of his estate, the Prince of Piedmount, and Madam his wife. And
because his request has the power of a command over me in Licitis, et
honestis, I must be enforced to pass the Mountains again at an unseasonable
time, before I have sufficiently refreshed my self after my last voyage, and I
know not whether I shall have the opportunity of writing unto your Honor again
before my going, which is uncertain, as depending upon the going of the Duke.
So with my hearty prayers unto Almighty God for the preservation of his
Majesty in health, and the prosperity of his Estate, in all humility I take
leave; And rest

Your Honors most faithfully to command, Isaac Wake.
Turin 27. September. 1619. 22. August. 1619.
Sir Isaac Wake to Mr. Secretary.
Right Honorable,
I Have received the Letter, wherewith your Honor has been pleased to favor
me, dated at White Hall the 27. of February, and having to my singular comfort
understood, that his Majesty has declared his gracious approbation of my
proceedings here, with the Duke of Savoy, and the Venetians. And I do with all
thankfulness acknowledge to receive that favor from the hand of your Honor,
as my only Gratum faciens --

I will not fail to govern my self precisely by the rule of those Instructions
which you have been pleased to give me. And as you have favored me with
passing your word for me, that I will not spend his Majesty's name without
particular Warrant, and direction; so will I promise faithfully to perform as
much, as you have undertaken for me, and both in this, as in all things else
you may assure your self, that his Majesty's revealed will, and that only,
shall be a Law unto me.

Your Honor will have understood by my former Dispatches, that the Duke of
Ossuna is re-confirmed in his Government of Naples: He has not (as far as I
can learn) any certain time prefixed, but is to remain there durante Regis been
-- placito; And when his Patent was presented unto him, he had likewise order
(which was delivered by word of mouth) that the King his Master did require him
immediately to dismiss all his Army, and to send the Walloons, and
Neapolitanes into Germany to the succors of the Emperor. The same party did
likewise signify unto him, that as the King of Spain had showed, to have a
care of the honor of the Duke of Ossuna in establishing him anew in that
Regencie, at this time, when the world had made some doubt, that his late
actions had not been conformable to the will and pleasure of his Master, so he
did expect that he should voluntarily, and of himself, ask leave to go into
Spain, and offer to give an account of all his proceedings. Which course, the
King did recommend unto him as most honorable, for the justification of his
own innocence, and the confusion of his enemies. This Message the said Duke
has wisely suppressed, and has published the Patent of his Confirmation,
without taking notice of the private Articles, which were annexed thereunto,
and delivered verbally. He does profess to understand very well, that in Spain
they wish him ill, and that their design is under the fair bait of this
establishing him in that Government, to make him swallow the hook of dismissing
his army, that so they may afterward dispose of him at their pleasure, when
he hall remain utterly disarmed. But his heart did not serve him to throw away
the scabbard when he had drawn his sword: and I am persuaded, that as in Spain
they will judge of his proceedings by the rule of Tacitus. Qui deliberant
desciverant: so he will repent of not having observed, that other Maxim, Aut
nunquam tents, Aut perfice. His best hope is, that Chi ha tempo ha vita, and
if he can make his peace at home upon any conditions, he will not much care to
turn honest, and change his dangerous designs into faithful service of his
Master. To play Le bon valett, he has now obeyed his Masters Commandment in
sending the Walloons and Nepolitans into Lombardie, and they are all so safely
arrived at Vado upon 19. Gallions, being in number 6. or 7000,

The landing of these troops, and their passing along the skirt of this State
does not only give a little jealousy to the Duke of Savoy, but put him
likewise to some Cost, and trouble. For as he does well know, how dangerous it
is to stand to the discretion of a reconciled enemy, so does he evidently see,
that their ill talent toward him, does not only continue, but increase; and
therefore to assure himself, and his State, he has caused at this present a
general muster to be made of all his Cavallarie, and trained Infanterie, which
he does send to the confines of his State, that way, which these newly landed
Troops are to pass. And although their order beto match to wards Swisserland,
and to pass that way into Germany, yet will this Prince stand upon his guard
until they are quite gone out of Lombardie, and has given order to the Count
Guido St. George in his absence, not to let him lodge in Monferrat upon any
terms whatsoever, nor to linger too long near the confine of this Province. He
has this reason to conclude, that the Spaniards wish him ill, because he does
see that they do mistrust him. For whereas they had a fair promise of the
passage for their army through this State, in virtue of ancient capitulations
betwixt the King of Spain, and the Duke of Savoy, they have chosen rather to
buy the passage at the hands of the Swisses at a very dear rate, then adventure
to take it here Gratis. Whereby it may appear unto all the world how little
confidence they have in this Prince, and how much they mistrust him for being
partiallie affected to the Prince Palatine, and all that party. Howsoever your
Honor does conceive, that the season of the year is too far passed for the
transportation of this army of the Spaniards into Germany, yet you will see
that necessity does make men strive with many inconveniences, for they must
pass whatsoever weather happen; and indeed the Alps are passable enough until
the months of January and February, if the Soldiers be well clothed, for
there is no danger but of cold, until the deluges of Snow which fall late do
shut up the passages.

Perhaps they will not find the passages of Suisserland so favorable as they
do conceive, and as is figured unto them, for they have bought it only of the
little Popish Cantons, without asking leave of the Seigniorie of Zurich, and
Berne, and it is to be supposed, that the State of Berne will take a hot
Alarm, considering that their controversy with Friburge is not accommodated,
and that the Governor of Millan has made offer unto those of Friburge, and the
little Cantons, of all this army for the defense of the Catholic religion in
the Bailiage of Eschalens, whereof I have given notice to our Signiorie of
Berne by an express Currier that they may have time to save themselves from a
surprise.

The voice does run current over all Italy, that the Duke of Parma is to
undertake a voyage shortly for the service of the King of Spain, but whither he
is to go they cannot tell; for some send him into Germany, others into
Flanders, and the most men into Spain. For all which discourse, I know no other
ground, but that his brother the Cardinal Farnese has asked leave of the Pope
to retire himself for a time to Parma, and I do imagine that the Speculativi
have concluded thereupon, that he is to govern the State in the absence of his
brother.

Prince Philibert having failed of the enterprise of Susa, did intend in his
scond setting out from Sicily, to meet with the Turkish Fleet and fight with
them. The first part of his design succeeded happily, for he had the good
fortune to encounter the whole Fleet between Zaat and Cephalonia, but finding
them more strong then he was aware, and well resolved to give him battle, he
was counseled to retire to Messina, where he is at this present, without
having effected any thing. The two armies of Venice, and the Turk, did likewise
meet on those Seas, not far from Corfu, but as soon as they did know each the
other, the two Generals, and all the principal Officers, did interchangeably
present one the other with wine, and Rinfres Camenti, and so much kindness
passed betwixt them, that the Vizier Bassa did offer to join his Fleet with the
Venetian, and to set upon the Spanish Armado, which charitable offer, the
Venetian General had so much christianity as to refuse with modest thanks.

Signiour Antonio Donato has sent a servant of his hither, who had the fortune
to arrive in an ill Conjuncture. For the Duke of Savoy having lately called
upon the Venetians for that money which is wanting in Signiour Donato's
account, they did excuse themselves upon his pleading not guilty, and did send
unto the Duke a Copy of his Letter written to the Senate, when he was yet
Ambassador, and not convicted. This Letter arrived here from Venice the very
day before Signiour Donato's servant, and if your Honor will be pleased to
cast an eye upon the Copy which I send here enclosed, you will not blame the
Duke of Savoy for refusing to give him audience, or to receive his Masters
Letters; for he does give the Duke the Lie three several times in that Letter,
which is strange language to be used of a Prince; and I do much wonder, that
the Venetians would upon any occasion whatsoever publish such a Petulancy,
committed by one, that was their Ambassador at that time.

He brought me a Letter from his Master of mere Ceremony, and Complement, and
had his principal address unto the Popes Nuntio in this Court, whereat I did
wonder somewhat formally at the first, as conceiving that in Congruity he ought
to have interrupted his Correspondence with the Popes Ministers, as long as he
does live under the protection of his Majesty; but when I understood, that the
Duke had lodged him in a prison, with an intent to send him to Venice, I was
glad that I had so little to do with him, and the Nuntio so much.

The Duke of Savoy does assure himself, that when his Majesty shall have
perused this Letter of Signiour Donato's, he will withdraw his countenance, and
protection from him, and account him unworthy of any favor, for having wronged
in so high a degree a Prince, that is so much a servant of his Majesty.

I may not likewise conceal from his Majesty's knowledge, that Signiour Donato
has not been wanting to ruin (as far as he could) Padre Paolo, and Fulgentio
in Venice; two persons that have done his Majesty very long and faithful
service, as by an enclosed Paper, your Honor may see, which is an abstract of
a Letter written from Fulgentio.

The Prince of Piedmont having made a posting voyage hither to receive his
Fathers blessing, before he bring his Lady in the Country, I did present unto
him his Majesty's Letters of Congratulation, whereunto he has returned an
answer, which I send here enclosed. So with my hearty prayers unto Almighty God
for the preservation of his Majesty's Person in all happiness and prosperity,
in all humility I take leave, And rest

Your Honors Most faithfully to command, Isaac Wake.
Turin 5/15 of October. 1619.
Sir Isaac Wake to the Duke.
Right Honorable, and my very singular good Lord,
IN these parts we have nothing of moment worthy the relating, the storms which
do vex our neighbors round about us keeping us here in calm, and quiet, as it
were per antiperistasin. Howsoever I am of opinion, that we shall enter into
the Dance either actively or passively before the next summer pass over. All
over Italy there does reign a great dearth, which did lately cause in Naples a
dangerous Cullevation of the people against the Cardinal Zappata Viceroy, who
had somewhat to do to save himself from the fury of the Popolarzo.

In the State of Millan likewise some insurrections were beginning to be made
in Novarra, Allessandria, and Cremona, both for want of bread, and for the
insolency of the Garrison Soldiers, who having had no pay for many months,
did commit many violent excesses upon the people, which did drive them into
despair; but those Commotions were appeased betimes, and no great matter of
Consideration has ensued, although there are some neighbor Princes who did
stand aux Escoutes, and would be ready to have acted a troublesome part, if the
scene had been ready.

The Duke of Parma has imprisoned his natural son Don Octavio, the mystery
whereof is not well known, but it must needs be for some great matter, because
he did make show to love him passionately. The Infanta Isabella of Modena has
been in danger of her life, by being surprised with a violent fever, near the
time of her childbirth: from hence the Duke of Savoy sent his Physicians to
help her, and we hear now that she has escaped that danger, and is safely
delivered of a daughter.

Count Mansfelt is grown formidable, and does daily increase in strength and
reputation. Although he has hitherto entitled his arms unto the service of
the King of Bohemia, yet I believe he will neither disarm, nor suspend his
arms, when he shall be commanded so to do by that King. For being now
entertained by the State of Venice with an honorable provision of 12000 Crowns
per annum in peace during his life, and the pay of 10000 Foot, and 2000 horse
in the time of War, he will try what he can do for the infranchising of the
Grisons, when the affairs of the Palatinate shall be accommodated. And if the
Austriaci do not bend all their forces against him very speedily, and break his
Army before it grow more strong, he is like to give them a greater blow then
they have had these many years. That which he has gotten already in Alsatia,
is much more worth, then the lower Palatinate; and although he has hitherto
made those people to swear Allegiance unto the King of Bohemia, yet when the
said King shall make his peace with the Emperor, it may be doubted whether
Count Mansfelt will resign up what he has conquered; and it is thought, that
he will either keep it for himself, or entitle some other Prince thereunto. The
Austriaci were never so matched as with Count Mansfelt, for he is a perpetual
motion, and does not stand upon the defensive (as others have done hitherto,
and lost by the bargain) hut he is always setting upon them, and does make War
at their cost; let them take heed how they proceed with him; for he, who has
nothing to lose, is ready to hazard the Paquet upon all occasions; And if he do
chance to overthrow them once in battle, they will run danger, or lose all that
they have in Germany. Let me in all humility beseech your Lordship to continue
me in the honor of your good opinion, and to favor me with your honorable
protection, especially with a good word to my Lord Treasurer, for the sending
me some relief, without which I cannot possibly subsist, having for want of my
pay, consumed all that I had in the world. God Almighty increase upon your
Lordship all happiness and prosperity, as is unfainedly wished unto you by him
that is

Your Lordships most humble obliged Creature and Servant, Isaac Wake.
Turin 13/23. of Febr. 1621.
Sir Isaac VVakes Proposition for the King of Denmark.
IT seems that the Glory of this State, which at all times was great, does
shine brighter now adays; since that besides so many Neighboring Kings and
Princes, whereof some are in a made league with us, and some do keep a good
correspondence, and all a good intelligence with us. Now the friendship of your
Highness is sought by the mighty King of Denmark, a monarch of those nations,
that in time past have left their remembrance of their prowess in Italy,
France, Spain, and in whole Europe behind them. This Great King of the North,
who like a Second Atlas holds up the Artick-pole, rich in treasure, numerous in
men, dreadful for his invincible generosity and Courage, does here offer
himself unto your Highness. And acquainting you of his actions, does
confidently promise you to stand firm, and stout in the defense of the common
cause, if so be that he receive that assistance as he has reason to expect
from those, that are interested in the same cause. His Majesty of Denmark has
had from the King my Master, as much as can be given, and it is no small
matter, that his Majesty of great Britain does still continue the same
assistance, having withal still those great expenses, that are required for
the surety of his Realms, and for the offense of the common enemy.

His Majesty of France has also contributed to this good work somewhat, and
there is great hope, that he will bring forth in a short time some fit remedy
against this evil. The Lords States do as much as they are able. And the
Princes of Low Saxony do not want in their duties. There remains now, that
your Highness put also your powerful hand to this work, and with a vigorous
succor, worthy of your great heart do encourage all the rest to continue
their Emprese. The two Kings are not ignorant of the great sincerity wherewith
this most Excellent State, does observe the capitulations made with Allies of
the league, and that rather then to be wanting in things agreed upon, you have
surpassed in necessary provisions for the advancement of the designs, and that
you have not been partakers, nor agreers of the treaty made at Moncon. But that
you do continue to keep some forces in your Dominions, and likewise some troops
in the Valtoline for the effecting (as much as is in you) of what was first
thought fit, and of the agreement of the League.

And as that generous resolution and constancy of this State is never enough
praised, so there is great hope that you will not bring this same in the
reckoning of the two Kings, who never will miss to praise the wisdom and
generositie of this State, though not obliged for their particular for any
thing whatsoever done till now, either by the league in general, or by
whomsoever of the united in particular, because that the league was made two
years and more before his Majesty of great Britain broke with Spain, or that
the King of Denmark had declared himself. Since the time that these two Kings
are come to the Dance, your Highness has not levied one man, and the Forces
which you do yet keep, as they were not levied, so are they not maintained in
Contemplation of the two Kings, but only for the first reasons of the League.

The only thing here sought for is to go with a common pace, that those that
are now too heavily laden, may be supported by their friends, either by way of
diversion, or by way of assistance. And therefore your Highness and other
Princes are now requested to help, seeing there is small appearance of
diversion. And set the case, that the Peace between Spain and France should be
firm, would it not turn against the Common Cause? Italiae incendium ruina
Germaniae extinguere? To quench a little fire in Italy by the ruin of whole
Germany? In Chronical diseases Physicians do not so much respect the symptoms
and accidents as they do the causes of the evil.

The Valtoline, Palatinate, Hussia, Marchisat of Baden, Dukedom of Brunswick,
and so many other Countries attempted, and oppressed by the Spanish and
Austrian usurpation, are grievous and dangerous symptoms and accidents: but
the Cause, and fuel of the evil remains yet in the ambitious bowels of the
Spaniard, who now with spread sails goes on toward the universal Monarchy;
unless there be applied betimes some fit remedies, all topic remedies will do
but little good.

The King of Denmark does offer himself ready to apply such an issue, whereby
he may be brought back to terms of modesty, and with the assistance he does
expect from your Highness and other interessed Princes, he hops to bring his
good intent to pass. And being prodigal of his great Soul, there is no doubt
he will ever go back, unless he be forsaken.

Thus there remains the Common liberty almost in your hands, and if this most
excellent Senate resolves to give aid unto that King, that liberty will be
preserved. If you do forsake him, that will also be endangered, yea lost. I
therefore beseech your Highness to ponder well this matter, and to grant such
an assistance, as is requested by the King of Denmarks Ambassador.

Sir Henry Wootton to the Duk.
My most Noble Lord,
I Will be bold by this opportunity to give his Majesty through your Lordships
hands, an account of a Command which I had from him at Theobalds, about
sounding how the Venetian Ambassador stood satisfied with the late
determination touching his predecessor Donato.

I did visit the said Ambassador immediately at my return from the King, and
saluted him as by express Commandment; interjecting some words of mine own
gladness, that he had received contentment in this tender point, which would
signalize his beginnings. This I said, because in truth I had found him always
before the more passionate in it by some reflection upon himself. His answer
(after due thanks for his Majesty's gracious remembrance of him from abroad)
was, That for his own part, he was Contentissimo, and had represented things
home in the best manner. He hoped likewise it would be well tasted there also,
though with some doubt, because the State out of their own devotion toward his
Majesty might form a confidence of expecting more. I replied, that the King
upon the matter (if we consider disgrace) had done more then themselves: for he
was but once banished at Venice, and twice here; viz. once from the Verge of
the Court, and secondly, from London, which was as much as could be done with
preservation of National immunities, and more then would have been done at the
suit of any other Ambassador here resident, or perhaps of any of their own
hereafter if the like case shall occur. For (as I told him) it was the Kings
express will, that his particular respect to the republique, and to him in
this business should not be drawn into examples. With this point he was not a
little pleased for his own glory, and said, that indeed Mr. Secretary Nanton
had told him so. This was the sum of what passed between us, omitting
impertinencies. Let me end (my dear Lord) as I am bound in all the use, either
of my pen, or of my voice, with an humble and hearty acknowledgment of my great
obligations toward your Lordship, which will make me resolve, and in good
faith unhappy, till I can some way show my self

Your Lordships most thankful and faithful servant, Henry Wootton.
25th. of January, 1619.
Sir Henry Wotton to the Duke.
My most honored Lord, and Patron,
THese poor lines will be presented unto your Lordship by my Nephew (one of
your obliged servants) and withal some description (as I have prayed him) of my
long infirmities, which have cast me behind in many private, and often
interrupted even my public Duties; with which yet I do rather seek to excuse
some other defects of service then my silence toward your Lordship.

For to importune your Lordship seldom with my pen is a choice in me, and not a
disease, having resolved to live at what distance soever from your sight, like
one who had well studied before I came hither, how secure they are whom you
once vouchsafe any part of your love. And indeed I am well confirmed therein by
your own gracious lines: for thereby I see that your Lordship had me in your
meditation, when I scant remembered my self.

In answer of which Letter after some respite from mine own evils, I have
deputed my said Nephew to redeliver my fortune into your Noble hands, and to
assure your Lordship, that as it should be cheerfully spent at your Command if
it were present and actual (from whose mediation I have derived it) so much
more am I bound to yield up unto your Lordship an absolute disposition of my
hopes: But if it should please you therein to grant me any part of mine own
humor, then I would rather wish some other satisfaction, then exchange of
Office; yet even in this point likewise shall depend on your will, which your
Lordship may indeed challenge from me, not only by an humble gratitude, and
reverence due to your most worthy person, but even by that natural charity and
discretion, which I owe my self: For what do I more therein, then only remit
to your own arbitrament the valuation of your own goodness? I have likewise
committed to my foresaid Nephew some Memorials touching your Lordships familiar
service (as I may term it) in matter of art and delight.

But though I have laid these Offices upon another, yet I joy with mine own pen
to give your Lordship an account of a Gentleman, worthier of your love, then I
was of the honor to receive him from you.

We are now after his well spent travailes in the Towns of purer language,
married again till a second Divorce, for which I shall be sorry, whenever it
shall happen. For in truth (my good Lord) his conversation is both delightful,
and fruitful, and I dare pronounce, that he will return to his friends, as well
fraught with the best observations as any that has ever sifted this Country,
which indeed does need sifting; for there is both flower and bran in it.

He has divided his abode between Sienna and Rome: The rest of his time was
for the most part spent in motion. I think his purpose be to take the French
tongue in his way homewards, but I am persuading with him to make Bruxels his
Seat, both because the French and Spanish Languages are familiar there, whereof
the one will be after Italian a sport unto him, so as he may make the other a
labor: And for that the said Town is now the scene of an important Treaty,
which I fear will last till he come thither: but far be from me all ominous
conceit.

I will end with cheerful thoughts and wishes; beseeching the Almighty God to
preserve your Lordship in health, and to cure the public diseases. And so I
ever remain

Your Lordships Most devoted obliged servant, Henry Wotton.
Venice 29. of July, 1622.
Sir Henry Wotton to the Duke.
My most honored, and dear Lord,
TO give your Lordship occasion to exrecise your Noble nature, is withal one of
the best exercises of mine own duty, and therefore I am confident to pass a
very charitable motion through your Lordships hands, and mediation to his
Majesty.

There has long lay in the prison of Inquisition a constant worthy Gentleman,
viz. Mr. Mole; In whom his Majesty has not only a right as his subject, but
likewise a particular interest in the cause of his first imprisonment. For
having communicated his Majesty's immortal work touching the alleagiance due
unto Sovereign Princes with a Florentine of his familiar acquaintance, this man
took such impression at some passages, as troubling his conscience, he took
occasion at next shrift to confer certain doubts with his Confessor, who out of
malicious curiosity, enquiring all circumstances, gave afterward notice
thereof to Rome, whither the said Mole was gone with my Lord Rosse, who in this
story is not without blame; but I will not disquiet his Grave.

Now having lately heard, that his Majesty at the suite of I know not what
Ambassadors (but the Florentine amongst them is voiced for one) was pleased to
yield some releasement to certain restrained persons of the Roman faith: I have
taken a conceit upon it, that in exchange of his clemency therein, the Great
Duke would be easily moved by the Kings Gracious request, to intercede with the
Pope for Mr. Moles delivery. To which purpose if it shall please his Majesty
to grant his Royal Letters, I will see the business duly pursued. And so
needing no arguments to commend this proposition to his Majesty's goodness,
but his goodness it self, I leave it (as I began) in your Noble hand.

Now touching your Lordships familiar service (as I may term it) I have sent
the complement of your bargain upon the best provided and best manned ship,
that has been here in long time, called the Phoenix, and indeed the cause of
their long stay has been for some such sure vessel as I might trust. About
which since I wrote last to your Lordship, I resolved to fall back to my first
choice. So as now the one piece is the work of Titian, wherein the least figure
(viz the child in the Virgins lap playing with a bird) is alone worth the price
of your expense for all four, being so round, that I know not whether I shall
call it a piece of sculpture, or picture; and so lively, that a man would be
tempted to doubt, whether nature, or art had made it. The other is of Palma,
and this I call the speaking piece, as your Lordship will say it may well be
termed: for except the Damosel brought to David, whom a silent modesty did
best become, all the other figures are in discourse, and action. They come both
distended in their frames; for I durst not hazard them in rowles, the youngest
being 25. years old, and therefore no longer supple, and pliant. With them I
have been bold to send a dish of Grapes to your Noble Sister, the Countess of
Denbigh, presenting them first to your Lordships view, that you may be pleased
to pass your censure, whether Italians can make fruits as well as Flemmings,
which is the common Glory of their pencils. By this Gentleman, I have sent the
choicest Melon seeds of all kinds, which his Majesty does expect, as I had
order both from my Lord of Holdernesse, and from Mr. Secretary Calvert. And
although in my Letter to his Majesty (which I hope by your Lordships favor
himself shall have the honor to deliver together with the said seeds) I have
done him right in his due attributes; yet let me say of him farther as
Architects use to speak of a well chosen foundation, that your Lordship nay
boldly build what fortune you please upon him, for surely he will bear it
virtuously. I have committed to him for the last place a private memorial
touching my self, wherein I shall humbly beg your Lordships intercession upon a
necessary motive. And so with my heartiest prayers to heaven for your
continual health and happiness, I most humbly rest

Your Lordships Ever obliged devoted Servant, Henry Wotton.
Venice 2/15. December. 1622.
Postscript.
MY Noble Lord, it is one of my duties to tell your Lordship, that I have sent
a servant of mine (by profession a Painter) to to make a search in the best
towns through Italy for some principal pieces, which I hope may produce
somewhat for your Lordships contentment, and service.

Sir Henry Wotton to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
HAving some days by sickness been deprived of the comfort of your sight, who
did me so much honor at my last Access, I am bold to make these poor lines
happier then my self. And withal to represent unto your Grace (whose noble
Patronage is my refuge, when I find any occasion to bewail mine own fortune) a
thing which seems strange unto me. I am told (I know not how truly) that his
Majesty has already disposed the Venetian Embassage to Sir Isaac Wake; from
whose sufficiency if I should detract, it would be but an argument of my own
weakness.

But that which herein does touch me, I am loath to say in point of reputation,
surely much in my livelihood (as Lawyers speak) is that thereby after 17. years
of foreign in continual employment either ordinary or extraordinary, I am left
utterly destitute of all possibility to subsist at home, much like those Seal
Fishes which sometimes (as they say) oversleeping themselves in an ebbing
water, feel nothing about them but a dry shore when they awake. Which
comparison I am fain to seek among those Creatures, not knowing among men that
have so long served so gracious a Master, any one to whom I may resemble my
unfortunate bareness. Good my Lord, as your Grace has vouchsafed me some part
of your Love, so make me worthy in this of some part of your Compassion. So I
humbly rest

Your Graces, etc. Henry Wotton.

Sir Henry Wotton to the Duke.
My most Noble Lord,
WHen like that impotent man in the Gospel, I had lain long by the Pooles side,
while many were healed, and none would throw me in, it pleased your Lordship
first of all to pity my infirmities, and to put me into some hope of subsisting
hereafter. Therefore I most humbly and justly acknowledge all my ability and
reputation from your favor. You have given me encouragement, you have valued
my poor endeavors with the King, you have redeemed me from ridiculousnesse,
who had served so long without any mark of favor. By which arguments being
already and ever bound to be yours till either life or honesty shall leave me,
I am the bolder to beseech your Lordship to perfect your own work, and to draw
his Majesty to some settling of those things that depend between Sir Julius
Caesar and me, in that reasonable form, which I humbly present unto your
Lordship by this my Nephew; likewise your obliged servant, being my self by a
late indisposition confined to my Chamber, but in all estates such as I am

Your Lordships Henry Wotton.

Sir Henry Wotton to the Earl of Portland, Lord Treasurer.
My most honored Lord,
I Most humbly present (though by some infirmities a little too late) a
straying new years gift unto your Lordship, which I will presume to term the
cheapest of all that you have received, and yet of the richest Materials.

In short, it is only an image of your self drawn by memory from such
discourse as I have taken up here and there of your Lordship among the most
intelligent, and unmalignant men. Which to portraict before you, I thought no
servile office, but ingenious and real. And I could wish, that it had come at
that day, that so your Lordship might have begun the new year somewhat like
Platos definition of felicity with the contemplation of your own Idea. They
say, that in your foreign employments under King James your Lordship wan the
the opinion of a very able and searching judgment, having been the first
discoverer of the intentions against the Palatinate, which were then in
brewing, and masqued with much art, and that Sir Edward Conway got the Start of
you both in title, and employment, because the late Duke of Buckingham wanted
then for his own ends a Martial Secretary.

They say that under our present Sovereign you were chosen to the highest
charge at the lowest of the State, when some instrument was requisite of
indubitable integrity, and provident moderation, which atributes I have heard
none deny you.

They discourse thus of your actions, since, that though great exhaustations
cannot be cured without sudden remedies no more in a Kingdom then in a natural
body: yet your Lordship has well allayed those blustering clamours, wherewith
at your beginning, your house was in a manner daily besieged.

They note, that there has been made changes, but that none has brought to
the place a judgment so cultivated, and illuminated with various erudition as
your Lordship, since the Lord Burleigh under Queen Elizabeth, whom they make
your parallel in the ornament of knowledge.

They observe in your Lordships diverse remarkable combinations of virtues and
abilityes rarely sociable.

In the character of your aspect, a mixture of Authority, and Modesty. In the
faculties of your mind quick apprehension and solidity together, in the style
of your Port, and Trayn, as much dignity and as great dependencie as was ever
in any of your place, and with little noise, and outward form.

That your Table is very abundant, free, and noble, without Luxury; That you
are by nature no flatterer, and yet of greatest power in Court. That you love
magnificence and frugality both together. That you entertain your Guests and
Visitours with noble Courtesy, and void of Complement. Lastly, that you
maintain a due regard to your person and place, and yet no enemy to
froath-formalities.

Now in the discharge of your function, they speak of two things that have done
you much honor, viz. that you had always a special care to the supply of the
Navy; And likewise a more worthy and tender respect toward the Kings only
sister for the continual support from hence, then she has found before.

They observe your Greatness as firmly established as ever was any, of the
love (and which is more) in the estimation of a King who has so signalized his
Constancy: besides your additions of strength (or at least of luster) by the
noblest alliances of the Land.

Amongst these notes, it is no wonder if some observe, that between a good
willingness in your affections to satisfy all, and impossibility in the
matter, and yet an importunity in the persons, there does now and then, I know
not how, arise a little impatience, which must needs fall on your Lordship,
unless you had been cut out of a Rock of Diamonds, especially having been long
before so conversant with liberal studies, and with the freedom of your own
mind.

Now after this short Collection touching your most honored Person, I beseech
you give me leave to add likewise a little what men say of the Writer.

They say I want not your gracious good will toward me, according to the
degrees of my poor talent, and Travailes; but they say, I am wanting to my
self. And in good faith (my Lord) in saying so, they say the truth. For I am
condemned I know not how by nature to a kind of unfortunate bashfulnesse in
mine own business, and it is now too late to put me in a new Furnace.

Therefore, It must be your Lordships proper work, and not only your Noble,
but even your charitable goodness, that must in some blessed hour remember me.
God give your Lordship many healthful and joyful years, and the blessing of
that Text Beatus qui attendit ad attenuatum. And so I remain with all humble
and willing heart

At your Lordships command, Henry Wotton.

Sir Richard Weston to the Duke.
May it please your Lordship,
I Fear I have taken too much of that liberty of not writing, you were pleased
to allow me by Sir George Goring, but I hope your Lordship will measure my
devotion to serve you by no other rule then your own interest and desert. For
as I understand by Sir George Goring how often I come in your thoughts, and how
great a part I have in your Cares; so is there no man to whom I would more
willingly give daily account of my self then to your Lordship, to whose grace
and favor I owe so much.

I forbear to trouble your Lordship with any relation of business, because I
presume your Lordship is acquainted with all my dispatch, and it is not long
since I entreated my Lord Treasurer to tell your Lordship what I thought of
things then. I have yet little reason to change my opinion.

And if your Lordship please to know the state of things now, I have sent this
Gentleman the Bearer hereof especially to do your Lordship reverence in my
name, and to give you full information. For my return or stay, I humbly submit
it to his Majesty's pleasure.

Though this Negotiation be like to spin it self out into much length, I weigh
not my own interest. I shall willingly be there, where I shall be thought most
able to do his Majesty service. And so entreating that I may be continued in
that good opinion and grace, wherein your Lordships own affection, not any
merit of mine has placed me, I humbly kiss your hands; And remain

Your Lordships Faithful and devoted servant, Rich. Weston.
Bruxels 26. June, 1622.
Sir Richard Weston to the Duke
My very good Lord,
I Have understood by my Lord Treasurer the way you have made with his Majesty
for my calliing home, for which this present does give your Lordship most
humble thanks, though I have forborne to press or solicit it, because I would
approve my obedience to his Majesty, and take away from them all occasion, who
otherwise might have accused my departure, and imputed the want of success
here to my want of patience to expect an answer.

I have almost in all my Dispatches since we entered into this Treaty, signified
what opinion I had of their proceedings here, and my chief comfort was, that
whatsoever the success were, that the clearness of his Majesty's intentions
would appear to the whole world, and that the failing is not of his side, which
I think is manifest enough: for notwithstanding that his Majesty has followed
them in all their desires, and the Prince Electour has conformed himself to
what was demanded, that the Count Mansfelt, and Duke of Brunswick, the
pretended obstacles of the Treaty, are now with all their Forces removed. No
face of an enemy in the Palatinate, but his Majesty's power in the Garrisons;
All other places repossessed which Mansfelt had taken. No cause of continuing
any War now, nor any cause of jealousy or fear for the future, considering his
Majesty's fair and honorable offers: yet are they so far from a cessation,
that they are fallen upon Heidelbergh, and either want the will, or power to
remove the siege. And all I can get is two Letters of entreaty from her
Highness to the chiefs of the Emperor to proceed no further; and after some
18. days since I made my proposition for the Cessation, I have yet no answer:
so that being able to raise no more doubts, they make use of delays. I have
said, and done, and used all diligences within my power to bring forth better
effects, and can go no farther; and therefore I humbly beseech your Lordship
that I may have leave to return, when I shall hear that they will not remove
the siege at Heidelbergh. For their pretending to restore all, when all is
taken, is a poor comfort to me, and as little honor to his Majesty; and how
far they are to be believed in that, is to be examined more exactly then by
writing, by weighing how the weak hopes given me here, agree with the strong
assurances given by my Lord Digbie out of Spain.

I hope therefore his Majesty will be pleased to think it reasonable to speak
with me, and as your Lordship has ever been a happy and gentle star to me; so
have I now more need of your favorable aspect then ever, that his Majesty may
receive my obedience as a sacrifice, and interpret well of all my endeavors,
what success so ever I bring home with me. Wherein humbly entreating your
Lordships wonted grace and favor, I humbly kiss your hands, and vow unto you
the faithful observance of

Your Lordships Most humble and devoted Servant, Richard Weston.
Bruxels 3d. of September. 1622.
Sir Richard Weston to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
YOur Grace shall add much to the infinite favors I have received from you to
read a few lines from me, much more to vouchsafe them an answer, which I am the
more bold to beg, and the more hopeful to obtain, because I understand by Sir
George Goring, that howsoever I have had many ill offices done me, your Grace
will not easily depart from that opinion, you have hitherto conceived of me,
for which I humbly thank your Grace, and entreat the continuance of it no
longer, then I shall be able to make good the integrity of my heart unto you.
But that, which with all humility, and importunity I sue for at your Graces
hands, is to let me know my Accuser, and if your Grace think it unseasonable
now, that I may have a promise to know him at your return. Whatsoever, or how
great soever he be, (though respect, and reverence of those eyes which shall
read these lines make me forbear ill language now) I shall dare to tell him,
whatsoever becomes a wronged innocence to say. In the mean time, I despise him,
if there be any such that has accused me since your Graces departure, to have
done, or said, or given way to the hearing of any thing that may be wrested to
the impeachment of my faith and sincere professions toward your Grace; and yet
till it come to the trial, I rely (as I wrote to Sir George Goring) no less
upon your Graces wisdom and goodness, then my own innocence, that such
Calumnies shall not lessen the estimation I had with you; wherein being most
confident praying for the continuance and increase of your Graces honor and
happiness, I remain

Your Graces Most humble and devoted servant, Richard Weston.
17. July, 1623.
Sir Richard Weston to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
I Humbly thank your Grace for the Message I received from you yesterday by Mr.
Packer. And withal I humbly beseech your Grace to believe, that no man shall
condemn me more, then I would my self, if I had omitted any possible diligence
either to interest, or acquaint your Grace with the Commission of the
Treasury. Wherein I appeal to Mr. Secretary Conway, who first declared his
Majesty's pleasure unto me, which I could not ascribe more to any Cause, then
your Graces favor, and good opinion of me. And at my last being with your
Grace, I began to speak with you of it, but finding your Grace to grow into
some indisposition, I forbore, thinking it not only incivilitie, but a violence
to have spoken any thing of my self to your Grace at that time. This I
entreated Sir George Goring to relate unto your Grace, and withal to renew the
professions of my love and reverence to your Graces person, which I had rather
make good by real performances then by words, and therefore I will trouble your
Grace no longer upon this subject.

I am now extremely importuned by the Earl of Middlesex to solicit his
Majesty for the first testimony of his gracious disposition toward him. And
your Grace remembers, that in the beginning of his Lordships troubles, his
Majesty commanded me to deliver unto his Majesty, whatsoever his Lordship
should petition of him.

Now I humbly beseech your Grace to direct me what to do: His Lordship sues for
his enlargement, and I know desires to derive that favor from his Majesty by
your Graces mediation. And I am careful to perform all duties, my obedience to
his Majesty, my respect to your Grace, and my care of him (that relieth upon
me) being in affliction. And therefore I humbly beseech your Grace to vouchsafe
me an answer to this particular, because his Majesty goes from hence to
morrow, and the Earl of Middlesex will languish with expectation till he
receive some comfort from him. And so continually praying for the increase of
your Graces health, I remain

Your Graces Most humble servant, Richard Weston.
29. May, 1624.
Sir Richard Weston to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
I Have according to his Majesty's Command signified to me by Mr. Secretary
Conway, delivered to the Earl of Middlesex his Majesty's pleasure concerning
his Fine. The news of it did extremely dismay him, as being far contrary to his
expectation. He used not many words; but thereof I having given Mr. Secretary
a particular account in answer of the charge I received from his Majesty, I
will not trouble your Grace with the repetition of them.

The chief cause of this unto your Grace is, to acquaint your Grace with a
short Dialogue that passed between Mr. Brett and me touching his Pension.

He sent his man to me this week to demand it; to whom I made this answer, That
the charge of the Progress being settled, I would consider of the payment of
his Masters pension amongst others, before which time I could not in that case
give satisfaction to any. He went away with this answer, and immediately after
(within less then a quarter of an hour) Mr. Brett himself came to me, and asked
me at the first word, Whether I had any Command to stay his Pension. I replied,
No other command then the want of money. He told me, That the rest of his
fellows were paid: I said it was true, I was to have care of them that
immediately, followed his Majesty, when I was forced to entreat others to have
patience till more moneys came in. He asked me again, Whether I had any
Command to stay his? I answered as before; wherewith he parted from me, as it
seemed, not pleased.

This peradventure is not worth troubling your Grace withal, but that because
his Majesty was pleased to acquaint me with his just indignation against him
at VVansteed, I would be glad to receive some direction, what answer I shall
make upon his next importunity. And so humbly entreating your Grace ever to
number me amongst those that do most honor and pray for you, I remain

Your Graces Most humble and faithful servant, Richard Weston.
Chelsey 23. July, 1624.
Sir Richard Weston to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
I did scarce esteem my Letter worthy your Graces reading, much less worthy
your pains to answer it. It is my duty upon all occasions great and small, to
pay unto your Grace those observances I owe you. And when your Grace vouchsafes
to take knowledge of them, it is your favor, and therefore I humbly thank
your Grace for vouchsafing an answer.

I have according to his Majesty's commandment signified by your Grace unto
me, taking the best order I can about the Wardship of the Lady Cravens Son.
The most of the Officers of the Court of Wards being out of the town, I have
spoken with Sir Benjamin Ruddier, who assured me, that there is nothing yet
done, nor can be, till there be a master, or that the Officers meet together,
and that he will take care that nothing shall be done to the prejudice of his
Majesty.

And for the more Caution, I have commanded the Clerk of Court, if any man
petition, or sue about the Wardship, that there be no proceeding till he
acquaint me with it. This is all can be done for the present, and thereof I
think fit to give your Grace account, in answer of the charge I have received
from his Majesty. And so humbly craving leave to kiss your Graces hands, I
wish your Grace continual increase of honor and happiness, and remain

Your Graces Most humble and faithful Servant, Richard Weston.
Chelsey 12th August 1624.
Sir Francis Cottington to the Duke.
May it please your Honor,
MY last unto you was of the 23. of September by Mr. Berrie, who that day
departed from hence toward England, with intention to take passage by Sea from
St. Sebastians: and although I conceive, that this conveyance will be much
speedier (it being by an extraordinary dispatched for Flanders) yet for that I
hold the other to be sure, I will not forbear to trouble your Honor with any
repetition of that dispatch.

The strength and boldness of the Pirates (or rather of the Turks) is now grown
to that hieght both in the Ocean, and Mediterranean seas, as I have never known
any thing to have wrought a greater sadness and distraction in the Court, then
the daily advice thereof. Their whole Fleet consists of 40. Sail of tall ships,
of between 200. and 400, tuns a piece; Their Admiral of 500. tuns. They are
divided into 2. Squadrons, the one of 18. Sail remaining before Malaga (in
sight of the City) the other about the Cape St. Marie, which is between
Lisbone, and Sevil. That Squadron within the Straights entered the rode of
Mostil (a Town by Malaga) wherewith their ordnance, they beat down a part of
the Castle, and had doubtless taken the town, but that from Granado there came
Soldiers to succor it; yet they took there diverse ships, and amongst them 3.
or 4. of the west part of England. Two bigg English ships they drove on shore,
not past four Leagues from Malaga; and after they went on shore also, and burnt
them, and to this day they remain before Malaga, intercepting all ships, that
pass that way, and absolutely prohibiting all trade into those parts of Spain.
The other Squadron at the Cape St. Marie does there the like, intercepting all
shipping whatsoever. They lately met with seven sail of English ships, (all of
London as I take it) but laden only with pipestaves, which they had taken on
the Coast of Ireland by the way. Five of these, viz. the Marie Anne, the Marie
and John, the Rebecca, and Gibbs of Sandwich, and one John Cheyney of London
they took, and the other two escaped. They robbed them only of their victuals,
their Ordnance, and of some sayls, and so let them go, but in their company was
also taken a great Ship of Lubeck, said to be very rich, which they still keep
with all the men. They have few or no Christians aboard them, but all either
Turks, or Moors, and the most part are of those, which of late years were
turned out of Spain for Moriscos. They attend (as it seems) and as themselves
report to them that have been aboard them (the coming of the West Indian Fleet,
which is now very near.) But from hence they have commanded the Armada (which
was divided into three Squadrons) to be joined together, and advice is brought
that it is so, and now consists of twenty strong ships; Don John Faxardo (the
General) has also express order to fight with the Pirates, not admitting any
excuse whatsoever, but the common opinion is here, that we will be able to do
them little harm, because his ships are of great burden, and they will be able
to go from him at their pleasure. And the other Squadron within the Straights
will always be able to secure their retreat thither. I doubt not but in my
next dispatch, I shall be able to tell your Honor what Don John Faxardo either
has or will do to them. If this year they safely return to Argier (especially
if they should take any of the Fleet) it is much to be feared, that the King of
Spains forces by Sea will not be sufficient to restrain, them hereafter, so
much sweetness they find by making prize of all Christians whatsoever. The
Secretary of the Council of war, has hereupon discoursed much unto me, and by
him I perceive, that here is an intention, to move his Majesty (the King our
Master) that he will be pleased to join some of his Sea-forces (upon good
terms) with this King, for the suppressing of these Pirates, if they should
hereafter grow, and increase as hitherto they have done. Seeing they now
profess themselves the common enemies of Christendom. Many reasons he gave me,
that he thought might move his Majesty thereunto; but that whereon for my part
I most reflect is, that these courses of the Pirates, do but exercise the forces
of the King of Spain by Sea, and put an obligation on him by all means to
strengthen, and increase his Armada, and keep in practice his Sea-souldiers,
without doing him any great harm, for that the greatest damage will always
fall upon the Merchants that trade into those parts (of which the English will
ever be the greatest number, and the greatest losers) And as for the taking of
his Fleet, it is not to be imagined, for that besides, that they come very
strong (consisting of 50 great ships, of which eight are Gallions of war) they
shall always be meet, and guarded by the Armada. Your Honor may be pleased to
acquaint his Majesty with what I here write, for I perceive it is expected,
that I should advertize what the Secretary has discoursed to me, which I
would have done more at large; but I am straightned with want of time. Yet I
may not forbear to advertize your Honor, that the said Secretary told me
withal, that the last year the States desired leave of this King for certain
ships of war (which they had armed to Sea against Pirates) might have safe
recourse into these parts, which was accordingly granted them, but that instead
of offending the Pirates, the same ships sold in Argeir as much Powder, and
other warlike provision (especially powder) unto the Turks, as furnished the
foresaid Fleet which they have now at Sea, a thing which is here (he says)
very ill taken. I doubt not but from Piemount your Honor has better
advertizement (at least more speedier) then I can give you from hence, yet have
I thought it fit to advertize you, that in a late ambush, which the Duke of
Savoy had laid, at Don Pedro de Tolledo's entrance into Piemount, the Maestro
de Campo of the Spanish army was slain; the Son of the Prince of Astoli was
hurt: so was the Prince of Morveles (who serves this King there) and many other
Captains, and Gentlemen of note slain and hurt. They here say that the number
of men Don Pedro lost was but few, but their custom is to dissemble their
losses, howsoever it is to be conceived, that when so many principal men were
touched, the common Soldiers could not well escape.

At Lisbone there is arrived two Caracks, and a Gallion from the East Indies,
the Caracks very rich, and much richer then in former years, but (as in a
former Letter I advertised you) two others as rich as they, and that should
have come in company with these, were cast away coming home.

Don Roderigo Calderon (now the Marquess de Las Siete Iglesias) is suddenly
commanded from this Court, and confined to a small Village, and Judges are
appointed to examine by what means he is so suddenly grown to so great an
estate (which in my time is risen from nothing to above 60000. Ducats a year
rent, besides an infinite treasure in movables) and doubtless some heavy
sentence will fall upon him, for he has many enemies, and I understand that
the Duke of Lerma has much withdrawn his favor.

New supplies of Soldiers are here raised for the Governor of Millan, and 30.
Companies are ready to be embarked at Valentia, where the Galleys attend them.

Here is lately come hither one who calls himself Sir James Mackonel a
Scotchman, and says he is Cousin german to the Earl of Arguile: I have not
seen him, but I hear he discourses of his breaking out of the Castle of
Edenborough, of the unjustnesse of his imprisonment there, of his integrity in
the Popes Religion, and so desires to be entertained into this Kings service,
which doubtless he shall obtain if he can make it here be believed, that he
has a true fugitives heart.

My Lord Rosse is now much hearkened after, and they think he stays very long.
By the ordinary (God willing) I shall write again to your Honor. And so for
this time I humbly take my leave

Your Lordships to be Commanded, Fran. Cottington.
Madrid the first of October. 1616. Still. Vet.
The Lord Viscount Rochfort to the Duke of Buckingham.
My Lord,
I Have received great wrongs about my Lord of Oxford by reports, which can
find no author: yet have they wrought such impressions in the hearts of some,
that it is hard to remove those Calumniations: for diverse are possessed, that I
am to be his accuser, which is so strange, and so maliciously bruited, that it
is somewhat suspected; yet know I not any one particular, for which he is in
the Tower, neither if I knew any such slip (in so noble a person as might
deserve the Kings displeasure) would my nature give me leave to play the
Informer, except it nearly concerned the safety, or the honor of my King, and
then should my discovery be public to the face, and not private behind the
back, for that I account too base to be found faulty in.

Sorry I am to be so much as suspected, but since ill disposed persons will
raise ill rumors without any ground, the cleernesse of my heart is sufficient
content unto me; and as my heart has been always most faithful and watchful
to do you service; so good my Lord, let me entreat you, that for my sake, my
Lord of Oxford may receive some testimonies of your great favor for his speedy
enlargement, and that it may appear, you are the more willing to do it, for my
earnest entreaty. My Lord, you shall not only hereby oblige all my Lord of
Oxford's friends, but likewise the Lady Diana's, who does lose a great deal of
precious time by my Lords imprisonment, and therefore let all be arguments to
excite your noble heart to procure his freedom. And so I kiss your hands, and
rest

More yours then his own, H. R.

Postscript.
PRay make all haste from Spain, for neither are your pleasures and contents so
great there, as you may find them here, neither have you so faithful friends
there as you deserve; but sure I am you have many false ones. For I have work
enough both in Court and City to falsify their reports of you; yea some of
them (about women) very base ones, and much tending to your great dishonor.
And it goes current among very great ones, that the Prince has been somewhat
displeased with you of late. I have sent you another Letter of larger contents,
and I should be glad to hear from you.

King James to Pope Gregory 15th. 30. September, 1622.
James by the Grace of God King of great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the faith, etc. To the most Holy Father Pope Gregory the the 15th.
greeting, and all manner of Felicity.
Most Holy Father,
YOur Holiness will perhaps marvel, that we differing from you in point of
Religion should now first salute you with our Letters. Howbeit such is the
trouble of our mind for these calamitous discords and bloudsheds, which for
these late years by past, have so miserably rent the Christian World, and so
great is our care, and daily solicitude to stop the course of these growing
evils betimes, so much as in us lies, as we could no longer abstain,
considering that we all worship the same most blessed Trinity, nor hope for
salvation by any other means, then by the blood and merits of our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus; but breaking this silence to move your Holiness by these
our Letters friendly and seriously, that you would be pleased together with us
to put your hand to so pious a work, and so worthy of a Christian Prince.

It is truly to be wished, and by all means to be endeavored, that this
mischief creep on no farther, but that these storms at the last ceasing, and
the rancor being removed, by which they were at the first raised, the hearts of
these Princes, whom it any way concerns, may be reunited in a firm and
unchangeable friendship, and as much as may be knit together in stricter
obligations then before, one unto another.

This we have always had in our desires, and to bring it to pass, have not
hitherto spared any labor, or pains, not doubting but your Holiness out of
your singular piety, and for the credit and authority that you have with the
parties, both may and will further this work in an extraordinary manner. No way
can any man better merit of the state of Christendom, which if it shall take
the desired effect in your days, and by your assistance your Holiness shall
worthily reap the glory and the reward due to so excellent a work.

That which remains for us further to say concerning this matter, this
Gentleman our Subject George Gage will deliver unto you more at large. Praying
your Holiness, that you will give him in all things full credence and belief,
beseeching Almighty God from our heart to preserve you in safety, and to
grant you all other happiness.

From our Palace at Hampton Court the last of September. 1622.

Pope Gregory the 15th. to the Prince of Wales.
Most Noble Prince, Health and light of Divine Grace, etc.
GReat Britain abounding with worthy men, and fertile virtues, so that the
whole earth is full of the glory of her renown, induces many times the
thoughts of the great Shepherd to the consideration of her praises. In regard
that presently in the infancy of his Church, the King of kings vouchsafed to
choose her with so great affection for his inheritance, that almost it seems
there entered into her at the same time the Eagles of the Roman Standard, and
the Ensigns of the Cross. And not few of her Kings indoctrinated in the true
knowledge of Salvation gave example of Christian piety to other Nations, and
after-ages, preferring the Cross to the Scepter, and the defense of Religion
to the desire of Command. So that meriting heaven thereby (the Crown of eternal
bliss) they obtained likewise upon earth the luster, and glorious ornaments of
sanctity. But in this time of the Brittanicks Church, how much is the case
altered? yet we see that to this day the English Court is fenced and guarded
with moral virtues, which were sufficient motives to induce us to love this
Nation, it being some ornament to the Christian name, if it were likewise a
defense and sanctuary of Catholic virtues.

Wherefore the more the glory of your most Serene Father, and the property of
your natural disposition delights us, the more ardently we desire, that the
gates of Heaven should be opened unto you, and that you should purchase the
universal love of the Church. For whereas, that the Bishop Gregory the Great
of most pious memory introduced amongst the English people, and taught their
Kings the Gospel, and a reverence to the Apostolical Authority, we much
inferior to him in virtue, and sanctity, as equal in name, and height of
dignity, it is reason we should follow his most holy steps, and procure the
salvation of those Kingdoms, especially (most Serene Prince) there being
great hopes offered to us at this time of some successeful issue of your
determination.

Wherefore you having come to Spain and the Court of the Catholic King, with
desire to match with the house of Austria, it seemed good to use most
affectionatetly to commend this your intent, and to give clear testimony, that
at this time your person is the most principal care that our Church has. For
seeing you pretend to match with a Catholic Damosel, it may easily be
presumed, that the ancient seed of Christian piety, which so happily
flourished in the minds of British Kings, may by Gods Grace reverberate in your
breast. For it is not probable, that he, that desires such a wife, should abhor
the Catholic religion, and rejoice at the overthrow of the holy Roman
Church. To which purpose we have caused continual prayers to be made, and most
vigilant orisons to the Father of Lights for you (fair flower of the Christian
world, and only hope of great Britain) that he would bring you to the
possession of that most Noble inheritance, which your Ancestors got you by the
defense of the Apostolic authority, and destruction of monsters of haerisies.
Call to memory the times of old; ask your forefathers, and they will show you
what way leads to heaven, and perceiving what path mortal Princes pass to the
Heavenly Kingdom, behold the Gates of heaven open. Those most holy Kings of
England, which parting from Rome accompanied with Angels, most piously
reverenced the Lord of Lords, and the Prince of the Apostles in his Chair.
Their works and examples are mouths wherewith God speaks, and warns you,
that you should imitate their customs in whose Kingdoms you succeed.

Can you suffer that they be called Heretics, and condemned for wicked men,
when the faith of the Church testifies, that they reign with Christ in Heaven,
and are exalted above all the Princes of the Earth, and that they at this time
reached you their hands from that most blessed Country, and brought you safely
to the Court of the Catholic King, and desire to turn you to the womb of the
Roman Church; wherein praying most humbly with most unspeakable groans to the
God of mercy for your salvation, to reach you the arms of Apostolical charity
to embrace most lovingly your children, so often desired, and to point out as
it were with a finger the blessed hopes of Heaven. And truly you could do no
act of greater comfort to all Nations of Christendom, then to return the
possession of those most Noble Isles to the Prince of the Apostles, whose
authority for so many ages was held in England for the defense of the Kingdom,
and divine Oracle, which will not be uneasy to do if you open your breast
(upon which depends the prosperity of those Kingdoms) to God who is knocking.
And we have so great desire of the honor and exaltation of your Royal Name,
that we wish, that you should be called through thee whole world (together with
your most Serene Father) the Freer of Great Britain, and restorer of her
ancient Religion. Whereof we will not lose all hopes, putting them in mind in
whose hands the hearts of Kings lie, and he that rules all nations of the
world, by whose Grace we will with all possible diligence labor to effect it.
And you cannot choose but acknowledge in these Letters the care of our
Apostolical charity to procure your happiness, which it will never repent us
to have written, if the reading thereof shall at leastwise stir some sparks of
Catholic religion in the heart of so Great a Prince, who we desire may enjoy
Eternal comfors, and flourish with the Glory of all virtues. Given in Rome in
the Palace of St. Peter the 20. of April 1623. In the third of our Pontificado.

The Princes answer to the Popes Nuntio that brought him this Letter.
I Kiss his Holiness Feet for the favor and honor he does me, so much the
more esteemed, by how much the less deserved of me hitherto. And his Holiness
shall see what I do hereafter, and I think my Father will do the like. So that
his Holiness shall not repent him of what he has done.

The Prince of Wales his Reply to the Popes Letter.
Most Holy Father,
I Received the Dispatch from your Holiness with great content, and with that
respect which the piety and care wherewith your, Holiness writes, does
require: It was an unspeakable pleasure to me to read the generous exploits of
the Kings my predecessors, in whose memory, posterity has not given those
praises and Elogies of honor as were due to them: I do believe that your
Holiness has set their examples before my eyes, to the end I might imitate
them shall my actions, for in truth they have often exposed their estates and
lives for the exaltation of the holy Chair; and the courage with which they
have assaulted the enemies of the Cross of Jesus Christ, has not been less
then the care and thought which I have, to the end that the peace and
intelligence which has hitherto been wanting in Christendom, might be bound
with a true and strong concord: for as the common enemy of the peace watches
always to put hatred and dissension amongst Christian Princes, so I believe
that the glory of God requires that we should endeavor to unite them: And I do
not esteem it a greater honor to be descended from so great Princes, then to
imitate them in the zeal of their piety. In which it helps me very much to have
known the mind and will of our thrice honored Lord and Father, and the holy
intentions of his Catholic Majesty to give a happy concurrence to so
laudable a design: for it grieves him exceedingly to see the great evils that
grow from the division of Christian Princes, which the wisdom of your Holiness
foresaw, when it judged the marriage which you pleased to design between the
Infanta of Spain and my self, to be necessary to procure so great a good; for
it is very certain, that I shall never be so extremely affectionate to any thing
in the world, as to endeavor alliance with a Prince that has the same
apprehension of the true Religion with my self: Therefore I entreat your
Holiness to believe, that I have been always very far from Novelties, or to
be a partisan of any faction against the Catholic, Apostolic Roman Religion:
But on the contrary, I have sought all occasions to take away the suspicion
that might rest upon me, and that I will employ my self for the time to come,
to have but one Religion and one Faith, seeing that we all believe in one Jesus
Christ. Having resolved in my self, to spare nothing that I have in the world,
and to suffer all manner of discommodities, even to the hazarding of my estate
and life, for a thing so pleasing unto God: It rests only that I thank your
Holiness, for the permission you have been pleased to afford me, and I pray
God to give you a blessed health and his glory after so much pains which your
Holiness takes in his Church. Signed,

Charles Steward.

The Pope to the Duke of Buckingham. Gregory P. P. XV.
Nobleman, health and the light of Divine Grace.
THe authority wherein we have understood your Nobleness to flourish in the
British Court, is accounted not only the reward of your merits, but also the
patronage of virtue; certainly an excellent renown, and every way so worthy,
that the people desire a diuturnity to be annexed unto it. But it is almost
ineffable, what an increase of glory thoroughout the world would be annexed
unto it, if by Gods favor it should become the defense of Catholic Religion.

Certainly you have gained an opportunity by which you may insert your self
into the Councels of those Princes, who obtaining an immortal name, have
attained the Celestial Kingdom.

Suffer not then (O Nobleman) this occasion presented to you from God, and
commended by the Bishop of Rome, to slip out of your hands.

You that are privy to their royal Councels cannot choose but know in what
estate the affairs of Britain at this time stand, and with what voices of the
Holy Ghost (speaking in them) they daily sound in the ears of your Princes.
What Glory would redound unto your Name, if by your exhortation and
persuasion, the English Kings should again recover their Celestial inheritance
of that Glory left unto them by their Ancestors in those Kingdoms in
abundant manner, by providing for the increase of Gods Worship, and by not only
defending, but propagating the jurisdiction of the Pontifical authority. There
have been many, and shall be hereafter, whom the bounty of Kings has enriched
with fading riches, and advanced to envied titles, and yet mindful posterity
will not celebrate your name with eternal Praises for having attained these:
but if your Councels should reduce those most powerful Kings and people unto
the bosom of the Roman Church, the name of your Nobleness would be written in
the book of the living, whom the torment of Death touches not, and the
Monuments of Histories, shall place you amongst those wise men in whose
splendour Kings walked; but with what comforts in this life, and what rewards in
the life to come, God who is rich in mercy would reward you, they easily see,
who know the art, and force by which the Kingdom of heaven is conquered. It is
not only our Pontifical charity (to whose care the salvation of mankind
pertains) but also the piety of your Mother, who as she brought you into the
world, so she desires to bear you again to the Roman Church, which she
acknowledges for her mother, that moved us to desire, that you were made
Partakers of so great felicity. Therefore when our beloved son the religious
man Didacus de la Fuente, who has wisely administered the affairs of your
Princes in this City) prepared his journie for Spain, we commanded him to come
unto your Nobleness, and present these our Apostolical Letters, by which the
Greatness of our Pontifical charity, and the desire of your salvation may be
declared. Your Nobleness may therefore hear him as the interpreter of our
mind, and as one endued with these virtues which have won him the love of
foreign nations being a Catholic, and religious priest: He certainly has
reported those things of you in these parts of the world, that he is worthy to
be embraced of you with singular affection, and defended by your authority
being a servant to the Glory, and salvation of the British Kings, and people.
This thing truly will we pray for to the father of mercies that he will open to
your Nobleness the gates of his Celestial kingdom, and afford you frequent
Documents of his Clemency. Given at Rome at St. Marie the Greater under the
Ring of the Fisherman the 19. of May. 1623. and of our Popedom the third,

John Champolus.

To his Sacred Majesty ab ignoto.
My most Gracious King,
THese things which your Majesty did lately command to be spoken unto you, and
now to be repeated in writing, are not such as they can be made by legal and
Judicial proofs, both because they by whose testimony they may be confirmed,
do for fear of a most potent adversary withdraw themselves. And also because
they think it a crime to come into the Ambassadors house, yea even they are
afraid to do it, who have commandment from your Majesty; but neither was it
lawful for the Ambassadors themselves to speak these things, especially not to
such as they directed, when the order of the affairs required it, because they
had never the freedom to speak unto your Majesty, and no audience was given or
granted them in the absence of tht Duke of Buckingham. An example certainly
unusual with other Kings, and never to be taken in good part, unless it be
perhaps, when the King himself wanting experience, and being of weak judgment
and no wisdom, some one, that is familiar, and inward with the King, a man
wise and circumspect, of great judgment and no less experience, supplies the
Kings place. But here, when all things go preposterously, and the King himself
being a most prudent, and experienced Prince, he that is familiar, or favorite
does in all things show himself, a rash, headie young man, a Novice in managing
of business, and to the Crown of Spain most offensive. Certainly by all just
right, this man was to be kept away from the audience of the Ambassador of the
State. We may also be bold to say, that his presence so earnestly desired of
him does argue a great fear in him and a great distrust in him, as well of his
own upright conscience, as also the Kings wisdom. Hence therefore it is come to
pass, that your Majesty's most faithful Vassals dare not so much as indirectly
disclose their minds to the King, though they take it in very ill part, that a
very good King should be driven into such streights. And that a man pleasing
himself in his own designs, should use the favors of Princes so sinisterly,
that he does of set purpose stir up breach of friendship, and enmity between
most Mighty Kings.

Besides, who can without a discontented mind endure, that the greatest
affairs, and of greatest moment (if any in the Christian world can be so
termed) shall be ordered, or concluded at the pleasure of your Parliament, and
from thence all things carried on with a headlong violence, at his will and
pleasure, and a most deadly war to be preferred before a most happy Peace.
When as nevertheless, I am not ignorant, that not so much the restitution of
the Palatinate, as the very claim to it, will very difficultly be obtained, or
recovered by force of arms. Let your Majesty exactly consider as it uses to
do, whether this be not an evident argument of that I have said, that the
conference, or treaty about the Palatinate was taken from the Council of
State, a society of most prudent men, only for this cause, that almost every
one of them, had with one consent approved the proposition of the most
Catholic King, and did not find in it any cause of dissolving that treaty.
Hereupon the Parliament of this Kingdom was procured by the Duke, because he
thought his plots would be most acceptable to the Puritans, not without great
injury to your Council of State, from which he fled, and disclaimed by way of
an appeal, and with such success, that we may be bold to say, that the
Parliament is now above the King; Nay, which is more, that this daring Duke
propounded many things to the Parliament in the Kings name, your Majesty being
neither acquainted with them nor willing to them. Yea and that he propounded
many things contrary to your Majesty's service. Who is there that does not see,
and commend the royal disposition of the Prince, adorned with so great
endowments, of his mind, that he does not in them all show, and approve himself
to be a very good son, of a very good King. And yet nevertheless, that the
Duke does so much presume upon his favor, that he contemns all men, as
knowing that those, who are obedient to his Highness, will also subject
themselves to his will. I would to God, he did direct those his actions, to the
good of the Prince. But that is a thing so far from the opinion of good men,
that they rather believe, that he, who has overthrown the marriage with Spain,
will be of no less power to the breaking of any other marriage, and that is it
which many do prophecy.

They knew in Spain, that very same day, that he had received Letters from the
most illustrious Prince Palatine, that he caused the procuration to be revoked,
and in a few days after, when the coming of the foresaid Princes Secretary,
and the confirmation of his hope of having his Daughter married to her
Highness son, all things were utterly dashed in pieces. Let your Majesty have
a care of your self, and the Prince, and foresee the hurts, and damages, which
a man of such a turbulent humor may stir up; whose headie spirit your Majesty
says you have noted, and have desired to mittigate.

A man (I say) that is ambitious of popular air, as plainly appeared in
Parliament, when the casting of all odious matter upon your Majesty, he did
arrogate the thanks of all things that were acceptable, to himself, being
styled the redeemer of his country. I say again, a man that has envied so
great a good to the Christian world, and principally to the kingdoms of
England and Spain, having used some certain means, which do argue, that he
aimed at such an end, as many already do fear, and to prophecy in it the worst
event that can be, if the Puritans desire a kingdom (which they do against
their wills) they wish it not to the most illustirous Prince, the best and true
Heir of your Majesty, but to the Prince Palatine, whose spy and Scout
Mansfelt is, what show soever he makes. He that makes these things known to
your Majesty discharges the part of a good man, as well toward God, as your
Majesty, and the illustrious Prince, whom it now stands in hand to foresee
the vengeance of God provided by the Dukes plots, and the fury of the
Parliament, there having been so many, and so great testimonies published
against Spain contrary to truth, so many, and so frequent infamous Libels
begotten and brought forth, and many such other things so full of bitterness,
and ignominy, that they cannot be read even of our enemies, without some taint
upon the English Nation.

It is most apparent, and stories will testify, that here Leagues have been
broken by the will and pleasure of them, whom it especially concerns to
provide for your peace, and quiet, and to with from the bottom of their hearts,
that after many, and these most happy, years, that Motto of yours (blessed be
the Peacemakers) might be verified in Letter of the person of your Majesty,
and to propound the same Counsel to the most illustrious Prince to be imitated,
which your Majesty has done to the whole world to be commended, and admired.
A happy Prince will he be, if he comes, and succceeds peaceably into the
haereditarie possession of his kingdom, and which will be of no less advantage
to him, having his peace established with those Princes, whose friendship and
amity your Majesty has procured, and deserved. He would certainly love and
commend those that had given him those Counsels of peace. Peace and
tranquillity are by haereditarie right devolved to the most illustrious
Prince, in as much as he is born of the Father, who has with so much industry
procured them, not only to this Island, but to the continent also, esteeming
them at a higher value, then his kingdoms themselves.

Which since it is thus, and that the blood of his Father, which is in him, and
the love wherewith he is carried toward your Majesty, and the experience of
this your most happy Government, and that great example wherewith your
Majesty has drawn, and won the Christian world to an admiration, and love of
you, did all direct the most illustrious Prince with a kind of connatural
motion to the same Counsel, and purpose of peace, as might have heretofore been
likewise hoped. Certainly this Machination is very strong, violent, and mighty,
which does suddenly labor to turn him into a clean contrary course.

And questionless if the very entrance into a war, the war it self if it want
justice, it will want also happy success. It cannot be unknown to your
Majesty, that the Duke of Buckingham carries himself so lofty; that he would
have all men persuaded that he has, and does exercise a kind of dominion over
the will of your Majesty, and of his Highness. All things shall be made
manifest to your Majesty, if you will have them so; for there are not means
wanting, whereby you may free your vassal from fear and diffidence, who will
otherwise dare nothing, nor say nothing, which certainly appears so far to be
true, that when all things standing as they do, it is an easy matter to find
who will speak against your Majesty, yet there is none that dare speak against
the Duke.

Let your Majesty call some certain men unto you, and sift out of them, the
opinion of the more moderate Parliament, and enquire of those that come out of
Spain, who did first give the first cause of falling out? whether the
Complaints against the King of Spain be true, or no? whether that foresaid King
were not desirous to satisfy the desire of the Prince his Highness? Whether
he did not faithfully endeavor to effect the marriage? Whether the Duke of
Buckingham did not many things against the authority and reverence due to the
most illustrious Prince? Whether he was not wont to be sitting, whilst the
Prince stood, and was in presence, and also having his feet resting upon
another seat, after an undecent manner? Whether when the Prince was uncovered,
whilst the Queen, and Infanta, looked out at the Windows he uncovered his
head, or no? Whether sitting at the Table with the Prince he did not behave
himself unreverently? Whether he were not wont to come in to the Princes
Chamber with his clothes half on, so that the doors could not be opened to
them that came to visit the Prince from the King of Spain, the Door-keepers
refusing to go in for modesties sake? Whether he did not call the Prince by
ridiculous names? Whether he did not dishonor and profane the Kings Palace
with base and contemptible women? Whether he did not diverse obscene things, and
used not immodest gesticulations and wanton Tricks with Players in the presence
of the Prince? Whether he did not violate his faith given to the Conde
Olivares? Whether he did not presently communicate his discontents, offenses
and complaints to the Ambassadors of other Princes? Whether in doing of his
business, he did not use frequent threatenings unto the Catholic Kings
Ministers, and to Apostolical Nuns? Whether he did not affect to sit at Plays
presented in the Kings Palace after the manner and example of the King, and
Prince, being not contented with the honor that is ordinarily given to the
High Steward, or Major domo of the Kings house. Besides all these things which
have heretofore been told your Majesty, there is yet this more, that is new:

That the Duke of Buckingham (with what intention let others judge) has
divulged in Parliament some secret Treaty negotiated betwixt your Majesty and
the King of Spain touching the affairs of Holland; the secrecy whereof,
nevertheless your Majesty had so recommended, that besides the King, and the
Conde of Olivares, no man in Spain knew of it.

If the Duke do not appear guilty of all these things, let him be still your
Majesty's most faithful servant, and let your Majesty yet confer upon him
greater Honors, if you can. For I would have these things conceived to be
spoken for the security of your Majesty; not for the hurt of him, to whom I
wish prosperity, if by him the Christian world might be in prosperity.

It only remains, that your Majesty will be pleased to take in good part
this my service and obedience showed to your Commandments.

To the King, ab ignoto.
Best, and most excellent King,
YOu will wonder that he who at first protests to be neither Papist nor
Puritan, Spaniard nor Hollander, or yet in any delirium fit, should presume in
this Libel-like way, to lay down to your Majesty the strong zeal he bears to
the safety of your Majesty, and his Country, by showing in this dark Tablet
(drawn by the worst Painter) the common opinion of all those which are not
possessed as above.

They say, the business of greatest consequence, that ever your Majesty
handled, is now at point to go well, or ill. The marriage, or none, and (as it
is carried) a present War, or a continued Peace. The match of your son, they
wish you may perfect in your own time, and think that for the quiet of your
self and Kingdoms, the shortest time the best: And that this already traced
will far sooner piece, then any new one have beginning and accomplishment.

They fear this suspension carried by Killegrew was brought by Buckingham, not
for what he pretends, and plainly say, It was not only to prevent his
Highness marriage there, but any where.

Whereby, 1. His particular greatness may still stand absolute.

2. His Wife, and Tribe still present the Princess person.

3. And your Majesty be, and remain their Pupil.

The Parliament so much urged, they say, is to be a marrying his Mightiness
unto the Common Weal, that as your Majesty is his good Father, It may be his
Mother, and so he stand not only by the King, but by the People, and popular
humor, that he has lately so earnestly courted, and especially from those who
are noted to be of the most troubled humor.

How your Majesty should gain upon a Parliament they cannot imagine, seeing
all are resolved to sell your Courtesies at the dearest rate both by ill words,
and for double as much again, the humor of it being so inconstant, that twenty
to one, but those very tongues, which in the last did cry War, War, War, will
now curse him that urges for one poor Subsidy to raise a War. And miserable
is he, that is to make a War, or to defend against it, with money that is to be
given, and gathered from them.

They say, our Great Duke has certainly a brave desire to War, but in that
also, he has some great end of enriching himself, which he too well loves,
being carried away with that sweet sound, how Nottingham gained yearly during
that sickness 40000 l. by his Admirals place; but what his Majesty gained,
they find not in the Exchequer or Kingdom.

Somewhat also they fear this his Graces precipitate humor, and change of
humor, has of pride, to show his power as great here, as is Olivares his
there, as also of revenge against him in particular. For were it love to his
now much beloved Country, they say, there was as much reason for breach both
of the Match, and Peace when the Parliament urged it, as there is now.

They say, There is a rumor of his Graces, a match for his Mary with the young
Palatine. It is no Gorgon; and will concern his Highness, if they that are now
our best friends the Hollanders should change their Copy.

In this his Highness coming off from Spain, they say, He has advised him to
no worse then he did himself; for how many did he deflour, abuse, and cosen
with marriage, by his grace in Court, and power with your Majesty?

In short, your Subjects that have sense of your estate, do most earnestly
beseech your Majesty, to have more especial care of your own preservation,
then ordinarily you have, both in respect of the desperate staggering which
their Priests now stand in, and of your own Phaeton himself, who in truth
wants nothing of man enough but a good nature, and being in custom to carry
all with a high hand, must be desperate if he fail in any Punto of his violent
will.

We know your Majesty according to the sweetness and virtue of your Nature,
agreeing with Gods blessed Will, has long preserved your people in all peace
and plenty. And all good and sensible people pray you even for Gods sake not
to be cousened of your own life and liberty. Oh be not mislead to trouble your
own Kingdoms quiet, but that after many and many a happy year you may die
happily in peace.

To his Sacred Majesty, ab ignoto.
May it please his most excellent Majesty to consider,
THat this great opposition against the Duke of Buckingham is stirred up and
maintained by such, who either maliciously, or ignorantly and concurrently seek
the debasing of this free Monarchy, which because they find not yet ripe to
attempt against the King himself, they endeavor it through the Dukes side.
These men though agreeing in one mischief, yet are of diverse sorts and humors,
viz.

1. Meddling, and busy persons, who took their first hint at the beginning of
King James, when the union was treated of in Parliament. That learned King gave
too much way to those popular speeches, by the frequent proof he had of his
great abilities in that kind.

Since the time of H. 6. these Parliamentary discoursings were never suffered,
as being the certain symptoms of subsequent rebellions, civil Wars, and the
dethroning of our Kings. But these last 20 years most of the Parliament men
seek to improve the reputation of their wisdoms by these Declamations, and no
honest Patriot dare oppose them, lest he incur the reputation of a Fool, or a
Coward in his Countries Cause.

2. Covetous Landlords, Inclosers, Depopulators, and Justices of the Peace, who
have got a habit of Omniregencie, and an hope to extend the same against the
King in Parliament, as they do on his Subjects in the Country. Hereby the King
loses 24000 l. in every whole Subsidy; for Anno 1600. it was 80000 l. and now
it is but 56000 l. which comes by the decay of the yeomandry, who were three
and four pound men. And these Gentlemen (most of them of the Parliament) do
ease themselves to afflict those who are the true Commons, and yet persuade
them, that the grievances are caused by the Duke, and the ill government of the
King.

3. Recusants and Church Papists, whose hatred is irreconcilable against the
Duke for the breach of the Spanish Match. The French Lady, though as zealous a
Catholic, does not please him, for they were tied to Spain by their hopes of
a change of Religion that way. All the Priests are sent from the Spanish
Dominions, and the sons and daughters of the Papists remain as hostages of
their fidelities in the Colleges and Nunneries of the King of Spain. And
though the Papists have no place in the house of Commons, yet privately they
aggravate all scandals against the Duke, to kindle a separation between the
King and his people, and avert them from enabling the King to resist, or be
avenged of our great enemy. Remember the course held by these men in the
Parliament of undertakers; also Dr. Eglesham and all the Priests daily practice
libelling against all great men about the King.

4. Needy and indebted persons in both Houses, who endeavor by these
Parliamentary stirs not so much the Dukes overthrow, as a rebellion, which
they hope will follow if it be not done. This is much to be suspected, as well
by their Calumniations against his Majesty, as for their own wants; many of
them being outlawed, and not able to show their heads, but in Parliament time
by privilege thereof, and they know, that there are enough to follow them in
the same mischief.

5. Puritans and all other Sectaries, who though scarce two of them agree in
what they would have, yet they all in general are haters of Government. They
begun in Parliament about Anno 23. Eliz. and spit their venom not only against
the Bishops, but also against the Lord Chancellor Hatton, and others, the
Queens favorites, and Councillors, as they do now against the Clergy and the
Duke. But their main coffeehouse is against the Kings Government, which they
would have extinguished in matters Ecclesiastical, and limited in Temporal.
This is a fearful and important Consideration, because it pretends Conscience
and Religion, and they now more deadly hate the Duke, because he shows
himself to be no Puritan, as they hoped he would at his return from Spain.

6. Malcontents censured or decourted for their deserts, as the kindred and
dependants of the Earl of Suffolk, and of Sir Henry Yelverton, Coke, Lake,
Middlesex, though all of them (the last excepted) were dejected by King James
without any Concurrencie of the Duke. Others because they are not preferred, as
they do imagine that they deserve, as the Lord Say, Earl of Clare, Sir John
Eliot, Seldom, and Glanvile, Sir Dudley Diggs, and the Bishops of Norwich and
Lincoln. These, and many others, according to the nature of envy, look upon
every one with an evil eye, especially upon the Duke, who either has, or does
not prefer them to those places, or retain them in them, which their ambition
expects.

7. Lawyers in general, for that (as Sir Edward Cook could not but often
express) our Kings have upholden the power of their Prerogatives, and the
rights of the Clergy, whereby their comings in have been abated. And therefore
the Lawyers are fit ever in Parliaments to second any Complaint against both
Church, and King, and all his servants, with their Cases, Antiquities, Records,
Statutes, Presidents, and Stories. But they cannot, or will not call to mind,
that never any Nobleman in favor with his Sovereign was questioned in
Parliament, except by the King himself in case of Treason, or unless it were
in the nonage, and tumultuous times of Rich. 2. Hen. 6. or Edw. 6. which
happened to the destruction both of the King and Kingdom. And that not to
exceed our own, and Fathers memories, in King Hen. 8. time Wolsies exorbitant
power and pride, and Cromwels contempt of the Nobility and the Laws, were not
yet permitted to be discussed in Parliament, though they were most odious and
grievous to all the Kingdom. And that Leicester's undeserved favor, and
faults; Hatton's insufficiency, and Rawleigh's insolence far exceeded, what yet
has been (though most falsely) objected against the Duke: yet no Lawyer durst
abet, nor any man else begin any Invectives against them in Parliament.

8. The Merchants and Citizens of London convinced (not by the Duke, but) by
Cranfield and Ingram, to have deceived the King of Imposts and Customs, and
deservedly fearing to be called to account for undoing all the other Cities and
good Towns, and the poor Colonie of Virginia, as also for transporting of our
silver into the East Indies; these vent their malice upon the Duke in the
Exchange, Paul's, Westminster Hall, with their suggestions, and therein they
wound, both to Subjects and strangers the honor of his Majesty, and his
proceedings.

9. Innovators, Plebicolae, and King-haters. At the latter end of Queen
Elizabeth it was a phrase to speak, yea to pray for the Queen and State. This
word (State) was learned by our neighborhood and Commerce with the
Low Countries, as if we were, or affected to be governed by States. This the
Queen saw, and hated. And the old Earl of Oxford his Propositions at her death,
they awakened King James to prevent this humor, and to oppose the conditions
and limitations presented unto him by the Parliaments.

The Lawyers, Citizens, and Western men (who are most hot infected with
Puritanisme) stood strong against him under a color of Parliaments, and
Parliamentary privileges. His Majesty therefore strengthened himself ever
with some Favorite, as whom he might better trust then many of the Nobility
tainted with this desire of Oligarchie. It behooves without doubt his Majesty
to uphold the Duke against them, who if he be but decourted, it will be the
Corner stone on which the demolishing of his Monarchy will be builded. For, if
they prevail with this, they have hatched a thousand other demands to pull the
feathers of the Royalty, they will appoint him Councillors, Servants,
Alliances, Limits of his expenses, Accounts of his Revenue, chiefly if they can
(as they mainly desire) they will now dazzle him in the beginning of his reign.

10. King James and King Charles lastly, are the Dukes Accusers; (my meaning
is, with all humble reverence to their Honors, and Memories, and to speak in
the sense of the House of Commons) both their Majesty's are Conjuncta Persona
in all the aspersions that are laid upon the Duke. For instance, The
Parliaments money destined for the Wars, spent in the Treaties, Messages,
Ambassadors, and Entertainments of the Kings marriage, and the burial of his
Father, and the War in the name of the Count Palatine, the Breach of both the
Treaties, which then Canonized the Duke, but now is made evidence against him;
the Honors and Offices conferred upon him by King James, That his Majesty
might with his own Councels direct their managing, the setting forth of the
Navy, though to the Duke's great charge by both their Commandments; the Match
with France, and generally whatsoever has not been successeful to men's
expectations. All these, though the Acts of the Kings, are imputed to the Duke,
who if he suffer for obeying his Sovereigns, the next attempt will be to call
the King to account for any thing he undertakes, which does not prosperously
succeed as all men would desire it.

If it please his Majesty to remove, and set aside all these disadvantages, He
shall find the Charge laid against the Duke will prove very empty, and of small
moment. And for them, if his Majesty and the Duke's Grace think it no
impeachment to their Honors, all that the Parliament has objected against the
Duke, is pardoned at the Kings Coronation, which benefit every poor Subject
enjoys. Three things only excepted which may most easily be answered.

Mr. Chapter Th. to the Duke of Buckingham.
My Lord,
IT is intimated to your Lordship, first, that you would procure his Majesty
to desire the Lords to choose six (or so many as you shall think fit) of whom
they have most confidence to attend him to morrow morning, to whom his Majesty
may be pleased to declare; That he has endeavored to divert the charges
against your Lordship, because his Majesty has had sound knowledge, and
experience of the service, and fidelity (though in outward show the contrary
might justly appear) and because also he saw, it was urged with a great deal of
private spleen, and perhaps not without some Papisticall device of troubling
his Majesty's business in Parliament, but seeing no suite, or persuasion could
prevail to appease the distempered course, his Majesty is now forced, and so
pleased to reveal some secrets, and Arcana of State, which otherwise in the
wisdom of Kings were unfit to be opened. Here his Majesty may let them know,
that the King his Father finding the Palatinate more then in danger to be lost,
and after his Majesty being in Spain, and there deluded, and his abode, and
return, both unsafe. It was a necessity of State to sweeten, and content the
Spaniards with a hope of any thing that might satisfy, and redeem those
engagements, and therefore willed your Lordship to yield discreetlie to what
you should find they most desired, and this was chiefly the point of religion;
so as in this and all of the like kind, your Lordship (upon his Majesty's
knowledge) was commanded, and but the instrument trusted by your Master in this
exigent, or (if you will) extremity. And this with other more Potent overtures
(such as your Lordship best understands) may Cancel all those objections of
that nature. Upon this same ground, though not in so high a degree, the sending
of the ships to Rochel may be excused (and this is not the least fault objected
in the opinion of the wisest.) Touching the vast creation of Nobility his
Majesty may ask those six Lords (whereof perchance some of them may be
concerned in this article,) whether they conceive any reason of King James his
doing herein; to which I suppose, they will stand mute. Then his Majesty may
say, I will tell you, and therein discover a truth, and a secret of State. My
Father who was born a King, and had long experience of that Regiment,
especially more traversed in this point, then perhaps ever any King, found
that this State inclined much to Popularitie, a thing apparent universallie in
all the Courts, viz. in that of Star Chamber, which was at first erected to
restrain the insolence of Great men, in great outrages, but now for every
petty offense, the meanest Tennant may be bold to call thither his Lord. A
thing also appearing in the saucy approaches of the Puritans upon the Bishops
etc; and plainly in the boldness of the house of Commons against the Kings
pattents, and edicts, which in all good times (out of their necessity) have
been powerful. And especially this humor has been comforted by the sturdie
example of the Neighbor States of the Low Countries, as in their insolences
in the East Indies etc. From this place an enticing voice has sounded in our
ears of liberty and freedom, though indeed a feigned voice, and (but in
sound) unsound. I say when the king my Father had well beheld these things, he
could not foresee a remedy more proper, or easier, as being unserviceable and
in his own gripe, then to enlarge the number of his Nobles, that these being
dispersed into several Counties might as lambs of Soveraigntie, in protection
of their own degrees, and at their own charge inure the people with respect,
and obedience to greatness; and yet not to amate, and discourage them, he
thought good to raise some near, or of their own rank, whereby they might see
themselves in possibility of the like honor, if either by virtue, wealth, or
honesty they make themselves worthy. This I protest was a child of my Fathers
best judgment in this point, and the Duke but the instrument thereof. And if
you say, that there was money many times given for these Honors, nay if you
say, that money has been given for places of Clergy, and Judicature; I pray
take this of me, that this is so in all other Countries, as in France, and
Spain. And those Councels seem a little to smile at our dullness, that we have
so lately apprehended their soundness herein; for (say they) when men pay well
for such places, it is the best kind of security for their honesties,
especially when failing in their duty, they shall be sure to be as much
punished as they were advanced. Howbeit I am not satisfied in this opinion. And
if it be said that the King should have had the money, which the Duke took to
his own use; I believe this last is more, then any can prove, neither will I
deliver what I know therein. Howsoever, it matters not much being no popular
disbursment. Only this I will say, that I know the Dukes particular service,
and affection to me, and that he, and his will lay down themselves, and all
they have at my Feet. Neither is this bare opinion, since the Duke alone has
dibursed, and stands engaged more for my affairs, and the States, then any
Number of Noblemen of England whatsoever, and therefore there is reason, that
from a King he would receive his own and more.

And now (my Lords) since I have thus far opened a Kings Cabinet unto you at
least by the measure of this foot of answer, you may discover, what may be said
concerning that great body, and bulk of accusations of the Highest kind made
against the Duke. I desire you would take it to heart, remembering, that it is
your King, that speaks this, who therefore expects your service, and love
herein, and who will requite the same assuredly; hoping you will believe me
indeed, and do accordingly indeed, and that you will also rest assured, that my
spirit is not so young (though a young King) as that I would bring this
testimony in mine own wrong, were not that I say, true in my own knowledge. And
being so, you also will grant, that it is not for a King to use his Servant,
and Instrument as he does his Horses, which being by hard riding in his service
foundred, and lamed, to turn them off to grass, or to the Cart. I must
therefore in right of the King my Fathers Honor and my own, protect a man
(though I have said justly seeming guilty, yet) in mine own knowledge
innocent, and free as I have delivered it; will you then deny the King to
savor whom he please, which the King has never denied you, that are his
subjects? will you control me your Head and Governor in things wherein your
selves have taken liberty uncontroled? would you that I should require account
of your liberality? nay of all your failings, which are liable to my
authority? well commend me to my Lords, and tell them, that if any thing had
been formerly done amiss by others, I have power, and will to redress it, and
to prevent the like. I speak it in the word of a King, neither Lords, nor
Commons can desire of me any thing that is honest, which I am not ready to give
them. Let not therefore the world by these mistakings make Table-talk any
longer of your King and his negotiations? nay of his secrets and necessities;
for alas what great wrong, or indignity can the Glory of the State receive,
then that the private grudges of subjects (accusing to the ignorant, when in
their consciences they could excuse) should be the business of our Parliament,
and that the King himself should be forced to appear us a party? No doubt this
is a Cocatrice egg, that crafty heads of our enemies seek to hatch, whilst
the weighty affairs that in present concern the Honor, and welfare of the
King and State, and the peace of all Christendom are by us utterly neglected.

I end, hoping your Lordship (now privy to these things) will be tender of your
Sovereigns honor, and will so satisfy, and treat with the rest, that those
particular janglings may be by some other course, and in some other place and
time discussed and determined, that so our minds and time may be employed in
the care of better things, which earnestly invoke our aid at this instant.

Thus much spoken, or written, or the like, (for I seek but to awaken your
Lordships higher spirit and invention) I conceive it may get this effect: That
these 6. Lords won by these reasons, and by other the Kings invitations, may
deliver to the House, that for their parts, they have received unexpected
satisfaction in those greatest points of the accusation against your Lordship,
and of such secret nature as are not fit to be published without further
deliberation. Wherefore since it pleased their Lordships, to have made choice
of them to be trusted in this employment, they have faithfully served
accordingly, and do upon their Honors freely, and without any engagement or
respect, protest the same. And therefore humbly desire their Lordships, that
they would entreat his Majesty to be President in advice with their Lordships:
What further were to be done in this private Contention betwixt your Lordship
and the Lord Digbie; which obtained, something may then follow for your
Lordships good, by yielding up that Cause into the Kings hands. And his
Majesty has great reason to bend it that way, because it is conceived, that
the Lords will be loath to admit the King to be supreme Judge, and Accuser;
which point will much touch his Majesty. And his Majesty were better give
some ease to the Lord Digbie, then permit that dispute.

And now for my self, I beseech your Lordship to pardon my strange boldness; I
know I am a mere stranger to you, and if ever you have heard of me, it must be
as of a friend of such you then did not love. I know it shows me a medler in
business, or an insinuator, which are suspicions, that may distaste you, and
make you suspect my pretenses, though they were not altogether witless. I know
this disadvantage, and am in my own nature offended for putting my self thus
into your notions. But yet I resolved to undergo all this; First, because you
made my Brother a Captain in Ireland, who had otherwise perished. Next, for the
favor you did to my Lord of Northumberland, and the retiring of disfavour from
my Lord of Sommerset. And lastly, for your firm hand, that advanced the now
Lord Treasurer. To all which Lords I am familiarly known, and bound. But
(nearest to you) your Lordship may hear of me from the Lord Treasurer.

I am confident of your Lordships noble interpretation, since I seek no ends,
no acquaintance, no other thanks, being one that have no Court-suits to your
Lordship; but being one that loves not ruins, (which my friends have tasted)
nor that the public should wrestle with a private Inturn of Spleen. And I
offer it but as a simplicity, yet with good will enough; for what can a man,
that is not privy to the Elements of State, demonstrate any conclusion thereof;
yet I hear sometimes how the world goes as other men do.

I conceive I have said something to your Lordship, and though perhaps short,
yet enough to occasion, and stir up your deeper thoughts. I also may have
deeper, but also I know, that little pinnes of wood do sustain the whole
building. More I could have said touching the other points, but these greatest
elided, the fall of the others may be easily directed. What I have said against
those objections I touched, does arise from grounds of truth, and they must
win, and prevail, and my conceit is fitted to the Kings part, and to the
occasions now on foot.

I humbly cease your Lordship further trouble, and with you all good, desiring
your Lordship also to pardon my tedious and hasty scribled hand.

Your Lordships unknown servant, Chapter Th.

Postscript.
YOur Lordship shall be pleased to take off some part of my boldness, and
impute it to the obligation and service I owe this worthy Lady, the Bearer.

To Count Gondomar.
My Lord,
I Thought my hands bound that I could no sooner have occasion to write unto
you, being forced against my will to delay my writing from day to day in
expectation of the news of your arrival at that Court, assuring my self, that I
should then receive from you some ground whereupon to write. But after a long
expense of time before that I could hear of your arrival, and in the Packet
that his Majesty's Ambassador sent thereafter, receiving no Letters nor word
from you as I expected, I do now by these break my long silence unto you.

As for news from hence, I can in a word assure you, that they are in all
points, as your heart could wish: for here is a King, a a Prince, and a
faithful friend and servant unto you, besides a number of your other good
friends, that long so much for the happy accomplishment of this match, as every
day seems a year unto us, and I can assure you in the word of your honest
friend, that we have a Prince here, that is so sharp set upon the business, as
it would much comfort you to see it, and her there to hear it. Here are all
things prepared upon our parts; Priests and Recusants all at liberty: all the
Roman Catholics well satisfied, and which will seem a wonder unto you, our
Prisons are emptied of Priests and Recusants, and filled with zealous Ministers
for preaching against the Match; for no man can sooner now mutter a word in the
Pulpit though indirectly against it, but he is presently catched, and set in
straight prison. We have also published Orders both for the Universities, and
the Pulpits, that no man hereafter shall meddle, but to preach Christ
crucified; Nay it shall not be la^^ul hereafter for them to rail against the
Pope, or the Doctrine of the Church of Rome further then for edification of
ours; and for proof hereof you shall herewith receive the orders set down, and
published. But if we could hear as good news from you, we should think our
selves happy men; but alas! Now that we have put the ball at your feet,
although we have received a comfortable Dispatch from his Majesty's Ambassador
there; yet from all other parts in the world, the effects appear directly
contrary. For Mr. Gage brings us news from Rome, that the dispensation there is
at a stand, except a number of new Conditions be granted, which we never
dreamed of, and some of them can tend to no other end, but to bring our Master
in jealousy with the greatest part of his Subjects; nay which is strangest of
all, we find some points yielded unto by us, (which would have given the Pope
good satisfaction) to be concealed from him by the King your Masters ministers
there. We were never more troubled to put a good face upon an ill Game, then we
were upon Gage's arrival here, which in your phrase is to put a good sauce to
an unsavory dish.

For the whole world being in expectation of bringing the Dispensation with
him, we are now forced to make him give it out here to all his friends, that
it is past in Rome, and sent from thence to Spain. And from Brussels we find,
that notwithstanding, both of the King your Masters promises, and undertaking
of the Infanta there, who has long ago acknowledged to have had power from the
Emperor for granting of this long-talked of Cessation, yet now after
innumerable delays on her part, Heidelbergh is besieged by Count Tilley, and
that at such a time, as his Majesty cannot imagine what ground or shadow of
excuse can be found for his Commission. For the Treaty has been twice reformed
at her desire, and all the Auxiliaries such as Brunswick and Mansfelt have
taken another course: His Majesty's son in law staying privately in Sedan,
ready to obey all his Majesty's directions; and the places in the Palatinate,
which are not already in his enemies hands, being only possessed by his
Majesty's Soldiers. So as now if the War shall continue, it must be directly
between the Emperor, and our Master, his Majesty having sent a Commandment to
his Ambassador at Brussels, that if Tilley will needs go on with that siege,
that he return hither with all speed. For his Majesty in honor cannot endure,
that whilst he is treating for a cessation of Arms at Bruxels, the Wars should
go on in the Palatinate, especially when they have no body to invade, but his
Majesty's own Subjects and servants; And indeed his Majesty thinks he is very
ill dealt withal, for all that great sincerity an^^ and our, wherewith he has
constantly carried himself from the very beginning of this business, that no
less can satisfy the Emperors revenge then the utter extermination of his
children both of honor and inheritance, and not without a direct breach of his
former promise, avowedly set down in his last Letter to his Majesty.

And now let me I pray you in the name of your faithful friend, and Servant,
beseech you to set apart all partiality in this case, and that you would be
pleased indifferently to consider of the streights we are driven into, if the
Emperor shall in this fashion conquer the Palatinate, the ancient inheritance
of his Majesty's children: what can be expected but a bloody and
unreconcileable war between the Emperor, and my Master wherein the King of
Spain can be an Auxiliarie to the Emperor against any other party but his
Majesty. And therefore as my Master lately offered to the Infanta for
satisfaction of her desire, that in case the Auxiliaries would not be contented
with reason, but still perturbe the treaty, he offered in that case to assist
the Emperor and her against them; so can he in justice expect no less of the
King your Master, that if the Emperor will contrary to all promises both by
his Letters, and Ambassadors, proceed in his conquest, and refuse the
cessation, that the King your Master will in that case, and in so just a
quarrel assist him against the Emperor, in imitation of the King my Masters
just and real proceedings in the business from the beginning, who never
looked (as you can well be witness) to the rising, or faling hopes of his son
in Law his fortunes, but constantly keep on that course, that was most agreeable
to honor and justice, to the peace of Christendom; and for the fastening of a
firm and indissoluble knot of amity, and alliance betwixt the king your Master
and him, which was begun in the time of the treaty with France, and then
broken at your desire, that we might embrace this alliance with you; you are
the person, that many times before your departure hence, besought his Majesty
once to suffer himself to be deceived by Spain. We therefore do now expect to
find that great respect to honor in the King your Master, that he will not
take any advantage by the changing of fortune, and success of time, so to
alter his actions, as may put his Honor in the terms of interpretation. You
see how all the rest of Christendom, envy and malign this match and wished
conjunction; How much greater need then has it of a hasty and happy
dispatch? And what comfort can the Prince have in her, when her friends shall
have utterly ruined his Sister, and all her babes? you remember how your self
praised his Majesty's wisdom in the election of so fit a Minister, as Sir
Richard Weston in this business, but you saw what desperate Letters he writes
from time to time of their cold and unjust treating with him in this business;
you could not but wonder at any spark of Patience could be left us here; and to
conclude this point in a word, we ever received comfortable words from Spain,
but find such contrary effects from Bruxelles, together with our intelligences
from all other parts of the world, as all our hopes are not only cold, but
quite extinguished here. Thus far for the By, and yet such a By, as may put by
the main, if it be not well and speedily prevented. As to the Main, which is
the match, his Majesty, and we all here, thought we had done our part, and put
the ball at your foot, when we agreed upon the twenty, and five Atticles
more: whereupon as your self often answered, and assured us the best Divines in
Spain concluded that the Pope, not only might, but ought to grant a
dispensation to this marriage, but now we are surcharged with a number of new
Articles from Rome, and in the mean time the Dispensation is as far off as ever
it was.

His Majesty hopes that you are not ignorant, that the treaty is between him,
and your Master; He has no treaty with Rome, neither lies it in his way to
dispute with them upon this question; yet that his readiness to embrace your
Masters friendship may the better appear, he is contented to yield to so many
of their demands, as either his Conscience, Honor, or safety can permit, if
so the King your Master shall think it necessary. But on the other part we
three remember, that when as you first moved this match unto him, and persuaded
him to break off with France, you then promised, that he should be pressed to
nothing in this business, that should not be agreeable to his conscience, and
honor, and stand with the love of his people. As to the particular Articles
new added at Rome, I will not clogg this paper with them, which I fear without
them, will be too troublesome unto you. For what his Majesty's opinion is of
them, his Majesty's Ambassador there will particularly acquaint you.

But whereas the Pope desires in the end of his Articles, that he may see what
ponum publicum, the King our Master will grant unto, that may persuade to grant
this dispensation, I will remit it to your conscience and knowledge, whether if
the favors his Majesty daily grants to those of his religion, and is resolved
still to continue, if not to increase them, if they shall by their good
behavior deserve it, be not a real bonum publicum, considering that if the
match should break off (which God forbid) his Majesty would be importunatly
urged by his people (to whose assistance he must have his recourse) to give
life and execution to all the penal Laws now hanging upon their heads.

It only rests now, that as we have put the ball to your foot, you take a good,
and speedy resolution there to hasten a happy conclusion of this match. The
Prince is now two and twenty years of age, and so a year more, then full ripe,
for such a business: the King our Master longs to see an issue proceed from
his Loins; and I am sure you have reason to expect more friendship from the
posterity that shall proceed from him, and that little Angel, your Infanta then
from his Majesty's Daughters Children. Your friends here, are all discomforted
with this long delay: your enemies are exasperated, and irritated thereby; and
your neighbors, that envy the felicity of both Kings, have the more leisure
to invent new Plots for the Cross, and hinderance of this happy business; And
for the part of your true friend and servant Buckingham, I am become odious
already, and counted a betrayer both of King and Country.

To conclude all with; I will use a similitude of hawking (which you will
easily understand, being a great Faulkoner;) I told you already that the Prince
is (God be thanked) extremely sharp set upon this Match; and you know that a
Hawke, when she is first dressed, and made ready to fly, having a great will
upon her, if the Faulkoner do not follow it at that time, she is in danger to
be dulled for ever after.

Take heed therefore, lest in the fault of your delays there, Our Prince, and
Faulcon-gentle, (that you know was thought slow enough, to begin to be eager
after the Foeminine prey) become not so dull upon these delays, as in short
time hereafter, he will not stoop to the Lure, though it were thrown out to him.

And here I will end to you my sweet friend, as I do in my prayers to God,
(Only in thee is my trust,) and say as it is written on the outside of the
Pacquets, Haste, Haste, Post-haste.

Conde de Gondomar to the Duke, 13. Febr. 1625.
Most Excellent Sir,
AT last Sir, the Earl of Gondomar goes for England; There will be many good
discourses made in Holland about this voyage: But the truth is, that the
intention of his journey is not to offend any one, but only to desire, and
procure peace, and the public good. And only with this intent the King my
Master Commands me to go thither, and I go with a great deal of joy as well for
this as for to kiss his Majesty's and his Highness his hands, and your
Excellencies in particular.

And therefore I do appoint for the field of our Battle your Excellencies
Gallerie over the Thames, where I hope your Excellency shall see, that the
Earl of Gondomar is an honest man, and that he has been, is, and ever will be,
a faithful and true servant and friend to Sir George Villiers Duke of
Buckingham, whom God preserve many happy years.

The Countess my Wife, and my self, kiss my Lady the Countess, and my Lady
Duchess their hands.

Your Excellencies Constant and faithful servant, Gondomar.

Padre Maestre at Rome to the Spanish Ambassador in England, 12. June, 1621.
My Lord,
I Have received two Letters from your Lordship, the one of the 15th. of March
brought me by Mr. George Gage, and the other of the 30. of April which came by
the Ordinary. In both which Letters I have received a special favor from you,
and much comfort. The coming of Mr. Gage has given me infinite contentment,
then which there could nothing have happened more fitly and to the purpose, for
the matter which is in negotiation, nor any man have come hither that could
better advance the business then he, as well in respect of his good affection,
as for his wisdom and dexterity in all things. And if the King of Great
Britain will withal help now a little, the business will be quickly done, and
in a good manner. I beseech your Lordship preach to him a Christian Sermon as
is most needful: for there comes from thence diverse ways such reports thither,
that I am ashamed, and out of countenance in the streets as I go, and they do
me a favor, that they do not stone me, knowing that I am treating, and
laboring this business at the same time, when the poor Catholics are so
cruelly used in England, Scotland, and Ireland. And when I excuse it, that it
is not by the Kings order, but by the abuse and malice of some ill affected
Ministers, it will not be received; neither do they want Replies. Besides,
there is a rumor all over Rome, that the King in a Speech which he made at the
beginning of the Parliament, affirmed publicly, That for all this marriage
with Spain, the Catholic party in England should not be in one jott better
condition then they are.

But I cannot be yet discouraged; My confidence is in the King, and in the
desire which I know he has to procure a good Wife for his Son. And now that
the time is come, let him play the part of a Courageous Wooer, and frustrate
the intentions and desires of all those, that are adverse to it. It is a
comfort unto me, that I do not find here an impossibility; but that though
there be difficulties, yet I find many here that desire to overcome them. And
above all, I hope that God will assist this business as his own Cause. I am
going to prepare my self for the Congregation of the Cardinals, and a
Consultation of Divines, to whom I understand we shall be remitted this next
week. I shall give your Lordship an account punctually of all things that
happen in those Conferences. Ous Lord, etc.

Your Lordships, etc. Padre Maestre.

Don Carlos to the Lord Conway, 3. September.
SIR,
I Have understood by Mr. Strada with particular contentment the news of your
good health, which God continue for many years. I see by yours received by
Strada, what his Majesty has been pleased to order concerning the ships of
the Indies, which is as much in effect as could be hoped for from so great a
King, so zealous of Justice and Equity.

In the Conduct of this business, we will observe the order given by his
Majesty, in confidence that the Subjects of the King my Master shall obtain
their ends, and his Catholic Majesty receive the contentment to know, that
the excesses of those that shall be convinced have been punished.

By the last Currier of Flanders, we received neither from the Infanta, nor any
other person any other news, then what Mr. Trumbal sent by his Letters.

I confess freely, that the Marquess, and my self have been much troubled,
both of us being exceedingly desirous, that his Majesty should receive in
every thing (even in words, and formalities) the same satisfaction, which we
hope he shall receive in the effects. Nevertheless in discharge of her
Highness, I will say that which is fit for me as I am her servant, and which I
pray you from me to deliver unto his Majesty; but thus understood, that it is
only my own particular discourse.

By the displeasure his Majesty has been pleased to testify unto me upon
many occasions of the Prince Palatines refusal to sign, and ratify the Treaty
of suspension of Arms; He may be also pleased to judge how it may have been
taken by the King my Master in Spain, and the Infanta in Flanders, and the
rather because of the continual reports, that at the same time went up and down
and increased (as ordinraily it falls out) of the descent of Alberstat with a
mighty Army of 20000 foot, and 6000 horse, not any more to make war in Germany,
but to join with the Prince of Orange, and fall upon those Provinces in
obedience to his Catholic Majesty, which was no other but directly to aim at
the vital parts of the Spanish Monarchy.

If for these just fears (which cannot certainly be held vain, being considered
with those of the year past, proceeding from one and the same Cause, both of
which have been scattered by the Almighty hand of God, in his secret Judgments)
it has not only been lawful, but also necessary to conserve the ancient
alliances, and procure new, I leave it to the judgment of every man of
understanding, not doubting but for this respect you will be of the same
opinion with me: And much more his Majesty, whom God has endowed with so
great knowledge, and royal qualities, as are known to all the world.

Morover, let us see if in the Law of gratitude, the Infanta could do less
then acknowledge toward the Duke of Bavaria, the valor wherewith his Army had
resisted the pernicious designs of Alberstat, having hazarded his own estate to
hinder the imminent danger of the King my Masters.

Again let us consider if the Infanta sending to visit, and give him thanks
could excuse her self from giving him all those titles, which the Duke of
Bavaria gives himself, and desires should be given him. And if he might not, if
she had done otherwise have thought the ingratitude the greater, then the
acknowledgement. And therefore things being in this state, the Infanta could
not excuse her self from sending to visit him, seeing he had succored her in
a time of need, and in visiting him to give him that, which he desired should
be given him. And the like is to be said for the King my Master in case he has
done the like as Mr. Trumbal writes the Infanta should tell him, and with a
great deal more reason because the Countries are his own. And therefore since
his Majesty of Great Britain is so great a King, and has so great a
reputation of the exact performing of his royal obligations, I doubt not but he
will judge, that in this formality, the King my Master, and the Infanta his
Aunt, have but acquitted themselves of their obligations. For the rest, if at
the conferrence of Cullen, which his said Majesty, and her Highness have
desired, and do yet desire his Majesty of great Britain shall see, that they
are wanting on their part to proceed with that sincerity and truth, which they
have so often offered, and which the Marquess of Ynoiosa does still offer on
the behalf of the King my Master, so that only the Prince Palatine make the
submissions due to the Emperor as his natural Lord, and resolvie to follow the
Paternal counsels of his Majesty of great Britain, his Majesty shall then
have reason to complain. And in the mean time the Prince Palatine should do but
well not to entertain those Amities he endeavors to conserve, nor to solicit
those Leagues which he labors to procure, not only with the declared rebels
of the King my Master, and of the House of Austria, but also with the enemies
of all Christendom. I will engage my head if following this way his Majesty
and his son in law find themselves deceived.

You know Sir, that I treat in truth, and freedom, and do therefore hope you
will impute my excuses to that, and will not call this liberty of my
discourse, rashness, but an immortal desire in me in all things to procure the
service of our Kings, laying aside all occasions of misunderstandings, now we
treat of nothing else, but uniting our selves more by the strickt bonds of love,
over and above those of our Alliance.

I do humbly beseech you to say thus much to his Majesty, and to assure him
from me, that when he shall be pleased to employ me in this matter, as in all
other, he shall ever find me faithful and real, as I have offered my self, and
always continue, being well assured, that even in that I shall serve my
Master. And I pray you to believe in your particular that I am, and will be
eternally

Yours etc.

The Marquess Ynoiosa to the Lord Conway, 5. September, 1623.
I Answered not long since to both your Letters, and now I will add this, that
only the sport, and pleasure that Don Carlos, and I consider his Majesty has
in his progress, may make tolerable the deferring (by reason of that) and not
hearing the news we expect to hear of his Majesty's good health. For by that
means we might not only satisfy more often our desires in this point (having
his Majesty nearer) but also our desire to bring these businesses to an end,
which are ordinarily more delayed, and less well executed, when they are to
pass through the hands of Ministers (though they be very zealous, and well
affected to it) as these Lords are with whom we treat here; who are desirous
that the King should be known for just, though unnecessarily, when nothing is
pretended contrary to that which is agreed upon. This knowledge whereupon I
ground my reasons may perhaps make me (Sin Embargo) incur the Censure of an
impatient man; But I am persuaded, that if that which has been done here, had
been settled there by your Honor, and the Lord Count of Carleil (whose good
disposition, and proceeding is as much to be esteemed as it is praised by Don
Carlos and my self) we would have made an end, and those things, which I have
seen, and observed here had not happened unto us. For in the conference, in
which my Lord Keeper did assist, it was agreed (as we thought) that his
Majesty should give order to the Judges and Justices of Peace, Archbishops
and Bishops signed with his royal hand under the little Seal within three
months, or at the Princess her arival. He has persisted afterward, as also
Sir George Calvert in that (though it was plain) that his Majesty would give
the said warrant, afterward, there being no term nor day appointed.
Nevertheless at last we have condescended, that it should be within six
months, or at her Highness arrival, if she comes before that time, that we may
show how happy we think our selves in being Servants to his Majesty, whom God
save.

The dispatches that we are to have are contained in the relation here
enclosed. I pray you to take order, that those that are to be sent back to that
effect, may be subscribed, and Sealed; for I have differred the dispatching of
a Currier (with an evident danger that he will now arrive too late, and put in
hazard a business of mine of consideration, which obliges me to dispatch him)
that he may not go without them; And that it may not be an occasion to doubt of
the assurance we have given of his Majesty's good will and intention; whose
Royal hands, I, and Don Carlos do entreat your Honor to kiss in our name, and
to continue us in his Majesty's good Favor, and your Honor likewise in yours;
for we deserve it with a particular affection, and equal desire to serve you.
God save your Honor, as I desire

Your Honors servant, The Marquess, Ynoiosa.

Sir Arthur Chichester to the Duke, the 25. January, 1623.
May it please your Grace,
WHen you went last from White Hall I waited on the Prince and you into the
Gallery, where your Lordship spoke something unto me which I understood not, to
wit, Are you turned too? As I knew not the ground of the Demand, I could make
no present answer; nor now but by Conjecture. When I turn from the Prince,
(whom I know to be the worthiest of Princes) or from you, (who by your favors
have so bound me to serve you) or from the truth (as I conceive it) God I know
will turn from me; until then I humbly pray your Lordship to believe that I am
your honest servant.

The Sunday after your Lordships departure, the Ambassadors of the King of
Spain came unto me under the pretext of a visit. I have herewith sent your
Grace a brief of what passed between us. I judge some man has done me an ill
office, by insinuating me into their good opinions of me; sure I am, I never
spoke of them, nor of the affairs they have to manage, but what I have said,
when the selected Council were assembled. I cannot be so dull, but to know that
they meant your Grace to be the Interposer of their desires, and the Man, whom
they wished to be absent when they have their private audience. They are
exceeding Cautelous, and I conceive the late Dispatch from Spain is like a
gilded bayt to allure and deceive; your Lordship perceiving their Malice, will
be wary to avoid their Venom I am

Your Graces Humble, and faithful Servant, Arthur Chichester.

The Collections of the Passages and Discourses between the Ambassadors of the
King of Spain, and Sir Arthur Chichester, 18. Jannary, 1623.
These Passages were sent to the Duke, enclosed in the last foregoing Letter.
ON Sunday the 18. of this present January, the two Ambassadors of Spain came
to visit me at my House in Drury Lane. At their first entrance they took
occasion to speak of the profession of Soldiers, and of the Spanish Nation,
affirming them to be the bravest Friends, and the bravest Enemies. I approved
it in the Soldier, and contradicted it not in the Nation.

When they were come into an Inner Room, looking upon the Company as if they
desired to be private; I caused them to withdraw, but noting that they had
brought an Interpreter with them, I prayed Sir James Blount, and Nathaniel
Tomkins Clark of the Princes Council, (who does well understand the Spanish
tongue) to abide with me.

Being private, they said they came to visit me, because of the good intention,
and well-wishing they understood I had to the accommodation of businesses, and
because I stood named by his Majesty for the employment into Germany.

I acknowledged their coming to visit me as a particular Favor, professing my
self to be one of those, who was able to do least, but that I must and would in
all things conform my self to the will, and good pleasure of the King my Master.

They were pleased to remember, and to take for argument of his Majesty's good
opinion of me, to make me one of the Junta (as they called it) of the selected
Councillors, and his employment given me the last year as his Extraordinary
Ambassador into Germany.

I told them I had been bred a Soldier, as their Excellencies had been, but
that I wanted the capacity and abilities which they had, and that for want of
Language (not affecting to speak by an Interpreter) I had for born to wait on
their Excellencies, as otherwise I would have done.

To that they returned the like Complement, and then said, Their Master had
sent a good answer touching the Palatinate, and they assured me, that he would
perform what he had promised with advantage.

I said if it were so, I then hoped all things would sort to a good end.

They then asked me how his Majesty, and the Lords were affected, and whether
therewith they were satisfied, or no?

I answered, That I conceived their Excellencies knew his Majesty's mind as
well as the Lords, for that they had so lately audience of him.

They said. It was true, they had so, but not a private audience; nor could
they obtain any, though they had much desired the same, but that others were
still present.

I said merely that they were two, and I believed that the King their Master
had sent as able and experienced Ministers as he had any, and therefore his
Majesty might peradventure think fit not to hear them alone.

They said his Majesty might alone hear a thousand Ministers of any Kings, but
if he should be otherwise pleased, they well liked of the Princes being
present; but they said there were also other great Ministers of the Kings, who
wished not well to their Masters affairs.

I said, There might therein be a mistaking, or misunderstanding on their part;
for if the King their Master mean so really as they said, I conceived that no
body would be willing to remove his Majesty from those purposes, and that good
affection which he bore unto his dear Brother the King of Spain.

The Marquess said in English, The King was a good King, and the Prince a good
Prince, but some of their Ministers they doubted were ill willers to them.

I asked if greater demonstrations of reality could be devised, then had been
given on the part of the King and Prince, instancing in the Prince his going in
Person into Spain.

They confessed it, but as the times now were, they said ill offices were done
them.

I assured them, That I neither knew, nor understood of any; neither did I ever
hear them spoken of, but with due respect had unto them, as to the Ministers of
a great King, and his Majesty's dear Brother.

They said their meaning was not, that the ill offices were done to their
Persons, but to the great Businesses, which a certain Person had showed a
willingness to disturb; but they hoped, that the intended amity between our
Masters would hold, and proceed nevertheless.

I professed, that I knew nothing to the contrary, neither understood I the
particular at which they aimed.

The Marquess swore as he was a Christian, he knew that the King his Master
did so truly, and really esteem his dear Brother the King of England, and the
Prince of Wales, that if they needed part of his blood, they should have it for
their good: But he complained, that they could not have their Messages
delivered nor returned from the King of late, but qualified according to the
pleasures of others.

I said, They misconceived it, for I thought they had no cause to complain,
seeing they now had, or might have (as I supposed) the Kings Ear when they
craved it in due, and befitting times.

They seemed to deny it, alleging, That they could not get their Messages and
Papers answered as aforetime.

I said, When the Prince was in Spain, they had free access to his Majesty,
whenever they desired it.

Yea said the Marquess in Latin Tunc; but now, he said, the case was altered.

I said the King had given many testimonies to the world of his willingness to
comply with their Master, and Them: And if either his Majesty or the Prince
seemed now more reserved, and deliberate in their actions then heretofore, it
might be that his Highness had learned that wary and circumspect proceeding in
Spain, where they are said to use it in matters of far less moment.

They smiled hereat, and prayed me to continue my good intentions, and respects
toward them, and to the joint affairs of both our Masters.

I said, I would always serve the King my Master, with a true and faithful
heart, and so far as should be agreeable to his desires, and good liking, I
would to my small power be ready to serve them.

In Conclusion they said, They came but to visit me, but being come, they could
not choose but say something, and touch upon business.

Arthur Chichester.

22. of May, 1624. Having made visits at sundry times to the Spanish
Ambassadors, I do here under my hand declare, what passed betwixt them and me,
so near as my memory serves; lest in my absence any such ma ter should fall in
question, I now intending to travel for a space.
When his Highness was in Spain, being upon my journey in Scotland, I went to
Elie-House to take my leave of Don Carlos, where Vanvail was present, I
expressing much joy of the match, which in my mind would without all question
be perfected, did find no such humor, nor inclination on their part, which did
much astonish me; for they grumblingly did allege, that the King my Master
did perform nothing that he promised, or how could any thing be expected the
Infanta being here, whereas nothing was performed the Prince being in Spain? I
besought them to do better offices, then without reason to put jealousies
betwixt my Master, and theirs, who would never have sent his son to Spain
without a real intention. Which only act was reason sufficient to remove all
doubts.

Yet did they still continue their challenge of diverse Bracks, specially, anent
the sending of ships to Scotland to bring away the two Dunkirkers, and not
perfecting such conditions as were promised to Catholics. I did entreat them
again, that such conceits of my Master might be removed, for they might be
confident of full performance of what he had promised, by reason he had never
broke his promise to any. I desired them likewise to consider with what love
our Prince was gone, and what a stain it should be to the State of Spain, if
uncourteously he should return with distaste; Besides, it might fall out to be
the worst act that ever they committed, where anent if they had love to their
Master they would prove good Instruments. What was spoke by me in English was
related in Spanish to Don Carlo, so was it to me what they spoke in Spanish.
Sometimes Don Carlo spoke in French, so that not a word passed which each man
did not know.

I went again after the Treaties were given up, and did remember Don Carlo of
what I had forespoke, when the Marquess was present and took the speech; they
did demand of me whether I was come of my self, or by Commission, for they
professed to account me their friend.

I answered that I came mee^ly of my self, and was sorry that by their own
deserving, they had procured such alterations and I thought strange of such
demands as they had made at Hampton Court, which did both express much spleen,
and lack of good intelligence. They did avow their demands were reasonable;
but, from that time they would make visits to the Duke and love him better then
before, because they were in doubt before, but now they know him to be an
Enemy. I did answer, that I was sorry for their proceeding, and was their
friend so long as they were friends to my Master.

After a few haughty words, such (as it was a wrong way to deal with their
Master by threatenings, who gave pay daily to 300000. Soldiers that they had
followed the wars a long time, and had seen men killed by the Cannon, Musket,
Pike, and sword, but never saw men killed with words, they desired me to speak
to his Majesty, that they might either be dismissed, or have freedom to go
about their business with security. They did desire me likewise to speak to
his Majesty, that the treaty for the Palatinate might continue.

I did demand of them how these two things did agree, both to threaten and
entreat? whereupon they passed upon me with odd complaints. I went once more of
late to give them a farwell. I said, they proved themselves good Servants to
their Master in pressing to raise jealousies in this State, but they were now
too well known to do harm. The Marquess swore, that by this time the Infanta
had been here, and the Palatinate restored, if the blame had not been on our
Part. I did entreat I might be excused not to believe that. I did ask whether
they did not condemn their own judgments in accusing the Duke of Buckingham of
that whereof he was cleared, both by the King, and State. Their answer was, He
was cleared by those who were his confiderates, all as guilty as himself.

I demanded, why they should still express their malice against the Duke of
Buckingham. Did they not think but our Prince was a man sensible of what
injuries he had received? their answer was, if the Duke were out of the way,
the Prince would be well disposed. They said farther, his Highness was an
obedient son before the Duke guided him, but since, he was not. So that when we
speak of his Majesty, they speak with much respect, but for the Prince did not
use them kindly, they did make the less account of him. So after I took my
leave and parted.

Nithisdail.
MUch I have omitted for brevitie, wherein they did express much respect to
his Majesty, much of their threatening to the Duke of Buckingham.



The Lord Nithisdail to the Duke, 22 June, 1624.
My most Noble Lord,
FInding matters at great uncertainty when I came hither, I resolved to make
farther trial before I should part from hence. What thanks is due to the
Ambassadors for their paineful, and discreet Carriage can hardly be expressed.

Matters now being drawn to such a conformity (which I confess I thought
impossibilities, though withal I found much respect always to the Prince with
a sensible desire of the Match expressed, both by the King, and those I spoke
withal) our Ambassadors seem still to be discontent, that all things are not
remitted to our Masters verbal promise, which though it may be assurance
sufficient to all Catholics, who have the sense to consider, that it must be
our Masters, and the Princes gracious disposition must be our safety, more then
either word or writ: yet the writ being desired privately (as they pretend)
merely to draw the Popes consent (without the which nothing is to be finished)
the difference is not so great, their Princely promise being given already.

What cause of jealousy the refusing hereof should procure, you may consider:
besides, my judgment fails me, if a more easy way shall be assented unto upon
this side. If the Ambassadors have bestirred themselves to get this out of the
public Articles, I can bear witness. Thus much I dare avow, that neither
time nor place have been omitted by them to do good; though I must confess,
what intelligence I had in the proceeding, has rather been from the French
then from them. Their Reasons (as I conceive) was their doubts, that did bring
me hither, having neither Letters from the King, the Prince, nor your Grace.

Whereupon to remove these conceits, I showed them, that I did only take this
in my way, intending to go see the Jubilees, wherewith though his Majesty, nor
the Prince, neither yet your Grace were acquainted with at my parting, you will
be pleased to make my excuse. I am infinitely beholding to the Ambassadors
noble Courtesy, which I know has proceeded from that relation which they know
I have to you.

My Lord, let the happiness which shall come to the Prince by matching with
such a Lady, as I protest before God, has those perfections, to my thinking,
can hardly be equalled, be a means to hasten a happy Conclusion; And let not
matter of Ceremony draw delays where the substance is agreed upon. So shall
all that belong to our Master be made happy, in general, and you in particular,
for that love which thex express here to your self.

Once more I humbly beg, you will consider particularly upon each one of the
Articles, and I hope you shall not find such unreconcileable difference as an
affected Puritan may pretend. Whereupon if I have looked more with eyes of a
Papist then was fitting, it is my lack of judgment, and not of zeal to my
Masters Honor, which of all earthly things shall be preferred. Beseeching God
to give a happy success hereunto, with a sound recovery of your own health, I
humbly take my leave.

Your Graces Faithful servant, Nithisdail.
Dated at Compion.
Sir Tobie Matthew to the King of Spain.
DOn Tobea Mathei Cavallero Yngles y Catholico Romano beseeches your
Catholic Majesty with all humility and reverence, to give him leave to speak
these few words unto you.

He understands that the Theologos have persisted precisely upon the Voto,
which they gave before, and he finds clearly that the Prince conceives, that
he can by no means submit himself thereunto with his Honor. And besides, my
Lord the King has expressly required him to return with all possible speed, in
case that Voto should not be qualified. And it is certain that he will depart
for England within very few days. And whosoever shall inform your Majesty,
that the Treaty of this marriage may be really kept on foot after the
departure of the Prince upon these terms, does deceive your Majesty through
the ignorance wherein he is of the State of England. So that the Prince
departing thus, the Catholic Subjects of all my Lord the Kings Dominions are
to be in lamentable case. For although the Prince did yesterday vouchsafe to
have Compassion of me in respect of the grief wherein he saw I had upon these
occasions, and to say, That although the marriage were broken, yet he would
procure that his Catholic Subjects should not fare the worse for that; yet I
know that it is morally impossible for that honorable design of his to take
place in respect of the People, and the importunity and malice of the
Puritans, and especially because it will now be a case of mere necessity for
my Lord the King, to run in a course of very straight Conjunction with them of
his Parliament, that he may be able the better to serve himself of them in
other occasions: from which Parliament, as now the case will stand, what
Catholic can expect any other then the extreamitie of rigor?

In consideration whereof I cast my self with a sad heart at the feet of your
Majesty, beseeching you, that you will take into your royal remembrance the
love, which you owe, and procure to pay to our holy Mother, the Church, and
that some course may be taken, and with speed (for otherwise it will be too
late to give the Prince some foot of ground upon which he may be able to stand
in such sort, as that without loss of honor, and breach of that word, which
he has given to the world, and without prejudice to that obedience, which he
owes to the least commandment of the King his Father; his Highness may be
enabled to comply with the incomparable affection which he bears the Infanta
your Majesty's Sister. And that by means hereof the two Crowns may be kindly
in perfect union, and the Catholic religion may be highly advantaged, not
only in the Dominions of my Lord the King, but in many other parts of
Christendom, into which the Authority of these Dominions does flow.

For my part, I take the eternal God to witness, whom I procure to serve, and
who has given me a heart, which disclaimeth from all other interesses then to
serve God, and my King, that I conceive my self not to comply with a good
conscience without laying this protestation under the Eye of your Majesty,
that if the Catholic subjects of the King my Lord shall grow liable to
persecution, or affliction by occasion of breaking this Match, through the
disgust of the King my Lord and his Council, or through the power, which
infallibly the Puritans assembled in Parliament will have with him upon this
occasion, that blood, or misery whatsoever, it may partly be required at their
hands who have advised your Majesty not to accept of those large conditions
for Catholics which my Lord the King and the Prince have condescended to, and
of that more then moral Security which they have offered for the performance
thereof.

And on the other side, I undertake to your Majesty, under the pain of
infamy, in case that be not made good which here I affirm, that if your
Majesty will be pleased to give some such ground to the Prince, as whereupon
he may with Honor stay, and perfect the Treaty of the Marriage by any such
way, or means, as may occur to your Majesty's royal wisdom, the whole bodies of
the Catholics in England both religious, and secular, shall acknowledge it as
a great blessing of God, and shall oblige themselves to pray incessantly for
your happy Estate etc.

Sir Tobie Matthew to the Duchess of Buckingham, 9. June 1625.
Madam,
THere was no cause till now, why I should trouble your Ladyship with
presenting my unprofitable service to you: but now I shall venture to do it, by
reason of the good news I shall send with it.

For our Queen arrived here yesterday, and I was glad at the heart to see her
such, as she had seemed; she is more grown then I had thought, being higher by
half the head then my Lady Marquess. And whatsoever they say, believe me, she
sits already upon the very skirts of womanhood. Madam, upon my faith she is a
most sweet lovely Creature, and has a countenance which opens a window into
her heart, where a man may see all Nobleness and Goodness; and I dare venture
my head (upon the little skill I have in Physiognomie) that she will be
extraordinarily beloved by our Nation, and deserve to be so; and that the
actions of her self, which are to be her own, will be excellent. Me thought I
discerned in her countenance a little remnant of sadness, which the fresh
wound of parting from the Queen Mother might have made, yet perhaps I was
deceived. Her Aattyre was very plain, for so Great a Queen can be thought to
have nothing mean about her. But I hope that amongst many other blessings,
which God, will have provided for us by her means, her example will be able to
teach our Country wit in this kind.

I had the happiness to see, and hear her at a short distance, by the
Commandment which my Lady of Buckingham laid upon me to interpret for her, and
believe me, she is full of wit, and has a lovely manner in expressing it. But
I confess I was sorry with all my heart, to hear that her courage was so
great, as to carry her instantly (after my Lady of Buckingham had taken her
leave for that time) to Sea in a poor little boat in the company of her
brother, whom yet, I have not had the honor to see. I dare give my word for
her, that she is not afraid of her own shadow, who could find in her heart to
put her self at the first sight, upon an element of that danger, and disease
for mere pastime; Unless it were perhaps that she might carry some Steel
about her, and that there is some Adamant at Dover, which already might begin
to draw her that way.

I am extremely sorry, that we have lost the hope of seeing the two other
Queens, for if they had come, we might have had beauty here as well in the
preterperfect, and in the present tense, as now we have in the future.

But the Queen Mothers indisposition has arrested her at Amiens in punishment
of that malice, wherewith she dissembled it too long at the first, through the
extreme desire she had of coming hither.

Our Queen received my Lady of Buckingham with strange courtesy and favor,
and now there is no remedy but that the King will needs defray and treat her
after a high manner. And I have been told that Mounsieur will needs descend so
much as to visit her in her lodging; and the Duchess of Chevereux (being that
great Princess, as she is, both by match, and blood) will perforce give
precedence not only to my Lady of Buckingham, but to my Ladies her daughters
also: And I assure my self, that a less puissant example then this will serve
to convert our Great Ladies, even to exceed in England toward the Ladies which
are strangers, and do but come, and go.

But the while this Court does so apply it self to do my Lady of Buckingham all
imaginable honor, I look on it so, as that I am no way discouraged thereby
from bearing devotion to the blessed Virgin, when I see that men, who are sick
of love toward the Son, are put even by a kind of Law of nature into pain,
till they revenge themselves upon the Mother. I beseech Jesus, etc.

From Bulloign. ^.

Dr. Sharp to King James. The Complaint of Europe our Mother, aged, and
oppressed,
TO whom? To the Kings and Princes of Europe. Of whom? Of the Pope of Rome. For
what matter? For causing by his Catholic League so much blood to be spilt
within these few years in Europe. To this effect, as that excellent Poet
speaks, with a little change of his words, Quis non Europaeo sanguine pinguior.
Campus sepulchris impia praelia
Testatur? auditumque Turcis
Europaeae sonitum ruinae?
Qui gurges aut quae flumina lugubris
Ignara belli? quo Mare Civicae
Non decoloravere caedes?
Quae Caret ora cruore nostro?


And what further danger is it like to breed? Even to bring the Turk into
Austria, Italy, Germany, into Vienna, and into Rome it self, as it has brought
him into Pannonia, and of late into Pollonia to the great danger of all
Christendom. Which danger she does foresee, and lament, and tells, That no
European King has sought to compound these bloody home-quarrels but the King
of Great Britain. She most humbly desires the rest of the Princes, that they
would Commiserate her most afflicted estate; her Cities taken, her houses
spoiled, her children murdered, her Matrons and Virgins defloured, her ways
full of Thieves, her Seas of Pirates, all the helps of life taken from her in
many parts, her flocks and herds scattered, her Tillage ceased, her Trade
decayed, the Laws silent, Learning fallen, good manners ruined, neither fear
of God left, nor care of men, that all things seem to tend to the first Chaos,
etc. And therefore she does beseech the Princes to whose trust God has
committed, not to whose power he has permitted his two Wards, two Twins, the
Common Wealth, and the Church as to Guardians, that they will look better to
their charge.

And first, not suffer the Common Wealth of Christendom by their arms (at the
Popes secret instigation) to be destroyed, and to this end she first uses the
example of good Heathen Emperors to persuade them as Augustus, Vespasian,
Titus, Nerva, Trajan, Antoninus, Marcus Aurelius, Alexander Severus, Probus;
that they will settle peace at home, and by joint Forces make War abroad upon
the Common enemy of their Kingdoms, and so make the Commonwealth to Honor
them, being made by them, rich in wealth, strong in power, famous in glory,
honest in manners, the felicity of every earthly Commonwealth.

Now for the other Ward, or Twin, the Church, the Heavenly Commonwealth,
because she has before professed, that as she had been long a Pagan, so now by
the Grace of God, has long been a Christian, and did take this to be her
greatest honor, to be the harbor of the Christian Church, she stirs them up
to be more careful by the example of the best Christian Emperors, Constantine,
Jovinian, Gratian, Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius, Charlemaign, and his Sons
Lotharius, and Lodovicus, to defend her from heresies within, and from violence
without.

And now she begins to tell them, That as one walking with others in the Sun;
not thinking on it, must needs be Sun-burned; so she walking with her reformed
children in this new-risen Sun of the Gospel of Christ, did feel her self
colored (as it were) with the Spirit of Christ, by observing the differences
between the two Churches with great indifferency.

Here because she has before challenged the Pope and the Jesuits of cruelty,
and persuading first, that as men they should spare humane blood.

Secondly, as Europeans they should spare European blood.

Thirdly, as Christians they should spare Christian blood.

She is first thus answered by the Pope speaking for himself, and his Jesuits,
That they are not the authors of shedding Christian blood, but haeretical
blood: And that her reformed sons (as she terms them) are not Christians,
because they be no Catholics; And therefore Heretics to be taken away by
death, according to the sentence of St. Paul, Haereticum hominem post unam aut
alteram admonitionem devita; Hoc est de vita toll, as Cardinal Allen does
expound it, and according to the Decree of the Council of Lateran.

And where I pray you was this your Reformed Church before Luther? And as for
my Jesuits you call them bloody, even as you call your Physicians bloody, who
for driving away a Pestilential Fever, do take more corrupt and putrified
blood from the party then they would.

And thereupon, he does twitt Europe as an old doting Sibylla, in her youth,
being the Concubine of one Taurus, whom she feigned to be Jupiter, to cover her
fault, with the greatness of her lover, who did also give her the name of this
divided World, that by the honor of her title, she might excuse the shame of
her fact; And bytes the fond Orator, that put this person upon her, a whelp of
Luthers, that makes this Minion to accuse him before the Princes of Homicide,
or an insensible piece of Earth to plead his Cause.

To which Europe answers,

First, for her self;

Then for the Church.

This Sum I thought good to present to your Majesty, if it please your
judgment, I shall bring the whole work to your Majesty when I am recovered.

And thus craving pardon of your Majesty for troubling your greater thoughts,
though this tend to the good of Christendom which you intend, I rest

Your Majesty's Most humble Chaplain, Leonel Sharp.

Dr. Sharp to the Duke of Buckingham.
May it please your Grace,
IT is not my purpose to advise, but to attend what others shall determine of
the Match of the Palatinate; but if that be broken off, and this not restored
according to promise, every one may conceive that Peace must give place to War
abroad; but with whom, and where, and how it is to be made, it is for an higher
Council, then for any private man to resolve.

Peace were best, if it had Nihil infidiarum, as Tully says; but it is to be
feared that the malice of the Catholic League does, and will hinder the work
of the Kings most Noble and Christian heart, and then it will be a War wrapped in
the name of Peace.

A just War is the exercise of Faith, as Peter Martyr well collects out of
those Wars which those Worthy Kings and Princes Heb. 11. fought for their God
and his Israel: so war is just which is made for the maintenance of Gods true
religion, and for the safety of the Common Wealth, either for the keeping of
that we have, or recovering of that we have lost.

Every one therefore does rejoice to see the King and his Subjects so joined in
love together, and in the purpose of this defense, every one I mean that is a
true Christian, and good subject; and do wish that two things presently were
added, care at home to Coupe up all false-hearted Subjects, that are known, and
provision to meet with the secret, and open practices of such foreign Enemies,
as are like to abet them

The good policies of the former reign in such times is the best president for
this at this time. The heads were then committed liberali Custodiae, divided
from their inferior parts, the Papists disarmed, their claws pared, that they
might not hurt us, the laws executed upon the Jesuits and Priests,
firebrarnds of sedition, and rebellion withal: Or if not blood drawn of them,
yet close imprisonment, or banishment enjoined them.

Large subsidies granted to prepare the Navy, and pay the armies. And a great
while no war proclaimed, but brave Adventurers sent forth as to Portugal, the
Groine, to the West Indies, etc. And before Letters of reprisal granted to the
Merchants to make up their losses, a Rowland, for an Oliver, because they had
granted Letters of Mart against us. By this means Carricks were brought in,
the treasure of their West-Indian mines laid for at their return, so to make
war upon them with their own money, till they had made the enemy bankerout,
Ausb^ug.
and to break with their banquers of Auspurg, and Genua, that he was not able
to pay his Soldiers, and garrisons; and still the Low Countries strongly
assisted, and war made upon the enemy there, or at home, at his own doors,
which was more Noble, gainful and safe for us; for we still had peace and
plenty at home, though war abroad.

I know not how the ease stands now between us, and the Spaniards, but me
thinks it should not be very well, when nothing will satisfy him, but the head
of him, that spoke the truth for the good of the King and kingdom. Certainly if
we break with him, as they which sit at the Helm know what is best to do, he is
ready to strike, and will peradventure strike quickly before we be fully
prepared, therefore our preparations had need to be more speedy, and thorough,
lost we fall into the snare. While they were treating of peace in 88. they did
even then invade us. I pray God they have not used this treaty of marriage to
as bad a purpose; for it seems they never did intend it, but for delays, and
to make it serve their turn, they have plainly abused us in the Palatinate
therereby. But I can say nothing for the present, yet what is to be done, it is
proper to an higher judgment; only I tell what was then, when we were enemies.

I remember in 88. waiting upon the Earl of Leicester at Tilbury Camp, and in
89. going into Portugal with my Noble Master the Earl of Essex, I learned
somewhat fit to be imparted to your Grace.

The Queen lying in the Camp one night, guarded with her army, the old Lord
Treasurer Burleigh came thither, and delivered to the Earl the examination of
Don Pedro, who was taken, and brought in by Sir Francis Drake, which
examination the Earl of Leicester delivered unto me to publish to the army in
my next sermon. The sum of it was this.

Don Pedro being asked what was the intent of their coming, Don Pedro's
Confession.
stoutly answered the Lords, What? But to subdue your Nation, and root it out.

Good, said the Lords, and what meant you then to do with the Catholics? He
answered, We meant to send them (good men) directly unto Heaven, as all you
that are Heretics to hell. Yea but said the Lords, what meant you to do with
your whips of cord, and wire? (whereof they had great store in their ships)
What? said he, We meant to whip you Heretics to death, that have assisted my
Masters Rebels, and done such dishonours to our Catholic King, and people?
Yea, but what would you have done (said they) with their young Children? They
(said he) which were above seven years old, should have gone the way their
fathers went, the rest should have lived, branded in the forehead with the
Letter L. for Lutheran, to perpetual bondage.

This I take God to witness I received of those great Lords upon examination
taken by the Council, and by commandment delivered it to the army.

The Queen the next morning rode through all the Squadrons of her army, as
Armed Pallas attended by Noble Footmen, Leicester, Essex, and Norris then Lord
Marshal, and diverse other great Lords. Where she made an excellent Oration to
her army, which the next day after her departure, I was commanded to redeliver
to all the Army together, to keep a Public Fast.

Her words were these.
MY loving people, we have been persuaded by some, that are careful of our
safety, to take heed how we commit our self to armed multitudes for fear of
treachery: but I assure you, I do not desire to live to distrust my faithful,
and loving people. Let Tyrants fear, I have always so behaved my self, that
under God I have placed my chiefest strength, and safeguard in the loyal hearts
and good will of my subjects. And therefore I am come amongst you as you see,
at this time, not for my recreation, and disport, but being resolved in the
midst, and heat of the battle to live, or die amongst you all, to lay down
for my God, and for my kingdom, and for my people, my Honor, and my blood even
in the dust. I know I have the body, but of a weak and feeble woman, but I
have the heart and Stomach of a King, and of a King of England too, and think
foul scorn that Parma or Spain, or any Prince of Europe should dare to invade
the borders of my Realm, to which rather then any dishonor shall grow by me, I
my self will take up arms, I my self will be your General, Judge, and Rewarder
of every one of your virtues in the field. I know already for your
forwardness, you have deserved rewards and crowns, and we do assure you in
the word of a Prince, they shall be duly paid you. In the mean time my
Lieutenant General shall be in my stead, then whom never Prince commanded a
more Noble or worthy subject, not doubting but by your obedience to my
General, by your Concord in the Camp, and your valor in the field, we shall
shortly have a famous victory over those enemies of my God, of my Kingdoms,
and of my People.

This I thought would delight your Grace, and no man has it but my self, and
such as I have given it to, and therefore I made bold to send it unto you, if
you have it not already.

I would I could persuade your Grace, either to read your self, or to command
your Secretary to gather out of the History of Spain translated into English
toward the end five or six leaves, which has matter of great importance fit
for the Parliament, especially for two points; the one concerning the settled
intention of the State of Spain against England, whenever they can get an
opportunity; the other concerning the main reasons of state, which moved the
Queen, and Council, then to take upon her the protection of the Low Countries.

They were of two sorts, the first inherent in the Person of the Prince then
being, which died with her, (as some think) the Quarrel being then between the
Queen, and King of Spain, Philip the second, which are said to be buried in
their graves; the other inherent in their estates, which live with them, and
remain in the heart of the State of Spain against us, whosoever is their King.

And this appears by a large Disputation of State had before the King of
Spain, and blab'd out by their Chronicler in many words, wherein pro et contra
two do argue. The one, who proves that the Netherlands their Rebels are first
to be conquered, that it may serve them as a rise to the Conquest of England,
and the reasons for that project. The other, who proves, that the English are
first to be conquered, the supporters of those their Rebels, and for a rise to
the Empire of Christendom, and the reasons for the project, and specially for
that it is more easy now for the disuse of arms in England; for that England
is not now that England which it has been, etc.

And the mean, how they may win themselves into us by a Treaty of Marriage, as
Mariana blabs it out in general, that which the Prince has cried, and your
Grace has uttered in Parliament in special, that Colloquia de Contractibus,
are with them Mera ludibria parata tantum Regum animis, Ne noceant distinendis,
dum ea quae ipsi intendunt, perficiantur. Which Guicciardine also does in
general affirm, That the Spaniards bring more things to pass by Treaties, and
subtilties, then by force of Arms.

And that you may truly understand the full intention of the Spaniard to the
state of this Kingdom, and Church, I would your Grace would read a notable
Discourse of the late most Noble Earl of Essex, made by the Commandment of
Queen Elizabeth, and debated before her Majesty, and her Council concerning
this point, Whether Peace or War was to be treated with Spain? The Lord
Buckhurst speaking for a Treaty of Peace, to the which the Noble Queen, and
her old Lord Treasurer inclined: The Earl speaking for War, because no safe
peace could be made with that State for 3. special Reasons, which are in that
Treatise set down at large, which is not fit for me yet to deliver by writing,
but there you shall find them. Your Grace may have the book of diverse Noblemen
your friends. If you have it not (if I may understand your pleasure) I will get
it for you. It was of that effect, that it brought the Queen, and Treasurer
contrary to their purpose to his side, for the very necessity of the common
safety.

Your Lordship having angered them, and endeared your self to us, you had need
to look to your self; you are as odious to them as ever the Earl of Essex was.

The Jesuit Walpool set on one of the stable (Squire) one well affected to my
Lord, to poison the rests of his Chair. And seeing they strike at the
Ministers, which deal effectually for his Church, (witness worthy Doctor
White) what will they do to such Pillars of State as you are? The Lord preserve
your Grace, and watch over you. And thus I rest

Your Grace his most humble at Commandment, Leonel Sharp.

The Lord Cromwell to the Duke, 8. September. 1625.
May it please your Grace,
I Am now returned from mine own home, and am here at Fulham near Mr.
Burlemachi, making my self ready to attend your Command in the best manner my
poor fortunes will give me leave, and with what speed I may. Some things I have
sent to Plymouth, and some Gentlemen, so as when I come there, I hope to find
that your Lordship has appointed me a good sailing ship, and one, that shall
be able to play her part with the best and proudest enemy, that dare look
danger in the face.

Though your Grace has placed a Noble Gentleman in the Regiment was intended
to my Lord of Essex, yet I will not despair of your favor, or that you will
not give me some taste of it as well as to any other. I will study to be a
deserving Creature, and whether you will please to look on me with an
affectionate eye or no, I will love, honor, and serve you, with no less
truth, and faith, then those you have most obliged. What concerns me, I will
not here speak of for fear I offend. My prayers shall ever attend you, and my
curses those, that wish you worse then their own souls. Diverse I do meet, that
say your Grace has parted with your place of the Mastership of the Horse,
which makes the world suspect, that some disfavour your Lordship is growing
into: And that this prime feather of yours being lost, or parted with (be it as
it will) it will not be long ere the rest follow.

They offer to lay wagers, the Fleet goes not this year, and that of necessity
shortly a Parliament must be, which when it comes, sure it will much discontent
you. It is wondered at, that since the King did give such great gifts to the
Duchess of Chevereux, and those, that then went, how now a small sum in the
Parliament should be called for at such an unseasonable time: And let the
Parliament sit when it will, begin they will, where they ended. They say the
best Lords of the Council knew nothing of Count Mansfelts journey, or this
Fleet, which discontents even the best sort, if not all; They say it is a very
great burden, your Grace takes upon you, since none knows any thing but you.
It is conceived, that not letting others bears part of the burden you now
bear, it may ruin you; (which heaven forbid) Much discourse there is of your
Lordship here, and there, as I passed home, and back, and nothing is more
wondered at, then that one Grave man is not known to have your Ear except my
good, and Noble Lord Conway. All men say, if you go not with the Fleet you will
suffer in it, because if it prosper, it will be thought no act of yours; and if
it succeed ill, they say it might have been better, had not you guided the
King. They say your undertakings in the Kingdom, and your Engagements for the
Kingdom, will much prejudice your Grace.

And if God bless you not with goodness as to accept kindly, what in duty
and love, I here offer; questionless my freedom in letting you know the
discourse of the world, may much prejudice me. But if I must lose your favor,
I had rather lose it for striving to do you good in letting you know the talk
of the wicked world, then for any thing else, so much I heartily desire your
prosperity, and to see you trample the ignorant multitude under foot.

All I have said is the discourse of the world, and when I am able to judge of
your actions, I will freely tell your Lordship my mind. Which when it shall not
be always really inclined to serve you, may all noble thoughts forsake me.
Because I seldom am honored with your Ear, I thus make bold with your
all-discerning eye, which I pray God may be enabled with power and strength,
daily to see into them that desire your ruin. Which if it once be, I will
never believe, but so good a King will constantly enable you daily with power
to confound them.

Many men would not be thus bold and saucie. If I find you distaste me for my
respect to you. I will respect my poor self (who ever has honored you) so
much as hereafter to be silent. So I kiss the noble hands of your Grace.

Your Lordships servant, during life, Tho. Cromwell.

Sir Robert Philips to the Duke of Buckingham, 21. August, 1624.
May it please your Grace,
BEfore the receipt of that Dispatch, with which you were pleased to honor me
from Apthorp, dated the last of July, I was fully determined at your return to
Woodstock, to have presented your Grace my most humble and faithful service,
and by that means to have obtained the knowledge in what state and condition of
health you had passed this part of the progress. Your former weakness,
together with the dangerous temper of the season, giving me cause both to
doubt, and pray against the worst; But I found my self then to be more strictly
obliged to the performance of this duty, when I received from your Grace so
clear, and abundant a testimony, as well of your good opinion, as of the trust
you reposed in me. Obligations certainly of that nature, and of so large an
extent as do with reason deprive me of all degree of liberty, and justly
subject me to a perpetual state of servitude, and obedience to all your Graces
Commandments.

I have diligently perused my Lord of Bristols answer, which it pleased your
Grace to communicate unto me. And although it become me not, neither will I
presume to give my opinion of the strength, or weakness thereof, yet will I
take the liberty to say thus much, That I find in his case that to be verified
which I have observed at other times, (to wit) That when able and prudent men
come to act their own Parts, they are then for the most part not of the
clearest sight, and do commonly commit such errors, as are both discernable
and avoidable, even by men of mean abilities.

Being now fallen to speak of this Lord, I humbly beseech your Lordship to give
me leave plainly and briefly to set before you some Cogitations of mine own,
touching his present occasion.

First, that it may be maturely considered, Whether the tendering him any
further charge, unto which he may be able to frame a probable satisfactorie
answer, will not rather serve to declare his innocence, then to prepare his
Condemnation, and so instead of pressing him, reflect back with disadvantage
upon the proceeding against him.

Secondly, That your Grace would be pleased to consult with your self, whether
you may not desist from having him further questioned, without either blemish
to your Honor, or manifest prejudice to the service: Considering that you have
(to your perpetual glory) already dissolved and broken the Spanish party, and
rendered them without either the means, or the hope of ever conjoyning in such
sort together again, as may probably give the least disturbance or impediment
to your Graces ways and designs.

And lastly, Although his Lordship in sundry places of his answer, especially
in the latter part, does seem directly to violate the rule of the Provident.
prudent Mariner, who in foul weather, and in a storm, is accustomed (to
prevent shipwreck) rather to pull down, then to set up his sails.
Nevertheless as this case stands, it deserves to be thoroughly pondered, which
of the two ways will most conduce to your Graces purpose, and is likely to
receive the best interpretation and success, either to have him dealt with
after a quick and round manner, or otherwise to proceed slowly and moderately
with him, permiting him for a time to remain where he is, as a man laid aside,
and in the way to be forgotten. A state of being (if I mistake not his
complexion) which will be by him apprehended equivalent to the severest and
sharpest censure, that possibly can be inflicted on him.

Thus have I over-boldly adventured to present unto your Grace, these few
Queries and Proposals, which they might be both enlarged, and more forcibly
urged; yet to avoid the being too tedious, I have chosen to omit the further
insisting upon them, till such time, as I may have the honor and felicity of
being near your person. At this present it shall suffice, humbly to beseech
your Grace, to be assuredly persuaded, that what I have now delivered in this
subject, does not proceed from any over indulgent respect I bear either to the
person, or fortune of my Lord of Bristol; though I should not be sorry, that
like a prudent man he might by his discreet application to your Grace, render
himself capable to be again readmitted to your love and favor. But the motive
which has induced me principally to use this plainness and liberty, is the
Consideration, how importantly (as I conceive) the well ordering and disposing
this particular, does concern your Graces service. Unto the advancement and
furtherance whereof, if I may be able now, or at any time to contribute the
least proportion, I shall esteem my self most happy, and more then abundantly
rewarded, in case that my right humble endeavors in that kind may receive from
your Grace a favorable and acceptable construction.

I will conclude this Letter with a twofold prayer; first to you for my self,
that your Grace will be pleased to pardon this boldness. Next to God for you,
that he will give you health, and length of days for his Majesty's service,
and the good and honor of this Commonwealth. I humbly crave leave to remain

Your Graces Most obedient and devoted servant, Rob. Philips.

The Earl of Middlesex to the Duke.
Right Noble, and my most honored Lord,
I Have received diverse Letters from your Lordship since your going from
Theobalds, which though they concern several men, and in sundry kinds, yet they
all conclude upon diminution of his Majesty's estate, contrary to your general
ground, when his Majesty delivered me the Staff, and contrary to your
Lordships private directions given me at Theobalds, with which I did your
Lordship the right to acquaint the King.

I have of late had cause to take into consideration the miserable condition of
my present estate, who since I received the staff, have led such a life, as my
very enemies pity me, which I foresaw, the distraction of the Kings estate, and
burden of that place, would of necessity throw upon me. Yet my duty, love
and thankfulness to his Majesty, and my love and thankfulness to you,
contrary to my own judgment, and advice of my friends, made me undertake it,
little expecting these Cross accidents, which have lain heavy upon me, and
more troubled me, then the continual cares and vexations of my place.

I do most freely and willingly acknowledge one man cannot be more bound unto
another, then I am to your Lordship; and if I do not make a thankful return,
let me be held an ungrateful Monster, which is the worst of Villains.

I have been so ambitious as to desire to extend my gratitude so far, as that
the King may have cause to thank you for preferring me, and that your Lordship
may bless the time you did it. To effect that, I shall delight to live a
miserable life for a time. The course which must of necessity be held to do
it, I will acquaint your Lordship with very shortly, which I hope you will be
pleased to approve, and assist me in. And then I will express my thankfulness
to you that way: If that course shall not like you, I will not only deliver
you up my places, but whatsoever I hold from the King, and live privately upon
mine own estate. For I will never sell so good and gracious a Master, nor so
noble and constant a friend ruined, and undone. God bless you, and send you
your hearts desire. As for my self, I never desired to quit the World, and all
the fooleries in it, till now.

Your Lordships Faithfullest servant, and Kinsman, Middlesex.

The Earl of Middlesex to his Majesty, 26. April, 1624.
Sacred Majesty, and my most gracious Master,
YOur goodness is such to me your oppressed servant in this my time of
persecution, as I know not how to express my thankfulness otherwise then by
pouring forth my humble and hearty prayers to the great God of heaven and
earth, to grant your Majesty all happiness here, and everlasting happiness
hereafter.

Between 5. and 6. of the clock upon Saturday in the evening, I received my
Charge from the Lords assembled in Parliament, with an Order, by which I am
commanded to make my appearance at the Bar upon Thursday next by 9. of the
clock in the morning with my answer: And in the mean time to examine my
witnesses.

This Charge of mine has been in preparing, by examining of witnesses upon
oath, and otherwise, 23. days. And has been weighed by the Wisdom of both
Houses, and does concern me so nearly in point of honor, and faith to your
Majesty to answer well, as I value my life at nothing in comparison of it.

I may grieve, though I will not complain of any thing my Lords shall be
pleased to Command; but do hope, that upon a second consideration they will not
think three days a fitting time for me to make my Answer, and to examine
witnesses in a cause of such importance, and so nearly concerning me, when
twenty three days has been spent almost from morning until night in preparing
my Charge.

I know the House (whose Judgment I shall never desire to wave) is the proper
place for me to move to be resolved herein, and therefore shall upon Wednesday
morning make my humble motion there to have 7. days longer time, as well to
make my answer, and appearance, as to examine my witnesses, which are many, and
upon several heads.

But because the Prince his Highness, and many of the Principal Lords are now
with your Majesty at Windsor, my most humble suit to your Majesty is, That
you would be pleased to move them on my behalf, to yield me so much further
time, that my Cause may not suffer prejudice for want of time to make my just
defense, that which I have propounded being as moderate as is possible.

With my most humble and hearty prayer to Almighty God for continuance of
your health with all happiness, I humbly kiss your Royal hands, and will ever
rest

Your Majesty's most humble, etc. Middelsex.

The Earl of Carlisle to his Majesty, 14. February. 1623.
My it please your most Excellent Majesty,
THough my present indisposition deprives me of the Honor to attend your
Majesty with the rest of the Commissioners, with whom your Majesty was pleased
to associate me; yet I most humbly beseech your Majesty to give me leave in
all humility to represent unto your Majesty, what my heart conceives to be
most for your Majesty's service in the present conjuncture of your affairs.
During this time of my distemper, I have been visited by diverse Gentlemen of
quality, who are Parliament Men, none of those popular, and plausible Orators,
but solid, and judicious good patriots, who fear God, and honor the King. Out
of their discourses I collect, That there are three things, which do chiefly
trouble your people.

The first, that for the subsidies granted, the two last Parliaments, they have
received no retribution by any bills of Grace.

The second, that some of their Burgesses were proceeded against after the
Parliament were dissolved.

And the third, that they misdoubt, that when they shall have satisfied your
Majesty's demands and desires, you will nevertheless proceed to the conclusion
of the Spanish match. It would be too much importunity to trouble your Majesty
with the several answers, which I made to their objections, and would be too
great presumption in me to advise your Majesty's incomparable wisdom what
should be fittest to be done for your Majesty's honor, and the contentment of
the people; yet if it would please my Lord the King to give his humblest
Creature leave to give vent to the loyal fervor of his heart, restless, and
indefatigable in continual meditation of his Gracious Masters honor and
service, I would thus with all humble submission explain my self. That there is
nothing which either the enemies of this State, or the perverse industry of
false-hearted servants could invent more mischievous, then the
misunderstandings which have grown between your Majesty, and your people:
nothing that will more dishearten the envious Maligners of your Majesty's
felicity, and encourage your true hearted friends, and Servants, then the
removing of those false fears, and jealousies, which are mere imaginary
Phantasmes, and bodies of air easily dissipated, whenever it shall please the
sun of your Majesty, to show it self clearly in its native brightness,
luster, and goodness.

God and the World do know the scope, and the end of all your Majesty's pious
affections, and endeavors to have been no other, then the settling of an
universal peace in Christendom; (a felicity only proper for your Majesty's
time, and only possible to be procured by your incomparable goodness, and
wisdom) but since the malice of the Devil, and deceitful men, have crossed
those fair ways wherein your Majesty was proceeding, abusing your trust, and
goodness, (as Innocence, and goodness are always more easily betrayed then
wiliness, and malice) you must now cast about again, and sail by another point
of the compass, and I am confident your Majesty will more securely, and
easily attain, your Noble and pious end, though the way be different.

The means are briefly these three.

First let your Majesty's enemies see, that the Lion has teeth, and claws.

2. Next, embrace and invite a strict, and sincere friendship, and association
with those whom neighborhood and alliance, and common interest of state and
religion have joined unto you.

3. And last of all, cast off, and remove jealousies, which are between your
Majesty and your people.

Your Majesty must begin with the last, for upon that foundation, you may
afterward set what frame of building you please. And when should you begin
(Sir) but at this overture of your Parliament by a gracious, clear, and
confident discovery of your intentions to your People. Fear them not (Sir)
never was there a better King, that had better subjects, if your Majesty would
trust them. Let them but see, that you love them, and constantly rely upon
their humble advice and ready assistance, and your Majesty will see, how they
will tear open their breasts, to give you their hearts, and having them, your
Majesty is sure of their hands, and purses. Cast but away some crumbs of your
Crown amongst them, and your Majesty will see those crumbs will make a miracle,
they will satisfy many thousands. Give them assurance that your heart was
always at home, though your eyes were abroad; invite them to look forward,
and not backward, and constantly maintain, that with confidence you undertake,
and your majesty will find admirable effects of this harmonious concord. Your
Majesty as the head directing, and your people as the hands and feet, obeying
and cooperating for the honor, safety, and welfare of the body of the State.
This will revive, and reunite your friends abroad, and dismay, and disappoint
the hopes of your enemies, secure your Majesty's person, assure your estate,
and make your memory glorious to posterity.

Pardon I most humbly beseech your Majesty, this licentious freedom, which
the zeal of your safety and service, has extorted from a tongue-tyed man, who
puts his heart into his Majesty's hand, and humbly prostrateth himself at
your Royal feet, as being

Your Majesty's Most humble, most obedient obliged Creature, Subject, and
Servant, Carlisle.

The Earl of Carlisle to the Duke, the 20. of November, 1625.
My most Noble dear Lord,
SInce my Last to your Lordship by Mr. Endimion Porter, there has not happened
any matter of great moment, or alteration here, saving the resolution (which
his Majesty has taken by the advice of his Council) for the disarming of all
the Popish Lords. In the execution whereof there fell out a brabble at the Lord
Vaux his house in, North-hamptonshire, wherein there were some blows exchanged
between the said Lord, and Mr. Knightly, a Justice of the Peace, who assisted
the Deputy Lieutenant in that action. Whereof complaint being made, his
Majesty was pleased himself in Council to have the hearing of the business,
and upon examination to refer the judgment thereof to the Star Chamber the
next Term. But at the issuing out of the Council Chamber, the Lord Vaux taking
occasion to speak to Sir William Spencer, (who with the rest had given
information in favor of Mr. Knightly,) told him, that though he neglected his
reputation before the Lords, yet he doubted not, but he would have more care of
his oath when the business should come to Examination in the Star Chamber.
Herewith Sir William Spencer finding his reputation challenged, presently
complained, and thereupon the words being acknowledged, the Lord Vaux was
committed prisoner to the Fleet.

In the disarming of the Lords-Recusants, there was as much respect had of
some, who have relation to your Lordship, as you your self would desire.

The Papists in general here do give some cause of jealousy by their
Combinations and Murmurings, wherein it is suspected, that they are as fondly,
as busily encouraged by the pragmatical Mounsieurs. But his Majesty's temper
and wisdom will be sufficient to prevent all inconveniencie, which their folly
or passion may contrive. There is one Sir Thomas Gerrard a Recusant brought up
hither out of Lancashire, being accused of some treacherous design against his
Majesty's Person. Rochel is so straightly blocked by Sea and Land, as no
Intelligence can be sent into the Town. We have not as yet any clear
Categorical answers touching the restitution of our ships. As soon as any thing
more worthy of your Lordships knowledge shall occur, you shall not fail to be
advertised from him that is eternally vowed

Your Graces Most faithful friend, and most humble servant, Carlisle.

The Earl of Carlisle to the Duke.
My most Noble dear Lord,
I Must ever acknowledge my self infinitely obliged to your Lordship for many
Noble favors; but for none more, then the freedom, and true cordial
friendship expressed in your last Letter touching my son; And I shall humbly
beseech your Lordship in all occasions to continue that free and friendly
manner of proceeding, which I shall ever justly esteem as the most real
testimony of your favor toward me. Your Lordship will now be pleased to give
me leave with the same freedom and sincerity to give your Lordship an account,
that it is now 4. months since the Count of Mansfelt made the proposition to
me, to nominate my son to be one of his Colonels, as he did likewise to my Lord
of Holland for his Brother Sir Charles Rich; which at the first (I must deal
plainly with your Lordship) I took for a piece of art, as if he knowing, that
next to the benefit and assistance he received from your Lordships favor and
protection, we were the most active instruments employed in his business, and
therefore he sought to engage us so much the farther by this interest. But
afterward I found, that under the shadow of this Complement put upon me, he
had a desire to gratify Sir James Ramsey, whom he designed to be my sons
Lieutenant, having regard to his former deserts, and the courage and
sufficiency he has found in him. I profess unto your Lordship sincerely,
that he received no other encouragement, or acceptance from me then a bare
negative; Insomuch as he afterward sent a Gentleman to tell me, That he
perceived whatsoever he should expect from me in the furtherance of his
business, must be only for the respect I bare to my Masters service, and
nothing for love of his person, since I accepted not the proffer of his
service. My Lord of Holland can justify the truth of this assertion, who alone
was acquainted with that which passed: for I protest upon my salvation, that I
neither spoke of it to any creature living, not so much as to my son, neither
have I written one word thereof to the Count Mansfelt, neither knew I any thing
of his proceedings, till by the last Currier Mr. Secretary was pleased to
acquaint me with the nomination of my son. If I had seriously intended any such
thing, I want not so much judgment and discretion, as not first to discover my
desire to my gracious Master, humbly craving his leave, and allowance: And I
should not have failed to have recourse to your Lordships favorable assistance
therein. And thus (my Noble Lord) have I given you an account what
entertainment I gave to the Count Mansfelts Complement. And I will be bold also
to give your Lordship this further assurance, that no particular interest, or
consideration of mine own shall have power to alter my constant course of
serving my gracious Master faithfully, and industriously. And so humbly
submitting all to his Majesty's good pleasure, and your Lordships wisdom, I
remain eternally

Your Graces most faithful friend, and humble servant, Carlisle.

Postscript.
I Most humbly beseech your Lordship that this unfortunate Complement put upon
my son, may be no prejudice to the deserts of Sir James Ramsey.

The Lord Kensington to the Duke.
My Noblest Lord,
I Find the Queen Mother has the only power of governing in this State, and I
am glad to find it so, since she promises, and professes, to use it to do
careful, and good offices in the way of increasing the friendship that is
between us, and this State, and likewise to relieve, and assist the united
provinces, the which they are preparing to do fully, and bravely; for she has
now a clear sight of the pretentions of the King of Spain unto the Monarchy of
Christendom; during the absence of the King, who went out of this town early
the next day after I arrived here (before I was prepared to attend him) I have
been often at the Louure, where I had the honor to entertain the Queen Mother.
She was willing to know upon what terms stood our Spanish alliance; I told her
that their delays had been so tedious, that they had somewhat discouraged the
King, and had so wearied the Prince, and State, which the dilatorie proceedings
in it, as that Treaty (I thought) would soon have an end; She straight said of
marriage, taking it that way; I told her I believed the contrary, and I did so
the rather, because the Spanish Ambassador has given it out since my coming,
that the Alliance is fully concluded, and that my journey had no other end,
then to hasten his Master unto it, only to give them Jealousies of me, because
he at this time fears their dispositions stand too well prepared to desire,
and affect a conjunction with us. And truly his report, and instruments have
given some jealousies to the persons of power in this State, especially since
they find I can say nothing directly unto them; yet thus much I have directly
from them, Mounsieur de Vievielle, and others, (but he is the chief guider of
all affairs here) That never was the affection of any State so prepared to
accept all offers of amity and alliance, so we will clearly, and as disingaged
persons seek it, as is this; but as a wise minister he says, that until we
have wholly, and truly abandoned the treaty with Spain, they may lose the
friendship of a brother in law, that is already so, in hope of gaining another
that they may fail of. But when we shall see it reallie by a public
Commission, that may declare all dissolved, that touches upon the way of Spain,
we shall then understand their hearts not to be capable of more joy, then that
will bring them. And the Queen Mother told me she had not lost those
inclinations, that she has heretofore expressed to desire her Daughter may be
given to the Prince, with many words of value unto the King, and person of the
Prince, and more then this she could not (she thought) well say, it being most
natural, for the woman to be demanded and sought. It is most certain, that
underhand Spain has done all that is possible to procure this State to listen
to a crosse-marriage, but here they are now so well understood, as this bait
will not be swallowed by them. This I have from a grave, and honest man, that
would not be brought to justify it, therefore he must not hear of it. It is
the Savoy Ambassador, that is resident here, a wise, and a Gallant Gentleman,
who vows this to be most true. So general a desire was never expressed, as is
here for alliance with us: and if the King and Prince have as many reasons of
State at this time, besides their infinite affection here, to have it so
continued, let it be roundly, and clearly pursued, and then I dare promise as
respective, and satisfactorie a reception, as can be imagined, or desired. And
if it were not too much sauciness for me to advise, I could wish that the
propositions of a league, and marriage may not come together, but may be
treated a part. For I doubt whether it may not be thought a little
dishonorable for this King to give his sister conditionally, that if he will,
make war upon the King of Spain his brother, we will make the alliance with
him; on the other part, if the league should be propounded here, with all those
reasons of State, that are now pressing for them to make it, they have causes
to doubt, and so have we too, that we may both be interrupted in that; for
certainly the King of Spain, will (if he can possibly) please one side, the
which they think here may be us, with the restitution of the Palatinate, and we
may likewise fear may be them, with the rendering of the Valtoline, these being
the only open quarrels we must ground upon. Now as long as these doubts may
possess us both, this will prove a tedious, and jealous work of both sides;
But if we fall speedily upon a treaty, and conclusion of a marriage, the which
will find (I am persuaded) no long delays here: neither will they strain us to
any unreasonablenesse in conditions for our Catholics (as far as I can find)
then will it be a fit time for to couclude a league, the which they will then
for certain do, when all doubts, and fears of fallings off, are by this
conjunction taken away, and the necessity of their own affairs, and safety
will then make them more desire it then we, and so would they now, if they
could think it so sure, and so honorable for them. For the King of Spain has
so embraced them of all sides, as they fear, and justly, that he will one day
crush them to their destruction. My Lord, I do not presume to say any thing
immediately to the King, thorough your hands, this I know will pass unto him,
and if he should find any weakness in this that I have presumed to say, let
the strength of your favor exercise those accustomed Noblenesses that you have
always expressed unto

Your Graces most humble and obliged Servant, Kensington.

Postscript.
Within these few days your Grace shall hear again from me, for as yet I have
not seen the King, no otherwise then the first night I arrived here. This night
he is come unto the Town again.

The Lord Kensington to the Prince, 26. February, 1624.
May it please your Highness,
I Find here so infinite a value of your Person, and virtue, as what Instrument
so ever (my self the very weakest) having some commands (as they imagine) from
you, shall receive excess of honors from them. They will not conceive me,
scarce receive me, but as a public Instrument for the service of an Alliance,
that above all the things in this world, they do so earnestly desire. The Queen
Mother has expressed, as far as she thinks is fit for the honor of her
Daughter, great favor and good will in it. I took the boldness to tell her
(the which she took extremely well) that if such a proposition should be made,
your Highness could not believe, that she had lost her former inclinations,
and desires in it; She said, your trust of her should find great respect; there
is no preparation I find toward this business but by her, and all persuasions
of amity made light, that look not toward this end. And Sir, if your
intentions proceed this way, as by many reasons of State, and wisdom there is
cause now rather to press it, then slacken it) you will find a Lady of as
much Loveliness and Sweetness to deserve your affection, as any creature
under Heaven can do. And Sir, by all her fashions since my being here, and by
what I hear from the Ladies, it is most visible to me, her infinite value, and
respect unto you. Sir, I say not this to betray your belief, but from a true
observation, and knowledge of this to be so; I tell you this, and must somewhat
more, in way of admiration of the person of Madam, for the impressions I had of
her were but ordinary, but the amazement extraordinary to find her, as I
protest to God I did, the sweetest Creature in France. Her growth is very
little, short of her age; and her wisdom infinitely beyond it. I heard her
discourse with her Mother, and the Ladies about her, with extraordinary
discretion, and quickness. She dances (the which I am a witness of) as well
as ever I saw any Creature; They say she sings most sweetly, I am sure she
looks so. Sir, you have thousands of servants here, that desire to be commanded
by you, but most particularly the D. of Chevereux, and Mounsieur Le Grand, who
seek all opportunities to do you service, and have Credit and power to do so.
Sir, if these that are strangers are thus ambitious of your Commands, with what
infinite passion have I cause to beg them, that am your Vassal, and have no
other glory but to serve you; as your Highness, etc.

Kensington.

Postscript.
SIr, The obligations you have unto this young Queen are strange, for with that
same affection, that the Queen your sister would do, she asks of you with all
the expressions that are possible, of joy, for your safe return out of Spain,
and told me, that she durst say, you were weary with being there, and so
should she: though she be a Spaniard, yet I find she gives over all thought of
your Alliance with her sister. Sir, you have the fortune to have respects put
upon you unlookt for; for as in Spain the Queen there did you good offices: so
I find will this sweet Qeeen do. Who said, She was sorry, when you saw them
practice their Masks, that Madam her sister (whom she dearly loves) was seen
at so much disadvantage by you, to be seen afar off, and in a dark room, whose
person and face has most loveliness to be considered nearly. She made me show
her your Picture, the which she let the Ladies see with infinite Commendations
of your Person, saying, She hoped some good occasion might bring you hither,
that they might see you like your self.

The Lord Kensington to the Duke.
My Lord,
YEsternight being Sunday, I arrived safe here at Paris. I was informed as soon
as I came, that the King was resolved after sight of the Queens Masque (that
was to be performed that same night,) that he would go a private journey for 5.
or 6. days to Shautelie, a house of Mounsieur de Memorancies.

Being desirous therefore to kiss his hands before his going, and to see the
Court in that glory and luster, as must for certain be found upon such an
extraordinary occasion, I went to the Louure to the D. of Chevereux Chamber,
where I found him and his Lady apparrelling themselves for the Masque, and in
such infinite riches of Jewels, as I shall never be a beholder of the like worn
by Subjects. I had not been there above an hour, but the Queen and Madam came
thither, where they staid a great while. And it was observed, that Madam has
seldom put on a more cheerful then that night. There were some that told me, I
might guess at the cause of it. My Lord, I protest to God, she is a lovely,
sweet, young Creature. Her growth is not great yet, but her shape is perfect,
and they all swear, that her sister the Princess of Piemount (who is now grown
a tall and a goodly Lady) was not taller then she is at her age. I thought the
Queen would have put a fashion of reservation upon me, as not pleased with the
breach, and disorder of the Spanish Treaty; but I found it far otherwise. She
is so truly French, as (it is imagined) she rather wishes this alliance, then
with her own sister. The King (that was so early to go out of the Town) took
his rest, while the Ladies were making themselves ready; but as soon as he
waked, he sent for me, and purposed to have received me as an Ambassador. But
I entreated the D. of Chevereux before I went, to let him understand, that I
came as an humble and thankful servant only to kiss his Majesty's hands, and
had no other end then to do him service. He then received me with much freedom
and cheerfulness, with many questions how the King is satisfied with his
Present by Mounsieur de Bonevan, who when I related the Kings liking, and value
of it, he was infinitely pleased. He commanded me to attend him to the Masque,
which was danced by 16. of the greatest Princesses of France, St. Luke only
being by the Queen received amongst them, to put a singular honor, and value
upon her. The King with his Brother had danced a Masque the last Tuesday, with
the same number of persons of the best quality; who this night were to cast
Lots, who should dance with the sixteen Ladies, they only being allowed to
dance with them. And all those were so infinitely rich in Jewels, (embroiderie
of gold and silver being here forbidden) as they had almost all imbroidered
their clothes as thick with Diamonds, as usually with purle.

I cannot give your Lordship any particular account of my service in any thing,
yesternight being an unproper time for any such thing: But I am advised by the
Prince Jenvile to stay here till the Kings return, and I shall understand how
all things stand, and that no man's affection is so straight and true for the
service of the King and Prince as his is, who of himself falls into passionate
wishes for an Alliance, but tells me in much liberty, they have been informed
the cause and plot of my journey was to set an edge upon Spain, rather to cut
off their delays, then to cut the throat of the business. But I gave him
great satisfaction in that point.

My Lord, these are passages of my first nights being here, matters of
ceremony; and yet I omit much of that. I thought these too slight to trouble
his Majesty, or the Prince with, yet I thought it fit since this Messenger
goes, to let you see this outward show, and face of this Court, to have as much
sweetness, smoothness, and clearness toward our designs as is possible. My
next Letters shall inform you of a further search made by me, the which I am
confident will be of the same nature. And I conceive it the rather, because I
find them in a great alarm at the news, that they have received from Liege,
that the King of Spain makes a Fort upon the ruin there to command both that,
and the Town. This they say has made them more clearly see his vast ambition
to enlarge his Monarchy, and do all speak the careful and honest language of
our Lower house men how it may be prevented.

I have said enough, the Messenger I dare say thinks too much; yet this I will
add, That I will study to make it appear to the world, and your self, by a
thankful heart, and to God himself in my prayers for your Lordship, that I am

Your Lordships Most devoted, and most humble servant, Kensington.

Postscript.
IF the French Ambassador, or my Lord of Carlisle wonders I have not written
unto them, I beseech your Lordship, let them know this Messenger is not of my
sending, and in such haste as he cannot be stayed.

The Lord Kensington to the Prince.
May it please your Highness,
I Cannot but make you continual repetitions of the value you have here, to be
(as justly we know you) the most Complete young Prince and person in the world.
This reputation has begotten in the sweet Princess Madam, so infinite an
affection to your fame, as she could not contain her self from a passionate
desiring to see your Picture, the shadow of that person so honored, and
knowing not by what means to compass it, it being worn about my neck; for
though others, as the Queen and Princesses would open it, and consider it, the
which ever brought forth admiration from them, yet durst not this poor young
Lady look any otherwise on it then afar off, whose heart was nearer it then
any of the others, that did most gaze upon it. But at the last (rather then
want that sight the which she was so impatient of) she desired the Gentlewoman
of the house where I am lodged, that had been her servant to borrow of me the
picture in all the secrecy that may be, and to bring it unto her, saying, She
could not want that Curiosity as well as others toward a person of his
infinite reputation. As soon as she saw the party that brought it, she retired
into her Cabinet, calling only her in; where she opened the picture in such
haste, as showed a true picture of her passion, blushing in the instant at her
own guiltiness. She kept it an hour in her hands, and when she returned it,
she gave with it many praises of your person. Sir, this is a business so fit
for your secrecy, as I know it shall never go farther, then unto the King your
Father, my Lord Duke of Buckingham, and my Lord of Carliles knowledge. A
tenderness in this is honorable; for I would rather die a thousand times,
then it should be published, since I am by this young Lady trusted, that is for
beauty and goodness an Angel.

I have received from my Lord of Buckingham an advertisement, that your
Highness opinion is to treat of the General league first, that will prepare
the other.

Sir, whatsoever shall be propounded will have a noble acceptance; though this
give me leave to tell you, when you are free, as by the next news we shall
know you to be, they will expect, that upon those declarations they have here
already made toward that particularitie of the Alliance, that your Highness
will go that readier and nearer way to unite and fasten by that knot the
affection of these Kingdoms.

Sir, for the general they all here speak just that language that I should, and
do unto them of the power and usurpation of the Spaniards, of the approaches
they make to this Kingdom, the danger of the Low Countries, the direct Conquest
of Germany and the Valtoline. By which means we have cause to join in
opposition of the Ambitions, and mightiness of this King. The which they all
here say cannot be so certainly done as by an Alliance with us. This they speak
perpetually, and urge it unto my consideration.

Sir, unless we proceed very roundly, though they be never so well affected,
we may have interruptions by the arts of Spain, that make offers infinite to
the advantage of this State, at this time. But they hearken to none of them,
until they see our intentions toward them. The which if they find to be real
indeed, they will give us brave satisfaction.

But Sir, your Fathers and your will, not my opinion must be followed; and what
Commandments your Highness shall give me, shall be most strictly obeyed by the
most devoted,

Your Highness Most dutiful and humblest servant, Kensington.

The Lord Kensington to the Duke, the 14. of March, 1624.
My Lord,
I Have already acquainted your Grace how generally our desires are met with
here, much more cannot be said then I have already for that purpose. There was
never known in this Kingdom so entire an agreement for any thing, as for an
Alliance with England, the Count of Soysons only excepted, who has had some
pretensions unto Madam, but those are now much discouraged, upon a free
discourse the Cardinal of Rochfalcout made unto the Countess his Mother,
telling her, That if she or her son believed, or could expect, the King would
give him his sister in marriage, they would (as he conceived) deceive
themselves: for he imagined upon good grounds, that the King would bestow his
Sister that way, that might be most for her honor and advancement, and
likewise for the advantage of his Crown and Kingdom; and he professed for his
part, although he much honored the Count as a great Prince of the blood, yet
was he so faithful unto his Master, as he would advise him to that purpose.

The Queen Mother and Mounsieur Le Grand have advised me to say something unto
the King concerning my business. I told them, I could say nothing very
directly unto him, and yet would I not so much as deliver my opinion of the
King my Masters inclinations to wish an alliance with him, unless I were
assured, his answers might make me see his value, and respect unto him. They
then spoke unto him, and assured me, I should in that be satisfied. Having that
promise from them, I told the King, that I had made this journey of purpose to
declare unto him my humble service and thankfulness for all his Honors and
favors, the which I thought I could not better express, then by informing his
Majesty, that our Prince whom he had ever so much valued, would be as I
conceived free, and dis-ingaged from our Spanish Treaty, by reason that the
King could not find them answer his expectation in those things that made him
principally desire their Conjunction; the which your Lordship seeing you have
exercised your interest and credit with the King your Master, and the Prince to
convert those thoughts toward his Majesty, from whom, you were persuaded
nothing but truth and honor would be returned, the which at this time more
then ever, would be an infinite advantage to both these Kingdoms, and that I
believed if his Majesty would show a disposition, as affectionate to receive
Propositions to this purpose, as the King my Master had to make them, a long
time would not pass before the effects of this might appear, the which would
show the report raised here of the ends of my coming to be false, and me to be
free of all other designs, then those which I had expressed unto him. He told
me, that he had not heard, that the Spanish Match was yet broken, the which
justly might give him cause to be reserved; yet thus far he would assure me in
the general, That whatsoever should be propounded unto him from the King of
Great Britain, he would most heartily and affectionately receive it: but this
was with such a fashion of Courtesy, as showed that he desired cause to have
said more, and I am fully satisfied not only from him, but the Queens, and
most of all of Madam her self, who shows all the sweetness and contentment
that may be, and likewise from all the Officers of the Crown, and State, that
they can desire nothing equal with this alliance. A better and more large
preparation then this my instructions cannot make, and I wonder to see it thus
fair, considering the hindrances and defacings the Spanish Ambassador desires
to cast upon it, who besides the Rodomontado's and threatenings of the
preparations of his Master, does here take a contrary, but cunning way, letting
them know, that the Prince cannot have two Wives, for their Infanta is surely
his, only to create a jealousy and shienesse in them toward me, that he
suspects labors to do offices that are not to his liking.

You will therefore I hope speedily put this State out of these doubts, and
clearly and freely proceed with them. Upon my credit and reputation, they are
all of that disposition, that we can wish them to be, and it appears by their
tender care of the States, and their resolution to aid them: And likewise in
sending Captain Coborn, that came from the Duke of Brunswick to demand a
supply of men, who is returned with answer unto him, that he shall have double
what he required, and great satisfaction to the Count Mansfelt, that sent a
Gentleman hither, to let the King know, he was not yet in such disorder, but
that he could assemble his Troops to such a number, as might do his Majesty
good service, if he would be pleased to take him into his protection and favor.

And the King has sent a Gentleman of the Religion a Sedanois to Liege, to
give information to this State of the proceedings of the Spaniards there, and
to be ready to receive (if the Town shall seek it) the protection of them. But
these passages I am sure you continually understand from our Ambassador, the
which makes me omit many particularities in this kind that I could inform you
of. I have sent this Bearer of purpose, the which I beseech your Grace return
with some speed, and with him the resolutions of our dear and Sacred Master,
whom God ever bless and keep to our glory and comfort.

My Lord I am The humblest and most obliged of all your Graces servants,
Kensington.

The Lord Kensington to the Secretary the Lord Conway.
Right Honorable,
ACcording to his Majesty's order which your last of April the 14. derived unto
me, I have represented such reasons to the King, and his ministers of State
here, against the sending of any person, in what quality soever, to the Duke of
Baviers, as they acquiesce in them; specially for that they come commanded
under his Majesty's desire, which they profess to be very willing to comply
with, not only in this, but in any other occasion wherein his Majesty may
directly, or indirectly be any way interessed.

I took the same opportunity of preparing the way a little farther to a formal
treaty of alliance, by feeling once again their pulse in matters of religion,
and find, that it beats so temperately, as promises a very good Crisis of any
thing that may concern that particular.

I dealt plainly with the Marquess de la Veiville touching the course that
his Majesty may be driven to hold against Jesuits and Priests, of banishing
them the Kingdom; and of quickening the laws against the other Catholics, as
well out of necessity of reducing them within the bounds of sobriety and
obedience, as of keeping good intelligence with his Parliament, without which
he could not possibly go thorough with such a weighty work, as he is now to
undertake. He approved of the course for the ends sake; under hope
notwithstanding that his Majesty would not tie his own hands from some
moderate favor hereafter, which is all they pretend unto, and desire it may
flow from the mediation of this State upon an alliance here, for the saving of
their honor, who otherwise will be hardly reputed Catholics.

In representing a facility in these things, I leave no other difficulties to
be imagined.

Their good inclination to the match in general they are willing to
demonstrate, (as by many other evidences, so) by the care, they are now under
of lodging, and defraying my Lord of Carlisle, and my self in a more splendid
and Magnifique manner, then ever yet they did any Ambassador whatsoever, for
such is the language that Ville-aux Cleres holds to me upon that subject.

The Count of Soissons sees it, and storms, and manifests his discontent
toward me (who am the instrument) more fellie then discreetly. I encountered
him the other day, and gave him the due that belonged to his rank, but instead
of returning me my salute, he disdainfully turned back his head. I was
somewhat sensible thereof, and I told Mounsieur de Grandmont of it, and as he,
and I were discoursing of it the day following, Soissons offered himself full
butt upon us a second time. I again repeated my courtesy, and he is childish
in civility. Grandmont found it strange, and intimated to the Marquess de la
Valette a familiar, and confident of the Counts both my observation, and his
own distaste of such an uncivil kind of proceeding. Valette conveyes the same
to Soissons himself, who answered that he could not afford me a better
countenance, not for any ill will he bore unto my person, but to my errand and
negotiation; which (were it not in the behalf of so great a Prince) went so
near his heart, as he professed, he would cut my throat if he could. Nay, were
any Prince of Savoy, Mantova, or Germany here in person to solicit for
themselves in the like nature, he would hazard his life in the cause. Such is
the language that despair brings forth, which put me into an expectation of no
less then a challenge to decide the quarrel. And I once verily believed it
sent, for the Count de Lude came very soberly to me, and told me, he had a
message to deliver me from a great Personage, which he entreated he might do
without offense.

I desired him to speak freely what it was, and from whom He told me he was
sent by the Count of Soissons, and I presently replied that nothing should come
amiss from him. In conclusion the errand was to signify an extreme liking,
that the Count took to one of my Horses, which he was desirous to buy of me
upon any rate. I answered, that if the Count would express to me his desire
himself, and receive him of gift, he should be at his service, otherwise he
should remain still as he was. Since that I have met him, and been prevented
with a very courteous salute from him. I have been thus ample in these
particular passages betwixt the Count and my self, that by the trouble you find
in his disconsolate breast, you may judge of the constancy of Madams heart
toward our Prince, upon whom assuredly it is most strongly set, (as she
continually expresses upon all occasions.) Yesterday I had the honor to
entertain her two hours together, and received so many testimonies of respect,
as witnessed very warm affections toward the Personage I did represent.
Amongst other discourse, She fell to speak of Ladies riding on horseback, which
she said was rare here but frequent in England, and then expressed her delight
in that exercise.

There is lately arrived here a French Genleman ( Duport by name) with
commission from the King of Bohemia to solicit this Kings favor (in
consequence of his Majesty's generous, and Gracious declaration in his behalf)
for the recovering of his rightful inheritance, to entreat that Baviers may no
ways be countenanced in his unjust pretensions, and to crave (in this his
extremity) a reimbursement of the remainder of that sum, which his father lent
to Henry the fourth in the times of his necessities, which may arise to the sum
of 30000 Crowns; the facilitating of this negotiation is recommended unto me,
who contribute what I can to the good success thereof. There has happened
here this last Monday a dispute between the Marquis de Courtenvant one of the
first Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber, and the Colonel de Ornano (Mounseiurs
Governor) about a lodging, which this pretended unto as most convenient for
him, in regard that it adjoined to that of Mounseiurs; but the other claimed a
right unto it by a former assignation, and possession. Ornano at the first
prevailed, till the other complained to the King, who commanded the Colonel to
quit the lodging to him; which his people refusing (out of a presumption
perhaps, that the commandment was rather formal then real) the King sent 3. or
4. of his guard to reiterate the commandment, and in case of refusal to obey,
to cast out all the stuff, and to kill all such as should oppose. Thus
Courtenvant got the day; perhaps by Vievilles recommendation in opposition of
Toirax, between whom, there has been lately a little contestation upon this
occasion. Vieville being desirous to strengthen himself, and to stand upon the
surest bottom he could, endeavored to join a confident of his in equal
commission with the Guard des Seaux, that so he might in time work it out, and
prevail himself of that office at his devotion. The Guard des Seaux finding
feeble resistance in himself, addressed his course to Toirax to seek under his
Covert shelter from that disgrace, and injury. Toirax undertakes his defense;
Vieville expostulates the matter with him, and alleadges many reasons to
justify his intentions, which the other gainesaying, with some little
warmness, has occasioned by that heat, a coldness of affection between them
ever since, and that so far forth, as it has grown to be notorious.

To the same original, I reduce the Cardinal de Richlieus introduction into the
Council of the Cabinet by the favor of Vieville (being made also an Instrument
thereunto by the Queen) that by making his own party strong in Council, he may
the more easily crush any adversary, that shall grapple with him. Yesterday he
was admitted; so that now that Council is composed of the Queen Mother, the
Cardinal de la Rouch-foulcant, Richlieu, the Constable Vieville, and the Guard
des Seaux.

Before I had finished this Letter, I had occasion to visit the Constable, to
whom I used the same language, that formerly I had done to la Vieville, and
with the like approbation. And when I touched upon the point of dispensation,
how it might be passed over, he assured me in general, that such was the
disposition of this King, and State to give the Prince content, as he might be
(in a manner) his own Carver how he pleased.

This is the account I can give you of the public: but how shall I express
the deep sense I have of my obligations to your favor in particular? shall I
multiply in thanks? It is too ordinary a payment for so many Noble expressions
of your love. I will rather endeavor by my deeds constantly and continually to
witness unto you, that I entirely rest

Your most faithful and most Humble Servant, Kensington.

The Lord Kensington to the Duke.
My most dear, and Noble Lord,
BEsides that joint Letter to your Lordship from my Colleague, and my self, I
think fit to add this particular account of what passed yesterday at Ruel
betwixt Queen Mother, and me; whither going to give her double thanks; as for
the liberty, she had given me of access at all times to Madam, to entertain
her henceforth with a more free, and amorous kind of language from the Prince;
so for having so readily condescended to an humble suit of mine in the behalf
of my Lord of Carlisle for a favorable Letter for him to your Lordship; she was
pleased to oblige me farther in telling me she did it merely for my sake. I
redoubled my thanks, and added, that I knew your Lordship would esteem it one
of the greatest happinesses that could befall you to have an occasion offered,
whereby you might witness, how much you adored her Majesty's royal virtues,
and how infinitely you were her Servant, ready to receive law from her,
whenever by the least syllable of her blessed Lips or Penn, she should please
to impose it. And this I did (as on the one side to gratify my Colleague, who
would be infinitely sensible of the disgrace he apprehends in the miss of the
Ribbon, being thus brought upon the Stage for it) as also to help to mesnage
that your Gracious favor which Mounsieur de Fiatts to my Lord represents unto
him, by giving you means withal to oblige this sweet and blessed Queen, who
has your Lordship in a very high account, and would be glad to find occasions
how she may witness it. The mention of my Lord of Carlisle upon this occasion
refreshed her remembrance of the late falling out betwixt the Cardinal and him;
and though she were sufficiently informed of the particulars by the Cardinal
himself, yet she would needs have a relation from me, who in a merry kind of
fashion obeyed her command, and salved every thing the best I could. She would
needs know my opinion of the Cardinal, who so magnified to her his wisdom, his
courage, his courtesy, his fidelity to her service, his affection to our
business as pleased her not a little. Neither did my heart and my tongue
differ, for I esteem him such. This discourse she left to fall upon a better
subject, the Prince, concerning whose voyage into Spain, the censure of Italy
(she said) was, that two Kings had therein committed two great errors. The one
in adventuring so precious a pledge to so hazardous an enterprise, the other in
badly using so brave a guest. The first, Madam, (answered I) may be excused
from the end, the common good of all Christendom, which then standing upon
desperate terms, had need of a desperate remedy. The second had need of a
better advocate then I, to put any color of defense upon it.

But his Highness had observed as great a weakness and folly as that, in
that after they had used him so ill, they would suffer him to depart, which was
one of the first speeches he uttered after he was entered into the ship. But did
he say so? said the Queen. Yes Madam I will assure you (quoth I) from the
witness of my own ears. She smiled, and replied, Indeed I heard he was used
ill. So he was (answered I) but not in his entertainment, for that was as
splendid as that country could afford it, but in their frivolous delays, and
in the unreasonable conditions, which they propounded, and pressed (upon the
advantage they had of his Princely Person.) And yet (smilingly added I) you
here (Madam) use him far worse. And how so? presently demanded she? In that you
press (quoth I) upon that most worthy, and Noble Prince, (who has with so
much affection to your Majesty's service, so much passion to Madam sought this
Alliance.) The same, nay more unreasonable conditions then the other, and what
they traced out for the breaking of the match you follow, pretending to
conclude it very unseasonablely in this Conjuncture of time, especially when
the jealousies, that such great changes in state, are apt to beget, are
cunningly fomented by the Spanish Ambassador in England, who vaunts it forth,
that there is not so great a change in La Vievilles particular person, as there
is in the general affections, which did but follow before the stream of his
Greatness and credit.

Thus casting in the Kings mind the seed of doubts, whereunto the Conde de
Olivares in Spain has been willing to contribute by this braving speech to our
Royal Masters Ambassador there, That if the Pope ever granted a dispensation
for the match with France, the King of Spain would march with an army toward
Rome and sack it. Vrayement nous l'en empescherous bien (promptly answered She)
Car nous lui taglierous assez de besongne ailleurs. Mais qu'est-ce qui vous
press le plus. I represented unto her the unfitness of the seventh Article
(even qualified by that interpretationt, hat it is) and the impossibility of
the last which requires, and prescribes an oath. And desired that the honor of
the Prince (with whom she pretended a will to match her Daughter) might be
dearer to her, then to be balanced with that, which could add nothing to their
assurance. I also humbly besought her to employ her Credit with the King her
son, her authority to the Ministers for a reformation of those two Articles
especially, and a friendly, and speedy dispatch of all.

And if we must come to that extreamitie, that more could not be altered, then
already was, yet at least she would procure the allowance of this protestation
by the King our Master, when he should swear them, that he intended no further
to oblige himself by that oath, then might well stand with the safety, peace,
tranquillity, and convenience of his State. This she thought reasonable, and
promised to speak with the King and Cardinal about it. And if you speak as you
can (replied I) I know it will be done, Though when all is done, I know not
whether the King my Master will condescend so far yea, or no. Here I entreated
I might weary her Majesty no further, but take the liberty she had pleased to
give me in entertaining Madam with such Commandments as the Prince had charged
me withal to her. She would needs know what I would say. Nay then (smiling
quoth I) your Majesty will impose upon me the like Law that they in Spain did
upon his Highness. But the case is now different (said she) for there the
Prince was in person, here is but his Deputy. But a Deputy (answered I) that
represents his person. Mais pour tout cela (dit elle) qu' est ce que vous
direz? Rien (dis-re) qui ne Soit digne des oreilles d'vne si vertueuse
Princess. Mais qu' est ce? redoubled she? Why then Madam (quoth I) if you will
needs know, it shall be much to this effect; That your Majesty having given me
the liberty of some freer Language then heretofore, I obey the Prince his
Command, in presenting to her his service, not by way of Complement any longer,
but out of passion, and affection, which both her outward, and her inward
beauties (the virtues of her mind) so kindled in him, as he was resolved to
contribute the uttermost he could to the Alliance in question, and would think
it the greatest happiness in the world, if the success thereof might minister
occasion of expressing in a better, and more effectual manner his devotion to
her service; with some little other such like amorous Language. Allez, Allez,
Il n'y a point de danger en tout cela (smilingly answered she) je me fie en
vous, je me fie en vous. Neither did I abuse her trust, for I varied not much
from it, in delivering it to Madam, save that I amplified it to her a little
more, who drank it down with joy, and with a low Courtesy acknowledged it to
the Prince; adding, that she was extremely obliged to his Highness, and would
think her self happy in the occasion, that should be presented of meriting the
place she had in his good Graces.

After that, I turned my speech to the old Ladies that attended, and told them,
That since the Queen was pleased to give me this liberty, it would be henceforth
fit for them to speak a suitable Language. I let them know that his Highness
had her Picture, which he kept in his Cabinet, and fed his eyes many times with
the sight, and contemplation of it; since he could not have the happiness to
behold her person. All which and other such like speeches, she (standing by)
took up without letting any one fall to the ground.

But I fear your Lordship will think I gather together too much to enlarge my
Letter thus far: but it is, that by these Circumstances your Lordship may make
a perfect judgment of the issue of our negotiation, which I doubt not but will
succeed to his Majesty's, his Highness, and your Lordships contentment: And so
yield matter of triumph to you, and infinite joy to me

Your Lordships Most most humble, most obliged, and most obedient servant,
Kensington.

The Lord Kensington to the Duke.
My most dear Lord,
THis Bearer your Cousen's going is in such haste, as what you receive from me
must be in very few words. I was yesterday with the Marquess de Vieville, whom
I find cordial to do good offices between ours, and this Kingdom; and he
assures me by all the promises and protestations that may be, he will ever use
his credit and power to do so, knowing these Kingdoms can (as the King of
Spain's power and ambition increases) have no true safety and good, unless we
join in friendship and alliance. He is very free to me, telling me, That to
prevent this, the King of Spain offers now the largest conditions of
satisfaction and friendship that can be imagined, but their thoughts here are
wholly bent toward us; And although as yet, the King cannot with honor or
wisdom say more then he has done, yet we may be assured when we are free, to
be satisfied in all we can desire.

This day I understand the Earl of Argile is like lightning passed by for
Spain, and by a special Command from the King it is to put us in more terror;
That he will use his service in Scotland, where I believe he has little credit
and power to offend us. But howsoever they omit nothing that may dishearten us,
but we are of too noble and constant a temper, either to fear their cunning or
power.

My Lord, give me leave to beseech you, not to defer our business, for never
can this State be found so rightly and truly inclined in love and affection
toward us. And the rather hasten it, because all the art that may be is daily
used from Spain to prevent us, and if we go not roundly and clearly with them
here, they may have jealousies and discouragements that may change them: Take
them therefore now, when I dare promise they are free, very free from those
thoughts. My Lord, pardon the haste of this Letter, that has no more time
given me but to tell you, that you never can have any servant more devotedly
yours, then is

Your Graces Most obliged and most humble servant, Kensington.

The Earl of Holland to the Duke.
My dearest Lord,
WE have made a final conclusion of this great Treaty. Upon what terms the
dispatch at large will show your Grace: We have concluded honorably, that
which we could not do safely; for to receive words, that obliged not, would
have appeared an unwise, and unperfect Treaty of our part, and no way worthy
of the greatness of our Master, nor the passion of his Highness, the which
now has a brave expression, since his Mistress is only considered, and
desired, and the only object of our Treaty. But I must tell you, that since we
have proceeded thus, they say, they will out-go us in the like braverie, doing
ten times more then we expect, or they durst promise, fearing the World would
conceive all their doings conditionally; the which would be dishonorable for
Madam. But that being safe, they now say their interest is greater then ours
for the recovering of the Palatinate, and they will never abandon us in that
action. I hope we shall shortly have the honor and happiness to see your
Grace here; where you will be (as justly you deserve) adored. You must make
haste, for we are promised our sweet Princess within six weeks. I beseech you
let me know your resolution, that I may contrive which way I may best serve you
against your coming. I have carefully labored according unto your Commands in
that which the Marquess de Fiat. You may assure him of a speedy and good
success in it, the which he will more fully understand, when Mounsieur de la
Ville-aux-Cleres shall be in England. He begins his journey from hence within
3. days. He is worthy of the best reception that can be given him, having
throughout all this Treaty carried himself discreetly and affectionately. I
beseech you put the Prince in mind to send his Mistress a Letter: And though I
might as the first Instrument employed in his amors, expect the honor to
deliver it; yet will I not give my Colleague that cause of envy. But if his
Highness will write a private Letter unto Madam, and in it express some
particular trust of me: And that my relations of her, have increased his
passion, and affection unto her service, I shall receive much honor, and some
right, since I only have expressed what concerned his passion and affection
toward her. If you think me worthy of this honor, procure a Letter to this
purpose, and send it me to deliver unto her, and likewise your Commands, the
which I will receive for my greatest comforts: living in unhappiness until I
may by my services express how infinitely, and eternally I am

Your Graces Most humble, and most obliged and devoted servant, Holland.

Postscript.
THe Presents that the Prince will send unto Madam, I beseech you hasten.

The Earl of Holland to his Majesty.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
WE are in all the pain that may be, to know what to answer to the malicious
and continual complaints made by Blanvile of wrongs and violences done him,
even to the assaulting of him in his own lodging, the which he has represented
with so much bitterness, as it took great impression here in the hearts of
all, especially of the Queen Mother, whom yesterday I saw in the accustomed
privilege has ever been given me, to have at all times my entrance free into
the Louure. And I the rather went, because I would not shrink at all their
furies and clamours, and it came to such a height, as Petitions were given by
Madam de Blanvile, that she might for the injuries done to her husband his
Ambassador, have satisfaction upon our persons. But she was (as she deserved)
despised for so passionate a folly, yet was it in consideration (as I suspect)
by a word that the Queen Mother uttered in her passion to me, who with tears
before all the World, being accompanied by all the Princesses and Ladies, told
me, (but softly) That if your Majesty continued to affront, and suffer such
indignities to be done to the Ambassador of the King her Son, your Majesty
must look that your Ambassadors shall be used a la pareylie. I confess this
stirred me so much, as I told her, That if the intentions of your Majesty were
no better considered by the King here, your Majesty commanding us for the good
and happiness of his Kingdom, to endeavor to bring, and give him (the which
we have done) the greatest blessing in this World, Peace in his Country, then
to be balanced with a person, that in requital has stirred up, and daily
desires to do it, disputes, and jarres, even between your Majesty, and the
Queen, we had reason to believe your Majesty most unjustly, and most
unworthily requited. And it might take away upon any such occasion, the care,
that otherwise you would have had to do the like. And for my part, it took from
me all desire ever to be employed upon any occasion hither, where our Actions,
that their acknowledgments have been acceptable but a few days past, are now
of so little consideration, as we are of no more weight, then the unworthiest
Minister that ever was employed. Upon that I found, she was sorry for having
expressed so much. But this day we had from her a more favorable audience, and
from the King the effects and circumstances of that which we have in our
Dispatch presented unto my Lord Conway.

Sir, the malice of this Blanvile is so great unto your worthy servant my Lord
Duke, as he has written a private Letter unto the King, the which I saw by the
favor of a friend, that he is in a condition of danger to be ruined by the
fury and power of the Parliament. And to confirm him in that opinion, has
sent all the passages amongst them that concern my Lord Duke; adding to that,
of great factions against him at the Council Table, and naming some Lords, the
which makes me see, he has intelligence with all those, that he believes may
contribute any thing toward the mischieving of him. But those that know the
magnanimity and nobleness of your Majesty's heart, know that so noble a
vessel of honor and service as he is, shall never be in danger for all the
storms that can threaten him: when it is in your Majesty's hands not only to
calm all these tempests, but to make the Sun, and beams of your favor to shine
more clearly upon his deservings then ever, the which upon this occasion your
courage and virtue will no doubt do, to the encouragement of all deserving, and
excellent servants, and to his honor and comfort that is the most worthy that
ever Prince had: And so affectionate, that the world has no greater
admirations, then the fortunes that the Master and servant have run together.
And certainly our good God will ever preserve that affection, that in so many
accidents, and one may say afflictions, has preserved your Persons.

Sir, this boldness, that I take, proceeds not from the least doubt these
foolish rumors give me of changes, but out of a passionate meditation of those
accidents, that your courage and fortune has carried you through, blessing God
for your prosperity, the which will be by his grace most glorious, and
lasting, according to the prayers of

Your Majesty's Most humble, and most obedient Subject, and servant, Holland.
Paris 1/13. March, 1625.
The Earl of Holland to the Duke.
My dear Lord,
THis Messenger is so rigid, and such an enemy to all Jantileise, as by him I
will not send any news in that kind; but when the little Mercury comes, you
shall know that which shall make you joy, and grieve that you cannot enjoy what
your fate and merit has so justly destined unto you. We have such daily
alarums here out of England from Blanvile, of the beating of his servant, and
at the last the danger, that of late he himself has been in, of being
assassinated in his own house; for the first word that his servant said unto
the King, and the whole Court was, The Ambassador had run such a hazard of his
life, as no man that heard him believed he had escaped with less then 5. or 6.
wounds. Insomuch as your friend Bouteve asked, Fait un belle fine: And this
has so animated this Court, being (as your Lordship knows) apt upon all
occasions to be fired, and stirred up, as the King has been moved to forbid us
our entries, and liberties here. And yesterday Madam de Blanvile did openly
petition the King to imprison us for the wrongs and injuries done unto her
husband, and his Ambassador, that she feared was by this time dead. But that
had no other effect but to be laughed at. I never (I confess) saw the Queen
Mother in so much distraction and passion, for she never speaks of her Daughter
but with tears, and yesterday with some heat and bitterness to me about it:
the Circumstances I have taken the boldness to present unto his Majesty. That
which distracts me infinitely, is to hear, that they do traduce you, as the
cause of all these misfortunes, and that you stir up the King to these
displeasures. And so much impression it has made into the Queen Mother, as
this day at the audience she told me, That you had made the marriage, and were
now, as she imagined, and was informed, resolved to destroy your work. I asked
her what particularitie could make her say, and believe so against the general,
and continual actions and endeavors, that the whole world ought to be
satisfied of your infinite care, and affection, to fasten and tie together a
good, and constant intelligence and friendship between these Crowns. She told
me, that you entreated Madam de St. George to do some service for you to the
Queen, the which she did, and instead of giving her thanks, you threatened the
sending of her away. I told her, Though I had as yet heard nothing of this
particularitie, yet I knew your nature to be so generous, as you would never do
any action unjust. I told her, that she must distinguish between what you say
as Commanded by the King, and what you say of your self: for if it be his
pleasure to make the instrument to convey his will upon any occasion of his
displeasure, you are not to dispute, but to obey his Command in that, and in
all other things. I told her farther, that I saw the continual malice of the
Ambassador, that invents daily injuries and falsehoods of your Lordship, to
unload himself from his insolences and faults; but I hoped that nothing should
light upon your Lordship, but what you deserved, the which to my knowledge was
more value and esteem, then any man in the world could, or can ever merit from
this Kingdom. And I desired her, not to entertain the belief of these things
too hastily, until we had news out of England, that we knew would contradict
all these malicious discourses. And I must tell your Grace, that by a friend
(whom I am tied not to name) I was showed the private Lettter that Blanvile
wrote to the King, in the which he sent him the whole proceedings of the
Parliament; and concludes they will ruin you, naming great factions against
you, and as it were a necessity to destroy you. But I hope he, and the whole
world here will fall, before any misfortunes should fall upon so generous, and
so noble a deserver of his Master, and so excellent a friend and Patron unto

Your Graces Most humble, and most obedient servant, Holland.

Postscript.
THough the Ambassador deserves nothing but contempt and disgrace as Blanvile,
yet I hope as Ambassador he shall receive (for public Honors and accustomed
respect to Ambassadors) all possible satisfaction, and it will be conceived a
generous action.

My dearest Lord,
ALL the joy I have, has such a flatnesse set upon it by your absence from
hence, as I protest to God, I cannot relish it as I ought; for though beauty
and love I find in all perfection and fullness, yet I vex, and languish to find
impediments in our designs and services for you: first in the business, for I
find our mediation must have no place with this King concerning a Peace. We
must only use our power with those of the Religion, to humble them to
reasonable Conditions, and that done, they would as far as I can guess have us
gone, not being willing that we should be so much as in the Kingdom, when the
Peace is made, for fear the Protestants may imagine, we have had a hand in it.
For our Confederation, made by you at the Hague, they speak so of it, as they
will do something in it, but not so really or friendly as we could wish. But
for these things, you allow me, (I trust) to refer you to the general Dispatch:
I come now to other particulars; I have been a careful Spy how to observe
intentions, and affections toward you. I find many things to be feared, and
none to be assured of a safe and real welcome. For the fleur-de-lis (?)
continues in his suspects, making (as they say) very often discourses of it,
and is willing to hear Villanes say, That heart has infinite affections, you
imagine which way. They say there is whispered amongst the foolish young
Bravado's of the Court, That he is not a good Frenchman that suffers anchor to
return out of France, considering the reports that are raised, many such bruits
fly up and down. I have since my coming given Queen Mother by way of discourse
occasion to say somewhat concerning your coming, as the other night when she
complained to me, That things were carried harshly in England toward France; I
then said, That the greatest unkindnesse and harshnesse came from hence, even
to forbid your coming hither, a thing so strange, and so unjust, as our Master
had cause, and was infinitely sensible of it. She fell into discourse of you,
desiring you would respect, and love her daughter; and likewise that she had,
and would ever command her to respect you above all men, and follow all your
Councels (the matter of her Religion excepted) with many professions of value
and respect unto your Person; but would never either excuse what I complained
of, or invite you to come upon that occasion. But though neither the business
gives me cause to persuade your coming, nor my reason for the matter of your
safety; yet know you are the most happy, unhappie man alive, for heart is
beyond imagination right, and would do things to destroy her fortune, rather
then want satisfaction in her mind. I dare not speak as I would, I have
ventured I fear too much, considering what practices accompany the malice of
the people here. I tremble to think whether this will find a safe conveyance
unto you. Do what you will, I dare not advise you; to come is dangerous, not to
come is unfortunate. As I have lived with you, and only in that enjoy my
happiness, so I will die with you, and I protest to God for you, to do you the
least service, etc.

Postscript.
HAve no doubt of the party that accompanied me, for he is yours with his
soul, and dares not now (as things go) advise your coming.

Mr. Lorkin to the Duke, the 30. of August, 1625.
May it please your Grace,
FRom an honest and truly devoted heart, to receive the sacrifice of most
humble thanks, which come here offered for that excess of favor, which I
behold in those gracious lines, that you are so nobly pleased to honor me
withal; and which derive unto me farther, the height of all contentment, his
Majesty's gracious acceptance of my poor endeavors; which howsoever they
cannot shoot up to any high matter from so low an earth, yet (in their greatest
force) are eternally vowed (with the price of my dearest blood) as to his
Masters faithful service in the first place, so to your Graces in the next; who
have received I doubt not ere this, what my former promised in the Savoyard
Ambassadors behalf, and that as well from his own pen, as mine. But this State
is very Euripus, that flows, and reflowes 7. times a day, and in whose ways
is neither constancy, nor truth. The changes your Grace will find in my
Letters to my Lord Conway, whereunto I therefore make reference, because I
suppose, there will be but one Lecture thereof to his Majesty, and your self.

Therein likewise your Grace will see a sudden commandment laid upon Mounsieur
de Blanvile premire Gentilhome de la chamber du Roy speedily to provide himself
to go extraordinary Ambassador into England. The cause thereof I rove at in my
dispatch, taking my aim from two dark speeches to Queen Mother, and the
Cardinal. I have since learned the interpretation of the riddle, not from the
Cardinals lips (who yet being sounded by me, pretended a further end then
Ville-aux-cleres had done, viz; to entertain good intelligence betwixt the
Queen of England, and your Grace, and to do you all the best offices, and
services that are possible;) but from the Duke de Chevereux, who (whatsoever
pretexts may be taken) makes the true ends of that Voyage to be, first, to try
whether this man can mend what (they conceive here) the Duke has marred, in
showing himself more a servant to the King of England, then to his own King and
Master. Secondly, to spy and discover what he can; and (according as he shall
find cause) to frame Cabals, and factions, whereunto he is esteemed very
proper, being charactarized with the marks of a most subtle, prying,
penetrating, and dangerous man.

And therefore as an Antidote against the poison he brings, the Duke gives this
Caveat aforehand, That every one keep close, and covert toward him, and avoid
familiarity with him, though (otherwise) he wishes a kind and honorable
entertainment.

Thus much I received from the Dukes own lips yesternight; ( Bonocil being
witness, perhaps Counselor of all that passed) he promised a memorial in
writing this day, which I have attended till this evening, and even now receive
it.

I have not touched the least syllable hereof to my Lord Conway, because I
think both your Graces, and the Duke de Chevereux's will may concur in this,
that these things be not subject to many eyes.

Even now the Savoyard Ambassador sends an express Messenger unto me to
hasten to Fountain-Bleau. Perhaps it may be to facilitate the Treaty with
Rochel, by either some Letter, or Journey of mine thither.

But upon the conference I have had with the Duke de Chevereux, I shall
temporise, till I hear his Majesty's pleasure, or see good evidences of
generous effects like to ensue. Being desirous to shape my course so, as may be
most acceptable to his Majesty, and pleasing to your Grace, whose virtues I
adore, in quality of

Your Graces Most humble, most faithful, and most obedient servant, Tho. Lorkin.

Postscript.
THe Duke de Chevereux expects the Cipher from your Grace, if I be not deceived.

Mr. Lorkin to the Duke 17. September, 1625.
May it please your Grace,
TO read and consider two contrary advertisements; the one given me on Monday
evening by des Porches, who repeating what he had told me before, (D'avoir
destrompe la Royne mere en mil, et mil chooses) assured me, that her thoughts
were now so far changed from what they were, as she remitted every thing to his
Majesty's pleasure to do what he list, (provided, that he attempted not upon
the conscience of the Queen her Daughter, which was the only point she was
tender in, and scrupulous) that she had written a very sharp Letter, full of
good lessons, and instructions to her, that she had as clear a heart to your
Grace, as was possible; had sent for Blanvil expressly to alter his
instructions, and that howsoever he (like a hollow-hearted man) had uttered in
confidence to a friend of his, That he would persuade the Queen of England to
put on a reconciled countenance for a time, till the way should be better
prepared to give your Grace a dead lift, yet the Queen Mothers intentions were
assuredly sincere and good. The Savoyards Ambassadors voyage was not then
resolved, but his Secretary prepared to make it in his room. Of whom Pocheres
(by the way) gave this touch, That there was a great correspondence between
Mademoiselle de Truges, and him (contracted upon occasions of frequent visits,
that had passed betwixt her Mother, and the Ambassador) and that therefore a
careful eye was to be had of him.

Another (who must be namelesse) sent for me yesterday in the forenoone to tell
me, that Pore Berule's errand hither was only to make outcries against the
decree, or proclamation against the Catholics, and to accuse your Grace as
the Principal, if not the only author, who was now of a seeming friend become a
deadly foe. That the Earl of Arundel had (out of his respect unto this State)
purposely absented himself, that he might not be guilty of so pernicious a
Council. That your Grace and my Lord of Holland, had both but very slippery
hold in his Majesty's affections; that if this King would employ his credit as
he might, it would be no hard matter to root you both out thence, that there
were good preparatives for it already, and that my Lords Arundel, and Pembroke
would join hands and heads together to accomplish the effect. Whereupon
Blainville was sent for back to be more particularly instructed in the ways
how to compass it; and would speedily post away in diligence. The same party
added, that the propositions which the Marquess de Fiatt had made bout the
League, and Fleet, were before Brule's arrival somewhat well tasted, but since
slighted, as those, that became cheap (by their offer to diverse others, as well
as them) that the said Marquess should have visited Blainville at Paris, and
sounded him about his errand after this manner.

First, whether he had order to disnestle Madam de St. George? Whereto the
answer was, No; and that it was against all reason of State so to do; and when
the other replied, that the world was come to a bad pass, if reason of State
descended as low as her, Blainville remained silent.

Secondly, whether he had commission to introduce the Duchess of Buckingham
and the Countess of Denbigh into the Queens bedchamber. Answer was made,
that it was a nice, and tender point, and if that were once condescended to,
they would be continually whispering in the Queens ear, how dear she would be
to the King her Husband, how plausible, and powerful among the people, how
beloved of all, if she would change her religion, against which they were in
conscience here bound to provide, and therefore conclude with a refusal of that
likewise.

Thirdly, whether he carried any good instructions about an offensive, or
defensive league whereunto the negative was still repeated; but that he carried
brave offers for the entertainment of Mansfelt. And when the Marquess replied,
that if that were all the contentment he carried, he feared she would find but
a very cold welcome; the other added, that perhaps he might be an Instrument to
make the Queen and Duke friends. This were good (quoth the Marquess) if the
Queen had not as much need of the Dukes friendship, as the Duke of hers, and
upon these terms they parted. The same lips that utterred all this, gave
caution likewise against the Savoyard Ambassador, as a cunning, deep,
hollow-hearted man. And being felt by me, how his pulse beat toward Porcheres,
told me he was a mercenarie man, and no ways to be trusted. In the issue of
all this, his Council was, That your Grace would consider well your own
strength, and what ground you have in his Majesty's favor, If it be solid, and
good, then a Bravado will not do amiss (may be powerful here, to make them to
see their own error, and to walk upright) so it end with a good close: but if
your station be not sure, then he Counsels to prevent the storm; for to break
with all Spain, France, Puritanes, Papists, were not wisdom; And desires that
by any means you instantly dispatch a Currier to me to represent the true
state of things at home, and how you desire matters should be ordered for your
service here abroad, so that there may be fabriqued a more solid contentment to
your Grace whose, hands I most humbly kiss in quality of

Your Graces Most humble, most faithful, most obeent, and most obliged Servant,
Tho. Lorkin.

Postscript.
IF my stay be intended long, it will be necessary that I use a Cipher, which I
humbly beseech your Grace to send me, or to give me leave to frame one as I can.

As I was closing up my Letter, Mr. Gerbier arrived, who has been somewhat
indisposed in his health by the way, but now is reasonably well God be thanked.
His coming is very seasonable, and I assure my self will be useful.

By the discourse, I have had with Mr. Gerbier, I see a little clearer into the
state of things here, and think Porcheres his advertisement may be truer, as
being perhaps grounded upon knowledge, the other springing only upon
conjecture, built upon Berule's clamours, and overtures, and the sudden
sending for Mounsieur Blanville back. Your Grace will see day in all shortly.
But assuredly the latter advice comes from a heart that is affectionately
devoted to your Graces service. This Bearer will kiss your Graces hands from
the Author, and thereby you will know his name, which he stipulated might not
come in writing.

The Lord Herbert to his Majesty.
My most Gracious Sovereign,
NOw, that, I thank God for it, his Highness according to my continual
prayers, has made a safe, and happy return, unto your Sacred Majesty's
presence, I think my self bound by way of Complete obedience to these
Commandments I received from your Majesty, both by Mr. Secretary Calvert, and
my Brother Henry, to give your Majesty an account of that sense, which the
general sort of people does entertain here concerning the whole frame and
Context of his Highness voyage. It is agreed on all parts, that his Highness
must have received much contentment, in seeing two great Kingdoms, and
consequently in enjoining that satisfaction, which Princes, but rarely, and not
without great peril, obtain. His Highness discretion, diligence, and Princely
behavior every where likewise is much praised. Lastly, since his Highness
journey has fallen out so well, that his Highness is come back, without any
prejudice to his person, or dignity, they say the success has sufficiently
commended the Council. This is the most common censure (even of the biggest
party, as I am informed) which I approve in all, but in the last point, in the
delivery whereof I find something to dislike, and therefore tell them, that
things are not to be judged alone, by the success, and that, when they would
not look so high as Gods providence, without which no place is secure, they
might find even in reason of State, so much, as might sufficiently warrant his
Highness person, and liberty to return.

I will come from the ordinary voice to the selecter judgment, of the
Ministers of State, and more intelligent people in this Kingdom, who, though
they nothing vary from the above recited opinion, yet as more profoundly
looking into the state of this long treated of Alliance betwixt your Sacred
Majesty, and Spain, in the persons of his Highness, and the Infanta, they
comprehended their sentence thereof (as I am informed) in three Propositions.

First, that the protestation which the King of Spain made to his Highness
upon his departure, whereby he promised to chase away, and disfavour all those,
who should oppose this marriage, does extend no further, then to the said Kings
Servants, or at furthest, not beyond the temporal Princes, his Neighbors, so
that the Pope being not included herein, it is, though his consent must be yet
obtained, and consequently, that the business is in little more forwardness
then when it first began.

Secondly, that the Pope will never yield his consent, unless your Sacred
Majesty, grant some notable privileges and advantage to to the Roman
Catholic religion in your Sacred Majesty's Kingdoms.

Thirdly, that the said King of Spain would never insist, upon obtaining those
privileges, but that he more desires, to form a party in your Sacred Majesty's
Kingdoms, which he may keep always obsequious to his will, then to maintain a
friendly correspondence between your Sacred Majesty, and himself. I must not
in the last place omit to acquaint your Sacred Majesty, very particularly,
with the sense which was expressed by the bons Francois, and body of those of
the Religion, who heartily wish, that the same Greatness which the King of
Spain does so affect over all the world, and still maintains even in this
country, which is to be Protector of the Jesuited, and Bigott party, your
Sacred Majesty would embrace, in being defender of our faith. The direct
answer to which, though I evade, and therefore reply little more, then that
this Counsel was much fitter, when the union in Germany did subsist, then at
this time? Yet do I think my self obliged to represent the affection they bear
unto your Sacred Majesty. This is as much as is come to my notice, concerning
that point, your Sacred Majesty gave me in charge, which therefore I have
plainly laid open, before your Sacred Majesty's eyes, as understanding well,
that Princes never receive greater wrong, then when the Ministers, they put in
trust, do palliate and disguise those things, which it concerns them to know.
For the avoiding whereof let me take the boldness to assure your Sacred
Majesty, that those of this Kings Council here, will use all means they can,
both to the King of Spain, and to the Pope (In whom they pretend to have very
particular interest) not only to interupt, but if it be possible to break off
you Sacred Majesty's Alliance with Spain. For which purpose the Count de
Tilliers has strict command, to give al punctual advice, that accordingly they
may proceed. It rests, that I most humbly beseech your Sacred Majesty to take
my free relation of these particulars in good part, since I am of no faction,
nor have any passion, or interest; but faithfully to perform that service, and
duty which I owe to your Sacred Majesty, for whose perfect health, and
happiness, I pray with the devotion, of

Your Sacred Majesty's most obedient, most Loyal, and most affectionate Subject
and Servant, Herbert.
From Merton Castle the 31. of October, 1623. Still No.
Mr. Edward Clark to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
I Have been hitherto very unfit (by reason of my sickness) to give your
Lordship any account of my time at Madrid. So that without your Lordships
favorable construction, I may be thought forgetful of the trust committed to
my charge, and the rather, in that as yet your Lordship has only heard what I
have done, but not why. I presume I have faithfully followed the Princes
direction, and on such probable inducements, as will I hope both in your
Highnesses and your Lordships opinion plead my excuse at least. The very day
the Prince arrived at St. Anderaet, my Lord of Bristol, seeing me very weak,
told me he was very sorry, I was not able to perform the journie for England,
for that now there was an extraordinary occasion of a dispatch, not only in
respect of the ratification come the night before; but because also they were
almost come to a final conclusion of all articles, which were to be engrossed,
and signed the next day. Hereupon I was inquisitive to know what assurance he
had the Ratification was come: He answered, that, that very day, he had been
summoned to attend the Junto, and that there they had earnestly pressed him,
that the Articles might be speedily drawn up, and signed, since they had now
received full warrant to authorize them to proceed; And that the next day was
appointed accordingly. Thereupon unwilling to omit the present opportunity,
conceiving withal the purpose of the Princes Letter to be, either to express
his Highness further pleasure before the meeting of the Junto, or to prevent
the concluding of some other particular Article they might otherwise fall upon:
I delivered his Letter to his Lordship (pretending it came to my hands amongst
other Letters that same day) I found him exceedingly troubled in reading it,
nor did he forbear to tell me, it must for a time be concealed; for he feared,
if they should come to the knowledge of it they would give order to stay the
Prince. Upon these motives, and in this manner I parted with it, wherein I
humbly submitting my self to his Highness Construction, I remain

Your Graces humblest servant to command, Ed. Clark.
Madrid, 1. October. 1623.
Mr. Edward Clark to the Duke.
My Lord,
THe Infanta's preparation for the Disposorio was great, but greater sorrow
(good Lady) to see it deferred. It has bred in them all some distraction. The
multitude know not what to conjecture, what to say, but cry Piden el
Palatinato. They confess the demand just, but unseasonable, and do publish,
that (the Disposorio past) the Infanta on her knees should have been a suitor
to the King to restore it, making it thereby her act, and drawing the
obligation wholly to her. I must confess, I want faith to believe it, and the
rather, because I see it reflect secretly, and maliciously upon your Lordship,
who are made the author of all the impediments that happen, not by your
enemies only, but by those that should suppress it. Which troubles me so
much, that I hasten all I can my return, since I know no other then to be

Your Graces faithful servant, Edw. Clark.
Madrid, 6. Sept. 1623.
Sir Anthony Ashley to the Duke.
May it please your good Lordship,
IF any thing had happened worth your knowledge, I had either come or sent to
Theobalds in your absence, being ascertained that your Lordship had been
already particularly informed of what passed in the Higher House betwixt the
Earl of A. and the L. S. which is the only thing of note, and is thought will
beget some noveltie.

Your Lordship may be most assured, that your Adversaries continue their
meetings and conferences here in Holborn, how to give his Majesty some foul
distaste of you, as making you the only author of all grievances and
oppressions whatsoever for your private ends. And I hope to be able within few
days (if promise be kept) to give you good overture of a mutual oath taken to
this purpose amongst them.

The rumor lately spread touching his Majesty's untimely pardon of the late
Lord Chancellours Fine and Imprisonment, with some other favors intended
toward him, (said to be procured by your Lordships only intimation) has
exceedingly exasperated the rancor of the ill affected, which albeit it be
false, and unlikely, because very unseasonably; It does yet serve the present
turn, for the increase of malice against you. I can but inform your Lordship of
what I understand, you may please to make use thereof as your self thinks
best.

I most humbly entreat your good Lordship to keep Letters of this nature either
in your own Cabinet, or to make Heretics of them: for I am well acquainted
with the disposition of some Penmen in Court. Upon Message even now received
of my poor Daughters sudden dangerous sickness, I am constrained unmannerly
to post unto her, being the only comfort I have in this world, and do purpose
God willing a speedy return. In the mean time, and even with my hearty prayer
I commend your good Lordship to Gods merciful and safe keeping. This 12th. of
May, 1621.

Your honorable good Lordships faithfully devoted, A. A.

Sir Wa. Rawleigh to the Duke, 12. Aug.
IF I presume too much, I humbly beseech your Lordship to pardon me, especially
in presuming to write to so great and worthy a person, who has been told that
I have done him wrong. I heard it but of late, but most happy had I been, if I
might have disproved that villainy against me, when there had been no
suspicion, that the desire to save my life, had presented my excuse.

But my worthy Lord, it is not to excuse my self that I now write: I cannot;
for I have now offended my Sovereign Lord: for all past, even all the world,
and my very enemies have lamented my loss, whom now if his Majesty's mercy
alone do not lament, I am lost. Howsoever, that which does comfort my soul in
this offense is, that even in the offense it self, I had no other intent then
his Majesty's service, and to make his Majesty know, That my late enterprise
was grounded upon a truth, and which with one Ship speedily set out, I meant to
have assured, or to have died; being resolved (as it is well known) to have
done it from Plymouth, had I not been restrained. Hereby I hoped not only to
recover his Majesty's gracious opinion, but to have destroyed all those
malignant reports which had been spread of me. That this is true, that
Gentleman whom I so much trusted, (my Keeper) and to whom I opened my heart,
cannot but testify, and wherein if I cannot be believed living, my death shall
witness: Yea that Gentleman cannot but avow it, that when we came back toward
London, I desired to save no other Treasure, then the exact description of
those places in the Indies. That I meant to go hence as a discontented man, God
I trust, and mine own Actions will dissuade his Majesty. Whom neither the
loss of my estate, thirteen years imprisonment, and the denial of my pardon
could beat from his service, nor the opinion of being accounted a fool, or
rather distract, by returning as I did, balanced with my love to his Majesty's
person, and estate, had no place at all in my heart.

It was that last severe Letter from my Lords for the speedy bringing of me
up, and the impatience of dishonor, that first put me in fear of my life, or
enjoying it in a perpetual imprisonment, never to recover my reputation lost,
which strengthened me in my late, and too late lamented resolution, if his
Majesty's mercy do not abound: if his Majesty do not pity my age, and scorn
to take the extremest and utmost advantage of my errors: if his Majesty in
his great charity do not make a difference between offenses proceeding from a
life-saving-natural impulsion, without all ill intent, and those of an ill
heart; and that your Lordship, remarkable in the world for the Nobleness of
your disposition, do not vouchsafe to become my Intercessour, whereby your
Lordship shall bind an hundred Gentlemen of my kindred to honor your memory,
and bind me for all the time of that life which your Lordship shall beg for me,
to pray to God that you may ever prosper, and over-bind me to remain

Your most humble servant, W. Rawleigh.

Sir Henry Yelverton to the Duke, 15. March, 1623.
May it please your Grace,
MY humble heart and affection has wrote many lines, and presented many
Petitions to your Grace before this time, though none legible but one sent by
my Lord Rochford, within five days after your most welcomed arrival from Spain.

I have learned the plain phrase of honest speech. My Lord, I have honored
your name long, and your own virtue much. I never found misfortune greater then
this, that still sailing after you in all humble desires of duty, I was still
cast behind you. I excuse nothing, wherein your Grace may judge me faulty, but
will be glad to expiate my errors at any price.

Your noble heart (I hope) harbors no memory of what did then distaste you.
Your own merits which have so much ennobled you, will be the more complete, if
I may but merit your forgetfulness of wrongs past. If I seek your Grace before
I deserve it, enable me I beseech you to Deserve, that I may seek. If any, on
whom you have cast your eye most, endear himself more to your service, then I
shall; let me not follow the vintage at all. Till this day I feared the relish
of sour Grapes, though I have sought you with many broken sleeps. But this
Noble Earl, whose honor for this work shall ever with me be second to yours,
has revived me, with the assurance of your gracious pardon, and liberty to
hope, I may be deemed your servant.

I protest to God, it is not the affluence of your honor makes me joy in it,
nor the power of your Grace, that trains me on to seek it, but let the trial of
all your fortunes speak thus much for me, that I will follow you, not as Cyrus
his Captains and Soldiers followed him, the one for spoil, the other for
place: but if with safety to your Grace, though with peril to my self, I may
serve you, let me die if I do it not, rather then want any longer, what my
humble love ever led me to, and I still affect the honor

To be yours, Henry Yelverton.

Sir John Eliot to the Duke, 8. November. 1623.
Right Honorable,
WIth what affection I have served your Grace, I desire rather it should be
read in my actions, then my words, which made me sparing in my last relation to
touch those difficulties, wherewith my Letters have been checked, that they
might the more fully speak themselves. I shall not seek to gloss them now, but
as they have been, leave them to your Graces acceptance, which I presume so
noble, that scandal or detraction cannot decline it. It were an injury of your
worth, which I dare not attempt, to insinuate the opinion of any merit by false
colors, or pretenses, or with hard circumstances to endear my labors, and
might beget suspicion, sooner then assurance in your credit, which I may not
hazard. My innocence I hope needs not these, nor would I shadow the least
error under your protection. But where my services have been faithful, and not
altogether vain, directed truly to the honor and benefit of your place, only
suffering upon the disadvantage of your absence, I must importune your Grace to
support my weakness, that it may cause no prejudice of your rights and
liberties, which I have studied to preserve, though with the loss of mine own.
My insistance therein has exposed me to a long imprisonment, and great charge,
which still increases, and threatens the ruin of my poor fortunes, if they be
not speedily prevented. For which, as my endeavors have been wholly yours. I
most humbly crave your Graces favor both to my self, and them; In which I am
devoted

Your Graces thrice-humble Servant, J. Eliot.

The Earl of Oxford to the Duke.
My Lord,
I Cannot but believe that I have had some undeserved ill offices done me unto
your Lordship, otherwise I should not find this difficulty in being preferred,
if not before, at least equally in balance with my Accusers. It is common unto
all men's understanding, that it is not the guilt of the accused, but the legal
and just proceeding, which cleares the Kings honor, and this I do, and ever
will acknowledge to have been held toward me. Neither was it ever known, that
the Kings Grace, the more it came sweetened with his favor, did lessen or
diminish his honor, but rather seemed as a luster to make his goodness shine
brighter, and oblige the Receiver in a more strict Tie of gratitude. My Lord,
it cannot wrong you to oblige me to your service, nor add reputation to you
throw me upon Rocks. I appeal to the King, and your own Conscience, whether
ever I have harbored any treasonable thoughts, either against his Majesty, or
his issue, that should make me incapable of receiving his grace, without
imputation to those faithful and dutiful respects, with which I have ever
served his Majesty; If it shall please him to line me out my path to death
(the period whither we must all travel to) by imprisonment, I shall be far from
repining at the sentence, but with all humbleness, will undergo it, and employ
my heartiest prayers for the long continuance of his honor and happiness.

I beseech your Lordship receive my Character of what I am, and have ever been
toward you, not from Conjectures and reports of others, but from my own mouth,
and actions. For yet I have reason to suspect your opinion of me, else sure I
should have found better fruits of your power. I was always (as much as lay in
me) desirous to outstrip, rather then come short of any in doing you service,
and the same affections still remain with me, of the truth of which I pray you
be confident.

To this only I will add one request more, which is, That since your Lordship
is pleased to mediate with his Majesty for my freedom, you will procure it so
free from rubs, as that my obligation may be the greater, which I will ever
willingly and faithfully pay unto your Lordship in all respects, like him, who
truly is

Your Lordships, etc. H.O.

The Lady Purbeck to the Duke.
My Lord,
THough you may judge what pleasure there is in the conversation of a man in
the distemper you see your Brother in; yet the duty I owe to a husband, and
the affection I bear him, (which sickness shall not diminish,) makes me much
desire to be with him, to add what comfort I can to his afflicted mind, since
his only desire is my Company. Which if it please you to satisfy him in, I
shall with a very good will suffer with him, and think all but my duty, though
I think every wife would not do so. But if you can so far dispense with the
Laws of God, as to keep me from my Husband, yet aggravate it not by
restraining from me his means, and all other contentments, but which I think is
rather the part of a Christian, you especially ought much rather to study
comforts for me, then to add ills to ills, since it is the marriage of your
Brother makes me thus miserable. For if you please but to consider not only the
lamentable estate I am in, deprived of all Comforts of a husband, and having no
means to live of: besides falling from the hopes my fortune then did promise
me, for you know very well I came no beggar to you, though I am like so to be
turned off.

For your own honor, and Conscience sake, take some course to give me
satisfaction, to tie my tongue from crying to God, and the world for vengeance
for the unworthy dealing I have received. And think not to send me again to my
Mothers, where I have stayed this quarter of a year, hoping (for that my Mother
said you promised,) order should be taken for me, but I never received penny
from you. Her confidence of your Nobleness made me so long silent; but now
believe me, I will sooner beg my bread in the streets to all your dishonours,
then any more trouble my friends, and especially my Mother, who was not only
content to afford us part of the little means she has left her, but whilst I
was with her, was continually distempered with devised Tales, which came from
your Family, and withal lost your good opinion, which before she either had,
or you made show of it; but had it been real, I cannot think her words would
have been so translated, nor in the power of discontented servants Tales to
have ended it.

My Lord, if the great honor you are in, can suffer you to have so mean a
thought as of so miserable a creature as I am, so made by too much Credulity
of your fair promises, which I have waited for performance of almost these five
years: And now it were time to despair, but that I hope you will one day be
your self, and be governed by your own noble thoughts, and then I am assured to
obtain what I desire, since my desires be so reasonable, and but for mine own.
Which whether you grant or no, the affliction my poor husband is in (if it
continue) will keep my mind in a continual purgatory for him, and will suffer
me to sign my self no other, but

Your unfortunate Sister, F. Purbeck.

Dr. Done to the Marquess of Buckingham, 13th. September. 1621.
My most honored Lord,
I Most humbly beseech your Lordship to afford this ragg of paper a room
amongst your evidences. It is your evidence not for a Manor, but for a man.
As I am a Priest it is my sacrifice of prayer to God for your Lordship; and as
I am a Priest, made able to subsist, and appear in Gods service by your
Lordship, it is a sacrifice of my self to you. I deliver this paper as my
Image; and I assist the power of any Conjurer, with this imprecation upon my
self, that as he shall tear this paper, this picture of mine, so I may be torn
in my fortune, and in my fame, if ever I have any corner in my heart,
dispossessed of a zeal to your Lordships service. His Majesty has given me a
royal Key into your Chamber, leave to stand in your presence, and your Lordship
has already such a fortune, as that you shall not need to be afraid of a
suitor, when I appear there. So that I protest to your Lordship, I know not
what I want, since I cannot suspect, nor fear my self for ever doing, or
leaving undone any thing by which I might forfeit that title, of being always

Your Lordships, etc. J. D.

Dr. Done to the Duke.
My Honored Lord,
ONce I adventured to say to the Prince his Highness, That I was sure he would
receive a book from me, the more graciously, because it was dedicated to your
Grace: I proceed justly upon the same confidence, that your Grace will accept
this, because it is his by the same title. If I had not overcome that
reluctation, which I had in my self of representing devotions, and
mortifications to a young and active Prince, I should not have put them into
your presence, who have done so much, and have so much to do in this world, as
that it might seem enough to think seriously of that. No man in the body of
story, is a full president to you, nor may any future man promise himself and
adaequation to his precedent, if he make you, his. Kings have discerned the
seeds of high virtues in many men, and upon that Gold, they have put their
stamp, their favors upon those persons: But then those persons have labored
under the jealousy of the future Heir; And some few, have had the love of
Prince, and King, but not of the Kingdom, and some of that too, and not of the
Church; God has united your Grace so to them all, that as you have received
obligations from the King, and Prince, so you have laid obligations upon the
Church and state. They above, love you out of their judgment, because they
have loved you: and we below, love you out of our thankfulness, because you
have loved us. Gods privy Seal is the testimony of a good conscience, and his
broad-Seal is the outward bessings of this life. But since his Pillar of fire,
was seconded with a Pillar of Cloud, and that all his temporal blessings have
some partial Eclipses, and the purest consciences some remorses: so though he
have made your way to Glory, Glory; and brought you in the arms and bosom,
of his Vicegerent, into his own arms and bosom, yet there must come a minute
of twilight in a natural death. And as the reading of the actions of great men,
may assist you for great actions, so for this one necessary descent of dying,
(which I hope shall be the only step of Lownes, that ever you shall pass by,
and by that late) you may receive some Remembrances, from the Meditations and
Devotions of

Your Graces Devoutest Servant, J. Done.

Sir John Hipsley to the Duke.
My Noble Lord,
I Find that all my Lord of Bristols actions are so much extolled, that what
you command me to say is hardly believed. I will say no more in it, but leave
the rest to Mr: Greihams, only this, that you have written much to the King in
some man's behalf, and Mr. Gresley has a 100. a year given him during his life,
all which I think is without your knowledge; And Mr. Killegrew has the like,
that came for your sake after the other was granted. Mr. Greihams can tell you
how that came. My Lord of Southampton has offered his son to marry with my
Lord Treasurers Daughter, and tells him this reason, that now is the time he
may have need of friends, but it is refused as yet; the event I know not what
that will be.

I have spoken to the King of all that you gave me in command, and he does
protest, that what he has done, was merely for your sake, and indeed he is
very careful of all your business, as if you were here your self; but yet for
Gods sake make what haste you may home for fear of the worst. For the carriage
of Captain Hall, I will not trouble you till you come home, only this by the
way, that my Lord Treasurer has it; but upon what terms I know not nor indeed
desire you should be troubled with it. Sir George Goring came home but this
last night, and is gone to the Court, and desires to be excused for writing to
you. My Lady Hatton, and my Lady Purbeck came home with him from the Hague.

My Lord of Arundel has not been at Court since the death of his son. I fear
the news, that Charles Gleman did show you was true. For I can assure you
Marquess Hamilton was much troubled till I had spoken with him. There be some
have done no good offices betwixt you. Pray have a care of the Letter, I mean
the man Mr. Gleman did show you, and keep as many friends as you may. I have
spoken with no man, but my Lord Keeper who is yours, or not his own as he
swears. And Mr. secretary Conway is yours body, and soul; I never heard of
the like of him, for he flies at all men, that be not yours. Here is much
admiration, that they hear not from you, but I thank God, the King is not
troubled at it, for I do assure him, that it is the better, that he hears not
from you: for now he may be confident, that you keep your day in coming away,
which does much please him. I will write nothing of my own business, though
there be nothing done in it, but do hope, that you will not see your Servant
perish.

If I be too tedious, I pray pardon me, it is my love that makes me so, and
yet I have an humble suite unto you, which is to beg at your hands for
patience; for now is the time to show it or never; for all the eyes of the
world are upon you and this is the time to win Honor, and fame; and for
Gods-sake carry the business with patience betwixt my Lord of Bristol, and
you; for here be those that do laugh in their sleeves at you both. I beseech
you let me hear from you, what you will command me, for I will do nothing (as
near as I can) but what will give content: For you have that power in me, that
you need but say, and it is done (if it lie in my power) so shall you ever
command

Your faithful, and obedient Servant, till death, Jo. Hipsley
London 1. September. 1623.
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Marquess of Buckingham.
Right Honorable,
BY the dispatch of the fourteenth of this present (which I sent by Jonson the
Post) I advertised your Honor at large in the two several Letters of the
occurrents of these parts, and therewith sent a copy of my second proposition
which I made the day before in the Assembly of the States General touching the
business of Cleves, and Juliers in conformity to your Honors Letters of the
30th. of the last.

The answer thereunto was deferred until yesterday, and then brought me only by
word of mouth from the States by Mounsieur Magnus of Zealand, and Mounsieur
Zulestein of Vtrecht, and was to this effect, That the States having sent my
former proposition of the third of December to their several provinces, from
which this latter did differ in substance, save only in respect of the time
for the restitution of the Towns, which was prolonged for the space of a
month, all they could do according to the constitution of their government, was
to send this my second proposition likewise unto their provinces, which they
had done the day after I made the same, and until they receive more express
order from their principals, they were to rest upon their former answer.
Wherein they declared their good intentions to accommodate this business, so
it might be with safety to themselves, and satisfaction of their neighbors.
And herein they were to expect the resolution of the Elector of Brandenbergh,
from whom the time did not yet serve to know his mind. Mean while they humbly
beseech his Majesty to make a gracious construction of their proceedings.

I was the day before with Mounsieur Barnevelt, (who is President this week) to
solicit their answer, who excused himself upon the smalnesse of their number,
many of the States being absent, and of two Provinces all the Deputies: So as
to give a determinate resolution according as was required, they could not: And
to make answer in general terms, since his Majesty rested not satisfied with
the former, he doubted another of the same kind would not please him. So as it
seems this Message in place of an answer in writing, proceeded of his Council.

By discourse both with him, and those which came unto me, upon this subject, I
find their diffidence of the purpose of the Spaniard rather increased then
otherwise, upon the news of Leavies intended on the Archdukes side, to the
number of 9000 foot, and 1000, or 1200 horse; and their delay in taking a
determinate resolution, no way dissuaded, but rather counseled by all other
Princes, who have interest in this business. Their Ambassador at Paris having
advertised them by reiterated Letters, That Don Pedro di Sarmientos his offer
to his Majesty touching the execution of the Treaty of Zanten is absolutely
disavowed by both the Kings of France and Spain. And this French Ambassador
Mounsieur du Maurier, having made it appear unto them, that at Brussels they
have the same conceit of it, as a thing done without authority. Besides, the
Princes of the Union have written lately express Letters to the States,
wherein they persuade them to extraordinary vigilance upon the Spaniards, and
particularly in this business of Cleves, and Juliers, the translated Copies of
which Letters, I send your Honor herewith. And the Prince of Brandenbergh
being young himself, and having his Council divided in opinion, does nothing
absolutely without reference to this State, and he when I put them in mind, how
they themselves were the authors and framers of the Treaty of Zanten, they
stick not to say plainly, Tempora mutantur, et nos: so as I am daily more and
more confirmed in my former opinion, That there is no way left to accommodate
this business, but by a private agreement between the Princes Pretendents. But
Strickius, the Agent of Brandenbergh, being absent at Cleves, I do not hear how
this Negotiation proceeds.

Amongst the particularities which passed in discourse between Mounsieur
Magnus, and my self, I insisting upon restitution of the Towns, as the means
to prevent an imminent war upon the quarrel, He asked to whom they should
restore them, unless the Princes were agreed, and that they might know, which
of the Princes should receive him, and whom they should have for their
neighbor. Whereby it appears, this course will on this side remove all
difficulties.

It is advertised hither, by Mounsieur Langrack, the States Ambassador at
Paris, that the apprehension they had in the Court, to have this business
ended without the French Kings intervention, caused Mounsieur de Refuges to be
summoned to make an other journey expressly hither, in regard he had formerly
the managing thereof, Notwithstanding thta Mounsieur de la Nove was already
named for this extraordinary Embassage: But Refuges excusing himself upon his
indisposition, sent all his memorial of what passed, when he was here in the
treaty of Zanten, with his private opinion upon the whole matter to serve as
an instruction to la Nove.

By the other Letters of the 28. of this present Still No. Mounsieur Langrack
has given this State many important advertisements, as first, that he has
obtained of the French Kng a continuance of the succors of the 3. Regiments of
foot, and 2. Troops of horse of that Nation for one year longer,
notwithstanding the opposition of the Spanish, and Archdukes Ambassadors, who
advised the recalling of them upon occasion of the present troubles in France.
That there is order given and assignation for 120000 Crowns toward the
arrearages of their pay. That a resolution is taken in that Court by the advice
of the new Councillors, contrary to the opinion of the old, to prosecute the
Princes by war, and maintain the Kings authority henceforward by force. That to
this effect the King desires the State should perform their promises of sending
toward the river of Bordeaux 5. men of war. That he likewise requires of them
in conformity of the last treaties betwixt the Crown, and this Star, an
assistance of men to the number of the French, which are here in service, under
some good Commander; But the French themselves, the King will not have, for
fear, when they shall come into France, of their revolting to the Princes. That
he demands free passage through these Countries down the Mause, and the Rhene
of 3000. Soldiers, with their arms, which are leaived by the Count John
Giacomo Belioyosa in Luke-Land, and thereabouts, and shipping to transport them
into France.

All these particulars were moved unto him (as he writes) by the Marshal de
Anchre, to which he adds, That the King is so much incensed against the Duke of
Bovillon, for seeking to this State for protection, by these Letters whereof I
advertised your Honor in my last, that there is a resolution taken to declare
him Criminel de lose Majestate.

These Grauntes are so scantie (the continuance of the French Troops in the
service of the State, being but for a year only, and the payment of them
arriving only to the tenth part of what is already due) that they here
interpret them to proceed from the Marshal de Ancre Pour tenir (as they say) le
be en Leau, and the demands are so large and extravagant, that they are
thought iniquum petere, ut aequum ferant; Whereby on the one side to keep this
State in devotion to the French King, and on the other to prevent the like
requests of the Princes: for there is small appearance, they will give passage
to so many men through their Countries armed, and commanded by an Italian, who
has born arms against them, and is married into the Arch Dukes Country. And
when it comes to question of sending forces of their own thither, it is like
they will find as good excuses for that point, as they have hitherto done for
the sending of the ships, now three months since promised, and still solicited:
For howsoever the chief Persons here have been long particularly interested and
engaged (as your Honor knows) by near dependence on this Crown, I find them
of late very much alienated in consideration that it is so much governed by
Spain, which in the end they apprehended will turn to the ruin of this State.

In France they are jealous of this coldness, and have of late expostulated
the matter with Mounsieur Langrack, as if they here did incline to the Princes,
there being, a brute raised in Paris, that Count Maurice would go in Person to
their assistance; whereof the Queen Regent was very sensible; but I do not find
here, that there was any ground for that report.

Here has been lately a fame spread, and nourished by such as desire to weaken
the correspondence betwixt his Majesty and this State, that his Majesty is in
near terms of matching our Prince with Spain. Which report is now the more
credited, by an adviso out of Spain from a secret Minister, this State
entertaines, under color of soliciting Merchants causes. That this match has
been there, by order of the King of Spain debated in the inquisition, and
judged necessary in regard it would serve for introduction of Popery into
England.

This I find to be the Remora of my chief affairs with this State, my pressing
the restitution of the Towns in Cleves and Juliers being thought by many of
these jealous people to hang on this thread, as a thing very acceptable, and
agreeable at this time to the King of Spain, and much advantageous in this
present conjuncture to his affairs; and my insisting upon sending of
Commissioners to his Majesty in the business of our Merchants, they apply
the same way, as if the opinion which would be conceived of this Embassage,
(howsoever Merchants affairs were pretended, the chief intent was to play
Davus in Comaedia) should according to the use of Nitimur in Vetitum, rather
kindle, then quench the desire of the Spaniard, and draw the match to a more
speedy conclusion.

At my last being with Mounsieur Barnevelt, I did expostulate the States delay
of sending Commissioners to his Majesty upon this occasion, as neither
answers to Sir Noel Caron's word and promise to his Majesty, nor to that,
which from his mouth, I did advertise your Lordship of the States inclination
in general, and the resolution in particular of those of Holland. To which he
answered me, That with much difficulty and opposition, he had obtained the
assent of Holland, and that now the matter rested with Zealand, but he doubted,
that his Majesty's restoring the old Company of Merchants, would make a stay of
any farther proceeding, as now less requisite, howsoever, that Sir Noel Carone
had advertised, that notwithstanding this change, he thought the sending of
Commissioners very necessary.

The Questions here about Religion, rest in the same state as I advertised your
Lordship in my last, the Assembly of Holland being separated until the end of
February still. no. when they are to meet again. Mean while a provisional order
is taken, that the Contra-Remonstrants shall continue their preaching in our
English Church, which they have accommodated with Scaffolds, to make it more
capable of their number.

There was much question in this Assembly, whether his Excellency should be
present, or no: but in the end he was called by the major part of voices,
contrary to Mounsieur Barnevelt's opinion, and his authority over-swayed the
matter in favor of the Contra-Remonstrants for the continuance of their
preaching, which it was proposed to hinder by some violent Courses.

By example of this place, there is the like provisional order taken for
preaching at the Brill, and Rotterdam, and certain of the Burghers are
established in Tergow, who were put from their Trade and Commerce, for their
expostulating with the Magistrate upon this quarrel.

I have been spoken unto by diverse particular persons well affected in this
cause, to procure a Letter from his Majesty to his Excellency, whereby to
comfort and encourage him in his Zeal for the maintenance of the true doctrine,
and the professors thereof, against these Novellists and their opinions. Which
I most humbly refer to his Majesty's wisdom, (in case he judge this office
necessary) whether it be sit to be done by Letter or Message, the former of
which, will be of greater virtue, but the latter less subject to cross
construction of the Arminian faction, which your Honor knows how potent it is
here amongst those who have chief rule in this State. Thus I humbly take leave,
ever resting

Your Lordships most faithfully to be commanded, Dudley Carleton.
Hague this 24. Febr. 1616. Still. Vet.
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke of Buckingham.
My most honorable Lord,
IMmediately upon receipt of your Lordships Letter concerning Sir John Ogle, I
moved the Prince of Orange not only for his leave for Sir John to go into
England, but likewise for his Letters of recommendation, whereby to give your
Lordship subject, upon some such testimonies of his Excellencies good
satisfaction, to set him upright in his Majesty's favor, both which he granted
unto me: though against the first, he alleged the absence of all the English
Colonels; and touching the latter, he called to mind old matters; which
notwithstanding (upon what I undertook for Sir John's future intentions) he was
content to forget. I did once again upon Sir John's instance, put his
Excellency in mind of his dispatch, wherein I found no difficulty. Since I
find Sir John has changed his purpose of going, and his excuse will be made at
his entreaty by his Excellency, who has since let me know, Though he would
not deny me his leave, yet he is better content (in regard he is so slenderly
accompanied with Colonels, in a time when the State has need of their service
with his stay. So as Sir John has the obligation to your Lordship of a
favorable recommendation and for his not prevailing himself of his leave when
it was granted, I must leave to himself to render a reason. For my part, having
accomplished what I find by your Lordships Letter, to be agreeable both to his
Majesty's pleasure, and your Lordships, I thought it my duty to advertize,
That there is an ancient difference between Sir Horacio Vere, and Sir Edward
Cecyl, about the extent of their Commands; whereupon follows a great
inconveniencie to the dishonor of our Nation, (which as it appears when they
were last in the field before Reez) are divided hereby, and march, and lodge in
several bodies, and quarters. Much endeavor has been formerly used in these
parts to reconcile them, but all in vain, by reason of some ill Instruments,
who wrought upon both their discontents to set them farther asunder. Now, they
are both in England, and are both written for, to come over; It were a work
worthy of your Lordship to make them understand one another better, and what
they will not yield to of themselves, to overruled by his Majesty's authority.
I may not conceal from your Lordship, that I am entreated by the Prince of
Orange himself to do this office, both with his Majesty, and your Lordship,
wherein he would not be seen himself, because having dealt between them
fruitlesly heretofore, he doubts of the like success now. But when their
agreement shall be made, he will acknowledge his obligation to your Lordship,
and for the better proceeding therein, I sent your Lordship a Copy of an order
formerly set down betwixt them, with the translate of Sir Horacio Vere's
Commission, (both which I had of his Excellency) and likewise the beginning,
and proceeding of their difference, as I have collected the same in brief out
of other men's reports.

The projects I sent your Lordship with my last, of a West-Indian Company
having been proposed to the States of Guelderland for their ratification (who
have the leading voice in the Assembly of the States general, end were ever
least forward in that business) has thus far their allowance, that they will
concur therein with the rest of the Provinces. But withal I do understand, they
have given their Deputies secret charge not to give way thereunto, in case they
find it prejudicial to the Truce. Which makes the matter evident, that the
project of the Company (though it be never so advanced) will stand or fall,
according to the proceeding of the Truce. The expiration whereof approaching so
near, and here being advertisements from Paris, that a French Gentleman one
Belleavium (who was lately employed hither to the Prince of Orange about the
difference betwixt him, and the Prince of Conde) had secret instructions to
sound the States, how they stood affected to the renewing thereof. I have used
all diligence to know how far he went; and am well informed, he has done
nothing therein of Consideration: only this past between him, and his
Excellency.

He telling his Excellency from Mounsieur Desdiguieres, and some of the French
Kings Council, how acceptable the extraordinary Embassage intended from hence
will be in that Court and thereupon persuading a speedy embracing the
opportunity.

From whence (said his Excellency after his round manner) comes this
alteration?

To speak plainly (said he) they fear in France you will renew the Truce
without them, and therefore by your Ambassadors, they would interpose
themselves.

Here are good advertisements both from Bruxels and Paris, that the Spaniards
intent is not to renew the Truce, but to have a Peace proposed with these
plausible conditions; That the King of Spain will pretend nothing in the
Regiment of these United Provinces, nor require any thing of them in the point
of Religion, but leave all in terms as it now stands, with recognition only of
some titular Soveraigntie, which he cannot in honor relinquish.

This is already proposed to France, as a glorious work to establish a settled
Peace in these parts of the world, but with this condition, That if it be not
embraced here, then France shall refuse to give this State any further support,
or countenance, of which it is here believed, that Spain has already obtained
a firm promise in that Court. And that either the like overture is already
made, or will be within few days to his Majesty.

Under which does lie hidden many mysteries much to the advantage of the
Spaniard, and prejudice of this State: for the very proposition of a new
Treaty will distract them here very much, in regard of their unsettlednesse,
and aptness upon any dispute to relapse into faction, besides many
Considerations of importance belonging properly to the Constitution of their
Government, but the acceptance of the old, by renewing of the Truce upon the
former terms, for so many years, more, or less, as shall be thought sitting,
will (in my poor opinion (which notwithstanding is not slenderly grounded) take
place, without much difficulty. The importance of this business, has made me
give your Lordship this trouble, and your Lordship may be pleased to let his
Majesty understand as well that little as is done by Mounsieur Belleavium, as
what they here conceive to be further intended by the Spaniard. So I most
humbly take leave, ever resting

Your Lordships Most faithful servant, Dudley Carleton.
Hague this 10th. of June, 1620.
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke.
Most Honorable,
NOt to give your Lordship the trouble of often Letters, I render an account of
his Majesty's Commandments by the same hand I usually receive them. One I had
lately by an express Letter from his Majesty, accompanied with another from
your Lordship, touching my Lord of Buckleugh, to demand full satisfaction of
the States, for all his Lordships pretentions, and to that effect to procure
Instructions and Commission to be sent to Sir Noel Carone to end this business.

To which effect I have moved both his Excellency and the States, and whilst
they were treating thereof, Colonel Brogue arrived here out of Scotland: with
whom they are now handling to put him to Pension, and to give my Lord the
Command of his Regiment in lieu of his Pretensions. Which when they come to
calculate, my Lord will find a short reckoning of them, and to send accounts
out of their accountants hands, and refer them to others, they will never be
moved.

Wherefore if the course they now take can be gone thorough with (which Colonel
Brogue does most unwillingly hear of) it will be then in my Lords choice,
whether he will remain satisfied, or not. And within few days I hope to return
my Lords Secretary with advertisement of what is done. Mean time I assure your
Lordship nothing is omitted in my endeavors to procure him that, which may be
most to his contentment.

In the present condition of public affairs, your Lordship knows well how
at this instant we have all buone Parolle out of Spain, and Cattivi-fatti of
all the rest of the House of Austria. In so much as these Low-Countrie Troops
under the governance of the Infanta, assist in the blocking up of a poor town,
all which remains of his Majesty's only Daughters Jointure in the Palatinate.
And the Emperor not content with having chased her Husband out of the Empire,
in the Proposition of the Diett of Ratisbone, makes this one Article, to make
war upon these Provinces, because (amongst other quarrels) they give refuge to
the Prince Palatine. Where will this persecution cease? And what place in the
world to which they are driven from hence (and is easily guessed in all their
extreamitie, whither they will be forced to fly) is not subject to the same
quarrel? within this week that I now write (betwixt Sunday, and Sunday) we were
here in that state, if God had not prevented it, this Country had been too hot
for them to remain in, and it had been a happiness for them, if they could
have got a poor skeveling boat to have transported them elsewhere. This
Bearer my Nephew will inform your Lordship more particularly thereof.

Now, de agendis, there rests no more, then question of maintaining the Army of
Mansfelt, and Brunswick, which is lodged at the present in a place, out of
which, it can hardly match, and more hardly be removed. If it have pay, and
countenance, it may do good service in Germany; if not, I will tell your
Lordship what I conceive may be the consequence. It will be hedged into
East-Friseland by Tillie, (whose Troops already draw that way) Cordova and
Anholt, against which keeping it self within that Country, it will be able to
make resistance, as the poor Peasants thereof did heretofore against the
Spanish Army, by reason of the difficulty of access. From this State it will
have all assistance, and though it be kept in by land, it will have the Sea
open betwixt Griett and Norden, (both which places are in Mans-felts
possession) a Haven fit for a Fleet of Gallions. If by that means they, with
correspondencie with this State may support themselves, it will be very ill for
many important consequences. If they and this State, (which will be forced to
run a fortune together) be overcome, much worse; for what can keep the rest of
Europe from subjection to the Austriaci? We see how in Terra firma, the
Walloons joined to Spaniards, both make and maintain their Conquests. Join the
Hollanders to them by Sea, they will reap the like service by them. The fruit
we have reaped heretofore of the shiping of these Provinces, both for defense
in the year 88. and offense in the Cadiz journey, shows what a strong
addition this is to a greater power.

My most honorable Lord, I am so full of such like speculations, that these
have broken out ex Plentitudine Cordis, surcharged with grief to see in
Plenitudine temporis, that to come to effect in the public affairs which was
discovered long since, by the Emperors intercepted letters sent by the
Capuchin into Spain, and to hear the judgment made every where, that the
public opposition of the Spanish Ambassador (D'Ognates) words to the
Emperors proceeding de facto, is but a patelinage, with secret understanding
to abuse his Majesty's goodness. Of which it lies yet in his Majesty's power
to vindicate himself; but there is no time to spare. I humbly crave pardon for
this liberty of discourse I use with your Lordship, who am

Your Lordships, most humble, and most faithful Servant, Dudley Carleton.
Hague, 31. Jan. 1622.
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke.
Most Honorable,
I Observe in such Letters from the Prince Electour to her Highness, with the
sight of which, she is pleased sometimes to favor me, a misunderstanding
betwixt him, and his Uncle the Duke of Bovillon, who grows weary of his
Guest, doubting least in his Consideration some danger may be drawn upon his
Town of Sedan; And the jealousy the Prince conceives, what may be done with
him in case of a Siege; (against which, that is no place to make long
resistance) besides the discomforts of living in another man's house, and being
ill looked on, makes him wish himself any where else; but chiefly here, where
he is as much desired, as missed by her Highness, his children, and Family:
And where the Prince of Orange, and the States (apprehending very well his
present danger, and incommoditie) will give him very willingly his wonted
welcome. Your Lordship may be pleased to make thus much known to his Majesty:
And if your Lordship can so dispose of the matter, that with his Majesty's good
liking, he may return hither again, I know nothing your Lordship can do more
agreeable to her Highness, though she does wholly submit her affections and
desires to his Majesty's pleasure.

The wars were never warmer then they are already, and now likely more and
more to kindle in these parts: The Siege of Ostend, by those which were present
there and are now in Berghem, being esteemed sport in comparison of the fury
is used in disputing the outworks of that Town. Where on Monday last in the
night an assault was given, and maintained six hours by the Spaniards upon a
half Moon kept by the Dutch on the North side; out of which they were three
several times repulsed, with the loss of betwixt 3. and 400 men of their best,
and on this side under 40. All that they gained being (after the same manner as
their former attempt on the other side wherein Colonel Hynderson was slain) to
lodge in the foot of the work. Two of our old Captains, Sir Michael Everard,
and Lovelace (hurt in that, and the like assault given on that side within few
days after) are both dead of their wounds within these two days. One at Dort,
the other at Rotterdam, whither they were retired to be cured: which is imputed
by the Chyrurgeons to some malignity is used to the bullets: but that is not to
be believed amongst Christians, yet I have seen some brought hither shot by the
Enemy, sufficient to break all quarter.

We shall have now questionless many and sharp encounters in the field; Count
Mansfelt being on his way hitherwards with his Army, much weakened during his
abode in the Frontiers of France; but of strength sufficient to march through
the open Countries of Henault, and Brabant. Which course he takes directly with
intention to come to Breda. And where by computation, he should be by Monday,
or Teusday next at the farthest, unless he be overtaken by Don Conzales de
Cordova, or met with by the Count Henric Vandenbergh, or the Marquess Spinola,
in any of which there is small appearance. Cordova going forward at leisure
with 16. pieces of Canon, and the 18th. of this present, when Mansfelt passed a
bridge at Marpent over the Sambre in Henault (which was the only passage of
difficulty, and that as our advertisements here say, he crossed without
resistance) being some hours March behind him, who having three field pieces
only, and small store of baggage, and in effect his whole Army on horseback,
may make great expedition.

If Vandenbergh stir, he will be followed by the Prince of Orange. And the
Marquess Spinola cannot go strong enough to encounter him without raising his
Siege at Berghen, which though he should do, the Campaigne is large enough, and
Mansfelt lightly laden to take, and leave at pleasure, it being in his power,
(if his way to Brdea be stopped) to fall down toward such places, the State
hold in Flanders.

The States furnish him with 6000 Florins for the time of three months, they
entertain him and his Army. In which space, the service they hope to draw from
him, is, the raising the Siege of Berghen, by cutting off the Convoyes betwixt
Antwerp, and the Spanish Leaguer, which can no longer continue in the place it
now remains, then it can keep the way of Antwerp open, by which only their
victuals and Munition is conducted.

This time of three months expired, there is small appearance of longer
entertainment of Mansfelt by this State, who does then purpose to retire to the
Duke Christien of Brunswick's old Quarter at Lipstadt: Where they intend to
winter their Army, and augment the same against the next Spring, to return
again into Germany, if the Peace of those parts be not concluded, or some
mischance do not happen in the mean time. Which resolution of theirs, for such
it is (as I am very well informed) deserves the more to be cherished, by how
much the more disrespect is showed his Majesty's Ambassador in the Palatinate,
by burning and spoiling her Highness Jointure even in his view, (as Don
Gonzales did whilst he remained in those parts) and since besieging his
Majesty's Garrison Heidelbergh; before which place, we understand here by
Letters of the 14th. from Frankford, that Baron Tillie began his approaches the
12th. of this present.

I have not heard what is the issue of Captain Brett's business, but hope the
best. Colonel Hynderson's Regiment was given upon the first news of his death
to Sir Francis Hynderson by the Prince of Orange, with which the States are
much displeased, as contrarying their Act. And I have lamented my self to them,
as a wrong done my Lord of Buckleugh, and his Majesty, in his behalf: which
they promise me to repair, as they possibly may be able. And I press them to
it by those means which your Lordship will find contained in an abstract of a
Letter I wrote lately to his Excellency, chiefly to this purpose.

Her Highness having received a fair Present from the Prince her Brother, does
render his Highness thanks by the enclosed. I know not so great a Lady in the
world, nor ever did, though I have seen many Courts) of such natural
affections: An obedient Daughter; A loving Sister; And a tender Wife, whose
care of her Husband does augment with his misfortunes.

Your Lordship cannot therefore show your care of her more, then by bringing
them again together with the soonest. Of which I beseech your Lordship, that
with the soonest I may know what hope there is, and that (if your Lordship
please) by Mr. Ashburnham, whose return with a favorable dispatch is daily
expected. Thus I most humbly take leave,

Your Lordships Most humble, and most devoted Servant, Dudley Carleton.
Hague 23. August. 1622.
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
THe general knowledge the Queen of Bohemia received from your Grace, by my
Nephew, of the disposition of our affairs at home, since his Highness, and
your Graces return out of Spain, upon the true understanding you have bred in
his Majesty of the Spanish proceedings, being more particularly both for the
state of the matter, and the manner fit to be held here in disposing these men
to such overtures as are necessary, expressed unto me by Sir George Goring
with special caution of secrecy and celeritie.

I have thought fit to set down at large (whilst it is fresh in my memory) an
opportunity as properly given unto me this day by the Prince of Orange, who is
the only person of power and confidence we have here to treat withal) as I
hope your Grace will judge it seasonably taken.

And that was an occasion of business concerning a mutiny at Breda, which
drew the Council of State, (where I have my Seance) to the States general, with
whom we found the Prince. That business ending in good time, gave him a long
hours leisure with me afterward in his Garden, which he himself desired of me,
because somewhat was farther to be digested betwixt us concerning the English
Troops, which showed themselves most in this Mutiny: And hereupon the
consideration of the necessity of this State, and impossibility of giving their
Troops full contentment, gave us subject of further discourse, both of the
means of better payment they have here at home, and the helps they might
conceive from abroad, which making appear unto me to be coldest from England,
as long as our Match with Spain is still in treaty, he asked me bluntly (after
his manner), Qui at'il de vostre Marriage? I told him, it was now at a stay upon
this point, That the restitution of the Palatinate must be first concluded. And
that the Queen of Bohemia was not only well comforted with this assurance, but
pleased her self with a further conceit, that the opportunity was never fairer
for this State to regain the King her Fathers favor, and return to the ancient
support of his Crowns, which by the way of gratitude for her good usage, since
she had her refuge into these parts, she could not but admonish his Excellency
of, and advise him not to let it slip. This he did not so suddenly lay hold of,
as not first to cast many misdoubts, as if the alienation were too great, and
his Majesty too much wedded in affection, if not in Alliance to new friends,
to be so soon reconjoyned to his old, as their necessities did require.

Here I took occasion to play my own Part, and to remember unto him how things
had passed within the compass of my experience from the beginning; letting him
know what friendship his Majesty had showed this State, in the making their
Truce; what sincerity in rendering their Cautionarie Towns according to
contract, when they were demanded; what affection in supporting their affairs
during their late domestique disputes; what care in settling our East-Indian
differences: finally, what Patience in conniving at all the misdemeanors, and
insolences of their Seamen, without seeking revenge.

And hereupon concluded, that I found them here in the same error as men are,
which put first from Land to Sea, and believe the Land passes from them, not
they from the Land, in that the Alienation, which has long been nourished
betwixt his Majesty and this State, sprang originally from them.

First, by Barnevelt and his faction of Arminians carrying the State to new
Alliances, with the Hans-Townes, and otherwise by themselves, refusing so much
as the knowledge of them to my Predecessor in this place, Sir Ralph Wynwood,
with much scorn, and contempt.

Next, by a harsh and peremptory style, used in all we had then to do with
them, savouring rather of Pride and presumption, then any due respect or desire
of friendship.

Lastly, by a precipitate course taken at Sea by their ships of war and
Merchants against his Majesty's Subjects, making prize of some, shouldering
others out of their places of trade, and entering in the East Indies into open
hostility, avowed by a public Act of the States General. This ill course
begun and pursued for some years continuance, breeding a deserved distaste in
his Majesty on this side; and on the Spanish part fair overtures of
friendship, being continually made, and confirmed by the tender of a Match of
a potent Prince, None can marvel that his Majesty did embrace the same,
unless it should be expected of him, that for love of this State how ill
soever deserving, he should lend a deaf ear to all other friendships, that did
not concur with the interest of this State. And the remembrance of these
things not being so old as to be worn out, they might here very well conceive,
that the suspicion of Alienation and disaffection, is as strong on our side for
their giving the cause of our leaning another way, as on theirs for the effect
which has since followed. And now the cause is removed, the effect may
possibly cease in like manner, if we may have good assurance, that breaking
with our new friends upon the occasions now presented, we might fasten after
the wonted manner with an old: and the King be satisfied in such doubts, he may
upon good reason cast, and know certainly what to trust to. To this conclusion
he answered (confessing first their many obligations to his Majesty, both for
his favor, and sufferance,) that nothing could be more certain, then the
affection of this State to a Prince embracing their cause of opposition to
Spain. And if his Majesty could take that resolution, he might dispose of
them, their lives and their fortunes. I told him, that more (in a case of this
importance, when there was question of alteration of the whole course of a
great Princes affairs) would be required then bare professions and
protestations, and the rather, because he knew I was not ignorant, how many
Billets, and Papers have been heretofore brought hither by An old Popish
Gentlewoman of this town, who by passeport on both sides trots so often to and
fro betwixt this and Bruxells, (where she has private access to the Infanta)
that she is known by the title of la Maquerelle de la Tresur.
Madam Serclaus, and others, tending to Truce, or peace, and how much such a
matter was thirsted after by their Frontier Provinces; which being free for
them to take, or leave, after their own humors, it was not likely his Majesty
would discharge them of their burden, to pull it upon his own Shoulders; But
to enter into the common cause of defense, and add a powerful hand in
supporting them, might be faisable in the present conjuncture, upon good
assurance, he should never be left single in the quarrel. Whereunto he
answered, that true it was, the woman I named, and diverse others, had been
tampering heretofore about such Treaties, and that he had continually put their
Papers into his Pocket, and so suppressed (them with consent of some of the
States, of whom he was most confident) lest such propositions, being brought
into their public Assemblies, might have driven them into distraction, and
dispute one with another according to their several affections, either to
Peace, or War, and thereby slacken their Contributions, wherewith they pay
their Army, and by consequence expose them to the mercy of the enemy.

And that this course of his being finally discovered by the Merquesse Spinola,
and Peckius, their purpose now was (as he is privately advertized from Bruxels)
to steal over some person hither by the usual means of Passe-ports for
Merchants and Travailers, to make some such like Proposition at the several
Assemblies of the States of these united Provinces: which it should be his
study to prevent, because of the mischief may be bred thereby amongst them;
And this he assured me for conclusion, That as their affections and affairs now
stand, nothing but despair can bring these Provinces to Peace, or Truce with
Spain.

To this I yielded, but said, That was not enough because of such changes, to
which the world was daily subject. Neither did Queen Elizabeth undertake their
protection upon such bare presumptions, wherefore some further assurance must
be thought on; which he consented unto, as a thing requisite on both sides, and
joined issue with me in this point, That when the King would be to this State,
as Queen Elizabeth was; this State would be to him, as it was to Queen
Elizabeth.

This being opus unius diei, not unlike the first day of the Creation of the
world in distinguishing light and darkness, I will give your Grace this
further light, of what belongs to negotiation with this State.

The present opportunity of the Prince of Orange's good affection and strength
of these Provinces both by Sea and Land, as it yet stands, (but not possible so
long to continue) being seasonably laid hold of, his Majesty may have with
this State a firm and fruitful alliance.

But if the Prince of Orange should die, (as he is much broken, and the last
year at this time, we did not think he could live till May) or the enemy break
into the borders of this State, (as this last Summer, if the Imperialists had
joined with the Spaniards, they had undoubtedly done; and unless some Change
or Alteration happen, as is feared will do this next year) the best link we
have for a bond of friendship would fail, and as much difference be betwixt
this State, as it now is, and what it is like to be upon any such ill accident,
(as was now feared, and still hangs over them) as betwixt a strong Staff, and
a broken Reed. So I cease to give your Grace any further trouble.

Your Graces Most humble, and most faithful servant, Dudley Carleton.
Hague, 9. December. 1623.
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
WHat Comfort and Contentment the Queen of Bohemia receives in your Graces
Message and Letter by my Nephew, I leave to her own expression, which never
fails her, when her heart goes with her hand, as I can assure your Grace, it
does in this subject. And this I will say more, who can say nothing but truth,
I never knew your Grace ill with this good and gracious Princess; but now you
are so well settled in her good opinion and favor, that I know none has more
interest therein.

And this use your Grace may make thereof to his Majesty's service, that now
this King and Queen are both of them no less confident of your affection, then
they are of your sincerity; what you advise them in their affairs will be of
much weight to sway them in the balance of their judgment.

Which now a Proposition is made unto them, on which their whole estate does
depend as well for themselves, as their posterity, full of doubtful
circumstances on both sides, (the choice not being, as they conceive, betwixt
one thing certain, and another uncertain; but betwixt two unequal
uncertainties) it is hard to say which way they incline: but if they be left to
themselves, I perceive they will rather stand to the hazard of the latter, with
preservation of their honor and lawful pretensions, then submit themselves to
the former with shame and disgrace, and no assurance of better dealing then was
used to the deported House of Saxe, by a better Emperor then this accounted,
of which we have the Heir (one of the worthiest Princes in Germany) here in
hard Conditions amongst us. And he serves as a spectacle to these Princes of
their fortunes by the same way as his Predecessors took, of submission. Yet
other things being before agreed of, and settled in that sort as his Majesty
has always assured these Princes to be his full intention of restitution to
their Patrimonial Honors and estate; This King I find will conform himself, to
what his Majesty shall think fit, touching a due submission.

But this being a matter of ceremony, the other of substance, he judges, that
if this precede, (that is, the Submission) the other of restitution will never
follow. Neither can it be well seen, how in possibility it may be effected,
considering that (whilst things have been held sometimes in terms, always in
talk of accommodation) the Electoral is given to Bavier by the Emperor, and
avowed by a Congratulatory Embassage from Bruxels: the upper Palatinate settled
in his possession, with some portion to Newburgh for his Contentation, and
engagement. A principal part of the lower Palatinate (the Bergstrate) given to
the Elector of Mentz, with the consent of those of Bruxels, (where he was
lately in person to obtain it) though they grossly dissemble it, and promises
of parts of the rest made to other Princes.

So as what is now pretended (I must deal plainly with your Grace) is no
otherways interpreted, then as experience does teach of these three former
years proceedings: Ever new Overtures in Winter, and new Ruptures in the
Summer. And as of two former Treaties with this Prince, which passed my hands,
(one a Consent to a Submission sent to Vienna, the other a Ratification of a
Suspension oftentimes sent to Bruxels) no other use was made, but with the
first to accelerate Bethlem Gabor in his Treaty of Peace with the Emperor as
then on foot, and with the second to intimidate both the Electours Saxe, and
Brandenburgh, with the Princes of the Nethes, Saxe, and Creyes from entering
into Arms, to which they were well disposed, upon the coffeehouse they
received of the preposterous courses that were taken in the Diet at Ratisbone;
(and to this effect Copies of the very projects of the said Treaties were
dispersed by the Imperialists, before the Instruments themselves were
perfected,) so it is here believed, that now Gabor is again in arms, and other
Princes ready to embrace any good occasion of redress of affairs, time is
only sought to be gained by this new Overture, and the King of Bohemin's
Credit, with his friends and well wishers in Germany to be weakened, if not
lost; for if once he submit himself allowing the translation of the Electoral,
he shall thereby avow the Emperors undue procedings in that cause (which have
been protested against by Saxe, and Brandenbergh, and all the other Germane
Princes, excepting those only of the Catholic league) and by whom afterward
upon any ill dealing can he expect to be befriended, who forsakes himself and
his own cause? This is the discourse of these Princes upon this occasion; but
when they are asked, What then can you trust unto? their recourse is to his
Majesty, who they hope knows the means to effect in their behalf, what he
has so long, and so constantly undertaken for them. And though for these three
or four years past, affairs on this side have gone in a continual decadence,
and now threaten a final ruin, unless it be withstood by some Princely
Resolution; (not of petty, but of great Princes) yet here is no such
discouragement: but that it is thought there is yet strength and vigor enough
left in the good Party, not only to subsist, but to rise and flourish again as
well as ever. And in this cogitation the King and Queen remain, not prescribing
any thing to his Majesty, nor willing to submit themselves anew to the same
rod, with which they have been so often scourged.

Your Grace was lately invited with my Lord of Richmond to christen their young
Son, which being excused by my Lord of Richmond in both your names, And the
King of France undertaking that office, it was performed by that King, and the
King of Swede yesterday was seven-night (represented by the French Ambassador
here resident, and the Prince of Orange) in the same manner, and the same
Church, as the Princess Louise, bearing the same name, was christened the last
year: when the Duke Christien of Brunswick being invited to be Godfather,
though absent, and for some respects of precedence could not have a Deputy,
was understood notwithstanding to be one of the Parrins; and so do the King and
Queen hold both your Grace, and my Lord of Richmond.

I must now render your Grace my humble thanks for your manifestation of your
favor to my self, which you are pleased to do in such ample manner, as to tell
me farther for my Comfort who are my friends; And a farther effect of
friendship, I could not expect of them, then to procure me the assurance I now
receive from your Grace, who have won the reputation by your Constancy to
those you take into your Care, that your word is taken for your deed. And
though that, which I thought fittest for my self fails me, if your Grace can
think me fit for any thing else toward the amendment of my poor fortune, I
shall attend the same with much patience of mind, though great extreamitie
otherwise, by reason of a small estate charged with great debts, (which are no
small burden to an honest mind,) And ever remain

Your Graces Most faithful devoted servant, Dudley Carleton.
Hague, 13th. December. 1623.
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
THe Queen of Bohemia desirous to draw the Prince of Orange to more then
general professions of service to his Majesty, has sometimes in my presence,
when I waited on her highness, given occasion of discourse her self, and at
other times I have spoken in her name with his Excellency to the like effect,
as in my former Letter to your Grace: which caused his Excellency to take
three of the States, such of whom he is most confident (one of Guelderland,
another of Holland, the third of Zealand) unto him, to strengthen himself by
their concurrence in that, which is his own inclination, of carrying this State
to a strict alliance with his Majesty, in which he told them, That first their
minds must be known, and next such assurance thought of, as not only must give
his Majesty present Contentment, but likewise free him from all misdoubt for
the future, that either upon offers from Spain to these Provinces, or any
sinister accidents of War, they should be induced to make Peace or Truce
without his Majesty's consent.

Whereunto they answered him, (as I have it from himself this day) That nothing
could be more agreeable to their affections, and Interests in all respects,
then to be under his Majesty's protection: And for assurance of their remaining
constant to that course, they doubted not, but when the matter should be
treated of, the Provinces would willingly condescend to what should be
necessary to that purpose.

His Excellency in relation hereof unto me went so much further, as to
instance in their new resolution here, now finally put in practice of making
Voyages into the West Indies after the same form, as they have done into the
East; both which joined together, make them irreconcilable with Spain. Yet if
his Majesty will have a further tie on them, they will not refuse it; but he
says, The States will expect that such obligation be mutual, and that they in
like manner may rest assured, when they put themselves wholly under his
Majesty's wings, his Majesty will not fly from them, and make his peace
without them.

I told him the case was not equal betwixt his Majesty, and them, they being
actually in War, his Majesty in Peace: so as to come to a conjunction, his
Majesty must change condition, not they, and therefore has the more reason to
look before he leap out of Peace into War. And so did Queen Elizabeth, who had
reigned 27 years before she openly took upon her the protection of these
Countries; but after continued her War in their Cause to her dying day. This he
confessed, but remembered withal, That there was a Treaty of Burburck, with
which the States were much startled, and he thought that when this business
should be more particularly scanned amongst them, as they would willingly give,
so they would expect to receive good assurance.

In this point of declaration of their affection, and willingness to warrant
his Majesty sufficiently, I asked him, How far I might go not to be disavowed:
so as if his Majesty should take any sudden resolution, according as affairs
require, he might confidently build upon the concurrence of this State. He
answered me, That a resolution in this kind would require a further proceeding,
then was fit, until his Majesty would be content to make his mind known, by
such private means as might seem best to his own wisdom, and then according to
his own liking, they would enlarge this matter here, to more men's knowledge,
then the small circle, in which it hitherto walked, and guide it in that manner
as may be fit for the form of it to his Majesty's honor, and for the substance
to his full contentment. Which he offered to do now if I would press him to
it; but withal told me his opinion, that it would raise nothing but bruit and
noise without effect, when we had here no better ground to work upon, and
therefore wished the business might expect a return from his Majesty, if he
could be content it should be proceeded in. In these terms remains this
business, not free from many Cautions, and nice Circumstances; and yet on this
side, (I can assure your Grace) full of good affection; but these are the true
reasons of their coming on no faster. They hold it for a maxim, That Spain
will never match with his Majesty for love, but either for hope, or fear. If
Spain can entertain hope of reducing these Provinces to obedience by the Match,
or fear, that unless the Match proceed, his Majesty will join with these
Provinces in opposition to Spain: They hold in either of these Cases the Match
as made. And therefore lest some use should be made of their presentations of
themselves, to their own prejudice, they are thus shie, and circumspect.
Besides, as they have had some help of money out of France this last year, so
they are entertained with hopes of more against the next: which they fear would
be excused upon any offer they should make of themselves toward his Majesty,
and therefore are loath to adventure the exchange of a substance, for that
which appears unto them hitherto, no better then a shadow; And they are indeed
very umbragious; for they suspect, that Tentatives of this kind, of which some
have been made heretofore amongst them, tend to no other end, then to endear
our Merchandise with Spain, and let the Ministers of that Crown know, that we
refuse in their Contemplation. But when his Majesty shall resolve in his own
heart, and be pleased to make himself so understood, it will be no hard matter
by his Excellencies means (who is a Prince full of good intentions and real
affections to his Majesty, and his royal Family) to make these men lay by
their Jealousies, and be as true to his Majesty, and the support of his
Crowns, as his own Kingdoms. Which is no more then they owe for the protection
which these that are now in Government had of his Majesty, when they were
lately sinking under the burden of a contrary faction; and no more then upon a
good knowledge of their Interests and affections I can undertake for them, they
will really and readily pay, if the matter be well managed. In which the
confidence and freedom I have used with this Noble Gentleman, Sir George
Goring, may give your Grace some further light, as any doubts shall arise
concerning the business. So I most humbly take leave,

Your Graces Most humble, and most faithful servant, Dudley Carleton.
Hague, 18. December. 1623.
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
THe business of strict conjunction betwixt his Majesty, and this State
(touching which the Queen of Bohemia has received his Highness, and your
Graces Letters, and I your Graces of the 9th. of this present) goes on the
right foot (according as your Grace will see more particularly by my Letters to
Mr. Secretary Conway, and as the matter is here embraced with much affection,
so for the manner I doubt not but it will be well ordered in that sort, as will
be for his Majesty's honor, and contentment. But in regard of jealousies
toward us, and emulations amongst these men in matters of employment, (to
which all men are subject, especially in good and advantageous businesses, some
time, will be required, to set all in the right way, yet no illimited time; for
I hope within a week all will be resolved of, and within a a few days more,
put in execution fully to expectation. Sir Noel Caron writes, a league
offensive and defensive will be embraced by his Majesty, if it be proposed
from hence, with offer of assurance; And I assure my self both the overture,
and offer will be made and reallie effected, if it be answered on our side with
good correspondence. That which busieth my cogitations is, that tempus agendi
may be lost Consultando; and therefore seeing how both his Majesty, and this
State stand affected, I will take the liberty to give your Grace two
advertisements in matters of action, which will be of exceeding fruit, if they
be thought of in time, and for which there is no time to spare.

One is, that your Grace does inquire after in your Letter to the Queen of
Bohemia (who excuses writing either to his Highness, or your Grace till the
States have resolved of their sending) that is the States preparation for the
West Indies, which way, the company for those parts newly erected in these,
has set out one Fleet of 32. Sail now already at Sea, with some Land men
amongst them, to put on ground and fortify as they shall find occasion; for
which they have men for the purpose, and all materials ready embarked with
them.

A second Fleet they are now preparing against April next, about which all
their Admiralties and some of the Deputies of this new West-Indian Company are
here at this present. And the design is, for the Admiralties to set out at the
charge of the generality twelve good ships of war, besides they have already
on the coast of Spain and in the narrow Seas, which they will still continue.

To these 12. ships they require the West-Indian Company to join 12. more,
which will make a good Fleet, and this they intend shall be ready (as I said)
in April next, to attend the coming of the Spanish West-Indian Fleet, which
here they understand is put into the Havana, with intention there to winter as
it did the last year.

Now if his Majesty will give leave to his subjects to erect a Company for
the West Indies, and join with these men in those Parts, as they do in the
East, (and upon more equal conditions, since the business is but now in the
beginning) it will be here gladly embraced. And if he will frame a Fleet
betwixt his own ships and his Merchants to join with the States Fleet prepared
for April next to intercept the Spanish West-Indian Fleet, nothing more will be
desired by these men, and there is nothing of which for the present they
promise themselves greater fruit: for either they hope to take, or to stop the
silver of those parts (both which are good services, considering the need of
money, the Spaniards have in these), or else they resolve with the ships which
belong to the company to pursue their voyage of the West Indies.

The second is a Truce with the Pirates of Algier, such an one as this State
has made in conformity to their peace with the Grand Seigniour, which will be
no more observed for unmolesting all, and every one of our Merchants ships as
they are straglingly lighted on, then it is with these men, who suffer many
losses in particular; but those are recompensed in the General. For the
Spaniards are much amazed with this correspondence; And the men of War of this
State, or such Merchants, as can make any reasonable defense are most meddled
withal. Besides, in any matter of offense they concur together; And even now a
proposition is made from Algier to the Prince of Orange, (which I have from his
own mouth to acquaint your Grace therewith) that in case this State against the
beginning of next summer will set out twenty Sail of ships upon any good
service against the Spaniards, they will join unto them 60. Sail to pursue the
design, whatsoever it shall be of this State. The acceptance of which offer
being now in deliberation, it will be suspended till it be seen, how this
unexpected business with his Majesty may proceed; And then they will here do
nothing but that, as may concur with our common Interests. But because the
negotiation of this matter with those of Algier (that is a Truce betwixt his
Majesty's subjects, and those men) will require time, your Grace may
provisionallie move his Majesty (if the matter be well liked) to use such
endeavors as may conduce thereunto. Here they use to write, and send through
France by Marseilles to the Consul they have continually at Algeir, by whose
means (if no better present it self) any thing may be proposed, his Majesty
shall find fitting.

Other things, I will within few days remonstrate to your Grace for his
Majesty's service in this change of affairs, which require all possible
industries, and diligences to be used both far and near; And those not
neglected, I doubt not, but they who have so grossly abused his Majesty's
friendship, will soon repent themselves, and by their harms see their own
errors. Thus I most humbly take leave;

Your Graces Most humble, and most faithful Servant, Dudley Carleton.
Hague 24. January, 1625.
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
ACcording as I advertised your Grace the 24. of the last of the disposition of
the Prince of Orange, and such of the States, as he called unto him to Council,
they procured the rest soon after to resolve of an Embassage to his Majesty,
and now they have dispatched the same with as much expedition, as could
possibly be used. The Persons are Aersens of Holland, and Joachim of Zealand,
both able, and well affected Persons, and both sufficiently known to his
Majesty by former employments. They go amply authorized for what they shall
treat: but that as yet is an Embrion only which must receive form, and life
from his Majesty, in whose hands it lies to preserve this State, and dispose
for ever of the whole strength thereof for his own service, and his royal
Families. Which after more debates, and distasts, then have passed with all the
world besides, I am glad I can say upon good warrantize: whereof this is one
proof, that when his Majesty is constrained by the necessity of affairs to
send, and seek to his other friends, he is sent and sought, and sued to from
hence. I doubt not but it will be objected (as has heen formerly) that it is
for their own Interest, and that they would gladly engage his Majesty in their
quarrel, which it were a folly to deny: but there is always the friendship
strongest when the interests are most conjoined. And if that which is
principally for one man's benefit, turn likewise to another man's advantage, Hoc
non facere (says an old School-book) summae est imprudentiae.

The affairs of these parts for matter of Action (which have been more then
ordinarily succeeds in this cold season, but have been more coldly pursued then
was feared) I refer to this Bearer my Nephew's report, who having the honor to
be his Majesty's servant, I employ him the more willingly, as able to give
Account of such particularities, either of this Negotiation, or otherwise, of
which his Majesty, and your Grace may require knowledge. And I humbly beseech
your Grace to give him encouragement by your accustomed noble favor. So rests

Your Graces Most humble, and most devoted servant, Dudley Carleton.
Hague, 16. February, 1625.
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
IT were a sin against the public service, in which your Grace does employ
your self so much to the common good, and your own honor, to molest you with
Letters in this busy time: which must serve me for excuse of silence, since
the beginning of the Parliament. What I write now is by Commandment of the
Queen of Bohemia concerning this Bearer Captain Gifford an old Seaman of our
Nation, who having a private suite to the States, has made a journey over
hither with recommendation to me from our two Secretaries for advancement
thereof, but with a further purpose to be employed by the Queen against the
Spaniard in a matter of no less moment, then taking of a Gallion, which
usually brings the treasure over the Gulf of Mexico, from Nova Spagna to the
Havana. Which he designs after this manner: To go out with two Ships and a
Pinnace, only fitted for fight, without more in number, because of the Alarm
would be taken at a greater Fleet, and to lie under Covert of a small Island in
the entry of the Gulf of Mexico: where the Gallion coming usually alone,
unless it be accompanied with some Merchants ships, which he sets light by,
and which encumbered with goods and Passengers, he thinks may be mastered, and
taken, building upon the security in which that Gallion, with the rest of that
Nova Spagna Fleet, do sail scattering in the Gulf, till they meet with the
Fleet of Terra Firma at the Havana, where he having been heretofore a prisoner
made this observation, and does now offer himself to put the design in
execution, with a demand of betwixt 10000 and a 11000 l. for the whole equipage.

The Queen in recompense of his good will returns him with this address to
your Grace as a man fit for employment, for so he is generally reputed; but for
the particularitie of the Exploit, she does not entertain any thought thereof,
but refers it wholly to your Graces Consideration, and to the opportunity
according as affairs shall succeed betwixt his Majesty, and Spain.

Here are come Letters from some of the King and Queens servants on that side,
and one to my self from a private friend, advertizing, That there is a
readiness in diverse of his Majesty's Subjects of good abilities, to put to Sea
with Letters of Mart in the name of this King and Queen against the Spaniard,
and of a likelihood, that if such Commissions were given by these Princes, they
would not be ill understood by his Majesty.

Mounsieur Aertsens has likewise written hither in a private Letter to the
Prince of Orange, that he has been spoken with to move the States to increase
the number, he and his Colleague have mentioned of 10 or 12 Ships to join in
any good occasion with his Majesty's Fleet to 20: And that the purpose is to
set out 50 sail on that side, and that both shall go under the name of the King
and Queen of Bohemia. Wherein though the motion be not directly made, yet the
Prince of Orange has discoursed enough, that when it shall come to issue, they
will stretch themselves to furnish to the full what is required on this side.
In both these businesses, as well the granting Letters of Mart by these
Princes, as their lending their names to any greater Action, they intend to
govern themselves only as they shall understand to concur with his Majesty's
pleasure, and therefore hope they shall receive advice from his Highness, and
your Grace, what is fit for them to contribute to such occasions as they see
much to their Comforts, you advance with so great care and vigilance. Thus I
most humbly take leave,

Hague 16. April, 1624. Your Graces most humble, and most devoted Servant,
Dudley Carleton.

Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
SUch Commandments as I received from your Grace by double Dispatches of the
4th. of the last, by way of provision whilst Sir William Saintleiger lay sick,
were prevented by his own presence. He bringing the first of those Packets with
him, and thereby had Commodity to assist at the breaking of the business to
the States, by virtue of his Majesty's Credence given him, and my Lord General
Cecil: which since, he has solicited both at the Camp, and in this place with
all possible care and industry, and I have not failed of my utmost endeavors.

But the unsettlednesse of this Government, which still continues since the
late change of Governors, has bred delay to some, and direct impediments to
other points we had in charge: which we have endeavored to supply by other
means. And now in what state he leaves the whole business, he will relate to
your Grace. Such Patents as your Grace required from the King and Queen of
Bohemia, I have committed to his delivery in diverse forms, with a Blank signed
and sealed, wherein to frame such an one as may be better to your minds: But if
your Grace make no use of it, you may please to return it to me again, to the
end I may restore it.

What concerns my self, I absolutely remit and submit to your Grace; only I
will renew the request I made to your Grace by my Nephew, That your Grace will
not prefer any before me in your formerly intended favor, out of belief, that
any can be more, then I resolve to rest whilst I live a touttes Espreves,

Humbly and faithfully devoted to your Graces person and service, Dudley
Carleton.
Hague, 20. June, 1625.
Sir Dudley Carleton to the Duke.
May it please your Grace,
AFter long attendance the wind is come good for Plymouth, which I hope will
carry thither speedily and safely the States whole Fleet, though in 3. parts;
12 Ships with the Admiral de Nassau, who has long waited in the Tessel; 4 but
newly ready provided by those of Zealand at Amsterdam, and 4 which have layen
sometimes before the Brill; whereof one is to land the Marshal Chatillion in
passing by Calice; the other three to Convoy the English men: And Arms I send
in 10. other Ships I have hired at Rotterdam: before which place they have
layen 20 days a Shipboard, by reason of contrary winds, with some impatiencie,
but no disorder: which what course I took to prevent, as likewise what may
happen in their Voyage, my Lord Conway (to whom I give a particular account of
all) will inform your Grace.

I have obtained leave for Sir John Proud to go the Voyage according to his
Majesty's Letter, though it was somewhat stood upon by the States, and he has
taken his passage by Zealand.

When I call to mind, what Patents I procured of the King of Bohemia, and sent
your Grace by Sir William Saint Lieger, (amongst which was one of submission to
any accommodation his Majesty shall at any time like well of for the King of
Bohemia) I think it necessary to advertize your Grace, that knowledge being
come hither of the Infanta's sending the Count Shomburgh to the King of Denmark
with a fair Message, and the Count Gondomar's overtures to Mr. Trumbal tending
to reconcilement, and restitution of the Palatinate, it is so willingly
hearkened unto by the King of Bohemia, that there is no doubt of his Consent:
but withal he well considers, that if Treaty alone be trusted unto, and
thereupon Arms now leavied by his Majesty, and his Friends be laid aside, all
will prove as fruitless as formerly. For howsoever the King of Spain (for more
free prosecution of other quarrels, or designs) may be induced to quit what he
possesses in the Palatinate, the shares, the Emperor, the Duke of Bavier, and
the two Electours Majenct, and Trevers, with a great rabble of Popish Priests
and Jesuits have therein, will require more then bare negotiation, to wring it
out of their hands; and nothing but Victory, or at least a well armed Treaty
can serve that turn.

The time seems long both to the King and Queen, and grows very irksome every
day more then other of their abode here in this place: which indeed does prove
in all respects very uncomfortable; and that your Grace will gather out of Mr.
Secretary Morton's report, and my Letters to my Lord Conway. In this very
Consideration, I beseech your Grace be the more mindful of

Your Graces Most humble, and most devoted servant, Dudley Carleton.
Hague, 20th. of August, 1625.
FINIS.
The Table of things most remarkable.
A.
ADmiral of England his Office, p. 102 of Castile takes place of the Imperial
Ambassador, 165 Aerscus, 342 Algier Voyage, 143, 144 Allegiance Puritanes will
not swear it, 121 Alps when passable, 186 Anchre Marshal of France. 320
Archbishop of Canterbury shoots a Keeper by mischance, 12. see tit. James King,
etc. for the Palsgraves accepting the Bohemian Crown, 169, 170 Archbishop of
York against Toleration of Popery, blames the Voyage into Spain, 13 Argile
Earl, 291 Arminians chief in the Dutch State, 322 Arundel Earl Marshal, no
friend to the Bishop of Lincoln, 62, 63, 74, 302, 307, 316. Ashley Sir Anthony,
gives the Duke of Buckingham intelligence of Plots against him, 308 Aston Sir
Walter will not consent that the Prince Palsgrave should be brought up in the
Emperors Court, 17 see Bristol Earl. Concurs with the Earl of Bristol in
prefixing a day for the Deposorio's, without making certain the restitution of
the Palatinate, which is heynously taken by the Prince, 35. in danger for it to
be called off, there, 36, 37. His Care to discover Plots against his Masters
Crowns, 49, 51, 53. of the Merchants, 168. see Merchants. Prosecutes the
Marquess of Ynoiosa, in defense of the honor of England, 52. sues to return
home, 52, 54. will not see the Archduke in Spain, and why, 166 Austrian
Usurpation, 191. See tit. Spain.
B.
BAcon Viscount St. Albans Lord Chancellor declines all Justification of
himself, 5, 6. Casts himself upon the Lords, 6 Discontents the Marquess of
Buckingham, 8. his ways to make the Kingdom happy, 9 advises King James
concerning his revenues, devises a book of his estate, there-how he carried
himself when a Counselor, and otherwise, how esteemed, 10. Never took bribe
to pervert Justice, 11. his pardon, 60, 82 Barnevelt, 318 factious, no friend
to the English, an Arminian, 331 Bavaria Duke offers to depend wholly on Spain,
167. see Palatinate. Beamont Lord fined in the Star Chamber, 16. E. 2. 58
Bergen besieged, 328 Bergstrate given the Archbishop of Mentz, 335 Blanvile the
French Ambassador an enemy to the Duke of Buckingham, holds intelligence with
the Dukes English enemies, 295. his Character by the French. 300. See 274, 296,
197, 302. Blundel Sir George, 129 Book of Common Prayer translated into
Spanish, and why, 73. See Spaniards. Borgia, Cardinal, 178 Bovillon Duke, 165.
seeks the protection from the States united, 320. weary of the Palsgrave, 327
Brandenburgh Elector, 317, 336 Bret, a Peusioner in disgrace, 204 Bristol Earl
first mover in the Spanish Match, negotiates in it, 16. Earnest to conclude it,
24, 25, 26, 306 ohidden by the King Charles for giving the Spaniards hopes of
his inclination to a change in Religion, for his manage of things concerning
the Match, and undervaluing the Kingdom of England, 16, 17. Consents that the
Prince Palsgrave shall be bred in the Emperors Court which the King Charles
takes ill, 17. Proffered by the King the favor of the general pardon, or to
put himself upon his trial, 18. under restraint for his errors in Spain, 19.
removed from his offices, forbidden the Court, denied his Parliament Writ,
there. Justifies himself, 19, 20. to King James, 30. Differs in opinion from
the Duke of Buckingham concerning the Match, 21. Seeks the Duke of Buckingham
his savor, 28. charged to be his enemy, his wisdom and power at Court 161,
162. Conde of Olivarez offers him a blank paper, signed by the King, bids him
choose what was in his Masters power -- he refuses, 42
Brule Peter his practices, 302 Buckingham Duke his carriage and esteem in
Spain, 16, 22. See Olivarez. contemns the Earl of Bristol, 22. See Bristol. an
enemy to him, 231 The Spaniards will not put the Infanta into his hands, 22
thought an enemy to the Match with Spain, 32, 92, 159, 218, 219, 222, 237, 243,
248, Censured, 159, 160, 218, 219, 221, 222, 263, 210. Forgives wrongs, 58
Steward of Westminster, 69 Haughty to the Prince of Wales. 78 Used to sit
when the Prince stood, etc. 221 falls from his affection to Williams Lord
Keeper. 87. See Don Francisco. his power, 91 King James his words of him on Don
Francisco's relation 92 Mediates for the Earl of Suffolk, 125 No audience of
Ambassadors without him 216. taxed to King James freely, 218,, 219, 220, 221,
223. defended, 224, 225, 226, 227. a faithful servant, 229 Charge against him
in Parliament, 228, 229, 230 Procures graces for the Nobility and Gentry, 231
Breaks the Spanish Designs and Party, 265 for the Match with France, 291 A
Consederacy by Oath against him, 307, 308 The Queen of England had need of his
friendship, 303 Dares submit the judgment of his Actions to any trial, 87
Buckingham Countess, 254, 302 Buckleugh Lord, 327, 329 Button Sir Thomas in
the Voyage of Algier, 143, 144.
C.
CAlcedon, a titulary Roman Bishop in England, 81 Calvert Sir George, 202. See
304. Carlisle Earl Viscount Doncaster loves not the Bishop of Lincoln, 74, 89.
See 180, 182. persuades King James to feed his Parliament (so he) with some
crumbs of the Crown, 270. refuses, See 288. Count Mansfelts Commission for
Colonel to his son, 273
Carlos, Archduke in Spain, 165 Calderon Don Rodrigo Marquess de las Siete
Iglesias his Riches, confined, 208 Carleton Sir Dudley Ambassador, in the
Low Countries, 317. writes to reconcile Sir Horatio Vere, and Sir Edward Cecyl,
323. his prudence to reunite England and the States, 331, 332 Carone Sir Noel,
Ambassador in England from the Low Dutch, 321-325 Cavendish, 97 Cecyl Sir
Edward, General, 128, 345. sues for Command, will save the King in Expenses,
128. a loser by his service, 129. see 345. See Vere Sir Horatio. Viscount
Wimbledon commands in chief at Sea, neglected, maliciously accused, examined,
135, 137, 138 Charles Prince of Wales, King of England after, how entertained
and honored in Spain, 14, 15, 16. Not to be shaken in Religion, contrary to
Conde Gondomar's Information to his Master, 15. got the love of all men in
Spain, 16, 22, 159 Will not proceed in the Match without restitution of the
Palatinate and Electoral dignity. 17, 35, 36 Displeased with the Earl of
Bristol for raising an opinion among the Spaniards; of his willingness to
become Roman Catholic, and his offers of seducing that way. 17 will not be
bargained with for future favors, 18. will not be drawn to things but freely,
18 His affability, patience, constancy, 22 his civil and wise Reply to the
Popes Letter, 215 No lover of women. 237 Defends the Duke of Buckinghams
actions, as done out of politic Compliance for the Palatinate cause, 228, 229,
230 will favor as he pleases, will grant the Lords and Commons all things fair
and honest, 230 Ill used by delays in Spain, his Voyage thither censured, 288,
289, 3^4
Chevereux Duke, a servant of the Prince of Wales, 277, 278, 230. See 300, 301.
Chichester Sir Arthur distrusted by the Duke, 243 his conference with the
Ambassadors of Spain, 244, 245
Chidley a Sea Captain, 141 Churchman an homicide, 12, 55, 56 Church of England
Reformed, 116 Church differences, Judges of them, 117 Clerk Edward, 306, 307
Cleves and Juliers the succession of them pretended to, 317 Coborn, a Captain
of the Duke of Brunswick, 283 Contracts ever before Marriage, where, 106, 107
Coke Sir Edward, 104, 122 Conde imprisoned, 176 Conference betwixt Don
Francisco and the Lord Keeper, 86, 87. betwixt Sir Arthur Chichester and the
Spanish Ambassadors, 244. the Earl of Nithisdail and them, 247 Confession of
Don Pedro concerning the Armada of 88. 259 Conway Lord, Secretary, advises the
Earl of Bristol, 19 estranged from the Lord Keeper Lincoln, 89 a Martial
Secretary, 198 enough the Dukes servant. 316
Cordova Don Gonzales, 328, 329 Corona Regia. See Libel. Cottington Sir
Francis. 23, 81 Council Table of King James somewhat too much pressing upon the
King, 75 Courtenvant Marquess, 286 Coxe King Edward the sixth his
Schoolmaster, Master of Requests, and Privy Councillour, enters Orders. 68
Cromwell Lord, Counsels the Duke, 263.
D.
DEnbigh Countess, 302 Denmark King his offers, 190, 191. Dispensation with a
Layman to hold cure of souls cannot be, 66, 67 Dominican Friar turns to the
English Church, 79 Don Francisco's Discourse to the Lord Keeper, 86, 87, 90,
91, 92, 93 His cunning to speak with King James, 90. Accuses the Duke of
Buckingham, 90, 91
Donato a Venetian Ambassador, gives the lie to the Duke of Savoy, an enemy to
Paul the Father of Venice. 187 banished once at Venice, twice in England. 192
Don Doctor, 314. presents the Duke with a book of devotions, ibid.
E.
ELiot Sir John imprisoned, 311 Elvis Sir Gervas his posterity restored in
blood and estate, 3 Most guilty of the death of Sir Thomas Overbury, 3
Emperor Ferdinand the third deals unworthily with King James, 166. and
against his own Letter, 234 changes the German Customs, 171 his proceeding
against the Palsgrave protested against, 336
Elizabeth Queen of England her Speech to her Army at Tilbury, 260 Restrains
the Papists, and why, 258 protects the Low Countries, and upon what terms,
333, 338
England alone happy in its Religion, 112 inclined to popularity. 228, 229 not
what it has been, 261
Episcopacy gone what will follow, 117 Essex Earl commanded to fight the
Spanish Ships, lets them escape, 135
F.
FEria Duke, 168 Fiat Marquess, 293, 302, 288 Finch Lady created Viscountesse
of Maidstone, 79 Fleet of Spain, 43, 53 Plate Fleet, 48, 49. part cast away,
208 of Portugal, 53. for Brasil, 167 Of the Spaniard's, Venetians, and Turks,
186, 207. of the Low Countries for the West Indies. 341, 346
Frenchman burnt in Spain for contempt to the host, 51 Frenchmen use the
English basely, 149 their Contract for the English Ships, 150
French King falls upon those of the Religion, 164, 177 France governed by the
Queen Mother at the proposals of the Match with Madam, which she is earnest
for, but will do nothing till the Treaty with Spain be broke, 274, to 277. The
French not much sollicitous for the English Recusants, 275, 284, 285 Richness
of their habits at a Masque in honor of the English, 278, 279 fear the Spanish
greatness, 281 desirous of the English alliance, 282, 283, 287 articles of the
Match disliked by the English, 289 endeavor to break the Spanish Treaty, 305
Give precedence to the English, 254

G.
GAbor Bethlem, 335 Gage employed about the Dispensation, 233, 238 Geere Sir
Michael. 135 Gerard Sir Thomas seized, upon suspicion of designs against the
King, 272 Gifford, a Sea Captain, his design upon a Gallion in the Gulf of
Mexico, 343 Gondomar, his false relations of the Prince of Wales, 15 Commanded
again for England, 54
Goodness ever most easily betrayed, 270 Goring Sir George, 96, 200, 330, 316
339 Grandees of Spain severally present their King with sums of moneys to
relieve his wants, 168 Grandmont French Mounsieur, 285 Gregory the 15. tempts
the Prince of Wales to change Religion, 212, 213 tries to make the Duke of
Buckingham, 216
Greiham, 316 Gresley, ibid. Gelderland States have the leading voice in the
united Netherlands, 323 Goring Sir George, 200 Guicciardines Judgment of
Venice, 8
H.
HAlberstat Christian Duke of Brunswick, 240 Hamilton Marquess, 316 Hartford
Earl's Petition, 89 Harton Sir Christopher, 226 Haughton Sir Gilbert complains
of the Lord Keeper Williams his servants, 74 Henderson Colonel slain at Bergen,
328 Henderson Sir Francis, 329 Henrietta Maria of France, after Queen of
England, 253. beautiful, discreet, and full of respect to the Prince of Wales,
276, 277. See 278, 290 sends privately for his picture, 280
Herbert Lord, of no faction, his Informations to King James from France, 304,
305 Holland Earl Lord Kensington in France, when the Treaty for the Match there
was beginning for it, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278, 279. received by the French
King, 278. speaks to him concerning the Match, 282. with the Queen Mother, 289.
with Madam, 290. allowed at all times free entrance into the Louure, 294 Howard
Sir Robert, 103, 104.
I.
JAniville Prince for the Queen Mother, 176. forwards the alliance with France,
279 James King of England famous for wisdom, mercy, etc. 7 Appoints
Commissioners to inquire of the Archbishop of Canterburies Case, 12. See
Archbishop of Canterbury. his promises to Williams Lord Keeper, 56. Never
breaks his word, 77 Protector of the Protestants, 110, 111 sought to, to be
declared Head and Protector of that faith; as the Spaniard would be taken to
be of the Roman, 305 Protector of the Venetians owned so by them; conservation
of the public tranquillity relyes upon him, 179, 280 Ayds the Savoyard --
joins in the cause of Cleve, 170 Promises not to draw his severity to Donato
the Venetian Ambassador into example, 192 sought to by the Spaniards to join
against the Pirates, 207 writes to the Pope, 211 aims at the universal peace
of Christendom, 270 what a friend to the Low Countries, slighted and
ingratefully dealt with by them, 331 The Germane Princes rely upon him, 336
Infanta of Spain, 15, 16, 21, 22. her virtues and beauty, she loved the Prince
of Wales, 26 her portion, 27
Ingram, 226 Inquisitor General presents a consulta to the Spanish King to
procure a Jubilee, 51. See Jubilee. is the first who offers toward the Kings
necessities, 168
Joachim of Zealand, 342 Irish raise aspersions in Spain of persecutions in
England, 15 practices of their Priests there. 49
Isabella Clara Eugenia her Complement to the Bavarian, 240. See 167, 335
Jubilee from Rome to expiate for the Contempt done to the Host, 51 Junto of
Divines to consider of the Spanish King's Oath, by which he would undertake for
the King of Englands performance of Articles, 15 Jurisdiction Episcopal used in
England without the Kings consent, against Common Law, 81
K.
KEeper of the Seal where questionable, 76 Killegrew, 316 Kings Gods shadows,
12 yielding to demands, must deny nothing, 227

L.
LAken Nicholas his discoveries concerning Corona Regia, 151, 152 Lamb Dr. of
Law favored by the Bishop of Lincoln, 56, 62 Langrack Dutch Ambassador at
Paris, his advertisements of affairs, 318, 319 Landaffe Bishop sues for
preferment, troubled, 119, 120 Laud Bishop of St. David's sues to be a
Commissioner, and why, 113 Lawyers mischievous in Parliaments, 226 Le grand
professes service to the Prince of Wales, 277 Leicester the Favorite, 226.
refuses to be Admiral for the Lord Stewards place, 102. no man in Parliaments
durst touch him, 226
Letters of Mart against the Spaniard, 344 Libel against King James by the
Papists, called Corona Regis, 151, 152 Liberty of a free Subject, 19 a
pretense, 229 Of Kings invaded by the Spaniard, 191 Of Westminster impeached by
the Lord Steward and Earl Marshal 68, 69 where Liberties are to be impleaded, 69
Liege, King of Spain raises a Fort there, 279 Offered protection by the French
King, 283
Lieutenants of Counties chosen, 76 Londoners deceive the King in his Customs,
undo all other Towns, transport silver, enemies to the Duke, 226
Low Countries, offers of those States to Sir Edward Cecyl, 130 their
proceedings in affairs, 317, to 320 how much bound to England, 339 Jealous of
the English, their courses for Religion, 321. carry themselves strangely to the
English, 331 apt to fall into faction, 324 desire the King of England's
protection, 337 why they haste not to conclude, 339 Send Ambassadors into
England to treat. 342
Lude, Count, 285 Luines, the great French Favorite, 176, 177.
M.
MAconel Sir James, a fugitive Scot, seeks to be entertained in Spain, 209
Magnus of Zealand, 317 Malcontents of King James and King Charles their
Reigns, 225 Mansel Sir Robert b fore Argier Commands against the Turks, 140,
141, 142. Mansfelt Earl hates the house of Austria, entertained by the
Venetians, how obedient to the Palsgrave, 189. In the Low Countries, 328, 329
Maqueda Duke a Pyrate, 166 Marriages of Princes of different Faiths, in what
manner, 106 Marshal of England his office, power, etc. once hereditary --
Marshal of the Kings house, 63, 64 Masks in France, 278, 279 Master of the
Horse to the King, 102 Mathewes Sir Tobie. 251, 252, 253. Match with the
Infanta of Spain, the proceedings, 15. See Infanta. Many things yielded to for
it, 236 The Portion and all the temporal Articles were settled, 23, 25
Difficulties in it from Rome and Spain, 233, 234, 236, 238, 239. The Proxy,
106, 107 Betwixt the Prince of Wales and Madam of France, 275-279. Concluded,
292, 53 agitated betwixt the Emperors Son and the Infanta Donna Maria, 167
Isabella Clara Eugenia moves for the Prince of Poland, 167 Betwixt the
Emperors Daughter, and Palsgraves Son, 170, 171
Maurice of Nassaw Prince of Orange, a blunt Prince, 324, 331 against the
Novellists, 321, 322 would reconcile Sir Horatio Vere, and Sir Edward Cecyl,
323 he and the Prince Conde differ, ibid. gives away Colonel Hyndersons
Regiment contrary to an act of the States, 329 desires the protection and
friendship of King James, 331, 332, 337, 338
Melon seeds sent out of Italy to King James by Sir Henry Wotton, 195
Merchants of England denied the free entrance of their Commodities in Spain,
46, 47. the order of prohibition staid, 52, 168 ill used there, 48
Michel Sir John, sues injustly in Chancery, 83, 84 Middlesex Earl sues to the
King for grace, 203 fined, 204 will not consent to any diminution of the Crown
revenues, 266 begs time for his defense, 268
Medena Duchess, 188 Mole, an Englishman in the Inquisition, concerning King
James his Book for Allegiance, 194 Montague after Bishop of Chichester
imprisoned by the House of Commons, who (so he) had nothing to do with him, 115
Requires the Papists to prove certain questions, 115, 116 Three Bishops defend
him, 116, 117, 118. and his Book Appello Caesarem, so much disliked by the
Puritanes, 116. 118
Montgomery Earl taxed, 27. See 302. Murray Schoolmaster to the Prince of
Wales, a Puritan, preferred to be Provost of Eaton, 66, 67, 68.
N.
NEcessity only drives men to Sea, 102 Newburgh Duke in Spain, 165, 166 shares
in the Palatinate, 335
Nithisdail Earl his Conference with the Spanish Ambassadors, 247 Nove
Mounsieur, 319
O.
OFfice of the Originals, 70 Ogle Sir John gives Extracts of the Duke and
Ambassadors Letters, 137. See 322. Olivarez Conde the Favorite of Spain, his
and the Duke of Buckinghams farewell, 16 his protestation to the Earl of
Bristol, 40 saves the Marquess of Ynoiosa from the prosecution of Sir Walter
Aston, 52 his Rodomontade, 289 The Condessa of Olivarez prays for the Duke of
Buckingham, 33
Opinions of some in the Church dangerous, 117 Ornano Colonel Monsieur of
Orleans his Governor, 286 Ossuna Duke, Vice Roy of Naples, counterfeits
madness to cover his disloyalty, 182 Threatens the Venetians because they
would not be robbed by him, 183 Confirmed in his Government, avoids the Spanish
trap, 184
Oxford Earl, 22, imprisoned, 209 seeks to the Duke of Buckingam, but
gallantly, 312

P.
PAlatinate of the Rhine cause of breach in the Spanish Match, 17, 35, 38, 234,
235, 307. mangled by the Emperor by guists, 335 difficulties in the
restitution of it, 171, 172, 346 Ever beaten upon, 245. 248 the upper settled
on the Bavarian, 335
Pardon of the Lord of St. Albans, 60 Parma Duke, 186. imprisons his bastard
son, 188 Parliament of England -- House of Commons no where before Henry the 1.
thwart the King, their privileges graces of Kings, 65 grown in the late Reigns
tumultuous and licentious, 224 private grudges made public business, 230 what
men dangerous in Parliaments, 215 See 226. Of Spain grant their King 60.
Millions of Ducats which the Guies will not ratify, 45
Palsgrave a d^sperate enemy to the Emperor, 172. promised restitution
conditionally, 241. content to submit, 337 Passages betwixt the Keeper Lincoln,
and Don Francisco a Spaniard, concerning Peace or war betwixt England and
Spain, upon breach of the Match, 77 Paul the Father of Venice, 187 Peckius, 333
Peers Judges in Parliament, 6 Bennington Sir John, 141. will not deliver up
the Kings Ship for the French service, 147, 148 his advice concerning the
Contract of the French for the use of some English Vessels, 150
Persian Ambassador his suit to King James, 12 Philibert of Savoy Viceroy of
Sicily, his good affection to King James, 158 at Messina, 182 dares not fight
the Turkish Fleet which he finds too strong for him, 186
Philips Sir Robert. 264 mediates with the Duke for the Earl of Bristol, 265
Pirates of Algier, 142 Of the Levant seek for pardon, 156 formidable, 158
infest the Coasts of Spain, 206, 207
Popes their arts, 172 Porcheres, 301, 303 Portland Earl. See Weston Sir
Richard. Presents given on both sides in Spain, 16 Prisoners in the Fleet, and
the damned in Hell compared by the Keeper Lincoln, 65 Privileges of
Parliament, 65 made a color, 227
Procession upon the Jubilee in Spain by the King, Queen, etc. 51 Proclamation
concerning the signature of Bills, 82 Protestants of all parts beholding to
King James, 110, 111 Provost of Eaton, has cure of souls, must be in Orders,
66, 67 Purbeck Lady (so she) much affects her husband, 313 Complains highly of
the Duke and his Family, 313, 314.
Puritanes, see Allegiance, haters of the Government, begun in Parliaments,
fall upon the Councillors of State, willing to clip the King. 225 Putcan had a
hand in Corona Regia the Libel. 152
Q.
Queen of Bohemia her virtues, 329, 337 Queen Mother of France. 176. for the
Match with England, 290, 296 young Queen shows great respect to the English
Prince, and is earnest for the Match with Madam, 277 not Spanish, though a
sister of Spain, 278

R.
RAwleigh S'r Walter, insolent, 226 his Western Voyage, had described those
Countries, makes the Duke of Buckingham his Intercessour, 308, 309
Records of the Order of the Garter, 221 Reformation of Justice, rules for it,
6, 7. Refuges Monsieur, 319 Religious life, entering into it after betrothing,
24 Richlieu Cardinal, when first of the Cabinet Council, 287 Richmond Duke Lord
Steward, 100, 101. See 336.
Richmond Duchess gives 1600 l. the year for a house to sleep in, 106 Rochel
so straightly blocked up in November, 1625. no intelligence could be had from
thence, 272 Rochfort Viscount his generosity, 209 su^s for the Earl of Oxfords
Liberty, 210. See 310.
Rochfoulcaut Cardinal. 282 Ro^ Sir Thomas frees 13. English from the Spanish
Galleys, by the favor of Philibert of Savoy, 158 Roman Catholics favored in
England, because of the Spanish Match, and to comply with the Articles, 80, 81
Bishop of Lincoln his advice concerning it, ibid. titular Bishop of Calcedon in
England, see tit. Williams. Complain of persecution in England, 95 238 to the
Spanish Ambassador, turbulent, 105 King James his Clemency to them disliked,
what that was, 110, 111, 112. and why, 233, 236, 242 Jesuits stir up the
French King against the Calvinists, because King James executes his Laws
against the Papists, 111. their practices in Parliament against the King, 225,
229 Imprisoned in the time of the Queen; and why, 258 Contrive tumults,
disarmed by the King, their insolency, 271, 272

S.
ST. George Madam, 296, 302 Saint-Leger Sir William, 334, 335 Sandys Sir Edwin,
76 Santa Croce Marquess, 178 Sarmientos Don, 318 Savil Sir Henry, Provost of
Eaton, 67 Savoyard Ambassador, 275, 299, 300, 301, 303. Savoy Duke, 168 a
friend to the Palsgrave, distrusted by the Spaniards, 185 defeats them, 208
Say Viscount a Malecontent, 225, 307 Saxony Duke, a friend to King James, and
the Palatine Family, 167 Scor Doctor described by the Bishop of Lincoln, 99,
100, 101 Scotch Masters confiscated in Spain, and sentenced to the Galleys, 50
Scultetus at the Synod of Dort, 173 Serclaus a Dutch Gentlewoman, trotting on
both sides betwixt the Dutch and Spa^nish, 332 Shipwreck of the Plate Fleet,
48, 49 Ships attempted to be fired, 135 Sibrandus a furious Calvinist at the
Synod of Dort, 174 Soissons Count, a Prince of the Blood of France, would marry
Madam of France, 282 his incivility to the Earl of Holland, 285 altered, 286
Sommerset Earl sues to the King for his life and estate, rise upon his Fathers
Merits, 1, 2, 3 4 South-hampton Earl confined to his own house, 57 hardly dealt
with, but without the Kings Order, 61. See 316.
Spanish King gives precedencie to the Prince of Wales, 14 Much sought to by
the English Papists, 252 aims at the universal Monarchy, 274, 281
Spaniards committed many errors in the Match 23 forward to give any security
to the accomplishing it, 24, 25 Cautelous in their proceeding, 243, 247 arm,
the Grandees summoned, and the Battalon, 51. for the Sea, 166
Slight and wrong the English, 54 Seize the Venetian Vessels in the Ports of
Naples, arm in all their Dominions, 178, 179, 182 their subleties, they rob the
Venetians, 183. their plots upon the States united, 333. Complain they cannot
obtain free audience, 246
Spanish Rodomontades, 289, 248 Intended with their Armada to have rooted out
the English Nation, 259 by the Match to have formed a party here, 305. See 338,
339. Get more by their policies then Swords, 261. no peace can be with them --
there. would make peace with the Dutch, 327 will not believe the English had
either Faith, Church or Liturgy, 79. See Book of Common Prayer. burn the
Princess Palatines Jointure in sight of the English Ambassador, 329
Spinola, 328, 333 Star Chamber an ancient Court, 58 held Pleas of restitution
of Ships and goods, 75
State, when the word came first over hither, 226 Steward of the house, 63
Office of Lord Steward, what, 101, 102
Success things not to be judged by it, 304 Suffolk Earl his Staff of
Treasurer taken away, 126 sentenced in the Star Chamber, 122 will not persuade
his sons to leave the Court, delivered from the Tower, 123, 124, 125
Synod of England, 117 of Dort, passages of it, 173, 174, 175 of no authority
with us, 117

T.
TIlley count besieges Heidelbergh, 234, 329 Tilliers Count, 305 Toirax, 286,
287 Treasurer of England accuses the Lord Keeper of Lincoln, 72, 73 Treasure
ill managed, 122 Tresham of the Powder Treason preserved his estate, 3 Truger
Mademoiselle, 301 Trumbal an Agent at Brussels for King James, his care to find
out the Author of Corona Regia, 152, 153 Turkish kindness to the Venetians,
186 Tyrconnel Page to the Queen of Spain, 49
V.
VAlette Marquess, 285 Vandenbergh grave Henric, 328 Vaux Lord committed to
the Fleet for resisting the Kings commands, 271 Venetians in danger of the
Spaniard, seek to King James, 178, 179 sue to him to forbid exportation of
Artillery, etc. 180 refuse Turkish ayds against Christians, 186. incivil to the
Duke of Savoy, 187
Velville Marquess, 274, 284, 286, 287, 289. Vere Sir Horatio slighted
unreasonably by Sir Edward Cecyl, as inferior in birth and worth, 134, 323
Viceroy of Portugal, 45 Ville-aux Cleres, 293, 300 Vorstius questioned for
blasphemous propositions, 175 Uprores in Naples, Millain, etc. 188
W.
Wake Sir Isaac employed in Savoy, his prudence, 180, 181, 186. governs
himself according to his instructions, 184 not supplied with moneys, 189
War the most prosperous has misfortune enough in it to make the author
unhappy, 33 knowledge of it the highest of humane things, 133 preparation of
things shows experience what war is lawful, 258
Weston Sir Richard Earl of Portland, 198, 199. a fit Minister, 234 treats for
the Palatinate at Brussels, cannot prevail, 201, 234. accused to the Duke, 202
Intercedes for the Earl of Middlesex, 203
Wilford Sir Thomas sinks a Turkish man of war, 141 Williams Dean of
Westminster, Lord Keeper, and Bishop of Lincoln, after sues for the Bishopric
of London, 54 his Ecclesiastical promotions, 55 advanced by the Duke of
Buckingham, 62, 70. his opinion of the Archbishop of Canterburies mischance,
where his ambition is visible, 56
Will serve the Earl of Southampton while he makes good his professions to the
Duke, 58 loves the Earl of Bristol at this rate, 23 sits in the Common Pleas. 61
Will not seal the Lord St. Albans pardon, and why, 61, 62, 81. nor Sir Richard
Westons Patent, 93 nor an order for a Papist Priests liberty, 62. nor the Earl
of Arundels Patent for the Earl Marshals place, 68 An enemy to the Lord
Treasurer, 62 To the Earl of Arundel, 62, 63, 64.
Will not discharge a prisoner for contempt of a Decree in Chancery, 65 seems
to advise King James to dissolve the Parliament of 1621. to find out other
ways to supply his wants, and acquaint the Kingdom with the undutifulnesse and
obstinacy of the Commons, 66 accused by the Lord Treasurer, of making injust
advantages of his place, vindicates himself. 71, 72, 74. forbidden the Court, 78
Will not seal the Kings Patent of honor, without knowledge of the Dukes good
pleasure, 79 against the Council Table, 75 Dislikes prohibiting execution of
Statutes against the Papists, 80 His advice to hang the titulary Bishop of
Calcedon, 81
Would have all honors and offices derived from the Duke, 83, 84 Is his
vassal, 85, 100, 101, 103 Lives not but in the Dukes favor, 107 Loves and
hates as the Duke does, 84, 88, 94 does equal Justice, 83
Wants, 85 Would not be over-topped, 94 charged by the Duke to run Courses
dangerous to his Country, and to the cause of Religion, betrays the Duke,
esteemed by him a firebrand, and not worthy of trust, 87, 88 his Reply, 89, 96.
Writes unworthily of King James to the Duke, 94 sues to the Duke for the
Countess of Southampton, 96
Would have the Duke to be Lord Steward, 101, 102 Mercy with Sir Edward Coke,
104 advises concerning the Proxies and Marriage with France, 106, 107 In
disgrace, the Seal taken away, excuses himself to King Charles, 108 suspected
as a Malecontent, and willing to imbroil, 225
Wimbledon Viscount. See Cecyl Sir Edward, etc. Wotton Sir Henry, 193, 194.
sends rare Pictures to the Duke, 195 Complains that after his long service his
Embassage should be given another, and himself left naked without any rewards,
or provision for his subsistence, 196, 197 too bashful, 199
Wynwood Sir Ralph, Ambassador in the Netherlands, how contemned there. 331.
Y.
YElverton Sir Henry, 310 Ynoiosa Marquess, Ambassador in England, his ill
Offices here, and false informations, 40, 41, 50. endeavors to stain the
Prince of Wales his honor, 52. See Olivarez. for the Duke of Bavaria's
pretenses, 167
Young Patrick! 94
Z.
ZAnten Treaty, 318 Zapara Cardinal Viceroy of Naples, 188 Zutenstein of
Utrecht, 317
Books Printed for William Lee. D. Pakeman, Ga. Bedel.

REports of certain Cases, Arising in the several Courts of Records at
Westminster, in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and the late King
Charles; with the resolutions of the Judges of the said Courts, upon debate,
and solemn Arguments. Collected and lately reviewed by Justice Godbold; in
Quarto.

The Touchstone of common assurances, by William Sheppard Esquire; in Quarto.

The whole office of a Country Justice of Peace, both in Sessions, and out of
Sessions; with an Abridgement of all the Acts and Ordinances of Parliament,
relating to the office of a Justice of Peace; in Octavo.

A Collection of several Acts of Parliament, published in the years 1648,
1649, 1650, 1651. very useful, especially for Justices of Peace, and other
Officers, in the execution of their duties, and Administration of Justice, with
several Ordinances of the like concernment, by Henry Scobel Esquire, Clark of
the Parliament: in Folio.

A Collection of several Acts of Parliament, which concern the Adventurers of
Ireland, by Henry Scobel Esquire, Clark of the Parliament; in folio.

A General Table, to all the several Books of the Reports of the Lord Cook,
with two Tables, one of the principal Cases, the other of the general Titles,
arising out of the matter of the Reports, done into English; in Octavo.

The new Natura Brevium, of the Reverend Judge Mr. Antho. Fitzherbert, with the
Authorities of Law, Collected out of the year-Books: an Abridgment with Writs,
and return of Writs, translated into English; never before Printed; in octavo.

The Grounds and Maxims of the Laws of England, by William Noy Esquire, in
Octavo.

The Atturney's Academy; being the manner of proceedings in all the Courts of
Record at Westminster, and other Courts of Law, and Equity; in Quarto.

An excellent Treatise entitled, For the Sacred Laws of the Land, by Francis
White Esquire; in Octavo.

De Priscis Anglorum Legibus, being the ancient Laws of England, in Saxon, and
Latin, out of the Authors (Mr. Lambert) own Manuscript Copy, published with
the Additions of Mr. Wheelock of Cambridge; in folio.

Reports and Pleas of Assizes at York, held before several Judges in that
Circuity, with some Presidents useful for pleaders at the Assizes; never
Englished before: in Octavo.

Reports, or Cases in Chancery, collected by Sir George Carry, one of the
Masters of the Chancery; in Octavo.

A perfect Abridgment of the Eleven Books of the Reports of the Lord Cook,
written in French by Sir John Davis, and now Englished; in Duodecimo.

Reports, or new Cases of Law, by John March, in Quarto.

Statuta pacis, containing all Statutes in order of time, that concern a
Justice of Peace; in Duodecimo.

Three Learned Readings, the first by the Lord Dyer, of Wills; second, by Sir
John Brograve, of Joyntures; third, by Thomas Risden, of forcible Entryes; in
quarto.

The Learned Arguments of the Judges of the Upper Bench, upon the Writ of
Habeas Corpus, with the opinion of the Court thereupon; in Quarto.

The Book of Oaths, with the several forms of them, both Ancient and Modern; in
Duodecimo.

The Office of Sheriffe^ and Coroner, by J. Wilkinson of Bernards Inn; with
Kitchins return of Writs, newly translated into English; in Octavo.

Synopsis, or an exact Abridgment of the Lord Cook's Commentary upon Littleton,
being a brief Explanation of the Grounds of the Common Law, Composed by that
learned Lawyer, Sir Humphrey Davenport Knight, Lord chief Baron of the
Exchequer; in Octavo.

Miscellania Spiritualia, or devout Essay 's, by the Honorable Walter
Mountague Esquire, the first Part; in Quarto.

The History of the Civil wars of France, written in Italian, by Henrico
Catarino D'Avila; translated into English by Sir Charles Cotterel Knight, and
William Aylsbury Esquire: in folio.

Books Printed for, or to be sold by M.M.G. Bedell, and T. Collins, at their
shop at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet.
EAdmeri Monachi Cantuariensis, Historia Novorum, Joannes Seldenis Notis; in
Folio.

Mare Clausum, seu Dominio Mare, Joannes Seldeni; in folio.

The History of great Britain, from the first peopling of this Island, to the
Reign of King James, by William Slayter, with the Illustrations of John Seldom
Esquire; in Folio.

The History of Tithes, in the payment of them, the Laws made for them, and
touching the Right of them by John Seldom Esquire; in Quarto.

Annals, or a general Chronicle of England, with an Appendix, or Corrollary of
the foundations of the Universities of England, begun by John Stowe, and
continued to the year, 1631. by Edm. Howes Gent. in folio.

A Chronicle of the Kings of England, from the Romans Government, unto the
Reign of King Charles, Containing all passages of Church, and State, with all
other observations proper for a History. The second Edition, enlarged with
Marginal notes and large Tables, by Sir Richard Baker Knight; in Folio.

The History and Lives of the Kings of England, from Will. the Conqueror to the
end of the Reign of K. Henry the eighth, by Will. Martyn Esquire. to which is added,
the History of K. Edward the fixed, Q. Mary, and Queen Elizabeth; in Folio.

The History of the Reign of K. Henry the seventh, written by the right
Honorable Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban; with a very useful and
necessary Table annexed to it; in folio.

The Life and Reign of K. Henry the Eight, written by the Right Honorable
Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury; in folio.

Orlando Furioso, in English Heroical verse, by Sir John Harrington Knight, now
the third time revised and amended, with the Addition of the Authors Epigrams;
in folio.

The Marrow of the French tongue, containing rules for pronunciation, an exact
Grammar of the nine parts of speech, and dialogues for Courtiers, Citizens, and
Countrymen, with varieties of Phrases, Letters missive, Proverbs etc. So
compiled, that a mean capacity may in short time, without help, attain to the
perfection of the Language, by Mr. John Woodroephe; in folio

Pyrotechina, or a discourse of artificial fireworks, laying down the true
grounds of that Art; to which is annexed, a treatise of Geometry, by John
Babington student in the Mathematics; in folio.

A French-English Dictionary, with another in English and French, Compiled by
Mr. Randal Cotgrave; Whereunto are added the Animadversions, and supplement of
James Howel Esquire; in Folio.

Annals veteris Testimenti, a prima Mundi Origin deductis, una cum Rerum
Asiaticarium, et Aegyptiacarum Chronico, Jacobo Vsserio Armachana digestore; in
folio.

With the second Part now in press in Latin; in folio.

Devotionis Augustinianae Flammae, or certain devout and learned Meditations,
upon several Festivals in the year, written by the excellently accomplished
Gentleman, William Austin, of Lincolnes Inn Esquire; in folio.

The Christian man, or the Reparation of nature by grace, written in French by
John Francis Sennault, and now Englished by H. Gresly Master of Arts, and
student of Christ Church in Oxford; in quarto.

An Interpretation of the number 666, wherein not only the manner how this
number ought to be interpreted, but it is also showed, that this number does
exactly describe that state of government, to which all other Notes of
Antichrist do agree, by Francis Potter, B.D. with Mr. Medes Judgment of this
Treatise: in quarto.

John Barclay his Argenis, translated out of Latin into English, the prose
upon his Majesty's command, by Sir Robert le Gry's Knight, and the verses by
Thomas May Esquire; with a Clavis annexed to it, for the satisfaction of the
Reader: in Quarto.

The History of the Imperial state of the Grand Seigneurs, their Habitations,
Lives, Favorites, Power, Government and Tyranny; to which is annexed, the
History of the Court of the King of China, written in French, and translated by
Edward Grimston: in quarto.

The state of France, as it stood in the ninth year of this present Monarch
Lewis the 14th. written to a friend, by J.E. in Duodecimo.

The Pourtract of the Politic Christian Favorite, drawn from some of the
Actions of the Lord Duke of St. Lucar, by the Marquess Virgillio Malvezzi; to
which is annexed, Maxims of State, and political observations, on the same
story of Count Olivarez, D. of St. Lucar: in Duodecimo.

The Prince, written in French by Mounsiour Du Balzac: now translated into
English, by Henry Gresly, Master of Arts, and Student of Christ Church in
Oxford: in Duodecimo.

The Life and Reign of King Edward the sixth, with the beginning of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, both written by Sir John Hayward Knight, Doctor of Law: in
Duodecimo.

Of Liberty and Servitude; translated out of the French into the English
tongue, and dedicated to George Evelyn Esquire: in duodecimo.

The new Planet no Planet; or the earth no wandering Star. Here, out out of the
principles of Divinity, Philosophy, etc. the earths Immobility is asserted, and
Copernicus his opinion, as erroneous, etc. fully refuted, by Alexander Rosse;
in Quarto.

The Picture of Conscience, consisting in the truths to be believed, the
virtues to be practiced, the vices to be avoided, and the Heresies to be
rejected, by Alexander Ross; in Duodecimo.

An humble Apology for Learning and Learned Men, by Edward Waterhous Esquire;
in Octavo.

Selected parts of Horace Prince of Lyricks, concluding with a piece out of
Ausonius, and another out of Virgil; done into English by Richard Fanshaw
Esquire; in Octavo.

Palmer in D'Oliva both parts, in quarto.

The true History of the Tragic Loves of Hypollito and Isabella, Neapolitans;
in Octavo.

The Nuptial Lover: in Octavo.

The Jesuit, the chief, if not the only State-heretick, in the world, or the
Venetian Quarrel; in Quarto.

Brinsley's small Coppy-Book: in Octavo.

Synopsis, or a Compendium of the Fathers: in Octavo.

Supplementum Lucani, Thomae May Anglo: in Duodecimo.

Jackson's Evangelical temper; in duodecimo.

Maran-Atha, the second advent, or Christ coming to Judgment. A Sermon preached
before the Honorable Judges of Assize, at Warwick, July 25. 1651. by VVil.
Durham, B. D. late Preacher at the Rolls, now Pastor of the Church of
Tredington, in Worcester shire; in Quarto.

Steps of Ascension unto God, or a ladder to heaven, containing prayers and
meditations for every day of the week, and for all other times and occasions,
by (...) Edward Gee, Dr. of Divinity: in quarto.

The Devils an Asso, a Comedy, acted in the year 1616, by his Majesty's
Servants, the Author Ben. Johnson: in folio.

The Marriage of the Arts, by Barten Holliday; in Quarto.

Michaelmas Term, in Qu^^to.

Fine Companion; in Quarto.

The Phaenix; in Quarto.

The Just General, by Cosmo Manuche; in Quarto.

The Courageous Turk; in Quarto. by T. Goffe Christ Church in Oxford.

The Tragedy of Orestes; in Quarto. by T. Goffe Christ Church in Oxford.

The Bastard, a Tragedy; in Quarto. by T. Goffe Christ Church in Oxford.

Edward the fourth, first and second Part, a Play, in Quarto.

Platonic Lovers, in quarto. per Sir William Davenant Knight.

The Wits, a Comedy, in quarto. per Sir William Davenant Knight.

The Triumphs of Prince D' Amor; in quarto. per Sir William Davenant Knight.

The Faithful Shepardesse, Acted before the King and Queen, diverse times, with
great applause, at Blackfriars, by his Majesty's Servants, written by John
Fletcher, Gent. in quarto.

A Recantation of an ill led life, or a discovery of the highway Law, as also
many Cautelous Admonitions, and full Instructions, how to know, shun, and
apprehend a thief: most necessary for all honest Travelers to peruse, observe,
and practice; written by John Clavel Gent.

The eleventh Report of the Lord Cook in French; in folio.

Statutes in the xxi K. James, and the first and third Caroli: in folio.

Lamberts Archeion; or Comments on the High Courts of Justice; in Octavo.

Powels search of Records: in Quarto.

The Laws, and Resolutions of women's Rights: in quarto.

Reformatio Legum, Ecclesiasticarum: in quarto.

The Parsons Law, Collected out of the whole body of the Common Law, and some
late Reports: in Octavo.

The Court keepers Guide; A plain and familiar Treatise, useful for the help of
those that are employed in keeping Law days, or Courts Baron; wherein is
largely and plainly opened, the Jurisdiction of those Courts, with the learning
of Manors, Coppy-holds, Rents, Herriots, and other services and advantages
belonging to Manors, to the great profit of Lords of Manors, and owners of
these Courts. The third Edition enlarged, the Author William Shepard Esquire:
in Octavo.

Reliquiae Wottonianae, or a Collection of Lives, Letters and Poems, with
characters of sundry personages, and other Incomparable pieces of Language, and
Art, by the Curious pensil, of the ever Memorable, Sir Henry Wotton Knight,
late Provost of Eaton: in Duodecimo.

The Ladies Cabinet enlarged, and opened; Containing many rare Secrets, and
rich Ornaments, of several kinds, and different uses: comprised under three
general Heads, viz. 1. Preserving, Conserving, Candying, etc. 2. Physic and
Surgery. 3. Cookery and Houswifery. With sundry Experiments and Extractions
of Waters, Oils, etc. Collected and practiced by the late Right Honorable and
learned Chemist, the Lord RUTHUEN; in Duodecimo.

Calendarium Pastorale, sive Eglogae Duodecim, totidem Anni mensibus
Accomodatae, Anglice olim scriptae, ab Edmundo Spencero, Anglorum Poetarum
Principe, nunc autem Eleganti Latino Carmine donatae, a Theodoro Bathurst Aulae
Pembrokianae, apud Cantabrigiensis, aliquando socio. And the same in English,
against the Latin; in Octavo.

The Combat of Love and Friendship; A Comedy, as it was formerly presented by
the Gentlemen of Christ-Church in Oxford; by Robert Mead, sometime of the same
College: in Quarto.

Miscellanea spiritualia, or devout Essays, by the Honorable Walter Mountague
Esquire, the second Part: in Quarto.

The End.
SCRINIA SACRA; Secrets of Empire, IN LETTERS Of illustrious Persons.

A SVPPLEMENT OF THE CABALA.

IN WHICH Business of the same Quality and Grandeur is contained:

With many famous Passages of the late Reigns of K. HENRY 8. Q. ELIZABETH, K.
JAMES, and K. CHARLES.

LONDON, Printed for G. Bedel, and T. Collins. and are to be sold at their Shop
at the Middle-Temple-gate in Fleet Street. 1654.

THE STATIONERS To the READER.
WE cannot suppose here that words will be needed to raise opinion; yet it may
be expected we should give some account of what we have done, and we will do
it. Not long agone we printed that excellent collection of Letters known by the
name of Cabala, which the world has seen and approved. Since, another volume of
Letters has come to our hands; a volume which may justly be called a second
Cabala, not unworthy to keep that company, a part which must add much to the
other, as illustrious in its titles, as considerable and as weighty for the
matter. In which, besides not a few noble monuments of the former years from
the deserting of the Roman Church by our great Henry downward, of his daughter
the most glorious virgin Queens life and government recorded, some of the same
great actions are begun, many continued; much of the policy, contrivances, and
workings of the same succeeding Princes and their Ministers, of the carriage of
the same things farther prosecuted, and more fully discovered. Like
sister-twins of lovely faces they have both apart their native sweetness, their
several worths and graces; yet they are not so fully taking, so perfectly
beautiful, as where they are drawn together in one frame. In the new more is
discovered, not only of the foreign affairs in Germany, Italy, France, Spain,
and other Countries whither the interest of the late Reigns engaged the
Sovereign actors; but of our home-Councels, Orders, and provisions both for the
Church and Commonwealth, enough to show the prudence, judgment, and foresight
of those who swayed in chief then, and to let us know now the Ages past have
had the honor to be governed by men, who did not permit all things to fortune;
who if they could not assure themselves of the events, yet they could command,
design, and understand: Their designs and counsels (which will be admirable to
some, but ridiculous to others) being ever directed and ruled by equity and
justice, ever aiming at honest ends, such as may venture abroad, such as will
appear fair and handsome in the light: whereas if we cast our eyes upon the Popes
in the same leafs, we shall find nothing but combustions, nothing but fire,
brimstone and alarums to war and blood. If upon the French, nothing but
inhumane cruelty and violence upon the conscience too. If upon the Imperialists
and Spaniards, nothing but artifice, nothing but cunning perfidiousness; all
their plots and consultations, their cheating Treaties, tending merely to the
advancement of the Austrian house, without any respect to piety and justice,
faith or honor. A taste of which unworthiness we find in this second Part,
where the Spanish Match is first moved by the Duke of Lerma, the grand Minion
in Philip the 3. his reign; this Duke damns himself in oaths for his sincerity
and reality toward the Match, which Olivarez, the present Kings Favorite, tells
his Master here was never intended. It would be too tedious but to touch in
passing by, upon the generals in these Letters; upon the calamities and
miseries of the Palatine Germans, of the Hugonots, the siege and taking in of
Rochel, etc. Heresy and Superstition every where triumphing over truth. To
speak of the spirit and worthiness of our Hero's were impossible; we might cull
out some Letters here, of which (were there no more) might be said, -- An hand
or eye
By Hyliard drawn, is worth a History.


Of these Letters we may safely be believed, though they come out thus late,
and are so little known, their merit will easily weigh down the age and fame of
those which have gone before.

Temple-Gate, May 1. 1654. G. B. T. C.

ERRATA.
Page 13. movendis for moventib. p. 16. l. 13. dele Statute of usus. l. 17. d.
port-corn. p. 21. d. a few days before my departure. p. 20. l. 22. d. opera. p.
33. l. 22. put in not. p. 50. taglaes, r. tailles. 61. tain, r. retein. 75.
Quadruials, r. Quadrivials. 77. im, r. in. 80. r. cartel. 81. Lo, r. Lee. 83.
nos, r. eos. p. 85. l. 14. put in no less. l. 17. Claudius, r. Clodius. 88
temeriti, r. emeriti. 93. Fintons, r. Fenton. 98. Almonte, r. Ayamonte. 105. d.
nimis. l. 13. vel quod in villa villae and in incolorum, etc. l. 17. distata,
r. dilatata, tenenda, r. tenendae. aucupandam, r. aucupanda. obstrictam and
reverentiam, r. obstricta est reverentia. vetera, r. veteri. 124. Briston, r.
Digby. 130. l. ult. add requires. 145. r. ewig and einig. 153. Inijosa, r.
Ynoyosa. p. 202. d. Mook or. 229. sacrum and sacrum, r. sacrum and saxum.
eadem, r. iter. 241. solely, r. fully.

A Table of the Letters contained in this COLLECTION.
KIng Henry 8. to the Clergy of the Province of York, An. 1533. touching his
title of Supreme head of the Church of England. P. 1 Q. Anne of Bullen to K.
Henry from the Tower, May 6. 1536. P. 9 Q. Elizabeth's Letter to the Lady Norris
upon the death of her son. P. 10 Thomas Duke of Norfolk to Queen Elizabeth. P.
11 A Defiance sent by the Grand-Seignieur to Maximilian the second. P. 12 Sir
John Perrots Commission for Lord Deputy of Ireland. P. 13 The whole Contents of
the Commission for the Lord Deputy. ibid. The Queens Warrant to the Lords etc.
of Ireland for ministering the Oath, and delivery of the sword to him, Jan. 31.
1583. P. 14 Another for his Entertainment there. P. 15 The Queens Instructions
to him. ibid. Sir John Perrot to the Lords of the Council, Jan. 31. 1583. P. 16
Earl of Desmond to the Earl of Ormond, June 5. 1583. P. 18 Sir Henry Wallop to
the Queen, Aug. 12. 1583. P. 19 The Earl of Essex to Mr. Secretary Davison. P.
20 Again to Secretary Davison. P. 21 Again to Secretary Davison, July 11. 1589.
P. 22 Again to Secretary Davison, ibid. E. of Essex to K. James concerning
Secretary Davison, April 18. 1587. P. 23 Earl of Essex to Mr. Secretary
Davison. P. 24 Again to Secretary Davison, upon the death of Secr. Walsingham.
P. 25 Earl of Essex to the Queen. ibid. Again to the Queen. P. 26 Sir Tho.
Egerton L. Chancellor to the Earl of Essex. P. 27 The Earls Answer. P. 29 Two
Letters framed, one as from Mr. Anthony Bacon to the Earl of Essex, the other
as the Earls answer. P. 31. and 34 Lord Mountjoy to the Earl of Essex. P. 35
Sir Robert Cecil, after Earl of Salisbury, to the Lord Burleigh his father,
from France, Feb. 26. 1597. P. 36 Sir Francis Walsingham Secr. to Mr. Critoy
Secretary of France. P. 38 Sir Fr. Bacon to the Earl of Essex, when Sir To.
Cecil was in France. P. 42 Sir Fr. Bacon to the Earl of Essex concerning the
Earl of Tyrone. P. 43 Another to the Earl before his going to Ireland. P. 45
Another to him after his enlargement. P. 48 Sir Fr. Bacon to Sir To. Cecil,
after defeat of the Spaniards in Ireland. ib: Considerations touching the
Queens service in Ireland. P. 49 Sir Fr. Bacon to the L. Treasurer, touching
his Speech in Parliament. P. 54 Sir Francis Bacon to the Earl of Northampton.
P. 55 To the Lord Kinloss, upon the entrance of King James. P. 56 To King
James. ibid. To the Earl of Northumberland, concerning a Proclamation upon the
Kings entry. P. 58 To the Earl of Southampton. ibid. To the Earl of
Northumberland. P. 58 To Sir Edward Coke, expostulatory. P. 60 To the same
after L. Chief Justice, and in disgrace. ibid. To Sir Vincent Skinner,
expostulatory. P. 66 Sir Francis Bacon to the Lord Chancellor. P. 71 To King
James. P. 72 Mr. Edmond Andersons Letter to Sir Francis Bacon. P. 73 Sir Thomas
Bodeley to Sir Francis Bacon, upon his new Philosophy. P. 74 Mr. George Brook
to a Lady in Court. P. 79 To his Wife. P. 80 King James to the Major and
Aldermen of London, after he was proclaimed, Mar. 28. 1603. P. 81 The Roman
Catholics Petition to King James for Toleration. P. 82 Sir Walter Raleigh to
King James before his Trial. P. 85 Sir Walter Raleigh to Sir Robert Car, after
Earl of Somerset. P. 86 Sir Tho Egerton Chancellor, after L. Ellesmere, to the
E. of Essex. P. 87 Lord Chancellor Ellesmere to King James. ibid. Again to the
same King. P. 88 Sir Francis Norris to King James. P. 89 A Patent for the
Admiralty of Ireland. P. 90 A Commission to diverse Lords, etc. for the delivery
of Flushing, Brill, etc. May 14. Jac. 14. P. 92 A Commission to Visc. Lisle
Governor, to deliver them up, May 22. J. 14. P. 93 Countess of Nottingham to
the Danish Ambassador. P. 94 Sir Charles Cornwallis Lieger in Spain, to the
Spanish King, July 23. 1608. ibid. Again to the Spanish King, Jan. 16. 1608. P.
98 Again to the Spanish King, P. 100 and 101 K. James to the University of
Cambridge, Mar. 14. 1616. P. 105 Mr. Ruthen to the Earl of Northumberland, P.
106 Sir Henry Yelvertons submission in the Star Chamber, P. 107 Ferdinand the
second, Emperor, to the Catholic King, P. 109 Ferdinand Emperor to Don
Balthazar de Zuniga, October. 15. 1621. P. 110 K. James to Ferdinand Emp.
concerning the Palatinate, Nov. 12. 1621. P. 113 His Imperial Majesty to King
James Jan. 14. 1621. P. 116 Earl of Bristol to King James, P. 117 Ab ignoto to
Conde Gondomar, concerning the death of Philip 3. P. 125 K. James to the Earl
of Bristol Ambassador in Spain, October. 3. 1623. P. 127 Earl of Bristol to King
James, October. 21. 1622. P. 129 K. Philip the third of Spain to the Conde of
Olivarez, P. 133 Conde Olivarez his answer to the King, ibid. K. James to the
Earl of Bristol, October. 8. 1623 P. 136 Earl of Bristol in answer to King James
October. 9. 1623. P. 137 Again to King James, November. 1. 1623. P. 141 King James
to the Palsgrave, P. 143 The Palsgraves answer to King James, P. 145 Ab Ignoto
from Madrid, P. 151 A Memorial to the King of Spain, by Sir Walter Ashton
Ambassador in Spain, Aug. 29. 1624. P. 152 The Petition of Francis Philips to
King James, for the release of Sir Robert Philips prisoner in the Tower, P. 155
Oliver St. John to the Major of Marlborough, against the Benevolence. P. 159
The Justices of Peace in Com. Devon to the Lords of the Council. P. 182 The
Archbishop of Canterbury to the Bishops, concerning K. James his Directions for
Preachers, with the Directions, Aug. 14. 1622. P. 183 King James his
Instructions to the Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning Orders to be observed
by Bishops in their Dioceses, 1622. P. 187 Bishop of Winchester to his
Archdeacon to the same effect, P. 189 The Bishop of Lincoln Lord Keeper, to the
Bishop of London concerning Preaching and Catechizing. P. 190 Instructions for
the Ministers and Churchwardens of London, P. 193 Mons. Bevayr Chancellor of
France, discharged to the French King. ibid. Mons. Richere forced, recants his
opinions against the Papal supremacy over Kings, P. 196 Car. Richlieu to the
Roman Catholics of Great Britain, Aug. 25. 1624. P. 197 Mons. Balsac to the
Cardinal de la Valette, ibid. Mons. Balsac to the King Louis, P. 200 Mons.
Toyrax to the Duke of Buckingham, P. 201 Ab ignoto, concerning the estate of
Rochel after the surrender, P. 202 The Protestants of France to Charles King of
Great Britain, P. 204 The Duke of Rohan to his Majesty of Great Britain, Mar.
12. 1628. P. 208 Pope Greg. 15. to the Inquisitor-general of Spain, April 19.
1623. P. 210 Pope Urban to Lewis the 13. Aug. 4. 1629. P. 211 The Duke of
Buckingham, Chancellor Elect, to the University of Cambridge, June 5. 1626. P.
213 King Charles to the University of Cambridge, in approbation of their
election, June 6. 1626. P. 214 The University of Cambridge its answer to the
Duke, June 6. 1626. P. 215 The University of Cambridge its answer to the King,
P. 216 A Privy Seal for transporting of Horse, June 6. 1624. P. 217 The
University of Cambridge to the Duke, P. 218 The Dukes answer, P. 219 The
Vice Chancellor of Cambridge to the King upon the Dukes death, ib. King Charles
to the University of Cambridge for a new election, P. 220 The Earl of Holland
to the University, P. 221 The Vnimersity of Cambridge to the King, P. 222 An
Order made at Whitehall betwixt the University and Town of Cambridge, December.
4. 1629. P. 223 The University of Cambridge to the Archbishop of York, P. 224
The University of Cambridge to the Earl of Manchester, P. 225 The University of
Cambridge to Sir Humphrey May, P. 226 Instructions by K. Charles to the
Vicechancellor and Heads of Cambridge for Government, etc. Mar. 4. 1629. P. 127
The University of Cambridge to the Lord chief Justice Richardson, P. 228 The
Bishop of Exeter to the Lower House of Parliament, P. 229 King Charles to the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, P. 230 A Councel-Table Order against hearing Mass
at Ambassadors houses, March 10. 1629. P. 232 The King of Spain to Pope Urban,
Sept. 11. 1629. P. 234 The Council of Ireland to King Charles, in defense of the
Lord Deputy Faulkland, Aug. 28. 1629. P. 235 Ab ignoto, Of the affairs of
Spain, France, and Italy, June 5. 1629. P. 239 The Lords of the Council of
England, to the Lords of the Council of Ireland, Jan. 31. 1629. P. 240 The Lord
Faulklands Petition to the King, P. 242 The Duke of Modena to the Duke of
Savoy, July 30. 1629. P. 243 Sir Kenelm Digby to Sir Edward Stradling, P. 244
Mr. Gargrave to the Lord Davers, P. 253 A Declaration of Ferdinand Infanta of
Spain, July 5. 1636. P. 257
FINIS.
King HENRY the 8. to the Clergy of the Province of York, An. 1533. Touching
his Title of Supreme Head of the Church of England.
RIght Reverend Father in God, Right trusty and welbeloved, We greet you well,
and have received your Letters dated at York the 6. of May, containing a long
discourse of your mind and opinion concerning such words as has passed the
Clergy of the Province of Canterbury in the Proeme of their Grant made unto
us, the like whereof should now pass in that Province. Albeit ye interlace such
words of submission of your Judgment, and discharge of your duty toward us
with humble fashion and behavior, as we cannot conceive displeasure nor be
miscontent with you, considering what you have said to us in times past in
other matters, and what ye confess in your Letters your self to have heard and
known, noting also the effect of the same; We cannot but marvail at sundry
points and Articles, which we shall open unto you, as hereafter follows.

First, ye have heard (as ye say ye have) the said words to have passed in the
Convocation of Canterbury, where were present so many learned in Divinity and
Law, as the Bishops of Rochester, London, S. Assaph, Abbots of Hyde, S.
Bennets, and many other; and in the Law the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Bishop of Bath; and in the Lower House of the Clergy so many notable and great
Clerks, whose persons and learning you know well enough. Why do ye not in this
case with your self as you willed us in our great matter, conform your
conscience to the conscience and opinion of a great number? Such was your
advice to us in the same (our great matter) which now we perceive ye take for
no sure counsel; for ye search the grounds, not regarding their sayings.
Nevertheless forasmuch as ye examine their grounds, causes and reasons, in
doing whereof ye seem rather to seek and examine that thing which might
disprove their doings, then that which might maintain the same, We shall answer
you briefly without long discourse to the chief points of your said Letters:
wherein taking for a ground, that words were ordained to signify things, and
cannot therefore by sinister interpretation alter the truth of them, but only
in the wits of perverse persons that would blind or color the same, by reason
whereof to good men they signify that they mean only doing their office, and
to men of worse sort they serve for maintenance of such meaning as they would
imagine: so in using words we ought only to regard and consider the expression
of the truth in convenient speech and sentences, without overmuch scruple of
super-perverse interpretations, as the malice of men may excogitate: wherein
both overmuch negligence is not to be commended, and too much diligence is not
only by daily experience in men's writings and laws showed frustrate and void;
insomuch as nothing can be so clearly and plainly written, spoken and ordered,
but that subtle wit has been able to subvert the same; but also the Spirit of
God, which in his Scripture taught us the contrary, as in the places which ye
bring in and rehearse: -- if the Holy Ghost had had regard to that which might
have been perversely construed of these words, Pater major me est; and the
other, Ego and Pater unum sumus: there should have been added to the first
humanitas, to the second substantia. And wherefore does the Scripture call
Christ primogenitum? whereupon, and the Adverb donec, was maintained the error
contra perpetuam virginitatem Mariae. Why have we in the Church S. Paul's
Epistle, which S. Peter writes to have been the occasion of errors? Why did
Christ speak of many words, which the Jews drew ad calumniam, and yet reformed
them not? as when he said, Solvam Templum hoc, etc. meaning of his body, where
Templum with them had another signification; And such other like? There is none
other cause but this, Omnia quae scripta sunt, ad nostram doctrinam scripta
sunt. And by that Learning we ought to apply and draw words to the truth, and
so to understand them as they may signify truth, and not so to wrest them as
they should maintain a lie. For otherwise as Heretics have done with the holy
Scripture, so shall all men do with familiar speech; and if all things shall be
brought into familiar disputation, he that shall call us Supremum and unicum
Dominum, by that means, and as goes your argument, might be reproved: For
Christ is indeed unicus Dominus and Supremus, as we confess him in the Church
daily; and now it is in opinion that Sancti be not Mediators: The contrary
whereof ye affirm in your Letters, because of the Text of S. Paul, Vnus est
Mediator Deum and hominum. And after that manner of reason which ye use in the
entry, if any man should say, This Land is mine own, and none has right in it
but I; he might be reproved by the Psalm, Domini est terra: For why should a
man call terram aliquam only his, whereof God is the chief Lord and Owner? Why
is it admitted in familiar speech to call a man dead, of whom the soul which is
the chief and best part yet lives? How is it that we say this man or that man
to be founder of this Church, seeing that in one respect God is only founder?
We say likewise that he is a good man to the Church, a special benefactor of
the Church: and that the Church is fallen down, when the stones be fallen down,
the people preserved and living. And in all this manner of speech when we hear
them, it is not accustomed ^e used to do as ye do, that is to say, to draw the
word Church to that sentence wherein the speech may be a lie, but to take it in
that wherein it signifies truth. Which accustomed manner if ye had followed,
you should not have needed to have labored so much in the declaration of the
word Ecclesia, in that signification wherein it is most rarely taken, and
cannot without maintenance of too manifest a lie be applied to any man. For
taking Ecclesia in that sense ye take it, S. Paul wrote amiss writing to the
Corinthians, saying, Ecclesia Dei quae est Corinthi: for by your definition,
non circumscribitur loco Ecclesia. In the Gospel where Christ said Dic
Ecclesiae, must needs have another interpretation and definition then ye make
de Ecclesia in your said Letters, or else it were hard to make complaint to all
Christendom, as the case in the Gospel requires. Sed est candidi pectoris
verba veritati accommodare, ut ipsam refer quod torum officium est non
corrumpere videantur. Furthermore the Lawiers that write how Ecclesia fallit
and fallitur, what blasphemy do they affirm, if that definition should be given
to Ecclesia which you write in your Letters, wherein albeit ye write the truth
for so far, yet for as much as ye draw that to the words spoken of us to the
reprobation of them, yet ye show your selves contrary to the teaching of
Scripture, rather inclined by applying a diverse definition to make that a lie
which is truly spoken, then genuino sensu addita and candida interpretatione to
verify the same. It were nimis absurdum, Us to be called Caput Ecclesiae
representans corpus Christi mysticum, and Ecclesiae quae sine ruga est and
macula quam Christus sibi Sponsam elegit, illius partem vel oblatam accipere
vel arrogare. And therefore albeit Ecclesia is spoken of in these words,
touched in the Proeme, yet there is added, Et Cleri Anglicani: which words
conjoined restrains by way of interpretation the word Ecclesiam, and is as
much to say as the Church, that is to say the Clergy of England. Which manner
of speaking in the Law ye have professed ye many times find, and likewise in
many other places.

But proceeding in your said Letter, ye have showed Christ to be Caput
Ecclesiae, ye go about to show how he divided his power in earth after the
distinction temporalium and spiritualium, whereof the one ye say he committed
to Princes, the other Sacerdotibus; for Princes, ye alleadg Texts which shows
and proves obedience due to Princes of all men without distinction, be he
Priest, Clerk, Bishop, or Layman, who make together the Church: and albeit
your own words make mention of temporal things, wherein ye say they should be
obeyed; yet the Texts of Scripture which ye alleadg having the general words
obedite and subditi estote contain no such words, whereby spiritual things
should be excluded; but whatsoever appertains to the tranquillity of man's life
is of necessity included, as the words plainly import, as ye also confess;
wherefore Gladium portat Prince ps not only against them that break his
Commandment and Laws, but against him also that in any wife breaks Gods Law;
For we may not more regard our Law then God, ne punish the breach of our Laws,
and leave the transgressor of Gods Laws unreformed: so as all spiritual things
by reason whereof may arise bodily trouble and inquietation, be necessarily
included in Princes Power, and so proves the Text of Scripture by you
alleged: and also the Doctors by you brought in, confirm the same. After that
ye intend to prove, which no man will deny, the ministration of spiritual
things to have been by Christ committed to Priests to Preach and minister the
Sacraments, them to be as Phisicians to men's souls; but in these Scriptures
neither by spiritual things so far extended, as under color of that vocabule
be now adays, ne it proves not that their office being never so excellent,
yet their persons, acts and deeds, should not be under the power of their
Prince by God assigned, whom they should knowledge as their Head; the excellency
of the matter of the Office does not always in all points extol the dignity
of the Minister. Christ who did most perfectly use the Office of a Priest, and
nihil aliud quam vere curavit animas, gainsaid not the authority of Pilate upon
that ground; and St. Paul executing the Office of a Priest, said, ad tribunal
Caesaris sto, ubi me judicari oportet: And commanded likewise indistinctly all
others to obey Princes, and yet unto those Priests being as members executing
that Office, Princes do honor, for so is Gods pleasure and commandment;
wherefore howsoever ye take the words in the proheme, we indeed do show and
declare that Priests and Bishops preaching the word of God, ministering the
Sacraments according to Christ's Law, and refreshing our people with ghostly and
spiritual food, we not only succor and defend them for tranquillity of their
life, but also with our presence, and otherwise do honor them as the case
requires, for so is Gods pleasure: Like as the husband, although he be head of
the wife, yet says S. Paul, Non habet vir potestatem sui corp^ris, sed mulier,
and so is in that respect under her: And having our Mother in our Realm, by the
commandment of God we shall honor her, and yet she for respect of our dignity
shall honor us by Gods commandment likewise: And the Minister is not always
the better man, sed cui ministratur; the Physician is not better then the
Prince, because he can do that the Prince cannot, viz. curare morbum. In
consecration of Archbishops, do not Bishops give more dignity by their
ministration then they have themselves? The Doctors ye bring in, taking for
their Theme to extol Priesthood, prefer it to the dignity of a Prince; after
which manner of reasoning it may be called dignius imperare affectibus quam
populis, and so every good man in consideration of every dignity to excel a
King not living so perfectly as he does. And why is a Bishop better then a
Priest, seeing and considering in the matter of their office Episcopus etiam si
administret plura, non tamen administrat majora. Emperors and Princes obey
Bishops and Priests as doers of the message of Christ, and his Ambassadors for
that purpose: which done, statim fiunt privati, and in order and quietness of
living knowledge Princes as head. For what meant Justinian the Emperor to make
Laws de Episcopis and Clericis, and such other spiritual matters, if he he had
not been persuaded Illi esse curam Ecclesiae a Deo mandatam? This is true, that
Princes be filii Ecclesiae, that is to say, illius Ecclesiae which ye define:
wherewith it may agree that they be nevertheless Suprema Capita of the
Congregations of Christian men in their Countries; like as in smaller number of
Christian men, Non est absurdum vocare Superiores capita, as they be called
indeed, and may be called Primi and Supremi, in respect of those Countries. And
why else does the Pope suffer any other besides himself to be called
Archbishop, seeing that he himself indeed challenges to be Princeps
Apostolorum and Episcoporum in Peter's stead, which the name of an Archbishop
utterly denies. But by addition of the Country they save the sense: whereunto
in us to be called Ecclesiae Anglicanae ye at the last agree, so that there
were added in temporalibus; which addition were superfluous, considering that
men being here themselves earthly and temporal, cannot be head and Governor to
things eternal, nor yet spiritual, taking that word spiritual not as the common
speech abuses it, but as it signifies indeed: For, quae spiritu aguntur,
nulla lege astringuntur, as the Scripture says, Quae Spiritu Dei aguntur
libera sunt. And if ye take Spiritualibus for Spiritual men, that is to say,
Priests, Clerks, their good acts and deeds worldly, in all this both we and all
other Princes be at this day chief and heads, after whose ordinance either in
general or in particular they be ordered and governed. For, leaving old
stories, and considering the state of the world in our time, is there any
Convocation where Laws be made for the order of our Clergy, but such as by our
authority is assembled? And why should not we say as Justinian said, Omnia
nostra facimus quibus a nobis impartitur aucthoritas? Is any Bishop made but he
submits himself to us, and acknowledges himself as Bishop to be our
subject? Do not we give our License and assent to the election of Abbots? And
this is concerning the Persons and Laws spiritual. As touching their goods, it
is in all men's opinions learned in our Laws, Extra controversiam, that debate
and controversy of them appertains to our decision and Order. And as for the
living of the Clergy, some notable offenses we reserve to our correction, some
we remit by our sufferance to the Judges of the Clergy; as murder, felony and
treason, and such like enormities we reserve to our examination; other crimes
we leave to be ordered by the Clergy; not because we may not intermeddle with
them, for there is no doubt but as well might we punish adultery and insolence
in Priests, as Emperors have done, and other Princes atethis day do; which ye
know well enough; so as in all those Articles concerning the persons of
Priests, their Laws, their Acts and order of living, forasmuch as they be
indeed all temporal, and concerning this present life only, in those we (as we
be called) be indeed in this Realm Caput; and because there is no man above us
here, be indeed supremum Caput. As to spiritual things, meaning by them the
sacraments, being by God ordained as instruments of efficacy and strength,
whereby grace is of his infinite goodness conferred upon his people; forasmuch
as they be no worldly nor temporal things, they have no worldly nor temporal
head but only Christ that did institute them, by whose ordinance they be
ministered here by mortal men, elect, chosen and ordered as God has willed for
that purpose, who be the Clergy; who for the time they do that, and in that
respect tanquam ministri versantur in his quae hominum potestati non
subjiciuntur, in quibus si male versantur sine scandalo Deum ultorem habent si
cum scandalo hominum cogniti^ and vindicta est. Wherein, as is before said,
either the Prince is chief doer, rhis authority proceeded to the execution of
the same; as when by sufferance or privilege the Prelates intromit themselves
therein; wherefore in that which is derived from the Prince at the beginning,
why should any obstacle or scruple be to call him Head from whom that is
derived? Such things as although they be amongst men, yet they be indeed
Divina, quoniam supra nos sunt nihil ad nos. -- And being called Head of all we
be not in deed nor in name to him that would sincerely understand it head of
such things being not spiritual as they be not temporal, and yet to those
words spoken of us adevitandam illam calumniam, there is added quantum per
legem Christi licet; for interpretation of which Parenthesis your similitude
added of homo immortalis est quantum per naturae legem licet, is nothing like;
for naturae lex is not immortality, as is lex Christi to superiority: for lex
naturae ne speaks, ne can mean of any immortality at all, considering that
the law of Nature ordains mortality in all things; but Christ's law speaks
of superiority, admits superiority, shows also and declares obediendum
esse Principibus, as ye do allege. Wherefore if the law of God permits
superiority, and commands obedience: to examine and measure modum obedientiae
and superioritatis, there can to no other thing so good a relation be made. For
as ye understand the Scripture, though it say nay to part, it says not nay to
the whole, whereas nature denies utterly all immortality; and so though in
speaking of immortality of man it were superfluous to say quantum per naturae
legem licet; yet is not so speaking de superioritate and modo Principatus,
referring the certain limits to the law of Christ, ad cujus normam quicquid
quadrat planum and rectum est, quicquid non quadrat pravum and iniquum. And as
touching the doubt and difficulty you make to give a single answer yea or no,
for that the question propounded contains two things, whereof the one is true
the other false, as ye say, meaning as ye write, that in temporalibus we be
Caput, and in spiritualibus we be not. It seems that neither your example
agrees in similitude with that ye bring it in for, nor is there in learning
or common speech used the scrupulosity in answers ye write of Truth it is,
that the question in plain words contains two parts expressly, whereof the
one is true, the other false; our yea or nay cannot be answered, for there
should appear a manifest lie, which Gods law detesteth, and naturally is
abhorred: as if it should be asked Us, if We were King of England and of
Denmark, our nay or yea should not suffice: But it is far otherwise both in
matters of Learning and common speech, where the words in the question may by
diverse interpretations or relations contain two things, and yet in expression
contain but one: As if a man should ask Us, An filius and pater unum sunt? We
would not doubt to answer and say, Yea, as the Scripture says, for it is truly
answered, and to make a lie is but Sophistication, drawing the word unum to
person, wherein it is a lie. If one were asked the question, Whether the man
and wife were one, he might boldly and truly say, Yea, and yet it is
distinctione corporum naturalium a lie, and to the question, Vtrum Ecclesiam
constet ex bonis and malis; Yea, and yet as ye define Ecclesiam it it is a
lie. The reason of diversityis this, for that it is not supposed men would
abuse words, but apply them to signify truth, and not to signify a lie,
wherein the Arrians offending, took occasion of heresies.

For that which is in Scripture written is a most certain truth; and as it is
there written, so and no otherwise would Christ have answered, if the question
had been asked An Pater esset major illo? he would have said yea, as it is
written. And if the Arrians would have taken for a truth that of him that is
truth, and speaks truth, and from whom proceeds but truth, they would have
brought a distinction with them to set forth truly, and not disprove that it
was truly written, by sophistication of the word. When S. James wrote, Fides
sine operibus mortua est, he wrote truth; and so did S. Paul, Quod fides
justificat absque operibus legis: which it could not do, if it were mortua.
Either of these made a single asseveration of a sentence, by interpretation
containing two; trusting that the Reader would pio animo so understand them, as
their sayings might, as they do indeed, agree with truth. It is never to be
thought men will willingly and without shame lie; And therefore the sense, if
any may be gathered true, or like to be true, is to be taken, and not that
which is a lie. And when we write to the Pope Sanctissimo, we mean not holier
then S. Peter, though it sound so; and he that in our Letters should object
that, should be thought ridiculous. He that should say he rode beyond the sea,
were not conveniently interrupted in his tale by him that would object sailing
upon the sea, where he could not ride at all. And rather then men would note a
lie when they know what is meant, they will sooner by allegory or methaphor
draw the word to the truth, then by cavillation of the word note a lie. Has
not the Pope been called Caput Ecclesiae? and who has put any addition unto
it? Have not men said that the Pope may dispense cum Jure divino, and yet in a
part Juris divini, viz. moralis and naturalis, the same men would say he might
not dispense: wherefore if in all other matters it was never thought
inconvenient to speak absolutely the truth without distinction, why should
there be more scruple in our case? The truth cannot be changed by words: that
we be, as Gods law suffers us to be, whereunto we do and must conform our
selves. And if ye understand, as ye ought to understand Temporalibus for the
passing over this life in quietness, ye at last descend to agree to that which
in the former part of your Letters you intend to impugn; and sticking to that,
it were most improperly spoken to say, We be illius Ecclesiae Caput in
temporalibus, which has not temporalia.

Queen Anne of Bullen to King Henry from the Tower, May 6. 1536.
SIR,
YOur Graces displeasure and my imprisonment are things so strange unto me, as
what to write or what to excuse I am altogether ignorant. Whereas you send unto
me (willing me to confess a truth, and so to obtain your favor) by such a one
whom you know to be my ancient professed enemy, I no sooner received this
message, then I rightly conceived your menning: And if, as you say, confessing
a truth indeed may procure my safety, I shall with all willingness and duty
perform your command; but let not your Grace ever imagine that your poor wife
will ever be brought to acknowledge a fault, where not so much as a thought ever
proceeded: And to speak a truth, never Prince had wife more loyal in all duty
and in all true affection, then you have ever found in Anne Bullen: with which
name and place I could willingly have contented my self, if God and your Graces
pleasure had so been pleased. Neither did I at any time forget my self in my
exaltation, or received Queenship, but that I always looked for such an
alteration as now I find, the ground of my preferment being on no surer
foundation then your Graces fancy, the least alteration whereof I knew was fit
and sufficient to draw that fancy to some other subject.

You have chosen me from a low estate to be your Queen and Companion, far
beyond my desert or desire. If then you find me worthy of such honor, Good
your Grace let not any light fancy or bad council of my Enemies withdraw your
Princely favor from me; neither let that stain, that unworthy stain of a
disloyal heart toward your good Grace ever cast so foul a blot on your most
dutiful wife, and the Infant-Princess your daughter. Try me, good King, but let
me have a lawful trial, and let not my sworn enemies sit as my accusers and
Judges: yea let me receive an open Trial, for my truths shall fear no open
shames: then shall you see either my innocence cleared, your suspicion and
conscience satisfied, the ignominy and slander of the world stopped, or my
guilt openly declared. So that whatsoever God or you may determine of me, your
Grace may be freed from an open censure; and my offense being so lawfully
proved, your Grace is at liberty both before God and man, not only to execute
worthy punishment on me as an unfaithful wife, but to follow your affection
already settled on that party for whose sake I am now as I am, whose name I
could some while since have pointed to, your Grace being not ignorant of my
suspicion therein. But if you have already determined of me, and that not only
my death, but an infamous slander must bring you the enjoying of a desired
happiness, then I desire of God that he will pardon your great sin herein, and
likewise my enemies the instruments thereof, and that he will not call you to a
strict account for your unprincely and cruel usage of me at his general
Judgment Seat, where both you and my self must both shortly appear, and in
whose just judgment I doubt not, whatsoever the world may think of me, my
innocence shall be openly known and sufficiently cleared.

My last and only request shall be, That my self may bear the burden of your
Graces displeasure, and that it may not touch the innocent souls of those poor
Gentlemen who as I understand are in strait imprisonment for my sake. If ever I
have found favor in your sight, if ever the name of Anne Bullen have been
pleasing in your ears, let me obtain this last request, and I will so leave to
trouble your Grace any further, with my earnest prayers to the Trinity to have
your Grace in his good keeping, and to direct you in all your actions.

From my doleful prison in the Tower, this sixth of May. Your most loyal and
faithful wife, ANNE BULLEN.

Queen Elizabeth's Letter to the Lady Norris upon the death of her Son.
ALthough we have deferred long to represent unto you our grieved thoughts,
because we liked full well to yield you the first reflections of our
misfortunes, whom we have always sought to cherish and comfort; yet knowing now
that necessity must bring it to your ears, and nature consequently must move
many passionate affections in your heart, we have resolved no longer to smother
either our care for your sorrow, or the sympathy of our grief for his death;
wherein if society in sorrowing work diminution, we do assure you by this true
messenger of our mind, that Nature can have stirred no more dolorous affections
in you as a mother, for a dear son, then the gratefulness and memory of his
services past has wrought in Us his Sovereign, apprehension of the miss of so
worthy a servant. But now that natures common work is done, and he that was
born to die has paid his tribute; let that Christian discretion stay the flux
of your immoderate grieving, which has instructed you both by example and
knowledge, that nothing of this kind has happened but by Gods providence; and
that these lines from your loving and gracious Sovereign, serve to assure you,
that there shall ever appear the lively characters of you and yours that are
left, in our valuing rightly all their faithful and honest endeavors. More we
will not write of this subject, but have dispatched this Gentleman to visit
both your Lord, and condole with you in the true sense of your love, and to
pray you, that the world may see, that what time cures in weak minds, that
discretion and moderation may help in you in this accident, where there is so
opportune occasion to demonstrate true patience and true moderation.

Thomas Duke of Norfolk to Queen Elizabeth.
O Most dear and dread Sovereign and Lady Queen, and most gracious Mistress,
when I consider with my self how far I have transgressed my duty to your most
gracious Majesty, I dare not now presume to look up or hope for your gracious
favor, I confess my self so far unworthy thereof: but again, when I look into
your Highness manifold merciful and most pitiful nature, of which so many
have so abundantly tasted of since your Majesty's most prosperous reign, I am
emboldened with penitent and sorrowful heart, to make my trembling hand to
offer unto your Highness my most ruful and lowly submission, having none other
means to ease my oppressed mind, I am for my sins and disobedience to ask
pardon, that is, of Almighty God, and of your most excellent Majesty: the first
I have done to Almighty God, and so I by the grace of him will continue with a
new heart and full mind of amendment, not doubting but asking mercy, to receive
it, according to the Scripture, he that knocks at the door shall have it
opened unto him. Now do I prostrate my self at your Highness most gracious
feet, my poor children, and all that I have, hoping more in your Majesty's most
gracious clemency, then in any of mine unadvised deserts; I seek to excuse my
self no way, but wholly submit my self to what shall please your most merciful
heart like a most gracious Queen to a man that has been astray, who finding
mercy has afterward with bad service oftentimes redoubled his former folly. O
most noble Queen, it is in your most gracious power to make of my wretched
mould what it pleases you, my faith and religion reserved to my Savior, my
body being already to your Highness subject, and imprisoned for my most just
desert, I dedicate my mind and heart to be hereafter as it shall please your
Majesty to direct it; I do not seek favor at your Majesty's hands in respect
of my former good service, I confess undutifulness has now blotted the same
out, neither dare I remmeber which heretofore was my greatest comfort, because
I deserve not that honor which was that it has pleased your Highness to
account me indeed your unworthy kinsman. Woe wretch that day when I entered into
that matter which has made such alteration of your Majesty's most gracious
favor unto me, and has heaped upon my self these intolerable troubles. O
unworthy that I am, that in all the days of my life counting upon nothing but a
quiet life, I take God to witness, whatsoever some have judged the contrary of
me, I was so unhappy to give ear to that which has done, and ever was like to
bring me to the contrary.

A Defiance sent by the Grand Seignieur to Maximilian the second.
BY the sufferance of the great God, We Solomon, God in earth, great and high
Emperor of all the world, Patron and Distributer of all Christians, We send
and declare unto thee Maximilian, all wrath and ill fortune and infidelity, and
to all thy Princes, subjects and helpers, We give it known unto thee, That We
by the sufferance of the great God, named the Perpetual and Universal God in
earth, most mighty Emperor, Sultan in Babylon, Lord of Armenia, the most
mightiest in Persipolis and Numidia, the great helper of God, Prince from the
Rode of Barbary unto the mountains of Achaia, King of Kings from the Meridian
to the Septentrian of the earth, from the rising place of the Sun to the
setting of it, the first and chiefest, placed in the Paradise of Mahomet, the
destroyer of all Christendom, and of all Christians, and that do profess
Christianity, the keeper and defender of the Sepulcher of thy God crucified,
the only victorious and triumphant Lord of all the world, and of all Circuits
and Provinces thereof: Thou Maximilian, which writest thy self King of our
Kingdom of Hungary, which is under our Crown and obeisance, We will visit thee
for that cause, and also persuade thee that with our strength and force of
thirteen Kingdoms with might and strength, to the number of one hundred
thousand as well Horsemen as Footmen prepared for war, with all the power and
strength of Turkish munition, and with such power as thou nor none of thy
servants have seen, heard, or had knowledge of, even before thy chief City
Vienna, and the Country thereabouts: We Solomon, God on earth, against thee
with all thy assisters and helpers, with our Warlike strength, do pronounce and
protest your uttermost destruction and depopulation, as we can by all means
possible devise it. And this we we will signify unto thee, to the which thou
and thy miserable people may prepare your selves. With us it is determined,
with our men appointed, thee and all thy German Kingdoms and Provinces
altogether to spoil: This misery we have consented unto against thee and thy
Princes, and have thou no doubt but we will come. Dated in the City of
Constantinople, out of the which we did expulse your predecessors, their wives,
children and friends, and made them most miserable slaves and captives, the
year of our reign forty seven.

Sir John Perrots Commission for Lord Deputy of Ireland.
ELizabetha Dei gratia etc.
omnibus ad quos presents literae pervenerint, salut.
Sciatis quod nos certis urgentibus causis and considerationibus nos
specialiter movendis, de provida circumspectione and industria praedilecti and
fidelis nobis Johannis Perrot milit. before confidentes dejadvisamento
Concilii nostri assignavimus, fecimus, ordinavimus, constituimus and
deputavimus, and per praesentes assignavimus, etc. eundem Johannem Perrot
milit. Deputat. nostrum Generalem Regni nostri Hiberniae, habend. tenend.
gaudend. exercend. and occupand. officium praedict. eidem Johanni Perrot milit.
durante beneplacito nostro dantes and concedentes eidem Deputat. nostro
Generali plenam tenore praesentium potestatem ad pacem nostram ac ad leges and
consuetudines regni nostri praedict. custodiend. and custodiri faciend. and ad
omnes and singulas leges nostras, etc.

The whole Contents of the Commission for the Lord Deputy.
TO conserve the peace, to punish offenders; to make Orders and Proclamations,
to receive offenders to grace, to give pardons and impose fines, to levy
forces, to fight and make peace, to dispose Rebels lands, to pardon all
treasons saving touching the Queens person, and counterfeiting of coin; to give
offices, saving the Chancellor, Treasurer, two chief Justices, chief Baron and
Master of the Rolls; to dispose of Ecclesiastical livings, except Archbishops
and Bishops; to receive homage and the oath, to make provision for his household
according to the ancient custom; to assemble the Parliament with her Majesty's
privity, to receive the account of Officers, saving the Treasurers, to exercise
martial law.

The Queens Warrant to the Lords, etc. of Ireland for ministering the Oath, and
delivery of the Sword to him, 31 Ian. 1583.
RIght Reverend Father in God, right trusty and welbeloved, and trusty and
right welbeloved, we greet you well: Whereas upon the departure from thence of
our right trusty and welbeloved the Lord Gray of Wilton, late our Deputy there,
we thought it meet for our government there, to appoint you jointly to have the
place of our Justices, until such time as we should resolve to send another
thither to be our Deputy there; We let you wit, that meaning now no longer to
burden you with such a charge; wherein you have, according to the trust
imposed in you, very wisely behaved your selves, greatly to our contentation,
we have chosen and appointed our right trusty and welbeloved Sir Jo. Perrot
Knight, this bearer, to be our Deputy of that our said Realm, and that for that
purpose to send him presently thither: Wherefore our will and pleasure is, and
by virtue of these our Letters we authorize you, upon the view of our letters
Patents made and delivered unto him in that behalf, both to minister unto him
the oath accustomed to be given unto the Deputy there, and also to deliver unto
him the Sword, as heretofore has been used. And further, that you communicate
unto him amply the present estate of that our Realm, and of all our affairs
there for his better instruction, at his entrance into that Government, and the
advancement of our service. And these our Letters shall be your sufficient
warrant and discharge in this behalf Given under our Signet, etc. the last of
January 1583. the 26 year of our reign.

Another for his Entertainment there.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well. Whereas we have now appointed our
right trusty and welbeloved Sir John Perrot Knight to be our Deputy in that our
Realm of Ireland, for which Office allowance as well of dyets as of
entertainments for certain Horsemen is to be given him: These be therefore to
let you wit, that we allow unto him for his ordinary diet one hundred pounds
sterling, according to the last Establishment in March 1589. and for his
Retinue fifty Horsemen and fifty Footmen, with such wages for every Horsman and
Footman and for their Officers, as was allowed to Sir William Fitzwilliams and
Sir Henry Sydney Knights, in the late times of their Governments in that Realm.
After which rates as well for his own diet, as for the said fifty Horsemen and
fifty Footmen, and for their Officers, We will and command you to make payment
to him during his employment and service in that place, from the date of our
Letters Patent authorizing him to that government; And these our Letters shall
be sufficient Warrant as well to you as to any Treasurer or Vice-treasurer
there for the time being, and to your and their Substitutes, as also to the
Auditor or his Deputies, and to all other Commissioners to be appointed over
your Accounts, to pass and allow the same payments to you accordingly. Given
etc. the fourth of April 1583. in the 26. year of our Reign of England, etc.

The Queens Instructions to him.
YOU shall see immediately upon your arrival into that Realm assembled our
Council there, and confer with them what course of Government upon due
consideration had of the present estate of the said Realm may be held, so as
Justice may take place, our Charges be lessened, our Revenues increased, and
our Subjects there not oppressed.

You shall also consider what Forces are meet to be continued in pay, and how
the rest chargeable unto us and burthensom unto the Country may be discharged;
and also how the Horsemen and Footmen serving there may be reduced to their old
pay, which by reason of the general Rebellion in that Realm (the Country being
wasted) we were driven to increase: And therefore we see no reason but the Band
residing in those Countries that are not wasted may live well enough of the old
pay, especially being victualled by us; and for the ease and diminishing of our
charges in that behalf, We do think it meet that you should treat with those
Countries that are not wasted, as well in Munster or elsewhere in that Realm, to
see if you can draw them with good contentment to contribute something toward
the finding of that Garrison, at Carberrie heretofore has done.

And for that our Subjects in that Realm, etc.

To advise of the inhabiting of Munster, the attainted Lands to be let out at
easy rents. Survey, certify what States, Statute of Vsus. 5. Port-Corn. 6.
The attainted Lands to be bestowed in reward upon Servitors. 7. Younger
Brothers of Noblemen, Diminish Pensioners. 9. Review former Instructions. 10 --
11. Renewing of forfeited Leases for three years: Beef, Port-Corn, Remittal of
Arrearages. 12. Reversion of Lands to the Governors. 13. Lands of the
attainted to be appointed to housekeeping. 14. Reservation of Timber-woods.
15. Residence of Officers. 16. Report to the State outrages of disloyal
Subjects. 17. Profits of Customs, Escheats, etc. 19. Establishment for
Connaught. 20. President for Munster, allowance begin at May, Transportation.
21. Counselors, B. of Mead, John Norris, Richard Bi^gham, Tho. Strange. 22.
Refer the choice of a person to the Chancellor and others. 23. Certificate of
the last Treasurers Receipts and Expenses.

Every one of these Articles does contain half a side of Paper, and therefore I
have rather thought fit to abbreviate them then to transcribe them at large,
the whole Contents being contained in this Abbreviation.

Sir John Perrot to the Lords of the Council. Jan. 31. 1585.
May it please your good Lordships,
ALthough I and this Council have by our joynt-Letters truly declared unto you
the dutiful state of things here, and the causes both foraign and domestical
whereupon we gather it; and withal have showed our extreme wants, and what
supplies are desired: Yet understanding thence, but not from your Lordships,
(for I have had no kind of advertisements, answer, or resolution from the same
these twelve months) that there is a great preparation made by the Spanish
King against the Realm, and that your Lordships have intelligence thereof; I
cannot but as one whose chief charge and care it is, importune your Lordships
to cast your eye more carefully this way, humbly praying you to consider what
case we are in to try with a most mighty Prince, whether this Realm shall be
still her Majesty's or his, if there be any such matters (as your Lordships
know best) then I beseech your Lordships to think whether it be more safety to
say that we have sent provision to encounter the danger, or else you will send
when perhaps it will be too late. And withal for mine own discharge, if I
shall tarry, and have nothing wherewith: I have but a life to yield for her
Majesty and my Country; for the loss thereof I grieve not, but rather for the
harm that through defects I fear may come to her Majesty and the State, and the
shame I shall leave behind me. This foreign preparation, if there be any such
thing, is likely to be spent against Munster, to seize upon and to spoil the
Cities and Towns of the same, which in truth are very weak. If I shall go
thither, what for the late wars, and this last bad season, there is not so much
to be had there as will maintain that one Band of 200. that is under Mr. Thomas
Norris the Vice President there, but that I am enforced to shift them from Town
to Town, who by reason of their extreme penury do receive them with great grief
and grudge. And though I had men sufficient to encounter the Enemy that should
come, yet for want of victuals I should be driven to abandon the place with
danger and shame, where they that are to come over are like to bring their
provision with them, and to settle it in some Town that they will soon seize
upon for that purpose: whereof what may ensue amongst this unconstant people
naturally delighting in change, your Lordships may soon gather. Besides this
that I have said of the bare estate of Munster, where there is not so much to
be had as will serve for mine own family, or yet to feed my horses till grass
grow, I refer you to understand not only the same more fully, but also the
great wants of the rest of the Realm by the declaration here enclosed, which as
Beverley the Victualler makes it, so I know it to be true. And therefore I
most humbly beseech your Lordships to send speedy order, that such a Staple of
victuals may be provided and be sent over, as your Lordships shall think
requisite to serve as well for the numbers here already, as also for those that
are to be sent over to encounter such an accident as may fall out. And herein I
would wish your Lordships to consider the winds and weather, how untowardly
they have framed this year: for as some have lain at Chester nine weeks to come
over hither, so has there been no passage since this six weeks. Moreover if
there be such purposes in hand, it were good some shipping were dispatched for
the guard of the Coasts. And to all these and other difficulties, may I with
your Lordships favor add one more to be considered of, How weakly I am
seconded, if need fall out by those foreign attempts, whereof I would say little
for any other cause: The Marshal is old, and not able either to ride or go; the
Master of the Ordnance is both absent, and old, and I wish there were a more
sufficient man in his place: The Lord President and Sir William Stanley, who
are men of good conduct, are drawn away: Sir H. Harrington, Mr. Edward Barkley,
and the Senescal Dantry are suffered to remain still there; but I humbly pray
they may be sped away, together with all other that are Servitors by any manner
of pay there. And so having herein discharged my duty, I humbly end. From the
Castle of Dublin, the last of January 1585.

Your Lordships most humble at commandment, JOHN PERROT.

Earl of Desmond to the Earl of Ormond, June 5. 1583.
My Lord,
GReat is my grief when I think how heavily her Majesty is bent to disfavour
me; and howbeit I carry the name of an undutifull Subject, yet God knows that
my heart and mind are always most lowly inclined to serve my most loving
Prince, so it may please her Highness to remove her heavy displeasure from me.
As I may not condemn my self of disloyalty to her Majesty, so cannot I excuse
my faults, but must confess that I have incurred her Majesty's indignation; yet
when the cause and means which were found and devised to make me commit folly
shall be known to her Highness, I rest in an assured hope that her most
gracious Majesty will both think of me as my heart deserves, and also of those
that wrung me into undutifulness, as their cunning device meriteth. From my
heart I am sorry that folly, bad councels, sleights, or any other thing has
made me to forget my duty: And therefore I am most desirous to get conference
with your Lordship, to the end I may open and declare to you how tyrannously I
was used, humbly craving that you will vouchsafe to appoint some time and place
where and when I may attend your Honor, and then I doubt not to make it appear
how dutiful a mind I carry, how faithfully I have at mine own charge served
her Majesty before I was proclaimed, how sorrowful I am for my offenses, and
how faithfully I am affected ever hereafter to serve her Majesty. And so I
commit your Lordship to God, the 5. of June 1583. Subscribed

GIRALD DESMOND.

Sir Henry Wallop to the Queen, 12. Aug. 1583.
IT may please your Majesty, a rumor has been raised not long since at Dublin
(I know not how, nor by what particular person, but strongly confirmed since
the last passage out of England) (neither does your service now in hand upon
this Northern border, suffer me to examine it) that your Majesty conceived some
hard opinion of me, from which your Highness is not yet removed; but what the
offense is, or how conceived, is neither by the reporters published, nor
secretly revealed unto me: And like as it is easy to judge what effects this
may work in the service of your Majesty, or to a man in public office, as I
am, in such a government as this is, where the obedience for the most is
constrained, and all reputation with the people either growing or diminishing
as your Majesty graceth or disgraceth your Officers; so how much this quiet
burden over-presseth my most devoted and dutiful mind toward your Majesty, I
feel to my exceeding grief and discomfort. In examining my self in what root
this your judgment should spring, I confess Madam, I have viewed in my self
many imperfections, some in nature, others perhaps for lack of ability and
sufficiency to be a cooperator or an assistant in so great and so ticklish a
government and charge, into which not ambition in me, but your Majesty's will
and commandment has intruded me. But in all that my memory can hitherto
present unto me, I find my loyalty in your service, and my sincerity in
employing your Majesty's treasure according to your intent, so unspotted and
direct, as I cannot but comfort my self in opposing my innocence to the envy of
the informer, or to any other his hard construction whatsoever: yet since in
general consideration I cannot feel such a particular error, as might settle
in your Majesty's grave judgment, an offense meriting your disfavour, I am
most humbly to beseech your Majesty, that by knowing my fault I may either
purge my self by a just denial, or by confessing it crave pardon of your
Highness, and reform my self. If therefore it shall stand with your Majesty's
good pleasure to declare to my honorable good friend Mr. Secretary Walsingham,
commanding him to charge me with it, I will thereupon simply answer, even as
before the Lord God, without concealing any matter of truth any wise, for mine
own defense. This grace the sooner I shall obtain, the apter I shall be found
for your other services, from which I find my self distracted, because the end
of my travels is none other but to purchase that grace and favor which I may
now fear to be alienated from me till my cause be better explained. And so I
humbly end, praying the Lord to bless you with a long and prosperous reign.

At your town of Dundalk, August 11. 1583. Your Majesty's most humble servant
and subject, HENRY WALLOP.

The Earl of Essex to Mr. Davison.
IF this Letter do not deliver you my very affectionate wishes, and assure you
that I am both careful to deserve well, and covetous to hear well of you, it
does not discharge the trust that I have committed unto it. My love to your
worthy Father, my expectation that you will truly inherit his virtues, and the
proof that I have seen of your well spending your time abroad, are three strong
bands to tie my affection unto you; to which when I see added your kindness to
my self, my reason tells my heart, it cannot value you, or affect you too much:
you have laid so good a foundation of framing your self, as if now you do not
perfect the work, th'expectation you have raised will be your greatest
adversary: slack not your industry in thinking you have taken great pains
already, Nusquam enim nec opera sine emolumento, nec emolumentum sine impensa
opera est: Labor voluptasque dissimilia natura, societate quadam naturali inter
se conjuncta sunt. Nor think your self at any time so rich in knowledge or
reputation, as you may spend on the stock: For as the way to virtue is steep
and craggy, so the descent from it is headlong. It is said of our bodies, that
they do lent augescere and cito extinguntur, it may be as properly said of our
minds. Let your virtuous Father, who in the midst of his troubles and
discomforts, has brought you by his care and charge to what you are now in,
you receive perfect comfort and contentment; Learn virtutem ab illo, fortunam
ab aliis. I write not this as suspecting you need be admonished, or as finding
my self able to direct; but as he that when he was writing, took the plainest
and naturallest style of a friend truly affected to you: Receive it therefore I
pray you as a pledge of more love then I can now show you. And so desiring
nothing more then to hear often from you, I wish you all happiness, and rest,

White Hall, Jan. 8. Your affectionate and assured friend, R. ESSEX.

Earl of Essex to Secretary Davison.
SIR,
AS I have ever loved you, so now taking leave of my good friends, I cannot
forget you of whose love I desire to be ever assured, and whom I would desire
to satisfy in all things that I shall do. If you be troubled with the
suddenness of my unlooked for journey, let my resolute purpose to perform it,
which could not be without secrecy, excuse me: if you call it rashness, I will
better allow it to be heresy then error; for many months ago it was resolved:
if you doubt of the success or event thereof, I say, that the same God who
has given me a mind to undertake, may according to his good pleasure make me
in it, or it with me to prosper or die, as it shall seem best unto him. And so
purposing that you shall see me return happy, or never, I take my leave a few
days before my departure. Let me be commended to your good self, and such
other of my good friends, as in my absence you find I am beholding to,
especially to Sir Drew Drury, and Sir Edward Waterhouse.

Your assured friend, R. ESSEX.

Earl of Essex to Secretary Davison, July 11. 1589.
SIR,
AS at my departure, so upon my return, I must needs salute you, as one whom
then, and now, and ever, I must love very much. I would gladly see you, but I
am tied here a while; when I may have occasion to show my love to you, I will
do more then I now promise. In the mean time wishing you that happiness which
men in this world ought to seek, I take my leave

At the Court this 11. of July 1589. Your assured Friend R. ESSEX.

Again to Secretary Davison.
SIR,
I Had speech with her Majesty yesternight after my departure from you, and I
find that the success of my speech (although I hoped for good) yet did much
overrun my expectation. To repeat many speeches and by-matters, as of my
acquaintance with you, and such like, it will be fitter for such a time when I
shall have conference with you. But in effect, our end was thus: I made her
Majesty see, what in your health, in your fortune, and in your reputation with
the world you had suffered since the time that it was her pleasure to commit
you; I told her how many friends and well-wishers the world did afford you, and
how for the most part, throughout the whole Realm her best subjects did wish
that she would do her self the honor to repair for you, and restore to you
that state which she had overthrown; your humble suffering of these harms, and
reverend regard to her Majesty, must needs move a Princess so noble and so
just, to do you right; and more I had said, if my gift of speech had been any
way comparable to my love. Her Majesty seeing her judgment opened by the story
of her own actions, showed a very feeling compassion of you, she gave you many
praises, and among the rest, that which she seemed to please her self in, was,
that you were a man of her own choice. In truth she was so well pleased with
those things that she spoke and heard of you, as I dare (if of things future
there be any assurance) promise to my self that your peace will be made to your
own content, and the desire of your friends, I mean in her favor and your own
fortune, to a better estate then, or at least the same you had, which with all
my power I will employ my self to effect. And so in have I commit you to God.

Your friend most assured, R. ESSEX.

Earl of Essex to King James concerning Secretary Davison. April 18. 1587.
MOst excellent King, for him that is already bound for many favors, a style
of thankfulness is much fitter then the humor of suing; but so it falls out,
that he which to his own advantage would have sought nothing in your favor,
but your favor it self, does now for another become an humble petitioner to
your Majesty: your Majesty cannot be such a stranger to the affairs of this
Country, but as you know what actions are done in this place, so you
understand the minds of the men by whom they are done. Therefore I doubt not,
but the man for whom I speak, is somewhat known to your Majesty, and being
known, I presume of greater favor, Mr. Secretary Davison fallen into her
Majesty's displeasure and disgrace; beloved of the best and most religious of
this land, does stand as barred from any preferment or restoring in his place,
except out of the honor and nobleness of your own Royal heart, your Majesty
will undertake his cause. To leave the nature of his fault to your Majesty's
best judgment, and report of your own servant, and to speak of the man, I must
say truly, that his sufficiency in Council, and matters of State, is such, as
the Queen her self confesses, in her Kingdom she has not such another; his
virtue, religion and worth in all degrees is of the world taken to be so great,
as no man in his good fortune has had more general love then this Gentleman
in his disgrace: And if to a man so worthy in himself, and so esteemed of all
men, my words might avail any thing, I would assure your Majesty would get
great honor, and great love, not only here amongst us, but in all places of
Christendom where this Gentleman is any thing known, if you should now be the
author of his restoring to his place, which in effect he now is, but that as a
man not acceptable to her Majesty, he does forbear to attend. I do in all
humbleness commend this cause to your Majesty, having the warrant of a good
conscience, that I know to be both honorable and honest; and your Majesty to
the blessed protection of that mighty God, to whom will pray for your Majesty's
happy and prosperous estate, He that will do your Majesty all humble service,

Greenwich April 18. R. ESSEX.

Earl of Essex to Mr. Secretary Davison.
SIR
I Have as I could, taken my opportunity since I saw you, to perform as much as
I promised you; and though in all I have been able to effect nothing, yet even
now I have had better leisure to solicit the Queen then in this stormy time I
did hope for. My beginning was, as being amongst others entreated to move her
in your behalf: my course was to lay open your sufferings and your patience; in
them you had felt poverty, restraint and disgrace, and yet you showed nothing
but faith and humility, faith, as being never wearied nor discouraged to do her
service; humbleness, as content to forget all the burdens that had been laid
upon you, and to serve her Majesty with as frank and willing a heart as they
that have received greatest grace from her. To this I received no answer but in
general terms, that her honor was much touched, your presumption had been
intolerable, and that she could not let it slip out of her mind. When I urged
your access, she denied it, but so as I had no cause to be afraid to speak
again. When I offered in them both to reply, she fell into other discourse, and
so we parted. So all that I have done you know; what I shall do ye shall
prescribe. If you hear any man's else -- I pray you let me know, for so I shall
perceive whether she will open her heart more to me then them, which being
known I may deal accordingly. And so I commit you to God.

Windsor, October. 2. Your most assured friend, R. ESSEX.

Again to Mr. Secretary Davison, upon the death of Mr. Secretary Walsingham.
SIR,
Upon this unhappy accident, I have tried to the bottom what the Queen will do
for you, and what the credit of your Solicitor is worth. I urged not the
comparison between you and any other: But in my duty to her, and zeal to her
service, I did assure her that she had not any other in England that would for
these three or four years know how to settle himself to support so great a
burden. She gave me leave to speak, heard me with patience, confessed with me
that none was so sufficient, and could not deny but that which she lays to your
charge was done without hope, fear, malice, envy, or any respect of your own,
but merely for her safety both of state and person. In the end she absolutely
denied to let you enjoy that place, and willed me to rest satisfied, for she
was resolved. Thus much I write to let you know, I am more honest to my
friends, then happy in their cases. What you will have me do for your suit, I
will as far as my credit is any thing worth. I have told most of the Council of
my manner of dealing with the Queen; my Lord Chamberlain tells me he has dealt
for you also, and they all say they wish as I do; but in this world that is
enough. I will commit you to God for this time, and rest

Your constant and true friend, R. ESSEX.

Earl of Essex to the Queen.
MY dutiful affections to your Majesty always overweighed all other worldly
respects; that seeking in all particulars to manifest my truth, I have maimed
my estate in general, as I dare in the heat of my thoughts compare with the
greatest that ever vowed for faithful service, so is there not the meanest that
has overslipped me, I will not say in recompense, but in some gracious estate
of service. Thus whilst my faith wrestleth with my fortune, the one winns
breath to beat the other down. Though I have no hope to repair the ruins of my
oversight, yet I cannot but presume your Majesty will suffer me to preserve
them from blowing up; and what youth and forward belief has undermined in mine
estate, providence by a retired life may underlay. In which discontinuance from
Court there shall be added (if any thing be added) increase of loyalty: Nor so
solitary shall be my course, as it shall seem to proceed of coffeehouse, but
of necessity; and all actions both with living and my life so forward, as
though some may have overrun me in fortunes, none shall in duty.

Next my allegiance to your Majesty, which shall be held most sacred and
inviolable, the report of mine Honor challenges chief interest; which that I
may preserve in my wonted state, reason draws me to stay my self slipping from
falling. That of late (by what secret and venomous blow I know not) my faith
has received some wounds, your Majesty's wonted grace withdrawn assures me:
But truth and my patience in this case were one with me, and time in your
Princely thoughts did wear it out from me. Let time be Judge; I will leave you
with as great lothness as I were to lose what I love best. But your favor
failing, in which I have placed all my hopes, and my self less graced after
seven years then when I had served but seven days, may be a reason to excuse,
if there were no other reason. These things pressed out of a distressed mind,
and offered in all humility, I hope it shall not be offensive if I choose this
wearisom course, rather to be retired then tired. If any of envy take advantage
of absence, seeking by cunning to draw me into suspicion of coffeehouse, my
conscience is settled in your never erring Judgment, that if he come with Esau's
hands and Jacob's voice, your Highness will censure it a wrought malice under
such simplicity. It is true that grief cannot speak; but this grief has made
me write, lest when I leave you I should so far forsake my self as to leave
this unsaid. To your gracious acceptance I commit it, and with all humble and
reverent thoughts that may be, rest ever to be commanded to die at your
Majesty's feet,

TO. ESSEX.

Again to the Queen.
FRom a mind delighting in sorrow, from spirits wasted with passion, from a
heart torn in pieces with care, grief and travel, from a man that hates
himself and all things that keeps him alive, what service can your Majesty
expect, since your service past deserves no more then banishment or
prescription in the cursed'st of all other Countries? Nay, nay, it is your
Rebels pride and success that must give me leave to ransom my life out of this
hateful prison of my loathed body: which if it happen so, your Majesty shall
have no cause to mislike the fashion of my death, since the course of my life
could never please you.

Your Majesty's exiled Servant, TO. ESSEX.

Sir Thomas Egerton Lord Chancellor to the Earl of Essex.
My very good Lord,
IT is often seen, that he that stands by sees more then he that plays the
game; and for the most part every one in his own cause stands in his own
light, and sees not so clearly as he should. Your Lordship has dealt in other
men's causes, and in great and weighty affairs with great wisdom and judgment;
now your own is in hand, you are not to contemn or refuse the advice of any
that love you, how simple soever. In this order I rank my self among others
that love you, none more simple, and none that love you with more true and
honest affection; which shall plead my excuse, if you shall either mistake or
mistrust my words or meaning: but in your Lordships honorable wisdom I neither
doubt nor suspect the one nor the other. I will not presume to advise you, but
shoot my bolt and tell you what I think. The beginning and long continuance of
this so unseasonable coffeehouse you have seen and proved, by which you aim
at the end: If you hold still this course, which hitherto you find to be worse
and worse, (and the longer you go, the further you go out of the way) there is
little hope or likelihood the end will be better: You are not yet gone so far,
but that you may well return: The return is safe, but the progress is dangerous
and desperate in this course you hold. If you have any enemies, you do that for
them which they could never do for themselves: Your friends you leave to scorn
and contempt, you forsake your self and overthrow your fortunes, and ruinate
your honor and reputation: You give that comfort and courage to the foreign
enemies, as greater they cannot have; for what can be more welcome and pleasing
news then to hear that her Majesty and the Realm are maimed of so worthy a
Member, who has so often and so valiantly quailed and daunted them? You
forsake your Country, when it has most need of your Council and aid: And
lastly you fail in your indissoluble duty which you owe unto your most gracious
Sovereign, a duty imposed upon you not by nature and policy only, but by the
religious and sacred bond wherein the divine Majesty of Almighty God has by
the rule of Christianity obliged you.

For the four first, your constant resolution may perhaps move you to esteem
them as light; but being well weighed, they are not light, nor lightly to be
regarded. And for the four last, it may be that the cleerness of your own
conscience may seem to content your self, but that is not enough; for these
duties stand not only in contemplation or inward meditation, and cannot be
performed but by external actions, and where that fails, the substance also
fails. This being your present state and condition, what is to be done? what
is the remedy, my good Lord? I lack judgment and wisdom to advise you, but I
will never want an honest true heart to wish you well; nor being warranted by a
good conscience, will fear to speak that I think. I have begun plainly, be not
offended if I proceed so. Been cedit qui cedit tempori: and Seneca says,
Cedendum est fortunae. The medicine and remedy is not to contend and strive,
but humbly to yield and submit. Have you given cause, and yet take a scandal
unto you? then all you can be is too little to make satisfaction. Is cause of
scandal given unto you, yet policy, duty and religion enforce you to sue,
yield and submit to our Sovereign, between whom and you there can be no equal
proportion of duty, where God requires it as a principal duty and care to
himself, and when it is evident that great good may ensue of it to your
friends, your self, your Country, and your Sovereign, and extreme harm by the
contrary. There can be no dishonor to yield; but in denying, dishonor and
impiety. The difficulty (my good Lord) is to conquer your self, which is the
height of true valor and fortitude, whereunto all your honorable actions have
tended. Do it in this, and God will be pleased, her Majesty (no doubt) well
satisfied, your Country will take good, and your Friends comfort by it; and
your self (I mention you last, for that of all these you esteem yourself least)
shall receive honor; and your Enemies (if you have any) shall be disappointed
of their bitter sweet hope.

I have delivered what I think simply and plainly, I leave you to determine
according to your own wisdom: if I have erred, it is error amoris, and not amor
erroris. Construe and accept it, I beseech you, as I meant it; not as an
advice, but as an opinion to be allowed or cancelled at your pleasure. If I
might conveniently have conferred with your self in person, I would not have
troubled you with so many idle blots. Whatsoever you judge of this my opinion,
yet be assured my desire is to further all good means that may tend to your
Lordships good. And so wishing you all happiness and honor, I cease.

Your Lordships most ready and faithful, though unable poor Friend, Tho.
Egerton, Cust. Sigil.

The Earls Answer.
MY very good Lord, though there is not that man this day living whom I would
sooner make Judge of any question that might concern me, then your self; yet
you must give me leave to tell you, that in some cases I must appeal from all
earthly Judges: And if in any, then surely in this, when the highest Judge on
earth has imposed upon me the heaviest punishment without trial or hearing.
Since then I must either answer your Lordships Arguments, or else forsake mine
own just defense, I will force mine-aking head to do me service for an hour. I
must first deny my coffeehouse (which was forced) to be an humorous
discontent; and in that it was unseasonable, or is so long continuing, your
Lordship should rather condole with me then expostulate: natural seasons are
expected here below, but violent and unreasonable storms come from above: There
is no tempest to the passionate indignation of a Prince, nor yet at any time so
unseasonable as when it lights on those that might expect an harvest of their
careful and painful labors. He that is once wounded must needs feel smart
till his hurt be cured, or the part hurt become senseless. But cure I expect
none, her Majesty's heart being obdurate; and be without sense I cannot, being
of flesh and blood. But you may say, I may aim at the end: I do more then aim,
for I see an end of all my fortunes, I have set an end to all my desires. In
this course do I any thing for mine enemies? when I was present I found them
absolute, and therefore I had rather they should triumph alone, then have me
attendant upon their Chariots: Or do I leave my friends? When I was a Courtier
I could sell them no fruit of my love, and now that I am an Hermit, they shall
bear no envy for their love to me. Or do I forsake my self, because I do not
enjoy my self? Or do I overthrow my fortunes, because I build not a fortune of
paperwalls, which every puff of wind blows down? Or do I ruinate mine honor,
because I leave following the pursuit, or wearing the false mark or the shadow
of honor? Do I give courage or comfort to the enemies, because I neglect my
self to encounter them, or because I keep my heart from business, though I
cannot keep my fortune from declining? No, no, I give every one of those
considerations his due right, and the more I weigh them, the more I find my
self justified from offending in any of them. As for the two last objections,
that I forsake my Country when it has most need of me, and fail in that
indissoluble duty which I owe to my Sovereign: I answer, That if my Country
had at this time any need of my public service, her Majesty that governs it,
would not have driven me to a private life. I am tied to my Country by two
bonds; one public, to discharge carefully and industriously that trust which
is committed to me; the other private, to sacrifice for it my life and
carcass, which has been nourished in it. Of the first I am free, being
dismissed by her Majesty: Of the other nothing can free me but death, and
therefore no occasion of performance shall sooner offer it self, but I will
meet it half way. The indissoluble duty I owe unto her Majesty, the service of
an Earl and of Marshall of England, and I have been content to do her the
service of a Clerk; but I can never serve her as a villain or a slave. But you
say I must give way to time. So I do, for now that I see the storm come, I have
put my self into harbor. Seneca says, we must give way to Fortune: I know
that Fortune is both blind and strong, and therefore I go as far as I can out
of the way. You say the remedy is not to strive: I neither strive nor seek for
remedy. But you say, I must yield and submit: I can neither yield my self to be
guilty, nor this my imprisonment lately laid upon me, to be just; I ow so much
to the Author of Truth, as I can never yield Truth to be Falsehood, nor Falsehood
to be Truth. Have I given cause, you ask, and yet take a scandal? No, I gave
no cause to take up so much as Fimbria his complaint: for I did totum telum
corpore accipere, I patiently bear and sensibly feel all that I then received
when this scandal was given me. Nay, when the vilest of all indignities are
done unto me, does religion enforce me to sue? Does God require it? Is it
impiety not to do it? Why? cannot Princes err? Cannot subjects receive wrong?
Is an earthly power infinite? Pardon me, pardon me, my Lord, I can never
subscribe to these principles. Let Solomon's fool laugh when he is stricken; let
those that mean to make their profit of Princes, show to have no sense of
Princes injuries; let them acknowledge an infinite absoluteness on earth, that
do not believe an absolute infiniteness in heaven. As for me, I have received
wrong, I feel it; my cause is good, I know it; and whatsoever comes, all the
powers on earth can never show more strength or constancy in oppressing, then I
can show in suffering whatsoever can or shall be imposed upon me. Your Lordship
in the beginning of your Letter makes me a Player, and your self a looker on;
and me a player of my own game, so you may see more then I; but give me leave
to tell you, that since you do but see, and I do suffer, I must of necessity
feel more then you. I must crave your Lordships patience to give him that has
a crabbed fortune, leave to use a crooked style. But whatsoever my style is,
there is no heart more humble, nor more affected toward your Lordship, then
that of

Your Lordships poor friend, ESSEX.

Two Letters framed, one as from Mr. Anthony Bacon to the Earl of Essex, the
other as the Earls answer.
My singular good Lord,
THis standing at a stay does make me in my love toward your Lordship jealous
lest you do somewhat, or omit somewhat that amounts to a new error: For I
suppose that of all former matters there is a full expiation; wherein for any
thing which your Lordship does, I for my part (who am remote) cannot cast or
devise wherein my error should be, except in one point, which I dare not
censure nor dissuade: which is, that as the Prophet says, in this affliction
you look up ad manum pertutientem, and so make your peace with God. And yet I
have heard it noted, that my Lord of Leicester, who could never get to be taken
for a Saint, yet in the Queens disfavour waxed seeming religious. Which may be
thought by some, and used by others as a case resembling yours, if men do not
see, or will not see the difference between your two dispositions. But to be
plain with your Lordship, my fear rather is, because I hear how some of your
good and wise friends, not unpractised in the Court, and supposing themselves
not to be unseen in that deep and unscrutable Center of the Court, which is her
Majesty's mind; do not only toll the bell, but even ring out peals, as if your
fortune were dead and buried, and as if there were no possibility of recovering
her Majesty's favor; and as if the best of your condition were to live a
private and retired life, out of want, out of peril, and out of manifest
disgrace. And so in this persuasion to your Lordship-wards, to frame and
accommodate your actions and mind to that end, I fear (I say) that this
untimely despair may in time bring forth a just despair, by causing your
Lordship to slacken and break off your wise, loyal, and seasonable endeavor
and industry for reintegration to her Majesty's favor, in comparison whereof
all other circumstances are but as Atomi, or rather as a Vacuum without any
substance at all.

Against this opinion it may please your Lordship to consider of these reasons
which I have collected; and to make judgment of them, neither out of the
melancholy of your present fortune, nor out of the infusion of that which
comes to you by others relation, which is subject to much tincture, but ex
rebus ipsis, out of the nature of the persons and actions themselves, as the
truest and less deceiving ground of opinion. For though I am so unfortunate as
to be a stranger to her Majesty's eye, much more to her nature and manners, yet
by that which is extant I do manifestly discern that she has that character of
the Divine nature and goodness, as quos amavit, amavit usque ad finem; and
where she has a creature, she does not deface nor defeat it: insomuch as if I
observe rightly in those persons whom heretofore she has honored with her
special favor, she has covered and remitted not only defections and
ingratitudes in affection, but errors in state and service.

2. if I can Scholar-like spell and put together the parts of her Majesty's
proceedings now toward your Lordship, I cannot but make this construction,
That her Majesty in her Royal intention never purposed to call your doings into
public question, but only to have used a cloud without a shower, and
censuring them by some restraint of liberty and debarring from her presence.
For both the handling the cause in the Star Chamber was enforced by the
violence of libelling and rumors, wherein the Queen thought to have satisfied
the world, and yet spared your appearance: And then after, when that means
which was intended for the quenching of malicious bruits, turned to kindle
them, because it was said your Lordship was condemned unheard, and your
Lordships Sister wrote that private Letter, then her Majesty saw plainly that
these winds of rumors could not be commanded down without a handling of the
Cause by making you party, and admitting your defense. And to this purpose I do
assure your Lordship, that my Brother Francis Bacon, who is too wise to be
abused, though he be both reserved in all particulars more then is needful,
yet in generality he has ever constantly and with asseveration affirmed to me,
That both those days, that of the Star Chamber, and that at my Lord Keepers,
were won of the Queen merely upon necessity and point of honor, against her
own inclination.

3. In the last proceeding I note three points which are directly significant,
that her Majesty did expressly forbear any point which was irrecuperable, or
might make your Lordship in any degree incapable of the return of her favor,
or might fix any character indeleble of disgrace upon you: For she spared the
public places, which spared ignominy; she limited the Charge precisely not to
touch disloyalty, and no Record remains to memory of the Charge or Sentence.

4. The very distinction which was made in the sentence of Sequestration from
the places of service in State, and leaving to your Lordship the place of
Master of the Horse, does in my understanding point at this, that her Majesty
meant to use your Lordships attendance in Court, while the exercises of other
places stood suspended.

5. I have heard, and your Lordship knows better, that now since you were in
your own custody, her Majesty in verbo Regio, and by his mouth to whom she
commits her Royal grants and Decrees, has assured your Lordship she will
forbid, and not suffer your ruin.

6. As I have heard her Majesty to be a Prince of that magnanimity, that she
will spare the service of the ablest Subject or Peer, where she shall be
thought to stand in need of it; so she is of that policy, as she will not
blaze the service of a meaner then your Lordship, where it shall depend merely
upon her choice and will.

7. I held it for a principle, That those diseases are hardest to cure, whereof
the cause is obscure; and those easiest, whereof the cause is manifest.
Whereupon I conclude, that since it has been your errors in your lowness
toward her Majesty which have prejudiced you, that your reforming and
conformity will restore you, so as you may be Faber fortunae propriae.

Lastly, Considering your Lordship is removed from dealing in Causes of State,
and left only to a place of Attendance, methinks the Ambition of any which can
endure no Partners in State-matters may be so quenched, as they should not
laboriously oppose themselves to your being in Court. So as upon the whole
matter, I cannot find neither in her Majesty's person, nor in your own person,
nor in any third person, neither in former precedents nor in your own case, any
cause of peremptory despair. Neither do I speak this, but that if her Majesty
out of her resolution should design you to a private life, you should be as
willing upon the appointment to go into the wilderness as into the land of
promise; only I wish that your Lordship will not despair, but put trust (next
to God) in her Majesty's grace, and not be wanting to your self. I know your
Lordship may justly interpret, that this which I persuade may have some
reference to my particular, because I may truly say testante non virebo, for I
am withered in my self; but manebo, or tenebo, I should in some sort be, or
hold out. But though your Lordships years and health may expect return of grace
and fortune, yet your Eclipse for a time is an ultimum vale to my fortune: And
were it not that I desired and hope to see my Brother established by her
Majesty's favor, as I think him well worthy for that he has done and
suffered, it were time I did take that course from which I dissuade your
Lordship. Now in the mean time I cannot choose but perform those honest duties
unto you, to whom I have been so deeply bound, etc.

The Earl of Essex his Answer to Mr. Anthony Bacons Letter.
Mr. Bacon,
I Thank you for your kind and careful letter; it persuades that which I wish
for strongly, and hope for weakly, that is, possibility of restitution to her
Majesty's favor: Your arguments that would cherish hope, turn into despair:
You say the Queen never meant to call me to public censure, which shows her
goodness; but you see I passed it, which shows others power. I believe most
steadfastly, her Majesty never intended to bring my cause to a public censure;
and I believe as verily, that since the sentence she meant to restore me to
tend upon her person: but those which could use occasions (which it was not in
me to let) and amplify and practice occasions to represent to her Majesty a
necessity to bring me to the one, can and will do the like to stop me from the
other. You say, my errors were my prejudice, and therefore I can mend my self.
It is true; but they that know that I can mend my self, and that if I ever
recover the Queen, that I will never lose her again, will never suffer me to
obtain interest in her favor: and you say, the Queen never forsook utterly
where she has inwardly favored; but know not whether the hourglass of time
has altered her, but sure I am, the false glass of others informations must
alter her, when I want access to plead mine own cause, I know I, ought doubly,
infinitely to be her Majesty's both jure creationis, for I am her creature; and
jure redemptionis, for I know she has saved me from overthrow. But for her
first love, and for her last protection, and all her great benefits, I can but
pray for her Majesty; and my endeavor is now to make my prayers for her and my
self better heard. For thanks be to God, that they which can make her Majesty
believe I counterfeit with her, cannot make God believe that I counterfeit with
him; and they that can let me from coming near to her, cannot let me from
drawing nearer to him, as I hope I do daily. For your brother, I hold him an
honest Gentleman, and wish him all good much rather for your sake; your self I
know has suffered more for me and with me, then any friend that I have: But I
can but lament freely, as you see I do, and advise you not to do that I do,
which is to despair. You know Letters what hurt they have done me, and
therefore make sure of this: and yet I could not, as having no other pledge of
my love, but communicate openly with you for the ease of my heart and yours.

Your loving friend, R. ESSEX.

Lord Mountjoy to the Earl of Essex.
MOst noble Lord, the Queen is now removing toward a Progress; wherein, after
I have somewhat waited upon her, I shall have a desire to write to your Lordship
of some things more at large, which I will do as safely as I can; your
Lordships virtue, and your clear conscience must be your own brazen wall: for
we that are not of the Council do see no hope to keep long together this State
from assured ruin. I pray God the Queen may with all prosperity outlive their
negligence, and your care, to be a just Judge, if not a rewarder thereof. In
the mean time you owe unto her, and your own virtue, extraordinary patience.
Your Lordships mind ( I do protest) cannot labor more in the storm wherein you
are, then mine does in this dangerous and miserable calm. For it is some
comfort to perish doing somewhat; and yet, my Lord, why should we despair,
since there is a Providence that looks beyond, and concludes contrary to the
practices of the world; which Providence has showed us ways, how rugged soever
they be, which will bring unto true happiness; and though we lose these mortal
Barks we sail in, yet he will assuredly save the passengers. Noble Lord, in
respect of that great Haven, contemn these tempests and shipwracks at sea. Your
Lordships servant Mr. Bushel, does fear to have you impute his slow dispatch
unto any want of his diligence, and has showed his fear in exceeding sorrow
that it could not be sooner, and with as much care by all his best means to
effect it. I much thank your Lordship for your favor to Sir Charles Blunt, of
whom (if he be not thankful) I shall not only be deceived, but also revenged.
I will pray continually for your Lordships prosperity, -- and that it shall be
impossible to make me otherwise then

Your Lordships most honest and faithful servant, MOUNTJOY.

Sir Robert Cecil, after Earl of Salisbury, to the Lord Burleigh his Father,
from France. Febr. 26. 1597.
MY duty humbly remembered to your Lordship: Having lately made dispatches from
Diep, and having made little way in France, by reason of Sir Thomas Wilks
indisposition, your Lordship can expect little from me; especially having
joined with my associates in a letter to your Lordship: Nevertheless, because
love and duty will find easily occasion to express themselves, I am bold to
yield your Lordship some more trouble by my private Letter. I have met here
with the primier President of Roan, a man of great credit and reputation, one
that until mere necessity did force him, kept much hold here for this King: he
afterward retired, and kept the Parliament at Caen; he is learned, grave, of
good person, good discourse, and well affectionate to England, his name is
Claude Grollart; he is now next the Duke Monpencier, the stay of all those
quarters, insomuch that when the King will be merry with him, he calls him one
of the petty Dukes in Normandy: he did visit me with great respect, and fell
into familiar discourse with me of your Lordship, whom he had known in England
many years since, and has had correspondency with your Lordship by letters in
Mr. Secretary Walsinghams time: And being talking thereof, he desired me to
tell your Lordship by occasion, that when these troubles were like to grow by
the League, you writ him a letter of advice to stick fast to the King, and not
to be doubtful though he saw difficulties; for you did hold it for a true
Oracle, That the Kings on earth are like the Sun, and that such as do seek to
usurp are like falling Stars: For the Sun, although it be ecclipsed and
obsuscated with mists and clouds, at length they are dispersed, where the other
are but figures of stars in the eyes view, and prove no more but exhalations,
which suddenly dissolve and fall to the earth, where they are consumed. Because
I have little else to fill my paper, I presume to trouble your Lordship thus
far, to whom I think it cannot be offensive to hear that for your sake I am by
many the better used, and that by your own wisdom you are by men of place and
gravity both honored and remembered. The marriage of the Duke of Tremouille to
the Count Maurice his sister, has drawn the Duke of Bovillon toward Britany,
where I am informed by this President, that he means to stay, and to attend
the King, to whom he will clear himself if he take any knowledge of any
jealousy; and the rather because he is there well fortified in a Country full
of those that are of the religion. It shall behove me being there to carry my
self tenderly toward him. The Kings prosperity in Britany, has already made
his Catholics begin to quarrel with the Accord which has been made at the
Assembly: For the persons that were appointed to frame the Articles into an
Edict, have varied upon some principal points, only to trifle out the time,
thereby to discover whether the King may need their assistance or no. But the
Duke of Bovillon hearing inckling of it, made more, haste, and has been with
the King, and does return forthwith to him as soon as he has been at the
marriage of the Lady Tremoville. Your Lordship knows the circumstances of my
journey are not such as can afford me any means to judge; but this your
Lordship may assure, that by that time I have spoken to the King, things will
break out one way other so far as it will appear whether it be worth the
tarrying to treat or no; after once the King has been dealt with, to which I
will address my self with all speed, and not tarry for the States, who may be
come to Paris by that time I do return: for I believe they will be content to
treat any where. I shall have a miss of Sir Thomas Wilks, were it not we were
well instructed; and surely, he was grown very heavy of late, and dull: If I
should stay here to attend his recovery, it would comsume me to no purpose. I
have written a Letter to the Queen of some such gathering as I have gotten, and
of the speeches between me and the President, because her Majesty may not be
offended that I write not particulatly to her self of something. Although the
Spaniards from Callis have spoiled Base-Bologne, yet it is not holden here that
the Cardinal will sit down before any Town speedily, for he will not be able.
Nevertheless the Constable is come into Picardy, to give stay to the Province;
if that be the fruit of the Treaty, we shall have less need to dissuade the
King.

I much fear Sir Tho. Wilks to be in a Lethargy. Since your Lordships Letter
of Feb. 15. which found me at Dover a little before my imbarking, the wind has
not served to bring me any Letter out of England. The Lord of heaven send me
tidings of your Lordships health, for whom I will daily pray. I received also a
Letter from the Earl of Essex of the 16. and did imbark the 17. I humbly take
my leave, and rest

Feb. 26. 1597. Your Lordships humble and obedient Son, TO. CECIL.

Sir Francis Walsingham Secretary, to Monsieur Critoy Secretary of France.
SIR,
WHereas you desire to be advertised touching the proceedings here in
Ecclesiastical causes, because you seem to note in them some inconstancy and
variation, as if we sometimes inclined to one side, sometimes to another, and as
if that clemency and lenity were not used of late, that was used in the
beginning; all which you impute to your own superficial understanding of the
affairs of this State, having notwithstanding her Majesty's doing in singular
reverence, as the real pledges which she has given unto the world of her
sincerity in Religion, and of her wisdom in Government well meriteth: I am glad
of this occasion to impart that little I know in that matter to you, both for
your own satisfaction, and to the end you may make use thereof toward any that
shall not be so modestly and so reasonably minded as you are. I find therefore
her Majesty's proceedings to have been grounded upon two principles.

1. The one, That consciences are not to be forced, but to be won and reduced
by the force of truth, with the aid of time and the use of all good means of
instruction and persuasion.

2. The other, That the Causes of Conscience wherein they exceed their bounds,
and grow to be matter of faction, lose their nature; and that Sovereign Princes
ought distinctly to punish the practice in contempt, though colored with the
pretense of Conscience and Religion.

According to these principles, her Majesty at her coming to the Crown, utterly
disliking the tyranny of Rome, which had used by terror and rigor to settle
commandments of men's faiths and consciences, though as a Prince of great wisdom
and magnanimity she suffered but the exercise of one Religion, yet her
proceedings toward the Papists was with great lenity, expecting the good
effects which time might work in them: And therefore her Majesty revived not
the Laws made in the 28. and 35. of her Fathers reign, whereby the Oath of
Supremacy might have been offered at the Kings pleasure to any Subject, though
he kept his conscience never so modestly to himself; and the refusal to take
the same oath without further circumstance was made Treason. But contrariwise
her Majesty not liking to make windows into men's hearts and secret thoughts,
except the abundance of them did overflow into overt and express acts or
affirmations, tempered her Laws so as it restrains every manifest
disobedience in impugning and impeaching advisedly and maliciously her
Majesty's supreme power, maintaining and extolling a foraign jurisdiction. And
as for the Oath, it was altered by her Majesty into a more grateful form, the
hardness of the name and appellation of Supreme Head was removed, and the
penalty of the refusal thereof turned only into disablement to take any
promotion, or to exercise any charge, and yet with liberty of being reinvested
therein if any man should accept thereof during his life. But after when Pius
Quintus had excommunicated her Majesty, and the Bulls of Excommunication were
published in London, whereby her Majesty was in a sort proscribed; and that
thereupon as upon a principal motive or preparative followed the Rebellion in
the North: yet because the ill humors of the Realm were by that Rebellion
partly purged, and that she feared at that time no foreign invasion, and much
less the attempt of any within the Realm not backed by some potent succor from
without, she contented herself to make a Law against that special case of
bringing and publishing of any Bulls or the like Instruments, whereunto was
added a prohibition upon pain not of treason, but of an inferior degree of
punishment against the bringing in of Agnus Dei, hallowed bread, and such other
merchandise of Rome, as are well known not to be any essential part of the
Romish religion, but only to be used in practice as Love Tokens to inchant the
peoples affections from their allegiance to their natural Sovereign. In all
other points her Majesty continued her former lenity: but when about the 20.
year of her reign she had discovered in the King of Spain an intention to
invade her Dominions, and that a principal point of the plot was to prepare a
party within the Realm that might adhere to the Foreigner; and that the
Seminaries began to blossom and to send forth daily Priests and professed men,
who should by vow taken at Shrift reconcile her Subjects from their obedience,
yea and bind many of them to attempt against her Majesty's sacred person; and
that by the poison which they spread, the humors of most Papists were altered,
and that they were no more Papists in conscience and of softness, but Papists
in faction; then were there new Laws made for the punishment of such as should
submit themselves to such reconcilements or renunciations of obedience. And
because it was a Treason carried in the clouds, and in wonderful secrecy, and
came seldom to light, and that there was no presuspition thereof so great as
the Recusants to come to Divine Service, because it was set down by their
Decrees, that to come to Church before reconcilement was absolutely heretical
and damnable: Therefore there were added Laws containing punishment pecuniary
against such Recusants, not to enforce Conscience, but to enfeeble and
impoverish the means of those of whom it rests indifferent and ambiguous
whether they were reconciled or no. And when notwithstanding all this provision
this poison was dispersed so secretly, as that there was no means to stay it
but by restraining the Merchants that brought it in; then lastly there was
added another Law, whereby such seditious Priests of new erection were exiled,
and those that were at that time within the Land shipped over, and so commanded
to keep hence upon pain of Treason.

This has been the proceeding, though intermingled not only with sundry
examples of her Majesty's grace toward such as in her wisdom she knew to be
Papists in conscience, and not in faction and singularity, but also with an
ordinary mitigation toward the offenders in the highest degree committed by
Law, if they would but protest that in case this Realm should be invaded with a
foreign Army by the Popes authority for the Catholic cause, as they term it,
they would take party with her Majesty, and not adhere to her enemies. For the
other part which have been offensive to this State, though in other degree,
which named themselves Reformers, and we commonly call Puritans, this has been
the proceeding toward them a great while: When they inveighed against such
abuses in the Church, as Pluralities, Non-residence, and the like; their zeal
was not condemned, only their violence was sometimes censured: When they
refused the use of some Ceremonies and Rites as superstitious, they were
tolerated with much connivencie and gentleness; yea when they called in
question the Superiority of Bishops, and pretended to bring a Democracie into
the Church, yet their Propositions were heard, considered, and by contrary
writings debated and discussed. Yet all this while it was perceived that their
course was dangerous and very popular: As because Papistry was odious,
therefore it was ever in their mouths, that they sought to purge the Church
from the relics of Popery, a thing acceptable to the People, who love ever to
run from one extreme to another. Because multitudes of Rogues, and Poverty were
an eyesore and dislike to every man, therefore they put it into the Peoples
head, that if Discipline were plaintive, there should be no Beggars nor
Vagabonds; a thing very plausible. And in like manner they promise the people
many other impossible wonders of their Discipline. Besides they opened the
People a way to Government by their Consistory and Presbytery, a thing though
in consequence no less prejudicial to the liberties of private men then to the
sovereignty of Princes, yet in the first show very popular. Nevertheless this
(except it were in some few that entered into extreme contempt) was borne with,
because they pretended but in dutiful manner to make Propositions, and to
leave it to the Providence of God, and the authority of the Magistrate. But now
of late years, when there issued from them a Colony of those that affirmed the
consent of the Magistrate was not to be attended; when under pretense of a
Confession to avoid slanders and imputations they combined themselves by
Classes and Subscriptions; when they descended into that vile and base means of
defacing the Government of the Church by ridiculous Pasquils; when they began
to make many Subjects in doubt to take an Oath, which is one of the fundamental
points of Justice in this Land and in all places; when they began both to vaunt
of their strength and number of their partisans and followers, and to use the
communications that their Cause would prevail, though with uprore and violence;
then it appeared to be no more zeal, no more conscience, but mere faction and
division: And therefore though the State were compelled to hold somewhat a
harder hand to restrain them then before, yet it was with as great moderation
as the peace of the Church and State could permit. And therefore to conclude,
consider uprightly of these matters, and you shall see her Majesty is no
Temporizer in Religion. It is not the success abroad, nor the change of
servants here at home can alter her; only as the things themselves alter, so
she applied her religious wisdom to correspond unto them, still retaining the
two rules before mentioned in dealing tenderly with consciences, and yet in
discovering Faction from Conscience. Farewell.

Your loving Friend, Francis Walsingham.

Sir Francis Bacon to the Earl of Essex, when Sir Robert Cecil was in France.
My singular good Lord,
I Do write because I have not yet had time fully to express my conceit, nor
now to attend you, touching Irish matters, considering them as they may concern
the State, that it is one of the aptest particulars that has come, or can come
upon the stage for your Lordship to purchase honor upon, I am moved to think
for three reasons: Because it is ingenerate in your House in respect of my Lord
your Fathers noble attempts; because of all the accidents of State at this
time, the labor rests most upon that; and because the world will make a kind
of comparison between those that set it out of frame, and those that shall
bring it into frame: which kind of honor gives the quickest kind of
reflection. The transferring this honor upon your self consists in two
points: The one, if the principal, persons employed come in by you, and depend
upon you; the other, if your Lordship declare your self to undertake a care of
that matter. For the persons, it falls out well, that your Lordship has had
no interest in the persons of imputation: For neither Sir William
Fitz-Williams, nor Sir John Norris was yours: Sir William Russel was conceived
yours, but was curbed: Sir Coniers Clifford, as I conceive it, depends upon
you, who is said to do well; and if my Lord of Ormond in this interim do
accommodate well, I take it he has always had good understanding with your
Lordship. So as all things are not only whole and entire, but of favorable
aspect toward your Lordship, if you now choose well: wherein in your wisdom you
will remember there is a great difference in choice of the persons, as you
shall think the affairs to incline to composition or to war. For your
caretaking, popular conceit has been, that Irish causes have been much
neglected, whereby the very reputation of better care will be a strength: And I
am sure her Majesty and my Lords of the Council do not think their care
dissolved, when they have chosen whom to employ; but that they will proceed in
a spirit of State, and not leave the main point to discretion. Then if a
Resolution be taken, a Consultation must proceed; and the Consultation must be
governed upon Information to be had from such as know the place and matters in
fact: And in taking of information I have always noted there is a skill and a
wisdom. For I cannot tell what account or inquiry has been taken of Sir
William Russel, of Sir Ralph Bingham, of the Earl of Tomond, of Mr. Wilbraham:
but I am of opinion much more would be had of them, if your Lordship shall be
pleased severally to confer, not obiter, but expressly upon some Caveat given
them to think of it before; for, been docet qui prudenter interrogat. For the
points of opposing them, I am too much a stranger to the business to deduce
them: but in a -- Topique methinks the pertinent interrogations must be either
of the possibility and means of Accord, or of the nature of the War, or of the
reformation of the particular abuses, or of the joining of practice with force
in the disunion of the Rebels. If your Lordship doubt to put your sickle in
others men's harvests, yet consider you have these advantages. First, Time being
fit to you in Mr. Secretaries absence: Next, Vis unita fortior: Thirdly, ^he
business being mixed with matters of war, it is fittest for you: Lastly, I know
your Lordship will carry it with that modesty and respect toward aged Dignity,
and that good correspondencie toward my dear Ally and your good friend now
abroad, as no inconveniencie may grow that way. Thus have I played the ignorant
Statesman, which I do to no body but your Lordship, except I do it to the Queen
sometimes when she trains me on. But your Lordship will accept my duty and good
meaning, and secure me touching the privateness of that I write.

Your Lordships to be commanded, FR. BACON.

Sir Francis Bacon to the Earl of Essex, concerning the Earl of Tyrone.
THose advertisements which your Lordship imparted to me, and the like, I hold
to be no more certain to make judgment upon, then a Patients water to a
Physician: Therefore for me upon one water to make a judgment, were indeed like
a foolish bold Mountebank or Doctor Birket. Yet for willing duties sake, I will
set down to your Lordship what opinion sprung in my mind upon that I read. The
Letter from the Council there leaning to distrust, I do not much rely upon for
three causes. First, because it is always both the grace, and the safety from
blame of such a Council, to err in caution: whereunto add, that it may be they
or some of them are not without envy toward the person who is used in treating
the Accord. Next, because the time of this Treaty has no show of
dissimulation, for that Tyrone is now in no straits, but like a Gamester that
will give over because he is a winner, not because he has no more money in his
purse.

Lastly, I do not see but those Articles whereupon they ground their suspicion,
may as well proceed out of fear as out of falsehood for the reteining of the
dependence of the protracting the admission of a Sheriff, the refusing to give
his son for hostage, the holding from present repair to Dublin, the refusing to
go presently to accord without including O Donell and others his associates,
may very well come of a guilty reservation, in case he should receive hard
measure, and not out of treachery, so as if the great person be faithful, and
that you have not here some present intelligence of present succors from
Spain, for the expectation whereof Tyrone would win time. I see no deep cause
of distrusting the cause if it be good. And for the question, her Majesty
seems to me a winner three ways: First, her purse shall have rest: Next, it
will divert the foreign designs upon that place. Thirdly, though her Majesty
is like for a time to govern Precario in the North, and be not in true command
in better state there then before, yet besides the two respects of ease of
charge, and advantage of opinion abroad before mentioned, she shall have a time
to use her Princely policy in two points: In the one to weaken by division and
disunion of the heads; the other by recovering and winning the people by
justice, which of all other causes is the best. Now for the Athenian question
you discourse well, Quid igitur agendum est, I will shoot my fools bolt, since
you will have it so. The Earl of Ormond to be encouraged and comforted above
all things, the Garrisons to be instantly provided for: For opportunity makes a
thief, and if he should mean never so well now, yet such an advantage as the
breaking of her Majesty's Garrisons, might tempt a true man. And because he may
as well waver upon his own inconstancy as upon occasion, and wont of
variableness is never restrained but with fear, I hold it necessary he be
menaced with a strong war, not by words, but by Musters and preparations of
forces here, in case the Accord proceed not; but none to be sent over lest it
disturb the Treaty, and make him look to be overrun as soon as he has laid
down Arms. And but that your Lordship is too easy to pass in such cases from
dissimulation to verity, I think if your Lordship lent your reputation in this
case, it is to pretend that if not a defensive war as in times past, but a full
reconquest of those parts of the Country be resolved on, you would accept the
charge, I think it would help to settle him, and win you a great deal of honor
gratis. And that which most properly concerns this action, if it prove a
peace, I think her majesty shall do well to cure the root of the disease, and
to profess by a commission of peaceable men chiefly of respect and countenance,
and reformation of abuses, extortions, and injustices there, and to plant a
stronger and surer government then heretofore for the ease and protection of
the subject; for the removing of the sword or government in Arms from the Earl
of Ormond, or the sending of a Deputy which will eclipse it if peace follow, I
think unseasonable. Lastly, I hold still my opinion, both for your better
information, and your fuller declaration of your care, and meddling and meriting
service, that your Lordship have a set conference with the persons I named in
my former writing. I rest,

At your Lordships service FR. BACON.

Another to the Earl before his going to Ireland.
MY singular good Lord, your note of my silence in your occasions has made me
set down these few wandering lines, as one that would say somewhat and can say
nothing touching your Lordships intended charge for Ireland; which my endeavor
I know your Lordship will accept graciously and well, whether your Lordship
take it by the handle of the occasion ministered from your self, or of the
affection from which it proceeds, your Lordship is designed to a service of
great merit and great peril; and as the greatness of the peril must needs
include no small consequence of peril if it be not temperately governed: for
all immoderate success extinguisheth merit, and seareth up distaste and envy,
the assured forerunner of whole changes of peril. But I am at the last point
first, some good spirit leading my pen to presage to your Lordships success:
wherein it is true, I am not without my Oracle and Divinations, none of them
superstitious, and yet not all natural: For first, looking into the course of
Gods providence in things now depending, and calling into consideration how
great things God has done by her Majesty, and for her collect he has disposed
of this great dissection in Ireland, whereby to give an urgent occasion to the
reduction of that whole kingdom, as upon the rebellion of Desmond there ensued
the reduction of that Province. Next, your Lordship goes against three of the
unluckiest vices of all other, Disloyalty, Ingratitude, and Insosolence: which
three offenses in all examples have seldom their doom adjourned to the world
to come Lastly, he that shall have had the honor to know your Lordship
inwardly, as I have had, shall find bona extra, whereby he may better ground a
divination of good, then upon the dissection of a Sacrifice. But that part I
leave; for it is fit for others to be confident upon you, and you to be
confident upon the cause; the goodness and justice whereof is such, as can
hardly be matched in any example, it being no ambitious war of Foreigns, but a
recovery of subjects, and that after lenity of conditions often tried; and a
recovery of them not only to obedience, but to humanity and policy from more
then Indian Barbarism. There is yet another kind of divination familiar in
matters of State, being that which Demosthenes so often relieth upon in his
time, where he says, That which for the time past is worst of all, is for the
time to come the best, which is, that things go ill, not by accident, but by
error; wherein if your Lordship have been a waking Censor, but must look for no
other now but Medice cura teipsum: And although your Lordship shall not be the
blessed Physician that comes to the declination of the disease, yet you
embrace that condition which many Noble Spirits have accepted for advantage,
which is, that you go upon the greater peril of your fortune, and the less of
your reputation; and so the honor countervaileth the adventure: of which honor
your Lordship is in no small possession, when that her Majesty known to be one
of the most judicious Princes in discerning of spirits, that ever governed,
has made choice of you merely out of her Royal judgment (her affection
inclining rather to continue your attendance) into whose hands and trust to put
the commandment and conduct of so great forces, the gathering in the fruit of
so great charge, the execution of so many Councels, the redeeming of the
defaults of so many former Governors, and the clearing of the glory of so many
happy years reign only in this part excepted. Nay further, how far forth the
peril of that State is interlaced with the peril of England; and therefore
how great the honor is to keep and defend the approaches of this kingdom, I
hear many discourse; and indeed there is a great difference whether the
Tortoise gather her self into her shell hurt or unhurt: And if any man be of
opinion, that the nature of an enemy does extenuate the honor of a service,
being but a Rebel and a Savage, I differ from him; for I see the justest
Triumphs that the Romans in their greatest greatness did obtain, and that
whereof the Emperors in their styles took additions and denominations, were of
such an enemy, that is, people barbarous and not reduced to civility,
magnifying a kind of lawless liberty, prodigal of life, hardened in body,
fortified in woods and bogs, placing both justice and felicity in the sharpness
of their swords. Such were the Germans and ancient Britains, and diverse others.
Upon which kind of people whether the victory be a Conquest, or a Reconquest
upon a rebellion or revolt, it made no difference that ever I could find in
honor. And therefore it is not the enriching predatory war that has the
pre-eminence in honor; else should it be more honor to bring in a Carrock of
rich burden, then one of the twelve Spanish Apostles. But then this nature of
people does yield a higher point of honor (considering in truth and substance)
then any war can yield which should be achieved against a civil enemy, if the
end may be Pacique imponere morem, To replant and refound the policy of that
Nation, to which nothing is wanting but a just and civil Government. Which
design as it does descend to you from your noble Father, who lost his life in
that action, though he paid tribute to nature, and not to fortune; so I hope
your Lordship shall be as fatal a Captain to this war, as Africanus was to the
war of Carthage, after that both his Uncle and his Father had lost their lives
in Spain in the same war.

Now although it be true, that these things which I have writ (being but
representations unto your Lordship of the honor and appearance of success of
the enterprise) be not much to the purpose of my direction, yet it is that
which is best to me being no man of war, and ignorant in the particulars of
Estate: for a man may by the eye set up the white right in the midst of the
But, though he be no Archer. Therefore I will only add this wish, according to
the English phrase, which terms a wel-willing advice a wish, That your
Lordship in this whole action looking forward set down this Position, That
merit is worthier then same; and looking back hither would remember this text,
That obedience is better then sacrifice. For designing to fame and glory, may
make your Lordship in the adventure of your person to be valiant as a private
Soldier rather then as a General; it may make you in your commandments rather
to be gracious then disciplinary; it may make you press action in the respect
of the great expectation conceived, rather hastily then seasonably and safely;
it may make you seek rather to atchieve the war by force, then by intermixture
of practice; it may make you (if God shall send you prosperous beginnings)
rather seek the fruition of that honor then the perfection of the work in
hand. And for your proceeding like a good Protestant (upon warrant, and not
upon good intention) your Lordship knows in your wisdom, that as it is most
fit for you to desire convenient liberty of instruction, so it is no less fit
for you to observe the due limits of them, remembering that the exceeding of
them may not only procure (in case of adverse accident) a dangerous disadvow,
but also (in case of prosperous success) be subject to interpretation, as if
all were not referred to the right end.

Thus I have presumed to write these few lines to your Lordship in methodo
ignorantiae, which is, when a man speaks of any subject not according to the
parts of the matter, but according to the model of his own knowledge. And most
humbly desire your Lordship, that the weakness thereof may be supplied in your
Lordship by a benign acceptance, as it is in me by my best wishing.

FR. BACON.

Another to him after his enlargement.
My Lord,
NO man can expound my doings more then your Lordship, which makes me need to
say the less, only I humbly pray you to believe that I aspire to the conscience
and commendation of Bonus Civis and Bonus Vir, and that I love some things
better I confess then I love your Lordship; yet I love few persons better, both
for gratitudes sake and for virtues, which cannot hurt but by accident. Of
which my good affection it may please your Lordship to assure your self of all
the true effects and offices that I can yield: for as I was ever sorry your
Lordship should fly with many wings, doubting Icarus fortune; so for the
growing up of your own feathers, be they Ostridges or other kind, no man shall
be more glad; and this is the Axel-tree, whereupon I have turned and shall
turn. Which having already signified unto you by some near means, having so fit
a Messenger for mine own Letter, I thought good to redouble also by writing.
And so I commend you to Gods protection. From Grayes Inn, etc.

FR. BACON.

Sir Francis Bacon to Sir Robert Cecil after defeat of the Spaniards in Ireland.
It may please your Honor,
AS one that wishes you all increase of Honor, and as one that cannot leave
to love the State, what interest soever I have, or may come to have in it, and
as one that now this dead Vacation time have some leisure ad aliud agend. I
will presume to propound unto you that which though you cannot but see, yet I
know not whether you apprehend and esteem it in so high a degree, that is, for
the best action of importation to your self, of sound honor and merit of her
Majesty and this Crown, without ventosity or popularity, that the riches of any
occasion, or the tide of any opportunity can possibly minister or offer. And
that is the Causes of Ireland, if they be taken by the right handle: For if the
wound be not ripped up again, and come to a festered sense by new foreign
succors, I think that no Physician will go on much with letting blood in
declinatione morbi, but will intend to purge and corroborate. To which purpose
I send you mine opinion without labor of words in the enclosed; and sure I am
that if you shall enter into the matter according to the vivacity of your own
spirit, nothing can make unto you a more gainful return: For you shall make
the Queens felicity complete, which now as it is incomparable: and for your
self, you shall make your self as good a Patriot, as you are thought Politic;
and to have no less generous ends, then dexterous delivery of your self toward
your ends; and as well to have true arts and grounds of government, as the
facility and felicity of practice and negotiation; and to be as well seen in
the periods and tides of estates, as in your own circle and way: then the which
I suppose nothing can be a better addition and accumulation of honor unto you.

This I hope I may in privateness write, either as a Kinsman that may be
bolder, or as a Scholar that has liberty of discourse without committing of
any absurdity. If not, I pray your Honor to believe I ever loved her Majesty
and the State, and now love your self; and there is never any vehement love
without some absurdity, as the Spaniard well says, De suario con la calentura.
So desiring your Honors pardon, I ever continue, etc.

FR. BACON.

Considerations touching the Queens service in Ireland, by Sir Francis Bacon.
THe Reduction of the Country as well to Civility and Justice, as to Obedience
and Peace, which things as th'affairs now stand I hold to be unspeakable,
consists in four points.

1. The extinguishing of the Relics of War. 2. The Recovery of the hearts of
the People. 3. The removing of the root and occasions of new troubles. 4
Plantation and buildings.
For the first, concerning the places, times and particularities of further
prosecution in fact, I leave it to the opinion of men of war, only the
difficulty is to distinguish and discern the propositions which shall be
according to the ends of the State here, that is, final and summary toward the
extirpation of the trouble, s from those, which though they pretend the public
ends, yet may refer indeed to the more private and compendious ends of the
Council there, or other particular Governors or Captains. But still as I
touched in my letter, I do think much letting blood in declinatione morbi, is
against method of cure and that it will but exasperate necessity and despair,
and per case discover the hollowness of that which is done already, which none
blazeth to the best show: For Taglaes, and proscription of two or three of the
principal Rebels, they are, no doubt jure Gentium lawful, in Italy usually
practiced upon the Banditi, best in season when a side goes down, and may do
good in two kinds; the one if it take effect, the other in the distrust which
follows amongst the Rebels themselves. But of all other points (to my
understanding) the most effectual is, the well expressing or impressing of the
design of this State, upon that miserable and desolate kingdom, containing the
same between these two lists or boundaries: the one, that the Queen seeks not
an extirpation of the people, but a reduction; and now that she has chastised
them by Royal power and Arms, according to the necessity of the occasion, her
Majesty takes no pleasure in effusion of blood, or displanting of ancient
generations; the other, that her Majesty's Princely care is principally and
intentionally bent upon that action of Ireland; and that she seeks not so
much the ease of charge, as the Royal performance of her Office of Protection,
and reclaim of those her Subjects: And in a word, that the case is allowed as
far as may stand with the honor of the time past, which it is easy to
reconcile, as in my last note I showed. And again I do repeat, that if her
Majesty's design be ex professo to reduce wild and barbarous people to civility
and justice, as well as to reduce Rebels to obedidience, it makes weakness
true Christianity, and conditions turn graces, and so has a sineness in
turning utility upon point of honor of these times. And besides, if her Majesty
shall suddenly abate the lists of her Forces, and shall do nothing to
countervail it in the point of reputation of a public proceeding, I doubt
things may too soon fall back into the state they were in. Next to this, adding
reputation to the cause by imprinting an opinion of her Majesty's care and
intention upon this action, is the taking away the reputation from the contrary
side, by cutting off the opinion and expectation of foreign succors: to which
purpose this enterprise of Algiers, if it hold according to the advertisement,
and if be not wrapped up in the period of this Summer, seems to be an
opportunity Coelitus demissa. And to the same purpose nothing can be more fit
then a Treaty, or a shadow of Treaty of a Peace with Spain, which methinks
should be in our power to fasten, at least rumore tenus, to the deluding of as
wise a people as the Irish. Lastly, for this point that the Ancients called
potestas facta redeundi ad sanitatem, and which is but a mockery when the Enemy
is strong or proud, but effectual in his declination; that is, a liberal
Proclamation of grace and pardon to such as shall submit and come in within a
time prefixed, and of some further reward to such as shall bring others in,
that our sword may be sharpened against another, as a matter of good
experience; and now I think will come in time. And per case though I wish the
exclusions of such a Pardon exceeding few, yet it will not be safe to continue
some of them in their strength, but to translate them and their generation into
England, and give them recompense and satisfaction here for their possessions
there, as the King of Spain did by diverse families of Portugal. The effecting
of all the which fall within the points aforesaid, and likewise those which
fall within the divisions following: Nothing can be in priority either of time
or matter precedent to the sending of some Commission of the continuance ad res
inspiciendas and componendas. For it must be a very significant demonstration
of her Majesty's care of that Kingdom, a credence to any that shall come in and
submit, a bridle to any that have their fortunes there, and shall apply their
propositions to private ends, and an evidence of her Majesty's politic
courses without neglect or respiration; and it has been the wisdom of the
best examples of Government. Toward the recovery of hearts of the people,
there be but three things in natura rerum.

1. Religion. 2. Justice and Protection. 3. Obligation and reward. For
Religion, to speak first of Piety, and then of Policy. All Divines do agree,
that if Consciences be to be enforced at all whereby they differ, yet two
things must precede their inforcement; the one means of information, the other
time of operation: Neither of which they have yet had. Besides till they be
more like reasonable men then they yet are, their society were rather
scandalous to true Religion then otherwise, as pearl cast before swine: For
till they be cleansed from their blood, incontinencie, and theft, and which are
now not the lapses of particular persons, but the very laws of the Nation, they
are incompatible with Religion formed with Policy. There is no doubt but to
wrestle with them now, is directly opposite to their reclaim, and cannot but
continue their alienation of mind from this government. Besides, one of the
principal pretenses whereby the heads of the Rebellion have prevailed both with
the people and the Foreigner, has been the defense of the Catholic religion;
and it is that likewise has made the Foreigner reciprocally more plausible
with the Rebel. Therefore a Toleration of Religion for a time not definite,
except it be in some principal Towns and Precincts, after the manner of some
French Edicts, seems to me to be a matter warrantable by Religion, and in
Policy of absolute necessity; and the hesitation of this, I think, has been a
great casting back of the affairs there. Neither if any English Papist or
Recusant shall for liberty of his conscience transfer his person, family and
fortunes thither, do I hold it a matter of danger, but expedient to draw on
undertaking, and to further population. Neither if Rome will cozen it self by
conceiving it may be some degree to the like Toleration in England, do I hold
it a matter of any moment, but rather a good mean to take off the fierceness
and eagerness of the humor of Rome, and to stay further Excommunications and
Interdictions of Ireland. But there would go hand in hand with this some course
of advantage. Religion indeed, where the people is capable of it, is the
sending over of some good Preachers, especially of that sort which are vehement
and zealous perswaders, and not Scholastical, to be resident in the principal
Towns, endowing them with some stipend out of her Majesty's revenues, as her
Majesty has most religiously and graciously done in Lancashire; and the
recontinuing and replenishing the College begun at Dublin, the placing of good
men Bishops in the Sea there; the taking care of the versions of Bibles,
Catechisms, and other books of Instruction into the Irish language, and the
like religious courses, both for the honor of God, and for the avoiding of
scandal and insatisfaction here, by a toleration of Religion there. For
instance, the Barbarism and desolation of the Country considered, it is not
possible they should find any sweetness at all of it, (which has been the
error of times past) formal and fetched far off from the State, because it will
require running up and down for process of polling and exactions by fees, and
many other delays and charges: And therefore there must be an interim in which
the Justice must be only summary, the rather because it is fit and safe for a
time the Country do partioipate of Martial government. And therefore I do wish
in every principal Town or place of habitation there were a Captain or a
Governor, and a Judge, such as Recorders and learned Stewards are here in
Corporations, who may have a Prerogative-Commission to hear and determine
secundum sanam discretionem, and as near as may be to the Laws and Customs of
England, and that by Bill or Plaint without Original Writ, reserving from their
sentence matter of Freehold and Inheritance to be determined before a superior
Judge itinerant, to be reversed if cause be, before the Council of the Province
to be established with fit Informations.

For obligation and reward, it is true no doubt which was anciently said, That
a State is contained in two words, Praemium and Poena: And I am persuaded, if a
penny in the pound which has been spent in poena, a chastisement of Rebels,
without other fruit or emolument of this State, had been spent in praemio, that
in rewarding, things had never grown to this extremity. But to speak forwards:
The keeping of the principal Irish persons in term of contentment, and without
particular complaint, as generally the carrying of an eaven course between the
English and the Irish, whether it be in competition, or whether it be in
controversy, as if they were one Nation, without the same partial course which
has been held by the Governors and Counselors, that some have favored the
Irish, and some contrary, is one of the best medicines for that State. And as
for other points of governing their Nobility as well in this Court as there, of
Knighthood, of Education of their Children, and the like points of comfort and
allurement, they are things which fall into every man's consideration.

For the extirpating of the seeds of troubles, I suppose the main roots are but
three: The first, the ambition and absoluteness of the chief of the Families
and Sects; the second, the licentious idleness of their Kerns and Soldiers
that lie upon their Country by sesses and such oppressions; the third, the
barbarous customs in habits of apparel, in these Poets or Heralds that inchant
them in savage manners, and sundry other such dregs of Barbarism and Rebellion,
which by a number of politic Statutes of Ireland meet to be put in execution
are already forbidden, unto which such additions may be made as the present
time requires. But the reducing of this branch requires a more particular
notice of the state and manners there then falls within my compass.

For Plantations and buildings, I do find it strange, that in the last plot for
the population of Munster, there were limitations how much in Demesnes, and how
much in Farm and Tenantry, how many buildings should be erected, how many Irish
in mixture should be admitted; but there was no restraint that they might not
build sparsim at their pleasure, much less any condition that they should make
places fortified and defensible, the which was too much secureness to my
understanding. So as for this last point of planta^ions and buildings, there be
two considerations which I hold most material; the one of quickening, the other
for assuring: The first is, that choice be made of such persons for the
government of Towns and places, and such undertakers be procured as be men
gracious and wel-beloved, and are like to be well followed; wherein for Munster
it may be because it is not Res integra, but that the former undertakers stand
interessed there, will be some difficulty; but surely (in mine opinion) either
with agreeing with them, or by overruling them by a Parliament in Ireland
(which in this course of a politic proceeding, infinite occasions will
require speedily to be held) it will be fit to supply fit qualified persons for
underakers. The other, that it be not left as heretofore, to the pleasure of
the undertakers and adventurers, where and how to build and plant, but that
they do it according to a prescript or formality. For first, the places both
Maritine and Inland, which are fittest for Colonies or Garrison, as well for
doubt of Foreigners, as for keeping the Country in bridle, would be found
surveighed and resolved upon; and then that the Patentees be tied to build
those places only, and to fortify as shall be thought convenient. And lastly,
it follows of course in Countries of new populations, to invite and provoke
inhabitants by ample liberties and Charters.

FR. BACON.

Sir Francis Bacon to the Lord Treasurer touching his speech in Parliament.
It may please your good Lordship,
I Was sorry to find by your Lordships speech yesterday, that my last speech in
Parliament delivered in discharge of my conscience, my duty to God, her
Majesty, and my Country, was offensive: if it were misreported, I would be
glad to attend your Lordship to disavow any thing I said not; if it were
misconstrued, I would be glad to expound my words to exclude any sense I meant
not; if my heart be mis-judged by imputation of popularity, or opposition, I
have great wrong, and the greater because the manner of my speech did most
evidently show, that I spoke most simply, and only to satisfy my conscience,
and not with any advantage or policy to sway the cause, and my terms carried
all signifification of duty, and zeal toward her Majesty and her service. It
is very true, that from the beginning, whatsoever was a double Subsidy, I did
wish might for presidents sake appear to be extraordinary, and for discontents
sake might not have been levied upon the poverty; though otherwise I wished it
as rising as I think this will prove, or more. This was my mind, I confess it:
and therefore I most humbly pray your good Lordship, first to continue me in
your own good opinion, and then to perform the part of an honorable good friend
toward your poor servant, and all in drawing her Majesty to accept of the
sincerity and simplicity of my zeal, and to hold me in her Majesty's favor,
which is to me dearer then my life. And so, etc.

Your Lordships most humble in all duty, FR. BACON.

Sir Francis Bacon to the Earl of Northampton.
May it please your good Lordship,
AS the time of sowing of a seed is known, but the time of coming up and
disclosing is casual, or according to the season; so I am witness to my self,
that there has been covered in my mind a long time, a seed of affection and
zeal toward your Lordship, sown by the estimation of your virtues, and your
particular honors and favors to my brother deceased, and to my self; which
seed sti l springing now bursteth forth into this profession. And to be plain
with your Lordship, it is very true, and no winds or noyses of evil matters
can blow this out of my head or heart, that your great capacities and love
toward studies and contemplations of an higher and worthier nature then
popular, a matter rare in the world, and in a person of your Lordships quality
almost singular, is to me a great and chief motive to draw my affection and
admiration toward you: and therefore, good my Lord, if I may be of any use to
your Lordship, I humbly pray your Lordship to hold me your own: and therefore
withal, not to do so much disadvantage to my good mind, as to conceive that
this commendation of my humble service proceeds out of any straits of my
occasions; but merely out of an election, and indeed the fullness of my heart.
And so wishing your Lordship all prosperity, I continue yours, etc.

FR. BACON.

To the Lord Kinloss, upon the entrance of K. James.
My Lord,
THe present occasion awaketh in me a remembrance of the constant amity and
mutual good offices which passed between my Brother deceased and your Lordship,
whereunto I was less strange then in respect of the time I had reason to
pretend; and withal I call to mind the great opinion my Brother (who seldom
failed in judgment of a person) would often express to me of your Lordships
great wisdom and soundness both in head and heart toward the service and
affairs of the Lord our Sovereign King. The one of those has bred in me an
election, and the other a confidence to address my good will and sincere
affection to your good Lordship, not doubting in regard that my course of life
has wrought me not to be altogether unseen in the matters of the Kingdom, that
I may be in some use both in points of service to the King and your Lordships
particular: And on the other side I will not omit to desire humbly your
Lordships favor in furthering a good conceit and impression of my most humble
duty and true zeal toward the King, to whose Majesty words cannot make me
known, neither mine own nor others, but time will to no disadvantage of any
that shall forerun his Majesty's experience by their humanity and
commendations. And so I commend your Lordship to Gods protection.

Your etc. FR. BACON.
From Grayes-Inne, etc.
To King James.
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty: It is observed upon a place in the
Canticles by some, Ego sum Flos Campi and Lilium Convallium; that it is not
said, Ego sum flos horti and lilium montium: because the Majesty of that Person
is not enclosed for a few, nor appropriate to the great. And yet
notwithstanding this Royal virtue of access, which nature and judgment has
placed in your Majesty's mind as the portal of all the rest, could not of it
self (my imperfections considered) have animated me to have made oblation of my
self immediately to your Majesty, had it not been joined to a habit of like
liberty which I enjoyed with my late dear Sovereign Mistress, a Princess happy
in all things, but most happy in such a Successor. And yet further and more
nearly I was not a little encouraged, not only upon a supposal that unto your
Majesty's sacred ears (open to the air of all virtues) there might have come
some small breath of the good memory of my Father, so long a principal
Councellor in your Kingdom, but also by the particular knowledge of the
infinite devotion and incessant endeavors beyond the strength of his body, and
the nature of the times, which appeared in my good Brother toward your
Majesty's service, and were on your Majesty's part through your singular
benignities by many most gracious and lively significations and favors
accepted and acknowledged, beyond the thought of any thing he could effect: All
which endeavors and duties for the most part were common to my self with him,
though by design between brethren dissembled. And therefore, most high and
mighty King, my most dear and dread Sovereign Lord, since now the cornerstone
is laid of the mightiest Monarchy in Europe, and that God above, who is noted
to have a mighty hand in bridling the floods and fluctuations of the seas, and
of peoples hearts, has by the miraculous and universal consent (the more
strange, because it proceeds from such diversity of causes) in your coming
in, given a sign and token what he intends in the continuance; I think there
is no Subject of your Majesty, who loves this Island, and is n^^ hollow and
unworthy, whose heart is not on fire not only to bring you Peace Offerings to
make you propitious, but to sacrifice himself as a Burnt-offering to your
Majesty's service: Amongst which number no man's fire shall be more pure and
fervent; but how far forth it shall blaze out, that rests in your Majesty's
employment. For since your fortune, in the greatness thereof, has for a time
debarred your Majesty of the fruitly virtue which one calls the principal,
(Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos) because your Majesty has many of
yours which are unknown unto you, I must leave all to the trial of further
time; and thirsting after the happiness of kissing your Royal hand, continue
ever

Your etc. FR. BACON.

To the Earl of Northumberland, concerning a Proclamation upon the Kings entry.
It may please your Lordship,
I Do hold it a thing formal and necessary for the King to forerun his coming,
be it never so speedy, with some gracious Declaration for the cherishing,
entertaining, and preparing of men's affections. For which purpose I have
conceived a draught, it being a thing to me familiar in my Mistress her times
to have my pen used in politic writings of satisfaction. The use of this may
be in two sorts: First properly, if your Lordship think convenient to show the
King any such draught, because the veins and pulses of this State cannot but be
known here; which if your Lordship should, then I would desire your Lordship to
withdraw my name, and only signify that you gave some heads of direction of
such a matter to one of whose style and pen you had some opinion. The other
collateral, that though your Lordship make no other use of it, yet it is a kind
of pourtraicture of that which I think worthy to be advised to the King, to
express himself according to those points which are therein conceived, and
perhaps more compendious and significant then if I had set them down in
Articles. I would have attended your Lordship, but for some little Physic I
took. To morrow morning I will wait on you. So I ever continue, etc.

FR. BACON.

To the Earl of Southampton.
It may please your Lordship,
I Would have been very glad to have presented my humble service to your
Lordship by my attendance, if I could have foreseen that it should not have
been unpleasing unto you. And therefore because I would commit no error, I
chose to write, assuring your Lordship how credible soever, yet it is as true
as a thing that God knows, that this great change in me has wrought no other
change toward your Lordship then this, that I may safely be now that which I
was truly before: And so craving no other pardon then for troubling you with
this letter, I do not now begin to be, but continue to be

Your Lordships most humble and devoted, FR. BACON.

To the Earl of Northumberland.
It may please your Lordship,
I Would not have lost this journey, and yet I have not that I went for: For I
have had no private conference to purpose with the King, no more has almost
any other English; for the speech his Majesty admits with some Noblemen, is
rather matter of grace then matter of business: with the Attorney he spoke,
urged by the Treasurer of Scotland, but no more then needs must. After I had
received his Majesty's first welcome, and was promised private access, yet not
knowing what matter of service your Lordship carried, for I saw it not, and
knowing that priviness in advertisement is much, I chose rather to deliver it
to Sir Thomas Hoskins then to let it cool in my hands, upon expectation of
access. Your Lordship shall find a Prince the furthest from vainglory that
may be, and rather like a Prince of the ancient form then of the latter time;
his speeches swift an cursory, and in the full Dialect of his Nation, and in
speeeh of business short, in speech of discourse large: he affects
popularity by gracing them that are popular, and not by any fashions of his
own; he is thought somewhat general in his favors; and his virtue of access
is rather because he is much abroad, and in press, then that he gives easy
audience: he hasteneth to a mixture of both kingdoms and nations, faster
perhaps then policy will well bear. I told your Lordship once before my
opinion, that methought his Majesty rather asked counsel of the time past,
then of the time to come. But it is yet early to be found in any settled
opinion. For other particularities I refer to conference, having in these
generals gone further in these tender arguments then I would have done, were
not the bearer hereof so assured. So I continue your, etc.

FR. BACON.

To Sir Edward Coke expostulatory.
Mr. Attorney,
I Thought best once for all to let you know in plainness what I find of you,
and what you shall find of me To take to your self a liberty to disgrace and
disable my Law, experience, discretion: what it pleases you, I pray think of
me. I am one that know both mine own wants and other men's, and it may be
perchance that mine may mend when others stand at a stay: And surely I may not
in public place endure to be wronged, without repelling the same to my best
advantage to right myself. You are great, and therefore have the more enviers,
which would be glad to have you paid at another cost. Since the time I missed
the Sollicitors place, the rather I think by your means, I cannot expect that
you and I shall ever serve as Attorney and Solicitor; but either to serve with
another upon your remove, or to step into some other course. So as I am more
free then ever I was from any occasion of unworthy conforming my self to you,
more then general good manners, or your particular good usage shall provoke:
And if you had not been short-sighted in your own fortune (as I think) you
might have had more use of me; but that tide is past. I write not this to show
any friends what a brave Letter I have writ to Mr. Attorney, I have none of
those humors: but that I have written is to a good end, that is, to the more
decent carriage of my Masters service, and to our particular better
understanding one another. This Letter, if it shall be answered by you in deed,
and not in word, I suppose it will not be worse for us both; else it is but a
few lines lost, which for a much smaller matter I would adventure. So this
being to your self, I for my part rest

Your etc. FR. BACON.

To the same after L. Chief Justice, and in disgrace.
My very good Lord,
THough it be true, that who considers the wind and the rain, shall neither
sow nor reap, Eccles. 9.15. yet there is a season for every action: And so
there is a time to speak, and a time to keep silence; there is a time when the
words of a poor simple man may profit: and that poor man in the Preacher which
delivered the City by his wisdom, found, that without this opportunity, the
power both of wisdom and eloquence lose but their labor, and cannot charm the
deaf Adder. God therefore, before his Son that brings mercy, sent his servant
the Trumpeter of repentance to level a very high hill, to prepare the way
before him, making it smooth and straight. And as it is in spiritual things,
where Christ never comes before his Way-maker has laid even the heart with
sorrow and repentance, since self-conceited and proud persons think themselves
too good and too wise to learn of their inferior, and therefore need not the
Physician: so in the rules of earthly wisdom it is not possible for nature to
attain any mediocrity of perfection, before she be humbled by knowing her self
and her own ignorance. Not only knowledge, but also every other gift (which we
call the gifts of fortune) have power to pull up earthly -- Afflictions only
level these Molehils of pride, plough the heart, and make it fit for Wisdom to
sow her seed, and for Grace to bring forth her increase. Happy is that man
therefore both in regard of heavenly and earthly wisdom, that is thus wounded,
to be cured; thus broken, to be made straight; thus made acquainted with his
own imperfections, that he may be perfected.

Supposing this to be the time of your affliction, that which I have propounded
to my self is, by taking this seasonable advantage, like a true friend (though
far unworthy to be counted so) to show you your true shape in a glass, and that
not in a false one to flatter you, nor yet in one that should make you seem
worse then you are, and so offend you, but in one made by the reflection of your
own words and actions, from whose light proceeds the voice of the people, which
is often not unfitly called the voice of God: but therein (since I purposed a
truth) I must entreat liberty to be plain, a liberty that at this time I know
not whether or no I may use safely, I am sure at other times I could not: yet
of this resolve your self, it proceeds from love, and a true desire to do you
good, that you knowing the general opinion, may not altogether neglect or
contemn it, but mend what you find amiss in yourself, and tain what your
judgment shall approve; for to this end shall truth be delivered as naked as if
your self were to be anatomized by the hand of opinion. All men can see their
own profit, that part of the wallet hangs before. A true friend (whose worthy
office I would perform, since I fear both your self and all great men want
such, being themselves true friends to few or none) is first to show the other,
and which is from your eyes.

First therefore behold your errors: In discourse you delight to speak too
much, not to hear other men; this some say becomes a pleader, not a Judge: for
by this sometimes your affections are entangled with a love of your own
arguments though they be the weaker, and rejecting of those which when your
affections were settled, your own judgment would allow for strongest. Thus while
you speak in your own Element, the Law, no man ordinarily equals you; but when
you wander, (as you often delight to do) you then wander indeed, and give never
such satisfaction as the curious time requires. This is not caused by any
natural defect, but first for want of election, when you having a large and
fruitful mind, should not so much labor what to speak, as to find what to
leave unspoken; rich soils are often to be weeded.

Secondly, you cloy your auditory when you would be observed, speech must
either be sweet or short.

Thirdly, you converse with Books, not men, and Books specially humane, and
have no excellent choice with men, who are the best Books: for a man of action
and employment you seldom converse with, and then but with your underlings,
not freely, but as a Schoolmaster with his Scholars, ever to teach, never to
learn. But if sometimes you would in your familiar discourse hear others, and
make election of such as know what they speak, you should know many of these
tales you tell to be but ordinary, and many other things which you delight to
repeat and serve in for novelties, to be but stale. As in your pleadings you
were wont to insult over misery, and to inveigh bitterly at the persons (which
bred you many enemies whose poison yet swells, and the effects now appear) so
are you still wont to be a little careless in this point to praise or disgrace
upon slight grounds, and that sometimes untruly, so that your reproofs or
commendations are for the most part neglected and contemned; when the censure
of a Judge (coming slow, but sure) should be a brand to the guilty, and a crown
to the virtuous. You will jest at any man in public, without respect of the
persons dignity or your own. This disgraceth your gravity more then it can
advance the opinion of your wit, and so do all actions which we see you do
directly with a touch of vainglory, having no respect to the true end. You
make the Law to lean too much to your opinion, whereby you show your self to be
a legal Tyrant, striking with that weapon where you please, since you are able
to turn the edge any way. For thus the wise Master of the Law gives warning to
young Students, that they should be wary lest while they hope to be instructed
by your integrity and knowledge, they should be deceived with your skill armed
with authority. Your too much love of the world is too much seen, when having
the living of 10000 l. you relieve few or none. The hand that has taken so
much, can it give so little? Herein you show no bowels of compassion, as if you
thought all too little for your self; or that God had given you all that you
have (if you think wealth to be his gift, I mean that you get well, for I know
sure the rest is not) only to that end you should still gather more, and never
be satisfied, but try how much you could gather to account for all at the great
and general Audit-day. We desire you to amend this, and let your poor Tenants
in Norfolk find some comfort, where nothing of your estate is spent toward
their relief, but all brought up hither to the impoverishing of your Country.

In your last, which might have been your best piece of service to the State,
affectioned to follow that old rule which gives Justice leaden heels and iron
hands, you used too many delays, till the Delinquents hands were loosed, and
yours bound. In that work you seemed another Fabius, here the humor of
Marcellus would have done better: What needed you have sought more evidences
then enough? While you pretended the finding out of more, (missing your aim)
you discredited what you had found. This best Judgments think, though you never
used such speeches as are fathered upon you, yet you might well have done it,
and but rightly: For this crime was second to none but the Powder Plot: That
would have blown up all at one blow, a merciful cruelty; this would have done
the same by degrees, a lingering, but a sure way; one might by one be called
out, till all opposers had been removed. Besides, that other Plot was
scandalous to Rome, making Popery odious in the sight of the whole world: This
has been scandalous to the truth of the whole Gospel, and since the first
nullity to this instant, when Justice has her hands bound, the Devil could not
have invented a more mischievous practice to our State and Church then this
has been, is, and is like to be. God avert the evil.

But herein you committed another fault, that you were too open in your
proceedings, and so taught them whereby to defend themselves; so you gave them
time to undermine Justice, and to work upon all advantages both of affections
and honor, and opportunity, and breach of friendship: which they have so well
followed, sparing neither pains nor cost, that it almost seems an offense in
you to have done so much indeed, then that you have done no more: you stopped the
confessions and accusations of some, who perhaps had they been suffered, would
have spoken enough to have removed some stumbling blocks out of your way: and
that you did not this in the favor of any one, but of I know not what present
unadvised humors, supposing enough behind to discover all, which fell not out
so. Howsoever, as the Apostle says in another case, you went not rightly to
the truth, and therefore though you were to be commended for what you did, yet
you were to be reprehended for many circumstances in the doing; and doubtless
God has an eye in this cross to your negligence, and the briers are left to be
pricks in your sides, and thorns in your eyes. But that which we commend you
for, are those excellent parts of Nature, and knowledge in the Law, which you
are endued withal; but these are only good in their good use: wherefore we
thank you heartily for standing stoutly in the Commonwealths behalf, hoping it
proceeds not from a disposition to oppose Greatness (as your enemies say) but
to do justice, and deliver truth indifferently without respect of persons; and
in this we pray for your prosperity, and are sorry that your good actions
should not always succeed happily. But in the carriage of this you were faulty,
for you took it in hand in an evil time, both in respect of the present
business which it interrupted, and in regard of his present sickness whom it
concerned, whereby you disunited your strength, and made a gap for the enemies
to pass out at, and to return and assault you.

But now, since the case so stands, we desire you to give way to power, and
so to fight that you be not utterly broken, but reserved entirely to serve the
Commonwealth again, and do what good you can, since you cannot do all the good
you would; and since you are fallen upon this work, cast out the goods to save
the bottom, stop the leaks and make toward land, learn of the Steward to make
friends of the unrighteous Mammon. Those Spaniards in Mexico who were chased of
the Indians, tell us what to do with our goods in our extremities, they being
to pass over a r^ver in their flight, as many as cast away their gold swam
over safe; but some more covetous, keeping their gold, were either drowned with
it, or overtaken and slain by the Savages: you have received, now learn to
give. The Beaver learns us this lesson, who being hunted for his stones, bites
them off: You cannot but have much of your estate (pardon my plainness) ill
got, think how much of that you never spoke for, how much by speaking unjustly
or in unjust causes. Account it then a blessing of God if thus it may be laid
out for your good, and not left for your heir to hasten the wasting of much of
the rest, perhaps of all; for so we see God oftentimes proceeds in judgment
with many hasty gatherers: you have enough to spare, being well laid, to turn
the Tide, and fetch all things again. But if you escape (I suppose it worthy of
an if) since you know the old use, that none called in question must go away
uncensured; yet consider that accusations make wounds, and leave scarres; and
though you see your tale behind your back, your self free, and the Covert
before, yet remember there are stands, trust not reconciled enemies, but think
the peace is but to secure you for further advantage, expect a second and a
third encounter, the main battle, the wings are yet unbroken, they may charge
you at an instant, or death before them: walk therefore circumspectly; and if
at length by means of our good endeavors and yours, you recover the favor
that you have lost, give God the glory in action, not in words only, and
remember us with sense of your past misfortune, whose estate has, does, and
may hereafter lie in the power of your breath. There is a great mercy in
dispatch, delays are tortures wherewith we are by degrees rent out of our
estates: do not you (if you be restored) as some others do, fly from the
service of virtue to serve the time, as if they repented their goodness, or
meant not to make a second hazard in Gods House; but rather let this cross make
you zealous in Gods cause, sensible in ours, and more sensible in all, which
express thus. You have been a great enemy to Papists, if you love God, be so
still, but more indeed then heretofore: for much of your zeal was heretofore
wasted in words: call to remembrance that they were the persons that prophesied
of that cross of yours long before it happened, they saw the storm coming, being
the principal contrivers and furtherers of the plot, the men that blew the
coals, heat the Iron, and made all things ready, they owe you a good turn, and
will, if they can, pay it you, you see their hearts by their deeds, prove then
your faith so too. The best good work you can do, is to do the best you can
against them, that is, to see the Law severely, justly, and diligently
executed. And now we beseech you, my Lord, be sensible both of the stroke, and
hand that strikes: learn of David to leave Shimei, and call upon God, he has
some great work to do, and he prepares you for it, he would neither have you
faint, nor yet bear this cross with a Stoical resolution. There is a Christian
mediocrity worthy of your greatness I must be plain, perhaps rash. Had some
notes which you have taken at Sermons, been written in your heart to practice,
this work had been done long ago, without the envy of your enemies: But when we
will not mind our selves, God (if we belong to him) takes us in hand; and
because he sees that we have unbridled stomachs, therefore he sends outward
crosses, which while they cause us to mourn, do comfort us, being assured
testimonies of his love that sends them: to humble our selves therefore before
God, is the part of a Christian; but for the world, and our enemies, the
counsel of the Poet is apt, Tune cede malis, sed contra andentior ito.

The last part of this counsel you forget, yet none need be ashamed to make
use of it, that so being armed against casualties, you may stand firm against
the assaults on the right hand and on the left. For this is certain, the mind
that is most prone to be puffed up with prosperity, is most weak and apt to be
dejected with the least puff of adversity. Indeed she is strong enough to make
an able man stagger, striking terrible blows; but true Christian wisdom gives
us armor of proof against all assaults, and teaches us in all estates to be
content: for though she cause our truest friends to declare themselves our
enemies, though she give heart then to the most cowardly to strike us, though
an hours continuance countervail an age of prosperity, though she cast in our
dish all that ever we have done, yet has she no power to hurt the humble and
wise, but only to break such as too much prosperity has made stiff in their
own thoughts, but weak indeed and fitted for renewing, when the wise rather
gather from thence profit and wisdom by the example of David, who said, Before
I was chastised, I went wrong. Now then, he that knows the right way, will
look better to his footing. Cardan says, That weeping, fasting, and sighing,
are the chief purgers of griefs. Indeed naturally they help to assuage sorrow;
but God in this case is the only and best Physician: the means he has
ordained are the advice of friends, the amendment of our selves: for amendment
is both Physician and Cure. For friends, although your Lordship be scant, yet I
hope you are not altogether destitute; if you be, do but look on good books,
they are true friends, that will neither flatter nor dissemble; be you but true
to your self, applying what they teach unto the party gtieved, and you shall
need no other comfort nor counsel. To them, and to Gods holy Spirit directing
you in the reading of them, I commend your Lordship, beseeching him to send you
a good issue out of these troubles, and from henceforth to work a reformation
in all that is amiss, and a resolute perseverance, proceeding, and growth in
all that is good, and that for his glory, the bettering of your self, this
Church and Commonwealth, whose faithful servant whilst you remain, I remain a
faithful servant to you.

To Sir Vincent Skinner, expostulatory.
Sir Vincent Skinner,
I See that by your needless delays this matter is grown to a new question:
wherein for the matter it self, if it had been staid at the beginning by my Lord
Treasurer and my Lord Chrncellor, I should not so much have stood upon it: For
the great and daily travels which I take in his Majesty's service either are
rewarded in themselves, in that they are but my duty, or else may deserve a
much greater matter. Neither can I think amiss of any man, that in furtherance
of the Kings benefit moved the doubt, that I knew not what warrant you had: But
my wrong is, that you having had my Lord Treasurers and Mr. Chancellors warrant
for payment above a month since, you (I say) making your payments belike upon
such differences as are better known to your self, then agreeable to due
respect of his Majesty's service, have delayed all this time, otherwise then I
might have expected either from our ancient acquaintance, or from that regard
as one in your place may owe to one in mine. By occasion whereof there ensues
to me a greater inconvenience, that now my name in sort must be in question
amongst you, as if I were a man likely to demand that that were unreasonable,
or to be denied that that is reasonable: And this must be, because you can
pleasure men at pleasure. But this I leave with this, that it is the first
matter wherein I had occasion to discern of your friendship: which I see to
fall to this, That whereas Mr. Chancellor the last time, in my man's hearing,
very honorably said that he would not discontent any man in my place, it seems
you have no such caution. But my writing to you now is, to know of you where
now the stay is, without being any more beholden to you, to whom indeed no man
ought to be beholden in those cases in a right course. And so I bid you
farewell,

FR. BACON.

To Mr. Toby Matthews.
Mr. Matthews,
DO not think me forgetful, or altered toward you: But if I should say I
could do you any good, I should make my power more then it is. I do fear that
which I am right sorry for, that you grow more impatient and busy then at
first; which makes me exceedingly fear the issue of that which seems not to
stand at a stay. I my self am out of doubt, that you have been miserably abused
when you were first seduced; and that which I take in compassion, others may
take in severity. I pray God, that understands us all better then we understand
one another, continue you, as I hope he will, at least within the bounds of
loyalty to his Majesty, and natural piety to your Country. And I entreat you
much to meditate sometimes upon the effect of Superstition in this last
Powder Treason, fit to be tabled and pictured in the chambers of Meditation as
another Hell above the ground; and well justifying the censure of the Heathen,
that Superstition is far worse then Atheism: by how much it is less evil to
have no good opinion of God at all, then such as are impious toward his divine
Majesty and goodness. Good Mr. Matthews, receive your self back from these
courses of perdition. Willing to have written a great deal more, I continue

Your etc. FR. BACON.

To the Lord Treasurer, concerning the Sollicitors place.
AFter the remembrance of my humble duty, though I know by late experience how
mindful your Lordship vouchsafes to be of me and my poor fortune; and since
it pleased your Lordship during your indisposition, when her Majesty came to
visit your Lordship, to make mention of me for my employment and preferment:
yet being now in the Country, I do presume that your Lordship, who of your self
had an honorable care of the matter, will not think it a trouble to be
solicited therein. My hope is this, that whereas your Lordship told me her
Majesty was somewhat gravelled upon the offense she took at my Speech in
Parliament, your Lordships favorable endeavor, who has assured me that for
your own part you construe that I spoke to the best, will be as a good tide to
remove her from that shelf: And it is not unknown unto your good Lordship, that
I was the first of the ordinary sort of the lower House that spoke for the
Subsidy; and that which I after spoke in difference, was but in circumstance
of time, which methinks was no great matter, since there is variety allowed in
Council as a Discord in Music to make it more perfect.

But I may justly doubt her Majesty's impression upon this particular, as her
conceit otherwise of my insufficiency and unworthiness: which though I
acknowledge to be great, yet it will be the less, because I purpose not to
divide my self between her Majesty and the causes of other men, as others have
done, but to attend her business only; hoping that a whole man meanly able, may
do as well as half a man better able: And if her Majesty thinks that she
shall make an adventure in using one that is rather a man of study then of
practice and experience, surely I may remember to have heard that my Father (an
example I confess rather ready then like) was made Solicitor of the
Augmentation (a Court of much business) when he had never practiced, and was
but 27 years old: And Mr. Brograve was now in my time called Attorney of the
Duchy, when he had practiced little or nothing, and yet has discharged his
place with great sufficiency. But those and the like things are as her Majesty
shall be made capable of them: wherein knowing what authority your Lordships
commendations has with her Majesty, I conclude with my self that the substance
of strength which I may receive will be from your Lordship. It is true, my life
has been so private, as I have had no means to do your Lordship service: but
yet, as your Lordship knows, I have made offer of such as I could yield. For
as God has given me a mind to love the public, so incidently I have ever had
your Lordship in singular admiration, whose happy ability her Majesty has so
long used to her great honor and yours. Besides, that amendment of state or
countenance which I have received has been from your Lordship: And therefore
if your Lordship shall stand a good friend to your poor Ally, you shall but
tueri opus which you have begun; and your Lordship shall bestow your benefit
upon one that has more sense of obligation, then of self-love.

Thus humbly desiring pardon of so long a Letter, I wish your Lordship all
happiness.

Your Lordships in all humbleness to be commanded, FR. BACON.
June 6. 1595.
To the Earl of Salisbury concerning the same.
It may please your Lordship,
I Am not privy to my self of any such ill deserving toward your Lordship, as
that I should think it an impudent thing to be a Suitor for your favor in a
reasonable matter, your Lordship being to me as (with your good favor) you
cannot cease to be: but rather it were a simple and arrogant part in me to
forbear it.

It is thought Mr. Attorney shall be Chief Justice of the Commonplace; in case
Mr. Solicitor rise, I would be glad now at last to be Solicitor: chiefly
because I think it will increase my practice, wherein God blessing me a few
years, I may mend my state, and so after fall to my studies and ease, whereof
one is requisite for my body, and the other serves for my mind: wherein if I
shall find your Lordships favor, I shall be more happy then I have been, which
may make me also more wise. I have small store of means about the King, and to
sue my self is not fit; and therefore I shall leave it to God, his Majesty, and
your Lordship: for I must still be next the door. I thank God, in these
transitory things I am well resolved. So beseeching your Lordship not to think
this Letter the less humble, because it is plain, I rest, etc.

FR. BACON.

Again to the Earl of Salisbury.
It may please your good Lordship,
I Am not ignorant how mean a thing I stand for, in desiring to come into the
Sollicitors place: For I know well it is not the thing it has been, time
having wrought alteration both in the profession, and in that special place.
Yet because I think it will increase my practice, and that it may satisfy my
friends, and because I have been voiced to it, I would be glad it were done.
Wherein I may say to your Lordship, in the confidence of your poor Kinsman, and
a man by you advanced, In idem fer opem qui spem dedisti: For I am sure it was
not possible for a man living to have received from another more significant
and comfortable words of hope: your Lordship being pleased to tell me during
the course of my last service, That you would raise me; and that when you were
resolved to raise a man, you were more careful of him then himself; and that
what you had done for me in my marriage, was a benefit for me, but of no use to
your Lordship, and therefore I might assure my self you would not leave me
there, with many like speeches: which I know too well my duty to take any other
hold of, then the hold of a thankful remembrance: And I know, and all the
world knows, that your Lordship is no dealer of Holy Water, but noble and
real; and on my part on sure ground, that I have committed nothing that may
deserve any alteration; and if I cannot observe you as I would, your Lordship
will impute it to my want of experince, which I shall gather better when I am
once settled.

And therefore my hope is, your Lordship will finish a good work, and consider
that time grows precious, and that I am now vergentibus annis; and although I
know your fortune is not to want an hundred such as I am, yet I shall be ever
ready to give you my best and first fruits, and to supply, as much as in me
lies, a worthiness by thankfulness.

FR. BACON.

Sir Fr. B^con to the Lord Chancellor.
It may please your Lordship,
AS I conceived it to be a resolution both with his Majesty, and among your
Lordships of his Council, that I should be placed Solicitor, and the
Solicitor to be removed to be the Kings Sergeant; so I most humbly thank your
Lordships furtherance and forwardness therein, your Lordship being the man that
first devised the mean: wherefore my humble request unto your Lordship is, That
you would set in with some strength to finish this your work, which (I assure
your Lordship) I desire the rather; because, being placed, I hope for your many
favors, to be able to do you some better service: for as I am your Lordship
cannot use me, nor scarcely indeed know me; not that I vainly think I shall be
able to do any great matters, but certainly it will frame me to use a more
industrious observance and application to such as I honor so much as I do your
Lordship, and not, I hope, without some good offices, which may deserve your
thanks. And herewithal, good my Lord, I humbly pray your Lordship to consider
that time grows precious with me, and that a married man is seven years older
in his thoughts the first day: And therefore what a discomfortable thing it is
for me to be unsettled still. For surely were it not that I think my self born
for to do my Sovereign service, and therefore in that station will I live and
die; otherwise for mine own private comfort, it were better for me that the
King should blot me out of his book, or that I should turn my course to
endeavor to serve him in some other kind, then for me to stand thus at a stop,
and to have that little reputation which by my industry I gather, to be
scattered and taken away by continual disgraces, every new man coming in before
me; and sure I am I shall never have fairer promises and hope from all your
Lordships, and I would believe you in a far greater matter; and if it were
nothing else, I hope the modesty of my suit deserves somewhat: for I know well
the Sollicitors place is not as your Lordship left it, time working alteration
somewhat in the profession, much more in that special place. And were it not
to satisfy my wives friends, and to get my self out of being a common gaze,
and a speech (I protest before God) I would never speak word for it. But to
conclude, as my honorable Lady was some mean to make me to change the name of
another: so if it please you to help me, as you said, to change mine own name,
I cannot be but more and more bounden to you. And I am much deceived, if your
Lordship find not the King well inclined; as for my Lord of Salisbury, he is
forward and affectionate. Yours, etc.

FR. BACON.

To King JAMES.
It may pleaase your excellent Majesty,
HOw honestly ready I have been, most gracious Sovereign, to do your Majesty
humble service to the best of my power, and in a manner beyond my power as I
now stand, I am not so unfortunate but your Majesty knows; both in the
Commission of Union the labor whereof for men of my profession, rested most
upon my hands; and this last Parliament for the Bill of Subsidy, both body and
preamble. In the Bill of Attainders; of Tresham, and the rest; in the matter of
Purveyance, in the Ecclesiastical Petitions, in the grievances, and the like,
as I was ever careful not without good success, sometime to put forward that
which was good, sometime to keep back that which was worse: so your Majesty was
pleased kindly to accept of my services, and to say to me, such conflicts were
the wars of peace, and such victories the victories of peace; and therefore
such servants as obtained them, were by Kings that reign in peace, no less to
be esteemed then Conquerors in the wars. In all which nevertheless I can
challenge to my self no sufficiency, that I was diligent and reasonably happy
to execute those directions which I received either immediately from your Royal
mouth, or from my Lord of Salisbury. At that time it pleased your Majesty also
to assure me that upon the remove of the then Attorney, I should not be
forgotten, but be brought into ordinary place: and this was after confirmed
unto me by many of my Lords. And toward the end of the last Term, the manner
also in particular spoken of, that is, that Mr. Solicitor should be made your
Majesty's Sergeant, and I Solicitor, for so it was thought best to sort with
both our gifts and faculties for the good of our service. And of this
resolution both Court and Country took notice. Neither was this any invention
or project of mine own, but moved from my Lords, I think first from my Lord
Chancellor: whereupon resting, your Majesty well knows I never opened my
mouth for the greater place, although I am sure I had two circumstances that
Mr. Attorney that now is could not allege: the one, nine years service of the
Crown; the other, the being Cousin-german to my Lord of Salisbury; for of my
Fathers service I will not speak. But for the less place, I conceive it was
never meant me: but after that Mr. Attorney Hubbard was placed, I heard no more
of any preferment, but it seemed to be at a stop, to my great disgrace and
coffeehouse. For, gracious Sovereign, if still when the waters be stirred,
another shall be put in before me, your Majesty had need work a miracle, or
else I shall be a lame man to do your services. And therefore my most humble
suit unto your Majesty is, That this which seemed to me intended, may speedily
be performed, and I hope my former service shall be but as beginnings to better
when I am better strengthened. For sure I am, no man's heart is fuller, I say
not but many may have greater hearts, but I say, not fuller of love and duty
toward your Majesty and your children, as I hope time will manifest against
envy and detraction, if any be. To conclude, I humbly crave pardon for my
boldness, etc.

Your, etc. FR. BACON.

Mr. Edmond Andersons Letter to Sir Francis Bacon.
Noble Sir,
THere is ever a certain presumption to be had of the favor of great men, so
as there be a reason added to accompany their justice; mine, that gives
boldness to call upon your succor, is, that I am fallen more under the
malignity of rumor, then severity of laws, though that has ever set mine
offense at the blackest mark: to force this latter cloud away, none can but the
breath of a King: the other which threatens and oppresses more, every good
Spirit may help to disperse. In this name, honorable Sir, I beseech your
goodness to spend some few words to the putting of false fame to flight, which
has so often endangered even the innocent: And if the saving of a poor
penitent man may come to be part of your care, let it ever be reckoned to your
virtue, that you have not only assisted to preserve, but create a person so
corrected by necessity, as the example of his repentance was not worthy to be
lost, who will live and die thankfully yours,

EDMOND ANDERSON.

Sir Thomas Bodeley to Sir Francis Bacon upon his new Philosophy.
Sir,
AS soon as the Term was ended, supposing your leisure was more then before, I
was coming to thank you two or three times, rather choosing to do it by word
then letter; but I was still disappointed of my purpose, as I am at this
present upon an urgent occasion, which does tie me fast to Fulham, and has
made me now determine to impart my mind in writing. I think you know I have
read your Cogitata and visa, which I protest I have done with great desire,
reputing it a token of your singular love, that you joined me with those your
friends, to whom you would commend your first perusal of your draught: for
which I pray you give me leave to say but this unto you, First, that if the
depth of my affection to your person and spirit, to your works and your words,
and to all your ability, were as highly to be valued as your affection is to
me, it might walk with yours arm in arm, and claim your love by just desert;
but there can be no comparison where our states are so uneven, and our means to
demonstrate our affections so different, insomuch as for mine own I must leave
it to be prized in the nature that it is, and you shall evermore find it most
addicted to your worth. As touching the subject of your Book, you have set
afoot so many noble speculations, as I cannot choose but wonder, and I shall
wonder at it ever, that your expense of time considered in your public
profession, which has in a manner no acquaintance with Scholarship or
Learning, you should have culled forth the quintessence and sucked up the sap
of the chiefest kind of Learning. For howsoever in some points you do vary
altogether from that which is and has been ever the received doctrine of our
Schools and was always by the wisest (as still they have been deemed) of all
Nations and Ages adjudged the truest, and yet it is apparent that in those very
points, in all your proposals and plots in that book, you show your self a
Master workman. For my self, I must confess, and I speak it Ingenue that for
the matter of learning I am not worthy to be reckoned in the number of
smatterers; and yet because it may seem that being willing to communicate your
Treatise with your friends, you are likewise willing to listen to whatsoever I
or others can except against it: I must deliver unto you for my private
opinion, that I am one of the crew that say there is, and we profess a greater
holdfast of certainty in your Sciences, then you by your discourse will seem to
acknowledge: For where at first you do object the ill success and errors of
practitioners of Physic, you know as well they do proceed of the Patients
unruliness: for not one of an hundred does obey his Physician in their own
indisposition, for few are able in that kind to explicate themselves, or by
reason their diseases are by nature incurable, which is incident, you know, to
many sorts of maladies, or for some other hidden cause which cannot be
discovered by course of conjecture; Howbeit I am full of this belief, that as
Physic is ministered nowadays by Physicians, it is much to be ascribed to
their negligence or ignorance, or other touch of imperfection that they speed
no better in their practice: for few are found of that profession so well
instructed in their Art, as they might by the precepts which their Art does
afford, which though it be defective in regard of such perfection, yet for
certain it does flourish with admirable remedies, such as tract of time has
taught by experimental effects, and are the open highway to that knowledge
that you recommend. As for Alchimie and Magic, some conclusions they have that
are worthy the preserving: but all their skill is so accompanied with
subtilties and guiles, as both the Crafts and the Crafts-masters are not only
despised, but named with derision. Whereupon to make good your principal
assertion, methinks you should have drawn the most of your examples from that
which is taught in the liberal Sciences, not by picking out cases that happen
very seldom, and may by all confession be subject to reproof, but by
controlling the generals, and grounds, and eminent Positions and Aphorisms
which the greatest Artists and Philosophers have from time to time defended:
for it goes for current among all men of learning, that those kind of Arts
which Clerks in times past did term Quadruials, confirm their propositions by
infallible demonstrations. And likewise in Trivials, such lessons and
directions are delivered unto us, as will effect very near, or as much
altogether, as every faculty does promise. Now in case we should concur to do
as you advise, which is to renounce our common notions, and cancel all our
Theorems, Axioms, Rules and Tenants, and so to come babes ad regnum naturae, as
we are willed by Scriptures to come ad regnum coelorum. There is nothing more
certain in my understanding, then that it would instantly bring us to
Barbarism, and after many thousand years leave us more unprovided of Theoricall
furniture, then we are at this present: For that were indeed to become Tabula
rasa, when we shall leave no impression of any former principles, but be driven
to begin the world again, to travel by trials of actions and sense, (which are
your proofs by particulars) what to place in intellectu for our general
conceptions, it being a Maxim of all men's approving, In intellectu nihil esse
quod non prius fuit in sensu. And so in appearance it would befall us, that
till Plato's year be come about, our insight in learning would be of less
reckoning then now it is accounted. As for that which you inculcate of a
knowledge more excellent then now is among us, which experience might produce
if we would but essay to extract it out of Nature by particular probations, it
is no more upon the matter, but to incite us unto that which without
instigation by a natural instinct men will practice of themselves: for it
cannot in reason be otherwise thought, but that there are infinite in all parts
of the world, (for we may not in this case confine our cogitations within the
bounds of Europe) which embrace the course which you propose, with all
diligence and care, that any ability can perform. For every man is born with an
appetite of knowledge, wherewith he cannot be glutted, but still as in a
dropsy thirst after more. But yet why men should hearken to any such
persuasions, as wholly to abolish those settled opinions, and general Theories
to which they have attained by their own and their Ancestors former experience,
I see nothing yet alleged to induce me think it. Moreover, I may speak as I
suppose with good probability, that if we should make a mental survey what is
like to be effected all the world over, those five or six inventions which you
have selected, and imagined to be but of modern standing, would make but a
slender show among so many hundreds of all kinds of natures which are daily
brought to light by the enforcement of wit or casual events, and may be
compared or partly preferred above those that you have named. But were it so
here, that all were admitted that you can require for the augmentation of our
knowledge, and that all our Theorems and general Positions were utterly
extinguished with a new substitution of others in their places, what hope may
we have of any benefit of learning by this alteration? Assuredly as soon as the
new are brought ad (...) by the Inventors and their followers by an
interchangeable course of natural things, they will fall by degrees in
oblivion to be buried, and so in continuance to perish outright; and that
perchance upon the like to your present pretenses by proposal of some means to
advance all our knowledge to an higher pitch of perfectness; for still the same
defects that antiquity found, will reside in mankind, and therefore other
issues of their actions, devices and studies, are not to be expected then is
apparent by Records were in former time observed. I remember here a note which
Paterculus made of the incomparable wits of the Grecians and Romans in their
flourishing state, that there might be this reason of their notable downfall in
their issue that came after, because by nature, Quod summo studio petitum est
ascendit in summum, difficilisque imperfecto mora est: insomuch that men
perceiving that they could not go further, being com^ to the stop, they turned
back again of their own accord, forsaking those studies that are most in
request, and betaking themselves to new endeavors, as if the thing they sought
had been by prevention fore-prized by others. So it fared in particular with
the eloquence of that age, that when their successors found that hardly they
could equal, by no means excel their predecessors, they began to neglect the
study thereof, and speak for many hundred years in a rusticall manner, till
this later revolution brought the wheel about again by inflaming gallant
spirits to give the onset a-fresh, with straining and striving to climb unto
the top and height of perfection, not in that gift alone, but in every other
skill in any part of learning. For I do not hold it any erroneous conceit to
think of every science, that as now they they are professed, so they have been
before in all precedent ages, though not alike in all places, nor at all times
alike in one and the same; but according to the changes and turning of times
with a more exact and plain, or with a more rude and obscure kind of teaching.

And if the question should be asked what proof I have of it, I have the
doctrine of Aristotle, and of the deepest learned Clerks of whom we have any
means to take any notice, That as there is of other things, so there is of
Sciences ortus and interitus: which is also the meaning (if I should expound
it) of nihil novum sub sole, and is as well to be applied ad facta as ad dicta;
ut nihil neque dictum neque factum, quod non est dictum aut factum prius. I
have further for my warrant that famous complaint of Solomon to his son against
the infinite making of books in his time, of which in all congruity great part
were of observations and instructions in all kind of literature, and of those
there is not now so much as one Pamphlet (only some parcels of the Bible
excepted) remaining to posterity. As then there was not in like manner to be
found any footing of millions of Authors that were long before Solomon, and yet
we must give credit to that which he affirmed; that whatsoever was then or
before, it could never be truly pronounced of it, Behold this is new. Whereupon
I must for my final conclusion infer, Seeing all the endeavors, study and
knowledge of mankind in whatsoever art or science have ever been the same as
they are at this present, though full of mutabilities according to the changes
and accidental occasions of ages, and Countries and Clerks dispositions, which
can never but be subject to intention and remission both in their devices and
in their practices of their knowledge. If now we should accord in opinion with
you, First to condemn our present knowledge of doubt and incertitude (which you
confer but by averment) without other force of argument, and then to disclaim
all our Axioms and Maxims, and general assertions that are left by tradition
from our Elders to us, which (for so it is to be pretended) have passed all
probations of the sharpest wits that ever were Abecedarii, by the frequent
spelling of particulars to come to the notice of new generals, and so afresh to
create new principles of Sciences, the end of all would be, that when we should
be dispossessed of the learning which we have, all our consequent travel will
but help us in a circle to conduct us to the place from whence we set forwards,
and bring us to the happiness to be restored in integrum, which will require as
many ages as have marched before us to be perfectly achieved. And this I write
with no dislike of increasing our knowledge with newfound devices (which is
undoubtedly a practice of high commendation) in regard of the benefit they will
yield for the present, that the world has ever been, and will assuredly
continue very full of such Devisers, whose industry that way has been very
obstinate and eminent, and has produced strange effects above the reach and
the hope of men's common capacities; and yet our Notions and Theorems have
always kept in grace both with them and with the rarest that ever were named
among the learned.

By this you see to what boldness I am brought by your kindness, That (if I
seem to be too saucy in this contradiction) it is the opinion that I hold of
your noble disposition, and of the freedom in these cases that you will afford
your special friend, that has induced me to do it. And although I my self,
like a Carriers horse, cannot bawk the beaten way in which I have been trained;
yet since it is my censure of your Cogitata that I must tell you, to be plain,
you have very much wronged your self and the world, to smother such a treasure
so long in your coffer: For though I stand well assured (for the tenor and
subject of your main discourse) you are not able to impanel a Jury in any
University that will give up a verdict to acquit you of error, yet it cannot be
gainsaid that all your Treatise over does abound with choice conceit of the
present state of learning, and with so worthy contemplations of the means to
procure it, as may persuade with any Student to look more narrowly to his
business, not only by aspiring to the greatest perfection of that which is now
adays divulged in the Sciences, but by diving yet deeper as it were into the
bowels and secrets of nature, and by enforcing of the powers of his judgment
and wit to learn of St. Paul, Consectari meliora dona: which course would to
God (to whisper so much into your ear) you had followed at the first when you
fell to the study of such a study as was not worthy such a Student.
Nevertheless being so as it is, that you are therein settled, and your Country
soundly served, I cannot but wish with all my heart, as I do very often, that
you may gain a fit reward to the full of your deserts. Which I hope will come
with heaps of happiness and honor.

From Fulham, Feb. 19. 1607. Yours to be used and commanded, THO. BODELEY.
Sir, one kind of boldness does draw on another, insomuch as methinks I should
offend to signify, that before the transcript of your book be fitted for the
Press, it will be requisite for you to cast a Censors eye upon the style and
the elocution; which in the framing of some periods, and in diverse words and
phrases, will hardly go for current, if the Copy brought to me be just the
same that you would publish.

THO. BODELEY.



Mr. George Brook to a Lady in Court.
Madam,
THe message which you sent me of her Majesty's gracious purpose altered
toward me, has put me into that ecstasy, that I know not whereupon to rest my
self, not having power to believe that which I am bound to know. Is it possible
that you should be so weak in grace with her Majesty, as not to prevail in so
small a matter for any man but of an entire reputation? or shall I believe that
her Majesty, who suffers not the merit of her servants to be buried with them,
should not hold me equivalent with any new Melchisedech without father or
mother. I protest (Madam) I could not presage any ill success to my self, but
only out of the means of my ambition, and have held it therefore superfluous
to claim any favor in virtue of supererogation, esteeming it too great a
derogation from my self for so poor a thing as a Spittle-house to raise the
dead to speak for me, or challenge any thing more then my own. But it is
neither the strangeness of the matter, nor the hardness of my belief that can
alter the decree of a Prince. But I must take it in good payment, that is no
less then for as great a disgrace as can outwardly befall me; yet must I ever
hold my self beholding to this suit: for though I lose the Hospital, yet have I
lost many errors; withal I have weighed my friends in a balance, and taken a
just measure of my fortune. I must not despair, it is not impossible for a man
well taught to make a retreat into himself, neither will I yet despair of my
suit, only for this reason, that this change cannot proceed of her Majesty's
proper motion, but must be procured by some blind practice that dares not see
the light, though it may be my fortune to bring it forth blushing; howsoever it
be, it shall never distemper my dutiful affection toward her Majesty, though
that be for ever barred from her knowledge: for they who are able to prevent
her goodness, will be ever likely to prevent my service. That the place is
already meant to a Divine, cannot be true, nor my impediment: For there is no
kind of her Majesty's servants and subjects so provided for, there being such
store of places that fall daily both better then this in value, and more proper
for their function. Your Ladyship has been hitherto an honorable and faithful
intercessor for me; Good Madam, be not weary to continue so still, as I shall
do ever to acknowledge it, and if I be able, in part to deserve it.

G. B.

To his Wife.
LEt me entreat you to read my Letter once again, and if you can find no cause
of quarrel, do but then think what you have done all this time to send me such
a Cartoll; you cannot be more void of fault then I of suspicion, and what you
speak I cannot understand. But does my imprisonment abridge me that I cannot
give you counsel? Or have you resolved to follow the counsel of the Lady you
know? Know then, as my ill fortune cannot deject me, so ought it much less to
make you brave and insolent. You have your choice of two courses, let me know
which you will take, that I trust not to a broken Reed. And yet what need I
care, seeing that you who were my chief care, do now begin to sever your self:
I will not yet condemn you, you may see how unapt I am to entertain ill
thoughts. I will yet both hold and write my self

Your loving Husband, G. BROOKS.

King James to the Major and Aldermen of London after he was proclaimed, March
28. 1605.
To our trusty and wel-beloved Robert Lo, Lord Major of our City of London,
and to our welbeloved the Aldermen and Commons of the same.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you heartily well. Being informed of your
great forwardness in that just and honorable action of proclaiming us your
sovereign Lord and King, immediately after the decease of our late deceased
Sister the Queen; wherein you have given a singular good proof of your ancient
fidelity, a reputation hereditary to that our City of London, being the
Chamber of our Imperial Crown, and ever free from all shades of tumultuous and
unlawful courses; We could not omit with all possible speed we might, to give
you hereby a Test of our thankful mind for the same; and withal assurance
that you cannot crave any thing of us fit for the maintenance of you all in
general, and every one of you in particular, but it shall be most willingly
performed by us, whose special care shall ever be to provide for the
continuance and increase of your present happiness, desiring you in the mean
time to go constantly forward in doing all and whatsoever things you shall find
necessary or expedient for the good government of our said City, in execution
of justice, as you have been used to do in our said dearest Sisters time, till
our pleasure be known to you in the contrary. Thus not doubting but you will
do, as you may be fully assured of our gracious favor toward you in the
highest degree, we bid you heartily farewell.

Hallyrud-House March 28. 1603. JAMES R.

The Roman Catholics Petition to King James for Toleration.
MOst puissant Prince, and orient Monarch! Such are the rare perfections and
admirable gifts of wisdom, prudence, valor, and justice, wherewith the
bountiful hand of Gods divine Majesty has endued your Majesty, as in the
depth of your provident judgment we doubt not but you foresee what concerns
both the spiritual and temporal Government of all your Kingdoms and Dominions.
Notwithstanding your Graces most afflicted Subjects and devoted Servants the
Catholics of England, partly to prevent sinister informations which happily may
possess your sacred ears before our answer be heard, partly as men almost
overwhelmed with persecutions for our consciences, we are enforced to have
speedy recourse in hope of present redress from your Highness, and to present
these humble lines unto your Royal person to plead for us some commiseration
and favor. Alas, what allegiance or duty can any Temporal Prince desire or
expect at his Vassals hands, which we are not addressed to perform? How many
Noblemen and worthy Gentlemen, most zealous in the Catholic Religion, have
endured, some loss of lands and livings, some exile, others imprisonment, some
the effusion of blood and life, for the advancement of your blessed Mothers
right unto the Scepter of Albion? Nay, whose finger did ever ache but
Catholics, for your Majesty's present title and dominions? How many fled to
your Court, offering themselves as hostages for their friends to live and die
in your gracious quarrel, if ever adversary had opposed himself against the
equity of your cause? If this they attempted with their Princes disgrace to
obtain your Majesty's grace, what will they do, nay what will they not do to
live without disgrace in your Graces favor? The main of this Realm, if we
respect Religion, setting petty Sects aside, consists of four parts:
Protestants, who have domineered all the Queens days; Puritans, who have crept
up apace amongst them; Atheists or Politicians, who were bred upon their brawls
and contentions in matters of faith; and Catholics, who as they are opposite
to all, so are they detested of all, because error was ever an enemy to truth.
Hardly all, or any two of the first three can be suppressed: Therefore we
beseech your Majesty to yield us as much favor, as others of contrary Religion
to that which shall be publicly professed in England shall obtain at your
hands: For if our fault be like less, or none at all, in equity our punishment
ought to be like less, or none at all. The Gates, Arches, and Pyramids of
France proclaimed the present King Pater patriae and Pacis restitutor, that is,
the Father of his Country, and Restorer of their peace; because that Kingdom
being well near torn in pieces with Civil wars, and made a prey to foraign
foes, was by his providence, wisdom and valor acquitted in it self, and
hostile strangers expelled: the which he principally effected by condescending
to tolerate them of an adverse Religion to that which was openly professed.
Questionless, Dread Sovereign, the Kingdom of England through the cruel
persecution of Catholics, has been almost odious to all Christian Nations:
Trade and traffic is exceedingly decayed, Wars and blood has seldom ceased,
Subsidies and Taxes never so many, discontented minds innumerable. All which
your Princely Majesty's connivance to your humble suppliants the afflicted
Catholics, will easily redness, especially at this your Highness first
ingress. Si loquaris ad nos verba levia, erunt tibi servi cunctis diebus (1
King 12.7.) that is, if you speak comfortable things unto them, or if you
hearken unto them in this thing, they will be servants unto you, or they will
serve all their days,] say the sage Counselors of Solomon to Roboam. For,
enlargement after affliction resembles a pleasant gale after a vehement
tempest; and a benefit in distress, doubleth the value thereof. How grateful
will it be to all Catholic Princes abroad, and honorable to your Majesty, to
understand how Queen Elizabeth's severity is changed into your Royal clemency;
and that the lenity of a man reedified what the misinformed anger of a woman
destroyed; that the Lion rampant is passant, whereas the passant had been
rampant. How acceptable shall your Subjects be to all Catholic Countries, who
are now almost abhorred of all, when they shall perceive your Highness
prepares not pikes or prisons for the Professors of their Faith, but
permits them Temples and Altars for the use of their Religion. Then we shall
see with our eyes, and touch with our fingers that happy benediction of Isa.
14.7. in this Land, that swords are turned into mattocks or ploughs, and lances
into sithes; and all Nations admiring us will say, Hi sunt semen cui benedixit
Dominus, that is, these are the seed which the Lord has blessed.

We request no more favor at your Graces hands, then that we may securely
believe and profess that Catholic Religion which all your happy Predecessors
professed, from Donaldus the first converted, unto your late blessed Mother
martyred; a Religion venerable for antiquity, majestical for amplitude,
constant for continuance, irreprehensible for doctrine, inducing to all kind of
virtue and piety, dissuading from all sin and wickedness; a religion beloved by
all primitive Pastors, established by all Oecumenicall Councels, upholden by
ancient Doctors, maintained by the first and best Christian Emperors, recorded
almost alone in all Ecclesiastical Histories, sealed with the blood of
millions of Martyrs, adorned with the virtues of so many Confessors, beautified
with the purity of thousands of virgins, so conformable unto natural sense and
reason; and finally, so agreeable with the sacred Texts of Gods Word and
Gospel: The free use of this Religion we request, if not in public Churches,
at the least in private houses; if not with approbation, yet with toleration
without molestation. Assuring your Grace, that howsoever some Protestants or
Puritans incited by moral honesty of life, or innated instinct of nature, or
for fear of some temporal punishment, pretend obedience unto your Highness
Laws; yet certainly the only Catholics for conscience sake observe them: For
they defending that Princes Precepts and Statutes oblige no subject under the
penalty of sin, will have little care in conscience to transgress them, which
principally are tormented with the guilt of sin. But Catholics professing
merit in obeying, and immerit in transgressing, cannot but in Soul be
grievously tortured for the least prevarication thereof: Wherefore, most
merciful Sovereign, we your loving afflicted subjects, in all dutiful
subjection, protest before the Majesty of God, and all his holy Angels, as
loyal obedience, and immaculate allegiance unto your Grace, as ever did
faithful subjects in England or Scotland unto your Highness Progenitors, and
intend as sincerely with our goods and lives to serve you, as ever did the
loyallest Israelites King David, or the trustiest Legions the Roman Emperors.
And thus expecting your Majesty's customary favor and gracious bounty, we rest
your devoted suppliants to him whose hands do manage the hearts of Kings, and
with reciprocate mercy will requite the merciful.

Your Majesty's most devoted servants the Catholics of England.

Sir Walter Raleigh to King James before his trial.
IT is one part of the Office of a just and worthy Prince, to hear the
complaints of his vassals; especially such as are in great misery. I -- know
not amongst many other presumptions gathered against me, how your Majesty has
been persuaded, that I was one of them who were greatly discontented, and
therefore the more likely to prove disloyal. But the great God so relieve me
in both worlds as I was the contrary, and I took as great comfort to behold
your Majesty, and always learning some good, and bettering my knowledge by
hearing your Majesty's discourse. I do most humbly beseech your Sovereign
Majesty not to believe any of those in my particular, who under pretense of
offenses to Kings, do easily work their particular revenge. I trust no man
under the color of making examples, should persuade your Majesty to leave the
word Merciful out of your Style; for it will be no less profit to your Majesty,
and become your greatness, then the word Invincible. It is true, that the Laws
of England are no less jealous of the Kings then Caesar was of Pompey's wife:
for notwithstanding she was cleared for having company with Claudius, yet for
being suspected, he condemned her. For my self, I protest before Almighty God,
and I speak it to my Master and Sovereign, that I never invented treason
against him; and yet I know I shall fall in manibus eorum a quibus non possum
evadere, unless by your Majesty's gracious compassion I be sustained. Our Law
therefore (most merciful Prince) knowing her own cruelty, and knowing that she
is wont to compound treason out of presumptions and circumstances, does give
this charitable advice to the King her Supreme, Non solum sapiens esse sed and
misericors, etc. cum tutius sit reddere rationem misericordiae quam judicii. I
do therefore on the knees of my heart beseech your Majesty from your own sweet
and comfortable disposition, to remember that I have served your Majesty twenty
years, for which your Majesty has yet given me no reward; and it is fitter I
should be indebted unto my Sovereign Lord, then the King to his poor Vassal;
Save me therefore, most merciful Prince, that I may ow your Majesty my life it
self, then which there cannot be a greater debt. Limit me at least, my
Sovereign Lord, that I may pay it for your service when your Majesty shall
please. If the Law destroy me, your Majesty shall put me out of your power, and
I shall have none to fear but the King of Kings.

WALTER RALEIGH.

Sir Walter Raleigh to Sir Robert Car, after Earl of Somerset.
SIR,
AFter many losses, and many years sorrows, of both which I have cause to fear
I was mistaken in their ends: It is come to my knowledge, that your self (whom
I know not but by an honorable favor) has been persuaded to give me and mine
my last fatal blow, by obtaining from his Majesty the Inheritance of my
Children and Nephews, lost in Law for want of a word. This done, there
remains nothing with me but the name of life: His Majesty, whom I never
offended, (for I hold it unnatural and unmanlike to hate goodness) staid me at
the graves brink; not that I thought his Majesty thought me worthy of many
deaths, and to behold mine cast out of the world with my self, but as a King
that knows the poor in truth, has received a promise from God that his
Throne shall be established.

And for you, Sir, seeing your fair day is but in the dawn, mine drawn to the
setting; your own virtues and the Kings grace assuring you of many fortunes and
much honor: I beseech you begin not your first building upon the ruins of the
innocent, and let not mine and their sorrows attend your first plantation. I
have ever been bound to your Nation as well for many other graces, as for the
true report of my trial to the Kings Majesty; against whom had I been
malignant, the hearing of my cause would not have changed enemies into friends,
malice into compassion, and the minds of the greatest number then present into
the commiseration of mine estate. It is not the nature of foul Treason to beget
such fair passions; neither could it agree with the duty and love of faithful
Subjects (especially of your Nation) to bewail his overthrow that had conspired
against their most natural and liberal Lord. I therefore trust that you will
not be the first that shall kill us outright, cut down the tree with the fruit,
and undergo the curse of them that enter the fields of the fatherless: which,
if it please you to know the truth, is far less in value then in fame. But that
so worthy a Gentleman as your self will rather bind us to you (being six
Gentlemen not base in birth and alliance) which have interest therein: And my
self with my uttermost thankfulness will remain ready to obey your commandments.

WALTER RALEIGH.

Sir Thomas Egerton Chancellor, after Lord Ellesmere, to the Earl of Essex.
SIR,
HOw things proceed here touching your self, you shall partly understand by
these enclosed. Her Majesty is gracious toward you, and you want not friends
to remember and commend your former services. Of these particulars you shall
know more when we meet. In the mean time by way of caution take this from me:
There are sharp eyes upon you, your actions public and private are observed:
It behooves you therefore to carry your self with all integrity and sincerity
both of hands and heart, lest you overthrow your own fortunes, and discredit
your friends that are tender and careful of your reputation and well-doing. So
in haste I commit you to God, with my very hearty commendations, and rest

Your assured loving Friend, THO. EGERTON, C. S.
At the Court at Richmond, 21 October. 1599.
Lord Chancellor Ellesmere to King James.
Most gracious Sovereign,
I Find through my great age, accompanied with griefs and infirmities, my sense
and conceit is become dull and heavy, my memory decayed, my judgment weak, my
hearing imperfect, my voice and speech failing and faltering, and in all the
powers and faculties of my mind and body great debility. Wherefore, conscientia
imbecilitatis, my humble suit to your most sacred Majesty is, to be discharged
of this great Place wherein I have long served, and to have some comfortable
Testimony under your Royal hand, that I leave it at this humble suit with your
gracious favor. So shall I with comfort number and spend the few days I have
to live, in meditation; and prayers to Almighty God, to preserve your Majesty
and all yours in all heavenly and earthly felicity and happiness.

This suit I intended some years past, ex dictamine rationis and conscientiae:
Love and fear stayed it; now Necessity constrains me to it, I am utterly unable
to sustain the burden of this great service; for I am come to St. Paul's
desire, Cupio dissolvi and esse cum Christo. Wherefore I most humbly beseech
your Majesty most favorably to grant it.

Your Majesty's most humble and loyal poor Subject and Servant, THO. ELLESMERE
Cane.

Again to the same King.
Most gracious Sovereign,
YOur royal favor has placed and continued me many years in the highest place
of ordinary Justice in this your Kingdom, and has most graciously borne with
my many, but unwilling errors and defects, accepting in stead of sufficiency,
my zeal and fidelity, which never failed. This does encourage and stir in me an
earnest desire to serve still. But when I remember St. Paul's rule, Let him that
has an office wait on his office, and do consider withal my great age and
many infirmities, I am dejected and do utterly faint: For I see and feel
sensibly, that I am not able to perform those duties as I ought, and the place
requires; and thereupon I do seriously examine my self what excuse or answer I
shall make to the King of Kings, and Judge of all Judges, when he shall call me
to account; and then my conscience shall accuse me, that I have presumed so
long to undergo and weild so mighty and great a charge and burden: and I
behold a great Cloud of witnesses ready to give evidence against me.

1. Reason tells me, and by experience I find, Senectus est tarda and
obliviosa, and insanabilis morbus.

2. I heard the precepts and council of many reverend, sage, and learned men,
Senectuti debitur otium, solve senectutem mature, etc.

3. I read in former Laws, that old men were made temeriti and rude donati: And
one severe Law that says, Sexagenarius de ponte, whereupon they are called
Depontanei. And Plato lib. 6. de legibus, speaking of a great Magistrate which
was Praefectus legibus servandis, determines thus, Minor annis 50 non
admittatur; nec major annis 70 permittatur in eo perseverare. And to this Law,
respecting both mine office and my years, I cannot but yield. But leaving
foreign Laws, the Stat. anno 13. E. 1. speaks plainly, Homines excedentes
aetatem 70 annorum non ponantur in Assissis and Juratis. So as it appears
that men of that age are by that Law discharged of greater painful and
careful, especially Judicial Offices.

4. Besides, I find many examples of men of great wisdom, knowledge and
judgment, meet and worthy to be followed; of which (leaving all other) I will
remember that of William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor of
England, who after long service, was upon his humble suit discharged of the
office of Chancellor of England in respect of his great age. Seeing then such a
cloud of witnesses against me, which in my private Soliloquies and Meditations,
are daily and continually represented to my view, and mine own conscience (more
then a thousand witnesses) concurring with me; Pardon me, my most gracious
Sovereign, to conclude with good Barzillai, Quot s^nt dies annorum vitae meae,
quare servus tuus sit oneri domino nostro Regi, obsecro ut revertar servus tuus
and moriar, etc. So I most humbly beseech your sacred Majesty, graciously to
regard the great age, infirmity, and impotency of your most devoted, obedient,
loyal and faithful servant. Let me not be as Domitius after was, Maluit
deficere quam desinere. But with your Princely favor give me leave to retire
myself from the careful service of this great office, and from the troubles of
this world, and to spend the small remnant of this my life in meditation and
prayer, and I will never cease to make my humble supplications to Almighty God
to bless and prosper your Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, all your Royal issue,
with all heavenly and earthly felicity, which is the last and best service your
poor, aged, weak and decayed servant can do for you.

THO. ELLESMERE Canc.

Sir Francis Norris to King James.
Most gracious Sovereign,
THe advantage which mine adversary has taken, in first presenting his
complaint freely and uncontrolled, would have afflicted me greatly, had I not
known that your Majesty has given to your Judges Injunction, Auditne alteram
partem. That I entered into discourse with the Lord Willoughby in Church or
Churchyard, may make it manifest, that I had no disposition at all to
quarrel. The rest of the world is wide enough for men so affected. They that
profane such places, trust more to the place the ntheir own worth. That I was
improvidently in such a place by him surprised, muffled in my own Cloak, and
treacherously buffeted, showed that I suspected no such assault as was there
made upon me, and where I was so disgracefully and ignobly assaulted by the
Lord Willoughby, and he in no sort by me, yet well I hope to satisfy every
indifferent judgment, much more the supreme Judge, that I had nothing in my
intention either toward the Master or the Man. It is true, most gracious
Sovereign, that after the Lord Willoughby's dishonorable indignity by me
expelled, I seeing an unknown face coming fiercely with his sword upon me for
my life, (in defense whereof God himself, the law of Nature and Nations does
warrant us to contend) I was forced to have forgone it at a Ruffins command, or
by resisting to yield it up to your Majesty, to whom I have vowed it
(whenever you shall command it) to your service. This I presume to write to a
King in whom rests the spirit of honor; and by that spirit I hope your Majesty
will judge, that he which will run from his own defense, being injuriously
assaulted, will also run from the defense of his Sovereign Master. I also
presume in all humility to address my self to a Prince endued with the spirit
of Justice, joined to the divine virtue of compassion; by both which I nothing
doubt your Majesty will judge when you shall be truly informed, of the
preceding and succeeding wrongs offered me, that I am and will be

Your Majesty's most humble and loyal subject, FR. NORRIS.

A Patent for the Admiralty of Ireland.
RIght trusty and welbeloved Cousin and Councellor, We greet you well. Whereas
we are graciously pleased, as well for the increase of our Navy and Navigators,
as also for the better enabling and enriching of our subjects in our Realm of
Scotland, to give way and liecnce unto our loving subjects of Scotland, and so
many of them as may make a full, able, and complete company for Traffic and
Merchandising into the East Indies, to erect and set up among themselves a
Company, to be called The East Indian Company of Scotland, making their first
Magazin Storehouse for the said Company in some parts of our Realm of Ireland.
But for that our Ports and Seas upon the Coasts of our said Realm of Ireland,
have of late, and still are likely, without our special aid and assistance, to
be much troubled and annoyed with Pirates, and other Sea-Robbers, to the great
discouragement of our loving Subjects and Merchants passing that way: We, for
the avoiding of those inconveniences, and for the better heartning of the said
Company in their intended voyage and traffic, have, for reasons to us best
known, resolved (notwithstanding any other employments of our Ships there) by
our Letters Patents under our great Seal of England, and at the humble request
and Petition of our loving Subjects of the said Company, to nominate and
appoint A. B. our trusty servant, to be employed in those Seas and Coasts of
Ireland, as fully and amply as our servant Sir F. H. is now for our narrow
Seas. And to the end he may with more courage and less prejudice to our said
servant Sir F. H. by his diligence and industry in the said employment free
those Seas from the said annoyances, our pleasure is, That you by your Deed
Poll do give unto our said Servant such and the like power and authority for
the Irish Seas and Channel of St. George, as the said Sir F. H. has for the
Narrow Seas: So always as the power and authority of the said A. B. may begin
where the power and authority of the said Sir F. H. does end, that is to say,
from our Island of Scilie in our Realm of England, unto and along the Coast
of Ireland, and the Channel of St. George. So not doubting of your speedy
effecting of what is here required for the furtherance of so good a work, We
bid you heartily farewell.

From our Court at, etc.

A Commission to diverse Lords, etc. for the delivery of Ulushing, Brill, etc.
May 14. Jac. 14.
JAMES by the grace of God King of England, etc.
To the right Reverend Father in God, our right trusty and welbeloved
Councellor George Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and to our right trusty and
welbeloved Councellor Tho. Ellesmere Lord Chancellor of England, and to our
right trusty and welbeloved Cousins and Counselors Tho. Earl of Suffolk Lord
Treasurer of England, Edward Earl of Worcester Lord Keeper of our Privy Seal,
Lodowick Duke of Lennox Lord Steward of our household, Charles Earl of Nottingham
Lord Admiral of England, William Earl of Pembroke Lord Chamberlain of our
household, Tho. Earl of Exeter, John Earl of Mar, and Alexander Earl of
Dumfermlin; and to our right trusty and right welbeloved Counselors, Tho.
Viscount Fenton, Tho. Bishop of Winton, Edward Lord Zouch Lord Warden of our
Cinque Ports, William Lord Knowls Treasurer of our household, John Lord Stanhop,
and Tho. Lord Bannings; and to our right trusty and welbeloved Counselors, Sir
John Digby Knight our Vice-Chamberlain, Sir John Herbert Knight one of our
principal Secretaries of State, Sir Fulk Grevil Knight Chancellor and
Under-Treasurer of our Exchequer, Sir Tho. Parry Knight Chancellor of our
Duchy of Lancaster, Sir Edward Coke Knight Chief Justice of our Bench, and Sir
Julius Caesar Knight Master of our Rolls, greeting.
Whereas the States-Generall of the United Provinces of the Low Countries have
diverse times solicited us by their resident Ambassador Sir Noel Caron Knight,
that we would be pleased to render into their hands the Towns of Flushing in
Zeland, with the Castle of Ramakins, and of Bril in Holland, with the Forts and
sconces thereunto belonging, which we hold by way of caution, until such sums
of money as tney owe unto us be reimbursed, upon such reasonable conditions as
should be agreed on between us and them for the reimbursing and repayments of
the said moneys: And whereas we have recommended the consideration of this so
mighty and important an affair to the judgment and discretion of you the Lords
of our Privy-Councel, and have received from you after long and mature
deliberation and examination of the circumstances an advice, That as the
present condition of our State now stands, and as the nature of those Towns
is mere cautionary, wherein we can challenge no interest of propriety; it would
be much better for our service, upon fair and advantageous conditions to render
them, then longer to hold them at so heavy a charge. Now forasmuch as in our
Princely wisdom we have resolved to yield up our said Town, with the said
Castle and Sconces belonging unto them, upon such conditions as shall be most
for our advantage as well in point of honor as of profit, Know ye therefore
that we have assigned and appointed you the said Archbishop, L. Treasurer, L.
Privy Seal, L. Steward, L. Admiral, L. Chamberlain, E. of Exeter, E. of Mar, E.
of Dunfermlin, Vicount Fintons, L. Bishop of Winton, L. Zouch, L. Knowls, L.
Stanhop, L. Banning, Sir John Digby, Sir John Herbert, Sir Ralph Winwood, Sir
Tho. Lake, Sir Fulk Grevil, Sir Tho. Parry, Sir Edw. Coke, Sir Julius Caesar,
our Commissioners, and do by these presents give full power and authority unto
you or the more part of you for us and in our name to treat and conclude with
the said Sir Noel Caron Knight Ambassador from the States of the United
Provinces, being likewise for that purpose sufficiently authorized from the
said States his superiors, touching the rendition and yielding up of the said
Town of Flushing, with the Castle of Ramakins in Zeland, and of the Town of
Bril in Holland, with the Forts and Sconces thereto belonging, and of the
Artillery and Munition formerly delivered by the States, with the same which
are now remaining in them or any of them, and have not been spent and consumed.
And for the delivery of them into the hands of the said States on such terms as
by you shall be thought fit for our most honor and profit; and for the manner
thereof to give instructions to our said several Governors of the said
Garrisons, according to such your conclusion. And this our Commission or the
enrollment or exemplification thereof shall be unto you and every of you a
sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalf. In witness etc. Witness our
self at Westminster, the 31 day of May, in the 14 year of our Reign, etc. and
of Scotland the 49.

A Commission to Viscount Lisle Governor, to deliver them up, 22 May, 14. Jac.
JAMES by the grace of God, etc.
To our right trusty and welbebeloved Cozen, Robert Lord Viscount Lisle, Lord
Chamberlain to our dear Consort the Queen, and our Governor of our Town of
Vlushing, and of the Castle of Ramakins, greeting.
Whereas we by Our Letters Patents sealed with Our great Seal of England,
bearing date at Westminster the 22. day of April, in the fifth year of Out
reign of England, France, and Ireland, of Scotland the 36. for the
consideration therein expressed, did make, ordain, and constitute you the said
Viscount Lisle, by the name of Sir Robert Sydney Knight, for Us to be the
Governor and Captain of the said Town of Vlushing, and of the Castle of
Ramakins in the Low Countries, and of all the Garrisons and Soldiers that then
were, or hereafter should be there placed for Our service and guard of the said
Town and Castle, to have, hold, exercise and occupy the Office of the said
Governor and Captain of the said Town and Castle by your self, or your
sufficient Deputy or Deputies, to be allowed by Us during Our pleasure; giving
unto you full power and authority by your said Letters Patents, to take the
Oath and Oaths of all Captains and Soldiers then serving, or that hereafter
should serve in the same Town and Castle, as in like causes was requisite, with
diverse other powers therein mentioned, as by Our said Letters Patents at large
appears. And whereas the States general of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries, have diverse and sundry times for many years together solicited
Us by their Resident Ambassador Sir Noel Caron Knight, that We would be pleased
to render into their hands the said Town of Vlushing in Zealand, with the said
Castle of Ramakins, and the Town of Brill in Holland, with the Forts and
Sconces thereunto belonging, which We hold by way of Caution until such sums of
money as they owe unto Us, be reimbursed upon such reasonable conditions as
should be agreed upon between Us and them for the reimbursing and repaiment of
the said moneys. And whereas thereupon We recommended the consideration of this
so weighty and important an affair to the judgment and discretion of the Lords
of the Privy Council, and have received from them (after long and mature
deliberation and examination of Circumstances) an advice, that as the present
condition of Our State now stands, and as the nature of those towns is lying
only Cautionary, wherein we can challenge no interest of propriety, it should
be much better for our service upon fair and advantangious conditions to render
them, then longer to hold them at so heavy a charge. Now forasmuch as in Our
Princely Wisdom We have resolved to yield up Our said Towns with the said
Castle, and Sconces belonging unto them, upon such conditions as shall be most
sit for Our advantage, as well in point of honor as of profit: And to that end
by Our Commission under Our great Seal of England, have assigned and appointed
the Lords and others of Our Privy Council Our Commissioners, and thereby give
full power and authority unto them, or the more part of them for Us, and in Our
name to treat and conclude with the said Sir Noell Caron Knight, Ambassador
from the States of the United Provinces, being likewise for that purpose
sufficiently authorized from the said States his superiors, touching the
rendition and yiedling up of the said Town of Vlushing, with the Castle of
Ramakins in Zealand, and of the said town of Brill in Holland, with the Forts
and Sconces thereunto belonging, and of the Artillery or Munition formerly
delivered by the said States, with the same Towns, and Castles, and Forts, and
which are now remaining in them, or any of them, and have not been spent or
consumed. And for the delivery of the said Towns, Castle, Forts, Artillery, and
Munition into the hands of the said States, upon such terms as by the said
Lords, and other of our Privy Council, or the more part of them, shall be
thought fit for our most honor and profit, and for the manner thereof to give
instructions to our several Governors of our said Garrisons according to such
their conclusion, which conclusion according to our said Commission is already
made and perfected.

We do therefore hereby give power and authority unto, and do charge and
command you the said Lord Lisle for us and in our name to render and yield up
into the hands of the said States of the United Provinces, or to such persons
as shall be lawfully deputed by them, the aforesaid Town of Vlushing, and
Castle of Ramakins, whereof now you have charge by virtue of our
Letters Patent aforesaid, together with the Artillery and Munition now
remaining in them or any of them, heretofore delivered by the said States with
the said Town and Castle, and as yet not spent or consumed; observing and
performing in all points such instructions as you shall receive under the hands
of the said Lords and others of our Privy-Councel, or the more part of them,
concerning the rendering up and delivery of the said Town. And we do further
give you full power and authority, and by these presents do charge and command
you, for us and in our name to discharge and set free all the subordinate
Officers, Captains and soldiers under your charge, of that oath and trust
which heretofore they have taken for the keeping and preserving of that Town
and Castle to our use and service; and for that purpose to make such
Declaration, Proclamation, and other signification of our Royal pleasure,
commandment and ordinance in that behalf, as in your wisdom you shall think
fit; and these our Letters Patent, or the inrollment or exemplification
thereof shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalf. In
witness, etc. Witness our self at Westminster, the 22 day of May in the 14 year
of our reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the 49.

Countess of Nottingham to the Danish Ambassador.
SIR,
I Am very sorry this occasion should have been offered me by the King your
Master, which makes me troublesome to you for the present. It is reported to me
by men of honor, the great wrong the King of the Danes has done me, when I
was not by to answer for my self: For if I had been present, I would have
letten him know how much I scorn to receive that wrong at his hands. I need not
to urge the particular of it, for the King himself knows it best. I protest to
you Sir, I did think as honorably of the King your Master, as I did of my own
Prince; but now I persuade my self there is as much baseness in him as can be
in any man: For although he be a Prince by birth, it seems not to me that there
harbors any Princely thought in his breast; for either in Prince or Subject,
it is the basest that can be to wrong any woman of honor: I deserve as little
that name he gave me, as either the mother of himself or of his children; and
if ever I come to know what man has informed your Master so wrongfully of me,
I should do my best for putting him from doing the like to any other: but if it
has come by the tongue of any woman, I dare say she would be glad to have
companions. So leaving to trouble you any further, I rest,

Your friend M. NOTTINGHAM.

Sir Charles Cornwallis Lieger in Spain, to the Spanish King, July 23. 1608.
YOur Majesty has showed the sincerity of your Royal heart in applying remedy
to many inconveniences and injustice offered by your Ministers to the King my
masters subjects in their goods and bodies, and therein have performed not only
what belongs to your Kingly dignity, but also what might be expected from a
Prince so zealous of justice and of so good intention. It rests that now I
beseech you to cast your Royal eyes upon another extreme injustice offered not
only to their bodies and goods, but to their very souls; who being by your
Majesty's agreement confirmed with your oath to live within these your Kingdoms
free from molestation for matter of opinion and conscience, except in matters
of scandal to others, are here laid hold on and imprisoned by your Majesty's
Officers of Inquisition continually upon every light occasion of private
information of some particular persons of their own Country, who being
fugitives out of their own houses, and having according to the nature of our
people removed not only their bodies, but their hearts from the soil that bred
them, and from their brethren that were nourished with them, do here seek to
grace themselves by professing and teaching the observations of the Romish
Church; and that not out of any zeal, but as plainly appears by many of their
actions, out of malice and envy. By the Commissioners authorized by both your
Majesty's for the agreeing of the Peace, it was clearly discerned, that if upon
private or particular informations his Majesty's vassals here should be
questioned for matter of Religion, it was not possible that they should
exercise any commerce in these kingdoms, where they should be no one moment
assured either of their goods or liberties. It was therefore provided that they
should in no sort be impeached but in case of scandal; and that scandal, with
your Majesty's favor, must be understood to grow out of some public action,
not out of private opinion or single conscience; for if otherwise, very vain
and inutile had been that provision. How the word scandal is in the most usual
and common sense to be understood, is in no books more evident then in the
Divine Scriptures themselves. Our Savior, in regard of his public teaching
of the Gospel, and the abolishing of the Law-Ceremonial, was said to be to both
houses of Israel a stone of scandal. The sin of David, if it had lain covered
in his own heart, or been committed in private, should not have been either
published or punished as a scandal to the enemies of God. St. Paul himself
declares, that his own eating of flesh offered to Idols could not be an
offense, but only his eating before others of weak conscience whereby to give
the scandal. Besides, I humbly beseech your Majesty consider how fitly that of
the Apostle Quis es qui judicas alienum servum, may be applied to those
Officers of the Inquisition attempting to lay hands on the subjects of another
Prince your Majesty's confederate, offering none offense to the Laws, or
public prejudice to their profession: yea, in diverse parts of your Majesty's
dominions the subjects of my Master have suffered this restraint. The
Inquisitor-Generall lately deceased, who in all his actions showed himself a
considerate Minister, and careful in regard of your Majesty's honor of the
observing of what you have capitulated, upon my complaint never failed to give
the remedy that in justice I required. He being now with God, and one of my
Sovereigns subjects having been long without cause detained by the Inquisitors
in Lisbon, and another of good account, a man moderate and temperate in all his
actions, lately apprehended by that Office in Almonte, and restrained in their
prison at Sivil: I am commanded from his Majesty, and importuned by my
Countrymen, who all with one voice complain and protest that they dare not
longer continue their commerce without present order for remedy of so extreme
and perilous an injustice, do beseech your Majesty that you will be pleased
not only to give present order for the release of those that without scandal
are known for the present in your prisons, but also that in time to come the
true intention of that Article be observed, which is, That without known
offense and scandal the King my Masters subjects be not molested. The
accomplishment of this (considering how much it imports your Majesty in honor,
your Majesty and the Archduke having in that Article in no other sort then in
all the rest covenanted by especial words, that your selves would provide that
in no case but only in giving scandal to others, the subjects of my Sovereign
should be troubled for their consciences) I cannot but expect from so just and
sincere a Prince: And therefore will not trouble your Majesty with more words;
but offering my self in all things within my power to your Majesty's service, I
remain with a desire to be reckoned in the number of your Majesty's humble and
affectionate servants,

C. C.
July 23 stilo novo, 1608.
Sir Charles Cornwallis to the Spanish King, Jan. 16. 1608.
THe largeness and liberality of your Majesty's Royal hand being such, that it
has made your Greatness and Munificence of so much note through most parts of
this world; I assure my self it is far removed from the thoughts of your
Princely heart to straiten in matter of Justice, that so naturally and
necessarily belongs to your Kingly Office: your Majesty has been pleased to
refer to the Constable, the Duke of Infantasque, and two of the Regents of your
Council of Arragon, the understanding and determining of the extreme and
barbarous usage, outrage and spoil committed by ships set out in course under
the commission, and at the charge of your Majesty's Viceroy of Sardinia, and
his son-in-law Don Lewis de Calatana, and others by their procurement: those
Lords and others there authorized by that Commission, very nobly and justly
desiring that of the spoil committed there might be made entire satisfaction,
gave order diverse months since; but your Majesty's Viceroy adding to his former
offense, contempt of your Majesty's authority, has not only disobeyed in his
own person, but contradicted and withstood in others the accomplishment of your
commandments; it seems that God is pleased for the good of your Majesty's
Estate and Government to disvizard that man, and make apparent to the world how
unfit he is to be trusted with your command of so great importance, whose
covetous and ungodly condition is come to such height, as has drawn him not
only to spoil unlawfully, and so barbarously to use the subjects of so great a
King your confederate, and thereby to hazard a breach of the amity between your
Majesty's so necessary for both your Estates, and so utile to the whole
Commonwealth of Christendom, but also to neglect and contemn the authority of
your Majesty his own Sovereign to whom, besides the obligation of his natural
allegiance, he is so infinitely bound for preferring and trusting him with a
matter of so great consequence and dignity. By this paper enclosed your Majesty
shall understand the manner of proceeding of the King my Master against such of
his subjects as commit the like crimes and outrage against any of yours, and
thereby conceive what my said Sovereign expects of your Majesty in this and
the like, and what I am commanded in conformity thereof to require, which is,
that there be no proceeding in so clear and plain a case, by way of process or
suit in Law, which in this kingdom as by experience is known, are immortal;
but that according to the sixth Article of the Peace, and the most Christian
and just example showed by my Sovereign, who so punctually and conscionably in
all things observes with your Majesty, you will be pleased that there be not
only an entire and immediate satisfaction to the parties, but that as well
your said Viceroy, and Don Lewis his son-in-law, as all others their aiders,
partners, and receivers in that crime may be criminally proceeded against, and
suffer such punishment as so enorm and unlawful actions have justly deserved:
The performance of this (considering with what patience the King my Master out
of his love to your Majesty, notwithstanding the daily complaints and
importunities of the parties, and the general exclamation of other his
subjects, who hold it rather agreeable with his honor and Kingly Office, not so
long to permit unsatisfied or unpunished so intolerable an outrage, has more
then three whole years attended it) I cannot but expect from so just and pious
a Prince without further delay or protraction of time. Jan. 16. novo stilo.
1608.

Sir Charles Cornwallis to the Spanish King.
WEll knows your Majesty in your Royal wisdom, how necessary to Kings is the
conservation of authority and respect to their Kingly dignities; as also that
the greatest and most absolute precept of Justice, is to do to others what we
would be done unto our selves: How religiously and punctually the King my
master has observed these unto your Majesty, has appeared by many
demonstrations, and not the least in the denial he made to Antonio de Perez to
abide in his Kingdom, or to have access to his person; only out of a conceit
he had, that he came with a mind determined to disauthorize your Majesty in his
speeches, or to make offer of some practice against your estates in his
overtures. Your Majesty's own Royal and grateful inclination I know to be
such, as you are not without desire to pay my Sovereign with the like
equivalent retribution: but with your Majesty's pardon and favor, duty
inforceth me plainly to tell you, that the Ministers of these your Kingdoms
show not the like affection; where not one, but many my of Sovereigns worst
affected subjects are daily received, cherished and honored with entertainments
in your service. Were that sort of people contented only to abuse your
Majesty's Kingly munificence and Christian charity, and to deceive your
Ministers with their falsified genealogies, and with putting the Don upon many
whose fathers and Ancestors were so base and beggarly, as they never arrived to
be owners of so much as convenient apparel to cover their nakedness, it were
much more tolerable: but when having here tasted the warmth of your Majesty's
liberal and pious hand, they become furnished in such ample and abundant
manner, as their poor and miserable ancestors durst never so much as dream of,
like Aesops serpent they turn their venomous stings toward the bosoms that
gave them heat and life, and endeavor with all the force and Art they have, to
give cause of distaste, and by consequence of division between your Majesty and
your faithfullest and most powerful Confederate, in uneven payment for your
Majesty's so great and gracious favor. With generalities for the present I
will not deal, as he whose cares and desires have ever been to soften, and not
to sharpen. Two Irish in your Court, the one a son, as by his own Countrymen
is generally reported, either to a vagabond Rimer, a generation of people in
that Country of the worst account; or to give him his best title, of a poor
Mechanical Surgeon. The other descended rather of more base and beggarly
parents; neglecting what by the Laws of God they ow to their own Sovereign, and
as little regarding their obligation to your Majesty, who from the dust of the
earth and miserable estate has made them what they are, notwithstanding that
they cannot be ignorant of the strait charge and commandments your Majesty
has given, that all due respect be had to the King my Master, and his
Ministers and subjects; the first in irreverend and irrespective behavior
toward my self and some of mine; the other in obstinate defending his
companions unmannerliness, delivering by way of direct asseveration, that I am
an heretic, and such an one as to whom it is not lawful under the pain of
deadly sin, to use any courtesy or reverence whatsoever, have of late
miscarried themselves, as I hold it not agreeable either with what I ow to the
King I serve, or the honor I have to represent his person, to pass over with
silence, but to present it instantly to your Majesty. The names of the parties
are, Magg Ogg, a Solicitor (as here is said) for the fugitive Earl of Tyrone,
condemned by the verdict of his own Contreymen, besides his delict of Treason,
of thirteen several murders. The other names himself Condio Mauricio, and is
here (as I am informed) allowed for a -- for his vagabonding Countrymen, has
put on the habit of a Priest, and has of your Majesty thirty crowns a month
in Pension. The parties and the offenses I have made known unto your Secretary
of State, and I cannot doubt your Majesty in conformity of what the King my
master has by so many arguments demonstrated toward your Majesty and your
Ministers, will command such exemplary punishment to be made of them, as a
behavior so undecent, a slander and reproach so intolerable, and an opinion so
desperate and dangerous, and so contrary to what your Majesty and all those of
your Council, Nobility and Clergy do practice, do worthily merit, etc. Feb.
1608.

Sir Charles Cornwallis to the Spanish King.
YOur Majesty to whom God has given so large an Empire, and so much exceeding
that of other Princes, and whom he has blessed with so great an inclination to
piety, clemency, and other virtues becoming your Royal dignity and Person,
will I know hold it evil beseeming so rare a greatness, to come behind any King
how pious and virtuous soever, either in the observance of the laws of mutual
charity and friendship, or in love or zeal to justice, which to all Kingdoms
and Governments gives the assuredst foundation; and in defect whereof by the
Spirit of God himself, Kingdoms are said to be translated from one Nation to
another. The first King that God gave unto his people, he elected of higher
stature then the rest by the shoulders upwards, signifying thereby how much
Kings are to strive to exceed and excel in the height and measure of virtue
and justice; also how fit it is for them to overlook with their authorities
and providence the highest head of their Ministers, and to observe how they
guide themselves.

By the content of this paper enclosed, your Majesty shall perceive the
Christian and Kingly care the King my Master has had, not only of the
observances of the Articles of Peace since the same between your Majesty's were
concluded; but of the punctual accomplishment of the true Laws of amity and
friendship, which are more surely and expressively imprinted in Royal and
Noble hearts, then possibly they can be written or charactered by any pen in
paper. In your Majesty's Kingdoms (pardon I humbly beseech you if I speak
plainly) much contrary to that example, the King my Masters subjects suffer all
manner of spoils, oppressions and miseries, and are (as well I may term them)
made a very prey to the hungry and greedy; your Viceroyes and others enter
their ships under cover and color of Peace and Justice, finding them rich,
they lay crimes to their charge, whereof there appears neither proof nor
probability; yet serve their pretenses to possess them of their goods, and to
put the poor Merchants to a demand in Law: wherein were truth alone the
balance they should be weighed by, (though that form of redress were far short
of the immediate remedy provided by the King my Sovereign for your Majesty's
subjects) yet were it much more allowable and to be endured; but having here
complained two whole years without any course at all taken for redress, as in
the cause with the Duke of Feria three entire years, as in that with the
Viceroy of Sardinia one year and more, as in that of his Majesty's servant
Adrian Thihaut, taken and spoiled by your Majesty's General Don Luis; as in
that of Estry and Bispich, imprisoned and bereaved of their goods by Iuan de
Vendoza Alcalde of Madrid, we are after so long a time spent in misery and
charge countervailing a great part of the value of the goods taken from us,
enforced still to all punctualities and extremities of forms of law, and to
abide the uttermost peril of all advantages that by the inventions, wits and
tongues of Lawyers can be devised, to obscure and hide the light and right of
truth. The false color given by every of these, and the barbarous cruelty used
to the parties, would require too long and tedious a declaration. It satisfies
that none of their pretenses are proved; nay, which is more they are so false
and fabulous as to no indifferent understanding they appear so much as probable.

My humble desire is, your Majesty would be pleased to pass your own Royal eyes
upon this paper; and therefore to affect all possible brevity, I will pass unto
your Majesty's other inferior ministers of your Ports, of which few there are
(those in Biscay, and some in Portugal only excepted) where we have not diverse
oppressions, imprisonments, and unjust imbargements, in Sivil especially;
whereof forty several suits, and as many false sentences given, raised and
pursued by a man now dead, and therefore in charity left unnamed. We have
hitherto in your Majesty's Council of war (where before those noble Lords all
passed by the equal line of Justice) not failed in my remembrance in the
overthrowing of any, save one mistaken that passed in a wrong name, and another
concerning merchandise that had their manufacture in Embden, (whereof I suppose
those Lords were not rightly informed) only excepted. In that Court I must
acknowledge we have had redress, but yet with your Majesty's favor a miserable
one; our gain being whether we shall be owners of our own or not, our expenses
and charges certain, and the time without measure large, whereby many have been
undone, some dead in prison in England for want of what was unjustly detained
from them here. Yet neither the false Judges in Sivil nor Promoters ever
chastised, or for any thing that I yet have understood, so much as ever
reprehended or found fault with.

I haste to a conclusion, fearing lest I should dwell too long in a matter so
unsavory and unpleasing to your Majesty's pitiful ears and Christian heart,
so much of it self disposed to all clemency and piety. I will for the next
resort to the ships, cordage, corn, and other victuals and provisions taken
from the King my Sovereigns subjects for your Majesty's own services, and the
relief of the extreme necessity in your Galleys, and Garrisons of the Navy, of
whom some have been enforced for want of payment of their moneys to send their
ships home unfreighted, a loss extreme to poor Merchants that live by trade and
time, to repair to this Court, and here remain some of them 14 months, and
others two years and more, till their very charges had eaten out a great part
of what was due unto them, and in the end recover only their own without any
relief or recompense either for their expenses, times lost, or damages. I will
only instance two, because their causes are most strange and pitiful, and yet
unsatisfied; the one named Thomas Harrison, and the other Richard Morris: The
first served your Majesty with his ship, till the same with one of his sons and
all of his men were swallowed with the seas, and has been here more then four
years suing for his recompense and salary, recommended by the King my
Sovereign, by Letters from your Majesty's Ambassadors in England, and by my
self all that long time furthered with my earnest solicitation; which has
begot infinite promises, but to this day no manner of payment or performance:
The other, who sometimes has been a man of wealth and reputation, and falling
into great poverty, served your Majesty with all that in the world he was
worth, and all that in value above 6000 Ryals. I blush I protest to think of
it, and my heart is grieved to mention it to so great a King, of whose
liberality and magnificence the world takes so much notice. His right and his
necessity being well known unto your Officers, he has been more then three
years and a half fed with hopes, and put off with schedules and sending from
one Port to another for the receipt of his money, till he has indebted himself
the most part of the sum, and at present wants wherewith both to feed and
cover him. Now at last he is promised payment out here of your Royal chests,
but after so many ceremonies and circumstances to be performed with your
Officers in other parts, as God knows hunger may end the poor man before they
begin to satisfy him. By all this will plainly appear to your Majesty, that
your Majesty's subjects are by the favor and Christian justice of the King my
master entered into the new Testament and law of Grace, having restitution and
remedy without the delays of ceremony and formality; and we still remain under
the old, and tied in all things to the handwriting of the Law, to the
burthenous circumstances and intolerable dilatory formalities of proceeding in
this your Kingdom, and what else your unpittifull Ministers will out of
uncharitable and unsensible minds of other men's harms charge and impose upon us.

Well does your Majesty conceive, that would the King my Master wink at the
like courses to be taken by his subjects and ministers with such of yours as
they might meet upon the seas, the English are not of so little invention, but
they could devise as good colors and pretenses; nor their Lawyers of so small
skill and so much conscience, but they could form and protract suits; nor the
ships of England so weakened and lessened, but they could equal and surmount
their losses. I have out of mine own humble affection to your Majesty, out of
my general and ever continuing desire to hold firm the ancient amity so
necessary for your own estates, and utile for the whole commonweal of
Christendom, out of the force of duty I owe to my King and Country, thus far
adventured to unburthen my soul and thoughts, not doubting but your Majesty's
magnanimous and Christian heart will be moved as well in desire to equal the
pious and immutable example of the King my Master, as in a just compassion of a
Nation now confederate with you, and that so gladly would entertain any cause
to love and serve you, to give present remedy to those woeful and intolerable
oppressions; and that since you have firmed and consented by your Articles of
Peace of new orders (which being confirmed by your oath stand now in force of
Laws) you would be pleased in like manner to give them a new form of indilatory
execution, conformable to that of the King my Sovereign, etc.

King James to the University of Cambridge, Mar. 4. 1616.
JACOBVS Dei gratia Magnae Britanniae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
defensor, etc. Academiae Cantabrigiae communi salutem.
SI jus civitatis impetret a nobis Cantabrigia, veremur ne aemula urbis
potentia crescente minuatur Academiae securitas, sat erit apud nos metus vestri
judicium fecisse, nec enim tam vobis convenit Academiae periculum deprecari
quam nobis, sponte nostra quicquid in speciem illi noxium sit avertere.
Glorietur urbs illa se a Majoribus nostris electam doctrinarum sedem,
ingeniorum officium, sapientiae palestram. Quicquid his titulis addi potest
nimis, and non honestatur plebeia Civitatis appellatione Musarum domicilium vel
sane literatorum dicatur Civitas, vel quod in villa nostrae villae and in
incolitarum tegitur celebritate. Haec ejus fuerint privilegia Academiae
dignitatem comiter observare (cujus frequentia facta and seipsa major
affluentia bonarum artium studiosos amice excipere quorum congressu dislata
est) Literatorum deinque honori ancillari unde haec illa nata est felicitas,
hae arts quibus crevit tenenda, non aucupandam titulorum novitas incerti
eventus facessat popularis vocabuli fastus, unde certa oriatur aemulationis
necessitas quae eo turpior urbi est futura quo majori erga Academiam obstrictam
and reverentiam, nolumus sacrum illum musarum asylum minuti praetoris ense
temerari nec strepere tetrica edicta, ubi septem geminus vestri Chori auditur
concentus satis and in vetera purpura invidiae nova pompa tam illi futura, and
supervacua quam vobis suspecta. In nostra solvis tutela and post Deum opt. max.
Alma scientiarum Matter nostro fovebitur sceptro indefessa illius foecunditas
non abortiet ad praetorii gladii terriculum nullum honoris titulum Cantabrigiae
indulgemus, qui cum Academiae sollicitudine conjunctus sit. Valete. Datum e
Palatio nostro Westmonast. 4 Calend. Mar. 1616.

JACOBUS REX.

Mr. Ruthen to the Earl of Northumberland.
My Lord,
IT may be interpreted discretion sometimes to wink at private wrongs,
especially for such a one as my self, that have a long time wrastled with a
hard Fortune, and whose actions, words and behavior are continually subject to
the censure of a whole State; yet not to be sensible of public and National
disgrace, were stupidity and baseness of mind: For no place, nor time, nor
State can excuse a man from performing that duty and obligation wherein Nature
has tied him to his Country and to himself. This I speak in regard of certain
infamous verses lately by your Lordships means dispersed abroad to disgrace my
Country and my self, and to wrong and stain by me the honor of a worthy and
virtuous Gentlewoman, whose unspotted and immaculate virtue your self is so
much more bound to admire and uphold, in that having dishonorably assaulted it,
you could not prevail. But belike, my Lord, you dare do any thing but that
which is good and just. Think not to bear down these things either by greatness
or denial; for the circumstances that prove them are so evident, and the veil
wherewith you would shadow them, is too transparant. Neither would I have you
flatter your self, as though, like another Giges, you could pass in your
courses invisible. If you owe a spite to any of my contrymen, it is a poor
revenge to rail upon me in verse: or if the repulse of your lewd desire at the
Gentlewomans hands, has inflamed and exasperated your choler against her, it
was never known that to refuse Northumberlands unlawful lust was a crime for a
Gentlewoman deserving to have her honor called in question. For her part, I
doubt not but her own unspotted virtue will easily wipe out any blot which your
malice would cast upon it; and for me and my Countrymen (know my good Lord)
that such blows as come in rhyme, are too weak to reach or harm us. I am
ashamed in your Lordships behalf for these proceedings, and sorry that the
world must now see how long it has been mistaken in Northumberlands spirit:
and yet who will not commend your wisdom in choosing such a safe course to wrong
a woman and a prisoner; the one of which cannot, and the other by nature and
quality of the place, may not right his own wrongs. Wherefore (setting aside
the most honorable order of the Garter, and potesting that whatsoever is here
said, is no way intended to the Nobility and Gentry of England in general,
which I doubt not but will condemn this your dishonorable dealing, and for
which both my self, and I dare truly say all my Countrymen shall be even as
ready to sacrifice our bloods as for our own mother Scotland) I do not only in
regard of our own persons affirm, that whatsoever in those infamous Verses is
contained is utterly false and untrue, and that your self has dealt most
dishonorably, unworthily, and basely, but this I Will ever maintain. If these
words sound harshly in your Lordships ear, blame your self, since your self
forgetting your self have taught others how to dishonor you: And remember that
though Nobility make a difference of persons, yet Injury acknowledges none.

PATRICK RUTHEN.

Sir Henry Yelvertons submission in the Star Chamber.
My Lords,
I Humbly beseech you to think that I stand not here either to outface the
Court, or to defend this cause otherwise then justly I may; only I desire in
mine own person to second the submission which has been opened by my Council:
for hitherunto has nothing been opened unto you, but that which has passed
under the advised pen of others, and hitherto has appeared from my self
neither open nor inward acknowledgment.

My Lords, it may seem strange to the hearers, that against a Bill so sharpened
I should abruptly fall upon a submission or confession, whereby I may seem to
bow down my neck to the stroke. But my Lords, in this I weighed not my self,
but I did it to amplify the honor and mercy of his Majesty, from whom I may
say Clemency springs as the blood that runs in his own veins. For, my Lords,
when this Charter was sometime questioned, and diverse of my Lords here present
had out of their great wisdoms discovered that shame in it, (which I must here
confess I did not then see) and had related the same to his Majesty, it pleased
his Maj. out of his great favor to me his unworthy servant to send me this
message by two great honorable persons here present, and therefore under your
Lordships favor I think not fit to hide so great a favor of his Maj. from the
eyes of the people, who offered to my choice either to submit to himself in
private, or defend here openly; and when I saw I fell into such faithful hands,
I remember my answer then was, that the offer was gracious, and the choice was
easy, and his mercy free. After came this Information against me: I took it
but as trial whether I would make his Majesty King of my confidence, or not:
And though there was offered unto me and my Council such a way of defense as I
might have escaped, yet I protest I did reject it, because I would not distrust
his Majesty's mercy to let go the anchor-hold I had thereof; and whatsoever
becomes of me, I protest I shall still honor the King, though I go lame to my
grave. I humbly confess the manifold errors of this Charter to your Lordships,
wherein I have miscarried; and I beseech his Majesty and your Lordships to
think they are rather crept in unawares, then ushered in by consent. The errors
are of diverse natures, some of negligence, some of ignorance, some of
misprision; I mistook many things, I was improvident in some things, too
credulous in all things. But I who was chosen, when I had so much provoked his
Majesty by mine unexperienced years, and having since found so many favors
from his Majesty's hands, and this day having served him full seven years, who
this day has translated me from a low estate unto a place whereof I enjoy now
only the name, and now since has so much quickened and enlightened me by his
gracious countenance, and assured me by his daily favors to make me to depend
upon him; and that I should deliberately and determinately take any flowers
from his Crown to place them on the heads of others, or to betray his Majesty's
interest into the hands of others, I hope his Majesty will vouchsafe me so much
favor not to value me at so low a rate, as to think these things came in de
industria: For if I had felt any such Echo arise in my breast, I protest I
would have laid hands on my self, and judged my self unworthy of any society.

My Lords, the corruption of my hands are far inferior to the corruption of the
heart; and the hand that runs wilfully into error, works merely from the
corruption of the heart, and that makes it the more inexcusable, as the
bleeding of a wound inwardly ever becomes mortal; and were I conscious to my
self, I would not have any color of excuse I thank his Majesty's Council, that
howsoever these hands were at first mistrusted, yet since they are not at all
misdoubted, nor the least corruption laid to my charge. But this does most
grieve me, that my faithfulness to his Majesty should be suspected: And I
humbly desire upon my knees, that his Clemency in this case may stop the issue
of his Justice; that though a long time his face has been hid, yet now at
length his mercy will break through the clouds to support me that am now
fallen. I lay my self at his Majesty's feet to do with me as it pleases him,
and humbly desire his Majesty would take me to his own sentence. I never
thought of my self otherwise then clay in his Majesty's hands, to mould me to
honor or dishonor. When I look and behold this solemnity and spectacle about
me, I make no other account of it then Pompa mortis; and such a Prince as he
is, knows that Life and Reputation are equal, if the last be not the greatest.
I know your Lordships have such power, and his Majesty takes such pleasure in
you, you are so dear in his eyes, that he can deny you nothing, and therefore I
would desire you that you would be suitors in my behalf, that his favor might
once again shine upon me I know his grace and clemency sleeps, if I be not
unworthy to partake, and the rather because the River that did run another way,
is now turned into the Sea again, and the Charter given up, surrendered and
cancelled. I know much life might be added to the sinews of my happiness by
your Lordships intercessions for me; in vouchsafing whereof I shall pledge a
perpetual assurance of better service for the time to come, and shall be bound
and engaged to every one of your Lordships: so that my desire is, that his
Majesty might first be acquainted with this submission before you proceed into
the merits of the cause, remaining still a prisoner to his Justice, knowing his
Majesty may if he please, turn me to vanity.

Ferdinand the second, Emperor, to the Catholic King.
Most gracious King, my most loving Nephew.
FAther Jacinthus comes over to your Court to negotiate with your Majesty in
the Popes name, about a business much concerning the conservation of our holy
Faith, and consequently the support of our Family, as your Majesty shall
understand of the said Father, to whom I refer my self, as also to Don
Balthazar de Zuniga, to whom I have written more distinctly, fearing to be
over-tedious to your Majesty, and being well assured how well your Majesty
stands inclined to either of these points.

Ferdinand the Emperor to Don Balthazar de Zuniga, October 15. 1621.
To the Honorable and sincerely beloved Don Balthazar de Zuniga, Cousin and
Counselor of State to the most excellent and Catholic King of Spain.
Honorable and sincerely beloved,
WHat my mind and purpose is touching the translating of the Electorship to the
Duke of Bavaria, according to the promise I made him, and wherefore I think
that business so necessary and profitable, as for Germany in general, so
particularly for securing our House from all attempts of Heretics, as his
Holiness exhorts me not to be further delayed: You shall understand as well by
conference with Father Jacinthus, whom his Holiness has for that purpose
addressed unto me, his Majesty of Spain my Nephew, and other Catholiqne Princes
of Germany, as by these ensuing reasons, whereof the principal are, That when
I repeat from the beginning the whole course of my Reign, and the difficulties
through which I have attained my Kingdoms and Provinces, I behold with
reverence the admirable providence of God over me, which makes me the more
bound to repose my trust in him, and not to omit any occasion which may tend to
the advancement of his glory, and the honor of so admirable tried providence:
and therefore that I should use that most notable victory to the honor of God,
and extirpation of all seditious factions, which are nourished chiefly among
the Galvinists, and that I should withdraw my self from that judgment that the
Prophet threatens to the King of Israel, Because thou have dismissed a man
worthy of death, thy Son shall be for his soul. The Palatine keeps now in
Holland, exiled not only from the Kingdom which he rashly attempted, but
despoiled almost of all his own Territories, expecting as it were the last cast
of Fortune; whom, if by an impious kind of commiseration and subtle Petitions,
I be persuaded to restore to his Electorall dignity, and nourish in my bosom
as a trodden half living snake, what can I expect less then a deadly stinging?
For it is in vain for me to think that he should be able to discern the
greatness of such a benefit: For the Politicians saying is true, Vltionem
quaesivi, gratiam oneri habere; especially since the injuries he did me are so
heinous, his projects so subtle, that although I should overcome him with
Christian charity, yet I should never be able to take him from the guilt of his
offenses, and make him soundly faithful unto me; but he will always gape at
all occasions whereby he may free himself from fear of his ill deservings, and
cover his own prostituted honor with new attempt. Add hereunto the Calvinists
institution, of whose Sect the proper genius is to hold nothing either fraud or
wickedness, which is undertaken for the Religion; no sanctity of oath, nor fear
of dishonor hinders them. From such an one, what caution can either the house
of Austria, or other Catholic Princes with whom he is no less in enmity,
because for Religion, as because they are interessed in the war, receive? The
King of England will be engaged, but of the same Religion; nor is there any
thing mere easy then when there is occasion of perpetrating any wickedness, to
palliate it with a pretext of a breach of the League. Histories are fraughted
with examples; in some there are no cautions sufficient in such a business:
then to drive him where he cannot hurt, all other means are frail, and he which
once believed is despised. It is likewise a consideration of no less moment,
that the Palatine being restored will draw all his power and policy, as
hitherto, so hereafter, where he thinks he can do most hurt, and that most
easily, to wit, to Bethlem-Gabor and the Turks, whom he has already incited to
hostility against me, and will never cease hereafter to instigate the
Calvinists entire hopes in them. These, until they recover breath, and
recollect their forces, they endeavor to disarm and exhaust me of moneys,
ranging in my territories as they have done hitherto by fire and sword. But if
with them also, whom notwithstanding I cannot trust alike, I should make peace,
what conditions will Gabor who remains yet unconquerd require, if I should
restore the Palatine (already conquered) to his Electorall dignity?

Therefore since long before God granted me that famous victory, I firmly
forecast with my self, that the Palatine could not be restored to his Electoral
dignity without the extreme danger of the Catholics and my house, I offered
freely on my own motion, but being directed questionless by God, the
Electorship to the Duke of Bavaria, a most eager Defender of the Catholic
cause, whose territories on the other side lie as a Rampire between me and
other Princes of Germany; and since I made so good use of his help, and so
profitable in the recovery of my Kingdoms and Provinces, and continue yet to
this day, time it self more then the said Duke does cry out that I should
accomplish my promise without further delay, and by translation of the
Electorship take away quite all hopes from the Palatine and them that solicit
us so importunately for a restitution, that we may be freed from all
molestation; which thing, since it needs the help of his Majesty of Spain,
although I know his Majesty be propense enough of himself to all things which
appertain to the honor of God, and the security of our House, yet I thought
good to admonish you of this occasion, lest this opportunity of establishing of
our Religion and Family escape, which I conceive might conveniently be done by
you. Neither do I suppose his Majesty to be ignorant, that it was always
judged of our Ancestors, that the House of Austria, which by Gods permission
does now signiorize far and near upon the earth, to have its chief foundation
here in Germany, which is the more to be defended, the nearer its ruin depends
thereupon. In times past this House has had proof of many adversaries to its
greatness, as the Histories under Maximilian the first, Charles the fifth,
Ferdinand the second, and Rodulf the second do show: the perfidiousness of
Holland against his Majesty's Grandfather Philip the second, fetched her food
from the Palatinate, neither can his Majesty ever reduce the rebellious
Hollanders to obedience, unless his root be plucked up; which only motive,
besides these which I alleged before, might justly induce him not to suffer a
fallen enemy to rise and resume (as his stomach will never fail him) strength
again.

But albeit it is not to be dissembled that the Lutheran Princes, especially
the Elector of Saxony, will not approve happily of this translation, because they
fear it conduces too much to the corroborating of the Catholic Cause:
Nevertheless, since he cannot accuse that act of Charles the fifth, who for a
far lighter cause deprived John Frederick of the Electorship, and conferred it
on Maurice this Dukes great Uncle; and perceiving that all the Councels of the
Calvinists do aim to bring in the Turk, he will not condemn his translation:
For no less is the Lutherans hatred against the Calvinists, as the Catholics
and they think less danger do proceed from the later. It is to be hoped
therefore, that the Elector of Saxony, and other Lutheran Princes, when they
see the business brought to this point, will not so far disapprove thereof, as
to put themselves in Arms; which I shall shortly understand of the most
excellent Archduke Charles my brother, who is for this cause to treat with the
Elector of Saxony. And these motives as they are of great consequence, so I
imagine you, which are daily of his Majesty's Council, have pondered them as
diligently as my self, and therefore that you will omit nothing that is
pertinent to establish this business, whereby we obtain the long and wished
fruit thereof, which is the propagation of the honor of Almighty God through
the Empire, and the augmentation of the common safety, Family and Dignity.

Beloved Don Balthazar, I understand that there was a motive of great
consideration omitted in my Letter; to wit, that if we had more countenance of
his Catholic Majesty then we have at this present, the Empire should always
remain in the hands of Catholics, and so according to reason in our House, to
whose advancement the Duke of Bavaria will willingly concur in recognition of
such a benefit, being promoted by an Emperor of that House, to so eminent and
high a dignity as in our letters.

Vienna October. 15. 1621.
King James to Ferdinand the Emperor concerning the Palatinate. November. 12.
1621.
James by the grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc.
wishes health and constant peace unto the most mighty and invincible Prince
Ferdinando, by the same grace elected Roman Emperor, King of Germany, Hungary
and Bohemia, Archduke of Austria, etc. our loving friend and cousin.
Most mighty and invincible Prince, Brother, Cousin, and special loving
Friend; It is not unknown unto the whole world, much less to your Imperial
Majesty, how earnestly we have hitherto sought and endeavored as well by the
diligence of our Ambassadors whom we have sent, as by the intercession of the
chief German Princes, the appeasing of those Bohemian wars ever since they
first began, and with what ardent zeal and affection we have so much hunted
after the desire of peace: Let it not therefore seem strange unto any man, that
we take it ill, that all the very time when we were (to the uttermost of our
power) treating of peace, and giving our best furtherance for the overture of
wholesome means to effect it; even then notwithstanding, we found clean contrary
effects to ensue thereupon; whereat we much marvelled, seeing the Treaty was in
hand, and already begun on all sides: as namely among the rest, that our
son-in-law was wholly despoiled and robbed of his hereditary patrimony that
remained unto him, excepting the lower Palatinate, which was all by commandment
of your Imperial Majesty, taken and possessed by the Duke of Bavaria,
according as himself confessed, with strong hand and force of Arms, and that
for such reasons as are merely new, and such as the like were never hitherto
once heard of. That notwithstanding it plainly appears by the answer given
unto our Ambassador, that your Imperial Majesty had caused the suspension of
that Ban or prescription in those Countries, yet did your Imperial Majesty
permit the taking of Arms again in hand: which also after the same your
Imperial Majesty's answer, was yet again likewise commanded to be done in the
Lower Palatinate, whereby there has therein been since raised a grievous and
cruel war, and most part of the Country taken in by the Spaniards powerful
strength. But as we diligently observed those things, we clearly see what great
trouble and misery has been occasioned by this our great patience and long
delaying, forbearing and doubtfulness, which without all doubt may be hereafter
further occasioned, and which may perhaps prove heavier then the chief reasons
of this misery it self. And therefore we hold it best and most expedient that
your Imperial Majesty do at length put a period to this most unhappy business:
And for that end and purpose have thought good at this time to propound what we
prescribe our Son in law on the one part to perform toward your Imperial
Majesty, which we have always councelled and exhorted our Son in law to do, nor
will we so much as in the least once doubt of the contrary and adverse success
therein, but are persuaded that your Imperial Majesty will be most graciously
moved to receive our Son in law into grace and favor, to redeliver unto him
his hereditary lands and titles which he had enjoyed before those Bohemian
wars, and fully to restore him to his former honors and dignities. In regard
whereof the Count Palatine shall perform unto your Imperial Majesty as
follows.

1. He shall for himself and his Son wholly renounce and acquit all pretense of
right and claim unto the Crown of Bohemia and the incorporated Countries
thereof.

2. He shall from henceforward yield all constant due devotion unto the
Imperial Majesty, as do other obedient Princes Electors of the Empire.

3. He shall upon his knee crave pardon of the Imperial Majesty.

4. He shall not hereafter any manner of way either unfittingly carry or demean
himself toward the Imperial Majesty, or disturb your Kingdoms or Countries.

5. He shall upon reasonable conditions reconcile himself with other his
neighbor Princes and States of the Empire, and hold good friendship with them.

6. And shall really do all other like things as is above contained, and that
shall be reasonable and necessary.

Which proposed Conditions if your Imperial Majesty shall please to receive and
accept of, the same will be a notable testimony of your Imperial Majesty's
goodness and grace: which how well and acceptable it will be unto us, shall be
acknowledged and showed by our very willing service and unfeigned friendship as
well toward your Imperial Majesty as toward the most renowned house of
Austria. But if it shall fall out contrary to our expectation, that these our
just demands and well-willed presentation shall not find acceptance, or after
this our diligent endeavor you shall seek to delay us by the using some new
tergiversation, and pretend to use that long council and deliberate advice of
the Princes of the Empire upon these our propounded conditions, whereas
notwithstanding your Imperial Majesty expressly promised in your last answer
freely to declare what should be your purpose and resolution therein: So that
there being no ground to the contrary (as we call God and the world to witness
there is not) and being forced and constrained by the duty and natural
affection which we owe and bear to our Children for the preservation of their
honor and welfare, we are resolved to try the uttermost of our power for their
relief; especially seeing we sue for, desire, and would obtain and retain no
new title of honor for our Son in law, but only to have again those of his own
now lost, which he then had and enjoyed when we matched him with our dear and
only daughter: For if in this distress we should leave our Children and their
Partisans without council help and protection, it would be a foul stain to our
honor.

Let not therefore your Imperial Majesty in regard hereof blame us at all, if
we with a mighty and puissant Army by force and strong hand seek to recover
that which by propounded and reasonable conditions we could not obtain for the
continuance of our friendship. But for as much as it is most certain this
cannot be without the great hurt and prejudice of all Christendom, the breach
of public peace, and the wounding of our contracted amity and friendship with
the house of Austria, which we have ever hitherto by manifold testimonies
uprightly, faithfully and inviolably observed: It is therefore requisite and
necessary that your Majesty of your innate gracious mildness and goodness, and
of that most reverent discretion wherewith you are endowed, to seek in time to
meet with and prevent these so great evils likely to ensue, and use brotherly
love and good will. God almighty long preserve your Imperial Majesty's life,
and at last so direct your heart, that sweet peace and the concord of all
Christendom now rent asunder, may be recovered and again maintained.

At our Royal Residence-Town of Royston, November. 12. 1621. JACOBVS REX.

His Imperial Majesty to King James, Ian. 14. 1621.
COnstans atque eadem nobis semper fuit men's, idem desiderium, non tam verbis
quam re ipsa demonstrandi quanti tranquillitatem in Imperio publicam and mutuae
amicitiae cum vicinis Principibus, potissimum Serenitatis vestrae sincere
colendae studium aestimaremus. Inde si praeteriti temporis successus de rebus
in utroque Palatinatu tam superiore quam inferiore innovat, de quo literis ad
nos datis Serenitas vestra conqueritur deflexisse videri possint, illi culpa
venit omnis imputanda, quem ab improba cupiditate aliena regna captantem, nec
divini nec humani juris respectus, nec supremi Domini sui reverentia, nec sacri
Jus-jurandi religio, nec prudentissimi Soceri concilium cohibere potuerint; imo
qui justo Dei judicio ea acie in fugam profligatus usque adeo obstinatione sua
pertinaciter etiamnum inheret, ut continuis machinationibus per Jagarndorfium,
Mansfeildum, aliosque crudeles pacis publicae perturbatores, Acharonta potius
movere quam sanioribus acquiescere consiliis ab usurpatoque regni nostri titulo
desistere (non officiis per Serenitatem vestram per quam sane diligenter
interpositis, sua ex part quid deferens) videatur, nec ullum in hanc usque
horam animi poenitentis signum dederit. Itaque in tractatu de pace instituenda
uti condescendamus videt Serenitas vestra, ab eis quos principaliter id
concernit quam nulla nobis causa vel occasio praebeatur. Id quidem ingenue
profitemur, in exulceratissimo eo negotio, cujus calamitas universum pene orbem
involvit, eum Serenitatis vestrae candorem, eam animi moderationem, and
equitatis justitiaeque respectum enituisse, ut nihil sit vicissim quod non
ejusdem desideriis salva suprema auctoritate nostra Caesarea, salvisque Imperii
legibus libenter tribuamus, qui pro innata nobis benignitate -- aequisque
conditionibus Arma poni and optatam afflictissimae Germaniae pacem restitui,
quam legitime executiones insisti per caedes and sanguinem Christianum gloriosa
nomini nostro trophaea figi nunquam non maluimus. In gratiam itaque Serenitatis
vestrae, ut res ipsa deprehendat quanti nobis sit perpetuum cum eadem amicitia
cultum novo fomite subinde revocari, licet hactenus prosperos militiae nostrae
successus divina benignitas tribuit, acquiescimus, ut benevolo tractatu almae
pacis redintigrandae rations opportunae incantur, eumque in finem ad evitandum
viarum temporumque dispendia nunc in eo sumus ut serenissimae Principi Dominae
Elizabethae Clarae Eugeniae natae, Infanti Hispaniarum, Archiducissae Austriae,
Ducissae Burgundiae, Stiriae, Carinthiae, Carniolae, and Wirtinburgiae, and
Provinciarum Belgii Burgundiarumque Dominae, Consobrinae ac sorori nostrae
charissimae, ut istic in aula sua, quorsum vestra quoque Serenitas si ita
libuerit suos cum plena facultate ablegare poterit primum eumque proximum
assequendae pacis gradum cessationem ab armis aequis conditionibus nomine
nostro Caesari stabiliendum permittemus, prope diem expedituri Legatum nostrum
virum nobilem, qui diligentissime in gravissimo hoc negotio mentem nostram
before aperiet, atque inde ad Serenitatem vestram animum nostrum ad
redintegrandae pacis studia proclivem, qui non aliter quam quibuscunque
benevolentiae officiis cum Serenitate vestra certare studet magis magisque
testificetur, cujus interim consilia generosa praepotens Deus publico orbis
commodo in faelicissimos eventus disponat. Dat. Viennae, 14 Jan. 1621.

Earl of Bristol to King James.
MOst gracious Sovereign, it may please your Majesty to remember, that at my
coming out of Spain I signified unto your Majesty how far the Duke of Lerma had
upon several occasions intimated unto me an extraordinary desire of this King
and State, not only to maintain peace and amity with your Majesty, but to lay
hold of all things that may be offered for the nearer uniting of your Majesty
and your Crowns; and that from this generality he had descended often to have
discourse with me of a match for the Princes Highness with the second daughter
of Spain, assuring me, that in this King and his Ministers there was a forward
disposition thereunto. But from me he received no other answer but to this
effect, That I in the treaty of the former match for the late Prince, had
received so strange and unexpected answer firom them, and that their demands
seemed so improper and unworthy, that I conceived that your Majesty had little
reason to be induced again to give eat to any such overture, or that I should
again enter into any such treaty, much less to be the motioner thereof:
Although I would confess, that if I were fully persuaded of the sincerity of
their intentions, and of a possibility of having the said match effected, I
know not any thing wherein I would more willingly employ my endeavors; but as
the case now stood, I was certain, that if I should but make any such motion in
England, I should but draw imputation of much weakness upon me there, and no
whit advance the cause, for that your Majesty and your Ministers would make no
other construction of the motion, but as construed to divert the Match of
France; which was treated of, for that your Majesty who but the year before had
received so unpleasing and unequal an answer, should now be persuaded that
there was here so great a change, as that a match was really desired, there
would now need more then ordinary assurance. But the Duke of Lerma continuing
several times the same profession, and telling me besides that the greatest
Cases might be altered by circumstances, and that the Age of this Prince was
much more proper then that of his brother; I freely let the Duke know that in
case I might see that it was really desired here, and that I might be able to
propound unto my Master conditions of so much advantage and certainty ^s might
put him and his ministers out of doubt that this overture was not again revived
from, hence either for diversion or winning of time, I would then willingly
intimate unto your Majesty the inclination and desire I found here of having a
proposition for this match once again set on foot. The Duke told me he would
have a further conference with me, and that he then no ways doubted to give
such satisfaction as might well assure your Majesty and your Ministers, that
they sincerly desired the match in general, and would omit nothing on their
side for the accomodating of particulars that might give furtherance unto it.
But the very night before the Duke had appointed a meeting with me, there came
a Post dispatched out of England from the Spanish Ambassador upon the arrival
of Sir Thomas Edmonds into England, who brought word that the match with France
was absolutely concluded, and that within few days it was to be published:
Whereupon the Duke at our meeting the next morning, told me that it would be
needless now to descend to any particulars in the business whereof we are to
treat, since that they had newly received advertisement that the match with
France was fully concluded. And thus for the present the matter rested until
some five or six weeks after; about which time my self was to go into England,
and so taking leave of the Duke, he asked me whether I had not received
advertisement that the match with France was published. I told him no, but I
had certainly heard that it was not as yet fully concluded: Whreupon he
entreated me, that in case I found not the French match in such forwardness as
it could not be stayed, I would let him know of it; and that if I should see
any kind of possibility that the business we had spoken of might be set on
foot, I would advertise him, and that thereupon he would proceed to those
particulars which he formerly intended for my satisfaction.

Herewith I acquainted your Majesty, and finding the Spanish Ambassador in
England had notice from the Duke of our former proceedings, and order to
further them by all possible means he could, especially if he should understand
that your Majesty were not fully resolved of the French match, I thought it fit
by this means to let the Duke understand in what estate I found those
businesses in England; and thereupon with your Majesty's permission, I wrote a
letter unto him to this effect.

That although it were true that the Match with France had been treated of with
much earnestness on both sides, and with great likelihood of being concluded;
yet there daily arose so many difficulties, and new cases of delay, that I
judged it far from any perfect conclusion, neither did I see cause absolutely
to despair of the businesses which our selves pretended, unless the difficulty
of the Conditions should make it desperate. But if those things should be
expected by Spain, which in the Treaty for the late Princess were demanded, it
were better by much not to renew the business, then by impossible or unfitting
propositions on either side to give distaste, or lessen the friendship which
now was betwixt your Majesty's. And therefore except that in Spain they would
be contented with such conditions as your Majesty most fittingly and
conveniently might yield unto, and all other Catholic Princes were willing to
content themselves with, I neither saw cause to hope for good success, or
reason to set the treaty on foot. But in case I might know that the conditions
in point of Religion might be such as I should see a possibility of your
Majesty's condescending unto them, I should be far from despairing of some good
effect; for that I knew that diverse not of the meanest nor least power with
your Majesty were hereunto well inclined, and would give their helping hands.

Hereupon the Spanish Ambassador dispatched his Secretary into Spain, and
received answer from the Duke, that he should give me all assurance that there
was a great desire and inclination to the making of the Match, and that at my
return into Spain they no way doubted but that I should receive such
satisfaction, as should make it appear on their part there should be nothing
wanting for the effecting of it.

It now remains what has passed herein since my last coming to this Court. I
arrived here in Madrid only a day or two before Christmas; and having some six
days after my audience appointed by the King, whilst I was in a with drawing
chamber expecting the Kings coming forth, the Duke of Lerma came thither to
bear me company; and after many respectfull demands of your Majesty, and the
Queens and the Princes health, and some few complements unto my self concerning
my welcome again unto this Court, he fell to speak of the false Alarms we had in
England concerning a Spanish Armado, seeming much to be displeased that any
credit should be given to any thing to his Majesty's dishonor and want of
fidelity (as he termed it,) But your Majesty (he said) did never believe it:
And it seems he heard of some pleasant answer your Majesty should make to some
one of your Ministers, that in great haste came unto your Majesty when you were
a hunting, and told you that the Spanish Fleet was in the Channel. From this he
entered into great protestations of the sincerity of this Kings affection and
intention toward your Majesty, telling me that I should now see how much they
desired to work a greater neerness and uniting between your Majesty's: And that
of the principal business of which we had in former time spoken, meaning the
Marriage, he desired to speak with me, but it must be at more leisure. I
answered, that I would not fail shortly to wait upon him, and that he should
find me answerable to the professions I had made, which was, that being induced
thereunto by such sufficient and good grounds as might satisfy my Master both
for the conveniencie and fittingness of having such a Treaty set on foot, and
likewise might take away all objections of their intents of entertaining and
diverting your Majesty hereby, I would be as ready to do all good offices and
give furtherance to the business, as any Minister the King of Spain had. And
this was all that at our first meeting passed in this business.

About some eight days after, I having not in all this time stirred out of my
house under color of being ill disposed, though the truth was indeed to inform
my self of some particulars which concerned your Majesty's service, before I
would speak with the Duke: He being (as I have since understood) something
troubled that in all this time I made no means to come unto him, one morning by
nine of the clock very privately came to my house, without advertising of his
coming (as the custom is here) until the Coach stayed at my gate, and then he
sent in a Gentleman to me, telling me that the Duke was there to speak with me.
When I had conducted the Duke into a room where we were private, he fell into
th'aforesaid matter, and in the manner as I shall here set down unto your
Majesty, without making any other pretense or intent of his coming, or without
using in the space of an hour any speech touching any other business.

After some few questions of your Majesty and the Queen, he began to ask many
things of the Prince, as of his age, his stature, his health, his inclination,
to what sports he was chiefly given? And then suddenly, as it were with a
passionate expression of affection, he desired God to bless him, and to make
him the means by which your Majesty's might be conjoined in a nearer alliance,
and your Kingdoms in a perpetual amity: saying unto me, that he was out of
doubt of my good inclination to this business, both by what had formerly passed
between our selves, as likewise by my proceedings in England, whereof he had
been fully informed by the Spanish Ambassador. And therefore he would in few
words deal with me with much cleerness and freeness, assuring himself he should
receive the like measure from me; and thereupon entered into a solemn
protestation, how much this King desired the Match; and for himself he solemnly
swore, there was no one thing in the world he more desired to see before he
dyed, then the effecting thereof. But my Lord Ambassador (said he) you must
deal as justly with me to let me understand whether you conceive the like
desire to be in the King of England and his Ministers, and then I shall proceed
to speak further unto you.

I answered the Duke, That I ever esteemed more the reputation of a man of
truth and integrity, then of skill and subtilty: which I did hope he did well
perceive by what I was to say, for that I was much more desirous fairly to go
off from this business, then easily to go into it. And therefore if he would
have me speak my conscience, I neither conceived that either in your Majesty or
any of your Ministers there was any kind of inclination thereunto; for that
they having formerly given so resolute and distastefull an answer, your Majesty
had just cause never again to cast so much as your thoughts this way: And
though it might be alleged, that the fitness of the Prince his years, and
other civil regards might cause new resolutions, yet the difference of Religion
were still the same, and the same were the truths, and opinions of Divines in
matter of conscience; and therefore it would not but be a thing of great
difficulty to persuade your Majesty and your Ministers that a Match should be
hearkened unto, much less desired from hence, but upon the same terms the very
thought and remembrance whereof is yet unpleasing in England. So that to deal
plainly with him, I neither found in your Majesty or in the Council any kind of
thought or imagination of any possibility of having any such motion again
revived. But this I found not to grow from any particular dislike or want of
affection in your Majesty to Spain, or that many of the greatest or the
principallest person in England judged not the neerness and alliance of Spain
equally valuable with any other of Christendom; but that out of a
distastefulness of the former answer given from hence, all expectation of any
business of this nature was absolutely extinguished, and therefore again to
revive it there would need more then ordinary endeavors or ordinary
assurances: But in case that they might be given, I know that this Match would
neither want well-willers nor assistants; and for my own part I would freely
make profession that no man more desired it then my self, nor would more
willingly employ his endeavors for the furthering thereof, when by the
descending to particulars I should see both in regard of the conditions and the
assurances of sincere proceeding, the motion worthy and fit by a discreet and
good servant to be offered to his Master; neither then should I be wholly out
of hope of good success, though I would not but esteem it a business of
infinite difficulty.

The Duke replied, That any discourse that I thought fit herein should be
condescended unto, for that all time was lost that was spent in generalities:
And therefore if I so liked, he would move this King, that one or two besides
himself might be appointed to have conference with me; for that if he should
only retain it in his hands, by reason of his many occupations it would have a
slower progress then he wished; but if I would by way of conference digest the
difficulties into heads and particulars, he would as often as he might be
present at our meeting: But for his own part, he said he apprehended few but
what would arise out of the difference of Religion.

I told the Duke, that I very well approved of the descending into particulars,
neither should I refuse conference with any herein whom the King would appoint
to speak with me: But if his meaning were, that these persons should be
nominated or joined by way of Commission, I thought fit to let him understand
that I neither had any time, nor did at present speak of this business either
by order or direction, no nor so much as by your Majesty's privity, but as a
Minister that desired to lay hold of all occasions for the increasing of
further love and neerness betwixt his Master and the Prince to whom he is
employed, I should be glad to the uttermost of my power to advance and further
this cause, as that which I apprehended to be the greatest which the world now
affords for the firm uniting of your Majesty's and your estates.

The Duke told me, that the King would make no scruple to declare his good
inclination and desire to have this Match proceeded in; and that for the
accommodating of the difficulties, he had already used diverse diligences with
the Pope, as likewise with the greatest Divines of this Kingdom, whereof he
named some unto me, whom he said he found very well inclined to the Match: he
told me also he would be glad they might speak with me, to the end I might
truly understand of them all kind of scruples that could be alleged. I
answered, I desired nothing more; and that I could not but approve of those
courses he prescribed, as the most probable to produce a good effect, and that
I hoped God would give happy success unto the business: But I should be bold in
one thing to deliver my opinion, which was, No ways to interess our Masters
herein, unless by the understanding and clearing the difficulties on both
sides, there should be great appearances and probabilities that the business
would take effect: For if their names should be herein used, and after their
Treaty should not be successful, it would but exasperate and breed a greater
distaste betwixt your Majesty's. The Duke told me, he himself misliked not my
opinion; though he said that howsoever that business succeeded, yet your
Majesty should have reason to accept kindly this Kings good intention, for that
if it miscarried, it should appear not to be their default, but that they had
stretched as far as honor and conscience would give them leave. And thus much
he said I might write unto your Majesty if I thought fit, or to my confident
friends in England upon his word and assurance: and so telling me that he would
presently appoint those that should confer with me in this business, we then
parted.

Within two days after I went to the Duke, and after that I had spoken with him
about the business of Cleves according to my instruction, whereof I gave an
account unto Mr. Secretary in a dispatch directed unto him, we fell again into
the speech of the match.

The Duke told me had well considered of that which I had said unto him, and
much approved it, not to interest our Masters in the business, until we should
see some likelihood of good success.

And for that he supposed the difference of Religion like to prove the only
difficulty of consideration, he thought it fit that it should be first cleared;
and therefore he would break the matter with the Cardinal of Toledo, and the
Kings Confessor, and with them he joined another learned man, one Father
Frederick, who since I understand is a Jesuit, but truly has the report of a
moderate man. These the Duke said should have order to confer with me as far as
might be, reserving safe the grounds and sincerity of their Religion. I
answered the Duke, that I was well satisfied herewith, and that if their
demands were such as might content any other Catholic Prince, I should have
hope of good success; if otherwise, I should judge it a happiness to be put out
of doubt and suspense, and so we passed from this subject.

I presume to set down to your Majesty all the passages of this business with
so much length and fullness, for that I no way dare adventure to offer unto your
Majesty any opinion or belief of my own, either for the fitness of the match,
or the sincerity of their intention, or the possibility of accommodating
differences of Religion. But your Majesty seeing undisguised all that has
hitherto passed, with every circumstance, may be pleased out of the
consideration and knowledge of those particulars to frame unto your self both
such a belief of their direct meaning, and such a resolution of the further
proceeding herein, as shall be most suitable to your Majesty's wisdom: only I
think it fit to set down further unto your Majesty the particular ends which
may be conceived they aim at by setting this business afoot at this present, in
case they should not intend really to perform it: The first may be to stagger
and divert your Majesty's Treaty with France: The second for entertaining your
Majesty with fair hopes and promises, thereby to keep you from declaring your
self opposite unto them in the present business of Juliers and Cleves which
remains still uncompounded. But this being so, your Majesty may be pleased to
understand that they serve themselves with this occasion, not that there could
be any such thing primarily in their intention, for that the expression of
their desire to the match was the last year long before these differences
happened.

Further, the Duke of Lerma should be the most falls and dishonorable man
living, without Christianity or soul, if he should voluntarily damn himself
with oaths and protestations of a thing that he sincerely meant not; and truly
he should deal contrarily to the wisdom of his other proceedings, wherein he
lays all occasions of distaste or discourtesie upon other inferior Ministers,
laboring still to clear himself of the imputation of them, if in this he
should make himself the author and instrument of so unjust and indirect
proceeding between Princes. But the course of most security and caution is,
that your Majesty suffer none of your other resolutions to be interrupted by
this overture; only if your Majesty be pleased for a while to entertain and
suspend the conclusion of the match with France, I conceive it can be little to
your Majesty's disadvantage.

It lastly now remains, that I become an humble suitor unto your Majesty for
your clear and full directions in this business, desiring if your Majesty will
have it further entertained, that I may have ample instructions from your
Majesty, both that I may intimate what may be expected in point of Dowry, and
in all other things to be required by your Majesty, as likewise how far I may
proceed in satisfying in point of Religion. For it is not to be supposed that
they will proceed with that freeness and directness which is to be wished,
unless in a fitting measure they shall see me likewise able and willing to
declare my self in such points wherein they may expect satisfaction. I intend
not hereby to move for a formal Commission to treat, but only a private
instruction for my direction and warrant how to behave my self as may be most
advantageous to the cause, and your Majesty's ends. So humbly desiring your
Majesty to command this Bearer to be dispatched back with all convenient speed,
I commend your Majesty to the holy protection of God. Your Majesty's faithful
subject and servant,

BRISTOL.

Abignoto to Conde Gondomar, concerning the death of Philip the third.
Upon the last day of February, being Sunday, 1620. his Catholic Majesty,
after he had heard Mass and the Sermon in the Chapel, was taken with a Fever,
which continued with him eight days with a ruddiness and pimples which
appeared plainly in his face, which afterward began to diminish: but he was
suddenly taken with a vomiting and a great fever, which continued with him
till the 21. day; and the Physicians were of opinion to have him rise out of
his bed, which was accordingly done both that day and the next: but about
dinnertime happened unto him a great swouning, which much astonished him; and
the 23. day, in the night, his fever did redouble upon him with a vomiting and
a flux in the belly, and a great melancholy and an opinion that he should die:
which fever continued with diverse reduplications, the Physicians having an ill
opinion of him till on Saturday night the 27. when his reduplications were more
violent, his water bad; and the King persevered in saying how he saw well that
he should die, he commanded that the Image of our Lady of Antiochia should be
carried about, which was performed on Sunday the 28. in a solemn Procession,
wherein the Counselors of Spain assisted.

In the evening commandment was given to the Churches, that the blessed
Sacrament should be set upon the Altar, and the body of S. Isidore should be
placed in the Court. On Monday the 29. about four of the clock in the evening,
his disease then grew violent, and some ulcers appeared on his belly, on his
reins, and on his thighs; and the King still assuring himself that he should
die, the Physicians then feeling his pulse affirmed that undoubtedly they
assented unto the King in the opinion he conceived of his infirmity. At the
same time the President of Castile was sent for, and the Confessor, who having
had some speech with the King and the Duke of Ossuna, they went and fetched the
Counselors, before whom and the Grandees of Spain who were present, the King
sealed his Testament, which John de Serita Secretary of State had set down in
writing in his presence. Afterward they caused him to eat somewhat; and being
advised how it would be good for him to sleep, he made this answer in Spanish,
En jornada tan longa y tiempe tan breve ne convieue reposar; Upon so long a
journey, and so short a time to perform it, I must not rest. Then he sent for
the Prince, and the young Child Don Carlo, to whom having spoken for a good
while, at length in particular to the Prince he said aloud how he recommended
unto him the Child, and that he grieved that he should have been unprovided,
but he hoped he left him in the hands of a good and loving brother. Then said
he to the Prince, that he requested him that he would not do as he did at his
coming to the Crown, in removing his Fathers old Officers and Servants, but
that he would employ those who were experienced in affairs of the Commonwealth:
he then commended unto him particularly John de Luenza Secretary of the
Memorials, and his Confessor, and afterward the Duke of Ossuna. Then was
presently brought in the Infanta Maria, and the Infante-Cardinal. He cried out
when he saw the Infanta and said, Maria, I am full sorry that I must die before
I have married thee; but this thy brother shall have care of. He then turned
toward her brother, and said unto him, Prince, do not forsake her till you
have made her an Empress. Then he spoke unto the Cardinal Infant, whom he
appointed to be a Priest so soon as he should come to be of fit age, and said
that he should be much grieved if he thought he would not undertake this
profession. He had sent for Madam the Princess, but she swouned upon her entry
at the chamber door, which was the cause that she was conducted back again unto
her own chamber, fearing lest it might be prejudicial unto her being great with
child. Which being reported to the King, he showed great compassion thereat,
and said that he ever constantly believed that Madam the Princess loved him as
well as any of his own children. After that he began to speak of the Queen,
saying how she should lose a good Husband, and that he had always loved her
dearly. Afterward he distributed between the Prince and the Infanta the
Relics and other memorials he had, except one Crucifix which hung at the
testern of the bed, and said unto the Prince that he could not give it him
then, because it was the same with which his Grandfather and Father had dyed;
but he commended it to him to be held with great reverence after his death, and
that the Popes had given unto it special Indulgences. Afterward giving them
all his blessing, he caused them to go forth; and so calling for the blessed
Sacrament, which was administered unto him about midnight, he received the
Extreme unction at two of the clock in the morning, and so commended himself
unto God. Yet did he not for all this forbear to seal to a great number of
papers which were brought him: And complaining very much, he refused such meat
as they would have had him take. About noon the Body of St. Isidore was placed
near unto his bed, his Confessor and Father Florence persuading him to make a
vow for his health, and that he would build a Chapel to the same Saint, which
he did, but withal said, Pero ya es tarde, But now it is very late. He
continued all the rest of the day speaking continually to the Father Confessor,
Father Florence, and Rochas. Many processions of penance were solemnized in the
Town, and the Council assembled twice. About the evening his infirmity renewed
with violence, and having languished the whole night, in the morning his
departure was published, though indeed it was not till about nine of the clock
in the morning, the last of March, the self same day of our return. Which will
inform you of all things passed, at least of such as came any ways to our
knowledge. The Queen stirred not out of her bed all that day, for fear lest
either trouble or grief of mind (whereof she gave plentiful testimony by her
tears) might prejudice her health, or the fruit of her body, which she has
passed over (thanks be to God) whereof we send you word, that the good news may
shut up the discourse of an accident so lamentable and unlooked for.

King James to the Earl of Bristoll Ambassador in Spain, October. 3. 1622.
Right trusty and right well beloved Cousin and Councellor, we greet you well.
THere is none knows better then your self how we have labored ever since the
beginning of these unfortunate troubles of the Empire, notwithstanding all
opposition to the contrary, to merit well of our good brother the King of
Spain, and the whole House of Austria, by a long and lingering patience grounded
still upon his friendship and promises, That care should be had of our honor,
and of our Childrens patrimony and inheritance. We have acquainted you also
from time to time since the beginning of the Treaty at Bruxels how crossly
things have there proceeded, notwithstanding the fair professions made unto us
both by the King of Spain, the Infanta and all his Ministers, and the Letters
written by him unto the Emperor, and them effectually (at the least as they
endeavored to make us believe) but what fruits have we of all these, other
then dishonor and scorn? Whilst we are treating, the Town and Castle of
Heidilbergh taken by force, our Garrison put to the sword, Manheim besieged,
and all the hostility used that is within the power of an Enemy, as you will
see by the relation which we have commanded our Secretary to send you.

Our pleasure therefore is, That you shall immediately as soon as you can get
audience, let the King understand how sensible we are of those proceedings of
the Emperor toward us; and withal are not a little troubled to see that the
Infanta having an absolute commission to conclude a suspension and cessation of
Arms, should now at last when all objections were answered, and the former
(solely pretended obstacles remained) not only delay the conclusion of the
Treaty, but refuse to lay her command upon the Emperors Generals for
abstaining from the siege of our Garrisons during the Treaty upon pretext of
want of authority. So as for avoiding of further dishonor, we have been
enforced to recall both our Ambassadors, as well the Chancellor of the
Exchequer (who is already returned to our presence) as also the Lord
Chichester, whom we intended to have sent unto the Emperor to the Diet at
Ratisbone. Seeing therefore that out of our extraordinary respect merely to the
King of Spain, and the firm confidence we ever put in the hopes and promises
which he did give us, desiring nothing more then for his cause principally to
avoid all occasions that might put us into ill understanding with any of the
House of Austria, We have hitherto proceeded with a steadfast patience trusting
to the treaties, and neglecting all other means which might probably have
secured the remainder of our childrens inheritance. Those Garrisons which we
maintained in the Palatinate, being rather for honor sake to keep a footing
until the general accommodation, then that we did rely so much upon their
strength as upon his friendship, and by the confidence and security of ours are
thus exposed to dishonor and reproach: you shall tell that King, that seeing all
those endeavors and good offices which he has used toward the Emperor in
this business, on the behalf of our son-in-law, upon confidence whereof that
our security depended, which he continually by his Letters and Ministers here
labored to beget and confirm in us, have not sorted to any other issue then to
a plain abuse both of his trust and ours; whereby we are both of us highly
injured in our honor, though in a different degree we hope, and desire that
out of a true sense of this wrong offered unto us, he will as our deer and
loving brother faithfully promise and undertake upon his honor, confirming the
same also under his hand and seal, either that the Castle and Town of
Heidelbergh shall within threescore and ten days after this your audience, and
demand made, be rendered into our hands, with all things therein belonging, to
our son-in-law, or our daughter, as near as maybe, in the state wheirn they
were taken; and the like for Manheim and Frankindale, if both or eithe of them
shall be taken by the enemy whilst these things are in treating; as also that
there shall be within the said term of threescore and ten days, a cessation or
suspension of Arms in the Palatinate for the future upon the several Articles
and Conditions last propounded by our Ambassador Sir Richard Weston, and that
the general treaty shall be set on foot again upon such honorable terms and
conditions as were propounded unto the Emperor in a letter written unto him in
November last, and with which the King of Spain then (as we understand) seemed
satisfied, or else in case all these particulars be not yielded unto, and
performed by the Emperor, as is here propounded, but be refused or delayed
beyond the time before mentioned, that then the King of Spain do join his forces
with ours, for the recovery of our childrens honors and patrimony, which upon
this trust has been thus lost. Or if so be his forces at this present be
otherwise so employed, as that they cannot give us that assistance which we
here desire, and as we think we have deserved, yet at the least he will permit
us a free and friendly passage through his Territories and Dominions for such
forces as we shall send and employ into Germany for this service: of all which
disjunctively, if you receive not of the King of Spain within ten days at the
furthest, after your audience and proposition made, a direct assurance under
his hand and seal, without delay or putting us off to further Treaties and
Conferences, that is to say, of such restitution, cessation of Arms, and
proceeding to a general treaty, as is before mentioned, or else of assistance
and joining his forces with ours against the Emperor, or at least permission
of passage for our forces through his said Dominions, that then you take your
leave and return unto our Presence without further stay; otherwise to proceed
in the negotiation of the marriage of our Son, according to the instruction we
have given you. Given, etc. at Hampton Court, October. 3. 1622.

Earl of Bristol to King James, October. 21. 1622.
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty, I received your Majesty's Letter of
the 9. of September the 23. of the same month, and by them understand that your
Majesty has received much satisfaction by what I had formerly written unto
your Majesty both concerning the restitution of the Prince Palatine, as
likewise of this Kings resolution to proceed to the conclusion of the Match:
but that your Majesty finds the effects very unsuitable, both by the
proceeding at Bruxels, and in the Palatinate, as also by what you understand
from Rome by Mr. Gage of the Popes demands. I hope by the arrival of Mr.
Cottington your Majesty will have received satisfaction in some measure, at
least that there has been no diligence or time omitted either for the
redressing of any thing that has been amiss, or for the advancing of your
Majesty's affairs.

The very day I received your Letters, I sent a Gentleman post unto the King
who was gone into the Escurial, to demand audience, which he presently granted
me, and I repaired thither unto him upon the third of October, the Conde de
Gondomar being likewise commanded to wait upon the King, I was there well
received; and presently upon my arrival the Conde de Olivarez came to me to the
lodgings which were appointed for me to rest in. To him I delivered fully in
the presence of Sir Walter Ashton and the Conde de Gondomar, what I had to
negotiate with the King, both in the business of the Match, and of the
Palatinate. In the Match I represented how much it imported your Majesty that a
speedy resolution might be taken therein, both in regard of the Prince being
your Majesty's only son, now arrived to the age of 22 years, and for the
settling of your affairs in England. I repeated unto him all the passages in
this Treaty, how many years had been already spent in it; that after so long an
expectation, the diligences used in Rome for the obtaining of the Dispensation
had wrought but small effect, since the Pope had lately made such demands as
were altogether impossible for your Majesty to condescend unto; and therefore
your Majesty seeing the business still delayed, held it fit that some such
course might be taken that both your Majesty's might speedily know what you
were to trust unto; and therefore had commanded me to signify unto this King
your uttermost resolution how far you would condescend in point of Religion
toward what the Pope had demanded; and if herewith this King could be
satisfied, your Maj. desire that we might proceed to a final and speedy
conclusion; otherwise that this King would likewise clearly declare himself,
that your Majesty might lose no more time in the disposing of the Prince your
son. Hereunto the Conde de Olivarez answered with some length, the substance I
shall only presume to set down briefly to your Majesty. He proposed a sincere
intention and resolution in the King to make the Match, and that there should
not be one day lost; for the speedy dispatch thereof imported them as much as
your Majesty; and to the end that no time may be lost, this King had the next
day after for Don Balthazar de Zuniga appointed Don Ferdinando de Giron in his
place in the Commission: That for the going of Mr. Gage from Rome, and the
Popes demands, they were absolutely ignorant of them; That the King had done
all that I my self desired for the redress of this error: That I might assure
your Majesty that you shall find all sincerity and clear proceeding, without
any hours delay more then of necessity the nature of the business required.

As for the business of the Palatinate, I presented at large the merits of your
Majesty's proceeding, the many promises made from hence; yet notwithstanding
the whilst your Majesty was treating at Bruxels, Heidelberg one of the three
places which were only left, and where your Majesty had Garrisons, was besieged
by the Archduke Leopold and Monsieur Tilly; that this King had withdrawn his
Forces, and so exposed the Palatinate absolutely to the Emperor and the Duke of
Bavaria. The Conde de Olivarez answered me, by acknowledging how much your
Majesty's proceedings had deserved at the Emperor and this Kings hands: That
whatsoever your Majesty could expect, or had been at any time promised, should
by this King be really performed: That the Prince Palatines own courses
hitherto had been the only hinderance of the effecting of it: That he referred
it unto your Majesty's own just judgment, whether the calling of this Kings
forces out of the Palatinate were with any ill intention, or merely for the
defense of Flanders, which otherwise had been put in great hazard by Count
Mansfield, as your Majesty saw by what had really passed: That the siege of
Heidelbergh was no way by the consent or knowledge of this King or any of his
Ministers, but was generally disapproved by them all.

I told them, I conceived that was not enough; for that your Majesty had
engaged your self to this King, that in case your Son-in-law would not conform
himself, you would not only forsake him, but would declare your self against
him, and give the Emperor assistance for the reducing of him to reason, and
that your Majesty could not but expect a like reciprocal proceeding from the
King. He answered, your Majesty should see the Kings sincerity by the effects;
and that if Heidelbergh should be taken, and the Emperor refuse to restore it,
or to condescend to such accommodation as should be held reasonable, this King
would infallibly assist your Majesty with his Forces. And this he spoke with
great assurance, and wished me to desire your Majesty to be confident you would
find nothing but real and sinc ere proceedings from hence.

I was ^hen presently called for to the King, to whom I spoke first in the
business of the Match, and delivered him the contents thereof in writing, which
I have sent to Mr. Secretary. I received from him the same answer in effect as
from the Conde de Olivarez, That he desired the Match no less then your
Majesty; That on his part there should be no time lost for the bringing of it
to a speedy conclusion. In the business of the Palatinate I spoke unto the King
with some length, repeating many particulars of your Majesty's proceedings, and
how much your honor was like to suffer, that now whilst you were treating,
Heidelborgh defended by your Garrisons, was like to be taken. The King answered
me, He would effectually labor that your Majesty should have entire
satisfaction; and rather then your Majesty should fail thereof, he would employ
his Arms to effect it for you. My Lord Ambassador Sir Walter Ashton accompanied
me at my audience, and was a witness of all that passed as well with the King,
as with the Conde de Olivarez

Within few days after the news of the taking of Heidelbergh came hither:
whereupon I dispatched again to the King in such sort as I have at large
advertised Mr. Secretary Calvert. The effect of my Negotiation was, that they
on the 13. of October dispatched Letters away of the Emperors and Duke of
Bavaria's proceedings. But pressing them further in regard their former Letters
have wrought so little effect, they have given me at present a second Dispatch,
which I have sent unto the Infanta, and whereof Mr. Secretary will give your
Majesty an account, which I conceive will procure your Majesty's better
satisfaction then hitherto you have received from the Emperor and his party.

For the business of the match, I have written to Mr. Secretary what is to be
said at present; and will only add, that as I should not willingly give your
Majesty hope upon uncertain grounds, so I will not conceal what they profess,
which is, That they will give your Majesty real and speedy satisfaction
therein. And if they intended it not, they are falser then all the Devils in
hell; for deeper oaths and protestations of sincerity cannot be made.

It will only remain, that I humbly cast my self at your Majesty's feet for
that addition of Title wherewith it has pleased you to honor me and my
posterity. My gratitude and thankfulness wants expression, and shall only say
unto your Majesty, That as all I have either of fortunes or honor, I hold it
merely of your bounty and goodness; so shall I ever cheerfully lay them down
with my life into the bargain, for the service of your Majesty and yours.

So with my humble prayers for the health and prosperity of your Majesty, I
humbly commend your Majesty to Gods holy protection, and rest,

Your Majesty's most humble servant and subject, BRISTOL.
Madrid, October. 21. 1622.
King Philip the third of Spain to the Conde of Olivarez.
THe King my Father declared at his death that his intention never was to marry
my sister the Infanta Donna Maria with the Prince of Wales, which your Uncle
Don Baltezer well understood, and so treated this match ever with an intention
to delay it, notwithstanding it is now so far advanced, that considering
withal the aversness unto it of the Infanta, as it is high time to seek some
means to divert the treaty, which I would have you find out, and I will make it
good whatsoever it be; but in all other things procure the satisfaction of the
King of Great Britain, who has deserved very much, and it shall content me, so
that it be not the match.

Conde Olivarez his Answer to the King.
Sir,
COnsidering in what estate we find the Treaty of marriage between Spain and
Emgland, and knowing certainly how the Ministers did understand this business,
that treated it in the time of Philip the third, who is now in heaven, that
their meaning was never to effect it; but by enlarging the treaties and points
of the said marriage, to make use of the friendship of the King of Great
Britain, as well in the matter of Germany as those of Flanders; and suspecting
likewise that your Majesty is of the same opinion (although the demonstrations
do not show so) joining to those suspicions that it is certain that the Infanta
Donna Maria is resolved to put her self into the Monastery the same day that
your Majesty shall press her to make the marriage, I have thought fit to
present to your Majesty that which my good zeal has afforded me in this
occasion, thinking it a good time to acquaint your Majesty withal, to the end
you may resolve of that which you shall find most convenient with the advice of
those Ministers that you shall think fit.

The King of Great Britain does find himself at this time equally in the two
businesses, the one is the marriage to the which he is moved by the
conveniences which he finds in your Majesty's friendship with making an
agreement with those Catholics that he thinks are secretly in his Kingdom,
and by this to assure himself of them, as likewise to marry his son to one of
the house of Austria, knowing that the Infanta Donna Maria is the best born
Lady in the world. The Other business is, the restitution of the Palatinate, in
which he is yet more engaged. For (besides that his reputation is at stake
there is added) the love and interest of his Grandchildren, sons of his only
daughter. So that both by the law of Nature, and reason of State, he ought to
put them before whatsoever conveniences might follow by dissembling what they
suffer. I do not dispute whether the King of Great Britainy be governed in this
business of the Palatinate by Art or friendship, I think a man may say he has
used both; but as a thing not precisely necessary to this discourse, I omit it.
I hold it for a maxim, that these two Engagements in which he finds himself,
are unseparable: for although the marriage be made, we must fail in that which
in any way of understanding is most necessary, which is the restitution of the
Palatinate. This being supposed, having made the marriage in the form as it is
treated, your Majesty may find your self, together with the King of Great
Brirain, engaged in a war against the Emperor, and the Catholic league, so
that your Majesty shall be forced to delare your self with your Arms against
the Emperor and the Catholic league, a thing which to hear will offend your
Majesty's godly ears: or declaring your self for the Emperor and the
Catholic league as certainly you will, your Majesty will find your self
engaged in a war against the King of England, and your sister married with his
son, with the which all whatsoever conveniences that was thought upon with this
marriage do cease if your Majesty shall show your self Newtrall as it may be
some will expound --

The first will cause very great scandal, and with just reason, since in
matters of less opposition then of Catholics against Heretics, the Arms
of this Crown has taken the godly against the contrary part. And at this time
the French men have taken part with the Hollanders against your Majesty, your
piety has been such, that you have sent your Arms against the Rebels of that
Crown, leaving all the great considerations of State, only because those men
are enemies of the faith and the Church. It will oblige your Majesty, and good
occasion to those of the League, to make use of the King of France, and other
Catholic Princes ill affected to this Crown, for it will be a thing necessary
for them to do so, and those even against their own Religion will foment and
assist the Heretics for hatred to us, without doubt they will follow the
contrary part only to leave your Majesty with that blemish that never has
befaln any King of these Dominions.

By the second the King of England will remain offended and disobliged, seeing
that neither interesses nor hopes do follow the Alliance with this Crown, as
likewise the pretext of particular resentment: for having suffered his daughter
and grandchildren to be ruined for respect of the said Alliance. The Emperor,
though he be well-affected, and obliged to us in making the translation at this
time as businesses now stand (the Duke of Bavaria being now possessed of all
the Dominions) although he would dispose all according to our conveniences, yet
it will not be in his power to do it, as you and every body may see: And the
memorial that the Emperors Ambassador gave your Majesty yesterday, makes it
certain, since in the List of the Soldiers, that every on of the League is to
pay, he shows your Majesty, that Bavier for himself alone will pay more then
all the rest joined together; the which does show his power and his intention,
which is not to accommodate matters, but to keep to himself the superiority of
all in this broken time. The Emperor is now in the Diet, and the translation
is to be made in it. The opposition in this estate is, by conserving the means
for conference, which your Majesty's Ministers will do with their capacities,
zeal and wisdom, and it is certain they will all have enough to do; for the
difficulty consists to find a way to make the present estate of affairs
straight again, which with lingering, as it is said, both the power and time
will be lost. I suppose that the Emperor, as your Majesty knows by his
Ambassador, desires to marry his daughter with the King of Englands son, I
doubt not but he will be likewise glad to marry his second daughter with the
Palatines son.

Then I propound, that these two marriages be made, and that they be set on
foot presently, giving the King of England full satisfaction in all his
propositions for the more strict union and correspondency that he may agree to
it: I hold for certain, that all the conveniences that would have followed the
alliance with us, will be as full in this, it does accommodate the matter of the
Palatinate, and the succession of his grandchildren with his honor, and without
drawing a sword, or wasting treasure.

After I would reduce the Prince Elector, that was an enemy, to the obedience
of the Church, by breeding his sons in the Emperors Court, with Catholic
Doctrine.

The business is great, the difficulty greater then perchance have been in any
other case, I have found my self obliged to represent to your Majesty, and to
show (if you please to command me) what I think fit for the disposing of the
things, and of the great Ministers that your Majesty has; I hope with the
particular notice of these things, (and all being helped with the good zeal of
the Conde de Gondemer) it may be that God will open a way to it, a thing so much
for his and your Majesty's service.

King James to the Earl of Bristol, October. 8. 1623.
WE have received yours brought us by Gresly, and the Copy of yours to our dear
Son; and we cannot forbear to let you know how well we esteem your dutiful,
discreet and judicious relation and humble advise to our self and our Son:
whereupon having ripely deliberated with our self, and communicated with our
dear Son, we have resolved with the great liking of our Son to rest upon that
security (in point of doubt of the Infanta's taking a Religious house) which
you in your judgment shall think meet. We have further thought meet to give you
knowledge, that it is our special desire that the betrothing of the Infanta
with words de praesenti, should be upon one of the days in Christmas new
style, that holy and joyful time best fitting so notable and blessed an action.

But first we will that you repair presently to that King, and give him
knowledge of the safe arrival of our dear Son to our Court, so satisfied and
taken with the great entertainments, personal kindness, favor and respect he
has received from that King and Court, as he seems not able to magnify it
sufficiently, which makes us not know how sufficiently to give thanks; but we
will that by all means you endeavor to express our thankfulness to that King,
and the rest to whom it belongs, in the best and most ample manner you can. And
hereupon you may take occasion to let that King know, that according to our
constant affection to make a firm and indissoluble amity between our Families,
Nations and Crowns, and not seem to abandon our honor, nor at the same time we
give joy to our only Son, to give our only Daughter her portion in tears: By
the advice of that Kings Ambassadors, we have entered a Treaty concerning the
restitution of the Palatinate, as will more particularly appear to you by the
copies herewith sent. Now we must remember you, that we ever understood and
expected, that upon the marriage of our son with the Infanta, we should have a
clear restitution of the Palatinate and Electoral dignity to our son-in-law, to
be really procured by that King, according to the obligation of our honor, as
you have well expressed in your reasons why the person of our Son-in-law should
not be left out of the Treaty, but that the Emperor should findout a great
title, or by increasing the number of Electorate styles wherewith to satisfy
the Duke of Bavaria. We now therefore require you, that presently in your first
audience you procure from that King a punctual answer what course that King
will take for the restitution of the Palatinate and Electorate to our
Son-in-law; and in case that either the Emperor or the Duke of Bavaria oppose
any part of the expected restitution, what course that King will take to give
us assurance for our content in that point, whereof we require your present
answer; and that you so press expedition herein, that we may all together
receive the full joy of both in Christmas, resting our self upon that
faithful diligence of yours we have approved in all your service. Though
almost with the latest we must remember to you as a good ground for you to work
on, that our Son did write us out of Spain, That that King would give us a
Blank in which we might form our own Conditions concerning the Palatinate; and
the same our Son confirms to us now. What observation and performance that King
will make, we require you to express, and give us a speedy account, etc. Given,
etc.

Earl of Bristol in answer to King James, October. 29. 1623.
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty, I have received your Majesty's
Letters of the 8. of October on the 21. of the same month, some hours within
night; and have thought fit to dispatch back unto your Majesty with all
possible speed, referring the answer to what your Majesty has by these Letters
commanded me, to a Post that I shall purposely dispatch when I shall have
negotiated the particulars with this King and his Ministers, wherein God
willing all possible diligence shall be used.

But forasmuch as I find both by your Majesty's Letter, as likewise by Letters
which I have received from the Prince his Highness, that you continue your
desires of having the Match proceeded in, I held it my duty that your Majesty
should be informed that although I am set free in as much as concerns the
doubt of the Infanta's entering into Religion, for the delivering of the powers
left with me by his Highness, yet by this new direction I now received from
your Majesty, that the Deposories should be deferred till Christmas, the said
powers are made altogether useless and invalid, it being a clause in the bodies
of the said powers, that they shall only remain in force till Christmas and no
longer, as your Majesty may see by the copy I send herewith enclosed.

Your Majesty, I conceive, will be of opinion, that the suspending of the
execution of the powers until the force and validity of them be expired, is a
direct and effectual revoking of them; which not to do, how far his Highness
is in his Honor engaged, your Majesty will be best able to judge by viewing the
powers themselves. Further, if the date of these powers do expire, besides the
breach of the Capitulations, although the match it self jealousies and
mistrusts be hazarded, yet the Princes coming at the Spring, will be almost
impossible: For by that time new Commissions and Powers shall be after
Christmas granted by the Prince, which must be to the satisfaction of both
parties, I conceive so much of the year will be spent, that it will be
impossible for the Fleets and other preparations to be in a readiness against
the Spring; for it is not to be imagined that they will here proceed
effectually with their preparations, until they shall be sure of the
Desposorios, especially when they shall have seen them several times deferred
on the Prince his part, and that upon pretexts that are not new, or grown since
the granting of the Powers, but were before in being, and often under debate,
and yet were never insisted upon to make stay of the business; so that it will
seem that they might better have hindered the granting of them then the
execution of them. Now, if there were not staggering in former resolutions, the
which although really there is not, yet can it not but be suspected; and the
clearing of it between Spain and England, will cost much time. I most humbly
crave your Majesty's pardon if I write unto you with the plainness of a
true-hearted and faithful servant, who ever has cooperated honestly unto your
Majesty's ends. I knew them, I know your Majesty has been long time of
opinion, that the greatest assurance you could get, that the King of Spain
would effectually labor the entire restitution of the Palatinate, was that he
really proceeded to the effecting of the match, and my instructions under your
Majesty's hands, were to insist upon the restoring the Prince Palatine; but not
to annex it to the treaty of the match, as that thereby the match should be
hazarded; for that your Majesty seemed confident that here it would never grow
to a perfect conclusion without a settled resolution to give your Majesty
satisfaction in the business of the Palatinate. The same course I observed in
the carriage of the business by his Highness and my Lord Duke at their being
here, who though they insisted on the business of the Palatinate, yet they held
it fit to treat of them distinctly, and that the marriage should proceed as a
good pawn for the other.

Since their departure my Lord Ambassador Sir Walter Ashton and my self have
been pressed to have this Kings resolution in writing concerning the
Palatinate, and the dispatches which your Majesty will receive herewith
concerning that business, were writ before the receipt of your Majesty's
Letters; and doubtless it is now a great part of their care that that business
may be well entered before the Infanta's coming into England: And his Highness
will well often remember, that the Conde de Olivarez often protested a
necessity of having this business compounded and settled before the marriage,
saying, otherwise they might give a Daughter, and a War within three months
after, if this ground and subject of quarrel should still be left on foot. The
same language he has ever held with Sir Walter Ashton and my self, and that it
was a firm peace and amity as much as an alliance which they sought with his
Majesty. So that it is not to be doubted, but that this King concluding the
match, resolves to employ his uttermost power for your satisfaction in the
restitution of the Prince Palatine.

The question now will be, whether the business of the Prince Palatine having
relation to many great Princes that are interessed therein, living at distance,
and being (indeed) for the condition and nature of the business it self,
impossible to be ended but by a formal treaty, which of necessity will require
great length, whether the conclusion of the match shall any way depend upon the
issue of this business, which I conceive to be far from your Majesty's
intention; for so the Prince might be long kept unbestowed by any aversness of
those which might have particular interest in the Princes remaining unmarried,
or dislike with his matching with Spain. But that which I understand to be your
Majesty's aim, is only to have the conclusion of this match accompanied with a
strong engagement as can be procured from this King for the joining with your
Majesty not only in all good Offices for the entire restitution of the
Palatinate, but otherwise if need require of his Majesty's assistance herein.

These days past I have labored with all earnestness, and procured this Kings
public answer which I am told is resolved of, and I shall within these few
days have it to send to your Majesty, as also a private Proposition which will
be put into your hands; and shall not fail further to pursue your Majesty's
present directions of procuring this Kings Declaration, in what sort your
Majesty may rely upon this Kings assistance, in case the Emperor or the Duke
of Bavaria hinder the entire restitution of the Prince Palatine. But I conceive
(if it be your intention) that I should first here procure this Kings
peremptory answer in the whole business, and how he will be assistant unto your
Majesty in case of the Emperors or the Duke of Bavaria's aversness. And that I
should send it to your Majesty, and receive again your answer before I deliver
the Powers for the Deposorios, the match would thereby if not be hazarded, yet
I conceive the Infanta's going at Spring would be rendered altogether
impossible. For if upon the arrival of the Approbation I cannot refuse them,
but upon some grounds; if I allege your Majesty's desire of having the
Deposories deferred until Christmas, they know as well as my self that his
Highness Proxy is then out of date, besides the infringing of the
Capitulations; and they will judge it is a great scorn put upon this King, who
ever since the Princes granting of the powers has called himself the Infanta's
Desposado, and to that effect the Prince has writ unto him in some of his
Letters. Besides, it will be held here a point of great dishonor unto the
Infanta, if the powers called for by her friends should be detained by the
Prince his part: and whosoever else may have deserved it, she certainly has
not deserved disrespect nor discomfort. Further, upon my refusal to deliver the
powers, all preparations which now go on cheerfully and apace will be stayed,
and there will enter in so much distrust, and so many troubles and jealousies,
that if the main business run not hazard by them, at least much time will be
spent to clear them.

I must therefore in discharge of my duty tell your Majesty, that all your
Majesty's businesses here are in a fair way; the Match and all that is
capitulated therein, they profess punctually to perform.

In the business of the Palatinate, I continue my earnest and faithful
endeavors, and they protest they infinitely desire, and will to the utmost of
their powers endeavor to procure your Majesty's satisfaction.

The Prince is like to have a most worthy and virtuous Lady, and who much
loves him, and all things else depending upon this match are in good and
hopeful way.

This is now the present estate of your Majesty's affairs, as it appears unto
me and to Sir Walter Ashton, with whom I have communicated this Dispatch, as I
do all things else concerning your Majesty's service. And I must clearly let
your Majesty understand, that I conceive by the retaining of the powers when
this King shall call for them, and offering to defer the Deposories until
Christmas, that your Majesty's business will run a hazard, what by the
distaste and disgust that will be raised here, and what by the art and industry
of those which are enemies to the match, whereof every Court has plenty in
Christendom.

That therefore which I presume with all humility, is, That you would be
pleased to give me order with all possible speed, that when the business shall
come cleared from Rome, and that the powers of the marriage shall be demanded
of me in the behalf of this King, that I may deliver them, and no ways seek to
interrupt or suspend the Deposorios, but assist and help to a perfect
conclusion of the match.

And for the business of the Palatinate, I continue my earnest and faithful
endeavors to engage this King as far as shall be possible, both for the doing
of all good offices for the Palatines entire restitution, herein I will not
fail (as likewise for this Kings declaration of assistance in case the Emperor
or Duke of Bavaria shall oppose the said restitution) to use all possible
means; and I conceive the dispatch of the Match will be a good pawn in the
business, and the help and assistance which the Princes being once betrothed
would be able to give in this Court to all your Majesty's businesses would be
of good consideration.

So fearing I have already presumed too far upon your Majesty's patience, I
humbly crave your Majesty's pardon, and recommend you to the holy protection of
God, resting

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful subject and servant, BRISTOL.
Madrid, October. 29. 1623.
Earl of Bristol to King James, November. 1. 1623.
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty, I find that upon the news that is
now come from the Duke of Pastrava, that the Pope has clearly passed the
Dispensation, which is now hourly expected here. There is an intention to call
presently upon me for the Princes powers for the marriage left in my hands, the
which I know not upon what ground or reason to detain, the Prince having
engaged (in the said powers) the faith and word of a Prince no way to revoke
and retract from them, but that they should remain in full force till
Christmas, and delivered unto me a politic declaration of his pleasure, that
upon the coming of the Dispensation I should deliver them unto this King, that
they might be put in execution; and hereof likewise was there by Secretary
Serita as a public Notary an Instrument drawn, attested by all the witnesses
present. If I shall allege your Majesty's pleasure of having the marriage
deferred until one of the Holidays, although they should condescend thereunto,
that is impossible, for the powers will be then expired. If I shall insist upon
the restitution of the Palatinate, this King has therein declared his answer;
and it would be much wondered why that should be now added for a condition of
the marriage, having ever hitherto been treated of as a business apart, and was
in being at the granting of the said powers, and has been often under debate,
but never specified, nor the powers delivered upon any condition of having any
such point first cleared; and I must confess unto your Majesty I understand not
how with honor, and that exact dealing which has ever been observed in all
your Majesty's actions, the powers can be detained, unless there should appear
some new and emergent cause since the granting of them, whereof as yet I hear
none specified: Therefore being loath to be the instrument by whose hands any
thing should pass, that might have the least reflection upon your Majesty's or
the Princes honor (which I shall ever value more then my life or safety) and
judging it likewise to conduce more to your service, and assuring my self that
your Majesty's late direction to have the marriage upon one of the holidays in
Christmas, was for want of due information that the powers will be then
expired, I have thought it fit (with the advice of Sir Walter Ashton) to raise
no scruple in the delivery of the said powers, but do intend when they shall be
required to pass on to the nominating of a prefixed day for the Deposorio's:
but I shall endeavor to defer the time, until I may be advertised of your
Majesty's pleasure, if it may be within the space of 24 days, and will labor
to find some handsome and fair occasion for the deferring of them, without
alleging any directions in that kind from your Majesty or the Prince.

The reasons why I have thought it fit to take this resolution, are, First I
find by your Majesty's letters and the Princes, that your intent is to proceed
in the marriage, and to that purpose your Majesty and the Prince have set me
free to deliver the powers according to the first intentions, by removing that
scruple of the Infanta's entering into Religion, whereupon they were only
suspended.

Secondly, your Majesty's Letter only intimates a desire, not a direction of
having the marriage upon one of the holidays of Christmas: which I conceive is
to be understood, if it may well and fittingly be so, not if there shall be
impossibility therein by reason of the expiring of the powers before, and that
the intention of having it then should be overthrown thereby, when I am
confident that what your Majesty writes is for want of due information of the
clause of expiration of the powers.

Thirdly, if your Majesty upon these reasons and such as I have formerly
alleged unto your Majesty, should (as I no way doubt but your Majesty will)
give me order for the present proceeding to the marriage, yet by my refusing of
the powers, and alleging your Majesty's or the Princes directions, although
afterward all things should be cleared, yet would it cast some kind of
aspersion and jealousy upon the sincerity of your Majesty's and the Princes
proceedings. On the contrary side, if your Majesty's intention be not to
proceed in the match, whereof I see no ground, the intimation of that may be as
well a month hence as now: And I judge it duty in a servant, especially in a
business of so high a consequence, and wherein your Majesty has spent so much
time, to give his master leisure to repair to his second cogitations before he
do any act that may disorder or overthrow.

This I offer with all humility unto your Majesty's wise and just
consideration, and beseech you to make interpretation of my proceedings herein
according to my dutiful and zealous care of your honor and service. I have of
purpose dispatched this Post with this Letter, to the end I may receive your
Majesty's directions in this particular with all possible speed, which I hope
shall be to proceed directly to the marriage according to the Capitulations,
and so to order all things. for the Princess her journey in the Spring. And for
the Palatinate, your Majesty may be confident there shall be diligence used in
procuring a speedy and good resolution. So, etc.

King James to the Palsgrave.
My most dear Son,
WE have been careful, and are at this present, to perform the promise which
we made unto you, to employ all our power to re-establish you into your estates
and dignities; and having by the patience and industry which we have used,
reduced matters within a more near circle and of a less extent then the
generality in which they were heretofore: We have thought good to give you
knowledge of such things whereof hope is given to us that we shall in all
apearance obtain them, to the end you may have recourse to your wisdom, and
after a mature deliberation make choice agreeable to the providence, honor, and
safety of your estates; duly weighing and examining all circumstances: and
therefore we present unto you these Propositions, to wit, In the first place a
due submission to the Emperor, under convenient limitations, which first shall
be granted and agreed in conformity to that which is Noble, with a safe conduct
and assurance requisite and sufficient for the free and safe going and return
of your Person and Train. This being done, we make you offer of a present and
full restitution of all the Palatinate unto the person of your son, and that
you shall be his Administrator during your life. And that after the death of
the Duke of Bavaria, your son shall be re-established in the Electorall
dignity; And for the better confirming the sound Amity, and assuring your
Possessions, and enjoying of all according to the contract, which is presently
to be made, and also to serve for a preparation for the bettering of the said
conditions to your person, which will be in all likelihood when the marriage
will be resolved and concluded to be made betwixt your eldest son our
Grandchild, and one of the Emperors daughters. In contemplation whereof they
have approached a degree nearer, to wit, that the Electorall dignity shall come
again to your person after the Duke of Bavaria's death. In which Treaty of
marriage, to clear the principal difficulty which consisted with the education
of your son with the Emperor, we have taken from them all hope therein
(wherein we assure our selves you will be content) and are purposed that he
shall have his education with our son, and with and in the presence of the
Infanta, when she shall be in our Court. We have exactly showed you the state
of this Negotiation, which chiefly concerns you and yours, to the end you may
fix your eyes upon your necessity and bare condition and manner of living,
which depends on the courtesy and assistance of others, and that you may
judge advisedly whether your ready entrance into the possession of your own,
and with a kind of present liberty of living (with insurance in time to recover
the possession of it) shall not be more convenient for you then a hazardous
long expectation upon other uncertain means: The former whereof I prefer before
the later. We pray you to consider what probable and feasible means we may
undertake to reduce your condition to that state as you promise your self;
wherein we doubt not, but you will weigh our forces, and those of our Allies,
and such other whereof we may hope to be assured, to the end that if it should
happen that we cannot obtain to the entire of that we desire by way of treaty,
or that we should take another course, you may be partaker of Councels as well
as the issues and uncertain events. And forasmuch as we are desirous to
consider with you for your personal estate, and as we are obliged to have
regard to the right of our only daughter, and to the inheritance of your
children, with the hope of their posterity, by what way it may be most easily
established, and by what fit means provision may be made best to that effect.
And herein we remain your most affectionate Father,

From White Hall, November. 20. Jacobus Rex.

The Palsgraves Answer to King James.
SIR,
I Take as a great honor and favor your Majesty's Letter of the 2^. of
November, delivered unto me by the hands of your Ambassador Sir Dudley
Carleton, who has further explained your Majesty's intention touching that
which concerns my restitution unto my honors and patrimonial estate, that you
continue firm and constant (in conformity to your promises) to labor and
effect by one way or other, so that the said restitution may be entire and
total, as well in that which concerns the Electorall dignity as the
Palatinates; and that the Propositions which your Majesty makes by your Letter
(to content my self to be Administrator to my son, and he to be invested with
the said dignity, and put into present possession of the Palatinate) is but in
all events if so be your Majesty could not attain to the total restitution
(the desired effect of your intentions) leaving me nevertheless to be at
liberty to choose the lesser of the two evils (if I may be permitted to term
them so) the one by the total restitution of my Estates, but with diminution,
or rather annihilation (for so in effect it will be) in respect of my person of
the Electorall dignity; the other of the recovery of both by war, the events
whereof are uncertain. First, I most humbly thank your Majesty for the
paternall care which you continue and show in this occasion; and which does
more comfort me, and my dear wife in our afflictions, then the fear of humane
events can grieve or incline us to be willing to recover the loss of goods with
the loss of honors. I will therefore use the liberty which your Majesty is
pleased to give me in answering every particular point of your Letter. In the
first whereof I observe the proceeding of my enemies, who require a personal
submission (intended to precede all other things) under the safe conduct of the
Emperor; whereas by natural order used in these occasions, the restitution
which is material and substantial, ought by reason to precede the other,
being but a point of ceremony, at the least it is necessary that all things be
resolved and concluded under such assurances as shall be held convenient; and
then if the intentions on the Emperors part be real and sincere, and without
any aim to take advantage upon my person (as the Emperor Charles 5. did upon
the Lantgrave of Hessen under the subtilty of a distinction of a syllable in
safe conduct Ewis for Einis) the said submission may as well be made by a
Deputy as otherwise, whereby I shall be freed from the apprehensions which the
execution at Prague, and other cruelties exercised by the Imperialists, may
easily impress in the mind of him who is unwilling to lose himself by a quiet
de Coeur. Besides, a simple consent to such a submission under the specified
condition, to yield the Electorate to the Duke of Bavaria, will be sufficient
to prejudice my cause for ever. For the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh who
have always protested against the translation of the Electorate; and the other
Princes of Germany who have like feeling, will disavow their protestations in
regard of him who shall abandon his own pretentions, and in stead of favoring
me upon some breach of the Treaty, or otherwise, may be my opposites. Moreover,
the experience of things past teach us what issue we may hereafter expect of
the like conditions consented to on our part. The Emperor having manifestly
abused us in two already, First in the instrument which I signed for the
conditional resignation of the Crown of Bohemia in the year 1621. Then in my
ratification of the suspension of Arms this last Summer. The first having
served the Emperor to accelerate his Treaty then on foot with Bethlem Gabor:
The second to intimidate the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, that they
might not undertake any thing against the Emperor, both the one and the other
being divulged to the same effect, according to the knowledge which the
Emperor had of these designs before any thing was therein resolved and
concluded: And so will the Emperor in all appearance make his profit of this
present proposition, and strike with one stone two blows, by hindering the
progress of Gabor on the one side, and by continuing on the other the
intimidation of the Princes of Germany, who may with reason excuse themselves
if they move not for him, who has bound himself hand and foot, and consented
to a submission, which being yielded to, it will be always in the Emperors
power to break or go on, as he shall hold it expedient for himself. I do also
promise my self that your Majesty will have regard that by such submission and
entreaty, my undue proscription and banishment (which being done in prejudice
of the constitutions of the Empire, are therefore held by the Electors of
Saxony and Brandenburgh of no validity) be not approved, and thereby a mark of
infamy set upon me and my posterity. Touching the second point, your Majesty
may be pleased to remember, that on the part of Spain hope has always been
given me from the beginning, of a total and entire restitution to my own
person; yea the Earl of Bristol has assured me by his Letters from Madrid in
November 1622. when the marriage was not so much advanced at this time. That
the King of Spain (in case of refusal of the total restitution) would join
his forces with those of your Majesty against the Emperor to constrain him
thereunto: And yet in stead of the said restitution, the translation of my
Electorate to the Duke of Bavaria was since at Ratisbone agreed, and
congratulated unto him from Bruxels; the inferior Palatinate dismembered by the
grant of the Bergstreat one of the best pieces thereof to the Elector of Mentz;
the superior with the Bailywicks granted to the Duke of Nuburgh, thereby to
engage them further in the quarrel by the particular defense of that which
generally the Imperialists have usurped upon me; they confiscate and seize the
goods of my subjects, and those that follow my party, sparing neither widow nor
orphans.

It seems therefore necessary above all things to have sufficient assurance for
the total restitution of my Electorate and Palatinates, before any new treaty
of marriage be proposed: Of the which treaties, as they are ordinarily handled
and managed by the house of Austria, and drawn to length and delays, with the
only aim to the augmentation of their greatness, without respect to civil
honesty, word or promise, I have a doleful experience in my own house in the
person of one of my predecessors Frederick the second, who contributed more to
the first foundation which was laid for the greatness of the said house of
Austria then any other German Prince, and for recompense was allured and drawn
by the space of many years with treaties and promises of marriage, without any
real intention (as was seen by the effect) ever to bring them to execution.
Seeing therefore that he who had so well deserved of the house of Austria,
(which in all external appearance held him in greater estimation then any other
German Prince) was nevertheless so unworthily used by them in a treaty of
marriage; I who have been unduly put into the Ban of the Empire, and spoiled of
all my honors and goods, by the eagerness, hatred and usurpation of the
Emperor himself (whose daughter is propounded for the marriage in question)
know not what to hope but the same effect of fraud and deceit which my
forenamed predecessor found, with a sorrowful repentance of the evil when it
was past remedy. And the Emperor wants but two or three years of leisure,
which he shall easily gain by a treaty of a marriage, to establish in Germany
the translation of my Electoral dignity and Patrimonial estate, without any
hope ever hereafter to recover the like opportunity as at this time, that my
pretensions are not prejudiced by a long interposition of time, and that the
memory, of undue proceeding in the publication of the Ban against my person,
and the said translation of my Electoral dignity, and seizure of my patrimonial
inheritance, are yet fresh in the affections and minds of the Princes of
Germany, who are by the consideration of their own interests moved with the
greater compassion to see the wounds of my miseries yet fresh and bleeding, and
with passion and earnest desire to see them remedied. And in this place I will
say something in answer to the last point of your Majesty's Letter, wherein you
commanded me to consider the means probable and feasible whereby my condition
may be reduced to the former state, and to weigh your Majesty's forces with
those of your Allies, and others whereof your Majesty may hope and be assured.

If your Majesty hops for my restitution in Germany as an effect of the
marriage with Spain, nothing else is to be done but attend the event with
patience: And if you continue to distinguish between the Spaniards and the
Imperialists, there is no more to be said on this subject, but as they have
with joint consent conspired my ruin with the same forces, the same councels,
and the same designs, your Majesty will find (if you please to unmask the fair,
seeming, and hidden malice of the Spaniard, the same effect, as in the end you
found the open and declared violence and hostility of the Imperialists, who
besieged your Majesty's garrisons in my Towns taken into your protection. I
will use the liberty you have given me to discourse of your Majesty's forces
and those of your Allies, and what may further with good probability be hoped
from other friends and well-willers.

In the last rank I place what may be hoped from the Princes of Germany, who,
to wit the two Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, and in effect all the rest
except those of the Catholic league, have sufficiently declared the
disavowing of the Emperors proceeding against me, and their opinions that the
peace of Germany depends upon my restitution; besides the Levies which they
made in the beginning of the last summer, though by the unlucky accident of the
Duke Christian of Brunswick they were soon after dismissed. And certainly no
want of any other thing to be converted to my aid, but the countenance of a
great Prince to support them against the power of the house of Austria, the
same affections remaining still in them, and the same resolution to embrace the
first good occasion that shall be presented for the liberty of Germany. Will
there want hands for the accomplishing of such a work, when it shall be
undertaken openly and earnestly? seeing that the number of those that have
their interest conjoined with mine, is great and mighty: For the greater part
of the people both horse and foot which marched under the Catholic banner,
were of a contrary Religion to the Catholic, and of affection (as it is
notorious to all the world) more inclined to the ruin of those Leagues then to
their preservation. But the conduct of some powerful Prince is necessary as
well to the men of war, as we have seen by experience the last year. The King
of Denmark is he upon whom all have set their eyes: but he being a Prince full
of circumspection, and unwilling to enter into play alone, answers unto all
instances which are made unto him to that end, That as the other Princes have
their eyes upon him, so has he his upon your Majesty.

It is not for me to judge; but since you have commanded me, I will weigh them
by the balance of common judgment. That the felicity wherewith God has
blessed the person of your Majesty, having conjoined the three Crowns of
England, Scotland and Ireland upon one head; the power of the one of the three
alone having done great matters in the affairs of Europe on this side the sea,
yea when it was counterballanced by the other, gives demonstration what your
Majesty may do with the joint forces of the three together, when you shall be
pleased to take a resolution therein, chiefly the question being for the
interest of your own Children; and by the voluntary contribution which we have
already had in our support from your Majesty, we may easily comprehend what may
be promised of them when the public authority of your Majesty shall be
conjoined with their particular affections; there being no Prince in the world
more loved and reverenced of his subjects, nor more sovereign over their
affections and means for the service of your person and Royal house. Touching
the Allies, it is to my great grief that the unhappiness of this time has
separated a great part of them, the united Provinces of Germany, who make
profession of the same Religion whereof they acknowledge your Majesty for
Defendor and Protector. But the same affection remains still in them entire
and firm, though they have been constrained to yield to the present necessity
of their affairs; and the occasion presenting it self, your Majesty may account
of them.

The rest, the Estates of the united Provinces to whom we have recourse in our
afflictions, who support themselves by the help of God, and the situation of
their Country and Forces of their people alone until this time against the
puissance of Spain, seconded by the Imperialists. And in stead of fainting
under such a burden, or of giving ear unto the overtures and submissions which
from day to day are presented unto them, they now put themselves to the
offensive, by a good Fleet prepared and ready to set sail to the West Indies,
to the end they may at least interrupt the peaceable and annual return of the
gold and silver of those parts, by which the house of Austria does continually
advance their greatness. This is commended by all good men and lovers of the
public liberty, as the sole and only means to cast to the ground the fearful
power of Spain, even as a great tree of large exten^ (...) up by the root; but
is held too great for such a little extent of Country as this is, and yet
practically, and to be done by forces answerable to the importance of such an
enterprise: And if your Majesty would be pleased to use the Forces of this
estate by sea and land, to the opposition of their enemies, and by consequence
of mine, their profession of a loyal and sincere affection with the hazard of
their lives and goods for the service of your Majesty, grounded upon the
experience of things past, their present interest, and the judgment which may
be made of the future, makes me assured that your Majesty may absolutely
dispose of them; and by their means being firmly conjoined with your Majesty,
give the Law to Europe.

It is in obedience to your Majesty's commandment that I have enlarged my self
so far into this discourse, which I will send with my most humble thanks for
the continuance of your most gracious and paternall bounty, particularly showed
in the care you have of the education of my eldest son in your Court, who with
all the rest are at your Majesty's disposing, and we hope to live
notwithstanding our hard and doleful condition, to yield unto your Majesty the
fruits of a devout and filial gratitude, and I will remain until the last day
of my life,

From the Hague, December. 30. 1623. new style. Your Majesty's most, etc.
FREDERICK.

Postscript.
I am advertised from a good part, that the Elector of Mentz and the other
Princes of the Popish league are very instant with the Elector of Saxony and
Brandenburgh to persuade them to acknowledge the Duke of Bavaria as an Elector
of the Empire: which if they obtain, it were easy to judge how much it would
prejudice my affairs, and the common cause of the Empire. I therefore most
humbly beseech your Majesty, that you will be pleased to prevent and hinder
such an evil, by the interposition of good offices, and exhortations to the
said secular Electors, be it by some Ambassador, by serious Letters, or such
other way as you shall hold meet and suitable to the importance of the matter,
which above all requires singular celerity. Your Majesty shall increase more
and more my obligations, and that of the public of Germany, etc.

Abignoto from Madrid.
THe Spaniard begins now to be sensible of the great disobligation and gross
oversight he committed in suffering the Prince to go away without his Infanta:
For it has given occasion of advantage to the English (who now seem
indifferent whether they match with him or no) to proceed more stoutly, and to
add to the former Articles which the Prince had sworn at his being here,
certain new Propositions about the Palatinate, which was thought to be unfit to
motion at his being here, by reason of the engagement of his person. And there
is a Commission sent to the Earl of Bristol to treat of these two businesses
jointly; and if the King of Spain give not a satisfactory answer therein, then
he is to return home. Buckingham has little obligation to Spain, therefore for
his own particular he has good reason if he cannot prop himhimself this way,
to find other means for his support: unkindnesses passed between him and
Olivarez, and a hot heart-burning between him and Bristol, who told him here
before the Prince, that being so far his superior in honor and might, he might
happily contemn him, but he could never hate him. Ever since his departure he
has attempted to crush Bristol to pieces, who is out of purse two thousand
pound of his own since his coming hither, and he is so crossed that he cannot
get a penny from England. If he cannot get a surrender of the Palatinate to the
Kings mind, he is in a poor case; for he must hence presently: he is much
favored of the King here and Olivarez, therefore they will do much for him
before Buckingham work his revenge upon him: he has received lately more
comfortable dispatches from England, and in the last the King sent him, he
requires his advice in certain things. The Proxy the King of Spain had to
marry the Infanta in the Princes name, is proroged till March. There is great
resentment of the delays in the Court here; and the Infanta has given over
studying of English. The two Ambassadors here ever since the Princes departure,
have visited the Infanta as vassals; but now they carry themselves like
Ambassadors again. We are all here in suspense, and a kind of maze to see the
event of things, and how matters will be pieced together again, we know not.

A Memorial to the King of Spain, by Sir Walter Ashton, Ambassador in Spain.
Aug. 29. 1624.
SIr Walter Ashton, Ambassador to the King of Great Britain, says, That the
King his Master has commanded him to represent to your Majesty, that having
declared to your Majesty the reasons why he could receive no satisfaction by
your Majesty's answer of the first of January, and that thereby according to
the unanimous consent of his Parliament he came to dissolve both the Treaties
of the Match and Palatinate, he received another answer from your Majesty,
wherein he finds less ground to build upon; and having understood that either
by the Padre de Maestro, or your Majesty's Ambassadors which have assisted
these days past in this Court, there was something to be propounded and
declared touching the business of the Palatinate, whereby he might have
received satisfaction, the said Ambassadors until now have not said any thing
at all to purpose; which comparing with other circumstances of their ill
carriage, he gathers and doubts, that according to the ill affection, and
depraved intentions wherewith they have proceeded in all things, but especially
in particular they have labored to hinder the good correspondency and so
necessary and desired intelligence which should be conserved with your Majesty.
Furthermore he says, That the King his Master has commanded him to give
account to your Majesty, that in an Audience which he gave to the Marquess de
Injiosa and Don Carlo Colomma, they under Cloak and pretext of zeal and
particular care of his person, pretended to discover unto him a very great
conjuration against his person and Royal Dignity, and it was,

That at the beginning of the Parliament, the Duke of Buckingham had consulted
with certain Lords, of the arguments and means which were to be taken touching
the breaking and dissolving of the Treaties of the Palatinate and Match; and
the consultations passed thus far, That if his Majesty would not accommodate
himself to their councels, they would give him a house of pleasure whither he
might retire himself to his sports, in regard that the Prince had now years
sufficient to, and parts answerable for the government of the Kingdom.

The Information was of that quality, that it was sufficient to put impression
in him of perpetual jealousies, in regard that through the ribs of the Duke he
gave wounds to the Prince his son, and the Nobility; and it is not probable
that they could bring to effect such designs without departing totally from the
obligation of faith and loyalty which they owed to his Person and Crown,
because the Lords made themselves culpable as concealers: And it is not likely
that the Duke would hurl himself into such an enterprise, without communicating
it first with the Prince, and knowing his pleasure.

And because this information might be made more clear, he did make many
instances unto the said Ambassadors, that they would give him the Authors of
the said Conjuration, this being the sole means whereby their own honor might
be preserved, etc. whereby their great zeal and care they had pretended to have
of his person, might appear. But instead of confirming the great zeal they had
pretended to bear him; all the answer they made him, consisted of Arguments
against the discovery of the Conspirators: So that for the confirmation of the
said report, there remained no other means then the examination of some of his
Council of State, and principal subjects, which he put in execution, and made
them take oath every one particularly in his own presence, and commanded that
such interrogatories and questions should be propounded unto them that were
most pertinent to the accusation; so that neither part, particle, or
circumstance remained, which was not exactly examined and winnowed, and he
found in the Duke and the rest that were accused, a sincere Innocence touching
the accusations and imputation wherewith they were charged.

This being so, he turned to make new instances unto the said Ambassadors, that
they should not prefer the discovery of the names of the Conspirators to the
security of his Royal person, and truth and honor of thmeselves, and the
hazard of an opinion to be held, and judged the Traitors of a plot of such
malice, sedition and danger. But the Ambassadors remaining in a knotty kind of
obstinacy, resolved to conceal the Authors. Nevertheless afterterwards he gave
them an audience, wherein the Marquess of Injiosa took his leave.

Few days after they demanded new audience, pretending that they had something
to say that concerned the public good, and conduced to the entire restitution
of the Palatinate, with desire to lose no opportunity that might conduce
thereunto, and therewith the confirmation and conservation of the friendship
with your Majesty having suspended some few days to give them audience,
thinking that being thereby better advised, they would resolve upon a wiser
course, and declare the Authors of so pernicious an action, and having since
made many instances, and attended the success of so long patience, he sent his
Secretary, and Sir Francis Cottington Secretary to the Prince, commanding them
that they should signify unto the Ambassadors, that he desired nothing more
then the continuance of the friendship 'twixt both the Crowns; and if so they
had any thing to say, they would communicate it to the said Secretaries, as
persons of so great trust, which he sent to that end: And if they made
difficulty of this, that they would choose amongst his Council of State, those
which they liked best, and he would command that they should presently repair
unto them; and if this did not likewise seem best unto them, that they would
send what they had to say in a Letter sealed up, by whom should seem best unto
them, and he would receive it with his own hands. But the Ambassadors
misbehaving themselves in all that was propounded, the said Secretaries
according to the order which they brought, told them, that they being the
Authors of an information so dangerous and seditious, had made themselves
incapable to treat further with the King their Master; and were it not for the
respect to the King his dear and beloved brother and their Master, and in
contemplation of their condition as Ambassadors of such a Majesty, he would and
could by the Law of Nations, and the right of his own Royal Justice, proceed
against them with such severity as their offense deserved, but for the reasons
aforesaid he would leave the reparation hereof to the justice of their King, of
whom he would demand and require it.

In conformity whereof the said Ambassador of the King of Great Britain, says,
that the King his Master has commanded him to demand reparation and
satisfaction of your Majesty against the said Marquis de Injiosa and Don Carlos
Colomma, making your Majesty Judge of the great scandal and enormous offense
which they have committed against them and the public right, and expect
justice from your Majesty in the demonstrations and chastisements which your
Majesty shall inflict upon them, which for his proceeding sake with your
Majesty, and out of your Majesty's own uprightness and goodness ought to be
expected.

Furthermore he says, that the King his Master has commanded him to assure
your Majesty, that till now he has not mingled the correspondence and
friendship he held with your Majesty, with the faults and offenses of your
Ministers, but leaves and restrains them to their own persons, and that he
remains with your Majesty in the true and ancient friendship and brotherhood,
as heretofore; and that he is ready to give hearing to any thing that shall be
reason, and to answer thereunto: and when your Majesty is pleased to send your
Ambassadors thither, he will make them all good treaty, and receive them with
that good love that is due.

For conclusion, the said Ambassador humbly beseeches your Majesty will be
pleased to observe and weigh the care and tenderness wherewith the King his
Master proceeded with your Majesty's Ambassadors, not obliging to precipitate
resolutions, but giving them much time to prove and give light of that which
they had spoken; and besides opening unto them many ways that they might comply
with their orders, if they had any such. Which course if they had taken, they
might well have given satisfaction to the King his Master, and moderated the so
grounded opinion of their ill proceedings against the peace, and so good
intelligence and correspondence betwixt both the Crowns.

Madrid, Aug. 5. 1624.
The Petition of Francis Philips to King James for the release of Sir Robert
Philips Prisoner in the Tower.
Most dread Sovereign,
IF the Thrones of Heaven and Earth were to be solicited one and the same way,
I should have learned by my often praying to God for your Majesty, how to pray
to your Majesty for others. But the Liturgies of the Church and Court are
different, as in many other points, so especially in this, That in the one
there is not so poor a friend but may offer his vows immediately to the
Almighty; whereas in the other a right loyal subject may pour out his soul in
vain, without an Ora pro nobis. Now such is the obscure condition of your
humble Suppliant, as I know no Saint about your sacred Majesty to whom I can
address my orisons, or in whose mediation I dare repose the least assurance.
Let it be therefore lawful for me in this extraordinary occasion, to pass the
ordinary forms; and raising my spirits above uncertainties, to fix my entire
faith upon your Majesty's supreme goodness, which is and ever ought to be
esteemed both the best Tribunal, and the best Sanctuary for a good cause. But
how good soever my cause be, it would be high presumption in me to stand upon
it. I have therefore chosen rather to cast my self at your Majesty's feet, from
whence I would not willingly rise, but remain a monument of sorrow and humility
till I have obtained some gracious answer to my Petition: For though your
Majesty's thoughts cannot discern so low, as to conceive how much it imports
a poor distressed Suppliant to be reviled, neglected, yet you may be pleased to
believe that we are as highly affected, and as much anguished with the
extremities that press our little fortunes, as Princes are with theirs. Which I
speak not out of any pride I take in comparing small things with great, but
only to dispose your Majesty to a favorable construction of my words, if they
seem to be overcharged with zeal and affection, or to express more earnestness
then perhaps your Majesty may think the business merits as my self values it.
The suit I am to make to your Majesty is no slight one, it may be easily
granted without references: For I dare assure your Majesty upon my life, it is
neither against the Laws of the Kingdom, nor will diminish any of your
treasure, either that of your coffers, or that of your peoples hearts; it being
an act of clemency, or rather a word, for even that will satisfy to create in
your poor dejected Suppliant a new heart, and send him away as full of content
as he is now of grief and despair. Nor is it for my self I thus implore your
Majesty's grace, but for one that is far more worthy, and in whom all that I am
consists, my dear Brother, who I know not by what misfortune has fallen, or
rather been pushed into your Majesty's displeasure; not in dark and crooked
ways, as corrupt and ill-affected subjects use to walk, and near to break their
necks in, but even in the great road, which both himself and all good
Englishmen that know not the paths of the Court, would have sworn would have
led most safely and most directly to your Majesty's service from your Majesty's
displeasure; there needs no other invention to crucify a generous and
honest-minded suppliant, upon whom has issued and been derived a whole torrent
of exemplary punishment, wherein his reputation, his person, and his estate
grievously suffered.

For having (upon the last process of Parliament) retired himself to his poor
house in the Country, with hope a while to breathe after these troublesome
affairs, and still breathing nothing but your Majesty's service; he was sent
for ere he had finished his Christmas, by a Sergeant at Arms, who arrested him
in his own house with as much terror as belongs to the apprehending of treason
it self: But (thanks be to God) his conscience never started; and for his
obedience herein showed, it was not in the power of any authority to surprise
it: For at the instant without asking one minutes time of resolution, he
rendered himself to the officers discretion, who (according to his directions)
brought him up captive, and presented him at the Council Table as a
Delinquent, from whence he was as soon committed to the Tower, where he ever
since has been kept close prisoner, and that with so strict a hand, as his own
beloved wife and my self having sometime since urgent and unfaigned occasion to
speak with him about some private business of his Family; and hereupon making
humble petition to the Lords of your Majesty's most honorable Privy Council
for the favor of access, we were to our great discomforts denied it, by
reason as their Lordships were pleased to declare unto us, that he had not
satisfied your Majesty fully in some points, which being so far from being his
fault, as I dare say it is the greatest part of his affliction, that he sees
himself debarred from means of doing it. The Lords Commissioners that were
appointed by your Majesty to examine his offense, since the first week of his
imprisonment, have not done him the honor to be with him; by which means not
only his body, but (the most part of his mind) his humble intentions to your
Majesty are kept in restraint. May it please therefore your most excellent
Majesty now at length after five months imprisonment and extreme durance, to
ordain such expedition in this cause, as may stand with your justice, and yet
not avert your mercy, either of them will serve our turns; but that which is
most agreeable to your Royal and gracious inclination, will best accomplish
our desire. To live still in close prison is all one to be buried alive; and
for a man that has any hope of salvation, it were better to pray for the day
of judgment, then to lie languishing in such waking misery; yet not ours but
your Majesty's will be done. For if in your princely wisdom you shall not think
it a fit season to restore him to his former condition, or to accept the fruit
of his correction, an humble and penitent submission for his unhappiness in
offending your Majesty, which I assure my self is long since ripe and grown to
full perfection in so forward affection, and so proper for all duties as his
has ever been: If (I say) it be not yet time to have mercy, but that he must
still remain within the walls of bondage to expiate that which he did in these
privileged ones, my hope is, that he will die at any time for your Majesty's
service, and will find patience to live any where for your Majesty's pleasure;
only thus much let me beseech your Majesty's grace again and again, not to deny
your humble and most obedient suppliant, that you will at least be pleased to
mitigate the rigor of his sufferings so far as to grant him the liberty of the
Tower, that he may no longer groan under the burden of those incomodities
which daily prejudice his health and fortune, in a higher degree (I believe)
then either your Majesty knows or intends; I am the more bold to importune your
Majesty in the point of favor, because it concerns my own good and
preservation: For your Maj. shall deign to understand that I your suppliant
have no means to live but what proceeds from his brotherly love and bounty; so
as if I may not be suffered to go to him and receive order for my maintenance,
I know none but Our Father which art in heaven to beg my daily bread on; he
that was my father on earth is long since departed (if I have not been
misinformed) who was then beyond sea, your Majesty's anger was to him little
better then the messenger of death, though I persuade my self it was rather
sent in your Majesty's Name then in your Warrant.

For what use could your Majesty have of his not being, who neither was, nor
could be ever but your faithful and affectionate servant, who in his soul
adored your Royal Majesty as much as ever mortal man did any mortal God;
lastly, whose heart was so bent to please your Majesty, as the very sound of
your displeasure was enough to break it. And more perfect obedience then this
can no subject show, to make his Sovereigns savor equal to life and death.

Pardon me, dread Sovereign, if in this occasion I cannot hinder my Fathers
ghost from appearing: For how can it possibly be at rest, as long as your fatal
displeasure reigns still in his family, and makes it the house of continual
mourning? Remove then (if it be your blessed will) the clouds that have been so
long hanging over our heads; and let not the present storm that wants matter to
produce, extort a thunderbolt: For what is Philips, or the son of Philips, that
your Majesty should so destroy them? We are unworthy of Caesar's anger, as well
in regard of our means as of our innocence?

To conclude my prayers, I most humbly beseech your Majesty to forgive them;
and let not the ignorance of the style, or ceremonies used in the Court, be
imputed to your humble and well-meaning Suppliant, as a willing want of
reverence; in whose breast these two legal qualities, Love and Fear, do more
vigorously meet, or who could more willingly part with his essence, to add the
least acquisition to the greatness and majesty of his Sovereign. True it is,
that the subject that employed the faculties of my soul at this present, is of
such a nature, as I could not deny it the uttermost of my affection; and he
that thinks he can never speak enough, may easily speak too much. That neither
my self nor my brother have failed in any thing but words, that your Majesty
will pardon, without that all crimes are equal, and as much danger lies in an
humble Petition as in a plot of high Treason.

Be pleased then (most gracious Sovereign) to give us back one gracious word,
and keep our undoubted hearts, at least show us so much mercy as to judge us
according to your own goodness: For if we had not liberty to appeal thither, we
should be in danger of losing the best part of our birthright, and instead of
your Majesty's subjects become other men's slaves. From your Majesty therefore,
and from no other, your faithful suppliant craves and expects the joyful word
of grace: which if I may be so happy as to carry my poor brother before he
grows any elder in misery, I shall fill an honest heart with prayers and
thanksgiving: And for my particular, your Majesty's greatest favor and
liberality shall not more oblige or better affect others, then your Royal
clemency shall me. In memory whereof I shall daily pray, that your Majesty may
obtain all your desires of heaven, and so be obeyed in all your commandments on
earth, that we may live to see your holy intentions to take effect for the good
of Christendom, and so you may honor the age you live in with the miracles of
your wisdom. Finally, that your felicity in this world may overtake that in the
highest to make you wear a perpetual Crown to Gods glory and your own.

Your Majesty's most humble, loyal, and true-hearted English subject, FRANCIS
PHILIPS.

Oliver St. John's to the Major of Marlborough against the Benevolence.
AS I think, this kind of Benevolence is against Law, Reason, and Religion.

First, the Law is in the Statute called Magna Charta, 9. H. 3. cap. 29. That
no Freeman be any way destroyed but by the Laws of this Land.

Secondly, besides that the said Statute of Magna Charta is by all Princes
since established and confirmed, it is in the special case of voluntary or
free grants enacted and decreed 25. E. 1. cap. 5. That no such be drawn into
custom, and cap. 6. That henceforth be taken no such Aids, Tasks, free Grants,
or Prizes, but by assent of all the Realm, and for the good of the same. And in
primo R. 3. cap. 2. That the Subjects and Commons in this Realm from henceforth
shall in no wise be charged by any charge or imposition called a Benevolence,
or any such like charge, and that such exactions called a Benevolence, shall be
damned and annulled for ever.

First, it is not only without, but against reason, that the Commons in their
several and particulars, should be made relievers or suppliers of his
Majesty's wants, who neither know his wants, nor the sums that may be this way
raised to supply the same.

Secondly, it is against reason that the particular and several Commons
distracted, should oppose their judgment and discretion to the judgment and
discretion of the wisdom of their Land assembled in Parliament, who have there
denied any such aid.

It argues in us want of love and due respect of our Sovereign Lord and King,
which ought to be in every of us toward each other, which is to stay every one
which we see falling, and reduce the current. What prosperity can there be
expected to befall either our King or Nation, when the King shall happily of
ignorance, or ('it is I hope) out of forgetfulness or headiness, commit so
great a sin against his God, as is the violating of his great and solemn oath
taken at his coronation for the maintaining of his Laws, Liberties and
Customs of this Noble Realm, and his Subjects, some for fear, some in pride,
some to please others, shall join hands to forward so unhappy an achievement,
can he any way more highly offend the Divine Majesty (whom he then invocated)
as also can he then give unto another. Hen. 4. If such an one should rise up
(which God forbid) a greater advantage, let these Articles put up against R. 2.
be looked on, it will appear that the breach of the Laws, infringing the
Liberties, and failing in this his oath, were the main blemishes wherewith he
could distain and spot the honor of that good and gentle Prince, who indeed was
rather by others abused, then of himself mischievously any way disposed.

Secondly, as very irreligiously and uncharitably we help forward the Kings
Majesty in that grievous sin of perjury; so into what an hellish danger we
plunge our selves even so many of us as contribute, is to be learned out of the
several curses and sentences of excommunination given out against all such
givers, and namely the two following, viz. the great curse given out the 36. H.
3. against all breakers of the Liberties and customs of the Realm of England,
with their Abettors, Counselors, and Executioners, wherein by the sentence of
Boniface, Archbishop of Canterbury, and the chief part of all the Bishops of
this Land, are ipso facto excommunicated. And that of 24. Ed. 1. denounced
immediately upon the Acts made against such Benevolence, free Grants and
Impositions had and taken without common assent; which because it is not so
large as that former, I will set down as our Books deliver the same.

IN the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Amen. Whereas our Sovereign
Lord the King, to the honor of God, and of the Holy Church, and for the common
profit of the Realm, has granted for him and his heirs for ever these Articles
above written: Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England,
admonished all his Province once, twice, and thrice, because that shortness
will not suffer so much delay, as to give knowledge to all the people of
England of these presents in writing. We therefore enjoin all persons of what
estate soever they be, that they and every of them as much as in them is, shall
uphold and maintain those Articles granted by our Sovereign Lord the King in
all points; and all those that in any point do resist or break those
Ordinances, or in any manner hereafter procure, counsel, or in any ways assent
to, resist or break those Ordinances, or go about it by word or deed openly or
privately by any manner of pretense or color: We therefore the said Archbishop
by our authority in this Writing expressed, do excommunicate and accurse, and
from the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and from all the company of Heaven, and
from all the Sacraments of the holy Church do sequester and exclude.

Sir, hearing that to morrow the Justices will be here about this busy work of
Benevolence, wherein you have both sent unto, and talked with me, and thinking
that it may be you would deliver up the names of the not-givers. Forasmuch as I
think I shall scarcely be at home to make my further answer, if I should be
called for, I pray you both hereby to understand my mind your self, and if
cause so require to let the Justices perceive as much. So leaving others to
their own consciences, whereby in that last and dreadful day they shall stand
or fall before him who will reward every man according to his deeds, I commend
you to the grace of the Almighty, and rest,

Your loving Neighbor and Friend, OLIVER St. JOHN.

The Justices of Peace in the County of Devon to the Lords of the Council.
THe Letters from his sacred Majesty unto the Justices of Peace in this County,
together with your Lordships, have been opened and read according to the
directions in your Locdships Letter to our high Sheriff expressed, and the
weighty business therein contained, has been maturely and speedily debated,
according to our most bounden duties to his excellent Majesty, and the many
concurring necessities which press the expedition of such a service: and in
those respects we can do no less then give your Lordships a timely knowledge of
the vote and opinion of us all, which was this day almost in the same words
delivered by every of us.

That the sum enjoined to be levied by the first of March, is not to be so
suddenly raised out of this County by any means, much less by way of
persuasion; and hereof we had lately a certain experience in the business of
the loans, which notwithstanding the fear apprehended by the presence of the
Pursivant, has come at least 6000. l. short of the expected sum, and without
him we suppose would have been much less, and we are confident that nothing but
extremities, which had need also be backed by Law, will raise his Majesty a
sufficient quantity of treasure for his occasions. For our selves, at the time
of the proposition of the forementioned Loans, we did according to his
Majesty's proclamation and instruction then sent us, engage our faithful
promise to our Countrymen, that if they willingly yielded to his Majesty's
necessities at this time, we would never more be Instruments in the levy of
aids of that kind, his Majesty's intentions so clearly manifested not to make
that a president, was the cause of that engagement, and we conceive it cannot
be for his honor or service for us to be the means of such a breach. That his
Majesty's affairs and of his Allies, do all want an instant supply of Royal
provisions; his provident and Princely Letter has fully taught us; but we have
much more cau^^ to wish then hope that these parts so lately and so many ways
impoverished, can yield it.

Your Lordships may vouchsafe to remember how much this County has been
charged since the beginning of the war, though sometimes refreshed with
payment, which we acknowledge with humble thanks. By our own late loan of
35000. l. and 6000. l. more sent by Sir Thomas Wise and Mr. Stroad, and yet
there remains due to it for the Coat and Conduct of their own impressed Soldiers,
for diverse voyages for the Recruits intended for the Isle of Ree for the
conduct of the whole Army hence, besides three Companies stand yet here for
Silly, and no small number of scattered sick, whose mortal infection has more
discouraged the people then the charge.

That many and almost unaccountable are our ways of expense, few or none have
we of in-come for the want of Trade, how then can there be any quantity of
money to disburse; their bodies and goods are left which (we are assured) will
be ever ready for his Majesty's defense, and to be employed in his Majesty's
service as far forth as ever our forefathers have yielded them to his Majesty's
Royal Progenitors.

Particular proofs we would have made of the peoples disability to have
satisfied his Majesty's demands, but we had rather adventure our selves, and
this humble advertisement upon your Lordships private and favorable
instructions, then to expose his Majesty's honor to public denial, and
misspend his precious time, which applied to more certain courses may attain
his Princely and religious ends, wherein to be his Majesty's Instruments will
be our earthly happiness, and singular comfort to be your Lordships obedient
servants.

The Archbishop of Canterbury to the Bishops concerning King James his
Directions for Preachers, with the Directions, Aug. 14. 1622.
RIght Reverend Father in God, and my very good Lord and Brother, I have
received from the Kings most excellent Majesty, a Letter, the tenor whereof
here ensues.

Most reverend Father in God, right trusty and right entirely beloved
Councellor, we greet you well. Forasmuch as the abuses and extravagancies of
Preachers in the Pulpit, have been in all times repressed in this Realm by some
Act of Council or State, with the advice or resolution of grave and learned
Prelates, insomuch as the very licencing of Preachers had beginning by an Order
of Star Chamber the 8. day of July in the 19. year of King Henry 8. our Noble
Predecessor: and whereas at this present diverse young Students by reading of
late Writers and ungrounded Divines, do broach many times unprofitable,
unsound, seditious and dangerous Doctrine, to the scandal of the Church, and
disquieting of the State and present Government; We upon humble representation
to us of these inconveniences by your self and sundry other grave and reverend
Prelates of this Church, as also of our Princely care and zeal for the
extirpation of schism and dissension growing from these seeds, and for the
settling of a religious and peaceable government both of the Church and State,
do by these our special Letters straightly charge and command you to use all
possible care and diligence that these limitations and cautions herewith sent
unto you concerning Preachers, be duly and straightly henceforth observed and put
in practice by the several Bishops in their several Diocesses within your
jurisdictions. And to this end our pleasure is, that you send them forthwith
several Copies of these Directions, to be by them speedily sent and
communicated to every Parson, Vicar and Curate, Lecturer and Minister in every
Cathedral and Parish Church within their several Diocesses; and that you
earnestly require them to employ their uttermost endeavor in the performance
of this so important a business, letting them know that we have a special eye
to their proceedings, and expect a strict account thereof both of you and them,
and every of them. And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and
Discharge in that hehalf. Given under our Signet at our Castle of Windsor the
fourteenth day of August, in the twentieth year of our reign of England,
France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the fifty sixth.

Directions concerning Preachers.
THat no Preacher under the degree of a Bishop, or a Dean of a Cathedral or
Collegiat Church, and that upon the Kings days, and set Festivals, do take
occasion by the expounding of any Text of Scripture whatsoever, to fall to any
set Discourse or Commonplace, otherwise then by opening the coherence and
division of his Text, which be not comprehended and warranted in essence,
substance, effect, or natural inference within some one of the Articles of
Religion set forth by authority in the Church of England, and the two Books of
Homilies set forth by the same authority in the year 1562. or in some of the
Homilies set forth by authority of the Church of England, not only for the
help of non-preaching, but withal for a Pattern or a Boundary as it were for
the preaching Ministers; and for their further instruction for the performance
hereof, that they forthwith read over and peruse diligently the said Book of
Articles, and the two Books of Homilies.

2. That no Parson, Vicar, Curat, or Lecturer, shall preach any Sermon or
Collation hereafter upon Sundays or Holidays in the afternoon in any Cathedral
or Parish Church throughout the Kingdom, but upon some part of the Catechism,
or some Text taken out of the Creed, the ten Commandments, or the Lords prayer,
(Funeral-sermons only excepted) And that those Preachers be most encouraged and
approved of who spend their afternoons exercises in the examination of Children
in their Catechism, which is the most ancient and laudable custom of teaching
in the Church of England.

3. That no Preacher of what title or denomination soever under the degree of a
Bishop, or Dean at the least, do from henceforth presume to preach in any
popular Auditory the deep points of Predestination, Election, Reprobation, or
the universality, efficacy, resistibility or irresistibility of Gods grace;
but leave these Theams to be handled by learned men, and that moderately and
modestly by way of use and application, rather then by way of positive
doctrine, as being fitter for Schools and Universities then for simple
Auditories.

4. That no Preacher of what title or denomination soever shall presume from
henceforth in any Auditory within this Kingdom to declare, limit, or bound out
by way of positive doctrine in any Sermon or Lecture the power, prerogative,
jurisdiction, authority, right or duty of sovereign Princes; or otherwise
meddle with these matters of State, and the differences betwixt Princes and
people, then as they are instructed and presidented in the Homilies of
Obedience, and in the rest of the Homilies and Articles of Religion set forth
as before is mentioned by public Authority, but rather confine themselves
wholly to these two heads, Faith and good life, which are all the subject of
ancient Homilies and Sermons.

5. That no Preacher of what title or denomination soever shall causelessly or
without invitation of the Text fall into bitter invectives, or undecent railing
speeches against the persons of either Papists or Puritans, but modestly and
gravely when they are occasioned thereunto by the text of Scripture, clear both
the doctrine and discipline of the Church of England from the aspersions of
either adversary, especially when the Auditory is suspected with the one or the
other infection.

6. Lastly, That the Archbishop and Bishops of this Kingdom (whom his Majesty
has good cause to blame for their former remisness) be more wary and choice in
the licensing of Preachers, and revoke all grants made to any Chancellor,
Official or Commissary, to pass Licenses in this kind. And that all the
Lecturers throughout the Kingdom, a new body, and severed from the ancient
Clergy of England, as being neither Parsons, Vicars, nor Curates, be licensed
henceforward in the Court of Faculties only upon recommendations of the party
from the Bishop of the Diocese under his hand and seal, with a Fiat from the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and a confirmation under the great seal of England;
and that such as transgress any of these Directions, be suspended by the Lord
Bishop of that Diocese, or in his default by the Lord Archbishop of that
Province (ab officio and beneficio) for a year and a day, until his Majesty by
the advice of the next Convocation shall prescribe some further punishment.

By this you see his Majesty's Princely care that men should preach Christ
crucified, obedience to the higher powers, and honest and Christian
conversation of life, but in a regular form, and not that every young man
should take unto himself an exorbitant liberty to teach what he lists to the
offense of his Majesty, and to the disturbance and disquiet of the Church and
Commonwealth. I can give unto your Lordship no better directions for the
performance hereof then are prescribed to you in his Majesty's Letter, and the
Schedule hereunto annexed. Wherefore I pray you be very careful, since it is
the Princely pleasure of his Majesty to require an exact account both of you
and of me for the same. Thus not doubting but by your Register or otherwise you
will cause these Instructions to be communicated to your Clergy, I leave you to
the Almighty, and remain your Lordships loving brother,

Croydon, Aug. 15. 1622. George Cant.

King James Instructions to the Archbishop of Canterbury concerning Orders to
be observed by Bishops in their Diocesses. 1622.
1. THat the Lords the Bishops be commanded to their several Sees, excepting
those that are in necessary attendance at Court.

2. That none of them reside upon his land or lease that he has purchased, nor
on his Commendum if he hold any; but in one of his Episcopal Houses if he have
any, and that he waste not the woods where any are left.

3. That they give their charge in their Trienniall Visitations, and at other
convenient times both by themselves and the Archdeacons, and that the
Declaration for settling all questions in difference, be strictly observed by
all parties.

4. That there be a special care taken by them all, that the Ordinations be
solemn, and not of unworthy persons.

5. That they take great care concerning the Lecturers in their several
Diocese, for whom we give these special Directions following.

First, That in all Parishes the afternoon Sermons may be turned into
Catechizing by Question and Answer, when and wheresoever there is no great
cause apparent to break this ancient and profitable order.

Secondly, that every Bishop ordain in his Diocese, that every Lecturer do read
Divine Service according to the Liturgy printed by authority, in his Surplice
and Hood, before the Lecture.

Thirdly, That where a Lecture is set up in a Market Town, it may be read by a
company of grave and Orthodox Divines near adjoining, and in the same Diocese,
and that they preach in Gowns, not in Cloaks, as too many use to do.

Fourthly, That if a Corporation do maintain a single Lecturer, he be not
suffered to preach till he profess his willingness to take upon him a living
with cure of souls within that Incorporation, and that he actually take such
Benefice or Cure, so soon as it shall be fairly procured for him.

Fifthly, That the Bishops do countenance and encourage the grave and Orthodox
Divines of their Clergy, and that they use means by some of the Clergy, or
others, that they may have knowledge how both Lecturers and Preachers within
their Diocese, do behave themselves in their Sermons, that so they may take
order for any abuse accordingly.

Sixthly, That the Bishops suffer none under Noblemen, or men qualified by Law,
to have any private Chaplain in his house.

Seventhly, That they take special care that Divine Service be diligently
frequented, as well for Prayers and Catechismes as for Sermons, and take
particular note of all such as absent themselves as Recusants, or others.

Eighthly, That every Bishop that by our grace and favor, and good opinion of
his service, shall be nominated by us to another Bishopric, shall from that
day of nomination not presume to make any Lease for three lives or one and
twenty years, or concurrent Lease, or any way renew any estate, or cut any Wood
or Timber, but merely receive his Rents due and to quit the place. For we think
it an hateful thing that any man leaving the Bishopric should almost undo his
Successor. And if any man shall presume to break this Order, We will refuse him
Our Royal assent, and keep him at the place he has so abused.

Ninthly and lastly, We command you to give us an account every year the second
of January of the performance of these our commands. Subscribed at Dorchester.

I. R.

Bishop of Winchester to his Archdeacon to the same effect.
SAlutem iu Christo. I have received Letters from the most Reverend Father in
God the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the tenor whereof follows.

Right reverend Father in God, my very good Lord and brother, I have received
from the Kings most excellent Majesty a Letter, the tenor whereof here ensues.

Most reverend Father in God, right trusty and right entirely beloved
Councellor, we greet you well. For as much as the abuses and extravagancies of
Preachers in the Pulpit, have been, etc.

According to the tenor of these Letters you are to see that these limitations
and cautions herewith sent unto you be duly and strictly from henceforth
observed, and put in practice, and that several Copies of those Directions be
speedily communicated to every one of those whom they shall concern, and that
you may employ your uttermost endeavors in the performance of so important a
business, considering that his Majesty will have a special eye over you and me,
and expect a strict account at both our hands, whereof praying you to have all
possible care, I commend your endeavors therein to the blessing of God.

Your very loving friend, Lan. Winton.
From Farnham, Aug. 15. 1622.
The Bishop of Lincoln L. Keeper, to the Bishop of London, concerning Preaching
and Catechizing.
My very good Lord,
I Doubt not before this time you have received from me the directions of his
most excellent Majesty concerning Preaching and Preachers, which are so
graciously set down, that no godly or discreet man can otherwise then
acknowledge that they do much tend to edification, if he take them not up upon
report, but do punctually consider the tenor of the words as they lie, and does
not give an ill construction to that which may receive a fair interpretation.
Notwithstanding because some few Churchmen and many of the people have
sinisterly conceived, as we here find, that those Instructions do tend to the
restraint of the exercise of Preaching, and do in some sort abate the number of
Sermons, and so consequently by degrees do make a breach to ignorance and
superstition, his Majesty in his Princely wisdom has thought fit that I should
advertise your Lordship of the grave and weighty reasons which induced his
Highness to prescribe that which was done.

You are therefore to know, that his Majesty being much troubled and grieved at
the heart to hear every day of so many defections from our Religion both to
Popery and Anabaptism, or other points of Separation in some parts of this
Kingdom; and considering with much admiration what might be the cause thereof,
especially in the reign of such a King who does so constantly profess himself
an open adversary to the superstition of the one, and madness of the other, his
Princely wisdom could fall upon no one greater probability then the lightness,
affectedness, and unprofitableness of that kind of Preaching which has been of
late years too much taken up in Court, University, City and Country.

The usual scope of very many Preachers is noted to be soaring up in points of
Divinity too deep for the capacity of the people, or mustering up of so much
reading, or a displaying of their own wit, or an ignorant meddling with Civil
matters, as well in the private several Parishes and Corporations, as in the
public of the Kingdom, or a venting of their own distastes, or a smoothing up
those idle fancies (which when the Text shall occasion the same, is not only
approved but much commended by his Royal Majesty) both against the persons of
Papists and Puritans.

Now the people bred up with this kind of teaching, and never instructed in the
Catechism, and fundamental grounds of Religion, are for all this airy
nourishment, no better then a brass Tabret, new Table-books to be filled up
either with Manuals and Catechismes of the Popish Priests, or the papers and
pamphlets of Anabaptists, Brownists and Puritans.

His Majesty therefore calling to mind the saying of Tertullian, Id verum quod
primum; and remembering with what doctrine the Church of England in her first
and most happy Reformation did drive out the one, and keep out the other from
poisoning and infecting the people of this Kingdom, does find that the whole
scope of this doctrine is contained in the Articles of Religion, the two books
of Homilies, the lesser and the greater Catechism, which his Majesty does
therefore recommend again in these Directions as the theams and proper subjects
of all sound and edifying preaching.

And so far are these Directions from abridging, that his Majesty does expect
at our hands that it should increase the number of Sermons, by renewing every
Sunday in the afternoon in all Parish-Churches throughout the Kingdom that
primitive and most profitable exposition of the Catechism, wherewith the
people, yea very children may be timely seasoned and instructed in all the
heads of Christian Religion. The which kind of exposition (to our amendment be
it spoken) is more diligently observed in all the Reformed Churches of Europe,
then of late it has been here in England. I find his Majesty much moved with
this neglect, and resolved (if we that are Bishops do not see a reformation
thereof, which I trust we shall) to recommend to the care of the Civil
Magistrate: so far is his Highness from giving the least discouragement to
solid preaching, or discreet and religious Preachers.

To all these I am to add, That it is his Majesty's Princely pleasure that both
the former Directions and those reasons of the same be fairly written in every
Registers Office, to the end that every Preacher of what denomination soever
may, if he be so pleased, take out Copies of either of them with his own hand
gratis, passing nothing in the name of fee or expedition: But if he do use the
pains of the Register or the Clerk, then to pay some moderate Fee to be
pronounced in open Court by the Chancellor and Commissaries of the place,
taking the direction and approbation of my Lords the Bishops.

Lastly, That from henceforward a course may be taken that every Parson, Vicar,
Curate, or Lecturer do make and exhibit an account for the performance of these
his Majesty's directions, and the reasons for the same, at the ensuing
Visitation of the Bishops and Archdeacons, paying to the Register 6 d. for the
exhibiting. And so wishing, but withal in his Majesty's name requiring your
Lordship to have a special and extraordinary care of the premises, I leave you
to the Almighty.

Your very loving friend, J. Lincoln, C.S.
September. 3. 1622.
Instructions for the Ministers, and Churchwardens of London, Jan. 28. 1622.
1. THat his Majesty's declaration, published Anno Dom. 1628. before the
Articles of Religion, for settling all questions in difference be strictly
observed.

2. That special care be had concerning Lectures in every Parish.

3. That the Minister and Church wardens in every parish, or one of them, do by
writing under his or their own hands, certify unto the Archdeacon of London,
or his official, at, or before the 28 of this present January; and afterward
at, or before every visitation, the Christian and Sirnames of every Lecturer in
their parishes, and the place where he preaches, whether exempt, or not
exempt; together with his quality or degree.

4. That they do in like manner certify the names of such men, as being not
qualified by Law, do keep Chaplains in their houses.

5. That they do further certify the names of all such as absent themselves
from, or are negligent in coming to divine service, as well Prayers, as
Catechizing and Sermons.

6. That the Minister and Churchwardens of every Parish, successively, do
keep a several Copy of those Instructions by them, whereby they may be the
better informed of their duty; and that the said Copies be showed at every
visitation, when they shall present all such persons as have disobeyed these
instructions; that according to his Majesty's pleasure, such as do conform,
may be encouraged, and such as are refractory, may be punished. Subscribed Tho.
Paske, Archdeacon of London.

Monsieur Bevayr, Chancellor of France, discharged to the French King.
LO Sir, I willingly resign into your hands, the charge with which you were
pleased to honor me, and with the same Countenance that I received it, without
seeking for it, I leave it without grieving for it; the Law had sufficiently
taught me to obey your Majesty, so that I needed not to have been sent for by a
Captain of the Guard, and twenty Archers; violence should only be used against
those that resist, and not against me that know how to obey; and that have ever
esteemed this honor a heavy burden, rather then a dignity, which yet I had
accepted for the good of your service, because every able man owes his cares
and his years to the public good; and because it had been a shame for me to
refuse to die with the stern in my hand, being able to binder, or at the least
delay the shipwreck that threatens us. God grant Sir, that I be the greatest
loser in this disfavour, and that you and your state be the least touched in
it. This accident has not taken me on the sudden, having ever well foreseen,
that as I followed as much as I could, the integrity and virtues of Monsieur de
Villeroy, and the President Janin; so I ought to expect the like fortune to
theirs: your commandment in this, agrees with the choice my self had made, if I
had been at full liberty; for I love a great deal better to be companion in
their disgraces, (if I ought so to style the being disburthened of affairs)
then to be employed in the managing the State with them that there remain;
since I might in time have taken an ill day by the Company of such people, to
whom I no whit envy the increase of authority, which is given them at my cost;
for I have not used to give account of my actions every morning by stealth,
neither will I be prescribed what I ought to do, if the States good, and
reason do not counsel me unto it. This is much more honorable for me, then
to have betrayed your Majesty, in sealing a discharge to an accomptant of 80000
pound, in the great poverty of the Treasury, and that to further the good of a
man that blushes not (besides this) to demand the Duchy of Alanson by way of
mortgage, which is the portion of the Kings Sons, and to pretend to the office
of Constable, which the late Kings will expressly was, should be suppressed
after the death of the late Lord Monmorency. Think not Sir, that in not giving
my consent to this, I desired to oppose my self against your Authority; I know
well that that has no bounds, but those of your will; but yet are you bound to
rule your self according to reason, and to follow the Counsel of those which
have entered into the managing of the State by the choice which the late King
had made of them, as being more able to give it you, then certain new comers
drawn out of the dregs of business and of the people. This exchange which is
made of us for them, is the trick of the Wolves to the Sheep, when they took
their dogs from them; does not your Majesty perceive it, or dare you not
redress it for fear of disobedience? Sir, you owe obedience by nature to those
that preach it to you but they themselves owe it you both by divine and humane
right; and though you should yield them less they have given you but too many
examples so to do. Remember if it please you, that you are past fifteen years
old, and Kings are of age at fourteen. Isaac followed Abraham his Father to be
sacrificed, because he was not old enough to fear any thing: I believe if he
had been a man grown, and had foreseen the danger, he would not himself have
carried the sticks upon his shoulders; he was but the appearance of a
sacrifice, I pray God in these occasions keep you from the effect: for when I
see that men move the Authority of the Court when they will, that men set to
sale and dispose of the offices of the Crown, without being once hindered by
any; the Princes of the blood having been some imprisoned, and other Princes
having retired themselves for the security of their persons; when I see that
among the great ones, they that are made see some shadow of better fortunes,
are feign to lend their hands to bring themselves into bondage; that they which
have attained some settlednesse in this alteration, maintain it only for fear
of returning to the former misery of their former condition --. Besides, it
seems also that the people, and the Provinces partake of this change after the
example of the great ones, seeing the help of the law is unprofitable, every
thing being out of order by canvasing, by violences, and by corruptions; the
Louvre it self has put on a new face, as well as the affairs of the Kingdom;
there remains nothing of the old Court but the walls, and even of them the use
has been changed; for they were wont to serve for the safeguard of Princes,
and now they serve for their prison, and for yours it may be, (if it be lawful
to say so:) for it is not without some end, that when you go abroad, you have a
company of light horse to attend you, chosen by a suspected hand; this is your
Guard after the fashion of the Bastile, this distrust counsels you enough, what
you ought to do, and you need no other advice. I am hist at, I am scoft at,
and my discourse; so was Cassandra used, when she foretold the destruction of
Troy. Sir, I have nothing left but my tongue to serve you with; If I were so
happy to draw you out of the error in which you are fed, I would bless a
thousand times my disgrace; for having emboldned me to speak freely in a time,
wherein even words are punished. The falseness of the Alcharan, is only
authorized by that it is forbidden under pain of death to speak of it. The
incroachment which is made upon your Authority, takes footing only by the
danger that is in telling it you freely; consider (if it please you) that those
which usurp power over you, are of a Country where every body would reign;
thence it is that there is not a City on the other side the Alps, that has
not her republic or her petty King; and if your Majesty had but a little
tasted the History of your own Kingdom, you would have found that the most
learned Tragedies that were ever seen in France, have come from that side: the
last -- upon occasion of a lit-book which I published, touching Constancy and
Comfort in public calamities, I fear much that (contrary to my design) this
is a Work for your Reign, if the goodness of God take not pity on us. Think
not Sir, that the grief to see my self removed from the State Affairs, breeds
so bold a discourse; if I had felt any grief for that, it is but as new married
Wives weep to leave the subjection of their Fathers, to enter into the equality
of Marriage: Yet it is true, that owing you my service, I should with more
contentment have employed it in your Counsels of State, then in your
Parlaments, where the matters are of less importance. For I suppose, that if
the Carpenter which made the frame of the Admiral wherein Don John de Austria
commanded at the Battle of Lepanto, had known that she should have served in
so important an occasion, wherein depended the safety of the rest of Europe,
he would have taken more pleasure in the making her, then if he had made a
vessel destined only for Traffic. Notwithstanding, since your Majesty
commands me to retire my self, in a good hour be it, the lesser stars bear a
part in the perfection of the Universe, though they contribute less to it then
the Sun or Moon In what condition soever I live, I will ever bring all I shall
be able to the good of your service: and if there be any of those which are
near you, that lament mine absence, for my own sake, I would willingly say to
them, Weep for your selves, children of Jerusalem, that for want of courage
suffer your Majesty to be betrayed; and not for me, that have no other fault,
then that I am an honest man. I take leave therefore of you, Sir, praying God
to take pity of your Estate, and care of your Breeding.

Monr Richer forced, recants his opinions against the Papal Supremacy over
Kings.
EGo Librum quem composui Ecclesiasticae potestatis, and me ipsum measque omnes
Propositiones subjicio Eccles. Cathol. Apost. and Roman. and sanctae sedi
Apostolicae, quam matrem om^ium Ecclesiarum esse agnosco; and in qua semper
vig^it infallibile Judicium veritatis in rebus fidei decernendis. Vehementerque
doleo in praedicto meo Libro quasdam esse Propositiones quae scandalum
genuerint, and quae sint veritati Catholicae ut sonant contraria.

Cardinal Richlieu to the Roman Catholics of great Britain, Aug. 25. 1624.
VIri praeclari, longius differo ad vos scribere, quia res vestrae facta non
verba desiderant, vota vestra nostra sunt studia, and utraque propitio Deo,
aliqua ex part saltem optatos speramus exitus inventura; spondet hoc nobis Rex
Christianissimus, qui aut nullas, aut certe honorificias Religioni, pro Regia
sua indole conditiones foederis unquam admissurus est, Ita a nobis formatus,
ita animo praeparatus est, ut se rei divinae augendae non minus quam finibus
propagandis natum vocatumque ^sse meminerit: serenissima Regina ejus Matter,
sedula opera, intenta cura cavebit, non modo ne quid detrementi Religio capiat,
sed etiam ut qua possit promoveri, promoveatur, and adjuvetur. Equidem ita me
rerum vestrarum miseret, ut si non dico consilio, non fide, non authoritate
(quae sentio quam sint exigua:) sed si vita ipsa and sanguine vos eripere vel
levare etiam malis possem, libentissime facerem. Ex animo dico, testis est
conscientia, qua me vestrum omnium, libertatisque vestrae semper et omni loco
fore studiosissimum polliceor.

Vobis ex animo addictissimus, Amandus, Cardinalis Richlieu.
Apud Sanctum German. 25 August. 1624.
Monsr. Balsac to the Cardinal dela Valette.
MY LORD, I am retired here into Ciceroes house, where I take the fresh air,
and the shade of every hour of the day and laugh at those that broile
themselves at Rome. But although I be come hither as we^ to untire my Spirit,
as to recreate my body, notwithstanding it is impossible that the first can
rest, but must do business where it finds none; It crosses the Sea, and
passes over the Alps without my consent, and because there is nothing to do
at France, it goes to seek some at Constantinople, at Madrid, at L^ndon, and
at Montauban. Now, to the end you may not think me a liar, and that under an
honest pretext, I would palliate a reproveable idleness; I am going to write
you the adventures of my yesterdaies walk, and speak to you in the same style,
and the same sort as I rave. While the King is busied to make war, the King
of Spain passes his time with Ladies, and into places that may not honestly
be named; I will give no judgment upon the different inclination of these two
Princes, but I very well know, that so long as they live in that fashion, the
King of Spain shall take no Towns, nor the King of France the Pox. You have
surely heard it reported, that the Polanders have defeated the Turks Army,
which was composed of two hundred thousand Combatants, the half whereof, lay
dead upon the place. It must necessarily be granted, that but he only after
such a loss, could make such a second, and that he has a source of men that
cannot be drawn dry, either by wars, by plagues, or by any other ill
disposition of the air, seeing that in the abundance of all things, that his
Empire produces, there is nothing at so low a price, as the lives of soldiers.
When I dream that the Duke of Bouillon is shut up in Sedan, from whence he
cannot come forth to go and make his party, I imagine to my self, a poor
mother standing upon the brink of a River, seeing her son slain on the other
side, neither being able to help him or bid him farewell: never was man so
assaulted with such diversity of thoughts, nor oppressed with unprofitable cares;
one while it vexes him that sufficient resistance was not made at St. Jehan de
Angeli; and again I find that they made not use of the advantage which they
might have taken At one and the same time I would have been at Montauban to
defend, and in England to get succor for it. But why dwells so great a spirit
in a body that has no more heat in it then a fever gives it, and which is
never removed but by Ambergris and Physic? Its known that the better part
of it dwells in the history of troubles, and that in this world it holds but the
place of another. In the mean time, the affairs of the Rebels grow to ruin;
and if they make any small attempts, it is not that their hopes increase, nor
their courage strengthens, but it is Gods will that they shall not have either
victory or peace.

The Duke of Bouillon sees all this, not being able to remedy, and if sometimes
to divert his spirit from so vexing an object, he thinks to seek some comfort
out of the kingdom, and amongst strangers affairs, of one side he discovers a
puissant Army under the conduct of Spinola, which threatens all Germany; and of
the other side he sees his Nephew, whom from having been Count Palatine, and
King of Bohemia, is become pensioner to the Hollanders, and a Gentleman of the
Prince of Orange his train; as the beasts in time past, were wont to be
crowned, which ought to be sacrificed; so fortune presented a Kingdom to this
poor man, to the end he should lose his life; but not to lie, he has showed
himself craftier then she, and fled so we he could never be overtaken.
Notwithstanding to speak home, the gain which he got by not dying at the
battle of Prague, is not so great as the reproach which shall be cast upon
him for living by his own fault, and for having witnessed to all the people of
the world, that the end of his desires, was only to attain to be old; and
without doubt, as it is a great advantage to be the Grandchild of an usurper,
so there is not a more miserable condition, then to have been a King, and now
to be no more but the subject, or tragedy to plays. Let men then as much as
they please, praise the designs of this man, and his good intention. I for my
part, find nothing so easy as to fly and lose; and posterity shall put him
rather in the number of thieves that have been punished, then of conquerours
which have triumphed upon the earth. Since it is true, that the persecution
ceases in England, and that the King wearieth himself with giving us Martyrs,
it may be, that within a short time, he will altogether set souls at liberty,
that still makes one step to his mother Church. As for my part, I despair not
of this great conversion, that all honest men will with salt tears, desire this
from heaven, knowing to the contrary, that he has a reasonable spirit, and may
be persuaded upon a thing that he determined on. I assure my self that he
studies every day the truth of the instructions the great Cardinal Peron left
him, See King James his Remonstrance against Cardi Peron.
and that that will be the strongest in his Kingdoms as soon as his Conscience
-- authority better reestablished then his. His predecessors knew not how to
reign in regard of him, no not she that played with so many heads, and who was
more happy then needful for the Christian Commonwealth. It is certain, that
heretofore England believed in God, but this day it only believes in its
Prince, and Religion makes but a part of the obedience yielded unto him; in so
much, that if he would but set in the place of all the points of Faith, all the
fables of Poesy, he should find in his subjects complying enough to bring them
to his will, and persuade himself, that he may make all things just that he
does, and all things culpaple that he condemns; his Authority came not so far
at the first stroke; and there must be time to make men lose The way for
Romish Conversion.
reason, but at this time when all sp^rits are vanquished, and that the great
belief that he has given of his judgment, takes away the liberty of theirs;
they can imagine nothing above the wisdom of the King, and without meddling
with any thing that passes between God and him, they believe that if he command
them to tread under foot all the Holy things, and to violate all the Laws, all
that was but for the safety of their Consciences. But it is to be believed,
that this Divine providence, which conducts things to their ends, by means
which in appearance are contrary, will use the bloodinesse of this people to
procure their salvation, and cause them to come again into the Church, by the
same door they went out of it. And since the hearts of Kings are in the hands
of God, there wants nothing but a good motion sent unto him, to build again
the Altars which he has beaten down, and at one clap to turn to the true
Religion the souls of three Kingdoms. A while ago he sent a Gentleman
expressly to this Court, that it might not be contrary with the Marriage which
he treated with Spain, and to endeavor to make the Romans think well of it;
and that one of these days, it may be, he will call his Holiness, and the
sacred College of Cardinals; but hitherto these are terms of a tongue unknown
to him. Furthermore, in this Country we imagine, that there will be no lack of
wars till Rochel be re^uced to extremity: It is very true, that the forces
which the King has left before it, are not great; but for how many men think
you, they count the Captain into whose hands he has put them! It is not
permitted to judge of that which he will do by the ordinary course of the
things of this world, his actions cannot be drawn into example; and though he
be infinitely wise, notwithstanding it is certain, that in what he undertakes,
it always appears somewhat greater then man's wisdom; Yet truly my Lord, after
having considered the motion of the Stars which are so just; the order of the
seasons, which are so governed; the beauties of nature, which are so diverse; I
find in the end, that there is nothing in the world, where God shows himself
so admirable, as in the guiding of the life of my Lord your Father. But to the
purpose, behold this that I added yesterday to the great discourse (which I
made by your Commandment and which you much praised the first time.)

Monsr. Balsac to the King Louis.
SIR, The late King your father has not done more, and nevertheless not to
speak of the Actions of his life; your Majesty knows that his last thoughts
made all the Kings of the earth to tremble, and his memory until this day is
reverenced to the uttermost ends of the world. Notwithstanding, Sir, be it that
you are come in a better time then he, be it that God has destinated your
Majesty for higher things, the glory which you have gotten at the going out of
your infancy is not less then that which that great Prince deserved when he
was was grown old in Arms: and in affairs as he, so you make your self
redoubted without tyranny; as he, so you govern your people. But I am
constrained to avow that your Majesty must needs yield to him in one thing,
which is, that you have not yet begot a Son that resembles you. But certainly
Sir, we cannot any longer time have this advantage over you. All Europe
requires Princes and princesses of you, and it is certain, that the world
ought not to end, but when your race shall fail: if you will then that the
beauty of the things we see, pass to another age; If you will that the public
tranquillity have an assured foundation, and that your victories may be
eternal, you must talk no more of working powerfully, nor of doing great Acts
of State, but with the Queen.

Monsr Toyrax to the Duke of Buckingham.
MY Lord, your courtesies are sufficiently known to all the world; and you place
them with so much judgment, that those only may hope after them that make
themselves worthy by their actions. Now I know no action so worthy of that
merit, as for a man to employ himself, -- if in the defense of this place he
vanquish not all difficulties -- so that no despair of succor nor fear of
rigor, in case of extremity, can ever make me quit a design so generous; as
also I shall esteem my self unworthy of any your favors, if in this action I
omit the least point of my duty; the issue whereof cannot be but honorable:
and by how much you add to this glory by your valor and carriage, by so much
I am more bound to remain during my life, your Lordships humble and most
obedient servant, Toirax.

Ab ignoto, concerning the estate of Rochel after the surrender.
SIR, I presume you have long since heard the particulars of Ro^hel; and that
by far better relations then mine; notwithstanding you may be pleased to know
what I observed and learned there my self eight days after the Kings
entrance, whither curiosity and some other causes drew me. For the siege and
Dike, they prae caeteris excellens, were in all parts most royal and far
more perfect and uniforme, then relation could make me conceive: The misery of
the siege almost incredible, but to such only as have seen it, or some part
thereof: Corn was worth after the rate of 800 Franks the bushel; an Ox or Cow,
sold after the rate of 2000 Franks. The host where I lay, sold a Jade horse,
worth it may be four or five pounds, for 800 Franks, and for five and twenty
weeks, tasted no bread: of twelve persons in his family, only he and his wife
are living; who also within two days had dyed, if the Town had not been
rendered. He and his wife made a Collation the day before the Town was rendered,
which cost him about six or seven pound sterling; their cheer was a pound of
bread, made of Straw, Sugar, and other Spices; half a pound of horse flesh,
three or four ounces of Comfits, and a pint of Wine, which they imagined, was
the last good cheer they should make together; and in like case, were all the
rest of the Town, only two or three families of the better sort excepted; by
which you may conjecture what rates such kind of provision were at. There were
eaten between 3000 or 4000 Cow-hides, all the dogs, cats, mice and rats they
could get, not a horse left alive, which was food for the better sort, only
Madam Rohan, after having eaten her Coach horse, and her servants the Leather
of her Coach; removed, though full sore against her will, her lodging from
Rochel to the Castle of Mooke or Nioeul, where she is under guard, and since
(it is said) to the Bastile in Paris: God send her and hers to heaven. There
died for want of food in Rochel 15000 and rested living when the King entered
between three and four thousand, of which there are since very many dead; they
daily discover new miseries, which when I was there, were not spoken of; the
mother and the child at the breast both dead, the child having eaten most part
of the mothers breast; a soldier was found dead with a piece of his fellows
flesh in his mouth; a Burger having a servant killed, powdered her, which fed
him and his wife a long time, and dainty meat too: many languishing and finding
themselves draw near their ends, caused their coffins to be carried into the
Churches, laid them down in them and so dyed; these were of the better sort.
The common sort laid themselves down in Coffins in the Church yards and there
dyed; others in the streets, others not able to go out of their houses dyed and
remained there, their friends being not able to remove them thence. So that
when the first Forces of the King entered, there were in the Town, of Corpse
unburied, some in the Churchyards, others in the streets, some in their
houses, some on the floor, others in their beds, besides them that died
without the Gates under hedges, and in ditches round about the Town, which I
saw my self when I was there; half devoured with Ravens and other beasts, and
fowls of the air; In fine, the like misery has not been seen nor heard of.

The King on All Saints day, which was the day of his entry, with a wax Candle
in his hand, together with the Cardinal and all the Nobility, in like manner,
went all over the Town in procession with the B. Sacrament. The chief Temple
of the Hugonots shall be converted into a Church Cathedral, and Rochel to be a
Bishopric. All the fortifications and walls to Landwards to be razed, and the
Fosses filled so that a plough may pass, as in arable Land. The Mayor, with
some of the chiefest, are banished for ever, others for a certain time
limited, though quietly to possess their goods, moveable and immovable, and a
general remission of all crimes past: and all others that were in the Town
before the descent of the English into Rhee, and when the Town was rendered,
shall likewise enjoy the same privilege, though no child or heir absent, is,
or shall be capable to inherit the goods or lands of his parents or friends
deceased, but all is at the Kings disposing. The King has granted them free
liberty of their Religion in the Town of Rochel, which in short time will all
be rooted out; for no Forrainer (though naturalized) shall be admitted to
repair and inhabit in Rochel, nor French but Roman Catholics. The King has
added to the revenues of his Crown 20000 Franks per annum, which was a rent
belonging to the Townhouse, for the maintenance of the fortifications and
State of Rochel. The Townhouse is to be razed, and a pillar or pyramids with
an ample inscription of the particulars of the siege and rebellion, there to be
erected. The forts of the Isle of Rhee and Oleron, to be razed, and (as it is
said) most of all the chief forts of France, except on the frontiers. Four
Regiments are yet in Rochel, the rest of the Army (at least the most part) are
gone to winter in those parts of France, toward the coasts of Italy, to be
ready on all occasions to succor the Duke of Mantua, as it is thought. The
Fathers of the society have very fair buildings given them for their
establishing there, and 1000 Franks to begin to build; to which is added a
revenue which I know not, the place is said to be where the Heretics kept
their schools of Divinity, and Council of war, or rebellion. And where the
English had their Church, the Oratorians are likewise established with large
augmentations; The Capuchins are where was the chiefest Fort, called Le Bastion
de Levangile; The Minors are where the Dike was, and diverse other elsewhere.
There are at least 8000 houses in Rochel, which are feign to fall to the King
to dispose of for want of heirs. The Parisians are preparing a most sumptuous
and magnificent receipt for the King, which is the cause he has not been at
Paris since his return from Rochel, but is at St. Germins, and thereabouts,
till all things are ready for his entry, which is thought will exceed in
bravery and magnificence all the presidents of many years. The Jesuits are by
the body of Paris employed to make the speeches and inscriptions for that
purpose, which the body of the Sorbon take ill; The Prince of Conde does daily
get ground of Rohan, and has lately taken prisoners (as it is said) thirty
Captains and eight hundred soldiers. Those of Montauban boast (as it is said)
that they have provision for three or four years, and will stand out til the
last: though some of the best esteem, think it is only to draw the King to the
best composition they can.

The Protestants of France, to Charles King of Great Britain.
SIR, the knowledge and resentment which it has pleased your Majesty to take of
the misery of the afflicted Churches of France, has given us the boldness to
awaken your Compassion in such measure, as our calamities are aggravated by the
unmercifull rigor of our persecutors, and as the present storm does threaten
near at hand the total ruin, and lamentable destruction of that which the
mercy of God had yet kept entire unto us since the desolation of Rochel: and as
we have adored with humility the judgment of God in this bad success (which we
impute only to his wrath justly kindled against us for our sins) so our silence
could be thought no less then ingratitude, if we had not at the beginning of
our Assembly resolved the most humble and most affectionate acknowledgment
which we now render to your Majesty, for the great succor which you have sent
us, interessing your self so far in the grief of our oppression, and in the
means of our deliverance. The most humble supplication which we do offer to
your Majesty next after this our thansgiving, is, that your Majesty (according
to the sweet inclination of your goodness) would permit us still to present our
complaints, and discover our wounds before the eyes of your royal charity,
protesting unto your Majesty, that we see none other hand under heaven by which
we may be healed, but your Majesty's, in case your Majesty will still vouchsafe
to lift it up on the behalf of oppressed innocents, and of the Church of our
Lord outragiously persecuted by the most envenomed passion that our age, or any
age preceedent has seen; we most humbly beseech your Majesty to read this
letter which is written with our tears and with our blood; and (according to
your exquisite judgment, your incomparable wisdom, and the devotion of your
zeal, to the glory of God) to consider our estate, which is such, that our
persecutors upon the loss of Rochel, supposing we had been put to utter
discomfiture, and into a weakness without recovery or resistance, and boasting
themselves, that now there remained no more any eyes unto us, but to bewail
our selves, nor any sense, but to feel the smart thereof, without further
employing our hands or our arms for our defense; have made use of this
advantage, with so much fierceness insultation and cruelty, that they have not
only sacked the houses, and with an unheard of rudeness and barbarism, rifled
the goods of our poor brethren of this Province of Languedock, relying
themselves upon public faith, and the benefits of the edicts of pacification
(especially of the last which your Majesty had favorably procured and
confirmed unto us) dissipating whole families, and exiling them with perfidious
inhumanity, but also they have laid wast and destroyed almost all the Churches
of the some, which are at their command and discretion under the liberty of
edicts; employing Monks the P^pes Em^ssaries) assisted with force of
soldiers, and of the tyrannical Auth^rity of Governors, to ravish men's
souls, and to draw the most constant with violence to Mass, and to the feet
of the Idol interdicting assembles, and all exercise of true Religion ^n the
same places beating, imprisoning, ransoming, assasinating the faithful and
their pastors with an enraged fury, which has exceeded all the inhumanities of
the Inquisition, profaning and demolishing of Temples; their violence having
proceeded so far, as publicly to burn in pomp and triumph, the sacred books
of Gods Covenant in presence of the Governor of the Province, with damnable
sacrilege, which cries vengeance before God, and does elevate its voice to
the ears, (Sir) of a most puissant Monarch, professing the purity of the
Gospel, zealous of his glory, and capable to revenge so outrageous an injury.
But your Majesty shall understand, that all this has produced an effect much
contrary to the intention of our persecutors; for so far it is from us, that
their objects of pity and grief, whereof the very thought does make us repine,
should render us faint-hearted, and cause us to yield our selves in prey to
their rage, that on the contrary, seeing the Mask taken off, and the pretext
which they had alleged of the Army of rebellion whereof they accused us, quite
removed; and that without any more dissimulation, their design goes on to the
ruinating of our Religion, and the extirpation of our Church, and that there
remained no more hope of safety and liberty, but general resolution to die in
the Arms of our just and vigorous defense, and that our persecutors possessing
the spirit of our King, and hindering the effects of his bounty, have obtained a
declaration of the fifteenth of December last, which alluring us to implore his
grace and mercy, yet leaves us not any hope of enjoying the benefits of any
edict, nor by consequence of any tolerable peace, and soliciting us to disarm
our selves, and to put our selves into the condition of sacrafices destined by
one and by one to the slaughter, to be all at one stroke offered up to the fury
of Antichrist, by one general Massacre throughout the whole Kingdom, whereof
we do not only hear the vaunts, but do almost see great armies upon our
backs for execution. This makes us (Sir) have recourse to your Royal and
redoubtable puissance, as to a place of refuge, which God has yet left open to
us, in your Ardent charity, to find within your assistance assured and
effectual means to avoid ruin, which is ready inevitably to fall upon our
heads. And to attain thereunto, (Sir) we have religiously renewed in this
assembly, the oath of union, which binds us with a sacred bond unto the Arms
of your Majesty; of the violating whereof your Majesty may be assured, that we
will never make our selves guilty, being encouraged to this resolution by the
reiterate confirmations, which my Lord the Duke of Rohan has lately given us,
that your Majesty continues to take to heart the assistance and deliverance of
our Churches according to your Royal promises, being debtors to his sage and
valorous conduct, and to his pious magnanimity, for all that strength and
liberty which we yet enjoy: and we will leave unto posterity memorable examples
of our Constancy which prefers death before reproachful cowardice and
shameful servitude, hoping that out of our ashes, God will draw matter for his
glory, and the propagation of his Church; being persuaded (Sir) that you are
the instrument of his election to give us comfort and deliverance from our
evils in time convenient. Be you assured also, that he will uphold us in that
extraordinary valor wherewith he has inspired us to endure all extremities
with a patience invincible, expecting the succor of his hands through yours.
Of all (Sir) which a great Monarch could ever do in the world, nothing can be
more just then this interprize, nor more glorious then this deliverance: the
Lord having exalted you to the most eminent degree of dignity and power to be
the nursing father of his Church, she has right, being thus mangled and
bloody, to stretch forth her arms unto you, even she that Spouse of Jesus
Christ, the common mother of Christians, and and your mother also, by the
respect of her bruised members, and of the searing of her innocent breast,
covered with wounds, she will move your pity; She assures her self (Sir) that
the glorious title which you bear of the Defender of the faith, shall
interceede for your accepting of her humble request: if you do extend unto us
your cares, your affections, and your formidable Arms, you shall nourish in
our hearts affections of honor and obedience which shall never die; you shall
daunt all powers that would raise themselves against your Crown; you shall
raise your glory to such a height, that all the earth shall admire it, all
Christendom shall celebrate it, and your name shall be of sweet odor unto
Angels and men; and in perpetual benediction unto all posterity of Saints, and
your reward shall be great and eternal in heaven. May it please your Majesty to
pardon us, if our necessities pressing us, we all do press your Majesty by our
instant supplications accompanied with a most humble respect to strengthen our
selves so soon as may be with the honor of your commandments, and the
declaration of your favor, the wholesome effects of your assistance, according
to the sweetness of your compassion, and Charity, and we will redouble our
prayers to the divine clemency, for the length and safety of your life, and the
prosperity of your estate, being ready with a most holy and ardent affection to
expose our goods and lives to render us worthy of the quality which we dare
take of your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servants, the
Deputies of the reformed Churches of France, in their general Assembly held at
Nismes, and for all Jaques de Maresey adjunct la Reque.

The Duke of Rohan to his Majesty of great Britain, the 12 of March 1628.
SIR, the deplorable acc^dent of the loss of Rochel, which God has suffered
to humble us under his hand, has redoubled in the hearts of our enemies their
passionate fierceness to our utter ruin, with an assured hope to attain
thereunto. But it has not taken away from the Churches of those Provinces,
either the heart or the affection to oppose their unjust plots by a just and
lively defense. This is it has made them take resolution to assemble
themselves to cojoyn in the midst of these commotions to assist me with their
good counsels, and with me to provide the means of their deliverance. And for
as much as the greatest support which God has raised unto them upon earth is
the succor our Churches have, and do look to receive from your Majesty, the
general Assembly has desired that my Letters, which alone hitherto have
represented unto your Majesty the interest of the public cause, might be
joined to their most humble supplications put up to your Majesty. I do it Sir,
with so much the more affection, because I am a witness that these poor
people, who with sighs and groans implore your assistance, having once laid
down their weapons which the oppression of their enemies made so necessary,
because they knew such was your desire to take them up again, so soon as they
heard that your Majesty did oblige them thereunto by your Counsel and Promises;
they have upon this only assurance, continued all dangers, surmounted all
oppositions, accounted their estates as nothing, and are still ready to spend
their blood till the very last drop; they esteem your love and favor more
precious then their own lives, and whatsoever promises or threatenings have been
used to shake their constant resolution, they could never be brought to make
any breach in that they had tied themselves to, never to hear of any Treaty
without your consent. This great zeal for the preservation of all the Churches
of this Kingdom, which is naturally knit to the preservation of these few we
have left, and that fidelity with our example, are worthy and glorious subjects
to exercise your Charity and Power. You are (Sir) Defender of that Faith
whereof they make profession, suffer it not to be so unjustly oppressed; you
have stirred up their affection in this defense by your royal promises, and
those Sacred words, that your Majesty would employ all the power in your
Dominions to warrant and protect all our Churches from the ruin that threatened
them, have been (after Gods favor) the only foundation of all their hope: so
the Churches should think no greater a Crime could be committed by them, then
doubt of your Royal performance thereof, if their miseries and Calamities have
at the beginning moved your Compassion. This woeful subject has increased with
such violence, that nothing but your succor can prevent their utter undoing:
for at this day the greatest offense our Enemies lay to our Charge, (and
proclaim nothing can expiate but our blood) is, to have implored your aid, and
hope for it: for this cause, our Lands and Possessions are taken away and
destroyed; our houses made desolate, and reduced to ashes; our heads exposed to
sale to murderers; our families banished; and wheresoever the cruelty of them
that hate us can extend, men and women are dragged and beaten to Mass with
Bastinadoes. To be short, the horror of the persecution we suffer is so great,
that our words are too weak to express it. Moreover, we see great and mighty
Armies at our Gates, that wait their only fit time to fall with impetuosity
upon the places of retreat that remain; and after that, to expel and banish the
exercise of Religion, and massacre all the faithful ones throughout the whole
kingdoms. These things considered (Sir) I do beseech your Majesty not to
forsake us. I should fear by such words to offend so great, so potent, and so
faithful a king; But because of urgent necessity that presses us, I have
presumed importunately to entreat the hastening of your assistance, to keep us
from falling under the heavy burden of our Enemies endeavors. Your Majesty
need not to draw, but out of the source of your own profound wisdom, for the
fit means how to make your succor dreadful and powerful to those that
contemn it, and salutiferous to so many people that wait and long for it. Your
Majesty shall by this means acquire the greatest glory that can be desired,
pluck out from the fire and sword three hundred thousand families that
continually pray to God for your prosperity; preserve a people whom God has
purchased with his most precious blood, and which has (even in the midst of
most eminent dangers, and cruellest torments) kept entire a sound and an
upright faith, both toward God and man; you shall settle the fidelity of your
word, the reputation of your kingdoms and Arms, to a pitch worthy of your
grandeur; and in repressing of the audaciousness of those that go about every
day to blemish the same, through their vile and unworthy reproaches, you shall
add to your titles that of the Restorer of a people, the most innocent and most
barbarously persecuted that ever was. In that which concerns me, Sir, I will
not make mention to your Majesty of my own Interest, though I might do it,
having, as it seems, the honor to be unto you what I am: but I have so long
since consecrated all things with my self to the public good, that I shall
esteem my self happy enough, so that the Church were not miserably
distressed; and that I may have this advantage, that through my actions (which
your Majesty will not disavow) I may make it known, that I am

Your Majesty's most humble and most obedient servant, Henry de Rohan.

Pope Gregory the 15 to the Inquisitor-General of Spain, April 19. 1623.
Venerable Brother,
THe protection of the Orthodox Religion in the most spacious Kingdoms of
Spain, we think to be happily committed to your Fraternity: for we know with
what watchful vigilancie, in this renowned station, you are careful that
Monsters of wicked doctrine steal not into the bounds of the Church and Vine.
But at this time occasion from heaven is offered you, by which you may extend
the benefits of your piety beyond the bounds of those Kingdoms, and extend them
also to foreign Countries. We understand that the Prince of Wales, the King of
Great Britains son, is lately arrived there, carried with a hope of Catholic
Marriage: Our desire is, that he should not stay in vain in the Courts of those
Kings, to whom the defense of the Popes authority, and care of advancing
Religion, has procured the renowned name of Catholic. Wherefore by
Apostolic Lettets we exhort his Catholic Majesty, that he would gently
endeavor sweetly to reduce that Prince to the obedience of the Roman Church,
to which the ancient Kings of Great Britain have (with heavens approbation)
submitted their Crowns and Scepters. Now to the attaining of this victory,
which to the conquered promises triumphs, and principalities of heavenly
felicity, we need not exhaust the Kings treasure, nor levy Armies of furious
soldiers; but we must fetch from heaven the armor of Light, whose divine
splendour may allure that Princes eye, and gently expel all errors from his
mind. Now in the managing of these businesses, what power and art you have, we
have well known long ago: wherefore we wish you to go like a religious
Counselor to the Catholic King, and to try all ways which by this present
occasion may benefit the Kingdoms of Britain and the Church of Rome. The matter
is of great weight and moment, and therefore not to be amplified with words.
Whosoever shall inflame the mind of this Royal youth with the love of the
Catholic Religion, and breed a hate in him of Heretical impiety, shall begin
to open the Kingdom of heaven to the Prince of Britain, and to gain the
Kingdoms of Britain to the Apostolic See; into the possession of so great
glory, I make no doubt but that your Fraternity, armed with the sword of
Verity, will be desirous to come. About which matter, our venerable brother
Innocent Bishop of (...) the Apostolic Nuncio, shall discourse with you more
at large; whom you may trust. And we with most accurate prayers will endeavor
to procure the assistance of God for you, upon whom most lovingly we bestow our
Apostolical benediction.

Given at Rome in St. Peter's, under the Fishers Seal, April 19. 1623. of our
Popedom 30.
Pope Urban to Lewis the 13. Aug. 4. 1629.
To our dearest Son in Christ Jesus, Lewis the most Christian King of France;
Pope Urban sends greeting.
MOst dear Son in Christ, Health, and Apostolical benediction. The high
exploits of your Royal valor, which have drawn upon them all the eyes of
Christendom, bring a great deal of comfort to our fatherly care, as well in
regard of the glory of your Arms, as the hope of your triumphs. For
considering, as we do, with much grief, the impiety of Heretics, living in
some places without fear or danger, we now thank the Lord of hosts, that has
in so fit an opportunity made your Majesty to maintain with Arms the dignity
of the Catholic Religion. Oh fair Apprentiship of Royal Warfare, and worthy of
a most Christian King! What an admirable thing it is, that the age which other
Princes, out of a kind of softness and idleness, use to pass away in sports
and delights, your Majesty should employ so generously, so fortunately, in
appeasing differen^es, conducting Armies, and besieging the strongest places of
Hereti^ks, and all not without the special counsel of God, by which Kings
reign! Is it almost credible, that the very first steps of your thoughts should
carry you in so high and troublesome an enterprise; and that the dangers and
difficulties which have stopped others in their course, should only serve for a
spur to the greatness of your courage? Enjoy (dear Son) the Renown your name
has got, and follow the God that fights for you; to the end that as you are
now held the Thunderbolt and Buckler of War, so you may hereafter be esteemed
the praise of Israel, and the glory of the world. From the height of our
Apostolic Dignity, whereto it has pleased God of his goodness to raise us,
unworthy of so great grace, we assist your Arms with heart and affection, and
by our frequent prayers prepare the divine remedies. And though we doubt not
but your own virtue will make you constant in the work you have begun,
nevertheless we have thought good to add Exhortations, that the world may see
the care we have of the advancement of true Religion, and how willing we are to
give way to your glory. You have been hitherto infinitely bound to God for his
bounty toward you; and, as we hope and wish, you shall hereafter a great deal
more. For you having your mind endued with celestial doctrine, and not with
the bare precepts of humane wisdom, do well know, that Kingdoms have their
foundation upon the truth of Orthodox faith: and unless God keep the City, what
principality can subsist with any assurance? It may easily be judged with what
fidelity they are likely to defend your Royal Throne, that have cast the very
Saints themselves out of their Temples, and done as much as in them lay to put
them out of the number of the blessed, yea out of Paradise it self, that with
impious temerity condemn the Institutions of our Fathers, the Custom of Kings,
the Decrees of Popes, and the Ceremonies of the Church. These are the
disturbers of the Christian Commonwealth, and the reproaches of France, whom
the great God has reserved, to be exterminated, as it were, in the beginning
of your Reign. Know then, that all Europe (which the event of your Arms holds
all this time in suspense) hopes shortly it will hoyse sail upon the Ocean
under the conduct of your Greatness and Power, and go to the place which serves
now for Sanctuary and protection to the Heretics and Rebels, and it will
shortly serve for a Trophie of your Victories. We are confidently persuaded,
that neither fear nor inconstancy shall ever be able to divert you from the
pursuit of your so glorious enterprise, nor hinder you to subvert that
unsanctified people: Only, by the way, we would have you remember, that the
Saints in heaven assist that Prince who takes upon him the defense of Religion,
and fight on his side like fellow soldiers. The same God that hardened the
waters like dry land, and turned the waters of the Sea into walls, to give safe
passage to his childrens Army, will certainly in this most pious action be as
favorable to you: and then we shall have good cause to hope, that having
established your own Kingdom, and crushed the impiety that was and yet is there,
you may one day, by the progress of your victorious Arms, join the Orient to
the Occident; imitating the glories of your Ancestors, who have ever born as
much respect to the Exhortations of Popes, as to the commandment of God. St.
Lewis, whose name you bear, and whose steps you follow, invites you to it: so
did the first of your Race, who in defending the Apostolic authority, and
propagating Christian Religion, laid the best and surest foundation to your
Royal House. Follow (dear Son) which are the ornaments of the world, the
commandments of heaven: pour out your wrath and indignation upon those people
that have not, nor will not know God, and our Apostolic benignity; to the end
the divine treasure of heaven may belong unto you by a just acquisition. In the
mean time, we send you most affectionately our Apostolic benediction.

Given at Rome at great St. Mary's, under the Seal of the Fisher, the 4 day of
August 1629. being the seventh year of our Pontificate.
The Duke of Buckingham, Chancellor elect, to the University of Cambridge, June
5. 1626.
MR. Vice Chancellor, and Gentlemen of the University of Cambridge, there is no
one thing that concerns me more near, then the good opinion of good and
learned honest men; amongst which number as you have ever held the first rank
in the estimation of the Commonwealth, and fame of the Christian world; so in
conferring of this Honor of Chancellorship upon me, I must confess you have
satisfied a great ambition of mine own, which I hope will never forsake me, and
that is, To be thought well of, by men that deserve well, and men of your
profession. Yet I cannot attribute this Honor to any desert in me, but to the
respect you bear to the sacred memory of my Master deceased, the King of
Scholars, who loved you, and honored you often with his presence; and to my
gracious Master now living, who inherits with his blessed Fathers virtues, the
affection he bore your University. I beseech you, as you have now made your
choice with so many kind and noble circumstances, as the manner is to me
acceptable and grateful as the matter; so to assure your selves, that you have
cast your votes upon your servant, who is as apprehensive of the time you have
showed your affection in, as of the Honor you have given him. And I earnestly
request you all, that you would be pleased not to judge me comparatively by the
success and happiness you have had in your former choice of Chancellors, who as
they knew better, perhaps by advantage of education in your University, how to
value the deserts of men of your qualities and degrees; so could they not be
more willing to cherish you then my self, who will make amends for want of
Scholarship, in my love to the professors of it, and unto the Source from
whence it comes: having now most just cause more chiefly to employ my
uttermost endeavors, with what favor I enjoy from a Royal Master, to the
maintaining of the Charters, Privileges, and Immunities of your University in
general, and to the advancing of the particular merits of the Students therein.
And since I am so far engaged unto you, I will presume upon a further
courtesy, which is, That you will be pleased to supply me with your advice,
and suggest a way unto me (as my self likewise shall not fail to think on some
means) how we may make Posterity remember you have a thankful Chancellor, and
one that both really loved you and your University. Which is a resolution writ
in an honest heart, by him that wants much to express his affection to you;
who will ever be

York-house, 5 Junii, 1626. Your faithful friend, and humble servant, Geor.
Buckingham.

King Charles to the University of Cambridge, in approbation of the Election.
June 6. 1626.
TRusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well. Whereas upon Our Pleasure intimated
unto you by the Bishop of Durham for the choice of your Chancellor, you have
with such duty as We expected highly satisfied Us in your election, We cannot
in Our Princely nature (who are much possessed with this testimony of your
ready and loyal affections) but for ever to let you know, how much you are
therein made partakers of Our Royal approbation: and as We shall ever conceive,
that an Honor done to a person We favor, is out of a loyal respect had unto
Our Self: and as we shall ever justify Buckingham worthy of this your
Election, so shall you find the fruits of it: for We have found him a faithful
servant to our dear Father of blessed memory; and Our Self cannot but undertake
that he will prove such a one unto you; and will assist him with a gracious
willingness, in any thing that may concern the good of the University in
general, or the particular merits of any Students there.

Given under Our Signet at Our Palace of Westminster, the sixth of June, in the
second year of Our Reign.
The University of Cambridge Answer to the Duke, June 6. 1626.
Illustrissime Princeps, atque auspicatissime Cancellarie,
NEptunum perhibent gratum cum Minerva iniisse certamen, utere re magis
mortalium conferret donum: ille potens maris Deus illico effudit equum, Ill^
pacis and musarum numen, suppeditavit oleam; utrumque certe Deo dignum munus.
Adeo nostrum non est tantam litem dirimere, quin facessat potius litis
importuna vox, ubi non alia quam Amoris propinantur pignora. Perinde tecum se
res habet, excellentissime Dux, quem jam olim potentissimus Oceani Britannici
Neptunus, non solum suprema Maris Praefectura cohonestavit, sed and Praetorio
donavit Equo: adeo ut illius munere and propria virtute, unus audias, Terrae
Marique summus Dictator, ut sic dicamus Classis, and Magister Equitum. Post
tanta honorum vestigia, ecce, nostra Minerva tua jam Cantabrigia supplex suas
obtendit oleas, tanquam inter victri^es lauros lambentes hederas; oleas quidem
quibus and tuis rebus, and rebus tum publicis tum Literariis precatur simul and
auspicatur pacem. Nec ad usque sumus gens togata impotenter su^erbi, ut hoc
Cancellariatu arbitremur, Nos tantillos tibi in id Meritorum and Gratiae culmen
evecto, quicquam vel testimonii ad aestimationem, vel tituli ad gloriam
contulisse. Quod autem ipse aliter opinaris vestra illa pretas est, haud
ambitio, major tua tum virtus tum decus est, quam ut eis aut nostra quidpiam
suffragia addere, aut aliorum possit Invidia detrahere: stellae in primo orb,
quas fixas vocant, altiores sunt, quam ut ad eas valeat terrarum umbra
pertingere, quanquam foelicissimae memoriae Jacobo pientissimoque Carolo non
est, quod hoc quicquid est nominis te debere dicas, citra est, misellum munus
Academicum, citra est quam ut tantos auctores mereatur, quin vestram potius
celsitudinem, vestrum tutelare numen, Nos illis Principibus imputabimus, qui
inde ex illius potissimum voto te elegimus, unde non misi immortalia accipere
beneficia solebamus. Quod si nostrum hoc in vestram Excellentiam studium tibi
ipsa uti scribis commendat tempestivitas, nos illud saltem debituri sumus
temporibus caeterum non nimis foelicibus, quod tibi vel inde gratiores sumus;
quanquam suspicamur, ut hoc totum quod de oportunitate insinuas merum sit, nec
magnis ingeniis insolens been de suis cultoribus merendi artificium, quae eo
consilio singula suorum officia maxim tempestive autumant, quo uberius sibi
remunerandi argumentum autupentur: nam faciles credimus honorificis quibus nos
dignaris promissis. Jamdiu est, ex quo te animo atque opera Cancellarium
sensimus, nihilque tibi hoc tempore nostra potuere suffragia quam nomen
adjicere. Nolis tamen ut cum illustrissimis heroibus praecessoribus tuis, te
committamus, in quo sane tua praedicanda modestia illorum honori and memoriae
consuluit, ne tanti fulgoris claritudine offuscentur, ut enim nulla re magis se
jactat Cantabrigia quam praeteritorum gloria ac splendore Patronorum; hodie
tamen, nescio quid solito augustius spirat, and tuis superba auspiciis quasi
Buckinghamiensis aucta tutelis, magnaque spe gravida intumescit. Ad extremum
nos ad concilium vocas, qua potissimum ratione quo digno monumento tuo, in nos
amoris memoriam posteritati consecres, verum enim vero (Illustrissime Dux,
indulgentissimeque Cancellarie) major est ea provincia, quam ut nos eam
subeundo simus, quod tuo amori par sit monumentum, tuum potest solummodo
excogitare ingenium. Nos interea alia manebit cura quibus nimirum apud Deum
precibus quibus studiorum vigiliis officiorum obsequiis tantae Clientelae
foelicitatem nobis propriam and perpetuam despondeamus,

Datae frequentissimo Senatu nostro, sexto Idus Junii, 1626. Vestrae
Excellentiae humillimi devotissimique Clientes Servique, Procancellarius, and
reliquus Senatus Cantabrigiensis.

The University of Cambridge Answer to the King. Serenissimo invictissimoque
Principi ac Domino nostro, CAROLO Dei gratiae, Magnae Britanniae, Franciae and
Hiberniae Regi, Fidei Defens. etc.
SErenissime Domine noster invictissime Carole, multum nos fortunae nostrae,
sed tuae clementiae infinitum quantum debemus, satis nempe erat judicio nostro
satisfecisse cum illum nobis praeficeremus, quem unum certissime praefici posse
constabat. At tua admirabilis bonitas non patitur nos gratis nobismetipsis
benefacere, sed tibi imputari vis quod nobis fecimus beneficium. Enimvero
arduam aliquam sibi materiam obsequium nostrum poscebat, and cujus tenuitas
sublimitatem vestram assequi non posset, difficultatem -- se, and molestia
commendaret. Tu autem a te gratiam -- quod tanti Patroni beneficio usi sumus,
qui ita nos amat, ut plurimum velit, ita a te amatur, ut plurimum nostra causa
posset per quem vestra in nos transeat benignitas, and difficultates nostras
discutiat: si quae tamen in hac divina bonitate tua existere possit difficultas
superasti, nempe majorum tuorum Clementiam, qui and easdem nobis immunitates
indulges, and id etiam prospicis, ut iis rectissime utamur. Et quod unum tantae
foelicitati reliquum erat ut esset perpetua, id ipsum precibus nostris
superesse non finis; praecurris enim vota nostra, and spem ipsam, qua nihil est
importunius, exuperas: nam and ipsa fines suos habet, quos tuae bonitati nullos
esse experti sumus. Exhausisti votorum nostrorum materiam, Serenissime Regum,
nec quicquam nobis deinceps optandu^ est quam ut tu regnes ut vincas, ut nos in
perpetuum simus quod sumus,

Datae frequentissimo Senatu nostro, sexto Idus Junii, 1626. Excellentissime
Majestatis vestrae humillimi servi and subditi, Procancellarius, and reliquus
Senatus Academiae Cantabrigiensis.

A Privy Seal for transporting of Horse. June 3. 1624.
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Treasurer and under-Treasurer of our
Exchequer for the time being, greeting. We do hereby will and command you, that
out of our Treasure remaining in the receipt of our said Treasury forthwith to
pay, or cause to be paid unto Philip Burlamack of Lond' Merchant, the sum of
30000 l. to be by him paid over to the Low Countries, by Bill of Exchange, and
Germany, unto Our Trusty and Welbeloved Sir William Belfour Knight, and John
Dabler Esquire; or either of them, for levying and providing a certain number of
Horse, with Arms for Foot and Horse to be brought over into this Kingdom for
our Service; viz. for the levying and transporting of 1000 Horse, 15000 l. for
5000 Muskets, 5000 Corslets, 5000 Pikes, 10500 l. for 1000 Curasiers complete,
200 Corslets and 200 Carbines, 4500 l. amounting in the whole to the said sum
of 30000 l. And this Our Letter shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge
in this behalf. Given under Our Privy Seal at Our Palace of Westm' the 30 of
Januar' in the third year of Our Reign, Anno Dom. 1627.

The University of Cambridge to the Duke.
Illustrissime Princeps,
QUam paterno cum affectu, quam divina cum charitate vestrae hujus Academiae
salutem utilitatemque vestra Celsitudo semper procuraverit, nec nos effari
possumus, nec aetas ulla conticere.

Ingentia beneficia seculum praesens admiratione obruunt; nec alio queunt quam
perennis famae and immortalitatis praemio compensari. Vestrae Celsitudinis
singulari patrocinio, de Typographis Londinensibus triumphavimus. Hostium
undequaque ferociam persensimus imminutam, auctamque Academiae dignitatem:
Nihil nos votis expetiscere, nihil vestra Celsitudo confer potuit, quod a
vestra benignitate non acceperimus. Et quid nos praeter hanc sterilem cultus
nostri messem rependimus? At beneficia vestra, quam sancte posteritas alet,
quibus praeconiis, quam aeternis laudibus vestrae Celsitudinis memoriam nepotes
nostri celebrabunt, facile conjiciet is qui norit quantum Academia tranquille
administrata, vindicata privilegia, immunitates conservatae, otium, libertas,
ipsa vita Musis do^ata, promereantur! Quot hosts Reipublicae Literariae
infensos vestra Celsitudo profligavit, quot in nos munera contulerit, nec illi
sine gemitu agnoscere, nec nos sine stupore recitare valeamus. Dum te licet
conspicari, dum tua genua prehendere, flocci faciamus mortalium iras, and in
recessibus nostris abditi tuto literis indulgeamus.

Jam vestra Celsitudo novam parat Militiam (quam vestro nomini gloriosam,
Religioni Christianae faustam, nobis omnibus foelicem, omnipotens Deus faxit)
quibus nos periculis exponimur? Alii flumen nostrum siccare, eumque ablatum a
quo forsan ipsi aquas olim ingrati hauserunt: alii nobis Imprimendi facultatem
rursus adimere conabuntur. Illustrissime Princeps, pauca sunt nostra bona,
suppellex curta, angusta Athenarum pomoeria: nullae tamen opes Croesi vel Midae
perditorum hominum insidiis petuntur atrocius, quam inermis and nuda paupertas
nostra. Videt vestra Celsitudo quam in ipsa fiduciam collocamus, qui tempestas
priusquam ingruit, ad vestras aras confugimus. Et quamvis haud ignari sumus
quanta moles vestrae Celsitudinis humeros jam premat, audacter tamen tot
curaru^ montibus nostrum Parnassum superaddimus. Perficiat vestra Celsitudo
hanc suam Academiam, ut incipit: florentem ornet, trepidantem excitet,
depressam sustentet, periclitantem expediat; quae Deum perpetuo implorat, ut
omnia tua gloriosa molimina vestra Celsitudo consequatur, and illa vestrae
Celsitudinis patrocinio fruatur in aeternum.

Dat' e frequenti Senatu nostro, Nonas Julii, 1628. Celsitudinis vestrae
devinctissimi, Procancellarius, reliquusque Senatus Academiae vestrae
Cantabrigiensis.

The Dukes Answer.
Gentlemen,
SUch and so cordial have your respects been unto me, that no other Pen then
your own can express them, nor no other heart then mine can apprehend them: and
therefore I labor not any verbal satisfaction, but shall desire you to
believe, that what service soever you please to think I have hitherto done for
you, I cannot so much as call an expression of that I would willingly do for
you. And whereas in your Letters you seem to fear that my absence may be an
advantage of time to make your adversaries active and stirring against you, and
your affairs consequently meet with partiality and opposition; I have therefore
most humbly recommended them to the Justice of my Royal Master, and to the
bosoms of some friends, where they shall likewise meet with mediation and
protection, to what part of the world soever my Master or the States service
shall call me. I can carry but one Chancellor of your University along with me,
but I hope I shall leave you many behind me. And I shall presage likely of the
success of our actions, since they are all so followed by your wishes and
devotions; which I shall endeavor you may always continue unto

Chelsey, 30 July, 1628. Your most affectionate friend, and humble servant,
BUCKINGHAM.
Directed, To my very worthy and much-respected friends, The Vicechancellor and
Senate of the University of Cambridge.
The Vicechancellor of Cambridge to the King, upon the Dukes death.
Dread Sovereign,
THe fatal blow given your most loyal servant, whom your Majesty made our
Patron and Chancellor, has so stounded our University, as (like a Body without
a Soul) she stirs not, till your Majesty's directions breathe life again, in
the choice of another. And although I am but one of many, and therefore (having
to do with a multitude) cannot absolutely assure the effecting of your
pleasure; yet I dare undertake for my self, with the rest of the Heads, and
many others, truly and faithfully to labor in your Majesty's desires, and now
presume to send fair and strong hopes to give them full satisfaction: Humbly
entreating the continuance of your Majesty's love and care of your University;
the only stay and comfort of this her sad and mournful estate, occasioned by
such an unexpressible disaster; cherishing her self with that blessed word your
Majesty used upon her last Election, That howsoever your Majesty's appointment
shadowed out another, yet your Self in substance would be her Chancellor. This,
as an indelible Character in her memory, shall ever return, as all thankful
observance, so to God prayers full of cordial zeal, for your Majesty's long and
happy Reign.

King Charles to the University of Cambridge, for a new Election.
RIght Trusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well. As We took in gracious part
your due respect in electing heretofore for your Chancellor a man who for his
parts and faithful service was most dear unto Us: so now We are well pleased to
understand, that you are sensible of your own and the common loss, by the
bloody assassinate of so eminent a person, and that you desire and expect for
your comfort an intimation from Us of a capable subject to suc^eed in his room.
This expression on your part, has begotten in Us a Royal affection toward
you, and more care for your good; out of which, We commend unto free election
of you the Vicechancellor and Heads, and of the Masters Regents and Non-Regents
(according to Our ancient Custom) Our Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin
and Counselor, Henry Earl of Holland, lately a member of your own Body, and
well known unto you all: whose hearty affection to advance Religion and
Learning generally in Our own Kingdoms, and especially in the Fountains, cannot
be doubted of. Not that We shall cease to be your Chancellor in effect,
according to Our promise; but the rather for your advantage, We advise you to
the choice, that you may have a person acceptable unto Us, and daily attending
on Our person, to be Our Remembrancer and Solicitor for you upon all
occasions. And your general concurring herein, shall be to Us a pledge of Our
affections, which We are willing to cherish.

Given at Our Court the 28 of August, in the fourth year of Our Reign. CAROLUS
Rex.

The Earl of Holland to the University.
Mr. Vicechancellor and Gentlemen, the Senate of the University of Cambridge,
THe condition of man is so frail, and his time so short here, that in the sum
of his account there are few accidents can deliver him worthy to posterity: yet
to prevent my destiny in this defect, you have made my name to live, by your
general and free election of me to be your Chancellor; the which will give me
so to the world, not my merit. I take but my beginning by this Creation, and
will endeavor to proceed with such strength, in my serious affection to serve
you all, as you shall see this Honor is not conferred upon an unthankful
person. It is my hap to succeed the most excellent example of the best
Chancellor, who had both will and power to oblige you: for the first, none can
exceed me, that am tied by my education to serve you: for my power, although it
be but short in all other things, yet in what concerns you, my Master, whose
word you have, and whose thanks you will receive in my behalf, will for his own
sake, if not for mine, accept of all humble requests for you, which may conduce
to the support of every particular good, that can any way advantage your whole
Body, or advance the several members of our University. For whose increase of
fame and honor I do wish, from an affectionate heart, as I profess my self
obliged, being

Your most thankful friend, and humble servant, Henry Holland.

The University of Cambridge to the King. Serenissimo, and Magnificentissimo
Principi, CAROLO Dei gratiae, Britanniae Regi, etc.
Serenissime and Potentissime Monarcha, Carole, Defensor Fidei, Pater Patriae:
DUm ad Majestatis tuae pedes discumbimus, veniam humillime deprecamur
temeritatis nostrae, Quod Majestati tuae in illud gloriae fastigium evectae, ad
quod nulli Principes a multis retro seculis provenere, Chartas has ineptas ausi
sumus, and querimonias obtrudere, sed nullum jam in terris effulget Majestate
tua aut illustrius, aut magis beneficum sidus, cujus coelesti aspectu mortales
afflicti ab adversis, ad salutis portum perduci possint. Sensimus nos persaepe,
laesi sensimus vivificam charitatis tuae auram, divinam clementiam amplectimur,
and benignitatem incredibilem sempiterna veneratione adoramus. Quae enim per te
nobis pax data sit, quae privilegia indulta and confirmata, quae gratia,
candor, misericordia, beneficentia nobis impertita, nec nos effari possumus,
nec ulla secula conticere. O nos foelicissimos sub tuo Sceptro, Carole! qui
certe miserrimi essemus, si Regio Majestatis tuae Patrocinio ac favore
destitueremur: irruunt in nos omne genus illiteratorum hominum longum haerent
in nostris malis, and sine magno numine non amoventur. Centum olim annos cum
oppidanis nostris de summa privilegiorum decertavimus, quinquaginta cum
Typographis Londinensibus, adeo crudelis est, ac pertinax malitia, quae literis
bellum indicit; Typographis per tuam in nos pietatem nuper compositis oppidani,
veterem odii Camarinam incipiunt commovere. Ita ab Oppidanis ad Typographos, a
Typographis ad Oppidanos, nostra in gyrum calamitas circumacta volvitur, and
infinitis controversiarum nodis astringimur, and jugulamur. Deflexis genibus
Excellentissimam Majestatem tuam imploramus, ut qua serenitate suam Academiam
semper aspexerit, eadem dignetur huic causae ad dictum a se diem interesse. Et
Deum Optim. Max. precabimur, ut te nobis quam diutissime conservet
clementissimum Principem, and Patrem indulgentissimum: In cujus salute, totius
Regni incolumitas, tranquillitas Literarum, publica seculi foelicitas, and
bonorum omnium vota abunde continentur.

Servi Majestati tuae devoti and fideles subditi, Procanc' and Senat'.

An Order made at Whitehall betwixt the University and Town of Cambridge,
December. 4. 1629. Lord Keeper. Lo. Archb. of York. Lord Treasurer. Lord
President. Lord Privy Seal. Lord high Chamberlain. Earl Marshal. Lord Steward.
Lord Chamberlain. Earl of Suffolk. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Salisbury. Earl of
Bridgewater. Earl of Holland. Earl of Danby. Earl of Kelly. Lord Visc.
Dorchester. Lord Visc. Grandison. Lord Bish. of Winton. Master of the Wards.
Master Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary Cook.

THis day his Majesty sitting in Council, did hear at large the controversy
between the University of Cambridge and certain Burgers of the Town, concerning
the rating and setting the price of Victualia, and particularly of Candles and
other necessaries comprised under the terms of Focalia; and of the consequences
lately fallen out upon the controversy: which having been long debated by
Counsel learned on both sides, his Majesty finally ordered, by advice of the
Board, That as well the late Mayor and Bailiff, and William Bridges, as Edward
Almond, John Ball, Jonas Scott, and Thomas Oliver, shall acknowledge and submit
themselves (by setting their hands to this Order in the Councel-book) to the
Jurisdiction and Privileges of the University, as well for the rating and
setting the price of all manner of Victualia, and of Candles, and all other
necessaries under the term of Focalia, as for the correcting and punishing of
all such inhabitants of the Town as shall break and exceed the said rates and
prices so set by the Vicechancellor, or such Officers of the University as are
in that behalf authorized. And it is further ordered, That all the parties
fined by the Vicechancellor, shall pay the Fines, and such charges of the Court
as were set upon them by the Vicechancellor; and shall make public confession,
in the Vicechancellors Court, of their fault, in breaking the said rates and
prices so set, and refusing to pay the fines so assessed upon them, and
questioning the privileges of the University. And as touching the discommuning
of any of the said persons in this Order mentioned, It is ordered, That peace
and agreement shall be settled between the parties, according to the performance
of that respect and submission which is due from the inhabitants of the said
Town of Cambridge to the said University.

Ex. Will. Becher.

The University of Cambridge to the Archbishop of York. Reverendissimo in
Christo Patri, and summo Archi-praesuli, Samueli, Dei gratia, Archiepiscopo
Eborazensi, Patrono nostro aeternum colendo.
Reverendissime in Christo Pater, Archi-praeful amplissime,
NIsi perspecta esset Paternitatis tuae in Academiam gratia and favor supra
quam meremur immensius, vereremur sine multis ambagibus, ad tam illustre in
Ecclesia caput accedere; verum ea semper fuit indulgentia tua, and stabile
nobis patrocinium, ut in difficultatibus nostris ultro fueris magis ad
accurendum alacer, quam nos esse potuimus ad implorandum; temerarii incidimus
in veterem controversiae lacunam cum nostris Oppidanis. Novit sat Paternitas
tua ab experientia multiplici, quas illi erga nos mentes gerant, quam atra
lolligine and invidiae succo a teneris unguiculis pasti fuerint, neque jam
incipiunt ferocire, nec unquam credimus, desinent homines insulsi, tam
dignitatis nostrae immemores, quam rationis suae, nonnullis eorum commercium
cum nostris interdiximus, dum procacius, quam parerat fasces nostros videbantur
contemnere, sed grave est, and permolestum quicquid cadit in praecipites
animos, and ira impotentes. Illi tanquam fulmine perculsi ad publica judicium
subsellia, Lymphatice festinant, cum possent consultius forsan in domibus suis
-- Nos autem veriti ne Majestas Reipub. Literariae minueretur, si in foro
publico prostituta Academia de privilegiis, and summa rerum trepidaret, Senatus
Regis tribunali appellavimus. In quo cum jam auspicatissime consedisse tuam
Paternitatem, intelligeret Almae Matter, and de honor tua, and sua foelicitate
eximie triumphabat, nunquam oblita virtutis tuae, and magnanimitatis invictae,
qua solebas hic toties Vicecancellarius ad immortalem nominis tui laudem
istiusmodi perduelles contundere humillime rogamus Paternitatem tuam, pro suo
summo in nos affectu and pietate, ut quemadmodum semper Academiam ornare
studuit, ita nunc dignetur eidem periclitanti succurrere.

Pat' tuae devotiss. Procanc' and Senate.

The University of Cambridg to the Earl of Manchester. Illustrissimo,
nobilissimo, nostroque amantissimo Domino, Comiti Manchestriae Privati Sigilli
Custodi, Regiae Majestati a Sanctioribus Consiliis, Patrono nostro plurimum
colendo.
HOnoratissime nostrumque amantissime Domine Montacute, Nescimus an ipsi nobis
vana credulitate blandiamur, sed cum singula tua pro nobis gesta perpendimus,
fruimur hac opinione, vix quenquam vivere, qui nostram salutem, literarum
incrementum, tranquillitatem Academiae magis ex animo velit quam nobilissimus
Montacutus; tot indies apparent indubitata testimonia amoris tui erga nos
integerrimi et profusissimae benevolentiae. Quid dicemus de Typographis, quos
tandem aliquando post varios casus et tot discrimina subegimus, quamvis nodum
controversiae Gordianum consuerant non nisi Alexandri gladio explicabilem, et
tanquam sepia piscis longa perplexae litis caligine capita involverant ne
caperentur. Ac haec ultima sententia vestra momento beneficii favoris
magnitudine, celeritate conficiendi trajecit, quicquid ulla spes nobis dictare
potuit, aut suggerere, sententia celebris, sancta memorabilis ad opprimendam in
perpetuam morosam oppidanorum insolentiam; sententia quam quo penitus
contemplamur, eo magis sub stupore bonitatis vestrae, et admirationis onere
laboramus.

Noli (nec enim fas est) metiri observantiae nostae rationem, ex nostro
scribendi modulo. Majora de te sentimus quam verba nostra expedire valent,
multo minus rependere. Illud nostrum erga te tantum est et tam firmum, ut nulla
novae opportunitatis accessione augere queat, aut temporum injuria diminui.

Honori tuo aeternum obligati Procanc' and Senatus reliquus Academiae.

The University of Cambridg to Sir Humphrey May. Clarissimo and spectatissimo
Domino Humphredo May Equiti Aurato, and Regiae Majestatis Procamerario, amico
and fautori nostro aeternum observando.
AETernas agimus tibi gratias, Clarissime Domine Procamerarie, quod favore tam
subito tam propensa and inclinata benevolentia ad nostram causam ultro
accesseris: subiit forsan and pupugit (clarissime Domine) conditionis nostrae
pia commiseratio cum videret Musas litibus implicatas circa Tribunalia tremere,
quas aequius erat inter lauros and virgulta pacifica in veritatis disquisitione
occupari. Verum est, and in hac aetate improba sic vivimus, ut frequenter
deposita toga and calamo, pallia and Clientum soccos induere cogamur: Maxim
vero nos ad incommoda pellunt opidani nostri, qui hoc a natura principium
mordicus tenent, and nullo dimittunt fato, turbare semper pacem literarum, et
bonis Academiae quovis modo insidiari. O quam magna merces est prudentia, et
sobria men's, aequa in utriusque sortis importunitate! sunt quos ipsum
foelicitatis taedium fatigat ad mortem, and dira contentionis ambitio fanatico
quodam aestro impellit ad suam perniciem. Post triginta annos simulatae pacis,
and induciarum oppidulani nostri quietis impatientia, and invidiae aculeis
acti, nuper tentare voluerunt quantum possent calcibus contra spinas, aut
contra Solemn jaculis; at praeter poenitentiam ac suspiria nihil domum
reportarunt; Ita Musas in aeternum sibi devinxit Senatus ille tremendus and
gloriosus, in quo majores dii gentis nostrae sedent. Tu in illa scena splendida
Regiae Majestati adstare maluisti, quam tuam inter divos reliquos classem
retinere, ut nostro momento inservires, and illud pectus sacrum proprius
attingeres, in quo omnes gratiae nidificant, and nostra beatitudo reconditur.
Magna sunt haec amoris tui testimonia, nolis vero messem sementi parem a nobis
expectare; Musae non sunt solvendo. Et tamen, si preces, vota, lauds, encomia
pro nobis sufficere possint, Nihil nos tuis meritis debituros confidenter
promittimus.

Dignitati tuae devinctiss. Procanc' and Senat' vel Academ. Cantabrigiens.

Instructions by King Charles, to the Vice Chancellor and Heads of Cambridge
for Government, etc. March 4. 1629.
CHARLES REX.

FIrst, that all those directions and orders of our Father of blessed memory,
which at any time were sent to our said University, be duly observed and put in
execution.

2. Whereas we have been informed that of late years many Students of that our
University, not regarding their own birth, degree, and quality, have made
diverse contracts of marriage with women of mean estate, and of no good fame in
that Town, to their great disparagement, the discontent of their parents and
friends, and the dishonor of the Government of that our University; we will,
and command you, that at all times hereafter, if any Taverner, Inholder, or
Victualer, or any other inhabitant of the Town, or within the Jurisdiction of
the University, shall keep any daughter or other woman in his house to whom
there shall resort any Scholars of that University, of what condition so ever,
to mispend their time, or otherwise to misbehave themselves in marriage without
the consent of those that have the Gardiance and tuition of them, that upon
notice thereof, you do presently convent the said Scholars or Scholar, and the
said woman or women thus suspected, before you, and upon due examination, if
you find cause therefore, that you command the said woman or women, according
to the form of your Charter against women, de malo suspectas, to remove out of
the University, and four miles of the same: And if any refuse presently to
obey your commands, and to be ordered by you herein, that you then bind them
over with sureties to appear before the Lords of our Privy Counsel, to answer
their contempt, and such matters as shall be objected against them. And if any
refuse presently to obey, to imprison them til they either remove or put in
such bonds with sureties.

3. That you be careful that all the statutes of our University be duly
executed, especially those de vestitu Scholarium, et de modestia et morum
urbanitate. And whereas we are informed, that Batchelors of Law, Physic, and
Masters of Arts, and others of higher degree, pretend they are not subject to
your censure, if they resort to such houses and places as are mentioned in the
said statutes, to eat, drink, play, or take Tobacco, to the mispending of their
time, and corrupting of others by their ill example, and to the scandalizing of
the government of our said University: Our will and pleasure is by these
presents, that you do also command them and every of them, to forbear coming
to any such houses, otherwise, or at other times, then by the said statute
others of inferior order and degree. are allowed to do, any statute or
concession whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. And if any refuse to
obey you herein, that you proceed against them as contumacious; and if there be
cause, that you also signify their names to us, or the Lords of our privy
Counsel.

4. That you do severely punish all such of your body, of what degree or
condition soever, as shall contemn their superiors, or misbehave themselves
either in word or deed toward the Vice Chancellor or Proctors, or any other
officers of our University, especially in the executing of their office.

5. Lastly we will and command that a Copy of these our directions be delivered
to the Master of every College, and that he cause the same to be published to
those of his College, and then to be Registered in the Registers of their
Colleges, and duly observed and kept by all persons whom they concern.

Examinatur, et concordat cum Originali. Ita attestor Jacobus Fabor
Registrarius.

The University of Cambridg to the Lord Chief Justice Richardson.
Honoratissimo Domino Thomae Richardson Commmunium Placitorum Proto
Justiciario, and Proedro amico Academiae, and Patrono singulari.
AMplissime et honoratissime Domine, superiori et Termino et Anno te nostris
literis and negotiis graviter defatigavimus, and nunc novas afferre molestias
neutiquam dubitamus; sed tu pro candore quo polles maximo hanc nostram
morositatem benign interpretare, and da veniam impatienti nostrae occasioni ad
Sacerdotium Hallingburii, quod de cujusdam papicolae, lapsu in manus nostras ex
diplomate serenissimi Regis Jacobi nobis indulto, et per Senatum Regni solennem
confirmato venit. Hunc Magistrum Love Collegii divi Petri promovimus, virum
fide, doctrina, integritate, sanctimonia praeclarum, qui Procuratoris Officium,
magistratum apud nos amplissimum, insigniter administravit, et non sine magna
laud fasces ante biennium deposuit, unde liquido constet dominationi tuae,
quibus opulentiis abundat Alma matter, cum virum consularem, et de republica
nostra tam been meritum, tali sacerdotiolo auctum and remuneratum dimittimus.
Vtinam tamen vel tantillum hoc quod est beneficii homini nostro placide
concederent mortales Dii, et se precibus ad aequanimitatem flecti paterentur.
Enim vero nescimus quo malo fato nostro id comparatum sit, et inter sacrum and
sacrum semper haereamus, quemadmodum in proverbio est, Inter sacrum quod
ambinius, et hominum praecordia saxo duriora, nihil nos sine controversia
impetrare possumus; sed cogimur virtute nostra nos involvere, and probam
pauperiem sine dote quaerere, cum Poeta Horatio; nam in tanta dominorum et
captatorum turba, difficile est ad omnes articulos sic excubare, ut qui modeste
prensat in lutum non detrudatur; et certe usque adeo praeclusus est industriae
nostrae ad eadem honoris et emolumenti aditus, ut multi repudia literis in
aeternum renunciare mallent, quam post tot laboribus, consumptam juventutem et
senectam studiis immature acceleratam, vanae spei cassa nuce ludificari; cum
non solum sua nobis negare beneficia, sed et nostra abripere terrarum Domini
flagitiose contendant. Quid ad te haec verba spectant, facile conjicias: Nos te
Patronum appellamus, quem adversarii nostri Judicem; et per omnia patrocinia
tua nobis ante hac gnaviter concessa, per omnia sacra clementiae tuae et amoris
in Academiam te obtestamur, ut huic Alumno nostro jus suum et Academiae
dignitatem, sarctam tectam, authoritate tua conservare velis: et cum tua merita
non alia re consequi valeamus, quam debiti agnitione cui sumus impares,
memorisque animi grata testificatione, utramque tibi sempiternam religiose
pollicemur.

Dat' e frequenti Senatu nostro, perridie Calend. Maii, 1630. Honoris tui
Clientes assidui Procancel' et Senatus integer Academ' Cantabrig.

Bishop of Excester to the lower House of Parliament.
Gentlemen,
FOR Gods sake be wise in your well meant zeal: why do we argue away precious
time, that can never be revoked, or repaired? Woe is me, whilst we dispute, our
friends perish, and we must follow them. Where are we if we break? (and I
tremble to think it) we cannot but break if we hold too stiff. Our Liberties
and properties are sufficiently declared to be sure and legal; our remedies are
clear and irrefragable; what do we fear? Every subject now sees the way
chalked out before him for future Justice, and who dares henceforth tread
besides it? certainly whilst Parliaments live we need not misdoubt the like
violation of our freedoms and rights; may we be but where the loanes found
us, we shall sufficiently enjoy our selves, and ours; It is now no season to
reach for more. O let us not whilst we over rigidly plead for a higher strain
of safety, put our selves into a necessity of ruin, and utter despair of
redress; let us not in a suspicion of evil that may be, cast our selves into a
present confusion: if you love your selves, and your Country, remit something
of your own Terms; and since the substance is yielded by your noble
compatriots, stand not too curiously upon points of circumstance: fear not to
trust a good King, who after the strictest Law made must be trusted with the
execution; think that your Country, yea Christendom lies in the mercy of your
present resolution, relent or farewell. Farewell from him whose faithful heart
bleeds in a vowed sacrifice for his King and Country.

King Charles to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal.
WE being desirous of nothing more then the advancing of the good peace and
prosperity of our people, have given leave to free debates of higest point of
our prerogative Royal, which in the times of our Predecessors, Kings and Queens
of this Realm, were ever restrained as matter they would not have disputed; and
in other things we have been willing so far to descend to the desires of our
good subjects, as might fully satisfy all moderate minds, and free them from
all just fears and jealousies, which those messages we have sent unto the
Commons House will well demonstrate to the world; and yet we find it still
insisted on, That in no case whatsoever, should it never so nearly concern
matters of State and Government, we or our privy Counsel have power to commit
any man without the cause be showed. The service it self would be thereby
destroyed and defeated; and the cause it self must be such as may be
determined by our Judges of our causes at Westminster, in a legal and ordinary
way of Justice; whereas the cause may be such, as these Judges have not
capacity of Judicature, nor rules of Law, to direct and guide their Judgments
in cases of transcedent nature, which happening so often, the very intermitting
of the constant rules of Government for so many ages within this Kingdom
practiced, would soon dissolve the very frame and foundation of our Monarchy;
wherefore as to our Commons we made fair propositions, which might equally
preserve the just liberties of the subject: So my Lords, we have thought good
to let you know, that without the overthrow of our sovereignty, we cannot
suffer this power to be impeached; yet notwithstanding, to clear our conscience
and intentions, this we publish, that it is not in our heart or will, ever to
extend our Royal power (lent unto us from God) beyond the just rule of
moderationin, any thing which shall be contrary to our Laws and Customs,
wherein the safety of our people shall be our only aim. And we do hereby
declare our Royal pleasure and resolution to be, which (God willing) we will
ever constantly continue and mantaine, that neither we nor our Privy Counsel
shall, or will at any time hereafter commit or command to prison, or otherwise
restrain the person of any for not lending money unto us, or for any other
cause which in our conscience, does concern the public good, and safety of us
and our people; we will not be drawn to pretend any cause which in our
conscience is not, or is not expressed, which base thought we hope no man can
imagine, can fall into our Royal breast: and that in all causes of this nature
which shall hereafter happen, we shall upon the humble Petition of the party,
or address of our Judges unto us, readily and really express the true cause
of their Commitment or restraint, so soon as with convenience or safety the
same is fit to be disclosed and expressed; and that in all causes Criminal of
ordinary Jurisdiction, our Judges shall proceed to the deliverance and
bailment of the Prisoner, according to the known and ordinary rules of the
Laws of this Land; and according to the Statute of Magna charta, and those
other six statutes insisted on, which we do take knowledge stand in full force,
and which we intend not to weaken, or abrogate against the true intent thereof.

This we have thought fit to signify unto you, the rather for the shortning of
any long debate upon this question, the season of the year being so far
advanced; and our great occasions of State, not lending us many days of long
continuance of this Session of Parliament.

Given under our signet, at our Palace at Westminster, the twelfth day of May
in the Fourth Year of our Reign. CAROLUS REX.

A Counsel Table Order against hearing Mass at Ambassadors houses. March 10.
1629 At White Hall the tenth of March. 1629. PRESENT. Lord Keeper. Lord
Treasurer. Lord President. Lord Privy Seal. Lord Steward. Lord Chamberlain.
Earl of Suffolk. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Salisbury. Lord Wimbleton. Lord
Viscount Dorchester. Lord Viscount Wentworth. Lord Viscount Grandison. Lord
Viscount Faulkland. Lord Savile. Lord Newbergh. Mr. Vice Chamberlain. Mr.
Secretary Cook.

AT this Sitting the Lord Viscount Dorchester declared, that his Majesty being
informed of the bold and open repair made to several places, and specially to
the houses of foreign Ambassadors, for the hearing of Mass, which the Laws
and Statutes of this Kingdom do expressly forbid his Subjects to frequent: and
considering in his Princely wisdom, both the public Scandals, and dangerous
consequence thereof, is resolved to take present order for the stopping of this
evil before it spread it self any further, and for this purpose had commanded
him to acquaint the Board with his pleasure in that behalf, and what course he
thinks fit to be held therein; and withal to demand the opinion and advice of
their Lordships concerning the same, his Majesty being desirous to use the best
and most effectual expedient that can be found. Hereupon his Lordship
proceeding, did further declare, that his Majesty (to show the clearness and
earnestness of his intention herein) has begun at his own house, viz.
Wheresoever the Queens Majesty has any Chapel being intended for the only
service of her, and for those French who attend her; for which the Earl of
Dorset, Lord Chamberlain to her Majesty, has been commanded to take special
care; according to such directions as he has received from his Majesty. That
for so much as concerns the repair to the houses of Foreign Ambassadors at
the time of Mass, his Majesty thinks fit that some messengers of the Chamber,
or other officers or persons fit for that service, shall be appointed to watch
all the several passages to their houses, and without entering into the said
houses, or infringing the freedoms and privileges belonging unto them, observe
such persons as go thither, but at their coming from thence, they are to
apprehend them and bring them to the Board; and such as they cannot apprehend,
to bring their names. But to the end that the said Foreign Ambassadors may
have no cause to complain of this proceeding, as if there were any intention
to wrong or disrespect them, his Majesty does likewise think fit, that for the
preventing of any such mistaking and sinister Interpretation, the said
Ambassadors shall be acquainted with the truth of this business; and likewise
assured in his Majesty's name, that he is, and will be as careful to conserve
all privileges and rights belonging to the quality of their places, as any of
his Progenitors have been, and in the same manner as himself expects that
their Princes shall use toward his Ambassadors.

Lastly, That it is his Majesty's express pleasure that the like diligence be
used for the apprehending of all such as repair to Mass in prisons or other
places.

The Board having heard this declaration, did unanimously conclude, that there
could not be taken a more effectual course for the preventing of these evils,
then this which his Majesty in his wisdom has set down, and therefore did
order that the same be immediately put in strict and careful execution. And it
was likewise thought fit, that the Lord Viscount Dorchester, and Mr. Secretary
Cook, should be sent to the foreign Ambassadors severally, to acquaint them
with his Majesty's intention, as is before mentioned; and that the messengers
of the Chamber to be employed in the service before specified shall be
appointed and receive their charge from the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Lord Bishop of London, and the Secretaries, who are to take a special care to
see this put in execution.

King of Spain to Pope Urban. Sept. 21. 1629.
MOst Holy Father, I condescended that my forces should be employed in the
execution of Mountferrat, to divert the introduction of strangers into Italy,
with so evident danger of Religion: I suffered the siege of Cassal to run on so
slowly, to give time that by way of negotiation those differences might be
composed with the reciprocal satisfaction of the parties interessed; and to
show in effect, what little reason all Italy had to be jealous of the Arms of
my Crown, for having possessed many places of importance; some I have freely
given away, and others after I had defended them in a time the owners had need,
I presently restored with much liberality. Upon this moderation the Duke of
Nivers, being hardened against the Emperor my Uncle, and he perhaps and other
Princes calling thither the most Christian King, who not contenting himself to
have attained that which he publicly professed to desire, and having left
Garrison in Mount-ferrat, and in Suza, and as (I am told) having fortified some
places, has thereby given occasion to the Emperor my Uncle, to give order his
Army should pass into Italy, to maintain the Authority, Jurisdiction and
preheminency of the Empire, with whom I can do no less then concur, and
give him assistance, in respect of the great and strict obligation of Blood, of
Honor, and of Convenience which I hold with his imperial Majesty, and for the
-- which I do acknowledge from the sacred Empire; declaring now, as I have
done heretofore, and as my Ambassadors have told your Holiness; that in this
business, I do neither directly nor indirectly aim at any other end of mine
own particular interest. But beholding the numerous Armies of the Emperor in
Italy, and with extreme grief foreseeing the harms, inconveniences and
dangers that Italy must thereby suffer in matter of Religion, being that which
most imports; I do not only resent it, in respect of that portion which God
has given me in Christendom, but especially as a King and Prince of Italy,
the peace of those Provinces being disturbed, which my Progenitors with so much
Judgment and providence, and with so much Authority and benefit of the Natives
had so many years preserved. Wherefore I thought it my duty to present unto
your beatitude that experience has demonstrated that to oppose and straighten
the Jurisdiction of the Emperor, and to resist his commandments, has brought
matters to these difficult terms, and this way being still persisted in, there
must needs follow those mischiefs which we desire to shun. Now the most
convenient manner how to compose these businesses, is that your Holiness do
effectually persuade the Duke of Nivers to accomodate himself to the Justice
and obedience of the Emperor, and the King of France to recall his Armies out
of Italy, and the Princes that do aid Nivers, no more to interest themselves
in the business, even as from the beginning my Ministers have propounded to
your Beatitude; because this difference being ended juridically, all the
persons interessed shall come off with honor and reputation, and so all of
them shall have a ground to beseech the Emperor, that out of his wonted
clemency, he will take off that impression, which he justly might have conceived
against the Duke of Nivers; whereupon things inclining to this issue, I shall
with a very good will employ my best offices to the end that speedy and exact
justice may be administered, and also that his Caesarian Majesty may give
experimental effects of his magnanimity and stability, desiring with a most
sincere affection, that so much Christian blood may be spared, as would be
spilt in this war, and that those forces might be employed to the service, and
not to the prejudice of Christendom. Thus have I clearly and sincerely
delivered my meaning unto your Holiness, to the end that knowing my intention,
you may do those offices which your manifold wisdom shall find proper for the
place whereto God has advanced you; and if God for our sins have decreed to
chastise Christendom, by continuing the war; let this dispatch be a testimony
of my good will, and real intention toward peace; for the prosecuting whereof,
I on my part, will always embrace any reasonable and proportionable means.
Oar Lord God preserve your Beatitude a thousand years.

The Council of Ireland to King Charles in defense of the Lord Deputy
Faulkland. April 28. 1629
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty, we stand so bounden to your royal
Self, and your most blessed Father our late deceased Sovereign Lord and
Master, as we are urged in duty to prostrate this act of our faith at your
Majesty's feet, as an assay to clear some things wherein misinformation may
seem to have approached your high Wisdom. We understand that it is collected
out of some late Dispatches from hence, that there are such disorders in the
Government here, as by the present Governors are remediless; all which is
ascribed to the differences between persons of chief place; We do in all
humility testifiie and declare that we have not seen or known any inconvenience
to the public service by the difference between your Majesty's Deputy and
Chancellor, neither have of late seen or heard any act or speech of contention
between them. Other difference between persons of any eminent Action we
understand none, neither are any disorders here yet so overgrown, as to
surpass the redress of the present Governor, especially so long as he has
such a standing English Army, as your Majesty now allows; if only we may
receive some supply of Arms and munition, which we have often written for, do
daily expect, and which shall be no loss to your Majesty. It is true, most
gracious Sovereign, that in some late dispatches we mentioned three grievances
in this government, which in extent may threaten much, if we be not timely
directed from thence concerning them, viz. the insolence and excrescence of the
Popish pretended Clergy, the disorder and offense of the Irish Regiment, and
the late outrageous presumption of the unsettled Irish, in some parts; toward
all which (being parties perhaps otherwise conceived of there, then understood
here) your Deputy and Council have of late used particular abstinence, holding
themselves somewhat limited concerning them, by late Instructions, Letters and
directions from thence. And therefore lest countenance of that course, might
turn to greater damage, we make choice seasonably to crave expression of the
good pleasure of your Highness, and the most Honorable Lords of your Council,
lest our actions and zeal therein might vary from the purposes on that side,
and so want of unanimity in both States, break the progress of the
Reformation; not that we any way make doubt to give your Majesty a good account
of our selves therein, and of the full eviction of those evils in due time, so
we might be assured of your Majestys and their Lordships good allowance of our
endeavors, being confident in all humility, to declare and affirm to your
Sacred Majesty, that the rest of this great body, (as to the civil part
thereof) is in far better order at this time, then ever it was in the memory of
man; as well in the current and general execution of Justice according to the
Laws, in the freedom of men's persons and estates, (the present charge of the
Army excepted) and in the Universal outward subjection of all sorts of settled
inhabitants to the Crown and Laws of England, and also in the advancement of
the Crown Revenues; and lastly, in the competent number of Bishops, and other
able and Learned Ministers of the Church of England of all sorts, which we
especially attribute to the blessedness of your time, and to the Industryes,
Zeal, Judgment and moderation of your Deputy, as well in your Majesty service,
as toward this people, having now well learned this great office; and to the
good beginnings of the two last precedent Deputies under direction of your most
Renowned Father.

Secondly, we understand that your Deputy and Council are blamed for the
present surcharge of your Revenues here, far beyond the support thereof.

Herein your Royal Majesty may be pleased to cause a review of our dispatch
from hence, in August 1627. wherein it will appear, that their part in that
offense has been only obedience to extraordinary warrants from thence, and
that if those warrants had not been fully performed out of your Revenues, you
had had about 40000 pound Irish to pay pensioners, in your Coffers, and answer
other necessities which have since increased.

So as we humbly crave pardon freely to affirm, that the fault has not been
here; and further also to say for your Majesty's honor and our comfort, that
during 200 years last past, England has never been so free of the charge of
Ireland, as now it is.

Thirdly, we understand that your Deputy is accused for miscarriage in the
legal prosecution of Phelim Match Frogh, and others adhering to him in certain
treasonable Acts and Practices Herein we most humbly beseech your Majesty, that
a review may be of a declaration sent from hence about the beginning of your
Deputies government, signed by him and all the Counsel then here, whereby will
appear how the parts of Lemster, at least, have been from age to age infested
by him and his predecessors, and the inhabitants of the territory of Ranelagh,
wherein he took upon him a Chiefery; and therein will also appear, that it
was the special affection and endeavor of several worthy Deputies here to have
cleared that offensive plot, which no wise State could suffer so near the seat
thereof, and that they also severally attempted it by force, the said Phelims
Father being slain by actual Rebellion by Sir William Russels prosecution; but
the general Rebellion of the Kingdom always interrupted the settlement
thereof. This being at that time the declaration of the State, moved your
Deputy, being a stranger, to have a wary aspect upon the people, for the Common
peace, which he has carefully performed. Afterward at the time when the
general voice was amongst the Irish, that the Spaniards would be here, your
Deputy had cause to examine several persons and causes concerning that Rumor
whereby fell out to be discovered to him among others, that this Phelim had
confederated for raising a Commotion in Lemster, and murdering a Scottish
Minister, and Justice of peace (a ready instrument in Crown Causes) inhabiting
about the border of the said territory. Before which time, we never heard of
any displeasure or hard measure born by your said Deputy to him, or offense
taken by him, at any particular done to him, unless he were offended that your
Deputy refused his money offered to blanch your Majesty's title to the Lands in
Ranlagh, now granted to undertakers, discovered and prosecuted at first by his
brother Redmond and his Council Peter de la Hoyd, We do also herein in all
humility testify, and declare that he acquainted several Privy Counselors
here, and others of Judgment with the same. And also in every Act and passage
thereof used the labor and presence, either of your Majesty's Privy
Concellours, Judges, or learned Council, always professing publicly and
privately (which we also in our consciences do believe) that he had no
particular envy or displeasure to Phelims's person, or any of his, neither had
any end in what might fall out upon that discovery or pains, or any act done
concerning that Country, other then the reducement thereof, to the conformity
of other civil parts; the common peace of your Majesty's good Subjects
adjacent, and the legal and plenary effecting of that which by so many good
governors in times of disturbance could not be done, there being no power in
him to make any particular benefit of the Escheate, either in lands or goods;
and before any thing was to be done for the trial of him and the rest for their
lives, he made a speedy and immediate address to your Majesty, dated 27. August
1628 upon the indictment found, to inform you of the then present estate of
that business, which we have seen, not doing it before (as he affirms) for
that he had formerly received gracious approbations of his proceedings in the
like discoveries.

We also in all humbleness and duty do declare and protest, that if upon their
evil demerits, and the due proceedings of Law, those now questioned may be
taken away, and the Territory settled in legal Government and English order,
(toward which a strong Fort is already almost built in the midst of it by your
Majesty's Undertakers lately planted there: It will be a service of the
greatest importment to bridle the Irish, assure the inhabitants of other Parts,
and strengthen the general peace of the Kingdom (next to the great Plantation
of Vlster) that has been done in this age. If otherwise they shall by fair
trial acquit the course of your Majesty's free and indifferent justice, it
will make them wary in point of duty and loyalty hereafter. And we do further
in all submission declare, That in these discoveries, (the persons and Causes
considered) it was of necessity that the personal pains of your Highness Deputy
should be bestowed; the rather, for that the Evidences being to be given for
the most part by persons involved in the same confederacyes, and who were to
become actors, they would not be drawn to confess truths to any inferior
Ministers, being of stubborn and malign spirits; besides the disswasions of
Priests, and of the Dependants and manifold Allies of the said Phelim, if they
had not been warily looked after.

Lastly, We in all humbleness of heart and freedom of faithful servants, do
beseech your most sacred Majesty to consider how much the sufferings of your
zealous servants may prove to your disservice, especially in this place, where
discouragement of your most dextrous service is most aimed at by multitudes of
several qualities, and cannot but soon perplex the present happy state of your
affairs. We beseech the eternal God to guide and prosper your Majesty's
advices and designs.

28. April 1629. Your most humble and obedient Subjects and Servants. Signed by
L. Primate V. Valentia V. Kilmallock V. Ranelagh. L. Dillon. L. Cauffeild, L.
Aungier L. Pr. of Munster L. Chief Justice Sr Adam Loftus Mr of the Wards L.
Chief Baron. Sr. Charles Coote.


Ab Ignoto, Of the Affairs of Spain, France and Italy, 5 Jan. 1629.
SIR,
THough it be now full three months since I received any line from you, yet I
dare not, nor will I for that respect discontinue my writing to you; and
because no private business occurreth, I will be bold to advise a line or two
concerning the public affairs of Italy: Cassal is still made good against the
Spanyard, not by the Duke of Mantua, for he poor Prince was long since
bankrupt, but by the succors of France and this Seignory, the former
contributing monthly 40000 Dollers, the latter 20000, not only to maintain the
Cassaleschi, but also to enable the Duke to stand fast against all other the
Spaniards attempts; mean while we hear say boldly, that a league offensive and
defensive against the Spaniards in Italy is concluded between the French and
the Venetians; and that the French King has already sent out two Armies, one
under the Duke of Guise by sea, who they say is landed at Nizza; the other
under the Marquess de Coeure, who is marching hitherward through the Valtoline;
and though I doubt something these proceedings of the French, yet I am sure the
Seignior does daily give out new Commissions for the levying of Soldiers in
that number, that now every one demands what strange enterprise this State has
in hand, and all jump in this, that it is against the Spanyard. The Pope is
still adverse to the Spanyard, and inclines strongly to the good of Italy,
animating this State to meet the French with a declaration, and the French to
conclude a peace on any honorable terms with us, that they may the more safely
follow their present designs, which is to suppress the Spaniards in Italy. his
Catholic Majesty has lost a great deal of credit in these parts, by the
loss of his Silver Fleet; and that he is in extreme want of money, is
collected here from the present state of some of his public Ministers. Ognat
his ordinary Ambassador at Rome, being lately recalled, in stead of going home
into Spain, has retired himself privately to Monte Pincio, being in such
praemunire that he is not able to accommodate himself with necessaries for his
journey. And Mounterei who is to succeed him is arrived as far Sienna, but being
foundred in his purse, is able to get no farther, mean while, living there in
an Inn. Moreover the Merchants in Rome, are advised by their correspodents in
Spain, to be wary in letting either of them have moneys; this is from a good
hand in Rome. Sir Kenelm Digby has lately been at Delos, where he has laden
great store of Marble, he is said to be in very good plight and Condition. I
trouble you no more.

Your faithful servant, C. H.
Venice 5. January 1629. Stilo novo.
The Lords of the Council of England, to the Lords of the Council in Ireland,
31 Jan. 1629.
BY your Letter dated the ninth of January we understand how the seditious riot
moved by the Friars and their adherents at Dublin, has by your good order and
resolution been happly suppressed, and we doubt not but by this occasion, you
will consider how much it concerns the good Government of that Kingdom, to
present in time the first growing of such evils; for where such people be
permitted to swarm, they will soon grow licentious, and endure no government but
their own, which cannot otherwise be restored then by a due and seasonable
execution of the Law, and of such directions as from time to time have been
sent from his Majesty and this Board. Now it redoundeth much to the honor of
his Majesty, that the world shall take notice of the ability and good service
of his Ministers there, which in person he has been pleased openly in Council,
and in most gracious manner to approve and commend; whereby you may be
sufficiently encouraged to go on with like resolution and moderation, til the
work be solely done, as well in City as in other places of your Kingdom, the
carriage whereof we must leave to your good discretions, whose particular
knowledge of the present state of things can guide you better, when and where
to carry a soft or harder hand; only this we hold necessary to put you in mind,
that you continue in that good agreement amongst your selves, for this and
other services which your Letrers do express; and for which we commend you
much, that the good servants of the King and state may find encouragement
equally from you all; and the ill affected may find no support or countenance
from any; nor any other connivances used but by general advice, for avoiding of
further evils, shall be allowed; and such Magistrates and Officers, if any shall
be discovered that openly or underhand favor such disorders, or do not their
duties in suppressing them, and committing the offenders, you shall do well to
take all fit and safe advantages, by the punishment or displacing of a few, to
make the rest more cautious. This we write, not as misliking the fair course
you have taken; but to express the concurrency of our Judgments with yours,
and to assure you of our assistance in all such occasions wherein for your
further proceedings, we have advised. And his Majesty requires you accordingly
to take order, first that the house wherein Seminary Friars appeared in their
habits, and wherein the Reverend Archbishop, and the Mayor of Dublin received
the first affront, be spedily demolished, and be the mark of terror to the
resisters of Authority, and that the rest of the houses erected or employed
there, or elsewhere to the use of suspicious societies, be converted to houses
of correction, and to set the people on work, or to other public uses, for the
advancement of Justice, good Arts or Trades; and further, that you use all fit
means to discover the Founders, Benefactors and Maintainers of such Societies
and Colleges, and certify their names, and that you find out the Lands,
Leases, or Revenues applied to their uses, and dispose thereof according to the
Law, and that you certify also the places and institutions of all such
Monasteries, Priories, Nunneries, and other Religious houses, and the names of
all such persons as have put themselves to be brothers and sisters therein,
especially such as are of note, to the end such evil plants be not permitted to
take root any where in that Kingdom, which we require you take care of. For
the supply of Munition which you have reason to desire, we have taken
effectual order that you shall receive it with all convenient speed. And so
etc.

Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord President. Lord Privy Seal. L. high
Chamberlain. Earl of Suffolk. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Salisbury. Earl of Kelly.
Lord Viscount Dorchester. Lord Newbergh. Mr. Vice Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary
Cook. Sir William Alexander.


The Lord Faulkland's Petition to the King.
MOst humbly showing, that I had a Son, until I lost him in your Highness
displeasure, where I cannot seek him because I have not will to find him
there. Men say, there is a wild young man now prisoner in the Fleet, for
measuring his actions by his own private sense. But now that for the same your
Majesty's hand has appeared in his punishment, he bows and humbles himself
before and to it: whether he be mine or not, I can discern by no light, but
that of your Royal Clemency; for only in your forgiveness can I own him for
mine. Forgivennesse is the glory of the supremest powers, and this the
operation, that when it is extended in the greatest measure, it converts the
greatest offenders into the greatest lovers, and so makes purchase of the
heart, an especial privilege peculiar and due to Sovereign Princes.

If now your Majesty will vouchsafe out of your own benignity, to become a
second nature, and restore that unto me which the first gave me, and vanity
deprived me of, I shall keep my reckoning of the full number of my sons with
comfort, and render the tribute of my most humble thankfulness, else my weak
old memory must forget one.

The Duke of Modena to the Duke of Savoy. July 30. 1629.
WHen I was deprived of my Mistress the Infanta Izabella, so intimately beloved
of me, I was suddenly possessed with a most ardent desire of finding the means
how to follow her into Paradise; and distrusting in regard of my weakness and
life past, that I was not able to stand in those dangers wherein that holy
soul knew how to find security and tranquillity, I resolved to retire my
self out of the tempestuous sea of Government, and to shelter my self in the
harbor of Religion, rejoicing to sacrifice that unto God, which uses to be so
highly esteemed in the world; and knowing that truly to reign, is to serve
his Divine Majesty, hitherto I deferred the execution of my purpose, because
being bound in this, to depend upon the Counsel of him that governed my soul,
it seemed not expedient to him, that I should retire my self while there was
need of my assistance, both in respect of the age of the Duke my father (which
was Caesar d'Este, who dyed 1628) and of the nonage of the Prince my son (which
is Don Francisco, who now governs.) Now that these impediments are removed, I
go most contentedly whither the Lord does call me, namely, to take upon me the
Capuchin Religion out of Italy; and I do promise to find for my self in one
little Cel, that repose which all the greatness of the world cannot give me.
True it is, if I should look back upon my life past, I should find motives
rather of terror, then of comfort: But the mercy of God does make me
confident, and my having (for his love, and to perform his will) renounced all
that I could or had, I departed also most comforted, because I leave the Prince
my son so well qualified, that I may confidently expect an excellent issue of
his Government, especially if your Highness shall vouchsafe to direct him with
your most prudent Counsels, and to shroud him under your benign protection,
whereunto with reverent affection I do recommend him together with the rest of
my sons, especially Carlo Alexandro (who is now living in your Highness his
Court) since that (as a man may say) they have no other Father then your
Highness, and are branches of your Princely house.

Unto your Highness was in all respects due from me the account which I have
given you of my vocation; I beseech you to accept it, and to believe that I
will always be answerable to my duty, and will pray for the spiritual and
temporal increase of your Highness, whose hands I reverently kiss.

Your Highness most humble and most obliged servant, Alfons. d' Este.
From Salsuolo the 30th of July, 1629.
Sir Kenhelm Digby to Sir Edward Stradling.
To my Honorable Friend Sir Edward Esterling, alias Stradling, aboard his
ship.
MY much honored friend, I am too well acquainted with the weakness of my
abilities (that are far unfit to undergo such a task as I have in hand) to
flatter my self with the hope that I may either inform your understanding, or
do my self honor by what I am to write. But I am so desirous that you should
be possessed with the true knowledge of what a bent will I have upon all
occasions to do you service, that obedience to your Command weighs much more
with me then the lawfulness of my excuse can, to preserve me from giving you
in writing such a testimony of my ignorance and erring fantasy, as I fear this
will prove. Therefore without any more circumstances, I will as near as I can,
deliver to you in this paper, what the other day I discoursed to you, upon the
22d Staff of the ninth Canto in the second book of that matchless Poem, The
Fairy Queen, written by our English Virgil, whose words are these.

The Frame thereof seemed partly Circuler,
And part Trianguler: O work Divine!
These two the first and last proportions are,
The One imperfect, mortal, faeminine;
The Other immortal, perfect, masculine:
And twixt them both a quadrat was the base,
Proportioned equally, by seven, and nine;
Nine was the Circle set in heavens place,
All which compacted, made a goodly Diapase.
In this Staff the Author seems to me to proceed in a differing manner from
what he does elsewhere generally through his whole book, for in other places,
although the beginning of this Allegory or mistical sense may be obscure, yet
in the process of it he does himself declare his own conceptions in such
sort, that they are obvious to any ordinary capacity: But in this, he seems
only to glance at the profoundest notions that any science can deliver to us;
and then of a sudden, as it were recalling himself out of an Enthusiasme, he
returns to the gentle relation of the Allegorical history that he had begun,
leaving his readers to wander up and down in much obscurity, and to rove with
much danger of erring at his intention in these lines; which I conceive to be
dictated by such a learned spirit, and so generally a knowing soul, that were
there nothing else extant of Spencers writings, yet these few words would make
me esteem him no whit inferior to the most famous men that ever have been in
any age, as giving an evident testimony herein, that he was thoroughly versed in
the Mathemeticall sciences, in Philosophy and Divinity, unto all which this
might serve for an ample Theme to make large Commentaries upon; In my praises
upon this subject I am confident, that the worth of the Author will preserve me
from this censure, that my ignorance only begets this admiration, since he
has written nothing that is not admirable. But that it may appear, I am
guided somewhat by my own Judgment, (although it be a very mean one) and not
by implicit faith, and that I may in the best manner I can comply with what you
may expect from me, I will not longer hold you in suspense, but begin
immediately (though abruptly) with the declaration of what I conceive to be the
true sense of this place; which I shall not go about to adorn with any
plausible discourses, or with authorities and examples drawn from others
writings; (since my want both of convenience and learning would make me fall
very short herein) but it shall be enough for me to intimate my conceptions,
and to offer them up unto you in their own simple and naked form, leaving to
your better Judgment, the examination of the weight of them; and after perusal
of them, beseeching you to reduce me, if you perceive me to err. It is
evident, that the Authors intention in this Canto, is to describe the body of
man informed with a rational soul; and in prosecution of that design, he
sets down particularly the several parts of the one, and the faculties of
the other. But in this Stanza he comprehends the general description of them
both, as (being joined together to frame a complete man) they make one perfect
compound, which will appear better by taking a survey of every several Clause
thereof by it self.

The frame thereof seemed partly circuler,
And part trianguler. --
By these figures, I conceive that he means the Mind and the Body of man, the
first being by him compared to a Circle, and the latter to a Triangle; for as
the Circle of all figures is the most perfect, and includes the greatest
space, and is every way full, and without angles, made by the continuation of
one only line; so man's soul is the noblest and most beautiful creature that
God has created, and by it we are capable of the greatest gifts which God can
bestow, which are Grace, Glory, and Hypostatical union of the humane Nature to
the divine: and she enjoys perfect freedom and liberty in all other actions,
and is made without composition, (which no figures are that have angles; for
they are caused by the coincidence of several lines) but of one pure substance,
which was by God breathed into a body made of such compounded earth, as in the
preceding Stanza the Author describes; and this is the exact image of him that
breathed it, representing him as fully as it is possible for any creature,
which is infinitely distant from the Creator. For as God has neither beginning
nor ending, so neither of these can be found in a Circle; although that being
made of the successive motion of a line, it must be supposed to have a
beginning somewhere. God is compared to a circle whose center is every where,
but whose Circumference no where; but man's soul is a circle whose circumference
is limited by the true center of it, which is only God. For as a circumference
does in all parts alike respect that indivisible point, and as all lines drawn
from the inner side of it, do make right angles with it when they meet therein;
so all the interior actions of man's soul ought to have no other respective
point to direct themselves unto but God: and as long as they make right angles,
which is, that they keep the exact middle of virtue, and decline not to either
of the sides where the contrary vices dwell, they cannot fail but meet in their
Center.

By the Trianguler figure he very aptly designeth the Body: For as the Circle
is of all other figures the most perfect, and most capacious; so the Triangle
is the most imperfect, and includes the least space: It is the first and
lowest of all figures; for fewer then three right lines cannot comprehend and
enclose a superficies; having but three angles, they are all acutes (if it be
equilateral) and but equal to two right ones; in which respect all other
regular figures consisting of more then three lines, do exceed it: May not
these be resembled to the three great and compounded Elements in man's body, to
wit, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury? which mingled together, do make the natural
heat, and radical moisture, the two qualities whereby man lives: for the more
lines that do go to comprehend a figure, the more and greater the angles are,
and the nearer it comes to the perfection of a Circle.

A Triangle is composed of several lines, and they of points which yet do not
make a quantity by being contiguous one to another, but rather the motion of
them does describe the lines. In like manner the Body of man is compounded of
the four Elements, which are made by the four primary qualities, not compounded
of them (for they are but accidents;) but by their operation upon the first
matter.

And as a Triangle has three lines, so a solid body has three dimensions, to
wit, Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity: but of all bodies man's is of the
lowest rank (as the Triangle is among figures) being composed of the Elements,
which make it liable to alteration and corruption. In which consideration of
the dignity of bodies, I divide them by a general division, into sublunary,
which are the elementated ones; and into the ethereal (which are supposed to be
of their own nature incorruptible:) and peradventure there are some other
species of corporeal substances, which is not in this place to dispute.

-- O work Divine! Certainly of all Gods works the noblest and the perfectest
is man; and for whom indeed all others were done; for if we consider his soul,
it is the very Image of God; if his body, it is adorned with the greatest
beauty and excellent symmetry of parts of any created thing, whereby it
witnesses the perfection of the Architect, that of so drossie mould is able to
make so excellent a Fabric: if his operations, they are free; if his end, it
is eternal glory; and if you take him altogether, man is a little world, an
exact type of the great world, and of God himself.

But in all this me thinks that the admirable work is the joining together
of the two different, and indeed opposite substances in man to make one perfect
compound; the soul and the body, which are of so contrary a nature, that their
uniting seems to be a miracle: for how can one inform and work in the other,
since there is no mean of operation (that we know) between a spiritual
substance and a Corporal? yet we see that it does. As hard it is to find the
true proportion between a Circle and a Triangle, yet that there is a just
proportion; and that they may be equal, Archimides has left us an ingenious
demonstration: but in reducing it to a Problem, it fails in this, That
because the proportion between a crooked line and a straight one is not known,
one must make use of a mechanical way of measuring the Peripherie of the one,
to convert it into the side of the other.

These two the first and last proportions are. What I have already said
concerning a Circle and a Triangle, does sufficiently unfold what is meant in
this verse; yet it will not be amiss to speak one word more hereof in this
place, All things that have existence may be divided into three Classes; which
are, either what is pure and simple in it self, or what has a nature
compounded of what is simple, or what has a nature compounded of what is
compounded. In continued quantity this may be exemplified by a point, a line,
and a superficies, or body; and in numbers by an Unity, a Denary, and a
Centenary. The first, which is only pure and single, like an indivisible
point, or an Unity, has relation only to the Divine Nature; that point then
moving i^ a sphericall manner (which serves to express the perfections of Gods
actions) describes the circle of our souls, and of Angels, and of intellectual
substances, which are of a pure and simple nature, but receives that from what
is so in a perfecter manner, and that has his from none else: like lines that
are made from the flowing of points, or denaries that are composed of unities,
beyond both which there is nothing.

In the last place bodies are to be ranked, which are composed of the Elements,
and they likewise suffer composition, and may very well be compared to the
lowest of figures which are composed of lines, that owe their being to points
(and such are Triangles); or to Centenaries, that are composed of Denaries, and
they of Unites: but if we will compare these together by proportion, God must
be left out, since there is an infinite distance between the simplicity and
perfection of his nature, and the composition and imperfection of all created
substances, as there is between an indivisible point and a continuate quantity;
or between a simple unity, and compounded number: so that only the other two
kinds of substances do enter into this consideration, and of them I have
already proved, that man's soul is of the one the noblest, being dignified by
Hypostaticall union above all other intellectual substances, and his
elementated body of the other, the most low and corruptible; whereby it is
evident, that these two are the first and last proportions both in respect of
their own figure, and of what they express.

The one imperfect, mortal, faeminine,
The Other immortal, perfect, masculine.
Man's body has all the properties, of imperfect matter, it is but the patient,
of it self alone it can do nothing, it is liable to corruption and dissolution
if it once be deprived of the form, which actuateth it self, and is
incorruptible and immortal.

And as the feminine sex is imperfect, and receives perfection from the
masculine, so does the body from the soul, which to it is in lieu of a Male;
and as in corporal generations the Female does afford but gross and passive
matter, unto which the Male gives active heat and prolificall virtue; so in
spiritual generations, (which are the operations of the Mind) the body
administreth only the Organs, which if they were not employed by the Soul,
would of themselves serve to nothing. And as there is a mutual appetence
between the male and the female, between matter and form, so there is between
the body and soul of a man; but what ligament they have, that our Author
defines not; (and peradventure Reason is not able to attain unto it) yet he
tells us what is the Foundation that this Machine rests upon, and what
keeps the Parts together, in these words: And 'twixt them both a Quadrat was
the base.

By which Quadrat, I conceive, that he means the four principal humors in
man's body, to wit, Choler, Blood, Phlegm and Melancholy; which if they be
distempered and unfitly mingled, the dissolution of the whole does ensue; like
to a building, which falls to ruin if the Foundation or Base of it be
unsound or disordered: and in some of these the vital spirits are contained
and preserved, which the other do keep in a convenient temper; and as long as
they do so, the soul and the body dwell together like good friends: So that
these four are the Base of the conjunction of the other two; both which he
says, are Proportioned equally by Seven and Nine.

In which words, I understand, that he means the influences of the superior
substances, which govern the inferior into these two differing parts of man,
to wit, of the Stars (the most powerful of which are the seven Planets) into
his body; and of the Angels (which are divided into nine Hierarchies or Orders)
into the soul, which in his Astrophel he says, is By Sovereign choice from the
Heavenly Quires select,
And lineally derived from Angels race.


And as much as the one do govern the body, so much the other do the mind:
wherein it is to be considered, that some are of opinion, how at the instant of
the conception of a child, or rather, more effectually at the instant of his
birth, the conceived Sperme, or the tender body does receive such influence of
the heavens as then reigns over that place where the conception or birth is
made; and all the Stars and virtuall places of the Celestial Orbs
participating of the qualities of the seven planets; according to the which
they are distributed into so many Classes, or the compounds of them, it comes
to pass that according to the variety of the several aspects of the one and of
the other, there are various inclinations and qualities in men's bodies, but all
reduced to seven general heads, and the Compounds of them; which being to be
varied innumerable ways, causes as many different effects, yet the influence
of some one planet continually predominating: but when the matter in the woman's
womb is capable of a soul to inform it, then God sends one from heaven into
it.

-- Eternal God.
In Paradise whilome did plant this flower,
Whence he it fetched out of her native place,
And did in stock of earthly flesh enrace.
And this opinion the Author expresses himself more plainly to be of, in
another work, where he says, There She beholds with high aspiring thought,
The Cradle of her own Creation,
Amongst the seats of Angels, heavenly wrought.


Which whether it has been created ever since the beginning of the world, and
reserved in some fit place until due time, or be created upon the Emergent,
occasion no man can tell; but certain it is, that it is immortal, according to
that I said when I spoke of the Circle, which has no ending, and an uncertain
beginning.

The messengers to convey which soul into the body, are the Intelligences that
move the Orbs of heaven, who according to their several natures do communicate
unto it several proprieties, and they who are governors of those Stars that
have at that instant, the superiority in the Planetary aspects; whereby it
comes to pass that in all inclinations, there is much affinity between the
soul and the body, being that the like is between the Intelligences and the
Stars, both which communicate their virtues to each of them. And these Angels
being, as I said before, of nine several Hierarchies, there are so many
principal differences in humane souls, which do participate most of their
proprieties with whom in their descent they make longest stay, and that had
most active power to work upon them, and accompanied them with a peculiar
Genius; which is according to their several governments like the same kind of
water that running through various conduits, wherein several aromatical and
odoriferous things are laid, does acquire several kinds of taste and smells;
for it is supposed, that in their first Creation all souls are alike, and that
their differing proprieteis arrive unto them afterward, when they pass
through the spheers of the governing Intelligences; so that by such their
influence it may truly be said, Nine was the Circle set in heavens place.

Which verse by assigning his office to the nine, and the proper place of the
Circle, does give much light to what is said before.

And for further confirmation that this is he Authors opinion, read attentively
the sixth Canto of the third book, where most learnedly and at large, he
delivers the Tenets of this Philosophy; and of that, I recommend to you to
take particular notice of the second, and thirty second Stanzaes, and also of
the last staff of his Epithalamium; and surveying his works, you shall find
him constant disciple of Plato's School.

All which compacted, made a goodly Diapase. In nature there is not to be found
a more complete and more excellent concordance of all parts, then that which is
between the compaction and uniting together of the body and soul of man, both
which although they consist of many and most differing faculties and parts, yet
when they keep due time with one another, do altogether make the most perfect
harmony that can be imagined; and as the nature of sounds, (that consist of
friendly consonants and accords) is to mingle with one another, and to slide
into the ear with much sweetness, where by their unity they last a long time,
and delight it; whereas on the contrary side, discords do continually jar, and
fight together, and will not mingle with one another, but all of them striving
to have the victory, their reluctation and disorder gives a soon end to
their sounds, which strike the ear in a harsh and offensive manner, and they
die in the very beginning of their conflict. In like sort, when a man's actions
are regular, and that being directed toward God, they become like the lines of
a Circle which all meet in the Center, then his music is excellent and
complete, and all together are the Authors of that blessed harmony which
makes, him hapyy in the glorious vision of Gods perfections, wherein the mind
is filled with high knowledges and most pleasing contemplations, and the senses
are as it were drowned with eternal delight; and nothing can interrupt this
joy, this happiness which is an everlasting Diapase: whereas on the contrary
part, if a man's actions be disorderly and consisting; of discord, which is When
the sensitive part rebelleth and wrastleth with the rational, and striveth to
oppress it, then this Music is spoiled and instead of eternal life, pleasure,
and joy, it causes perpetual death, horror, pain, and misery, which
unfortunate estate the Poet describes elsewhere, as in the conclusion of this
staff he intimates. The other happy one, which is the never failing reward of
such an obedient body, and etherial and virtuous mind, as he makes to be the
seat of the bright Virgin Alma, man's worthyest inhabitant, Reason; her I feel
to speak within me, and to chide me for my bold attempt, warning me to stray no
further: for what I have said, (considering how weakly it is said) your
Commandment is all that I can pretend in excuse; but since my desire to obey
may as well be seen in a few lines, as in a large discourse, it were
indiscretion in me to trouble you with more words, and to discover unto you
more of my ignorance. I will only beg pardon of you for this blotted and
interlyned paper, whose contents are so mean, that it cannot deserve the pains
of a transcription, which if you make difficulty to grant unto it for my sake,
let it obtain it for having been yours, and now returning again to you, as
also does the book that contains my text which yesterday you sent me, to fit
this part of it with a Comment: which peradventure I might have performed
better, if either I had afforded my self more time, or had had the convenience
of some other books apt to quicken my invention, to whom I might have been
beholding, for enlarging my understanding in some things that are treated here,
although the application should still have been my own; with these two helps,
peradventure I might have dived farther into the Authors intention, the depth
of which cannot be sounded by any that is less learned then he was. But I
persuade my self very strongly, that in what I have said, there is nothing
contradictorie to it; and that an intelligent and well read man, proceeding
upon my grounds, might compose a worthy and true Commentary upon this Theme;
upon which, I wonder how I stumbled, considering how many learned men have
failed in the interpreting of it, and have all approved my opinion at the first
hearing it: but it was fortune that made me to light upon it, when first this
Stanza was read unto me for an undissoluble riddle: and the same discourse that
I made upon it, the first half quarter of an hour that I saw it, I send it
you here, without having reduced it to any better form, or added any thing at
all unto it; which I beseech you receive benignely, as coming from

Your Most affectionate Friend and humble Servant, Kenhelm Digby.

Master Gargrave to the Lord Davers.
MY very good Lord, I have heretofore many times both sent and written to you
touching the insupportable burden of wrong which has many years lain upon my
shoulders, but you were not pleased to return me any answer for my
satisfaction therein: my opinion at the first, was, that it was merely the
respect of some, whom you would not, or might not offend, that you suffered
your name to be used by others to wound and afflict me in my estate: to which
so fair an opinion, I was induced partly by ancient Judgment of your honorable
disposition, partly and much rather by the privity of my heart, which ever
constantly affected a good correspondency with you every way. But since now
this oppression which I suffer, has had its continuance so many years without
relaxation, in which I smart beyond all example, and the admiration of the
world has concurred with my sense of so great a bitterness from so near
Allies; I cannot but to my grief and wonder observe your too much either
consent or connivency to these my harms, which before I have not easily
suffered my thoughts to admit; wherein if I have not mistaken your Lordships
interest, I have yet conceived hope, that although you had in the beginning a
just ground to make me feel the weight of your displeasure and alienation from
me, yet that the sufferance of so many years, and such a sufferance under
pretense of Justice, as can hardly be paralleled, might yet at the last, have
satiated a very deeply intended revenge, much more satisfied a moderate mind
possessed with Honor or Religion, as I conceive your Lordships to be. Herein,
after a various agitation in my self, I am enforced to honor the wonderful
providence of God, who has pleased to convert the affinity which I affected
with your Noble house, for my comfort and assistance, to my ruin; and that in
the bosom of our nearest and dearest friendship, should breed so intestine a
hatred, as should tend to the overthrow of my credit, wealth, lands, liberty,
house, wife, and children, and all those comforts which should either support
or sweeten the life of man.

Wherefore I have adventured after so long silence, to mind your Lordship of
this my unfortunate estate, wherein I rather die then live, whereunto I have
been so long since precipitated by your Lordships countenance as I hope,
pretended only by the instruments of my mischief to proceed from you; that if
now your Lordship shall think it enough that I have so many years, so many
ways endured the crosses of so high a nature, and can be induced to affect a
reparation, or at least a determination of those injuries which undeservedly
have been heaped upon me, I may yet at length conclude this Tragedy of my life
past with some comfortable fruit of that love and kindness which at the first
I aimed at in seeking your Lordships Alliance, and which I endeavored to
deserve for the continuance, and which after so long intermission, I shall
think my self happy to enjoy, if so be your Lordship shall out of your
charitable consideration think my motion to concur with my desire that I may
not be enforced to advance my complaint further, which I wish may be prevented
by this my Expostulation, springing from the sense of so great and intolerable
a misery wherein I languish every day.

A Declaration of Ferdinand Infanta of Spain. 5 July, 1636.
Unto all those to whom this present Writing shall come, greeting.
FRance having contrary to reason and justice moved and maintained War in the
States of the Emperor, and of my Lord the King, given extraordinary Succors
both of men and money, to their rebellious subjects; procured the Swedes to
invade the Empire, received and bought of them the Towns of Alsatia, and other
hereditary Countries of our most Royal House, not sparing the Catholic League
it self, which had taken Arms for no other end but for the good of Religion.
And it being notorious, that the same France, (after all these public and
manifest contraventions to the Treaties of Peace) has finally proceeded to a
breach thereof: whereas we rather had cause to denounce the War, in that she
has sent her Armies to overrun the Low Countries, the Duchy of Millain, and
other Feoffs of the Empire in Italy, and now lately the Country of Burgundy;
contrary to the Laws of Neutrality, contrary to the Public Faith, and
contrary to the express promises of the Prince of Conde: Disguising in the
mean time, these attempts and breaches of Faith before all Christendom, with
certain weak pretexts and false surmises, contained in diverse Declarations,
approved in the Parliament of France; and accompanying all these unjust
proceedings with sundry Insolences, Calumnies and Contempts of sacred persons.
And having also observed, that this so long continence of ours at so manifold
injuries has served to no other purpose, but to make our enemies more
audacious and insolent, and that the compassion we have had of France has
drawn on the ruin of those whom God had put under the obedience of their
Majesty's: For these considerations, according to the power which we have
received from his Imperial Majesty, we have commanded our Armies to enter
into France, with no other purpose then to oblige the King of France to come to
a good and secure Peace, for removing those impediments, which may hinder this
so great a good. And for as much as it principally concerns France to give
end to these disorders, we are willing to believe that all the Estates of that
Kingdom will contribute not only their remonstrances, but also if need be,
their forces to dispose their King to Chastise those who have been the Authors
of all these Wars, which these seven or eight years past have been in
Christendom; and who after they have provoked and assailed all their
neighbors, have brought upon France all those evils which she does now suffer,
and draw on her those other which do now threaten her. And although we are well
informed of the weakness and devisions, into which these great disorders and
evil counsels have cast her; yet we declare, that the intentions of their
Mastjesties, are not to serve themselves of this occasion to ruin her, or to
draw from thence any other profit, then by that means to work a Peace in
Christendom, which may be stable and permanent.

For these reasons, and withal to show what Estimation their Majesty's do make
of the prayers of the Queen Mother of the most Christian King, we do give to
understand, that we will protect and treat as friends all those of the French
Nation, who either jointly or severally shall second these our good designs;
and have given Order that Neutrality shall be held with those of the Nobility,
and with the Towns which shall desire it, and which shall refuse to assist those
who shall oppose the good of Christendom, and their own safety; against whom
shall be used all manner of hostility, without giving quarter to their persons,
or sparing either their houses or goods. And our further will is, that all men
take notice that it is the resolution of their Majesty's not to lay down Arms,
til the Queen Mother of the most Christian King be satisfied and contented,
til the Princes, unjustly driven out of their estates, be restored; and til
they see the assurances of peace more certain then to be disturbed by him who
has violated the treaties of Ratisbone, and others made before, and sithence
he has had the managing of the affairs of France. Neither do we pretend to
draw any other advantage from the good success, which it shall please God to
give unto our just prosecutions, then to preserve and augment the Catholic
Religion, to pacify Europe, to relieve the oppressed, and to restore to every
one that which of right belongs unto him.

Given at Ments, the fifth of July. 1636.
FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table of the most Remarkable Things.
A
AGnus Dei 38 Alchimie 75 Alchoran false, because not to be disputed 194
Alfons. d'Este turns Capuchin. 243 Ancre Marquess would get the Duchy of
Alanson and Constables Office into his hands, in arere to the Crown of France
for 80000 pounds 195 Anderson Edmund 73 Anne of Bullen Queen of England sues to
King Henry, that her enemies may not be her accusers and Judges, protests her
innocence, declares the cause of the Kings change, begs the lives of her
brother, and the other Gentlemen, 9, 10 Archbishop of Dublin affronted by the
Friars 241 Ashton Sir Walter 130, 132, 138, 139 Austria House 114
B.
Bacon Sir Nicholas, Lord Keeper, 69. Antony and Francis friends to the Earl of
Essex, 32. Francis after Lord Verulam, and Viscount St. Alban, his discourses
to the Earl concerning Ireland, 42, 43, etc. concerning Tyrone, 44. his huge
opinion of the Earl of Essex 45 46 47. against the Subsidy in Parliament; how,
54 68. makes ways to get into King James his favor, 56 58. expostulates with,
and advises Sir Edward Cook 60 61. expostulates with Sir Vincent Skinner 66.
would be Solicitor 68 69 71. his good services to the Crown 72 See Bodley Sir
Thomas.
Balsac impudently abuses King James and Qu. Elizabeth, 198, 199. flatters the
French King grossly 200 201 Barbarians of old placed justice and felicity in the
sharpness of their swords 47 Bavaria Duke linked with the House of Austria
135. designed Elector of Rhine 113. seiseth part of the Palatinate 131 Bevayr
Chancellor of France discharged, complains to the King of the Government, 193
194 195 196. Commanded to discharge an account for 80000 li. 195. has no other
fault, but that he is an honest man 196 Bishops, in what manner parts of the
Commonwealth 5. submitted to Kings 6. chief against the Mass 233. too remiss
185 Bodeley Sir Thomas against Sir Francis Bacons new Philosophy 74 75 76. For
settled opinions and Theoremes 76 77 78 Bouillon Duke 37 198 Bristol Earl. See
Digby Lord. Brograve Attorney of the Duchy, 69 Broke George 79 80 Brunswic
Christian Duke 148 Buckingham Duke chosen Chancellor of Cambridg 213.
unkindness between him and Bristol, 151. and Olivarez, ibid. murdered 220. See
Charles King. Burleigh Lord for Kings, and against usurpation 136
C
Caecil Sir Robert after Earl of Salisbury, in France 36. a friend to Sir
Francis Bacon 69 70 Caesar d' Este Du. of Modena 243 Calvinists dangerous 112
Cambridg, differences betwixt the Town and University 223 Car Earl of Somerset
86 Carlo Don Infant of Spain 126 Carlo Alessandro of Modena 243 Carlton Sir
Dudley Ambassador in the Low Countries 145 Caron Sir Noel Ambassador in
England from the Low Countries 92 93 Cassal S. Vas beleaguered by the Spaniard
239 Causes of conscience growing to be faction 38 Charles King of great
Britain, engagement of his person in Spain, cause why things were not carried
on to the height 151 See Gregory Pope His piety and care toward the Hugonots of
France 206. acknowledged by them after the loss of Rochel 208 209. his opinion
of the Duke of Buckingham 214 215. A great lover of the University of Cambridg,
220 223. will rule according to the Laws, will give the Judges leave to deliver
and bail prisoners according to Magna Charta and the Statutes, 231. forbids
hearing of Mass 232. careful to root out Papistry in Ireland 242. commands the
house in Dublin to be pulled down where the Friars appeared in their habits 241

Charles the Fifth 145 Church Orders by K. James, 193 of England, its service
damnable by the Popes decree 40 Clergy where punished 6 Cleves and Juliers
pretended to, 123 124 Clifford Sir Coniers 42 Coeur Marquess 240 Coke Sir
Edward disgraces Sir Francis Bacon 60. described 62 63 College of Dublin 52
Colomma Don Carlo 152 Commission for the Deputies place of Ireland 13. for
delivery of Vlushing Bril, etc. 9^ 93. of union of the Kingdoms 72 Conde Prince
204 254 Conscience not to be forced 51 Considerations touching the service in
Ireland 49 50 Constable of France, the Office intended to be taken away by
Henry the Great 195 Cornwallis Sir Charles Ambassador in Spain 95 Cottington
Sir Francis, after Lord 130 Critory Secretary of France 38 Custom of Spain to
give notice of visits 120
D
Danish King 95 148 149 Davers Lord 253 Davison Secretary in disgrace 22 See
Essex Earl.
Defiance to the Emperor Maximilian from the Grand Seignieur 12 Deputy of
Ireland his power 13 14 Desmond Earl dissembles dutifulness 18. his Rebellion
45 Digby Lord after Earl of Bristol, in Spain, treats concerning the Match, 117
118 119 120 121, etc. zealous for it, 138 139 140 142 Sir Kenhelm 240 244. See
Fairy Queen.

Directions for preaching 184, etc. Discipline, See Presbytery. Disloyalty, the
doom of it seldom adjourned to the next world, 46
E
Egerton Sir Thomas Lord Ellesmere and Lord Chancellor, a friend to the Earl
of Essex 27 87 to Sir Francis Bacon 71 sues to be discharged 87 88 89 Elizabeth
Queen of England comforts the Lady Norris 10 11 her care for Ireland 5 16 50.
cast not off her creatures slightly, 32. Questions the Earl of Essex in the
Star Chamber unwillingly and forced 32 33. Her Government in things
Ecclesiastical, she will not force men's consciences, 38 39 40. her dealing with
Papists 39 See Walsingham Sir Francis. Gives stipends to preachers 52 Essex
Earl, a lover of Secretary Davison 20 21, etc. would bring him again into
favor, 22 25. writes to King James in his defense 23. to the Queen, being
less graced and discontented, 25 26. will not approve the Chancellors advice,
29. suddenly before his Rebellion, Religious 35
F
Fairy Queen, the 22d Staff of the ninth Canto of the second Book discoursed
of by Sir Kenhelm Digby 244 etc. Faulkland Viscount Lord Deputy of Ireland 235
236. Petitions the King for his son imprisoned in the Fleet 242 Ferdinand the
second will not restore the Palatine 112 113 etc. aims to settle the Empire
perpetually in the house of Austria, 113. abuses K. James, 113 115 116 146 his
Armies in Italy. 234 235 Ferdinand Infanta of Spain 254 Feria Duke 102
Fitzwilliams Sir William 42 Frederic father 123 Frederic the 2d Palatine 146
147 Frederic the fifth, driven out of his estates 112 113 116. will not quit
the electorat^ nor submit 145. see 198 French, the estate of things in the
minority of Lewis the thirteenth 195. authority of the French King ibid. French
Kings reverence the exhortations of Popes as much as the Commands of God 213
G
Gabor Bethlem Prince of Transylvania 113 146 Gage employed at Rome 129 130
Giron Don Hernando 130 Gondomar Conde 130 Gregory the 15 puts the Inquisitor
General of Spain upon it to gain the Prince of Wales to the Church of Rome,
fearful of his stay in the Spanish Court 210 unreasonable in the business of
the dispensation 130 Groillart Claude President of the Parliament of Rhoan 36
Guise Duke 240
H
Heretics abuse Scripture 2 Hall Bishop of Exceter 229 Harrington Sir Henry 18
Heidelberg taken by the Spaniards 127 Henry the 8 writes to the Clergy of York
in defense of his title, Caput Ecclesiae 1 2 3 4 5 etc. Henry the 4 of France
36 Hessen Landgrave Philip 145 Homily books 184 Hoskins Sir Thomas 59 Hugonots
of France acknowledge many obligations to Charles King of great Britain 204 205
Persecuted 205 206
I
Jacynthus father 109 112 Jagerndorf, Brandenburg, Marquess John Georg 116
James King of great Britain described 59. will take care of London 81 yields up
Vlushing etc. 94 95 his fairness to the Spanish King 100 101. will not make
Cambridge a City, his care of the University 105. Endeavors to appease the
Bohemian tumults 113 Offers Conditions to the Emperor on the behalf of the
Palatine 114. his Propositions to the Palatine 143 144. acknowledged Protector
of the Germane Protestants 149. his directions concerning Preachers 183. makes
Roman Martyrs 199 Janin President of the Parliament of Paris 195 Infantasque
Duke 98 Inquisition of Spain 97 Instructions to Sir John Perot Deputy of
Ireland 15 16 By King Charles for the University of Cambridg 227 Ireland in
what condition in Sir John Perots time 16 17 18 In the beginning of King
Charles 235 236 237 238 239 Irish delight in change 17. barbarous 46. murder,
theft etc. legal with them 51. renegadoes in Spain 100 101 Isabella Clara
Eugenia Infanta of Spain 127 128 Isabella Infanta of Savoy 243 Isidore Spanish
Saint 125 126 Italians dangerous to France 195 196 Justinian made Laws
concerning the Clergy 5
K
Kings, no man above them 6. like the Sun 36. of France and Spain 198
L
Lady of Antiochia 125 Laws of England most jealous for the safety of her
Kings 85 Leicester Earl out of favor, turns religious 31 Lecturers dangerous
186 Lerma Duke in the life of Phil. the third moves the Spanish Match 117 etc.
121 Lincoln Bishop Lord Keeper 190 Lisle Viscount after Earl of Leicester,
governor of Vlushing etc. 93 Loanes denied the King 182 London sometime the
chamber of her Kings 81 Louis the thirteenth in his minority 123 etc. enters
Rochel 203. see Urbane Pope Louvre of France the prison of her King 194 Low
Countries 149 Luenza Don John 126
M
Mac Frogh Phelim 237 Magic 75 Magog a renegado Irishman guilty of thirteen
murders 101 Manchester Earl 225 Manheim besieged 127 Mansfield Count 116 131
Married men seven years older the first day 71 Mantua Duke 204 234. defended by
the French and Venetians 239 Maria Donna Infanta of Spain 126 133 134.
deserved well of the Prince of Wales 140 Gives over learning English 151 Match
with France 117 118. with Spain 117 118 119 120 121 122 123. never intended by
the Spaniards 133 Mathews Sir Toby 67 May Sir Humphrey 226 Merchants in Spain,
see Spaniards Merit is worthier then fame 47 Monmorencie Duke 195 Monpensier
Duke 36 Montauban in rebellion 204 Monteri Spanish Ambassador 210 Mountjoye
Lord, after Earl of Devon 35 36 Munster in Ireland marked for the Spanish
invasions 17
N
Nevers Duke, see Mantua Duke. Newburgh Duke 147 Norfolk Duke sues to the Queen
for his life. 11 Norris Sir Thomas, 17. Sir John 42. Sir Francis 89
Northumberland Earl 58, 59 Nottingham Countess 95
O
Oath of Supremacy, why urged 39 Odonnel 44 Ognate Spanish Ambassador at Rome
240 Oleron Island 203 Olivarez Conde 130 131 139 Contrives to compose the
Palatine differences without the Match. 135 Order submitting the Town of
Cambridge to the University 223 See Charles King.
Ordination of Priests, etc. how to be 187 Ormond Earl 42 44 45 Ossuna Duke 125
126
P
Palatinate a motive of the Spanish match 129 134. Without which the Kings of
England will do nothing 136 138 141 143 151. Dismembered 147
Parliaments tumultuous 229 230 Pastrana Duke 142 Patent for the Admiralty of
Ireland 90 Perez Don Antonio Secretary to Philip the Second of Spain 100 Perrot
Sir John Deputy of Ireland 13. His care of that Kingdom 17 Philip the Second
of Spain transplants whole Families of the Portugese 51 Philip the Third of
Spain upon his deathbed 125, etc. Philips Sir Robert 155. Francis his brother
ibid. Physic modern 75 Pius Quintus his Excommunication of the Queen, because
of the Rebellion in the North 39 Polander defeats the Turks 198 Pope not more
holy then S. Peter, 8 Tyranny of Popes 39 Powder plot 67 Pretense of conscience
38 Preachers, Licenses to preach 183 Directions for preaching 184 Presbytery as
mischievous to private men as to Princes, 41. See Puritans.
Priesthood how to be honored 45 Princes to be obeyed, and by whom, ibid. by
Christ's Law 7. Supreme Heads 5. Driven out, must not give their Usurpers too
long time to establish themselves 147 Privy Seal for transporting of Horse 217
Puritans in the time of Queen Elizabeth 40. Would bring Democracie into the
Church, promise impossible wonders of the Discipline 41. Fiery, Rebellious,
contemn the Magistrate, ibid. Feared, not without cause, by King James 193
Q
Quadrivials 75
R
Ranelagh in Ireland 237 Rawleigh Sir Walter 85, 86 Ree Island 203 Rich
Baronness sister to Essex, writes to the dishonor of the Queen and advantage
of the Earl 32 Richardson Chief Justice of the Bench 228 Richer forced by
Richlieu, recants his opinions against the Papal Supremacy over Kings 196
Richlieu Cardinal greatly solicitous for the English Roman Catholics 197
Rochel 200. in what condition at the surrender 202 ^03. Fifteen thousand dye of
the famine ibid. Rohan Duchess in Rochel during the siege 202. Duk^ 204 206
208 210 Romish Priests seduce the subjects from their obidience, their
practices against the Queens sacred person 39 40 Roman Catholics sue to King
James at his entrance for toleration 82 83. great lovers of him, the only g od
subjects (witness the Mine then plotted) 82 their Religion upon their own words
83 84 Russel Sir William 237 Ruthuen, after Lord Ruthuen unhandsomely used by
the Earl of Northumberland 106 107
S
St. John Oliver against Taxes contrary to Magna Charta, etc. would not have
Oaths violated in which the divine Majesty is invocated, fearful of the
Archbishops Excommunication 160 Saxony Elector 114 Scandal what 97 Scriptures
how to be expounded 23 Seminaries blossom 39 in Ireland seditious, appear in
their habits 240 241 Serita Don John 125 Sin immortal to respect any of the
English Church 101 Southampton Earl 58 Spaniards design upon Ireland 17 spoil
base Bologne, 37. lose their Apostles, 47. wrong and oppress the English
Merchants, 97 98 99 102 103. suits in Spain immortal, ibid. give pensions to
the Irish renegadoes, 100 101. unreasonable in the business of the Match, 127
137 146. swear and damn themselves, yet never intended it 132 etc. their
unworthy sleights to make K James jealous of the Prince and others, 152 153
oppose the rights and successi^n of the Duke of Nevers to Ma^tua and
M^ntferrat, 234 lose their silver Fleet, poor, 240 Spencer Edmund, see Fairy
Queen his worth and Learning, 245 252 Spinola Marquess 198 199 Spiritualia how
to be taken 56 Stanley Sir William 18 Superstition worse the Atheism, 160
Supreme Head the Kings Title, 1^2, etc. 39
T
Tilly Count 131 Toirax Governor of the Fort in the I Will of Ree 201 Toledo
Cardinal 123 Toleration of Religion in Ireland necessary 52 Treason of the
Papists in the clouds 40 cannot beget f^ir passions 86 Treaty with Tyrone 43
44. of Bruxels 127 128 Trimouille Duke 37 Turks against the Pander 198 Tyrone
43 44 101
V
Valette Cardinal 197 Venetians side with the Mantouan 239 240 Villeroye
Secretary of France 195 Urban the Eight encourages Louis the Thirteenth to fall
upon the Hugonots, 211 212. against the Spaniards 240 Usurpers exhalations 37
W
Wallop Sir Henry has ill Offices done him to the Queen 19 Walsingham Sir
Francis his reasons why the Queen sometimes restrains and punishes the
Puritans 38 Warham Archbishop of Canterbury 98 Warrants of the Queen to the
Lords of Ireland, at the going over of Sir John Petot 14 15 Weston Sir Ridhard
Chancellor of the Exchequer, after L. Treasurer, and Earl of Portland. 128
Wilks Sir Thomas 36 37 Willoughby Lord, 90 Winchester Bishop 189 Words are to
be construed to make truth 8
Y.
Yelverton Sir Henry censured in the Starchamber, 107 108 109 Ynoiosa
Marquess, 152. his base carriage to King James 153
Z.
Zunige Don Balthazar 109 112, etc. 130
FINIS.

