THEALMA AND Clearchus. A PASTORAL HISTORY, In smooth and easy VERSE. Written
long since, By JOHN CHALKHILL, Esquire An Acquaintant and Friend of EDWARD SPENCER.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took, at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

The Preface.
THE Reader will find in this Book, what the Title declares, A Pastoral
History, in smooth and easy Verse; and will in it find many Hopes and Fears
finely painted, and feelingly expressed. And he will find the first so often
disappointed, when fullest of desire and expectation; and the later, so often,
so strangely, and so unexpectedly relieved, by an unforeseen Providence, as may
beget in him wonder and amazement.

And the Reader will here also meet with Passions heightened by easy and fit
descriptions of Joy and Sorrow; and find also such various events and rewards
of innocent Truth and undissembled Honesty, as is like to leave in him (if he
be a good natured Reader) more sympathizing and virtuous Impressions, than ten
times so much time spent in impertinent, critical, and needless Disputes about
Religion: and I heartily wish it may do so.

And, I have also this truth to say of the Author, that he was in his time a
man generally known, and as well beloved; for he was humble, and obliging in
his behavior, a Gentleman, a Scholar, very innocent and prudent: and indeed
his whole life was useful, quiet, and virtuous. God send the Story may meet
with, or make all Readers like him.

May 7. 1678. J. W.

To my worthy Friend Mr. ISAAC WALTON; On the Publication of this POEM.
LOng had the bright Thealma lain obscure,
Her beauteous Charms that might the world allure,
Lay, like rough Diamonds in the Mine, unknown;
By all the Sons of Folly trampled on,
Till your kind hand unveiled her lovely Face,
And gave her vigor to exert her Rays.
Happy Old Man, whose worth all mankind knows,
Except himself, who charitably shows
The ready road to Virtue, and to Praise,
The Road to many long, and happy days;
The noble Arts of generous Piety,
And how to compass true felicity,
Hence did he learn the Art of living well,
The bright Thealma was his Oracle:
Inspired by her, he knows no anxious cares,
Th^^ near a Century of pleasant years:
Easy he lives, and cheerful shall he die,
Well spoken of by late Posterity.
As long as Spencer's noble slames shall burn,
And deep Devotions throng about his Urn;
As long as Chalkhill's venerable Name,
With humble emulation shall inflame
Ages to come, and swell the Rolls of Fame:
Your memory shall ever be secure,
And long beyond our short lived Praise endure;
As Phidias in Minerva's Shield did live,
And shared that immortality he alone could give.
June 5. 1683. Tho. Flatman.

THEALMA AND Clearchus.
I.
SCarce had the Ploughman yoked his horned Team,
And locked their Traces to the crooked Beam,
When fair Thealma with a Maiden scorn,
That day before her rise, out blushed the morn:
Scarce had the Sun gilded the Mountain tops,
When forth she leads her tender Ewes, and hopes
The day would recompense the sad affrights
Her Lovesick heart did struggle with a-nights.
Down to the Plains the poor Thealma wends,
Full of sad thoughts, and many a sigh she sends
Before her, which the Air stores up in vain:
She sucks them back, to breath them out again.
The Airy Choire salute the welcome day,
And with new Carols sing their cares away;
Yet move not her; she minds not what she hears:
Their sweeter Accents grate her tender ears,
That relish naught but sadness: Joy and she
Were not so well acquainted; one might see
E'ne in her very looks, a stock of Sorrow
So much improved, 'twould prove Despair to morrow.
Down in a Valley 'twixt two rising Hills,
From whence the Dew in silver drops distills
To Enrich the lowly Plain, a River ran
Hight Cygnus; (as some think from Laeda's Swan
That there frequented) gently on it glides
And makes indentures in her crooked sides,
And with her silent murmurs, rocks asleep
Her watery Inmates: 'twas not very deep,
But clear as that Narcissus look in, when
His Self-love made him cease to live with men.
Close by the River, was a thick-leav'd Grove,
Where Swains of old sang stories of their Love;
But unfrequented now since Collin di'd,
Collin that King of Shepherds; and the pride
Of all Arcadia: Here Thealma used
To feed her Milkie Droves, and as they brous'd;
Under the friendly shadow of a Beech
She sat her down; grief had tongue-ti'd her speech;
Her words were sighs and tears; dumb Eloquence:
Heard only by the sobs, and not the sense.
With folded Arms she fate, as if she meant
To hug those woes which in her Breast were pent;
Her looks were nailed unto the Earth, that drank
Her tears with greediness, and seemed to thank
Her for those briny showers, and in lieu
Returns her flowery sweetness for her Dew.
At length her sorrows waxt so big within her,
They strove for greater vent: Oh! had you seen her,
How fain she would have hid her grief, and stayed
The swelling current of her woes, and made
Her grief, though with unwillingness, to set
Open the Floodgates of her speech, and let
Out that which else had drowned her: you would have deemed
Her rather Niobe than what she seemed.
So like a weeping Rock washed with a Sea
Of briny Waters, she appeared to be.
So have I seen a headlong torrent run
Scouring along the Valley, till anon
It meeting with some dam that checks his course,
Swells high with rage, and doubling of its force
Lays siege to his opposer: first he tries
To undermine it, still his Waters rise,
And with its weight steals through some narrow Pores,
And weeps it self a vent at those small doors;
But finding that too little for its weight,
It breaks through all. Such was Thealma's state,
When tears would give her heart no ease, her grief
Broke into speech to give her some relief:
O my Clearchus, said she, and with tears
Embalms his name: "O! if the Ghosts have ears,
"Or Souls departed condescend so low,
"To sympathize with Mortals in their woe;
"Vouchsafe to lend a gentle Ear to me,
"Whose life is worse than death, since not with thee.
"What privilege have they that are born great
"More than the meanest Swain? The proud Waves beat
"With more impetuousness upon high Lands,
"Than on the flat and less resisting Strands:
"The lofty Cedar, and the knotty Oak,
"Are subject more unto the thunder-stroak,
"Than the low shrubs, that no such shocks endure,
"Even their contempt does make them live secure.
"Had I been born the Child of some poor Swain,
"Whose thoughts aspire no higher than the Plain,
"I had been happy then; to have kept these Sheep,
"Had been a Princely pleasure; quiet sleep
"Had drowned my cares, or sweetened them with Dreams:
"Love and content had been my Musicks theams;
"Or had Clearchus lived the life I lead,
"I had been blessed. And then a tear she shed,
That was forerunner to so great a shower,
It drowned her speech: such a commanding Power
That loved Name had, when beating of her breast,
In a sad silence she sighed out the rest.
By this time it was Noon, and Sol had got
Half to his Journeys ending: 'twas so hot.
The Sheep drew near the shade, and by their Dam
Lay chewing of their Cuds: at the length came
Caretta with her Dinner, where she found
Her Lovesick Mistress courting of the Ground,
Moist with the tears she shed; she lifts her up,
And pouring out some Beverage in a Cup,
She gave it her to drink: hardly she sips,
When a deep sigh again locked up her lips.
Caretta wooes and prays, (poor Country Girl,)
And every sigh she spent, cost her a Pearl.
Pray come to Dinner, said she, see here is Bread,
Here Is Curds and Cream, and Cheescake, sweet now, feed;
Do you not love me? once you said you did.
Do you not care for me? if you had bid
Me do a thing, though I with Death had met
I would have done it: Honey Mistress eat.
I would your grief were mine, so you were well;
What is it that troubles you? would I could tell.
Dare you not trust me? I was never no blab,
If I do tell't to any call me Drab.
But you are angry with me, chide me then,
Beat me, forgive, I Will never offend again.
With that she kissed her, and with lukewarm tears,
Called back her Color worn away with cares.
O my poor Girl, said she, Sweet innocence,
What a controuling winning Eloquence
Has loving honesty; were not to give
Thy love a thanks, Thealma would not live.
I cannot eat; nay, weep not, I am well,
Only I have no stomach: thou can tell
How long it is since good Menippus found
Me Shipwrackt in the Sea, e'ne well-nigh drowned;
And happy had it been, if my stern fate
Had proved to me so cruel fortunate
To have unliv'd me then. Ah wish not so,
Answered Caretta, little do you know,
What end the fates have in preserving you.
I hope a good one, and to tell you true,
You do not well to question those blessed powers,
That long agon have numbered out our hours.
And as some say, spin out our threads of life;
Some short, some longer, they command the knife
That cuts them off; and till that time be come
We seek in vain to shroud us in a Tomb.
But I have done, and fear I Have done amiss.
I ask forgiveness: As I guess it is
Some three years since my Master saved your life,
'Twas much about the time he lost his Wife,
And that is three years come Autumn, my good Dame
Then lost her life, yet lives in her good name.
I cannot choose but weep to think on her.
Amongst Women kind, was not a lovinger.
She bred me up e'ne from my Infancy,
And loved me as her own, her Piety
And love to Virtue made me love it too;
But she is dead, and I have found in you
What I have lost in her: my good old Master
Followed her soon, he could not long out-last her.
They loved so well together, Heaven did lend
Him longer life, only to prove your friend:
To save your life, and he was therein blessed,
That happy action crowned all the rest
Of his good deeds: since Heaven has such a care
To preserve good ones, why should you despair?
The man you grieve for so, there is none can tell,
But if Heaven be so pleased, may speed as well.
Some lucky hand Fate may for ought you know,
Send to save him from death as well as you.
And so I hope it has, take comfort then,
You may, I trust, see happy days again.
Thealma all this while with serious eye,
Eyed the poor Wench, unwilling to reply;
For in her looks she read some true presage,
That gave her comfort, and somewhat assuage
The fury of her passions; with desire
Her ears sucked in her speech, to quench her fire:
She could have heard her speak an Age, sweet soul,
So pretty loud she chud her, and condole
With her in her misfortunes. O, said she,
What wisdom dwells in plain simplicity!
Prithee (my dear Caretta) why do cry?
I am not angry, good Girl, dry thine eye,
Or I shall turn Child too: my tide's not spent,
'Twill slow again, if thou art discontent.
For I will eat if thou wilt be merry; say,
Will thou Caretta? shall thy Mistress pray,
And thou deny her? Still Caretta wept,
Sorrow and gladness such a struggling kept
Within her for the Mastery; at the length
Joy overcame, and speech recovered strength.
Sweet Mistress, said she, pardon your Handmaid,
Unworthy of the Wages your love paid
Me; for my over-boldness think it not strange,
I was struck dumb at this so sweet a change.
I could not choose but weep, if you would have killed me,
With such an overplus of joy it filled me:
I will be merry, if you can forgive;
Wanting your love, it is a Hell to live:
I was to blame; but I Will do so no more.
Scarce had she spoke the word; but a fell Boar
Rushed from the Wood, enraged by a deep wound
Some Huntsman gave him: up he ploughs the ground,
And whetting of his Tusks, about began roam,
Champing his venoms moisture into foam.
Thealma and her Maid, half dead with fear,
Cried out for help; their cry soon reached his ear,
And he came snuffling towered them: still they cry,
And fear gave wings unto them as they fly.
The Sheep ran bleating over the pleasant Plain,
And Airy Echo answers them again;
Redoubling of their cries to fetch in aid,
Whilst to the Wood the fearful Virgins made,
Where a new fear assayed them: 'twas their hap
To meet the Boars pursuer in the gap
With his Sword drawn, and all besmeared, with gore,
Which made their case more desperate than before,
As they imagined; yet so well as fear
And doubt would let them, as the man drew near
They 'mplor'd his help: he minds them not, but spying
The chafed Boar in a thick puddle lying,
Toward him he makes; the Boar was soon aware,
And with an hideous noise sucks in the Air.
Upon his guard he stands, his Tusks new whets,
And up on end his grisly Bristles sets.
His wary foe, went traversing his ground,
Spying out where was best to give a wound.
And now Thealma's fears afresh began
To seize on her; her care's now for the man,
Lest the adventurous Youth should get some hurt,
Or die untimely: up the Boar flings the dirt,
Died crimson with his Blood: his foe at length
Watching his time, and doubling of his strength,
Gave him a wound so deep, it let out life,
And set a bloody period to their strife:
But he bled too, a little gash he got
As he closed with him, which he minded not.
Only Thealma's fears made it appear
More dangerous than it was, longing to hear
Her life's preserver speak: then down she falls,
And on the Gods in thanks for blessings calls,
To recompense his Valor. He drew near,
And smiling lifts her up, when as a tear
Dropping into his wound, he gave a start,
Love in that Pearl stole down into his heart.
He was but young, scarce did the Hair begin
In shadows to write man upon his Chin:
Tall and well-set, his Hair a Chestnut brown,
His looks Majestic, 'twixt a smile and frown;
Yet smeared with blood, and all bedewed with sweat
One could not know him: by this time the heat
Was well-nigh slak'd, and Sol's unwearied Team
Hies to refresh them in the briny Stream.
The stranger ^y'd her earnestly, and she
As earnestly desired that she might see
His perfect Visage. To the River side
She toles him on; still he Thealma eyed.
But not a word he spoke, which she desired:
The more he looked, the more his heart was fired.
Down both together fate, and while he washed,
She dressed his wound which the Boar lately gash'd.
And having wiped, he kissed her for her care,
When as a blush begot 'twixt joy and fear,
Made her seem what he took her for, his Love;
And this invention he had to prove,
Whether she was Clarinda, ay or no:
For so his Mistress hight. Did not you know
The Prince Anaxus? now Thealma knew
Not whether it were best speak false or true.
She knew he was Anaxus, and her Brother,
And from a Child she took him for no other;
Yet knew she not what danger might ensue,
If she disclosed her self: her telling true
Perhaps might work her ruin, and a lie
Might rend her from his heart, worse than to die.
But she, being unwilling to be known,
Answered his Quere with this Question:
Did not you know Thealma? at the name
Amazed he started; What then, lovely Dame?
Suppose I did? would I could say I do;
With that the wept, she fell a melting too:
And with a flood of tears she thanks her Brother;
No danger can a true affection smother.
He wipes her eyes, she weeps again afresh,
And sheds more tears to enrich her thankfulness.
Sorrow had tied up both their tongues so fast,
Love found no vent, but through their eyes; at last,
Anaxus blushing at his childish tears,
Roused up himself, and the sad Virgin chears.
And knew you that Thealma (sweet?) said he;
I did, replied Thealma, I am she:
Look well upon me; sorrow's not so 'nkind
So to transform me, but your eye may find,
A Sisters stamp upon me: Lovely Maid,
How fain I would believe thee, the Youth said,
But she was long since drowned in the proud Deep,
She and her bold Clearchus sweetly sleep,
In those soft Beds of darkness; and in Dreams
Embrace each other, spite of churlish streams,
The very name Clearchus chilled her Veins,
And like an unmoved Statue she remains.
Pale as Death's self, till with a warm love kiss,
He thawed her icy coldness; such power is
In the sweet touch of love: Sweet soul, said he,
Be comforted, the sorrow 'longs to me.
Why should the sad relation of a woe
You have no interest in, make you grieve so?
No interest, said she; Yes, Anaxus, know
I am a greater sharer in it than you.
Have you forgot your Sister, I am she
The hapless poor Thealma, and to me
Belongs the sorrow; you but grieve in vain
If It be for her, since she is found again.
Are you not then Clarinda? said the Youth,
'Twere cruelty to mock me with untruth:
Your Speech is hers, and in your Looks I read
Her lovely Character: sweet Virgin lead
Me from this Labyrinth of Doubts, what e're
You are, there is in you so much of her
That I both love and honor you. Fair Sir,
Answered Thealma smiling, why of her
Make you so strict enquiry, is your eye
So dazel'd with her beauty, that poor I
Must lose the name of Sister? Say you love her,
Can your love make you cease to be a Brother?
Whereat from forth her Bosom, next the Heart,
She plucked a little Tablet, whereon Art
Had wrought her skill; and opening it, said she,
Do you not know this Picture? let that be
The witness of the truth which I have told.
With that Anaxus could no longer hold,
But falling on her neck, with joy he kissed her,
Saying, Thanks Heaven, liv'st thou then my dear Sister!
My loved Thealma! were not thou cast away?
What happy hand has saved thee? But the day
Was then far spent; 'twas time to think on home,
And her Caretta all amazed was come
And waited her commands: the fiery Sun
Went blushing down at the short race he run:
The Marigold shuts up her golden Flowers,
And the sweet Song birds hy'd unto their Bowers.
Night-swaying Morpheus clothes the East in black,
And Cynthia following her Brothers track
With new and brighter Rays, her self adorns,
Lighting the starry Tapers at her Horns.
Homeward Anaxus and Thealma wend,
Where we must leave them for a while to end
The story of their Sorrows. Night being come,
A time when all repair unto some home,
Save the poor Fisherman, that still abides
Out-watching care in tending on the Tides.
Rhotus was yet at Sea, and as his Ketch
Tackt to and fro, the scanty wind to snatch;
He spyed a Frigate, and as night gave leave
Through Cynthia's brightness he might well perceive
It was of Lemnos; and as it drew near,
From the becalmed Bark he well might hear
A Voice that hailed him; asking (...) was?
He answered, from Arcadia. In that place
Were many little Islands, called of old
Rupillas, from the many Rocks they hold,
A most frequented place for Fish; in vain
They trimmed their flagging Sails to stem the Main.
But scarce a breath of Wind was stirring, when
The Master hailed the Fisherman again:
And letting fall an Anchor, beckoned him
To come aboard. Rhotus delayed no time,
But makes unto the Ship; he soon got thither,
Using his Oars to outdo the Weather.
His Ketch he hooks unto the Frigates Stern,
And up the Ship he climbs; he might discern
At his first entry such a sad aspect
In all the Passengers, he might collect
Out of their looks, that some misfortune had
Lately befaln them, they were all so sad.
One amongst the rest there was, a grave old man,
(To whom they all stood bare) that thus began.
Welcome, kind friend, nay sit, what Bark? with Fish?
Can thou afford for Lemnian Coin a Dish?
Yes Master, that I can, a good Dish too;
And as they like you, pay me; I will go
And fetch them straight; He did so, and was paid
To his content: the Fish were ready made,
And down they sat, the better sort and worse
Fared all alike, it was their constant course;
Four to a Mess; and to augment their Fare,
Their second Courses, good Discourses were.
Amongst the various talk, the grave old Lord,
(For so he was) that haled the Ketch aboard,
Thus questioned Rhotus, Honest Fisher, tell
What news affords Arcadia; thou know well:
Who rules that Freeborn State, under what Laws,
Or Civil Government remain they? what is the cause
Of their late falling out? Rhotus replies,
And as he spoke the tears stood in his eyes;
As well as grief will let me, worthy Sir,
Though I shall prove but a bad Chronicler
Of State Affairs, yet with your gentle leave
I Will tell you all I know; nor will I weave
Any untruths in my discourse, or raise,
By flattering mine own Countrymen, a praise
Their worth were merited; what I shall tell
Is nothing but the truth; then mark me well.
Then quiet silence shut up their discourse.
Scarce was a whisper heard, "Such a strange force
"Has novelty; it makes us swift to hear,
"And to the speaker chains the greedy ear.
Arcadia was of old (said he) a State
Subject to none but their own Laws and Fate:
Superior there was none, but what old age
And hoary hairs had raised; the wise and sage,
Whose gravity, when they were rich in years,
Begat a civil reverence more than fears
In the well manner'd people; at that day
All was in common, every man bare sway
Over his own Family; the jars that rose
Were soon appeased by such grave men as those:
This mine and thine, that we so cavil for,
Was then not heard of: he that was most poor
Was rich in his content, and lived as free
As they whose flocks were greatest, nor did he
Envy his great abundance, nor the other
Disdain the low condition of his Brother,
But lent him from his store to mend his state,
And with his love he quits him, thanks his fate;
And taught by his example, seeks out such
As want his help, that he may do as much.
Their Laws even from their childhood, rich and poor,
Had written in their hearts by conning over
The Legacies of good old men, whose memories
Outlive their Monuments: the grave advice
They left behind in writing; this was that
That made Arcadia then so blessed a State,
Their wholesome Laws had ^inkt them so in one,
They lived in peace and sweet communion.
Peace brought forth plenty, plenty bred content,
And that crowned all their pains with merriment.
They had no foe, secure they lived in Tents,
All was their own they had, they paid no rents;
Their Sheep found clothing, Earth provided food,
And Labor dressed them as their wills thought good.
On unbought Delicates their Hunger fed,
And for their Drink the swelling Clusters bled:
The Valleys rang with their delicious strains,
And pleasure revel'd on those happy Plains,
Content and Labor gave them length of days,
And Peace served in delight a thousand ways.
The golden Age before Deucalion's Flood
Was not more happy, nor the folk more good.
But time that eats the Children he begets,
And is less satisfied the more he eats,
Led on by Fate that terminates all things,
Ruined our State, by sending of us Kings:
Ambition (Sins firstborn) the bane of State,
Stole into men, puffing them up with hate
And emulous desires; Love waxen cold,
And into Iron freeze the age of Gold.
The Laws contempt made cruelty step in,
And stead of curbing animated Sin,
The Rich man tramples on the Poor man's back,
Raising his Fortunes by his Brothers wrack.
The wronged Poor necessity 'gan teach,
To live by Rapine, stealing from the Rich.
The Temples, which Devotion had erected
In honor of the Gods, were now neglected.
No Altar-smoaks with sacrificed Beasts,
No Incense offered, no Love-strength'ning Feasts.
Men's greedy Avarice made Gods of Clay,
Their Gold and Silver: Field to Field they lay,
And House to House; no matter how 'twas got,
The hand of Justice they regarded not.
Like a distempered Body Fever-shaken,
When with combustion every Limb is taken:
The Head wants ease, the heavy Eyes want sleep,
The beating Pulse no just proportion keep;
The Tongue talks idly, reason cannot rule it,
And the Heart fires the Air drawn in to cool it.
The Palate relisheth no meat, the Ears
But ill affected with the sweets it hears.
The Hands deny their aid to help him up,
And fall, as to his lips they lift the cup.
The Legs and Feet disjoynted, and useless,
Shrinking beneath the burden of the Flesh.
Such was Arcadia then, till Clitus reigned,
The first and best of Kings that e're obtained
The Arcadian Scepter: he piec'd up the State,
And made it somewhat like to fortunate.
He dying without Issue on the sudden,
Heaven nipt their growing glory in the budding:
They choose Philemon, one of Clitus Race
To sway the Scepter; a brave Youth he was,
As Wise as Valiant, had he been as Chaste,
Arcadia had been happy; but his Lust
Levelled Arcadia's Glory with the Dust.
There was a noble Shepherd Stremon height,
As good as great, whose Virtues had of right
Better deserved a Crown, had severe Fate
But pleased to smile so then upon our State.
He had one only Daughter young and fair,
Most richly qualitied, and which was rare
In that same looser age divinely chaste;
Though su'd to by no mean ones, yet at last
Her Father matched her to a Shepherds Son,
Equal in Birth and Fortune; such a one
As merited the double Dower she brought,
Both of her Wealth and Virtue: Heaven had wrought
Their minds so both alike: His noble Sire
Was Clitus named, to whose Thracian Lire
The Shepherds wont to tune their Pipes, and frame
Their curious Madrigals. The Virgins name
Was Castabella, Clitus his brave Son,
Lysander hight. The Nuptials being done,
To which the King came willingly a Guess;
Each one repaired unto their business,
The charge of their own Flocks; the nobler sort
Accompanied the King unto the Court.
The meaner rout of Shepherds and their Swains,
With Hook and Scrip went jogging to the Plains,
Scarce had the Sun (that then at Cancer in'd)
Twice measured the Earth, when Love struck blind
The lustful King, whose amorous desires
Grew into lawless passions, and strange fires,
That none but Castabella would serve turn
To quench his Flames, though she had made them burn,
He had the choice of many fair ones too,
And well descended: Kings need not to woo;
The very name will bring a Nun to bed,
Ambition values not a Maidenhead:
But he likes none, none but the new-wed Wife
Must be the Umpire to decide the strife.
He casts about to get what he desired,
The more he plots, the more his heart is fired.
He knew her chaste and virtuous, no weak bars
To Oppose the strongest Soldier in Loves Wars.
He knew her Father powerful, well-beloved,
Both for his Wisdom and good Deeds approved,
Among the giddy rout; as for his Son,
His own demerit spoke him such a one
As durst revenge; nor could he want for friends
To second his attempts in noble ends.
Still the King burns, and still his working brain
Plots and displots, thinks and unthinks again.
At length his will resolved him in this sort,
Stremon and Clitus both were yet at Court,
Busi'd in State Affairs; Lysander he
Was where a Husband lately wed should be,
At home a weaning of his Wives desires,
From her old Sire, to warm her at his fires.
As hapless hap would have it, it fell out
That at that time a rude uncivil rout
Of out-lawed Mutineers, had gathered head
Upon the Frontiers, as their fury led;
Burning and spoiling all; the Council sit
Advising to suppress them; 'twas thought fit
Some strength should go against them, all this made
For the Kings purpose? then a care was had
Who should conduct those Forces, some were named,
The Choice one likes, is by another blamed.
Philemon gives them line enough, for he
Had fore-projected who the man should be:
Yet held his peace, 'twas not his cue as yet
To speak his mind; at length they do entreat
That he would name the man: the King did so,
Lysander was the man, he named to go:
His judgment was agreed on; the two old men,
Stremon and Clitus thought them honored, when
They heard him name Lysander, and with glad ears
Welcome his killing favor without fears.
He makes him Captain of his strongest Fort,
Thus Wolf-like he did welcome him to Court.
The days were set for his dispatch; mean space
He takes his leave of his Wives chaste embrace:
It little boots her love to weep him back,
Nor stood it with his honor to be flack
In such a noble enterprise; he went
Armed with strong hopes, and the Kings blandishment.
No sooner was he gone, but the sly King
Rid of his chiefest fears, began to sing
A requiem to his thoughts: the Affairs of State
He left unto his Nobles to debate;
And minds his sport, the Hunting of the Hare,
The Fox and Wolf; this took up all his care.
Upon a day, as in a tedious chase
He lost his Train that did out-ride his Race;
Or rather of set purpose, slackt his coarse,
Intending to excuse it on his Horse,
He stole to Stremons lodge, the day was spent,
The fittest time to act his foul intent.
He knocks at Stremons Lodge, but no man hears,
All were abed, and sleep had charmed their ears,
He knocks again; with that he heard a groan,
Powerful enough to have turned a cruel one
From his bad purpose? Who Is within, said he,
If you be good folks, rise and pity me.
But none replied: another groan he hears,
And cruel fortune drew him by the ears
To what he wished for. Castabella yet
Was not in bed, sorrow denied to let
Her moist eyes sleep, for her increasing fears
Conspired to keep them open with her tears.
A little from the Lodge, on the descent
Of the small Hill it stood on, a way bent
Unto an Orchard thick with Trees beset;
Through which there ran a Crystal Rivelet,
Whose purling streams that wrangled with the stones,
In trembling accents, echoed back her groans,
Here in an arbor Castabella sat,
Full of sad thoughts, and most disconsolate.
The door was open, and in Philemon steals,
But in a Bush a while himself conceals,
Till he the voice might more distinctly hear,
And better be resolved that she was there;
And so he did: fortune his Bawd became,
And led him on to Lust. The fearless Dame
After a deep fetched sigh, thus faintly spoke,
O my Lysander, why would thou not take
Me along with thee; then a flood of tears
Closed up her lips, When this had reached his ears,
Like a fell Wolf he rusht upon his prey,
Stopping her cries with kisses: weep she may
And lift her hands to Heaven, but in vain,
It was too late for help t'undo again
What he had done. Her honor more to her
Was than her life, the cruel Murderer
Had robbed her of, and glories in his prize.
It is no news for lust to tyrannize.
He thankt this Fortune that did so prevent
His first design by short'ning his intent.
The Black deed done, the Ravisher hies thence,
Leaving his shame to murder innocence:
He had his wish, and that which gilt his Sin,
He knew suspicion could not suspect him.
Report, the blab-tongue of those tell-tale times,
That rather magnifies than lessens Crimes,
Slept when this act was done, such thoughts as these,
Seared up his Conscience with a carelessness.
Poor Castabella having now lost all,
That she thought worth the losing, would not call
For help to be a witness of her shame:
It was too late, nor did she know his name
That had undone her: cruel thoughts arise,
And wanting other vent, break through her eyes.
Shame prompts her to despair, and let out life,
Revenge advised her to conceal her grief:
Fear checks Revenge, and Honor chides her Fear,
Within her Breast such mutinous thoughts there were
She could resolve on nothing: day then breaks,
And Shame in blushes rose upon her cheeks.
With that she spies a Ring lie at her feet,
She took it up, and glad she was to see it.
By this she thought, if Fate so pitied her,
In time she might find out the Ravisher.
Revenge then whispers in her ear afresh,
Be bold, she looked upon it, but could not guess
Whose it might be; yet she remembered well
Sh'ad seen't before, but where she could not tell
With that she threw it from her in disdain,
Yet thought wrought so she took it up again;
And looking better on it, within the Ring,
She spied the Name and Motto of the King:
Whereat she starts: O ye blessed powers! said she,
Thanks for this happy strange discovery.
She wrapped it up, and to the Lodge she went
To study some revenge; 'twas her intent
By some devise to 'tise Philemon thither,
And there to end his Life and hers together:
But that was crossed, Lysander back returns,
Crowned with a noble Victory and Horns
That he never dreamt of: to his Wife he goes,
And finds her weeping, no content she shows
At his safe coming back; but speaks in Tears.
He loved too well to harbor jealous Fears.
He wiped her Eyes, and kissed her to invite
A gentle welcome from her if he might:
But 'twould not be; He asked her why she wept,
And who had wronged her; still she silence kept,
And turns away: then he began to doubt
All was not well; to find the matter out,
He tries all means; and first with mild entreats
He woes her to disclose it: then with threats
He seeks to wring it from her. Much ado
She told him the sad story of her woe.
The Ring confirmed the truth of her report.
And he believed her straight: He hies to Court
TO acquaint his Fathers with it. All three vow
To be revenged, but first they study how.
Well, to be brief, they muster up their Friends,
And now Philemon 'gan to guess their ends,
And counterworks to oppose them, gathers strength
And boldly goes to meet them; at the length
They Battle join: Philemon put to flight,
And many thousands butchered in the Fight;
Amongst whom old Stremon foll, whose noble spirit
Out-did his Age, and by his brave merit,
Did rein himself so glorious a name,
Arcadia to this day adores the same.
Lysander's wrongs spurred on his swift pursuit
After Philemon, when a sudden shout
Amongst his Soldiers caused him sound retreat,
Fearing some mutiny, all in a sweat
A Messenger ran towered him, crying out,
Return my Lord, the cunning Wolf's found out.
Philemon's slain, and you proclaimed King:
With that again the ecchoing Valleys ring.
The Foe it seems had wheeled about a Mere,
In policy to set upon the Rear
Of bold Lysander's Troops; they faced about
And meet his Charge; when a brave Youth stepped out
And singles forth the King: they used no words,
The Cause was to be pleaded by their Swords,
Which anger whet: no blow was given in vain,
Now they retire, and then come on again;
Like two Wild Boars for mastery they strive,
And many wounds on either side they give:
Then grappling both together, both fell down,
Fainting for want of Blood; when with a frown,
As killing as his Sword, the brave Youth gave
His Foe a Wound that sent him to his Grave.
Take that thou murderer of my Honors name,
Said the brave Youth, or rather the brave Dame;
For so it proved: yet her Disguise was such,
The sharpest eye could not discern so much,
Until Lysander came, his piercing eye
Soon found who 'twas, he knew her presently;
'Twas Castabella his unhappy Wife,
Who losing Honor, would not keep her Life;
But thrusts her self into the midst of danger,
To seek out Death, and would have died a Stranger
Unto Lysander's knowledge; had not he
Informed the world it could be none but she
That durst win Honor so. The Noble Dame
Was not quite dead when as Lysander came,
Who stooping down to kiss her, with his Tears
T'embalm her for a Grave, her self she rears,
And meeting his Embrace; welcome, said she,
Welcome Lysander; since I have seen thee
I dare Deaths worst: then sinking down she died,
The honor of her Sex: all means were tried
To call back Life, but Medicines came late,
Her Blood was spent, and she subscribes to Fate.
Lysander was about to sacrifice
Himself to appease the incensed Destinies;
And had not one stepped in and held his hand,
He'ad done the deed, and so undone the Land.
Peace was proclaimed to all that would submit
On the Foes side: the Soldiers dig a pit
And tumble in Philemon, none there were,
Or Friend or Foe, that seemed to shed a Tear
To deck his Hearse withal. Thus his base Lust
Untimely laid his Glory in the Dust.
But Castabella she outlived her shame,
And Shepherds Swains still Carol out her Fame*
She needs no Poets Pen to mount it high,
Lysander wept her out an Elegy.
Her Obsequies once over, the King was Crowned,
And Wars loud noise with Peals of Joy was drowned:
Ianus his Temple was shut up, and peace
Ushered in Plenty by their Flocks increase;
But long it lasted not, Philemon's Friends
Soon gathered head again. Lysander sends
Some Force against them, but with bad success,
The Foe prevails and seals their hardiness.
Lysander goes in person and is slain,
Philemon's Friends then make a King again;
A hot-spurr'd Youth height Hylas, such a one
As pride had fitted for Commotion,
About that time in a tempestuous night,
A Ship that by misfortune chanced to light
Upon the Rocks that are upon our Coast,
Was split to pieces, all the lading lost,
And all the Passengers, save a Young man
That Fortune rescued from the Ocean.
When day was broke, and I put out to Sea,
To fish out a poor living; by the Lea
As I was coasting, I might well espy
The Carkase of a Ship: my Man and I
Made straightway towered it, and with Wind and Oar,
We quickly reached it: 'twas not far from Shore,
About some half a League; we viewed the Wrack,
But found no people in it; when looking back
Upon a shelving Rock, a man we 'spi'd,
As we thought, dead, and cast up by the Tide:
But by good hap he was not, yet well-nigh
Starved with the Cold, and the Seas cruelty.
We thawed him into life again, but he
As if he relisht not our Charity,
Seemed to be angry: and had we not been,
The Youth had leapt into the Sea again.
Perforce we brought him home, where with warm Potions,
We thawed his nummed Joints into their motions*
And chiding his despair, with good advice
I warmed his hopes that else had froze to Ice.
A braver Youth mine eye never looked upon,
Nor of a sweeter disposition.
Old Cleon could no longer silence keep,
But asked his name, and as he asked did weep.
Was he your friend, quoth Rhotus. he is alive,
Knew you as much as I, you would not grieve,
He calls himself Alexis, now our King,
And long may we enjoy his governing:
But he forgets who saved his life; great men
Seldom remember to look down again.
There was a time when I Would have scorned to crave
A thanks from any, till a churlish wave
Washed off my friends, and thrust me from the Court,
To dwell with labor; but I thank them for it.
Content dwells not at Court; but I have done,
And if you please, my Lord, I will go on
Where I left off a while: Hyla^ being King,
Puffed up with Pride, by often Conquering.
He fell to riot, King and People both
Laid Arms aside to fall in love with Sloth.
The Downs were unfrequented, Shepherd Swains
Were very rarely seen to haunt the Plains.
The Plough lay still, the Earth Manuring needs,
And stead of Corn brought forth a Crop of Weeds.
No Courts of Justice kept, no law observed,
No hand to punish such as ill deserved.
Their Will was then their Law, who durst resist,
Hylas connives, and all did what they list.
Lysander's Friends were scattered here and there,
And lived obscurely circled in with fear.
Some Tilled the Ground, whilst others fed their Flocks,
Under the covert of some hanging Rocks.
Others felled Wood, and some dye weavy Yarn,
The Women Spun; thus all were forced to earn
Their Bread by sweaty Labor: amongst the many,
I and some others fisht to get a penny.
And had I but my Daughter which I lost
In the Foes hot pursuit; (for without boast,
She was a good one) I should think me blessed,
Nor would I change my Calling with the best.
She was my only comfort; but she is dead,
Or, which is worse, I fear me ravished.
But I digress too much: upon a day
When cares triumphs gave us leave to play,
We all assembled on a spacious Green,
To tell old Tales, and choose our Summers Queen.
Thither Alexis, my late Shipwrackt Guest,
At my entreaty came, and amongst the rest,
In their Disports made one; no exercise
Did come amiss to him; for all he tries,
And won the prize in all: the graver sort
That minded more their Safety than their Sport,
'Gan to bethink them on their former State,
And on their Countries Fractions ruminate.
They had intelligence how matters went
In Hylas Court, whose peoples minds were bent
To naught but idleness; that fruitful Sin
That never bears a Child that is not a Twin.
They heard they had unmann'd themselves by ease,
And how security like a Disease
Spread over their Dwellings, how their profus'd hand
Squandered away the plenty of the Land:
How civil Discords sprang up every hour,
And quenched themselves in Blood; how the Laws power
Was wholly slighted, Justice made a jeer,
And Sins unheard of practiced without fear.
The State was sick at heart, and now or never
Was time to cure it: all consult together,
How to recover what they lost of late,
Their Liberty and Means; long they debate
About the matter: all resolve to fight,
And by the Law of Arms to plead their Right.
But now they want a Head, and whom to trust
They could not well resolve on, choose they must
One of necessity: the Civil Wars
Had scarce left any that durst trade for Scars.
The flower of Youth was gone, save four or five
Were left to keep Arcadia's Fame alive;
Yet all too young to govern, all about
They view the Youth to single some one out.
By this time they had crowned Alexis brow
With Wreathes of Bays, and all the Youth allow
Of him a Victor; many Oades they sing
In praise of him; then to the Bower they bring
Their noble Champion, where, as they were wont,
They lead him to a little Turfie Mount
Erected for that purpose, where all might
Both hear and see the Victor with delight.
He had a man-like Look, and sparkling Eye,
A Front whereon sat such a Majesty,
As awed all his Beholders; his long Hair,
After the Grecian fashion, without care
Hung down loosely on his Shoulders, black as Jet*
And shining with his oily honored Sweat,
His body straight, and well proportioned, Tall,
Well Limm'd, well Set, long Armed; one hardly shall
Among a thousand^ find one in all points,
So well compact, and Sinew'd in his Joints.
But that which crowned the rest, he had a Tongue
Whose sweetness Toal'd unwillingness along,
And drew attention from the dullest ear,
His words so oily smooth, and winning were.
Rhotus was going on when day appeared,
And with its light the cloudy welkin cleared.
They heard the Milk-maids hollow home their Kine,
And to thtir Troughs knock in their straggling Swine.
The Birds 'gan sing, the Calves and Lambkins bleat,
Wanting the milky Breakfast of a Teat.
With that he brake off his Discourse, intending
Some fitter time to give his Story ending.
Some household business called his care ashore,
And Cleon thought on what concerned him more.
His men weigh Anchor, and with Rhotus sail
Toward the Land, they had so strong a gale;
They quickly reached the Port where Rhotus dwelt,
Who with old Cleon with fair words so dealt,
He won him to his Cell; where as his Guest
We Will leave him, earnest to hear out the rest.
By this time had Anaxus taken his leave
Of his kind Sister, that afresh can grieve
For his departure, she entreats in vain,
And spends her tears to wash him back again,
But 'twould not be; he leaves her to her woes,
And in the search of his Clarinda goes.
He scarce had traveled two days journey thence,
When hying to a shade, for his defense
Against the Suns scorching heat, who then began
TO approach the point of the Meridian.
Within a little silent Grove hard by
Upon a small ascent, he might espy
A stately Chapel, richly gilt without,
Beset with shady Sycamores about:
And ever and anon he might well hear
A sound of Music steal in at his ear
As the wind gave it being: so sweet an Air
Would strike a Siren mute and ravish her.
He sees no creature that might cause the same,
But he was sure that from the Grove it came.
And to the Grove he goes to satisfy
The curiosity of Ear and Eye.
Through the thick leaved Boughs he makes a way,
Nor could the scratching Brambles make him stay;
But on he rushes, and climbs up the Hill,
Through a glade he saw, and heard his fill.
A hundred Virgins there he might espy
Prostrate before a Marble Deity:
Which by its Portraicture appeared to be
The image of Diana: on their knee
They tendered their Devotions: with sweet Airs,
Offering the Incense of their Praise and Prayers.
Their Garments all alike; beneath their Paps
Buckl'd together with a silver Claps,
And cross their snowy Silken Robes, they wore
An Azure Scarf, with Stars Embroidered over.
Their Hair in curious Tresses was knit up,
Crowned with a Silver Crescent on the top.
A Silver Bow their left hand held, their right
For their defense, held a sharp headed flight
Drawn from their broidred Quiver, neatly ti'd
In Silken Cords, and fastened to their side.
Under their Vestments something short before
White Buskins laced with ribbanding they wore.
It was a catching sight for a young eye,
That Love had fired before, he might espy
One, whom the rest had sphere-like circled round,
Whose head was with a golden Chaplet crowned.
He could not see her Face, only his ear
Was blessed with the sweet words that came from her.
He was about removing; when a crew
Of lawless Thieves their horny Trumpets blew,
And from behind the Temple unawares
Rushed in upon them, busy at their Prayers.
The Virgins to their weak resistance fly,
And made a show as if they meant to try
The mastery by opposing; but poor souls
They soon gave back, and ran away in shoals.
Yet some were taken, such as scorn of fear
Had left behind to fortify the rear.
Amongst whom their Queen was one, a braver Maid
Anaxus never beheld; she su'd and prayed
For life, to those that had no pity left,
Unless in murdering those they had bereft
Of honor. This incensed Anaxus rage,
And in he rusht, unlookt for on that stage:
Then out his Sword he draws, and dealt such blows
That struck amazement in his numerous foes.
Twenty to one there were, too great an odds,
Had not his cause drawn succor from the gods.
The first he coapt with was their Captain, whom
His Sword sent headless to seek out a Tomb.
This cowarded the valor of the rest,
A second drops to make the Worms a Feast.
A third and fourth soon followed, six he slew,
And so dismayed the fearful residue,
That down the Hill they fled: he after hies
And fell another Villain, as he flies.
To the thick Wood he chased them, 'twas in vain
To follow further; up the Hill again
Weary Anaxus climbs, in hope to find
The rescued Virgins he had left behind.
But all were gone; fear lent them wings, and they
Fled to their home affrighted any way.
They durst not stay to hazard the event
Of such a doubtful combat; yet they lent
Him many a Prayer to bring on good success,
And thankt him for his noble hardiness,
That freed them from the danger they were in,
And met the shock himself; the Virgin-Queen
Full little dreamt, what Champion Love had brought
To rescue her bright honor; had she thought
It had Anaxus been, she would have shared
In the Adventure how so e're she fared.
But fate was not so pleased, the Youth was sad
To see all gone: the many Wounds he had
Grieved him not so, as that he did not know
Her for whose sake he had adventured so.
Yet was he glad who e're she was, that he
Had come so luckily to set them free
From such a certain thraldom; night drew on
And his Wounds smarted: no Surgeon
Was near at hand to bind them up, and pour
His balmy Medicines into his Sore:
And surely he had died, but that his heart
Was yet too stout to yield for want of Art.
Looking about upon a small ascent
He spied an old Thatcht-House, all to be rent
And eaten out by time, and the foul weather,
Or rather seemed a piece of ruin; thither
Anaxus faintly hies, and in the way
He meets with old Sylvanus, who they say
Had skill in Augury, and could foretell
The event of things: he came then from his Cell
To gather a few Herbs and Roots; the Cates
He fed upon: Anaxus him entreats
To bind his Wounds up, and with care t'apply
Unto his Sores some wholesome remedy.
A trim old man he was, though* Age had plowed
Up many Wrinkles in his Brow, and bowed
His Body somewhat towered the Earth; his Hairs
Like the Snows woolly flakes made white with cares,
The Thorns that now and then plucked off the Down,
And wore away for Baldness to a Crown:
His broad kemb'd Beard hung down near to his Wast,
The only comely ornament that graced
His reverend old age, his feet were bare,
But for his leathern Sandals, which he ware
To keep them clean from galling, which compelled
Him use a staff to help him to the Field.
He durst nor trust his legs, they failed him then,
And he was almost grown a child again:
Yet sound in judgment, not. impaired in mind,
For Age had rather the Souls parts refined,
Than any way infirm'd; his Wit no less
Than 'twas in Youth, his Memory as fresh;
He failed in nothing but his earthly part,
That tended to its center; yet his heart
Was still the same, and beat as lustily:
For, as it first took life, it would last die.
Upon the Youth with greedy eye he gazed,
And on his Staff himself a little raised;
When with a tear or two with pity pressed,
From his dry Springs, he welcomes his request.
He needs not much entreaty to do good,
But having washed his Wounds and stancht the Blood,
He pours in oily Balsam; fits his clothes,
And with soft Tents he stops their gaping mouths;
Then binds them up, and with a cheerful look
Welcomes his thankful Patient, whom he took
Home with him to his Cell; whose poor outside
Promised as mean a Lodging; Pomp and Pride
(Those Peacocks of the time) never roosted there,
Content and lowliness the inmates were.
It was not so contemptible within,
There was some show of beauty that had been
Made much of in old time; but now well-nigh
Worn out with envious time; a curious eye
Might see some relics of a piece of Art,
That Psyche made, when Love first fired her heart.
It was the story of her thoughts, which she
Curiously wrought in lively imagry.
Among the rest, the thought of Jealousy
Time left untoucht, to grace Antiquity.
It was decifer'd by a timorous Dame,
Wrapped in a yellow Mantle lined with flame:
Her looks were pale, contracted with a frown,
Her eyes suspicious, wandering up and down;
Behind her, fear attended big with child,
Able to fright presumption, if she smiled.
After her flew a sigh, between two springs
Of briny water; on her Dove-like wings
She bore a Letter sealed with a Half Moon,
And superscrib'd, This from suspicion.
More than this, churlish time had left no thing
To show the piece was Psyches broidering.
Hither Sylvanus brings him, and with Cates,
Such as our wants may buy at easy rates
He feasts his Guest; hunger and sweet content
Sucks from course Fare, a courtly nourishment.
When they had supt, they talk an hour or two,
And each the other questions how things go.
Sylvanus asked him how he came so hurt,
Anaxus tells him; and, this sad report
Spins out a long discourse: the Youth inquired
What Maids they were he rescued, why so tired:
What Saint it was they worshipped, whence the Thieves,
And who that Virgin was, that he conceives
Was Queen and Sovereign Lady of the rest.
Sylvanus willing to content his Guest,
After a little pause, in a grave tone,
Thus courteously replied; quoth he, My Son,
To tell a sad relation will, I fear,
Prove but unseasonable; a young ear
Will relish it but harshly; yet since you
Desire so much to hear it, I shall do
My best to answer your desires in all
That Truth has warranted authentical.
You are not such a stranger to the State,
But you have heard of Hylas, who of late
Backed by some Fugitives, with a strong hand,
Wrested the Crown and Scepter of this Land
From the true Owner; this same Hylas when
He had what his Ambition aimed at; then
When he grew wearied with conquering
His native Countrymen, and as a King
Sat himself down to taste what fate had dressed
And served up to him at a plenteous Feast.
When the loud clangors of these civil broils
Were laid aside, and each man viewed the spoils
He had unjustly gotten, and in peace
Securely dwelt with idleness and ease;
Those Moths that fret, and eat into a State
Until they render it the scorn of fate.
Hylas puffed up with pride, and self-conceit
Of his own Valor that had made him great,
In Riot and Lasciviousness he spends
His precious hours, and through the Kingdom sends
His pand'ring Parasites to seek out gain,
To quench the unmaster'd fury of his flame.
His Agents were so cunning, many a Maid
Were to their honors loss subtly betrayed
With gifts, and golden promises of that
Which womanish ambition levelled at,
Greatness and Honor; but they mistt their aim,
Their hopeful harvest proved a crop of shame.
Amongst the many Beauties that his Spies
Marked out, to offer up a sacrifice
Unto his lust, the beauteous Florimel
Was one, whose virtue had no parallel:
She is old Memnon's Daughter, who of late
Was banished from his Country, and by fate
Driven upon our Coast, and as I guess
He was of Lemnos famed for healthfulness,
Under this borrowed name; for so it was
(Or else my Art does fail me) he did pass
Unknown to any, in a Shepherds Weed
He shrowds his Honor, now content to feed
A flock of Sheep, that had fed men before.
"It is no wonder to see goodness poor.
It was his Daughter that the lustful King
Beast-like neigh'd after; still his flatt'rers sing
Oads of her praise to heighten his desires,
To swim to Pleasure through a Hell of Fires.
The tempting baits were laid, the Nets were spread,
And gilded over to catch a Maidenhead;
But all in vain, Eugenia would not bite,
Nor sell her honor for a base delight.
He speaks in Letters a dumb eloquence
That takes the heart before it reach the sense.
But they were slighted, Letters that speak sin
Virtue sends back in scorn: he writes again,
And is again repulst, he comes himself
And desp'rately casts Anchor on the shelf
Of his own power and greatness, toles her on
To come abord to her destruction:
But she was deaf unto his Siren Charms,
Made wisely wary by another harms.
Her strong repulses were like Oil to fires,
Strengthening the increasing heat of his desires.
With mild entreats he woes her, and does swear
How that his Loves intendments noble were;
And if she would love him, he protests and vows
To make her Queen of all the State he owes.
But she was fixed, and her resolves so strong,
She vowed to meet with death, rather than wrong
Him unto whom her Maiden Faith was plight;
And he is no mean one, if my aim hits right.
When Hylas saw ^o cunning would prevail
To make her his, his angry looks waxt pale,
His heart called home the blood to feed revenge,
That there fate plotting to work out his ends.
At length it hatched this mischief; Memnon's bid
To chide his Daughters coyness; so he did,
And she became the bolder, chid his checks,
And answered his injunctions with neglects.
Whereat the King enraged, laid hands upon her,
And was a dragging her to her dishonor.
When Memnon's Servants at their Mistress cry
Rusht in and rescued her, 'twas time to fly,
Hylas had else met with a just reward
For his foul lust: he had a slender guard,
And durst not stand the hazard: Memnon's men
Would have pursued, but they came off again
At Memnon's call: the woeful Florimel,
(For so her name was) on the pavement fell,
Waiting the stroke of Death, life was about
To leave her had not Memnon found her out.
Anaxus all this while gave heedful ear
To what he spoke, and lent him many a tear
To point out the full stops of his discourse;
But that he calls her Florimel, the force
Of his strong passions had persuaded him
It had been his Clarinda, (as in time
The story makes her;) spare thy tears my Son
Said old Sylvanus; so his tale went on.
These are but sad beginnings of events
Spun out to sorrows height; the foul intents
Of Hylas being frustrate, and his fires
Wanting no fuel to increase desires;
He lays a snare to catch his Maiden prize
By murdering her old Father; and h^s spies
Were sent to find his haunt out: Memnon, he
Of old experienced in Court policy,
Wisely forecasts the event, and studies how
He might prevent his mischiefs e're they grow
Too ripe, and near at hand to be put by
By all the art and strength he had; to dye
For him that now was old* he nothing cared,
Death at no time finds goodness unprepared.
But how he might secure his Florimel,
That thought most troubled him; he knew full well
She was the white was aimed at; were she sure,
He made but slight of what he might endure.
He was but yet a stranger to those friends
That his true worth had gained him, yet h' intends
To try some one of them; anon his fears
And jealous doubts call back those former cares.
He thinks on many ways for her defense;
But except Heaven finds, none save innocence.
Memnon at last resolves next day to send her
To Vestas Cloister, and there to commend her
Unto the Virgin Goddesses protection,
And to that purpose gave her such direction,
As fitted her to be a Vestal Nun,
And time seemed tedious till the deed was done.
The fatal night before that wished for day,
When Florimel was to be packt away,
Hylas besets the House with armed men,
Loath that his Lust should be deceived again.
At midnight they brake in, Memnon arose,
And e're he called his Servants, in he goes
Into his Daughters Chamber, and besmears
Her Breast and Hands with Blood; the rest her fears
Counsel her to; each hand took up a knife
To Oppose her foe, or let out her own life,
If need should be, to save her honored name
From Lusts black sullies, and never dying shame.
Memnon then calls his Servants, they arise,
And wanting light, they make their hands their eyes.
Like Seamen in a Storm about they go,
At their wits end, not knowing what to do.
Down a Back Stairs they hurried to the Hall,
Where the most noise was; in they venture all,
And all were suddenly surpised, in vain
Poor men they struggle to get loose again.
A very word was punished with a Wound,
Here they might see their aged Master bound,
And though too weak to make resistance found,
Wounded almost to death; his hoary hairs
Now near half worn away with age and cares,
Torn from his Head and Beard; he scorned to cry
Or beg for mercy from their cruelty.
He fared the worse because he would not tell,
What was become of his fair Florimel.
She heard not this, though she set open her ears
To listen to the whispers of her fears.
Sure had she heard how her good Father fared,
Her very cries would have the doors unbar'd*
To let her out to plead his innocence;
But he had locked her up in a close Room,
Free from suspicion, and 't had been her Tomb,
Had not the Fates prevented; search was made
In every corner, and great care was had,
Lest she should escape; but yet they mist the Lass:
They sought her every where but where she was.
Under the Bed there was a Trap-door made,
That opened to a Room where Memnon laid
The Treasure and the Jewels which he brought
From Lemnos with him: Round about they sought,
Under and over the Bed; in Chests they pry,
And in each hole where scarce a Cat might lie;
But could not find the cunning contrived door
That opened Bed and all: then down they tore
The painted Hangings, and survey the Walls,
Yet found no by way out: Then Hylas calls
To know if they had found her; they reply,
She was not there: Then with a wrathful eye,
Looking on Memnon; Doting fool (said he)
Wilt not thou tell me where she is: if she
Be in this house concealed, I have a way
Shall find her out; if thou have mind to pray
Be speedy, thou have not an hour to live.
I Will teach thee what it is for to deceive
Him that would honor thee: Would shame me rather,
Answered old Memnon, and undo a Father,
By shaming of his Daughter; Lustful King,
Call you this honor? death's not such a thing,
As can fright Memnon; he and I have met
Up to the knees in Blood, and honored Sweat,
Where his Sithe mowed down Legions, he and I
Are well acquainted; it is no news to die.
Do thou so brave it ( Hylas said) I Will try
What temper you are made on by and by.
Set fire upon the House, since you love death
I Will teach you a new way to let out breath.
This word struck Memnon mute, not that he feared
Death in what shape soever he appeared;
But that his Daughter, whom as yet his care
Had kept from ravishing, should with him share
In such a bitter potion; this was that
Which more than Death afflicted him, that Fate
Should now exact a double Sacrifice,
And prove more cruel than his Enemies.
This struck him to the heart, the House was fired,
And his sad busy thoughts were welnigh tired
With studying what to do: when as a Post
That had out-rid report, brought news the Coast
Shined full of fired Beacons, how his Lords
Instead of Sleep betook themselves to Swords.
How that the Foe was near, and meant e're day
To make his Court and Treasury their prey.
How that the Soldiers were at their wits end
For the absence of their King, and did intend,
Unless he did prevent them suddenly,
To choose a new one. Hylas fearfully
Did entertain this news, calls back his men,
And through bypath he steals to Court again,
Leaving the House on fire; the Thatch was wet,
And burnt but slowly: Memnon's Servants get
Their Master loose, and with their Teeth unties
The bloody Cords that binds the Sacrifice,
That Fate was pleased to spare; they quench the fire,
Whilst he runs to his Daughter; both admire
Their little hoped for wondrous preservation,
Praising their Gods with servent adoration.
Next day he shifts his Florimel away
Unto the Vestal Cloister, there to stay
Till he heard how things went, and what success
Befell the Wars; his men themselves address,
At his command to wait upon the Wars,
To purchase freedom, or by Death, or Scars.
Memnon himself keeps home, attended on
But by a stubbed Boy; his Daughter gone,
His fears 'gan lessen: Hylas was overthrown,
And bold Alexis Conquest gained a Crown:
And worthily he wears it; with his Reign
Desired Peace stepped on the Stage again.
The Laws were executed, Justice done,
And civil Order staid Confusion.
Sloth and her sister Ease were banished,
And all must labor now to get their bread:
Yet Peace is not so settled, but we find
Some work for Swords; the Foe has left behind
Some gleanings of his greater strength, that still
Commit great outrages, that rob and kill
All that they meet with, ravishing chaste Maids
Both of their Life and Honor; some such Lads
Were they that set upon that Virgin crew,
That were redeemed so worthily by you.
A hundred Virgins monthly do frequent
Diana's Temple, where with pure intent
They tender their Devotions: one is chose
By lot to be their Queen, to whom each owes
Her best respect, and for this month I guess
Their Queen was Florimel, now Votaress.
Sylvanus here brake off; 'twas late, and sleep
Like Lead hung on their eye lids; heaven them keep.
We Will leave them to their rest a while, and tell
What to Thealma in this space befell.
Anaxus had no sooner taken his leave
Of his glad Sister, making. her believe
That he would shortly visit her, when she
Led forth her Flock to Field more joyfully
Than she was wont to do; those rosy stains
That nature wont to lend her from her veins,
Began t'appear upon her cheeks, and raise
Her sickly beauty to contend for praise.
She trickt her self in all her best attire,
As if she meant this day t'invite desire
To fall in love with her: her looser hair
Hung on her shoulders, sporting with the air:
Her brow a Coronet of Rose-buds crowned
With loving Woodbines sweet embraces bound.
Two Globe-like Pearls were pendent to her ears,
And on her Breast a costly Gem she wears,
An Adamant in fashion like a heart,
Whereon Love sat a plucking out a Dart,
With this same Motto graven round about
On a gold Border; Sooner in than out.
This Gem Clearchus gave her, when unknown,
At Tilt his Valor won her for his own.
Instead of Bracelets on her Wrists, she wore
A pair of golden Shackles, chained before
Unto a silver Ring enameled Blue,
Whereon in golden Letters to the view
This Motto was presented, Bound yet free,
And in a true Loves Knot a T. and C,
Buckled it fast together; her silk Gown
Of grassie green, in equal pleits hung down
Unto the Earth: and as she went the Flowers
Which she had broider'd on it at spare hours,
Were wrought so to the life, they seemed to grow
In a green Field, and as the Wind did blow,
Sometimes a Lilly, then a Rose takes place,
And blushing seems to hide it in the Grass:
And here and there gold Oaes among Pearls she strew,
That seemed like shining Gloworms in the dew.
Her sleeves were Tinsel wrought with leaves of green,
In equal distance spangeled between,
And shadowed over with a thin Lawn cloud,
Through which her workmanship more graceful showed.
A silken Scrip and Shepherds Crook she had,
The badg of her profession; and thus clad,
Thealma leads her milky Drove to Field,
Proud of so brave a guide: had you beheld
With what a majesty she trod the ground,
How sweet she smiled, and angerly she frowned:
You would have thought, it had Minerva bee^,
Come from high Jove to dwell on earth again.
The reason why she made her self thus fine
Was a sweet Dream she had; some poor Divine
Had whispered to her soul Clearchus lived,
And that he was a King for whom she grieved:
She thought she saw old Hymen in Loves bands,
Tie with devotion both their hearts and hands.
She was a dreaming farther, when her Maid
Told her the Sun was up: she well appaid
With what her greedy thoughts had tasted on,
Quickly gat up; and hurried with her Dream,
Thus tricks her self, having a mind to seem
What she would be, but was not; strong conceit
So wrought upon her; those that are born great
Have higher thoughts than the low-minded Clown,
He seldom dreams himself into a Crown.
Caretta, modest girl, she thought it strange,
And wondered greatly at so sudden change;
But durst not be so bold to ask the cause,
Obedience had prescribed her knowledge Laws:
And she would not transgress them; yet it made
Her call to mind what garments once she had,
And when her Father lived, how brave she went,
But humble-minded wench she was content.
She knew the vanity of Pomp and Pride,
Which if not plucked off, must be laid aside
One day; and to speak truth, she had a mind
So decked with rich endowments, that it shined
In all her actions; how so e're she goes,
Few Maids have such an inside to their clothes.
Yet her Dames Love had tricket her up so brave,
As she thought fit to make her Maid, and gave
Her such habiliments to set her forth,
As rather graced than stained her Mistress worth.
They made her never the prouder, she was still
As ready and obedient to her will.
Thus to the Field Thealma and her Maid
Cheerfully went; and, in a friendly shade
They sat them down to work; the wench had brought,
As her Dame bid, her Lute; and as she wrought,
Thealma played and sang this cheerful Air,
As if she then would bid adieu to care.
I.
Fly hence Despair, and Hearts-benumming fears,
Presume no more to fright
Me from my quiet rest:
My budding hopes have wiped away my tears,
And filled me with delight,
To cure my wounded breast.
II.
Mount up sad thoughts, that whilom humbly straid
Upon the lowly plain,
And fed on naught but grief.
My angry fate with me is well appaid,
And smiles on me again,
To give my heart relief.
III.
Rejoice, poor heart, forget those wounding woes
That robbed thee of thy peace,
And drowned thee in despair,
Still thy strong passions with a sweet repose,
To give my soul some ease,
And rid me of my care.
My thoughts presage by Fortunes frown,
I shall climb up unto a Crown.
She had not ended her delicious lay,
When Cleon and old Rhotus, who that day
Were journeying to Court, by chance drew near,
As she was singing, and to enrich their ear
They made a stand behind the hedge to hear
Her sweet soul-melting accents, that so won
Their best attention, that when she had done,
The Voice had ravished so the good old men,
They wished in vain she would begin again;
And now they long to see what Goddess 'twas,
That owned so sweet a voice, and with such grace
Chid her sad Woes away: The cause that drew
Rhotus to Court was this; after a view
Made by the victor King of all his Peers
And well deserving men that force or fears
Had banished from their own, and Peace begun
To smile upon Arcadia; to shun
The future cavils that his Subjects might
Make to recover their usurped right:
He made enquiry what each man possessed
During Lysander's Reign, to re-invest
Them in their honored places, and such Lands
As Tyranny had wrung out of his hands.
And minding now to gratify his Friends,
Like a good Prince he for old Rhotus sends;
As he to whom he owed his Life, and all
The Honor he had rose to; at his call
Old Rhotus quickly comes, leaving his trade
To an old Servant whom long custom had
Wedded to that vocation; so that he
Aimed at no higher honor than to be
A Master-fisher: Cleon, who of late
As you have heard, came from the Lemnian State
In search of one whose name he yet kept close,
With Rhotus his kind Host to Court he goes,
And with him his Son Dorus: in the way,
As you have heard, Thealma made them stay,
And not contented to content their ear
With her sweet Music, towered her they drew near;
And wondering at her bravery and her beauty,
They thought to greet her with a common duty,
Would ill become them: humbly on their knee
They tendered their respect, and Prince-like, she
Thanked them with nodds: her high thoughts still aspire,
And their low lootings lift them a step higher.
Old Cleon eyed her with such curious heed,
He thought she might be what she proved indeed,
Thealma: her rich Gems confirmed the same,
For some he knew, yet durst not ask her name.
Caretta viewing Rhotus (loving wench)
As if instinct had taught her confidence,
Runs from her Mistress, contradicts all fears,
And asks him Blessing, speaking in her tears.
Lives then Caretta? said he, Yes, quoth she,
I am Caretta, if you will Father me.
Then Heaven has heard my Prayers, or thine rather,
It is thy goodness makes me still a Father,
A thousand times he kissed the Girl, whilst she
Receives them as his Blessings on her knee.
At length he took her up, and to her Dame
With thanks returned her: saying, If a blame
Be due unto your Handmaids fond neglect
To do you service, let your Frown reflect
On her poor Father. She, as Children use,
Is over joy'd to find the thing they lose.
There needs no such apology, kind Sir,
Answered Thealma, duty binds her*
More strictly to the obedience of a Father,
Than of a Mistress; I commend her rather
For tend'ring what she owed so willingly;
Believed I love her for it, she and I
Have drank sufficiently of sorrows cup,
And were content sometimes to Dine and Sup
With the sad story of our woes; poor cates
To feed on; yet we bought them at dear rates:
Many a tear they cost us: you are blessed
In finding of a Daughter, and the best
(Though you may think I flatter) that e're lived
To glad a Father; as with her I grieved
For his supposed loss, so being found
I cannot but rejoice with her; the wound
Which you have cured in her, gives ease to mine,
And I find comfort in her Medicine.
I had a Father, but I lost him too,
And wilfully; my Girl, so did not thou;
Nor can I hope to find him, but in wrath
I lost his love in keeping of my Faith.
She would have spoken more, but sighs and tears
Brake from their prison to revive her fears.
Cleon, although he knew her by her speech,
And by some Jewels which she wore, too rich
For any Shepherdess to wear, forbear
To interrupt her; he so loved to hear
Her speak, whom he so often had heard was drowned,
And still, good man* he kneeled upon the ground,
And wept for joy. Why do you kneel, said she,
Am I a Saint, what do you see in me
To merit such respects? pray rise, it is I
That own a reverence to such gravity,
That kneeling better would become, I know
No worth in me to worl you down so low.
Yes, gracious Madam, what I pay is due
To none, for ought I know, so much as you.
Is not your name Thealma? has your eye
Never seen this face at Lemnos, I can spy
Even through those clouds of grief, the stamp of him
That once I called my Sovereign; age and time
Has brought him to his Grave, that bed of dust,
Where when our night is come, sleep we all must.
Yet in despite of Death his honored name
Lives, and will ever in the vote of Fame.
Death works but on corruption, things Divine,
Cleans'd from the dross about them, brighter shine:
So does his Virtues. What was earth is gone,
His heavenly part is left to crown his Son,
If I could find him. You may well conceive
At his sad tale what cause she had to grieve;
Reply she could not, but in sighs and tears,
Yet to his killing language lent her ears:
And had not grief enforced him make a pause
She had been silent still; she had most cause
To wail her Fathers loss: Oh unkind Fate,
Replied Thealma; it is now too late
To wish I Would not offended; cruel love
To force me to offend, and not to prove
So kind to let him live to punish her,
Whose fault, I fear me, was his murderer.
O my Clearchus, 'twas through thee I fell
From a Child's duty; yet I do not well
To blame thee for it, sweetly may thou sleep,
Thou and thy faults lie buried in the deep,
And I Will not rake them up: ye partial powers,
To number out to me so many hours,
And punish him so soon; why do I live?
Can there be hope that Spirits can forgive?
Yes gracious Madam, his departing Soul
Sealed up your Pardon with a Prayer t'enroul
Amongst his honored Acts, left you his Blessing,
And called it love, which you do style transgressing,
Left you a Dowry worthy a loved Child,
With whom he willingly was reconciled.
Take comfort then; Kings are but men, and they
As well as poor men must return to Clay.
With that she op't the floodgates of her eyes,
And offered up a wealthy sacrifice
Of thankful tears, to expiate her crimes,
And drown their memory, lest after times
Might blab them to the world. Rhotus gave ear
To all that past, and lent her many a tear:
The Alms that sweet compassion bestows
On a poor heart that wants to cure its woes.
Caretta melted too, though she had found
What her poor Mistress grieved at, all drank round
Of the same briny cup. Rhotus at last
'Gan thus to comfort her: Madam, tho have
To obey my Sovereigns command would fit
The Duty of a Subject better; yet
I will incur the hazard of his frown
To do you service; Glory and Renown
The mark the noble Spirits still aim at
To crown their Virtues, did so animate.
Alexis our new Sovereign, once my guest
(And glad he was to be so) that his Breast
Full of high thoughts, could relish no content
In a poor Cottage. One day as he went
With me unto our Annual Games, where he
Puts in for one to try the mastery,
And from them all came off a Victor, so
That all admired him; on him they bestow
The Wreath of Conquest; at that time this State
Was governed by a Tyrant, one that Fate
Thrust in to scourge the peoples wickedness,
That had abused the blessing of their peace,
As he abused his honor, which he gained
By cruel usurpation; for he reigned
More like a Beast than Man; Fortune at length
Grew weary of him too; weak'ning his strength
By wantoning his people, without Law
Or Exercise to keep their minds in awe.
Which the exiled Nobility perceiving,
Took heart again, some new strong hope conceiving
Through the enemies neglect, to regain that
Which formerly they lost; so it pleased Fate
To change the scene: most of the noble Youth
The former War consumed, and to speak truth,
Unless some few old men, there was left none
Worthy to be a Leader; all was gone:
Wherefore when they had seen what he could do,
And by that guessed, what he durst undergo
(If they were put to it) they Alexis chose
To lead their Warlike Troops against their Foes.
His Valor spoke him noble, and's behavior
Was such as won upon the Peoples Favor;
His speech so powerful, that the hearer thought
All his Entreats Commands: so much it wrought
Upon their awful minds; this new come Stranger
They chose to be their Shield 'twixt them and danger;
And he deceived not the expectation
They fixed upon him: Hylas was overthrown,
And he returned in triumph: Joy was now
Arcadias Theme; and all Oblations vow
To their Protector Mars: to quite him then,
They choose him King, the wonderment of men.
'Twas much, yet what they gave was not their own,
They owed him for it; what they gave he won,
And won it bravely. When this Youth I found
Hanging upon the craggy Rock half drowned,
I little dreamt that he should mount so high
As to a Crown; yet such a Majesty
Shined on his look sometimes, as showed a mind
Too great to be, to a low state confined:
Tho while he lived with me, such sullen clouds
Of grief hung on his brow, and such sad floods
Rather than briny tears, streamed from his eyes,
As made him seem a man of miseries.
And often as he was alone, I heard him
Sigh out Thealma; I as often cheered him.
May not this be the man you grieve for so,
Your name's Thealma, and for ought I know,
He may not be Alexis; perhaps fear
Borrowed that nickname, to conceal him here.
Take comfort, Madam, on my life it is he,
If my conjecture fail me not, then be
Not so dejected till the truth be tried:
And that shall be my charge, Cleon replied;
Thanks noble Rhotus, this discovery
Binds me to thee for ever: thou and I
Will to the Court; could I Anaxus find
My work were ended; if Fate prove so kind,
I hope a comical event shall crown
These tragical beginnings; do not drown
Your hopes (sweet Madam) that I so would fain
Live to your comfort, when we meet again,
Which will be speedily; the news we bring
I trust shall be Clearchus is a King.
Most noble Cleon, thanks; may it prove so
Answered Thealma; yet before you go,
Take this same Jewel, this Clearchus gave me
When first I did consent that he should have me:
And if he still do love, as is a doubt,
For he never has a power to work Love out.
By this you shall discover who he is,
If Fortune have assigned me such a bliss
As once more to be his, she makes amends
For all my sorrow; but if she intends
Still to afflict me, I can suffer still,
And tire her cruelty, though it be to kill:
I have a patience that she cannot wrong
With all her flatteries; a heart too strong
To shake at such a weak artillery,
As is her frowns: no Cleon, I dare die,
And could I meet Death nobly I would so,
Rather than be her scorn, and take up woe
At interest to enrich her power, that grows
Greater by grieving at our overthrows.
No Cleon, I can be as well content
With my poor Cot, this woolly regiment,
As with a Palace; or to govern men;
And I can Queen it when time serves again.
Go, and my hopes go with you; if stern Fate
Bid you return with news to mend my state,
I Will welcome it with thanks; if not, I know
The worst on it, Cleon, I am now as low
As she can throw me. Thus resolved, they leave her,
And to the Court the two Lords wend together,
Leaving young Dorus, Cleons Son behind
To wait upon Thealma; Love was kind
In that to fair Caretta, that till now
Never felt what passion meant, yet knew not how
To vent it but with blushes; modest shame
Forbad it yet to grow into a flame.
Love works by time, and time will make her bolder,
Talk warms desire, when absence makes it colder.
Home now Thealma wends 'twixt hope and fear,
Sometimes she smiles, anon she drops a tear
That stole along her cheeks, and falling down
Into a pearl, it freezeth with her frown.
The Sun was set before she reached the Fold,
And sparkling Vesper nights approach has told.
She left the Lovers to enfold her Sheep,
And in she went, resolved to sup with sleep:
If thought would give her leave, unto her rest
We leave her for a while, Sylvanus guest
You know we lately left under his cure,
And now it is high time my Muse to lewre
From her too tedious weary flight, and tell
What to Anaxus that brave Youth befell.
Let Us pause a while, she will make the better flight,
The following lines shall feed your appetite.
Bright Cynthia twice her silver horns had changed,
And through the Zodiacks twelve signs had ranged,
Before Anaxus wounds were thoroughly well,
In the mean while Sylvanus 'gan to tell
Him of his future fortune; for he knew
From what sad cause his minds distempers grew.
He had ylearnt as you have heard while e're,
The art of wise Soothsaying, and could clear
The doubts that puzzle the strong working brain,
And make the intricat'st anigmas plain:
His younger years in Egypt Schools he spent,
From whence he sucked this knowledge; not content
With what the common Sciences could teach,
Those were too shallow springs for his deep reach,
That aimed at Learnings utmost: that hid skill
That out-doth nature, hence he sucked his fill
Of Divine knowledge: 'twas not all inspired,
It cost some pains that made him so admired.
He told him what he was, what Country Air
He first drew in, what his intendments were;
How 'twas for love, he left his native Soil
To tread upon Arcadia, and with toil
Sought what he must not have, a lovely Dame
But art went not so far to tell her name.
Heaven that does control Art, would not reveal it,
Or if it did he wisely did conceal it.
He told him of his Fathers death, and that
The State had lately sent for him, whereat
Anaxus starting; Stay old man (quoth he)
I Will hear no more; thy cruel Augury
Wounds me at heart, can thy Art cure that wound?
Sylvanus? No, no Medicine is found
In humane skill to cure that tender part,
When the Soul's pained, it finds no help of Art:
Yet Sir (said he) Art may have power to ease,
Though not to cure the sick Souls maladies.
And though my sadder news distaste your ear,
It Is such as I must tell, and you must hear.
I know y' are sent for, strict enquiry's made
Through all Arcadia for you; plots are laid
(By some that wish not well unto the State)
How to deprive you of a Crown; but Fate
Is pleased not so to have it, and by me
Chalks out a way for you to Sovereignty.
I say again, she whom you love, tho true
And spotless constant, must not marry you.
One you call Sister, to divide the strife,
Fate has decreed, must be your Queen and Wife.
Hie to the Arcadian Court, what there you hear
Perhaps may trouble you; but do not fear,
All shall be well at length, the blessed event
Shall crown your wishes with a sweet content.
Enquire no farther, I must tell no more,
Here Fate sets limits to my Art: before
You have gone half a League, under a Beech
You Will find your man enquiring of a Witch
What is become of you? the Beldame's fly,
And will allure by her strange subtilty
The strongest Faith to error; have a care
She tempt you not to fall in love with Air.
She Will show you Wonders; you shall see and hear
That which shall rarely please both eye and ear.
But be not won to wantonness, but shun
All her enticements: credit not, my Son,
That what you see is real; Son be wise,
And set a watch before thy ears and eyes.
She loves thee not, and will work all she can
To give thy Crown unto another man.
But fear not, there is a power above her skill
Will have it otherwise, do what she will.
But Fate thinks fit to try thy constancy,
Then arm thy self against her Sorcery.
Take this same Herb, and if thy strength begin
To fail at any time, and lean to sin,
Smell to it, and wipe thine eyes therewith, that shall
Quicken thy duller sight to dislike all,
And reinforce thy reason to oppose
All her temptations, and fantastic shows.
Farewell Anaxus, hie to Court, my Son,
Or I Will be there before thee! 'Twas high noon,
When after many thanks to his kind Host,
Anaxus took his leave, and quickly lost
The way he was directed; on he went
As his Fate led him, full of hardement.
Down in a gloomy valley thick with shade,
Which too aspiring hanging Rocks had made,
That shut out day and barred the glorious Sun
From prying into the actions there done;
Set full of Box, and Cypress, Poplar, Yew,
And hateful Elder that in Thickets grew,
Amongst whose Boughs the Scritch-owl and Nightcrow,
Sadly recount their Prophecies of woe,
Where leather-winged Batts, that hate the light
Fan the thick Air, more sooty than the night.
The ground o're-grown with Weeds, and bushy Shrubs,
Where milky Hedg-hogs nurse their prickly Cubs:
And here and there a Mandrake grows, that strikes
The hearers dead with their loud fatal shrieks;
Under whose spreading leaves the ugly Toad,
The Adder, and the Snake make their abode.
Here dwelt Orandra, so the Witch was hight,
And thither had she toal'd him by a slight:
She knew Anaxus was to go to Court,
And envying Virtue, she made it her sport,
To hinder him, sending her airy Spies
Forth with Delusions to entrap his Eyes,
And captivate his Ear with various Tones,
Sometimes of Joy, and otherwhiles of Mones:
Sometimes he hears delicious sweet lays
Wrought with such curious descant as would raise
Attention in a Stone: anon a groan
Reaches his Ear, as if it came from one
That craved his help; and by and by he spies
A beauteous Virgin with such catching Eyes,
As would have fired a Hermits chill desires
Into a flame; his greedy eye admires
The more than human beauty of her Face,
And much ado he had to shun the grace
Conceit had shaped her out: so like his Love,
That he was once about in vain to prove,
Whether 'twas his Clarinda, yea, or no,
But he bethought him of his Herb, and so
The Shadow vanished, many a weary step
It led the Prince that pace with it still kept,
Until it brought him by a hellish power
Unto the entrance of Orandras Bower,
Where underneath an Elder Tree he spied
His man Pandevius pale and hollow-eyed;
Enquiring of the cunning Witch what fate
Betid his Master; they were newly fate
When his approach disturbed them; up she rose,
And towered Anaxus (envious Hag) she goes;
Pandevius she had charmed into a maze,
And struck him mute, all he could do was gaze.
He called him by his name, but all in vain,
Echo returns Pandevius back again;
Which made him wonder, when a sudden fear
Shook all his joints: she cunning Hag drew near,
And smelling to his Herb, he recollects
His wandering Spirits, and with anger checks
His coward Fears; resolved now to out-dare
The worst of Dangers, whatsoever they were,
He eyed her over and over, and still his eye
Found some addition to deformity.
An old decrepid Hag, she was grown white
With frosty Age, and withered with Despite
And self-consuming Hate; in Furrs yclad,
And on her Head a thrummy Cap she had.
Her knotty Locks like to Alecto's Snakes
Hang down about her shoulders, which she shakes
Into disorder; on her furrowed Brow
One might perceive time had been long at plough.
Her Eyes like Candle-snuffs by age sunk quite
Into their Sockets, yet like Cats-eyes, bright:
And in the darkest night like fire they shined,
The ever-open windows of her mind.
Her swarthy cheeks Time, that all things consumes,
Had hollowed flat unto her Toothless Gums.
Her hairy Brows did meet above her Nose,
That like an Eagles Beak so crooked grows,
It well nigh kissed her Chin; thick bristled Hair
Grew on her upper Lip, and here and there
A rugged Wart with grisly Hairs behung,
Her Breasts shrunk up, her Nails and Fingers long,
Her left lent on a staff, in her right hand
She always carried her enchanting Wand.
Splay-footed, beyond Nature, every part
So patternless deformed, 'twould puzzle Art
To make her counterfeit; only her Tongue
Nature had that most exquisitely strung.
Her oily Language came so smoothly from her,
And her quaint action did so well become her,
Her winning Rhetoric met with no trips,
But chained the dull'st attention to her lips.
With greediness he heard, and tho he strove
To shake her off, the more her words did move*
She wooed him to her Cell, called him her Son,
And with fair promises she quickly won
Him to her beck; or rather he to try
What she could do, did willingly comply
With her request; into her Cell he goes,
And with his Herb he rubs his Eyes and Nose.
His man stood like an image still, and star'd
As if some fearful prodigy had scared
Life from its earthy mansion; but she soon
Unloos'd the Charms, and after them he run.
Her Cell was hewn out in the Marble Rock,
By more than human Art; she need not knock,
The door stood always open, large and wide,
Grown over with woolly Moss on either side,
And interwove with Ivies flattering twines,
Through which the Carbuncle and Di'mond shines;
Not set by Art, but there by Nature sown
At the Worlds Birth, so Star-like bright they shone.
They served instead of Tapers to give light
To the dark entry, where perpetual Night,
Friend to black Deeds, and Sire of Ignorance
Shuts out all knowledge; left her Eye by chance
Might bring to light her Follies: in they went,
The ground was strow'd with Flowers, whose sweet scent
Mixed with the choice Persumes from India brought,
Intoxicates his brain, and quickly caught
His credulous sense; the Walls were gilt and set
With Precious Stones, and all the Roof was fret
With a gold Vine, whose straggling branches spread
All over the Arch; the swelling Grapes were red;
This Art had made of Rubies clustered so,
To the quick'st eye they more than seemed to grow.
About the Walls lascivious Pictures hung,
Such as whereof loose Ovid sometimes sung.
On either side a crew of dwarfish Elves,
Held waxen Tapers taller than themselves:
Yet so well shaped unto their little stature,
So Angel-like in face, so sweet in feature.
Their rich attire so differing; yet so well
Becoming her that wore it, none could tell
Which was the fairest, which the handsomest decked.
Or which of them Desire would soon'st affect.
After a low salute they all 'gan sing,
And circle in the Stranger in a Ring.
Orandra to her Charms was stepped aside,
Leaving her guest half won, and wanton eyed.
He had forgot his Herb: cunning delight
Had so be witch'd his ears, and blear'd his sight,
And captivated all his senses so,
That he was not himself; nor did he know
What place he was in, or how he came there,
But greedily he feeds his Eye and Ear
With what would ruin him; but that kind Fate
That contradicts all power subordinate,
Prevented Arts intents; a silly fly
(As there were many) light into his eye,
And forced a tear to drown her self, when he
Impatient that he could not so well see,
Lifts up his hand wherein the Herb he held,
To wipe away the moisture that distilled
From his still smarting eye; he smelt the scent
Of the strong Herb, and so incontinent
Recovered his strayed Wit: his Eyes were cleared,
And now he liked not what he saw or heard.
This knew Orandra well; and plots anew
How to entrap him: next unto his view
She represents a Banquet ushered in
By such a shape, as she was sure would win
His appetite to ^aste; so like she was,
To his Clarinda both in shape and face.
So voic'd, so habited, of the same gate
And comely gesture; on her Brow in state
Sat such a Princely Majesty, as he
Had noted in Clarinda; save that she
Had a more wanton eye, that here and there
Rolled up and down, not settling any where.
Down on the ground she falls his hand to kiss,
And with her tears bedews it; cold as Ice
He felt her Lips, that yet, inflamed him so,
That he was all on fire the truth to know,
Whether she was the same she did appear,
Or whether some fantastic form it were,
Fashioned in his imagination
By his still working thoughts; so fixed upon
His loved Clarinda, that his fancy strove
Even with her shadow to express his love.
He took her up, and was about to 'quite
Her Tears with Kisses, when to clear his sight
He wipes his Eyes, and with his Herb of Grace
Smooths his rough Lip to kiss with greater grace:
So the Herbs virtue stole into his Brain,
And kept him off; hardly did he refrain
From sucking in Destruction from her Lip.
(Sins Cup will poison at the smallest sip,)
She weeps, and wooes again with subtleness,
And with a Frown she chides his backwardness.
Have you so soon (sweet Prince said she) forgot
Your own beloved Clarinda? are you not
The same you were, that you so slightly set
By her that once you made the Cabinet
Of your choice Counsel? has my constant heart
(As Innocene unspotted) no desert,
To keep me yours? or has some worthier Love
Stole your Affections? what is it should move
You to dislike so soon? must I still taste
No other Dish but Sorrow? when we last
Emptied our Souls into each others Breast
It was not so, Anaxus, or at least
I thought you meant what then you promised me.
With that she wept afresh; Are you then she,
Answered Anaxus, does Clarinda live?
Just thus she spoke, how fain I would believe!
With that she seemed to fall into a swound,
And stooping down to raise her from the ground,
That he might use both hands to make more haste,
He puts his Herb into his Mouth, whose taste
Soon changed his mind: He lifts her, but in vain
His hands fell of, and she fell down again.
With that she lent him such a frown as would
Have killed a common Lover, and made cold
Even lust it self: Orandra fumes and frets,
And stamping bites the lip to see her Nets
So long a catching Souls: once more she looks
Into the secrets of her hellish Books.
She bares her Breast, and gives her Spirit suck,
And drinks a Cup in hope of better luck.
Anaxus still the Airy Shadow eyed,
Which he thought dead, conceit the truth belied.
This cunning failing, out she drew a knife,
And as if she had meant to let out life,
In passion aimed it at her Breast, and said
Farewell Anaxus; but her hand he staid,
And from her wrung her knife: Art thou, said he,
Clarinda then? and kissed her: can it be,
That Fate so loves Anaxus? still with Tears
She answered him, and more divine appears.
His Herb was now forgot, lust had stolen in
With a loose kiss, and tempted him to sin.
A Bed was near, and she seemed sick and faint:
(Women to Cupid's sport, need no constraint.)
Down on the Bed she threw her self, and turned
Her blushing Beauty from him; still he burned,
And with entreaties her seeming coyness wooed
To meet with his Embraces, and bestowed
Vollies of Kisses on her icy Cheek,
That wrangled with their fire: she would not speak,
But sighed and sob'd, that bellows of desire
Into a flame had quickly blown his fire.
Now did Orandra laugh within her sleeve,
Thinking all was cocksure, one might perceive
Even in that withered Hag, an amorous look,
'Twas for her self she trained him to her hook.
Softly she steals unto the Bed, and peeps
Betwixt the Curtains, nearer then she creeps,
And to her Spirit whispers her command:
With that the Spirit seemed to kiss his hand,
Which stewed him into sweat; a cloth she wants
To wipe his face, and his enflamed heart pants
Beyond its usual temper for some air,
To cool the passions that lay boiling there.
Out of his Bosom where his Nosegay was,
He draws a Napkin, so it came to pass
In plucking of it out, the Nosegay fell
Upon her face; when with a countenance fell,
She started from him, cursed him, and with threats
Leaped from the Bed, Orandra stamps and frets,
And bit her lip; she knew the cause full well
Why her Charms failed her, but yet could not tell
With all her art, how she might get from him
That Sovereign Herb: for touch it she durst not,
And at this time Anaxus had forgot
The virtue of it, as in a maze he lay
At her soon starting from him; Cast away,
Said she, that stinking Nosegay: with that he
Bethinks of it; but it was well that she
Put him in mind on it; it had else been lost,
He little knew how much that Nosegay cost.
He seeks for it, finds it, smells to it, and by it
Turns out his lust, and reassumes his wit.
No Hag, said he, if this do vex thee so,
I Will make thee glad to smell to it e're I go.
With that he leaps unto her cursing ripe,
And with his Herb the Witches face did wipe.
Whereat she fell to the earth, the lights went out,
And darkness hung the Chamber ro^^d about.
A hellish yelling noise was each where heard,
Sounds that would make even Valors self afeard
A stifling scent of Brimstone he might smell,
Such as the damned Souls suck in in Hell.
He kept his powerful Herb still at his Nose,
And towered the entry of the Room he goes.
For tho 'twas more than midnight dark, yet he
Found the way out again. Orrandra she
Threw curses after him, and he might hear
Her often say, I Will fit you for this gear.
At the Caves mouth he found his careless man,
Wrapped in the Witches charms; do what he can
He could not wake him, such sweet lullabies
Pleasure sang to him, till he rubbed his eyes
With his rare Herb; then starting up he leaps
For joy to see his Master, that accepts
His love with thanks; from thence they make no haste,
Yet where they were they knew not; at the last
They came into a Plain, where a small Brook
Did Snake-like creep with many a winding nook,
And by it here and there a Shepherds Cot
Was lowly built, to one of them they got
T'enquire the way to Court: now night drew on,
It was a good old man they lighted on,
Height Eubolus, of no mean Parentage,
But courtly educated, wife and sage,
Able to teach, yet willing to enrich
His knowledge with discourses, smooth in speech,
Yet not of many words; he entertains
Them with desire, nor spares for any pains
To amplify a welcome: with their Host
A while we leave them, now my muse must post
Unto Alexis Court; lend me I pray
Yonr gentle aid to guide her on the way.
Alexis after many civil broils
Against his Rebel Subjects, rich in spoils,
Being settled in his Throne in restful peace,
The Laws established (and his peoples ease
Proclaimed) he 'gan to call into his mind
The fore-past times, and soon his thoughts did find
Matter to work on: First, Thealma now
Came to remembrance, where, and when, and how
He won, and lost her; this sad thought did so
Afflict his mind, that he was soon brought low
Into so deep a melancholy, that
He minded nothing else: nor cared he what
Became of State Affairs, and tho a King,
With pleasure he enjoyed not any thing.
His Sleep goes from him, Meats and Drinks he loathes,
And to his sadder Thoughts he suits his Clothes.
Mirth seemed a Disease, good counsel Folly,
Unless it served to humor Melancholy.
All his delight, if one may may called delight,
Was to find Turtles that both day and night
Mourned up and down his Chamber, and with groans
His Heart consented to their hollow moans,
Then with his Tears the briny Drink they drank,
He would bedew them: while his love to thank,
They nestle in his Bosom, where, poor Birds,
With piteous mournful tones, instead of words
They seemed to moan their Master: thus did he
Spend his sad hours; and what the cause might be,
His Nobles could not guess, nor would he tell;
For Turtle-like he loved his griefs too well,
To let them leave his Breast, he kept them in,
And inwardly they spoke to none but him.
Thus was it with him more than half a year,
Till a new business had set open his ear
To entertain advice: the first that brake
The matter to him, or that durst to speak
Unto the King, was bold Anaxocles,
One that bent all his study for the peace
And safety of his Country; the right hand
Of the Arcadian State, to whose command
Was given the Cities Citadel: a place
Of chiefest trust, and this the business was.
The Rebels, as you heard, being driven hence,
Despairing e're to expiate their offense
By a too late submission, sled to Sea
In such poor Barks as they could get, where they
Rom'd up and down which way the winds did please,
Without, or Chard, or Compass: the rough Seas
Enraged with such a load of wickedness,
Grew big with Billows, great was their distress;
Yet was their courage greater; desperate men
Grow valianter by suffering: in their ken
Was a small Island; thitherward they steer
Their weather-beaten Barks, each plies his geer;
Some Row, some Pump, some trim the ragged Sails,
All were employed, and industry prevails.
They reach the Land at length, their Food grew scant,
And now they purvey to supply their want.
The Island was but small, yet full of Fruits,
That sprang by Nature, as Potato-Roots,
Rice, Figs, and Almonds, with a many more,
Till now unpeopled: on this happy Shore.
With joy they bring their Barks, of which the best
They Rig anew, with Tackling from the rest.
Some six or seven they serviceable made,
They stand not long to study where to Trade;
Revenge prompts that unto them; Piracy
Was the first thing they thought on, and their Eye
Was chiefly on the Arcadian Shore, that lay
But three Leagues off: their Theft is not by day
So much as night, unless some straggling Ship
Lights in their trap by chance: closely they keep
Themselves in Rocky Creeks, till Sun be down
And all abed, then steal they to some Town
Or scattering Village; which they fire, and take
What Spoils they find, then to their Ship they make,
And none knew who did harm them; many a night
Had they used this free-booting: many a fright
And great hearts-grieving loss the unarmed poor
Were night'ly put to; and to cure this sore
The old man roused the King Alexis, chid
His needless sorrow: told him that he did
Not like a man, much less like one whose health
Strengthens the Sinews of a Commonwealth.
He lays his Peoples Grievances before him,
And told him how with tears they did implore him
To right their wrongs: at first Alexis frowned,
And in an angry cloud his looks were drowned.
A sign of Rain or Thunder; 'twas but Rain,
Some few drops fell, and the Sun shone again.
Alexis rising, thanks his prudent care,
And, as his Father loved him; all prepare
T^unnest these Pirates: Ships were ready made,
And some Landforces; as well to invade,
As for Defense: the Pirates now were strong*
By Discontents that to their Party throng.
Not so much friend to the late Tyrant King,
As thirsting after Novelty, the thing
That tickles the rude Vulgar: one strong Hold
The cunning Foe had gained, and grew so bold
To dare all opposition; night and day
They spoil the Country, make weak Towns their prey;
And those that will not join with them they kill,
Not sparing Sex, nor Age, proud of their ill
By their rich Booties: Against these the King
Makes both by Sea and Land; 'twas now Spring*
And Flora had embroidered all the Meads
With sweet variety, forth the King leads
A chosen Troop of Horse, with some few Foot,
But those experienced men, that would stand to it
If any need were; to the Sea he sends
Anaxocles, and to his care commends
His Marine Forces, he was bold and wise,
And had been custom'd to the Sea-mans guise.
He gave it out that he was bound for Thrace
To fetch a Princely Lady thence, that was
To be the Arcadian Queen, which made the Foe
The more secure and careless: forth they go
Assured of Victory, and prosperous Gales,
As fate would have't, had quickly filled their Sails:
The Pirates Rendevous was soon discovered
By scouting Pinnaces, that closely hovered
Under the lee of a high Promontory,
That stretched into the Sea; and now, days glory,
Nights Sable Curtains had eclipsed, the time
When Robbers use to perpetrate a Crime.
The Pirates steal abroad, and by good hap,
Without suspect they fell into the Trap
Anaxocles had laid; for wisely, he
Divides his Fleet in Squadrons, which might be
Ready on all sides: every Squadron had
Four Ships well manned, that where e're the Foe made.
He might be met with, one kept near the shore,
Two kept at Sea, the other Squadron bore
Up towered the Isle, yet with a weeling course,
Not so far distant, but the whole Fleets force
Might quickly be united if need were.
Between these come the Pirates without fear,
Making toward the Arcadian shore, where soon
The Arcadians met them; now the Fight begun,
And it was hot, the Foe was three to one:
And some big Ships Anaxocles alone
Gave the first onset, Cynthia then shone bright,
And now the Foe perceives with whom they fight.
And they fought stoutly, scorning that so few
Should hold them tack so long; then nearer drew
The two side Squadrons, and were within shot
Before they spied them: now the Fight grew hot:
Despair put Valor to the angry Foe,
And bravely they stand to it, give many a blow.
Three Ships of theirs were sunk at last, and then
They seek to fly unto their Isle again;
When the fourth Squadron met them, and afresh
Set on them, half overcome with weariness;
Yet yield they would not, but still fought it out;
By this the other Ships were come about,
And hemmed them in; where seeing no hope left,
Whom what the Sword did not ex'cute for Theft,
Leaped in the Sea and drowned them; that small force
They Would left within the Isle fared rather worse
Than better; all were put to the Sword,
And their Nest fired; much Booty brought aboard,
With store of Corn, and much Munition
For War; thus glad of what was done,
The Fleet with joy returns, the like success
Alexis had by Land, at unawares
Surprising their chief Fort: some lucky Stars
Lending their helpful influence that night;
Yet for the time it was a bloody Fight.
At length the fainting Foe gave back, and fled
Out of a Postern-gate with fear half dead,
And thinking in the Port to meet their Fleet,
They met with Death; an ambush did them greet
With such a furious shock, that all were slain,
Only some straggling cowards did remain,
That hid themselves in Bushes which next day
The Soldiers found, and made their lives a prey
Unto their killing anger: home the King
Returns in triumph, whilst Pans Priests do sing
Harmonious Odes in honor of that day,
And dainty Nymphs with Flowers strewn the way:
Among the which he spied a beauteous Maid,
Of a majestic countenance, and aray'd
After so new a manner, that his eye
Impt with delight upon her, and to try
Whether her Mind did answer to her Face,
He called her to him, when with modest grace
She fearless came, and humbly on her knee
Wished a long life unto his Majesty.
He asked her name; she answered Florimel,
And blushing made her Beauty so excel,
That all the thoughts of his Thealma now
Were hushed and smothered; upon her Brow
Sat such an awful Majesty, that he
Was conquered e're opposed; 'twas strange to see
How strangely he was altered: still she kneels,
And still his heart burns with the fire it feels.
At last the victor prisoner caught with Love,
Lights from his Chariot, and begins to prove
The sweetness of the bait that took his heart,
And with a Kiss uprears her: yet Loves Dart
Fired not her Breast to welcome his Affection,
Only hot Sunny Beams with their reflection
A little warmed her; then he questions who
Her Parents were, and why apparel'd so.
Where was her dwelling, in what Country born?
And would have kissed her, when 'twixt fear and scorn
She put him from her; My dread Lord, said she,
My Birth is not ignoble, nor was he
That I call Father, though in some disgrace
Worthy his unjust Exile: what he was,
And where I first breathed air, pardon dread King,
I dare not, must not tell you: none shall wring
That secret from me; what I am, you see,
Or by my Habit you may guess to be
Diana's Votaress: the cause, great Sir,
That prompts me to this boldness to appear
Before your Majesty, was what I owe,
And ever shall unto your Valor, know,
(For you may have forgot it) I am she,
Who with my good old Father you set free,
Some two years since, from bloody minded men,
That would have killed my honor; had not then
Your timely aid stepped in to rescue me,
And snatched my bleeding Father, dear to me
As was mine honor, even from the jaw of Death,
And given us both a longer stock of breath.
'Twas this, great King, that drew me with this tram,
From our Devotion to review again
My honors best preserver, and to pay
The debt of thanks I owe you: many a day
I Have wished for such a time, and Heaven at last
Has made me happy in it: day was now
Well nigh spent, and Cattle 'gan to low
Homewards to unlade their milky bags, when she
Her Speech had ended; every one might see
Love sit in triumph on Alexis brow,
Firing the captive Conqueror, and now
He 'gins to court her, and love tipped his Tongue
With winning Rhetoric; her hand he wrung,
And would again have kissed her; but the Maid
With a coy blush 'twixt angry and afraid
Flung from the King, and with her Virgin train,
Fled swift as Roes unto their Bower again.
Alexis would have followed, but he knew
What eyes were on him, and himself withdrew
Into his Chariot, and to Courtward went
With all his Nobles, hiding his intent
Under the veil of pleasant light discourse,
Which some marked well enough; that night perforce
They all were glad within the open Plain
To pitch their Tents, where many a Shepherd Swain
Upon their Pipes troul'd out their Evening Lays
In various accents emulous of praise.
It was a dainty pleasure for to hear,
How the sweet Nightingales their throats did tear,
Envying their skill, or taken with delight,
As I think rather, that the still-born night
Afforded such copartners of their woes.
And at a close from the pure streams that flows
Out of the rocky Caverns not far off,
Echo replied aloud, and seemed to scoff
At their sweet sounding airs, this did so take
Lovesick Alexis willingly awake,
That he did wish 't had been a week to day
TO have heard them still; but time for none will stay,
The wearied Shepherds at their usual hour
Put up their Pipes, and in their Straw-thatcht Bower
Slept out the rest of night, the King likewise
Tired with a weary March shut in his eyes.
Within their leaden sold all hushed and still;
Thus for a while we leave him, till my Quill
Weary and blunted with so long a story,
Rest to be sharpened, and then she is for ye.
No sooner welcome day with glimmering light
Began to chase away the shades of night,
But echo wakens, roused by the Shepherd Swains,
And back reverberates their louder strains.
The airy Choire had tuned their slender throats,
And filled the bushy groves with their sweet Notes
The Flocks were soon unfolded, and the Lambs
Kneel for a Breakfast to their milky Dams.
And now Aurora blushing greets the world,
And over her Face a curled Mantle hurled:
Foretelling a fair day, the Soldiers now
Began to bustle; some their Trumpers blow,
Some beat their Drums, that all the Camp throughout
With sounds of War they drill the Soldiers out.
The Nobles soon were horsed, expecting still
Their King's approach, but he had slept but ill,
But was but then arising, heavy eyed,
And cloudy looked, and something ill beside.
But he did cunningly dissemble it
Before his Nobles, all that they could get
From him was that, a Dream he had that night
Did much disturb him; yet seemed he make slight
Of what so troubled him; but up he chears
His Soldiers with his presence, and appears
As hearty as his troubled thoughts gave leave:
So that except his groans, none could perceive
Much alteration in him: toward Court
The Army marches, and swift winged report
Had soon divulged their coming; by the way
He meets old Memnon, who, as you heard say,
Was Sire to Florimel, good man, he then
Was going to his Daughter: when his men
Then in the Army in his passing by
Tend'red their duty to him lovingly.
He bids them welcome home; the King drew near,
And questioned who that poor man was, and where
His dwelling was; and why those Soldiers showed
Such reverence to him; 'twas but what they owed
Answered a stander by; he is their Lord,
And one that merits more than they afford.
If worth were rightly valued (gracious Sir)
His name is Memnon, if one may believe
His own report; yet sure, as I conceive,
He Is more than what he seems: the Army then
Had made a stand when Memnon and his men
Were called before the King: the good old man
With Tears, that joy brought forth, this wise began.
To welcome home Alexis ever be
Those sacred powers blessed, that lets me see
My Sovereigns safe return: still may that power
Strengthen your arm to Conquer: Heaven still shower
Its choicest blessings on my Sovereign,
My life's preserver: welcome home again.
I would my Girl were here, with that he wept,
When from his Chariot Alexis s^ept,
And lovingly embraced him: he knew well
That this was Memnon, Sire to Florimel:
And to mind how he had set them free
From more than cruel Rebels; glad was he
So luckily to meet him, from his wrist
He took a Jewel, 'twas an Amythist
Made like a Heart with wings: the Motto this,
Love gives me wings, and with a -- kiss.
He gave it to old Memnon: bear, said he,
This Jewel to your Child, and let me see
Both you and her at Court, fail not with speed
To let me see you there: old man, I need
Thy grave advise; all wondered at the deed,
But chiefly Memnon: Father, said the King,
I Will think upon your men: fail not to bring
Your Daughter with you; so his leave he takes,
And ravished Memnon towered his Daughter makes.
The Army could not reach the Court that night,
But lay in open Field, yet within sight
Of Pallimando where the Court then lay.
For greater state Alexis the next day
Purposed to enter it; the Townsmen they
In the mean time prepare what cost they may,
With Shows and Presents to bid welcome home
Their victor King; and amongst them were some
Studied Orations, and composed new lays
In honor of their King: the Oak and Bays
Were woven into Garlands for to crown
Such as by Valor had gained most renown.
Scarce could the joyful people sleep that night,
In expectation of the morrows sight.
The King and Soldiers enter: all men's eyes
Were fixed upon the King with such desire,
As if they would seen a God, while Musicks Choire
Filled every corner with resounding lays,
That spoke the conquering Alexis praise.
Drowned in the vulgars louder acclamations,
'Twould ask an age to tell what preparations
Were made to entertain him, and my muse
Grows somewhat weary: these triumphant shows
Continued long, yet seemed to end too soon,
The people wished 'thad been a week to noon.
By noon the King was housed, and order given
To pay the Soldiers, now it grew towered even,
And all repair to rest; so I to mine,
And leave them buried in sound sleep and Wine.
I Will tell you more hereafter, friendships laws
Will not deny a friendly rest and pause.
You heard some few leaves past Alexis had
A Dream than troubled him, and made him sad.
Now being come home it 'gan revive a fresh
Within his memory, and much oppress
The pensive King: Sylvanus, who you heard
Was good at Divinations, had steered
His course, as fate would have him, then to Court,
Beloved and reverenced of the nobler sort,
And Sainted by the vulgar: that that brought
The old man thither, was, for that he thought
To meet Anaxus there; but he you heard
Was othereways employed: the Nobles cheered
Their lovesick King with the welcome report
Of old Sylvanus coming to the Court;
For he had heard great talk of him before,
And now thought long to see him, and the more
Because he hoped to learn from his tried arr,
What his Dream meant, that so disturbed his heart.
Sylvanus soon was sent for, and soon came,
At his first greeting he began to blame
The amorous King for giving way to grief
Upon so slight occasion, but relief
Was rather needful now than admonition
That came too lat, his mind lacked a Physician,
And healing comforts were to be applied
Unto his Wounds before they mortified.
Sylvanus therefore wished him to disclose
The troublous Dream he had, and to repose
His trust in that strong power that only could
Discover hidden secrets, and unfold
The riddle of a Dream, and that his skill
Was but inspired by that great power, whose will
By weakest means is oftentimes made known.
Methought (Alexis said) I was alone
By the Sea side noting the prouder Waves,
How Mountain-like they swell, and with loud braves
Threaten the bounden Shore; when from the Main
I see a Turtle rise, the Wings and Train
Well-nigh deplum'd, and making piteous moan,
And by a mark I guessed it was mine own;
And slying towered me, suddenly a Kite
Swoopt at the Bird, and in her feeble flight
Soon seized upon her, crying, as I thought,
To me for help: no sooner was she caught,
When as an Eagle seeking after prey,
Flew towered the main Land from the Isles this way,
And spying of the Kite, the kingly Fowl
Seized on her strait; the Turtle pretty soul
Was by this means set free, and faintly gate
Upon the Eagles back, ordained by fate
To be preserved: full glad was I to see
Her so escape; but the Eagle suddenly
Soaring aloft to Seaward, took her flight,
And in a moment both were out of sight,
And left me betwixt joy and sorrow; sad
For the Birds flight, yet for her freedom glad.
Then, to my thinking, I espied a Swain,
Running affraighted towered me ore the Plain.
Upon his wrist methought a Turtle sat,
Not much unlike the other mourning for's Mate:
Only this difference was; upon her head
She had a tuft of Feathers blue and red,
In fashion of a Crown; it did me good
To see how proudly the poor Turtle stood
Pruning her self, as if she scorned her thrall.
If harmless Doves can scorn that have no Gall.
I was so much in love with the poor Bird,
I wished it mine, methought the Swain I heard
Cry our for help to me: with that I spied
A Lion running agter him glare-ey'd,
And full of rage; fear made the Swain let go
The lovely Turtle to escape his foe.
The Bird no sooner loose, made to the Beast,
And in his curled Locks plats out a Nest,
The Beast not minding any other prey
Save what he had, ran bellowing away,
As overjoyed; and as methought I strove
To follow him I waked, and all did prove
But a deluding Dream; yet such a one
As nightly troubles me to think upon.
The powers above direct thee to unfold
The mystery of it; 'twas no sooner told,
When Old Sylvanus with a cheerful smile,
Answered the King in a familiar style.
You are in love, dread Souereign, and with two,
One will not serve your turn, look what you do,
You will go near to lose them both; but fate
At length will give you one to be your mate.
She that loves you, you must not love as Wife.
And she that loves another as her life
Shall be the Arcadian Queen; take comfort then,
The two lost Turtles you will find again.
Thus much my Art does tell me, more than this
I dare not let you know: my counsel is
You would with patience note the working fates,
That Joy proves best that is bought at dearest rates.
He would not name Anaxus, tho he knew
He should make one in what was to ensue;
And would not hasten sorrow sooner on him,
Than he himself would after pull upon him.
The King was somewhat satisfied with what
Sylvanus told him; and subscribed to fate.
He puts on cheerful looks, and to his Lords
No little comfort by his health affords.
He sits in Council, and recals those Peers
That lived concealed in Exile many years.
Amongst whom was Rhotus, Memnon, and some others;
And tho with cunning his desire he somthers,
yet did he not forget fair Florimel,
Of whom my straggling Muse is now to tell.
Memnon, you heard, was going to his Child,
When the King left him with a heart e're filled
With Joy and Hopes: some marks he had espied
About Alexis, which so fortified
His strong conjecture, that he was the man
He ever took him for, thar he began
With youthful cheerfulness to chide his Age,
That stole so soon upon him with presage,
Sweetning his saucy sorrows that had showered
Life's blessing to him; many tears he showered
With thought of what had passed, and tho not sure
Alexis was his Son, those thoughts did cure,
Or at the leastwise eased his troubled mind.
The good old man no sooner saw his Child,
And blessed her for her Duty, when he smiled
At what he was to say, and glad she was
To see her Sire so cheerful; to let pass
The long discourse between them: 'twas his will
She should prepare for Court, chiding her still
For mentioning Anaxus; nor did he
Give her long time to think on, what might be
The cause that moved her Father to such haste,
But by the way he had given her a taste
Of what might follow: three days were assigned
Her for or get things ready; 'twas his mind
It should be so, and Duty must obey:
When Fathers bid, it is sin to say them nay.
Well then he meant to send for her, till when
He leaves her to her thoughts, and home again
The joyful old man wends; that very night
Before the day prefixed, the fates to spite
Secure Alexis, sent Anaxus thither,
And brought his long-sought Love and him together.
You know we left him with old Eubolus,
A wisely discreet man and studious.
In Liberal Arts well seen, and State Affairs,
Yet lived retired to shun the weight of cares.
That greatness fondly sues for: All that night
Was spent in good discourse too long to write,
He told the Prince the story of the War,
And Portrayed out Alexis character
So to the life, that he was fired to see
The man he spoke of, and disguised he
Intended in his thoughts next day to prove
The truth of what he heard: but cruel Jove
That loves to tyrannize for pleasure, stayed
His purposed Journey, and unawares betrayed
Anaxus to an ambush of sad woes
That set on him, when he least dreamed of Foes.
Amongst the various discourse that passed
Between these two, it fortuned at last
Eubolus fell in talk of Florimel,
And of her Father Memnon, who full well
He knew to be a Lemnian, howsoever
He gave it out for otherwise for fear
Of double-ey'd suspicion to the Prince.
He set his Virtues forth, and how long since
He lest his native Soil; the Prince conceived
Good hope of what he aimed at, and believed
By all conjectures that this Memnon might
Be banished Codrus, whom he meant to right,
If ever he was King. Eubolus went on
In praises of him and of Florimel.
Friend (quoth the Prince Anaxus) can thou tell
Where this fair Virgin is? yes, he replied,
I can and will, it is by yon River side,
Where yonder tuft of Trees stands, day then brake,
And he might well discern it; for loves sake,
Answered Anaxus, may one see this Maid,
That merits all these praises; yes, he said,
But through a grate, no man must enter in
Within the Cloister, that they hold a sin:
Yet, she has liberty some time to go
To see her Father, none but she has so.
What e're the matter is, unless when all
Armed with their Bows go to some Festival
Upon a noted Holiday, and then
These Female Army, out and home again
In comely order marches: the other day
It was my luck to see her, when this way
The King came from the Wars, she with her Train,
(For she seemed Captain) met him on this Plain.
Her coming thither, as I heard her say,
Was for her life's preserving to repay
A debt of thanks she owed him: many words
Did pass between them, and before the Lords
Most graciously he kissed her, and did woe
Her for a longer stay; but she in scorn,
Or finding him too amorous, blew her Horn,
To call her Troop together; all like Roes
Ran swiftly towered their Cloister, she is fair,
And you know Beauty is a tempting snare.
Here is no common one, her very eye
That sparkled with a king of Majesty*
Might without wonder captivate a King;
But this is ^oo too high a strain to sing.
It was enough that Eubolus had said,
If not too much, to him that thoroughly weighed
Each circumstance a kind of jealous fire
Stole to his heart, and spurred on his desire
To see and prove her; taking Pen and Ink
He writ his mind, foreseeing (as I think)
She might not come alone unto the Grate,
And so could not so privately relate
(If she should prove Clarinda) his intent.
So for an hour in vain to sleep he went,
But restless thoughts did keep him still awake,
Still musing on the words the old man spoke.
Well, Sun being up, with thanks he takes his leave
Of his kind Host, that did not once perceive
Him to be troubled: with such cunning he
Dissembled what had moved him, jealousy.
His man and he toward the Cloister go,
Casting in's mind what he were best to do
To win a sight of her: his nimble Brain
Soon hatched a polity, that proved not vain.
The Cloister outward Gare was newly open,
When he came there; and now' twixt fear and hope
He boldly enters the base Court, and knocks
At the inner Gate fast shut with diverse Locks:
At length one came, the Portress, as I guess,
For she had many Keys, her stranger dress
Much took Anaxus, who never sae till then
Women attired so prettily like men.
In courteous wise she asked him what he would?
Fair Dame, said he, I have been often told
(By one I make no question) whom you know,
Old Memnon, (to whose tender care I owe
For my good breeding) that within this place
I have a Kinswoman, that lately was
Admitted for a Holy Sister here,
My Uncle Memnon's Daughter; once a year
As Duty binds me, I do visit him,
And in my Journey homeward at this time.
A Kinsmans love prompted me to bestow
A visit on my Cousin; who I know
Will not disdain to own me: Gentle Sir,
Answered the man-like Maid, is it to her
Youl'd pay your loving tender? Yes, said he,
To Florimel if in this place she be?
And so my Uncle told me. Yes replied
The grave Virago, she is here: Yet, Sir,
You must content your self to speak with her
Thorough this Grate; her Father comes not in,
And by our Laws it is esteemed a sin
To interchange ought else, save words with men.
I ask no more, the Prince replied again.
That cannot be denied, said she, stay here
With patience a while, and do not fear
But you shall see her; so away she went,
Leaving the glad Anaxus to invent
Excuses for his boldness, if by hap
She might not prove Clarinda, and entrap
Him in a lie: Clarinda came at last
With all her Train, who as along she passed
Thorough the inward Court, did make a lane,
Opening their ranks, and closing them again.
As she went forward with obsequious gesture,
Doing their reverence; her upward Vesture
Was of blue Silk, glistering with Stars of Gold
Girt to her Waste, by Serpents that enfold,
And wrap themselves together, so well wrought,
And fashioned to the life, one would have thought
They had been real. Underneath she wore
A Coat of Silver Tinsel, short before,
And fringed about with Gold* white Buskins hide
The naked of her Leg, they were loose tied
With Azure Ribbands, on whose knots were seen
Most costly Gemms, fit only for a Queen.
Her Hair bound up like to a Coronet,
With Diamonds, Rubies, and rich Saphyrs set;
And on the top a Silver Crescent placed,
And all the Luster by such Beauty graced,
As her reflection made them seem more fair,
One would have thought Diana's self were there*
For in her hand a Silver Bow she held,
And at her back there hung a Quiver filled
With Turtle-feather'd Arrows: thus attired,
She makes toward Anaxus, who was fired
To hear this Goddess speak; when they came near*
Both star'd upon each other, as if fear
Or wonder had surpised them; for a while
Neither could speak, at length with a sweet smile
Graced with a comely blush, she thus began.
Good morrow Cousin, are not you the man
That I should speak with? I may be deceived;
Are not you kin to Memnon? I believed
My Maid that told me so; he is my Father.
If you have ought to say to me, fair Soul,
Answered Anaxus; many doubts control
My willingness to answer; pardon me,
Divinest Creature, if my answer be
Somewhat impertinent; read here my mind,
I am Anaxus, and I fain would find
A Chaste Clarinda here: she was about
To call the port'ress to have let her out.
But wisely she called back her thought for fear
Her Virgin Troop might see, or over-hear
What passed between them, doubts did rise
Within her, whether she might trust her eyes
It was Anaxus voice, she knew that well,
But by his disguised look she could not tell
Whether 'twere he or no; all that she said
Was, I may prove Clarinda too; and prayed
Him stay a little, till her short return
Gave him a better welcome; all her Train
Thought she had fetched some Jewel for the Swain.
And as they were commanded, kept their station
Till her return. The Prince with expectation
Feeds his faint hopes; she was not long from thence,
And in a Letter pleads her innocence,
Which he mistrusted; now she could not speak
But wept her thoughts, for fear her heart should break.
And casting over a Vail to hide her tears,
She bid farewell, and leaves him to his fears*
With that the Gate was shut: Anaxus reads*
And with judicious care each sentence heeds;
And now he knew't was she whom he so long
Had sought for; now he thinks upon the wrong
His rash mistruct had done her, 'twas her will,
What e're he thought of her, to love him still:
Nor could the Arcadian Crown tempt her to bread
Her promise with Anaxus: Now to seek
For an excuse to gild over this offense;
Yet this did somewhat cheer him, two hours thence
He was enjoined to come unto a Bower
That overlooked the Wall; and at his hour
Anaxus came; there she had often spent
One hour or two each day alone, to vent
Her private griefs: she came the sooner then
To meet Anaxus, and to talk again
With him, whom yet her fears mis-gave her, might
Be some disguised Cheat: at the first sight
She frowned upon him, and with angry look,
A Title that but ill became the Book
Wherein her milder thoughts were writ: Are you
(Said she) Anaxus? these loose lines do show
Rather you are some counterfeit; set on
By some to tempt my honor, here are none
That love the world so well to sell her Fame,
Or violate her yet unspotted Name,
To meet a Kings Embraces, tho a Crown,
And that the richest Fortune can stake down
Should be the hire; I tell thee saucy Swain,
Whoever sent thee; I so much disdain
To yield to what these looser lines import,
That rather than I will be drawn to Court
To be Alexis Whore; nay, or his Wife,
I have a thousand ways to let out life.
But why do thou abuse Anaxus so?
To make him Pander to my overthrow:
Know thou the man thou wrong'st; uncivil Swain?
Thou have my Answer, carry back disdain.
With that she was about to fling away,
When he recalled her; loath to go away,
What e're she seemed: before sh'had turned about
He pulled off his false Hair, and cured her doubt.
My dearest Florimel, said he, and wept:
My sweet Clarinda; and has Heaven kept
Thee yet alive to recompense my love;
My yet unchanged affection, that can move
But in one Sphere in thee and thee alone,
Forgive me, my Clarinda, what is done
Was but to try thee, and when thou shall know
The reason why I did so: and what woe
My love to thee has made me willingly
To undergo: thou will confess that I
Deserve Clarinda's love: poor Florimel
Would fain have sooner answered; but tears fell
In such abundance that her words were drowned
Even in their birth; at length her passions found
Some little vent to breath out this reply:
O my Anaxus, if it be no sin
To call you mine, methinks I now begin
To breath new life, for I am but your creature,
Sorrow had killed what I received fromn nature
Before I see you; tho this piece of Clay
My body seemed to move, until this day
It did not truly live: my Heart you had,
And, that you pleased to have it, I was glad:
Yet, till you brought it hime, the life I led,
If it were any, was but nourished
By the warmth I had from yours, which I still cherished
With some faint hopes, or else I quite had perished*
But time steals on, and I have much to say,
Take it in brief, for I Would be loath my stay
Above my usual hour should breed suspect
In my chaste Sisterhood: blessed powers direct
Me what to do; my soul's in such a strait
And labyrinth of doubts and fears that wait
Upon my weakness, that I know no way
How to wade out: to morrow is the day,
The unwelcom day when I must to the Court,
For what intent I know not; to be short,
I would not go, nor dare I here to stay,
The King so wills it: yet should I obey
It might perhaps undo me; besides this,
My Father so commands it, and it is
A well-becoming duty in a child
To stoop unto his will: yet to be styled,
For doing what he bids me, a loose Dame,
And cause report to question my chaste Fame;
'Twere better disobey; a Father's will
Binds like a law, in goodness, not in ill.
I hope I sin not, that so ill conceive
Of the end I Am sent for; and, can I believe
That honor's aimed at in it? Court-Favors shine
Seldom on mean ones, but for some design.
Are not these fears to startle weak-built Women,
A Virgin Child of Virtue should she summon
Her best and stout'st resolves; with that, in tears
And sighs, she speaks the remnant of her fears,
And sinks beneath their weight; Anaxus soon
Caught hold of her, so that she fell not down,
And shaking of her, plucked her to the Grate
And with a Kiss revived her; 'twas now late,
The Cloister Bell had summoned all to bed,
And she was missing, little more she said,
Save help me my Anaxus, keep the Jewel,
My love once gave thee: swift time was so cruel
He could not answer; for her Virgin Train
Flocked to the Lodge, and she must back again.
She had enjoined him silence, and to speak
Anaxus durst not, tho his heart should break:
As it was more than full of care and grief
For his Clarinda, thirsting for relief.
And in his looks one might have read his mind,
How apt it was t'afford it, still sh'enjoyn'd
Him not to speak; such was her wary fears
To be discovered; kisses mixed with tears
Was their best Oratory: then they part,
Yet turn again t'exchange each others heart.
Something was still forgot; it is loves use
In what chaste thoughts forbid to find excuse.
Her Virgins knock, in vain she wipes her eyes
To hide her passions, that still higher rise.
She whispers in his ear; think on to morrow,
They faintly bid farewell, both full of sorrow.
The window shuts, and with a fained cheer
Clarinda wends unto her Cloister, where
A while we will leave her to discourse with fear.
Pensive Anaxus to the next Town hies
To seek a lodging: rather to advise
And counsel with himself, what way he might
Plot Florimel's escape: 'twas late at night,
And all were drowned in sleep; save restless lovers,
At length as chance would have it, he discovers
A glim'ring light, towered it he makes and knocks
And with fair language, open, picks the Locks.
He enters, and is welcome by his Host
Where we will leave him and return again
Unto the Arcadian Court to sing a strain
Of short-lived Joy, soon sowr'd, by such a sorrow
As will drink all our tears: and I would borrow
Some time to think on it, 'twill come at the last,
"Sorrows we dream not on, have sowrest taste.
Cleon and Rhotus, as you heard of late,
Were traveling to Court, when (led by Fate)
They met Thealma, who by them had sent
A Jewel to the King: six days were spent
Before they reached the Court; for Rhotus sake
Cleon was nobly welcomed, means they make
To do their message to the lovesick King,
And with Sylvanus found him communing.
Sometimes he smiled, another while he frowned,
Anon his paler cheeks with tears be'en drowned;
And ever and anon he calls a Groom,
And frowning asked if Memnon were not come.
One might perceive such changes in the King,
As has the inconstant wellkin in the Spring.
Now a fair day, anon a Dropsy cloud
Puts out the Sun, and, in a Sable Shroud
The day seems buried; when the Clouds are over,
The glorious Sun shines brighter than before:
But long it lasts not; so Alexis fared:
His Sun-like Majesty was not impaired
So much by sorrow, but that now and then
It would break forth into a smile again.
At last Sylvanus leaves him for a space,
And, he was going to seek out a place
To vent his griefs in private; e're he went,
He asked if one for Memnon was yet sent?
With that he spies old Rhotus, him he meets,
And Cleon with him; both, he kindly greets.
They kneeling, kiss his hand; he bids them rise,
And still Alexis noble Cleon eyes.
Whence are you, Father (said he) what is your name?
Cleon replied, from Lemnos, Sir, I came,
My name is Cleon; and full well the King
Knew he was so, yet he kept close the thing.
He list not let his Nobles know so much,
What e're the matter was: his grace was such
To the old men, as rich in worth as years.
He leads them in, and welcomes them with tears:
The thoughts of what had passed, wrung from his eyes.
And, with the King in Tears, they sympathize.
O Rhotus, said he, 'twas thy charity
That raised me to this greatness, else had I
Fallen lower than the Grave, and in the Womb
Of the salt Ocean wept me out a Tomb.
Thy timely help preserved me, so it pleased
The all-disposing Fates. There the King ceased
His sad discourse; he sighs and weeps afresh,
And rings old Rhotus hand in thankfulness.
Sorrow had tongue-ty'd all, and now they speak
Their minds in sighs and tears, nor could they check
These embrio's of passion: reason knows
No way to counsel passion that o'reflows.
Yet like to one that falls into a swoon,
In whom we can discern no motion,
No life, nor feeling, not a gasp of breath,
(So like the bodies faintings are to death)
By little and by little Life steals in,
At last he comes unto himself again.
Life was but fled unto the heart for fear,
And thronging in it, well-nigh stifles there,
Till by its struggling Fear that chilled the heart,
Meeting with warmth, is forced for to depart,
And's Life is loose again: so sorrow wrought
Upon these three, that any would have thought
Them weeping Statues; Reason at the length
Struggling with passions recovered strength,
And forced a way for speech. Rhotus was first
That brake this silence, there is none better durst;
He knew his cause of sorrow, and was sure
The gladsom news he brought had power to cure
A Death-strook Heart; yet in his wisdom he
Thought it not best, what e're his strength might be,
To let in joy too soon; too sudden joy,
Instead of comforting, does often destroy:
Experience had taught him so't might be;
Nor would old Rhotus venture't, wherefore he
By some ambigual discourses thought
It best to let him know the news he brought.
So lowly bowing Rhotus thus begins.
Dread Sovereign, how ill it suits with Kings
(Whose Office it is to govern men) that they
Should be their passions laws; self-Reason may,
Or should instruct you: Pardon, gracious Sir,
My boldness, Virtue brooks no flatterer;
Nor dare I be so; you have conquered men,
And ruled a Kingdom; shall your passions then
Unking Alexis: be your self again,
And curb those homebred rebel thoughts, that have
No power of themselves, but what you gave
In suffering them so long: had you not nursed
Those Serpents in your bosom, but had crushed
Them in the egg, you then had had your health.
"He rules the best that best can rule himself.
And here he paused. Alexis willing ear
Was chained to his discourse; when with a tear,
He sighed out this reply: I know it well,
I would I could do so; but tears 'gan swell,
Raised by a storm of sighs: he soon had done.
Which Rhotus noting, boldly thus went on.
Most Royal Sir, be comforted, I fear
My rude Reproofs affect not you soft Ear,
Which if they have I Am sorry, gracious Sir,
I ask your pardon, if my Judgment err.
I came to cure your sorrows, not to add
Unto their heavy weight that makes you sad.
To cure me, Rhotus? (said Alexis) no,
Good man, thou can not do it, did thou but know
The sad cause whence they spring. Perhaps I do,
Replied old Rhotus, and can name it too.
If you will with patience hear me: cheer up then,
After these showers it may be fair again.
As I remember, when the Heavens were pleased
To make me your Preserver, you my Guest,
(And happy was I that it fell out so)
Amongst the many fierce assaults of woe,
That then oppressed your spirit, this was one:
When you were private, as to be alone
You most affected, I have often heard
You sigh out one Thealma; nor have spared
To curse the Fates for her: what might she be*
And what is become of her? if I may be
So bold to question it, tell us your grie^*
"The hearts unlading hastens on relief:
"When sorrows pent up closely in the breast.
"Destroy unseen, and render such unrest
"To the Souls wearied faculties, that Art
"Despairs to cure them: pluck up a good heart
And cast out those corroding thoughts that will
In time undo you, and untimely lay
Your honor in the dust. The speechless King
Wept out an Answer to his counselling;
For, speak he could not, sighs and sobs so thronged
From his sad heart, they had him quite untongu'd.
Will it not be, said Rhotus? then I see
Alexis is unthankful; not, that He
That once I took him for: but, I have done.
When first I found you on the Rock, as one
Left by stern Fate to ruin, well-nigh drowned,
And starved with cold, yet Heaven found
Even in that hopeless exigent, a way
To raise you to a Crown; and will you pay
Heavens providence with frowns; for ought you know,
She that you sorrow for so much, may owe
As much to Heaven as you do, and may live
To make the Joy complete, which you conceive
In your despairing thoughts impossible:
I say, who knows but she may be as well
As you; nay better, more in health and free
From headstrong passion? Can I hope to be
So happy, Rhotus? answered the said King:
No, she is drowned; these eyes beheld her sink
Beneath the Mountain Waves, and shall I think
Their cruelty so merciful, to save
Her, their ambition strove for to ingrave?
Why not, replied old Cleon, who till then
Had held his peace: "The Gods work not like men;
"When Reason's self despairs, and help there is none,
"Finding no ground for hope to anchor on;
"Then is their time to work. This you have known,
And Heaven was pleased to mark you out for one
It meant thus to preserve: it is for some end,
(A good one too, I hope) and Heaven may send
This happy seed-time such a joyful crop
As will weigh down your sorrows, kill not hope
Before its time, and let it raise your spirit
To bear your sorrows nobly: never fear it,
Thealma lives.
And here the Author died, and I hope the Reader will be sorry.

FINIS.

