A CERTAIN RULE, To Find out How many Honest Men there are in this NATION.
Fitted for the Use of all Sorts, Whether Church-of-England-Men, Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, or Papists.
And Proper to be Set up In all Schools, Shops, Parlours, Chambers, or Closets,
both in City and Country, in Court and Camp.
July 31. 1688.
This may be Printed,

Rob. Midgley.



Since Numbering the People has been so fashionable of late, I have bad a
Temptation of putting the Work forward, not in such manner as may any ways give
Offense either to God or Man; but so as to make it acceptable to both. And
therefore, since some have made so exact an Enquiry into the several Divisions
in this Nation, as to discover, such a Party to comprehend an Hundred to One of
such another: Another to be a Third Part of the Nation, etc. So many
Church-of-England.Men, so many Papists, so many Dissenters, etc. I earnestly
beg these Accountants to look over their Lists again, and tell me, how many of
St. Paul's Christians there are amongst them all. A Catalogue of these would be
an Excellent Work, and much more Edifying than all the rest; for however some
may please themselves that they Join with such a Communion; others, that they
Assemble with such a Congregation, yet all this is but an Empty Name, a Vain
Satisfaction, if they are not of this List of St. Paul's Christians. I do not
intend by this, as if St. Paul set up a Particular Order of Christians by
himself, distinct from those, who were the true Followers of Christ, but I call
those St. Paul's Christians, who fill up that Practical Character of a
Christian, as is described by St. Paul, and lead their Lives according to those
Rules and Directions given by this Apostle in his Epistles extant in Holy Writ.
For St. Paul taking occasion in his Letters he Writ to the First Christians of
several Nations, to prescribe them a Method of their Lives and Conversation;
what they ought to do, and what to avoid; it is certain, that in them he spoke
to us; that in reproving their Follies and Extravagancies, he condemned ours;
and in giving Directions to them, he instructed us in the Conditions and
Qualifications of good Christians. It Is a List then of such as live according
to these Rules and Directions laid down by St. Paul, I would gladly see; and to
give some Encouragement to the helping this forward, I Will here set down some of
the Chief Qualities and Conditions required by St. Paul for such a good
Christian.

Some Principal Conditions and Qualifications necessary for every honest Man
and good Christian, as set down by St. Paul.
I. Romans 1.29.
TO avoid all Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness,
Maliciousness, Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit, Malignity; Romans 1.29, 30, 31.
Not to be a Whisperer, Backbiter, Hater of God, Despiteful, Proud, Boaster,
Inventor of Evil Things, Disobedient to Parents, Covenant-breaker, without
Natural Affection, Implacable, Unmerciful. II. Romans 2.8.
Not to be Contentious; Romans 6.8.
not to do Wrong, not to Defraud our Brethren, 2 Cor. 7.2.
nor Corrupt any Man; 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
not to be a Fornicator, nor Idolater, nor Adulterer, nor Effeminate, nor
Abuser of himself with ^^nkind nor a (...) nor (...) a Drunkard, nor a Re^ nor
Extortioner. III. Gal. 5.15, 16, 19, 20.
Not to Bite and Devour others; not to fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh; to avoid
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Variance, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness,
Revelings. Ephesians. 4.25, 6, 27, 28, 29.
To put away Lying, and every Man speak Truth with his Neighbor; Let not the
Sun go down upon his Wrath; nor give place to the Devil; Let him that stole,
steal no more, let no corrupt Communication proceed out of his Mouth. IV.
Ephesians. 4.31.
Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil Speaking, be
put away from him. lb.c. 5.3, 4, 11.
But Fornication, and all Uncleanness, or Covetousness, let it not be once
named: Neither Filthiness, nor Foolish Talking, nor Jesting, which are not
convenient; And let him have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
Darkness, but rather reprove them. V. Let nothing be done through Strife, ^hil.
2.3, 14.
or Vainglory, but in Lowliness of Mind, without Murmurings, and Disputings.
Put off Malice, Blasphemy, Filthy Communication out of his Mouth. VI. 1 Thessalonians.
5.15.
Let him not render Evil for Evil; 1 Timothy 1.4, 10.
Nor give heed to Fables, Let him not be Profane, nor a Murderer, nor Liar,
nor Perjured. 1 Timothy 6.17, 20
Let him not be High-minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches: avoid Profane and
Vain Babbling, and opposition of Science, vainly so called, 1 Timothy 4.7.
and refuse profane and old Wives Fables. VII. 2 Timothy 3.2, 4.
Not to be a lover of his Ownself, nor Covetous, nor a Boaster; Proud,
Blasphemer, Unthankful, Unholy, a Truce-breaker, nor a False Accuser,
Incontinent, Fierce, or a Despiser of those that are good; Nor a Traitor, Heady
or High-minded; nor a lover of Pleasures more than of God. Tit. 3.2.
And speak Evil of no Man. VIII. Let his Love be without Dissimulation: Romans
12.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
abhor that which is Evil, cleave to that which is Good: Be kindly affectioned
to Neighbors with Brotherly Love: Not slothful in Business, fervent in Spirit,
serving the Lord; Patient in Tribulation; continuing instan^ in Prayer; given
to Hospitality. IX. Let him Bless them Which Persecute him; Romans 12.14, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21.
Bless, and Curse not: Mind not High Things; Be not Wise in his own conceit.
Recompenceo Man Evil for Evil; Live Peaceable, as much as in him lies with all
Men. Avenge not himself. Feed his Enemy, (...) he hun^^^^: Be not overcome of
Evil, but overcome Evil with Good. X. Let him be subject to Higher Powers; Romans
13.1, 5, 7, 8, 13.
he must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, b^^ ^ls^ for Conscience sake.
Let him render to all their Dues: Owe no Man any thing, but to love one
another. Let him walk honestly, as-in the Day; not in Rioting and Drunkenness,
not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying. XI. Romans 14.13.
Let him not Judge his Neighbor: 1 Cor. 4.12.
Being Reviled, let him Bless; Persecuted, let him suffer it: 1 Cor. 13.4, 5,
6, 7.
Let him have Charity. Charity suffers long, is kind, envieth not, vaunteth
not itself, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her
own, is not easily provoked, thinks no Evil, rejoices not in Iniquity, but
in the Truth, bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things. XII. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Let him cleanse himself from all filthiness of the Flesh and the Spirit,
perfecting Holiness in the fear of the Lord. Gal. 5.16, 22, 23.
Let him walk in the Spirit. The Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. XIII. Gal.
5.24, 25, 26.
If he be Christ's, he has crucified the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts.
If he live in the Spirit, let him walk in the Spirit; let him not be desirous
of Vainglory, provoking none, envying, none. Gal. 6.9, 10.
Let him not be weary in well-doing: let him do good unto all Men. XIV. Let him
walk worthy of the Vocation, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3, 15, 32.
wherewith he is called; with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering,
forbearing his Neighbor in Love; endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit
in the Bond of Peace, speaking the Truth in Love, and being kind to others. XV.
Ephesians. 5.15, 16, 17, 20, 21.
Let him walk circumspectly, redeeming the time, understanding what the Will of
the Lord is, giving thanks always for all things, submitting to others in the
fear of God. Phil. 1.27.
Let his Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ. XVI. Let his
Moderation be known unto all Men. Phil. 4, 5, 8.
Let him think on whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report; If there be any virtue, if there be any praise, let him think
on these things. XVII. Colos. 1.10.
Let him walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every
good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. Colos. 3.1, 2.5.
Let him seek those things which are above, set his affection on things above,
not on things on the Earth, Let him mortify his Members, which are upon Earth,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate Affection, Evil Concupiscence, and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry. XVIII. Let him put on the Bowels of Mercies,
Colos. 3.12, 13, 14, 17.
Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, Forbearing and
Forgiving others, that have a Quarrel against him. And above all things, let
him put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness; And whatsoever he does in
Word or Deed, let him do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus. XIX. Colos. 4.2, 5.
Let him continue in Prayer, and walk in Wisdom toward them that are without. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
Let him study to be quiet, and do his own business. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6, 8, 14, 22.
Let him watch, and be sober, put on the Breastplate of Faith and Love, and for
an Helmet, the Hope of Salvation. Let him warn them that are Unruly, comfort
the Feebleminded, support the Weak, be patient toward all Men, and abstain from
all appearance of Evil. XX. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
Let him withdraw himself from every Brother, that Walks disorderly, and not
after the Tradition received from the Apostles. 1 Timothy 1.18, 19.
Let him war a good Warfare, holding Faith and a good Conscience. 1 Timothy 6.11.
Let him follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience,
Meekness. XXI. 2 Timothy 2.19.
Let every one, that names the Name of Christ, depart from Iniquity. Heb.
13.5, 7, 17.
Let his Conversation be without Covetousness, and be content with such things
as he has. Let him remember those that have the Rule over him, and submit
himself.
These are some of the chief Qualifications prescribed by St. Paul, for every
good Christian, who desires, as in Name, so in Life and Conversation, to be a
Member of Christ: so that whatsoever else may be required to make up his
Character, yet it is cer^ain, let a man be under what Denomination he thinks
best, whether of Church of England, Dissenter, Papist, etc. yet all will avail
nothing, unless he takes care to comply with these Directions of the Apostle.
And therefore let the Apostolic Doctrine and Purity of Faith be professed and
taught where it will, yet it is a vanity to reckon all those for true Members of
that Communion, who only join in Worship, assemble to Hear, and approve the
Doctrine: For this is not enough; They must, besides all this, live the Life of
true Christians, observe what St. Paul prescribes, and avoid what he forbids
and declares to be displeasing to God. This then indeed will do; These are
Christians to the purpose; And therefore, when the next Lists are made, and
there is an Account of so many that go to this Congregation, and so many to
another, I would have the Rolls looked over again, and from every Congregation
be deducted, all those that are Unrighteous, Fornicato^^, Covetous, Malicious,
Deceitful, Backbiters, Drunkards, Unclean, Contentious, Liars, Cursers, etc.
and so on, according to what St. Paul directs above; and then those that
remain, will be a chosen Number, and the true Members of every Communion. And a
List of these it is I should gladly see: Perhaps you will think there will be but
a thin Number left behind; and it may be so indeed: But then what a strange
Generation are we fallen into, in which all are so seemingly Zealous in
contendin^ for the Truth of Christianity, and yet when we come to cast up the
Account the right way, there are so few Christians in earnest to be found
amongst us! But what shall we say, The Balance of Men is deceitful. Their
Account is cast up by halves, without due consideration; They reckon what
Congregation they go to; what Doctrine they hear and believe; but not so much
what their Lives are. And what signifies it, what their Faith is, if they live
the Lives not of good Christians, but rather of Unbelievers! A Christian Faith,
with an Heathenish Life will never carry a Man to Heaven. It Is fitting
therefore, every Man should call himself to a more just Account, and not only
consider, whether he goes to Hear and Worship, but likewise, ^^w he Lives.
These Directions of St. Paul may serve for this purpose, by which, if he Daily
or Weekly examine himself, he will soon find, what Grounds he has for true Peace
of Conscience. I humbly recommend therefore this Paper to all ^orts of ^^n.

1st. T^ all Teachers, of what Communion or Persuasion soever, that they weigh
it seriously; and remember, that a Congregation of Hearers, and not of Doers,
of Believers, and not of Livers, will One Day be little to their Credit: That
all Opinions and Doctrines are alike to the Evil Liver; And that it is to little
purpose to keep their Flock to a Party, if they let them run into Hell by their
wicked Lives.

2ly. T^ all Private Persons; That they peruse it carefully, and never esteem
themselves truly Members of any Christian Congregation, till they make it their
business to conform their Lives to these Directions of St. Paul. It matters not
where they assen^, if they have their Hearts full of Bitterness and Anger, full
of Malice and Revenge; If they lie under the Guilt of Incontinency and
Covetousness, of Drunkenness and Injustice; If they have not crucified the
Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts; Their Conversation be not as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. For however these may flatter themselves with the Name of
Catholic or Reformed Christian, yet it is certain they do not belong to Christ.

3ly. T^ all those, who being Members of no Congregation, hope to save their
Souls, by living Honestly and Justly, and giving every one their own; That they
reflect upon these Rules and Directions of St. Paul, and remember, that their
Honestly and Just^^ to render them pleasing to God, must include a Compliance
with all that is here directed by this Apostle; and that they deceive
themselves, if without all this, they think their Honestly and Justly will ever
rank them among the Blessed. Let these Me^ ^ee to conform their Lives in
earnest to this Model of a Christian Practice, and then I don't question but
'twill be available to them.

And si^^^ the observance of these Directions, gathered out of Holy Writ, is a
common Concern of all, I recommend them heartily to all, whether
Church-of-England-Men, Papists, Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Independents, or
Quakers, putting them in mind, that however they may think themselves obliged
to differ from one another in other things, yet that in these Duties they are
all obliged to agree: Let them all therefore examine their Lives and
Conversations, and often call themselves to an Account, these Directions of St.
Paul; let them have them always in fight, both in their Shop, their Parlour,
their Chamber, and their Closet, that so they may never forget their Duty. And
after a short Observation both of themselves and others, t^^^ soon discover,
who are the honest Men and good Christians. This too will soon remove our
Animosities, and establish a Common Peace; and otherwise, it is to be feared,
that notwithstanding all the Zealous Pretenses to the Truth, we shall in a
^^^rt time quite lose the Practice of Christianity, whilst we contend for the
Name.

LONDON: Printed by F. C. and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, 1688.


