CERTAIN REASONS PRESENTED TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, Feb. 24.
1641, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament touching the Princes stay at
Hampton Court.

WITH An Order of both Houses appointed to the Marquis HERTFORD concerning the
same.

ALSO, The PARLIAMENTS Answer to a Message from the Scotch Commissioners
touching their proffer of assistance by the Earl of Argile, and Lord
Chancellor of Scotland in the Affairs of Jreland.

A perfect Copy of his Majesty's Royal Message to both Houses of Parliament
on Thursday the 24th. of Febr. 1641. Concerning the raising of a Million of
Money by the City of LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by R. Olton and G. Dexter, for John Wright. An. Dom. MDCXLII.

HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS ANSWER TO THE PROPOSITIONS made by the City of
London, for the relief of Jreland.
HIS Majesty being very glad to receive any Proposition that may repair the
Calamity of his distressed Kingdom of Jreland, especially when it may be
without burden or Imposition. And for the ease of His good Subjects of this
Kingdom, has graciously considered the Overture made by both Houses of
Parliament to that purpose, and returns this Answer:

THat as he has offered and is still ready to venture his own Regal Person
for recovery of that Kingdom, if his Parliament shall advise him thereunto; so
he will not deny to Contribute any other Assistance he can to that service, by
parting with any profit or advantage of his own there: and therefore (relying
upon the wisdom of his Parliament) does consent to every Proposition now made
to him, without taking time to examine whether this Course may not retard the
reducing of that Kingdom, by exasperating the Rebels, and rendering them
desperate of being received into Grace, if they shall return to their
obedience.

And his Majesty will be ready to give his Royal Assent to all such Bills as
shall be tendered unto him by his Parliament, for the confirmation of every
particular of this Proposition etc.

Die Martis 22. Feb. 1641.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament are very sensible of the care
and affection of the Council of Scotland in offering the endeavors of so
eminent a Person as the Marquess of Argile, for the good and peace of both
Kingdoms, but finding the present State of Ireland to be such, as that for
want of his Residence in the Kingdom of Scotland; the Rebels of Ireland may
take great advantage, whereby the Peace of both Kingdoms may be disturbed; and
considering the power to be given by Commission from his Majesty, and the
Marquess of Argile or his Deputy, to raise Forts for the Service of the
Kingdom of Jreland. The Lords and Commons conceive that the presence of a
person of his worth, and Power, will be much more necessary at this time in
this Kingdom of Scotland then his Repair hither, for however the proceedings
of Parliament have met with such Obstructions as have put the affairs of this
Kingdom into some dfficulties: yet they are now in hope that by the Providence
of God, and the goodness and justice of his Majesty there will be so happy and
speedy an Issue thereof, as shall produce the Peace and Prosperity of the
Kingdoms, to which they find the Commissioners of Scotland here residing, so
ready, upon all occasions, to contribute their best endeavors with great
wisdom, and affection, that they desire neither the Lord Chancellor (whom We
likewise understand to be in the Commission for the Treaty) nor Marquess of
Argile, may now be put to the Incommodity, and trouble of so long a Journey,
they being both persons of so great merit, and Honor, as does not only place
them in a high Degree of estimation throughout this whole Kingdom, especially
in Parliament; but very much increase, and confirm our confidence, that by
their advise and assistance with the authority of the Council of State in
Scotland, the supply for Ireland will be furtherd in their Transportation, and
likewise followed with such Council, and direction, as may advance his
Majesty's service there, for reducing that Kingdom, and preserving the
Interest of his Crown: for which we shall always make a thankful return and
acknowledgment.

Dies Jovis. FEB. 24. 1641.
THE Lords and Commons in Parliament do humbly desire his Majesty,

That the Prince may not be removed from HAMPTON Court: And that for these
ensuing Reasons.

1. They conceive his Majesty had resolved that the Prince should stay at
Hampton Court until his Majesty's return.

2. That the Lord Marquess Hertford appointed by his Majesty to be Governor
of the Prince, and approved of, and commanded by the Parliament to give his
personal attendance on the Prince, is now so indisposed in his health, that he
is not able to attend the Prince to any other Place.

3. That the Prince his removal at this time from Hampton Court may be a
cause to promote jealousies and fears in the hearts of his Majesty's good
Subjects.

royal English blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Iovis 24. die
Februarii 1641.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That
the Lord Marquess Hertford take care that the PRINCE be not removed from
Hampton Court, until his Lordships health permit him to attend that Charge
given to him by His Majesty, and the Parliament.

FINIS.

