CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS UPON The two contrary COVENANTS, LATELY PVBLISHED, AND
Shortly to be offered by one side or other to the whole KINGDOM.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1643.

Certain Observations upon two contrary Covenants.
THat malignant and ill affected party which has of late years so disturbed
the peace and tranquillity wherein this Kingdom had long before flourished, and
has with their contagious preaching and writing infected many of the Kings
formerly loyal subjects with litigious and rebellious opinions, it is composed
of two sorts of people. Those who have contrived and do manage their whole
design, knowing what they do, and wherefore they do it; and those who by the
specious pretenses of the former are inveagled and drawn in to act they know
not what nor why. The first are engaged for their several and respective ends
against their Consciences, as some for Ambition, some for Covetousness, some
for Vainglory, some for Malice, and some for Revenge: The others are engaged
by their misinformed judgments; over those nothing but Force can prevail:
among these Reason may find entertainment. These two thus differing do yet so
agree, that they do equally conduce to one end, and (like the judicious eye
and brawnie arm of an Archer) one without the other can never hit the mark
they aim at. Since therefore the rectifying of either of these, will rectify
both, and so settle the Kingdom in statu quo prius: It is certainly as easy
to convince the misled, by Reason, as to subdue the mis-leaders by the sword.
Whilst others therefore strive to do the later, I will endeavor to do the
former; taking occasion by these two opposite Covenants lately published, and
shortly by one side or other to be offered to the whole Kingdom, because the
most powerful convincement in the world is to judge a man out of his own
mouth; if therefore I can prove (as I make no doubt but I shall) that that
which in this Covenant this Malignant party does swear to do, is contrary to
all their former pretenses, and discovers their malicious intentions, I hope it
will make some Proselytes. I desire every one therefore to consider well of both
these Covenants, as it behooves him to do before he takes either, and to
compare them together, and then as the Prophet Eliah said, 1 King. 18.21. How
long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal,
then follow him. So will I put it upon this issue, (though howsoever the cas^
is disputable) that if it shall appear to any man, that with a clear and
unsophisticated judgment considers these Covenants, that the forementioned
malignant party does principally and chiefly endeavor the establishing of the
true Reformed Protestant Religion, the preservation of the Kings Person, the
privilege of Parliament, the propriety of the Subject, and the Laws of the
Land, and the settling of peace and quiet among us, without preferring their
private ends, then let him enter into Covenant with them against his King: But
if he shall find that it is the King who endeavors all that is aforesaid, and
that in them it is but pretended, not intended, let him take heed that he
Covenant not with them, for it is a fearful thing to mock God so solemnly. Let
not fear induce him to it, but let him keep faith and a good conscience, and
trust God with the rest; and if he find that he has been hitherto seduced, let
him not be ashamed to profess his conversion: for it is the greatest honor to
a man in the world ingenously to confess his error.

But lest every man should not so circumspectly look into these Covenants as I
do, the better to help him, I will here set down 5. Observations which I have
taken.

The first is, that in the Covenant composed by this Malignant party, the
preservation of His Majesty's person and just Rights, is not at all mentioned
amongst other pretenses, as it has heretofore been in all their writings,
wherein their motives to begin and prosecute the war have been named, by which
I gather this, that their plausible pretenses having served their turns in
helping them to raise an Army; they do (like horse-stealers, who having ridden
one horse as far as he can go, turn him loose and take another) shift or
change their pretenses from Protestant Religion, etc. to whatsoever is for the
good of the Cause; so that their Army that was raised for the defense of the
King and Parliament, is maintained to fight against the Kings Army, his own
Person not excepted: Going back from their first principles, as best fitteth
for their purpose, (like trees that shed their beautiful blossoms when their
fruit begin to appear) whilst the Kings Covenant still mentions the
privilege of Parliament in the number of the causes wherefore he proceeds in
this war: But howsoever those who are contrivers of this wicked and malicious
design, take this liberty to themselves; let not those to whom I address my
self (that is, such who have been persuaded hitherto by their misinformed
consciences to all that they have done) consent with them, and so lose that
which is their only plea both before God and man, and let them take special
care not to pin themselves so upon the others sleeves, as to think their
wisdoms infallible, or honesties indisputable; but as a man will believe his
own eyes before another, so let him always have recourse to his own breast,
and ask counsel there: for by his own conscience shall he be judged.

The second is, that they vow never to lay down arms so long as the Papists now
in arms against the Parliament (as they say) shall be kept from the justice of
it; that is, till the Kings Army be overcome. This is the most irreligious and
inhumane Vow that can be imagined, for it excludes all hopes of Accommodation
and peace by Treaty, and it evidently shows that the settling of Religion,
Laws, and Liberty is not the thing they aim at, for the Kings Purry are sworn
by their Covenant that that shall be their first endeavor, whilst these Vow to
entertain ^o Treaty (for so far does the sense of their vow reach) and
indeed if we had not this evident proof of their averseness to peace, it were a
great folly to think otherwise of them; For wherefore took they up arms? Not
for the Establishing of the Protestant Religion etc. no, for then they would
have laid them down again upon the Kings Oath and promise to be as forward to
that as they: But they say we cannot confide in the Kings Oath, for my part, I
think that without repentance they will be damned for saying so, because they
have so little charity, I am sure they never durst venture to Treat for fear
he should be as good as his word. If it were not for this, wherefore was it
then that they took up Arms? Marry that I think none but God knows
(besides themselves) who in his good time will bring it to light: But in the
mean time, as I can judge by a man's countenance and other sympt oms that he is
not well, though I know not directly what he aileth; so by these Observations
out of their own Covenant, and the rest that I shall make, one may find that
their intentions are not for good, though he knows not the particular
Mischeife that they aim at; which may suffice to make every honest man,
heitherto misled by them, to desert them as well as if he had discovered their
whole design: and besides they may chance to be for sworn as those 40 men
were, who bound themselves under a Curse that they would neither eat nor
drink till they had slain Paul.

The Third is their Combination to stick to one another in these words. And I
will likewise assist all other persons that shall take this Oath in what they
shall do in pursuance thereof. This is a thing which was never done in a
lawful war, but in conspiracies, and confederacyes, which denotes that
theirs is so, and besides, it betrays their inward guilt when they take such
care for the protection of their several persons, and shows who were their
teachers, even their Brethren the Scots; in the other Covenant I find no such
thing, of which I shall make only this use, to desire every honest man to
consider, which side makes the just war, and have the clearest consciences,
and with them to join himself.

The fourth is, that their covenant is to be constrained, and that the Kings is
Voluntary. This in the first place is contrary to Gods law, to constrain a man
to take a vow, which with a safe Conscience he cannot keep, or else he sure to
be plundered and undo ne, so that to add to the public Miseries that they have
brought upon us, they do by this draw particular men into such an exigency,
that either their bodies or souls must be ruined. In the second place this
shows that they trust not much to the justice of their Cause, for if they
did, they would rather choose to trust to a few, and those such whose hearts
they know to be with them, as well as their bodies, then to have their strength
bound with that weak bond of constrained consciences, which will find twenty
ways to unloose themselves, but they fear if they should trust to that they
should not have so many men as were slain the other day at Brackly.

My fifth and last Observation is, that they entered into Covenant first, and
after them the Kings Party, of which I shall make this use, to prove that
theirs is the Offensive, the Kings the Defensive Party, which is a thing of the
greatest advantage to the King, and disadvantage to them that may be both
before God and Man, before Man, because that surely they will never take part
with them whom they believe to be the causers of all the miseries that have
fal^en unto them, and before God because all the innocent blood that has been,
or shall be spilt in this bloody war will be required at their hands that were
the Causers of it; and all the Rapes and Roberies that have been, and will be
committed during the same, will be laid to their charge. As therefore every man
in the managing his worldly affairs, takes heed not to engage himself so for
other men as to be forced to the payment of their debts besides his own: so let
him more especially take care that he put himself not in the number of those,
who at the day of Judgment will have more laid upon their score, then they can
be able to make satisfaction for. Let not any man therefore for any worldly
persuasion whatsoever, be induced to take this aforesaid oath of covenant,
especially if it be against his conscience.

I have here set down the Text with the Comment giving the priority to those to
whom for their shame, not their honor it belongs.

A sacred Vow and Covenant to be taken by the Armies and Kingdoms.
I A. B. In hum^lity and reverence of the Divine Majesty declare my hearty
sorrow for my own sins, and the sins of this Nation, which have deserved the
calamities and judgments that now lie upon it: and my true intention is by
Gods grace to endeavor the amendment of my own ways; and I do further in the
presence of Almighty God declare vow, and covenant, that in order to the
security, and preservation of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and
liberty of the Subject, I will not consent to the laying down of Arms, so
long as the Papists now in open war against the Parliament, shall by force of
Arms be protected from the justice thereof, and that I do abhor and detest
the said wicked and treacherous design lately discovered, and that I never
gave, nor will give my assent to the execution thereof, but will according to
my power and vocation oppose and resist the same, and all other of the like
nature: and in case any other like design shall hereafter come to my knowledge,
I will make such timely discovery, as I shall conceive may best conduce to the
preventing thereof: And whereas I do in my conscience believe that the Forces
raised by the two Houses of Parliament are raised and continued for their just
defense, and for the defense of the true Protestant Religion, and liberty of
the Subject, against the Forces raised by the King; that I will according to my
power and vocation, assist the Forces raised and continued by both Houses of
Parliament, against the Forces raised by the King without their consent, and
will likewise assist all other persons that shall take this Oath, in what they
shall do in pursuance thereof, and will not directly or indirectly adhere
unto, nor shall willingly assist the Forces raised by the K^^^ (...) the
consent of both Houses of Parliament; and this Vow and Covenant I make in the
presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to
perform the same, as I shall answer at the great day, when the secrets of all
hea^^^ shall (...).

A sacred Oath or Covenant to b^ (...) ^^jesties loyal Subjects, for the
maintenance of the true Reformed Pr^t^^^^^^ ^^^^^ion; his Majesty's just
Rights, and the P^^^^led^^ o^ ^^^liament.
I Resting fully assured of his Majesty's Pr^ncely truth and goodness, do
freely and from my heart promise, vow (...) protest in the presence of Almighty
God, that I will to the uttermost of my p^^^^^, ^^d (...) the hazard of my life
maintain the true Protestant Religion established in ^h^ ^^^rch (...) ^ngland,
his Majesty's sacred person, his Heirs and lawful Successors, his M^j^s^i^^
^^st power and privilege, and the just power and privilege of Parliament
against the Forces under the conduct of the Earl of Essex, and against all
other f^^c^ ^hat^oever, contrary to his Majesty's command, and I do believe
that the raising ^^d ^mploying of forces by his Majesty for the purpose and
cause before mentioned, to be most just and necessary; and I will do my utmost
endeavor to procure and reestablish the peace and quiet of the Kingdom: and
that here in his Majesty's subjects may fully enjoy their liberty and property
according to the Law of the land, and will neither divulge nor communicate any
thing to the said Earl, his Officers or to any other, to hinder or prejudice
the designs of his Majesty, in the conduct or employment of his Army, and I
do believe the Subjects of England are not obliged by any Act of State, Vote,
Ordinance, or Declaration made or to be made either by the Kings Majesty
solely; or by the Lords and Commons singly or jointly, without his Majesty's
express consent, saving such as are, or shall be in execution of, or according
to some known Law, Custom of the Realm, or Statute enacted by the King,
Lords and Commons in Parliament, and I do further protest and vow in the
presence of Almighty God, that I will not take nor bear Arms, but by the
expr^sse warrant of his Majesty, or by Authority justly derived from his
Majesty's immediate Warrant.

FINIS.

