THE CHARACTER OF A PAPIST.

Quis credit tantum Religio suasisse malorum. printer's or publisher's device

London* Printed in the Year 1673.

THE CHARACTER OF A PAPIST.
A Papist is a thing like a Man, but more unhappy than a Beast, since he is so
far from being reasonable, that he wants the use of his Senses, God made him a
Man, but his own zealous Ignorance transforms him into an Idol, not unlike that
of the Psalmist, He has Eyes and sees not. For he cannot (or which is worse,
out of a resolute Blindness will not) distinguish between the Color, Taste,
and Substance of Flesh and a Wafer.

He is one that thinks it safest walking blindfold, and puts out his own Eyes,
(we mean his Reason the Lamp of the Soul) to be guided through thick and thin
by another, and prefers the dark Lanthorn of an inveighing Priest, before the
bright Taper of Gods Word, or the natural Light of his Conscience which the
wisest of Men styles the Candle of the Lord.

His main boast is of good Works, though no Man's Life is more debaucht and
sullied with the continual stains of repented Crimes: Yet so confident he is
not only to quit scores with Heaven, but to obliege it too by his
superarogating Merits, Whilst his conniving Ghostly Father, easily winks at his
Venial sins, As, Swearing, Lying, Whoreing, etc. And his Holiness, for a petty
Sum, Cancels those more frightful ones of Adultery, and Incest; and Inrolls him
in the Calender of Saints, for perpetrating the useful Villainies of Murder,
Rebellion, and Treason.

His Faith exceeds that of Devils, for they believe the Truth and Tremble, but
he can resolutely credit the most nonsensical Lies in Nature, and never quake
or boggle at the matter. He is as safe in his Creed, as a Conjurer in his
Enchanting Circle. He believes as his Church, and his Church believes as he
does: That Church which is an Individuum vagum, a very Bull in expression, an
Absurdity in Terminis, Roman, Yet Catholic; Catholic. Yet Roman, a particular
General like the Nursery Phrase, Enter Seven Devils, Solus: A Church universal
confined to the Pope's Person, like Legion Crampt up in a single Lucifer.

A Church that is but a mere trick of State, a Politic Stratagem, to awe the
simple, and maintain the crafty Hierarchy that first contrived it in pride and
Idlen^ss. A Spiritual Legerd^main to bubble the credulous at once li^th out of
their wits and Money.

Their Miracles are equally more numerous and more thin and ayerical, than
those recounted in Holy Scripture; For what Christ and his Apostles performed
were so gross and visible, that all men's Senses could evidence them, but these
are so fine and rarefied, and yet so many, that it at once pusles the most
piercing Eye to perceive them and the ablest Arithmetician to Sum them up: Yet
must we not call our Papist an Athiest, he has a God, but he keeps it in a
Box. A Wafer which by the wonderful Words of a shaveling Priest, you must
believe in an instant Metamorphosed (or if you will) transubstantiated into
very Flesh, and Blood, Which is no sooner made, but forthwith they devour it,
which raises a Question, Whether a Cannibal or Papist, be the ^a^kest Flesh
eater, since the former eats only Man's Flesh, the later that of his God.

He fancies the Court of Heaven to be like those of Earthly Princes, where all
Addresses must be made by the mediation of Favorites, and therefore as if our
Saviors Intercession were insufficient, Courts the suffrages of Saints, and
spends more time in Imploring their Assistance then in supplicating the Mercy
of the Almighty; He offers such blasphemous Titles to the ever blessed Virgin,
as would (if glorified Essences be capable of disturbance) make her blush and
be troubled to hear them; and worries others for Intercession in such trivial
affairs, as he is ashamed to relate to his Confessor.

Here in England (which affords no Wolves but those in Sheeps Clothing) he
appears a pretty Innocent Beast; but in the Inquisition proves a Lion Rampant;
he is not Inspired with the Blessed gentle Dove, but carries the Talons of a
Devouring Vulture, thinks it the only way of Conversion to knock Religion into
peoples heads with Pole-Axes, and esteem no Arguments so proper for the
promoting his Catholic Faith, as Fire and Faggot, Racks and Tortures; All
England, Ireland, France, Germany, the Valtoline and West Indies too they have
Consecrated with their Sacrifices, as if the whole World were but their
Golgatha, or Acheldema, so much more dainty is their Idol-Worship than that of
Bell and Dragon of old, by how much the Blood of Saints is more precious than
that of Beasts; yet all this they shall justify by that Text in the vulgar
Latin, Hominem Hereticum devita; that is, as these Masters of Language
Interpret it, de vita toll; If his Impiety of Rome, the Bell-weather of this
Superstitious Flock, be St Peter's Successors in any thing, it is certainly in
denying his Master, for never were any things more Diametrically opposite, than
the humble, sweet and gentle example of the blessed Jesus, and the proud
insulting domineering, and usurping humor of this his pretended Viccar.

Infine, a Papist is one that has a Privilege not inferior to Paul the Roman,
born at Tarsus, for what Countryman soever he be, he is still a Roman; so
true to the Holy See, that he is false to all the World besides, his very
Religion, if he understands it, prompts him to Disloyalty, and according to
those cursed Tenets, his Priest have instil'd into him, it is impossible for him
at once to serve God, and honor his Kings yet will they ever boast themselves
the best Subjects, but it is only then and there were their Interest fall in; at
other times he will stir no further in his Princes cause, than he has orders
from Rome, one Bull from whence he believes, can in a moment Absolve him from
all Allegiance, and the most sacred Ties of Obedience; In most things the Court
of Rome makes use of him, as the Ape of the Cats foot, to take the Chestnut out
of the Fire, and generally the Jesuit behind the Certain that gives him motion;
That, and the Inquisition are the Buckle and Thong of Popery, the two Plasters
whereby the Pope hopes to cure the wounds he received from Luther, and ones
more by their help to ride in Triumph on the Necks of Kings and Emperors; But
it is time to conclude, which we think fit to do in the following Hymn:

To the Daughter of Babylon.
A PAPIST, He is the best Christian Wight,
If you will believe it, you may.
And he unto Heaven does go full right.
The clean contrary way,
Oh! the clean contrary way.
His Church of all Christian Churches the first,
If you will believe it, you may.
And he that is not of it, is surely accu st,
The clean contrary way,
Oh! the clean contrary way.
Of all Christian Churches the Pope is the Head,
If you will believe it, you may.
He leads men to Heaven when they are dead.
The clean contrary way,
Oh! the clean contrary way.
All sins he pardon's both past and to come,
If you will believe it you may.
Then you are sure to escape the last doom,
The clean contrary way,
Oh! the clean contrary way.
Legend of Legions, all Miracles sure,
If you will believe it you may.
More to be credited, then Scripture pure,
The clean contrary way,
Oh! the clean contrary way.
A Wafer the Priest Charm's into a God,
If you will believe it you may.
And so it becomes true Flesh, and Blood,
The clean contrary way,
Oh! the clean contrary way.
Then into your mouth he puts it all raw,
If you will believe it, you may.
Which surely will bleed if that you it Chew,
The clean contrary way,
Oh! the clean contrary way.
He is the best Friend to a Protestant,
If you will believe it, you may.
And will supply him in what he does want,
The clean contrary way,
Oh! the clean contrary way.
They are the best Leaders that can be chose.
If you will believe it, you may.
To teach Protestants to fight with their Foes,
The clean contrary way,
Oh! the clean contrary way,
A Papist best Subject is to a King,
If you will believe it, you may,
And most to be trusted in any thing,
The clean contrary way,
Oh! the clean contrary way.
FINIS.

