Englands Iubile: Or, A Poem on the happy return of his Sacred Majesty, Charles
the II.
To the Kings most Sacred Majesty,
PArdon great Prince, for all our offering here,
But weak discoveries of our wants appear
No language is Commensurate with thee,
Our loftiest flights but plain Humility.
Yet since we may, our frailty to conceal,
Be guilty of a Crime in smoothering zeal,
That bids thy blessed returns more welcome then
Plenty to the starved, or land to shipwrackt men.
For such were we, or if there is ought can more
Demonstrate ill, that woe was ours before.
Heaven, to restore our lost light sent us him,
Without whose raise our sphere had still been dim:
Dim as in that dark intervall, when we
Saw nothing but the Clouds of Anarchie,
Raised by the Witchcraft of Rebellion, to
So vast a height, none durst pretend to view,
Whilst they lay Curtain'd in that black disguise,
Majestic beams, but it was with blood-shot eyes.
Then if such of necessity must pine,
Who Are robbed of food, both humane and divine;
How could we thrive, when those that did pretend
To feed, did all on their Ambition spend,
Who with the Sword, not Reason did Convince,
And rackt the Subject to unthron the Prince.
The doleful year's of thy exile have been
At once our Nations punishment and sin:
Tossed in a storm of dark Afflictions, we
Floated at random, yet still looked on thee
As our safe, Harbor, but had none to guide
Us (...) False Pilates with the winds complide.
We saw what Crime drenched the amazed rout;
Yet wanted strength to cast that cursed thing out.
Though often it was vainlie strugl'd for, yet we
Who were exiled from naught but Liberty:
Who durst live hear Spectators of those times,
Do now in tears repent our passive Crimes,
And with one Universal voice allow
We all deserve death, since we live till now.
But this is Englands Jubilee, nor must
Thy Friends doubt mercy, where thy foes dare trust.
Thou art our great Panpharmacon, which by
Its virtue cures each various malladie,
Giving their pride, a cool alay of fears,
Whilst to restore our Hectic, hope appears:
And these began the Cure, which to complete,
Expansive mercy makes thy thron her seat:
So that there now (except the guilt within)
No sign remains, there has a difference been.
The giddy rout, who in their first Address,
Cried Liberty, but meant licentiousness,
Whose depraved judgments, not content to see
A heaven of Stars, their primum mobile
Did Change the systemes and in the spite oth' love
Or fear of heaven, taught earths base dregs to move,
In the bright Orb of honor, where to all
That Is great, or good they were excentricall:
Having long found their direful influence
In naught but plagues descended; did from thence
Learn sad repentant Lectures, and dare now
Present the Sword, where late the knee did bow
Dare tell their damb'd impostors they but made
False zeal the light, whilst treason cast the shade.
Dare Curse their new discoveries, which placed in
Hels Geographie, Amerricaes of sin.
But these, like dust raised 'twixt two Armies, do
Hurt, or assist, as they are hurried to
Either by levity; And therefore must
By none be held an Object of their Trust;
For though they are Usurpers hands, they have found
They rent at night, what they in the morning crowned;
But you (great Sir) whose fate has been so mixed,
As to behold these vollatile, and fixed,
May (since the offspring of their sufferings) be
More certain of their future Loyalty.
And though your title, and heaven settled state
Needs not (Usurper like) measure your Fate
By such vain love, yet may you still be sure
They Will near again, a Rebbels scourge endure.
These past years of infatuation, which
Has drayn'd their Coffers, did their hearts enrich,
With so much eager loyalty, that when
With wonder, like those new recovered men,
Who by our Saviors miracles escaped
From darkness thought men had like trees been shaped
They only through mist rarrified, gazed at
Those glimmering beams, whilst they knew not what
The event would be, how (winged with hope) did they
Each feeble glance praise as approaching day.
But when, with such advantage as the light
Gains by succeeding the black dress of night.
Through all the fogs of their preceding fear,
They from the North saw loyal Monk appear
How in Petitions did their Prayers exhale,
To wast him on, until the gentle gale
(Although by ways so wisely intricate;
They raised our fear, whilst they did calm our fate,
Brought him at length through all our doubts to be,
The great Assertor of our Liberty.
Then did we think that modest blush but just,
Whose present die, displayed our late mistrust.
And to requite those injuries we would done
To myriads raised, what single praise begun:
Through all the devious paths which he did tread,
From the base Rump, unto the glorious Head:
We scand his Actions, which did naught comprise
That might offend, but that he was too wise
For Vulgar judgments, whose weak fancies guest
By present Actions, what would be the rest.
But when their eyes unvailed, discovered who
Had to destroy the monster, found the Clew.
How did they praise his Wisdom, Valor, all
That could within the name of Subject fall:
And to complete, what ere his due might be,
Knit up those Laurels with his Loyalty;
That noble Virtue, without which the rest
Had only burthend, not adorned his Crest.
Then, since we now by this heaven guided hand,
Once more behold the glory of our land;
Whom midnight plots long studied to exclude
Again fixed in's Meridian Altitude:
Lets cease to mourn, and whilst those fogs attend
Such miscreant wretches, as dare still offend,
By flying mercy, raise our souls, deprest
Ere since this Scar set in the gloomy West.
For then begun that dreadful night, which we
Have since with terror seen, brave loyalty
Being so oppressed by a prevailing fate;
It Was only known by being unfortunate:
Yet, though Rebellion in unnatural Wars,
So far did thrive, to prove us falling Stars.
The wiser world saw those that did aspire,
Not as Heavens lamps, but Hels impetuous fire.
As monsters of Ambition, such whose wild
Chymera's since Rebellion first defiled
Our English Annals, only were advanced:
But fortunes light Ephemera's, to be glanced
A while with secret envy on; and then
Hurld from the will managed helm, to be by men
persude with such a just deserved hate,
As makes each curse, ad weights unto their fate:
Horrid as are their names, which near shall be
Mentioned without adjuncts of Infamy:
So full of guilt, all Ages to ensue
Shall weep to hear, what this near blushed to do.
Whilst we were in these uncoutch shades of recast
To tell what wild Meanders has been past
By thee, our Royal Sovereign, is a Task
That would the tongues of inspired Angels ask.
Yet since domestic miseries has taught
Us part of the sad stories ruder draught
We may, by weak reflection come to see,
With what dire weight, these dark storms fell on thee;
Who, whilst thou did (from hence excluded) stand
The pitied wonder of each Foreign Land:
Learnd'st by commanding Passions how to sway
A Nation more rebellious far than they;
So that the School which thou were tutored in,
Though thy disease, our Antidote has been
We suffering not our Crimes desert, because
From hence you learned to pity, and the Laws
Just harness with such Candor mitigate,
As once you bore the rigor of your Fate.
(What earthquakes breeds it in our breasts, when we
But think over thy progressive misery:
How thou (our restless Dove) seeing no mark
Of land, were hurried from our floating Arc:
(And whilst those Villains, that exposed thee lay
Forced every wind of Faction to obey)
Were long with billows of Affliction beat,
Ere thou did with thy Olive branch retreat.
How by poor Friends, and powerful Enemies,
By Flattering strangers, and by false Alies,
Were thy Afflictions varied, for all these
Shared in the complicating thy disease.
Like doleful Mourners that surround the bed
Of a departing Friend, those few that fled
Hence on the wings of Loyalty, to be
Partakers of what e're attended thee;
Whilst they did mourn, but could not lend relief:
Did by their sorrow but increase thy grief.
Such was the power of thy prevailing foes;
No place afforded safety, some of those
Whom poverty sent to attend thy Train,
To cure that mallady, did entertain
Infectious Councels, which did festering lie
Till Rebels Gold outweighed their Loyalty,
And from the black pernicious Embrio bred,
Monsters whose hands strove to destroy their Head.
Nor, whilst these secret sorrows sunk a mine,
Which if not hinderd by a power Divine
Had blown up all thy patience, were thou free
From public injuries, that amities
Which former leagues, or the more sacred ties
Of blood could claim, veiled in the base disguise.
Of policy starts back, and does give way
For treason to expel, or else betray
Great birth, and virtues which did that excel
As the meridian does each parallel,
Are but weak props, a Rebels threats convince:
And all avoid a persecuted Prince.
When after these big storms of ill abroad,
Some loyal Subjects had prepared the road
Unto thy throne, and thou did once more hear
Armed for redemption of thy Crown appear,
Whilst all our hearts, whose distant hands could not
Come to assist, thy righteous cause waxt hot
With loyal hopes: how were we plannet struck,
When fortune, with pretended friends forsook
Thy side, at fatal Worcester, and to raise
A Rebels Trophies, robbed thee of thy bays.
How dismal sad, how gloomy was each thought
Of thy obedient Subjects whilst they sought
Their flying Sovereign, curtain'd from their eyes,
In the dark dress of an unsafe disguise.
All wished to know, what all desire should be
A secret kept, such strange variety
Of contradictions did our passions twist:
We would behold the Sun, yet praised the mist.
But whilst desire thus shot at rovers, that
More powerful Sacrifice our prayers, being at
Heavens penetrated ear directed, found
Our hopes by thy diserting us nere Crown.
For though to want thee was our great'st distress;
Yet now thy Absence was our happiness.
Then; though we near enough can celebrate
The praise of this, yet thy misterious fate
(Great favorite of Heaven) so often has
Advanced our wonder, that the long trod path
Directs us now without more guides to see,
Those miracles, wrought in preserving thee
Were Gods imediate Acts, to whose intents
Were often fitted weakest instruments,
From whose success faith this impression bore,
He that preserved thee, would at length restore,
Which now through such a laborinth is done,
We see the end, ere know how 'twas begun:
That big bulkt cloud of poisonous vapors, in
Whose dismal shades, our Liberty had been
Long in amaze of errors lost, was by
A wholesome Northern gale enforced to fly
Easy as morning mists, so that the fate
Seemed not more strange, which did at first create,
Then what did now destroy in it, did appear
As far from hope, as was the first from fear:
When a Rebellious tyranny had been
So strengthened by a prosperous grows in sin,
That the contagious leprosy had left
None sound, but what were honest by their theft.
Then to behold that Hydra, which had bred
So many, in an instant, her last head
Submit to justice, is a blessing we
Must praise in the raptures of an exctasie,
Till from the pleasing trance, being welcomed by
Loud acclamations, raised from Loyalty:
We come, we come, with all the reverence due
To heavens bests gifts (great Prince) to welcome you:
You who by suffering in a righteous Cause
Safely restored, that Liberty, those Laws,
Which after long Convulsive Fits were now
Expiring, so, that future times told how
This great work was performed, shall wonder most
To see the Fever Cured, yet no blood lost.
But these are Mercies fit to Usher in
Him to a Thron, whose virtuous life has been
Beyond detraction good; therefore attend
Those joys which Heaven to us, by you, did send:
Whose sacred essence waighted on by all,
The most transcendent blessings that can fall
Within the Sphere of humane virtue, still
Surround your Throne; may all imagined ill
Die in the Embrio; may no dark disguise
Of seeming Friends, or Foes that temporise
E're prejudice your peace, may your Foes prove
All blushing Converts; may all those that love
You do it for zeal, not gain; and though that we
(What was of late your mark) our poverty
Are still enforced to wear, oh may there thence
Never spring a thought to take or give offense:
May all toward you be fraughted with desires,
That may in flaming zeal out blaze the fires,
That you were welcomed in with: May delight
Within your Royal breast no opposite
E're find, but so let gentle pleasure grow,
That it may kiss the banks, but near overflow.
When Hymen leads you to the Temple, let
It be to take that Jem, which heaven has set
The worlds adorning ornament, that we
May by that blessed Conjunctions influence fee
Such hopeful fruit spring from our Royal stem,
As may deserve the whole worlds Diadem.
May Peace adorn your Thron; yet if the Sword
Must needs be drawn may it no sound afford
But Victory, until extended Power
Adds weight unto your Scepter: May no hour
Ere set a seal to the Records of time
But what still makes your pleasure more sublime,
Till they being grown to pure for earth, shall be
Called to the Triumphs of Eternity.
By Will. Chamberlain.

London, Printed for Robert Clavell at the Stags-head in St. Paul's Church yard,
1660.


