THE DECLARATION AND PROCLAMATION OF THE ARMY of GOD, Owned by the Lord of
Hosts in many Victories.

To all the good People of GOD thtoughout ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, etc.

Whereunto is annexed 17 necessary Proposals for the Enthro- of Gods Laws,
settling of good Judges in every City, taking off the Excise, and Assesments,
and payment of the Soldiers, with the advancement of a free Trade and
Manifacture, for the good of the Poor in the three Nations, without injury to
any man's Propriety; with security proffered of 500000 l. if the Premises be
accepted of by the Parliament and Army.

The second Edition enlarged with new Additions.

LONDON, Printed by J. Clowes for the Author, 1659.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber



THE DECLARATION AND Proclamation OF THF ARMY of GOD.
Whosoever does Righteousness is Righteous, (1 Jo. 2. 29. 3. 7. 10.)
Wherefore having the Sword of the Lord put into our hands by His All-Wise
Providence, councelling the Godly party in the great Parliament, and stirring
up the honest People thereto; as also the several Appeals and Declarations of
the late King and Parliament, pressing upon us the Necessity of the Sword, even
by Protestations, Covenants, and several engagements imposed on us and others,
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well,
(Romans 13, 3, 4. 1 Pet. 2. 14.) Which Work the Lord so prospered in our hands,
that by us he wrought Peace throughout the three Nations, in so much that
supposing our work done we slumbered till we saw men in high places Drunk with
the Cup of Fornication (Romans 17. 2. 18. 3.) and our selves already hurried
amongst the Worshippers of the Beast, and his Image. (Rev. 14) At last the
Terrors of the Lord (2 Cor. 5. 10.) have awakened us, and we now behold all
three Nations, as in the Parable (Mat. 12. 44. 45.) swept and Garnished, and
the unclean Spirit bringing with him seven other Spirits, more wicked then
himself; so that the Treasure is exhausted, Merchants and Seamen discouraged,
Trade de^^yed, Prisons filled, West minster-Hall thronged with Lawyers and
Clyents, and complaints, and Fees innumerable, whilst Injustice, Poverty and
Oppression increase and Triumph; And our selves made use of, but to raise and
exact Taxes though left without pay, or Honorable employment, and many poor
Soldiers Families wholly Famished.

We Declare and Proclaim, That we have obtained now strength of the Lord, and
do as One Nan resolve (by his Almighty Help) one these Particulars.

1. Liberty of Conscince; but not of Sin.

2. Gods Laws to be Enthroned; but not the Jews.

3. Judges to be chosen in every City; but not imposed.

4. Taxes and Excise to be taken off, and never more laid on.

5. Free Trade for all Victuals, Ammunition and materials inported, and for all
Manufactures exported.

6. To endeavor a maintenance for Soldiers that have been for the Good Old
Cause, without Taxes or Oppression of the People.

7. To endeavor all the Poor may be employed and maintained, without injury to
any man's Propriety.

8. Prison Doors to be set open, to let out Debtors to labor toward the
payment of their Debts.

9. And for preventing Royalists and Malignants from sitting in Parliament to
dispose of the Estates, Lives and Liberties of those whose Vassels they ought
to be by Conquest, and so revenge by Councils what they lost in War, the
qualifications were thought fit for the Election of either new supplies, or new
Parliaments.

10. A Parliament or supply to be called from all Parts of the three Nations
for the better settling of this intended Good.

11. Elections not to be by a confused Rabble, nor yet returned by a more
Corrupt Sheriff; but to be chosen, or at least approved by the several
Congregations for places aforesaid.

12. Such Parliament men to be maintained by the several respective places they
are chosen for, and to bring with them the Attestation of the said Election,
under the Hands and Seals of the respective Congregations at large, certifying
also their Employment, Conversation, and time of abode amongst them.

13. That each Congregation have liberty to demand an Account of the several
Representatives; And upon their not discharging the Trust, to redemand them,
and to choose others.

14. That neither the Army, nor any Officer of the Army shall have to do with
Judicature, after the settling of the Laws of God throughout the Nations, so
long as they continue Members of the Army.

15. Because that Mercy is better than Sacrifice; and to save Life more then to
destroy it: Therefore an Act of Oblivion for all men that may be pardoned,
without leaving the Guilt of Sin upon the Nation, or doing injury to any
difference between man and man.

16. That there may be sufficient Provision for a godly Ministry throughout
all three Nations, upon such Establishment as may satisfy each Religious
Conscience without wounding the Liberty of any.

17. That there may be an honorable entertainment for above 1000 Lawyers or
Judges, if so many honest may be found, with sufficient Clarks and Registers
under them.

Since this was gathered, as the intent and meaning of some old Soldiers and
Officers, together with the mind of some godly people of the Nation; It has
pleased God to hasten the Resurrection of that Parliament, that first modelized
these Kingdoms into a Commonwealth: to whose grave consultations, as to all
others that desire the good of this Reipublick, and the establishment thereof,
upon solid and unalterable foundation; this lies open without interrupting
either public Councils, or private affairs; wherein these 3 difficulties
chiefly appear. 1. To pay the Soldier. 2. To take off Taxes. 3. To quicken
Trade; For it were great Ingratitude to let the good old Soldier perish for
want of pay, who has stood in the breach, and born the heat of the day.

It were Tyranny and Oppression still to burden the suffering People with
Assessements, Taxes, and Excise, who have spent themselves to Poverty and ruin
for the Good Old Cause.

It were destructive to the Nation, and would expose us naked to the mercy of
Foreigners, not to encourage Merchants and Seamen.

All which, having been the long meditations of some able and well-meaning men,
and God having answered their frequent desires, and Petitions in this behalf:
so as to show them a very probable way, not only for the maintaining of the
Good Old Officers and Soldiers, but of their Families also without
Assessements, Excise, or other Taxes on the people, Together with the
maintenance of the Navy, without Customs on Ammunition, Victual, on materials
imported, or any Manufactures, exported, or without invading any man's propriety.

They look upon this juncture of time as the Voice of God calling upon them,
and giving them opportunity to endeavor so good a work. Nevertheless desirous
to be assisted in so great an Enterprise, by as many persons of note and
ability as God has made willing and able, together with themselves to put in
sufficient security for performance hereof; they are entreated to send in their
names to Livewell Chapman, Bookseller in Popes-head-Ally by the Exchange, who
has promised to keep them secret, till by sober and freequent meetings the
matter may be digested, fit to be presented to the Parliament and chief
Officers of the Army. Where if the Propositions prove acceptable, there will be
a sum of 500000 l. ready toward performance of the same.

This Paper having found favor in the eyes of some worthyes of the Parliament,
Army, and the City. It is the desire of those in London (who are willing to
engage their Estates in the undertakings, when all difficulties are removed)
That they likewise in the Countries, whom God has made able men of Estates,
and of a willing mind thereto, might also send in their Names, that so there
may be a full meeting to advise, both how to perform these great Services to
the Nation, and how to obtain the favor and Assistance of the Parliament and
Army herein.

There being very great encouragements and Probabilities to answer all
Objections, and overcome all Difficulties that may seem at first sight to
appear therein,

FINIS.

