THE CHARACTER OF A Coffee-House.

WHEREIN Is contained a Description of the Persons usually frequenting it, with
their Discourse and Humors, AS ALSO The Admirable Virtues of COFFEE.

By an Eye and Ear Witness.

When Coffee once was vended here,
The Alc'ron shortly did appear:
For (our Reformers were such Widgeons,)
New Liquors brought in new Religions.
Printed in the Year, 1665.

THE CHARACTER OF A Coffee-House.
A Coffee-house, The derivation of a Coffee-house.
the learned hold
It is a place where Coffee's sold;
This derivation cannot fail us,
For where Ale's vended, that is an Alehouse.
This being granted to be true,
It Is meet that next the Signs we show
Both where and how to find this house
Where men such cordial broth carowse.
And if Culpepper won some glory
In turning the Dispensatory
From Latin into English; then,
Why should not all good English men
Give him much thanks who shows a cure
For all diseases men endure?
As you along the streets do trudge, Signs how to find it out.

To take the pains you must not grudge,
To view the Posts or Broomsticks where
The Signs of Liquors hanged are.
And if you see the great Morat
With Shash on's head instead of hat,
Or any Sultan in his dress,
Or picture of a Sultaness,
Or John's admired curled pate,
Or the great Mogul in's Chair of State,
Or Constantine the Grecian,
Who fourteen years was the only man
That made Coffee for the great Bashaw,
Although the man he never saw:
Or if you see a Coffee-cup
Filled from a Turkish pot, hung up
Within the clouds, and round it Pipes,
Wax Candles, Stoppers, these are types
And certain signs (with many more
Would be too long to write them 'ore,)
Which plainly do Spectators tell
That in that house they Coffee sell.
Some wiser than the rest (no doubt,)
Say they can by the smell find 't out;
In at a door (say they,) but thrust
Your Nose, and if you scent burnt Crust,
Be sure there is Coffee sold that is good,
For so by most it is understood.
Now being entered, there is no needing
Of complements or gentile breeding,
For you may seat you any where,
There Is no respect of persons there;
Then comes the Coffee-man to greet you,
With welcome Sir, let me entreat you,
To tell me what you will please to have,
For I Am your humble humble slave;
But if you ask, what good does Coffee?
He Will answer, Sir, don't think I scoff ye,
If I affirm there is no disease
Men have that drink it but find ease. The virtues of Coffee.

Look, there is a man who takes the steem
In at his Nose, has an extreme
Worm in his pate, and giddiness,
Ask him and he will say no less.
There sits one whose Droptick belly
Was hard as flint, now is soft as jelly.
There stands another holds his head
'Ore the Coffee-pot, was almost dead
Even now with Rhume; ask him he will say
That all his Rhum's now past away.
See, there is a man sits now demure
And sober, was within this hour
Quite drunk, and comes here frequently,
For it is his daily Malady.
More, it has such reviving power
'Twill keep a man awake an hour,
Nay, make his eyes wide open stare
Both Sermon time and all the prayer.
Sir, should I tell you all the rest
OF the cures 't has done, two hours at least
In numb'ring them I needs must spend,
Scarce able then to make an end.
Besides these virtues that is therein,
For any kind of Medicine,
The Commonwealth -- Kingdom I Would say,
Has mighty reason for to pray
That still Arabia may produce
Enough of Berry for it is use:
For 't has such strange magnetic force,
That it draws after 't great concourse
Of all degrees of persons, even
From high to low, from morn till even;
Especially the sober Party,
And News-mongers do drink 't most hearty.
Here you 'r not thrust into a Box,
As Taverns do to catch the Fox,
But as from the top of Paul's high steeple,
The whole City's viewed, even so all people
May here be seen; no secrets are
At the Court for Peace, or the Camp for War,
But straight they are here disclosed and known;
Men in this Age so wise are grown.
Now (Sir) what profit may accrue
By this, to all good men, judge you.
With that he is loudly called upon
For Coffee, and then whip he is gone.
Here at a Table sits (perplexed)
A griping Usurer, The company.
and next
To him a gallant Furioso,
Then nigh to him a Virtuoso;
A Player then (full fine,) sits down,
And close to him a Country Clown.
OF the other side sits some Pragmatick,
And next to him some sly Phanatick.
The gallant he for Tea does call,
The Usurer for naught at all. The several liquors

Pragmatick he does entreat
That they will fill him some Beau cheat,
The Virtuoso he cries hand me
Some Coffee mixed with Sugar candy.
Phanaticus (at last) says come,
Bring me some Aromaticum.
The Player bawls for Chocolate,
All which the Bumpkin wondering at,
Cries, ho, my Masters, what do you speak,
D' ye call for drink in Heathen Greek?
Give me some good old Ale or Beer,
Or else I will not drink, I swear.
Then having charged their Pipes around,
They silence break; First the profound
And sage Phanatique, Sirs, what news? Their discourse.

Troth says the Us'rer I never use
To tip my tongue with such discourse,
'Twere news to know how to disburse
A sum of money (makes me sad)
To get ought by 't, times are so bad.
The other answers, truly Sir
You speak but truth, for I Will aver
They never were worse; did you not hear
What prodigies did late appear
At Norwich, Ipswich, Grantham, Gotam?
And though profane ones do not not 'em,
Yet we -- Here the Virtuoso stops
The current of his speech, with hopes
Quoth he, you will not tak 't amiss,
I say all is lies that is news like this,
For I have Factors all about
The Realm, so that no Stars peep out
That are unusual, much less these
Strange and unheard of Prodigies
You would relate, but they are tossed
To me in letters by first Post.
At which the Furioso swears
Such chat as this offends his ears,
It rather does become this Age
To talk of bloodshed, fury, rage,
And to drink stout healths in brim-fill'd Nogans,
To the Downfall of the Hogan Mogans.
With that the Player doffs his Bonnet,
And tunes his voice as if a Sonnet
Were to be sung; then gently says,
O what delight there is in Plays!
Sure if we were but all in Peace,
This noise of Wars and News would cease;
All sorts of people then would club
Their pence to see a Play that is good.
You Will wonder all this while (perhaps)
The Curioso holds his chaps,
But he does in his thoughts devise,
How to the rest he may seem wise;
Yet able longer not to hold,
His tedious tale too must be told,
And thus begins, Sirs unto me
It reason seems that liberty
Of speech and words should be allowed
Where men of differing judgments crowd,
And that is a Coffee-house, for where
Should men discourse so free as there?
Coffee and Commonwealth begin
Both with one letter, both came in
Together for a Reformation,
To make's a free and sober Nation.
But now -- With that Phanaticus
Gives him a nod, and speaks him thus,
Hold brother, I know your intent,
That Is no dispute convenient
For this same place, truths seldom find
Acceptance here, they are more confined
To Taverns and to Alehouse liquor,
Where men do vent their minds more quicker,
If that may for a truth but pass
What Is said, In vino veritas.
With that up starts the Country Clown,
And stares about with threatening frown,
As if he would even eat them all up,
Then bids the boy run quick and call up
A Constable, for he has reason
To fear their Latin may be treason.
But straight they all call what is to pay,
Lay 't down, and march each several way.
At the other table sits a Knight, The company.

And here a grave old man ore right
Against his worship, then perhaps
That by and by a Drawer claps
His bum close by them, there down squats
A dealer in old shoes and hats;
And here withouten any panick
Fear, dread or care a bold Mechanic. Their discourse.

The Knight (because he is so) he prates
Of matters far beyond their pates.
The grave old man he makes a bustle,
And his wise sentence in must justle.
Up starts the Apprentice boy and he
Says boldly so and so 't must be.
The dealer in old shoes to utter
His saying too makes no small sputter.
Then comes the pert mechanic blade,
And contradicts what all have said.
The end of all their Chat is this,
Each for the Dutch have rods in piss.
There by the fier-side does sit,
One freezing in an Ague fit.
Another poking in' t with the tongs,
Still ready to cough up his lungs.
Here fitteth one that is melancolick,
And there one singing in a frolic.
Each one has such a pretty gesture,
At Smithfield fair would yield a tester.
Boy reach a pipe cries he that shakes,
The songster no Tobacco takes,
Says he who coughs, nor do I smoke,
Then Monsieur Mopus turns his cloak
Off from his face, and with a grave
Majestic beck his pipe does crave.
They load their guns and fall a smoking,
Whilst he who coughs sits by a choking,
Till he no longer can abide,
And so removes from the fire side.
Now all this while none calls to drink,
Which makes the Coffee boy to think
Much they his pots should so enclose,
He cannot pass but tread on toes.
With that as he the Nectar fills
From pot to pot, some on 't he spills
Upon the Songster, Oh cries he,
Pox, what do do? thou 'st burnt my knee*
No says the boy, (to make a bald
And blind excuse,) Sir 'twill not scald.
With that the man lends him a cuff
OF the ear, and whips away in snuff.
The other two, their pipes being out,
Says Monsieur Mopus I much doubt
My friend I wait for will not come,
But if he do, say I Am gone home.
Then says the Aguish man I must come
According to my wonted custom,
To give ye' a visit, although now
I dare not drink, and so adieu.
The boy replies, O Sir, however
You 'r very welcome, we do never
Our Candles, Pipes or Fire grutch
To daily customers and such,
They 'r Company (without expense,)
For that is sufficient recompense.
Here at a table all alone,
Sits (studying) a spruce youngster one,
Who does conceit himself full witty,
And's 'counted one of the wits of the City,)
Till by him (with a stately grace,)
A Spanish Don himself does place.
Then (cap in hand) a brisk Monsieur
He takes his seat, and crowds as near
As possibly that he can come.
Then next a Dutchman takes his room.
The Wits glib tongue begins to chatter,
Though 't utters more of noise than matter,
Yet 'cause they seem to mind his words,
His lungs more tattle still affords.
At last says he to Don, I trow
You understand me? Sennor no
Says the other. Here the Wit does pause
A little while, then opes his jaws,
And says to Monsieur, you enjoy
Our tongue I hope? Non par ma foy,
Replies the Frenchman: nor you, Sir?
Says he to the Dutchman, Neen mynheer:
With that he is gone, and cries, why should
He stay where wit's not understood?
There in a place of his own choosing
(Alone) some lover sits a musing,
With arms across, and's eyes up lift,
As if he were of sense bereft,
Till sometimes to himself he is speaking,
Then sighs as if his heart were breaking.
Here in a corner sits a Phrantick,
And there stands by a frisking Antic.
Of all sorts some and all conditions,
Even Vintners, Surgeons and Physicians.
The blind, the deaf, and aged cripple
Do here resort and Coffee tipple.
Now here (perhaps) you may expect
My Muse some trophies should erect
In high flown verse, for to set forth
The noble praises of its worth.
Truth is, old Poets beat their brains
To find out high and lofty strains
To praise the (now too frequent) use
Of the bewitching grapes strong juice.
Some have strained hard for to exalt
The liquor of our English Malt,
Nay Don has almost cracked his nodle
Enough to applaud his Caaco Caudle.
The Germans Mum, Teag's Usquebagh,
(Made him so well defend Tredagh,)
Metheglin, which the Britains tope,
Hot Brandy wine, the Hogans hope.
Stout Meade which makes the Russ to laugh,
Spic'd Punch (in bowls,) the Indians quaff.
All these have had their pens to raise
Them Monuments of lasting praise,
Only poor Coffee seems to me
No subject fit for Poetry.
At least it is one that none of mine is,
So I do wav t, and here write --
FINIS.

