TO HIS GRACE WILLIAM DUKE of HAMILTON THEIR MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER And
the Honorable ESTATES of PARLIAMENT, The following Considerations and
Proposals are humbly presented by Dr. HUGH CHAMBERLEN
First Consideration.
WHereas it is most evident, That a Wise and Large Establishment, and a
continued course of considerable Trade, is a sure way whereby any Nation
Capable of it, may attain to Honor, Wealth, and Power: because that thereby
will arise; First, A great Increase of Money, which answers all things:
Secondly, An Increase of People, which is the Strength of any Kingdom or State,
and who do always gather to those places where Money is in abundance. And
Thirdly, An Increase of Shipping, which is the strongest rampart of an Island;
And by which Merchandise is conveyed to the most profitable Market. It is
therefore the undoubted Interest of the People of Scotland, especially those
who have the greatest Estates, whether of Land or Money, to Employ themselves
to the Improvement of Trade, as universally as is possible. And it is humbly
conceived, that this proposition needs no other Proof or Illustration, than
what plainly arises from the Observation of those many and great Advantages
derived from Trade, to the Kingdom of England, the States of the united
Provinces, and all other Kingdoms, and States, that have applied themselves to
Commerce.

Second Consideration.
The Kingdom of Scotland is as Capable of making Advantages by Trade, as any
other Kingdom or State, being surrounded with good Sea Ports upon all its
Coasts, and having a very great and profitable Subject of Trade, proper to it;
The Land affording Grain, Cattle, Wool, Flax, Coal, Salt, Copper, Iron, Lead,
and other Native Products; besides the Fishing of the Rivers, Loghs, and Seas.
This Kingdom has likewayes great numbers of People, either not Employed, or
not so fully and profitably as might be: And has also such a Provision of
Shipping as may serve to begin a Trade, and may soon be Increased, if a greater
Trade be set up. The truth of this Consideration will appear by comparing the
Particulars therein contained, to those of the united Provinces, where the
proper Subject of Trade comes very far short of that of this Kingdom: Which
Provinces from very small beginnings, and under the Discouragement of a War
with Spain, at that time the most potent King of Europe, have yet raised
themselves, within a short period of years, to that immense, Wealth, Grandeur,
and Power, that now they possess: And have acquired it chiefly by their
Trafficking in those Subjects of Trade, which properly belong to this and other
Nations.

Third Confideration.
The People of this Kingdom, who have had Liberal Education, are generally in
all Countries allowed to be of great Ingenuity and Diligence, and so well
Inclined to Virtue and Frugality; and so averse from Luxury, that where they
are Employed abroad, they are outdone by none; and the Commons being docile and
Tractable, and likewayes Robust and Vigorous of Body, and sufficienty Inclined
to bestow their Labor where there is prospect of moderate Gain: And being
hitherto accustomed to small Wages; It may justly be concluded, that no People
in the World are naturally more fitted or better qualified for setting up,
managing and prosecuting a great and considerable Trade.

Fourth Consideration.
It is most certainly true in Fact, nor can it be unknown to the Intelligent of
this Nation, that the greatest Tradings in the World are carried on, not so
much by the species of Money, which is in Stock and Cash, as by a great Credit
attained to by means, partly of their visible Subject of Trade, partly of their
pains in, and application to Traffic, bust most of all upon account of the
Reputation and Opinion of the great Profits made in the course of a prosperous
Trade, even where the Native and Propper Subject of Trade keeps no proportion
with the Trade carried on, as it is in the United Provinces; Where Credit is
the chief Instrument of their Commerce, and that Credit raised upon a Fund more
of Opinion or Reputation than Real. If therefore in this Kingdom, the want of
a sufficient Stock of Money, for the Carrying on a great Trade, can be made up
by a Credit grounded upon a more Real and Substantial Fund, than the Credit of
any other Nation, either at present is, or probably can be founded upon, then
certainly it may most reasonably follow, that this Kingdom is rather more
Capable of carrying on great and National Trades, than most other Kingdoms or
States in Europe.

Fifth Consideration.
The Titles and Tenures of Estates, especially Land Estates in this Kingdom,
being more known sure and stated, and with greater ease and certainty
examinable, by reason of the Records here in use, than in any other Country;
and an evident clear and firm security upon Land, being the best and most
substantial Fund of Credit: This Kingdom is capable in this respect, to raise a
credit sufficient for improving to the uttermost the great subject of Trade,
that now it unprofitably possesses; and this Credit as far to execed that of
other Nations, as a real solid and permanent Fund exceeds those of Opinion and
Reputation, for such all those of other Nations will be found to be when duly
weighed, with that hereby proponed for this Kingdom.

Upon these considerations, which may so justly be presumed to induce the Right
Honorable Estates of Parliament, to receive and examine a proposal, that
Tenders to this Kingdom the certain and Effectual Means of so great Wealth and
Honor,

The said Doctor Hugh Chamberlen, humbly offers to the wisdom of this August
Assembly, The following Proposal.
THE PROPOSAL.
THAT a Statute or Law of this Kingdom may be Enacted, for nominating certain
Trustees or Commissioners, to be appointed now, and from time to time, by
Parliament, and accountable thereunto: which Trustees are to have power to
receive and examine the titles and Estates of all such as are willing to engage
their Lands for the ^orming such a secure current Credit. Upon finding any such
estate clear in title, the said Trustees to take a conveyance thereof for 150
Years, upon Condition to be void, when 100 Years payment shall have been made
to them of the rent agreed; and such rent to be paid, not in Money or Gold, but
only in the bills of Credit issued to the Grantor by the said Trustees, And the
Heritor or Grantor to enjoy the free and undisturbed possession of such Estate
for the whole Term; he duly paying such Annualrent. Upon the making over any
such Estate, the Trustees thereupon direct their Warrant to the Master of a
proper Office, therefore to be erected, to Issue 100 years value of such Estate
in bills of Credit of several values, the better to accommodate the uses of
Trade: Which bills of Credit are thus to be divided, Viz: 40 Years Value to the
Proprietor: 30 Years value for his use, but to be employed in such public
Trade or Trades, as the several Proprietors shall in a body agree upon: 10
Years purchase to the Government in ease of the People in point of Taxes, and
may be appropriated to such uses where the honor of the Crown, and Interest of
the Nation, may equally meet: And the residue to the use of the said Doctor
Chamberlen, as Master of such Office; who and his Heirs to be perpetually so,
in reward of this service done the Nation. And the Master of the Office, is out
of such his part, to pay all the charge of the Office, which will be very
great; and to answer all contingencies of it, And also generous and becoming
appointments to those Honorable Gentlemen to be made Trustees by the
Parliament, to see justice done to the people, and the honor, and security of
the bank preserved inviolable. The Heritors, or Proprietors that raise this
Fund, are to be a Corporation, with perpetual Succession, and all necessary
powers, for mannaging and carrieing on such National Trade, or Trades, as they
shall agree upon. From 120 to 150 Pound Sterling, Per annum, is to be made over
for the payment of every 100 Per annum, to be engaged for this Fund, and so in
proportion; And this to the end, that all credit thus to be issued, may be
supported by a greater value than it self.

That these Bills be made Current in all payments: and as they are paid
Yearly, for Rent to the Trustees, they are by them to be destroyed: so that at
the end of 100 years they will be all recalled. Bills of Credit thus founded
upon Land, and strengthened by the Sanction of Law, and made in a form
incapable of forgery, will be found an excellent instrument or medium of Trade,
equal in all respects to Gold and Silver Money, and superior to them in diverse
regards. They are more sure than any Bills, Bonds, or Morgages, or any manner
of Credit now known in the World: They have a real solid extrinsick and
permanent value, inseparably adhering to them by Law: nor can their value be
impaired, or their use taken away, by any future Parliaments, or by any
revolutions of State, where all men's properties will not also be swallowed up.
By this means, a considerable part of the Rents of the Nation may be applied to
Trade, which otherwise could not be done. Thus may all the poor be profitably
employed: all Due Improvements made in Husbandry, and all needful Arts and
Manufacturies; The Shipping and strength of the Nation will be increased by Sea
and Land: Public Taxes will become easy to the Subjects: and all who
Contribute to this Fund, will be made Richer by it, at their very entry into
it: Besides what their share in the future Trade will produce.

No person is forced to be concerned in it, yet all are permited that shall
desire it; which renders it truly a free and common Good. Although at the end
of 100 Years, all this Credit will be called in; Yet the course of Trade
managed with it, cannot in the mean time but produce Gold, Silver, and other
valuable commodities, and that to a far gre^ter value than the Bills
themselves: And the Trade founded by them, will be perpetual. These Bills not
passing out of the Kingdom, are an advantage: For all wise Laws restrain Money
from going out; and foreign Trade ought not to be managed with Money, but
with the native product and Manufactures of the Kingdom. The Banks of Holland
and Ven^ee are pregnant instances of the power of Credit, under wise
R^gulation: And yet the Credit of both those Banks, are far inferior to the
Credit her^by proponed. They take the ready Money and employ it for the
Government, an^ give their Bills to Negotiate, in payment: So that in any
exigence of State, if all their Creditors should at once call for their several
debts, it may reasonably be doubted if either of these Banks should be able to
answer their Credit: So that Opinion o^ Reputation, is their great support. But
the Bank hereby Proponed; Touches no ^^ans ready Money; makes all men concerned
in it presently much Richer than before; lays sure Foundations of lasting
National Trades; and becomes every year a ^tronger security than before: For as
the Term of years Lessens, the security becomes more strong. Upon the whole, It
is humbly conceived, to have all the force of demonstration, that this Kingdom
Receiving and Enacting this proposal, cannot fail of a success Superior to
either of those Powerful and Opulent States; because of the Advantages before
enumerated, that this Kingdom possesses over them.

It is therefore humbly Prayed, by Oliver Salusbury, and Peter Chamberlen,
Gentlemen, Agents on this behalf of the said doctor Chamberlen, That his Grace
the Lord High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable, the Estates of
Parliament, may please to commit the Consideration of this Proposal to be
examined and Rep^^^ being made, may determine therein as in their Great Wisdom
they shall see Cause.

