THE TRAGEDY OF ALPHONSUS EMPEROR OF GERMANY As it has been very often acted
(with great applause) at the Private house in BLACKFRIARS by his MAJESTY'S
Servants*

By George Chapman Gent*

LONDON, Printed for HUMPHREY MOSELEY, and are to be sold at his Shopp at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard 16^4.

To the Reader
I Shall not need to bespeak thee Courteous, if thou have seen this Piece
presented with all the Elegance of Life and Action on the Blackfriars Stage;
But if it be a Stranger to thee, give me leave to prepare thy acceptance, by
telling thee, it was received with general applause, and thy judgment (I doubt
not) will be satisfied in the reading.

I will not raise thy Expectation further, nor delay thy Entertainment by a
tedious Preface. The Design is high, the Contrivement subtle, and will deserve
thy grave Attention in the perusal.

Farewell.
Dramatis Personae.
ALphonsus Emperor of Germany The seven Electors of the German Empire.
King of Bohemia. Bishop of Mentz. Bishop of Collen. Bishop of Tryer. Pallatine
of the Rhein. Duke of Saxon. Marquess of Brandenburgh*
Prince Edward of England. Richard Duke of Cornwall: Lorenzo de Cipres,
Secretary to the Emperor. Alexander his Son, the Emperors Page. Isabella the
Empress. Hedewick Daughter to the Duke of Saxon. Captain of the Guard.
Soldiers. Jailer. Two Boores.
ALPHONSUS Emperor of Germany.
Enter Alphonsus the Emperor in his nightgown, and his shirt, and a torch in
his hand, Alexander de Tripes his Page following him. Al. BOy, give me the
Master Key of all the doors.
To Bed again, and leave me to my self.
[ Exit Alexder. Is Richard come? have four Electors sworn
To make him Keisar in despite of me?
Why then Alphonsus it is time to wake.
No Englishman, thou art too hot at hand,
Too shallow braind to undermine my throne;
The Spanish Sun has purified my wit,
And dried up all gross humors in my head,
That I am sighted as the King of Birds,
And can discern thy deepest Strat^ gems.
I am the lawful German Emperor,
Chosen, enstall'd, by general consent;
And they may term me Tyrant as they please,
I will be King, and Tyrant if I please;
For what is Empire but a Tyranny?
And none but children use it otherwise.
Of seven Electors, four are falln away,
The other three I dare not greatly trust;
My Wife is Sister to mine enemy,
And therefore wisely to be dealt withal;
But why do I except in special,
When this position must be general,
That no man living must be credited,
Further than tends unto thy proper good.
But to the purpose of my silent walk;
Within this Chamber lies my Secretary,
Lorenzo de Cipres, in whose learned brain
Is all the compass of the world containd;
And as the ignorant and simple age
Of our forefathers, blinded in their zeal,
Received dark answers from Appollo's shrine,
And honored him as Patron of their bliss;
So I, not muffled in simplicity,
Zealous indeed of nothing but my good,
Have to the Augur of my happiness,
To lay the ground of my ensuing Wars.
He learns his wisdom, not by flight of Birds,
By prying into sacrificed beasts,
By Hares that cross the way, by howling Wolves,
By gazing on the Starry Element,
Or vain imaginary calculations;
But from a settled wisdom in it self
Which teaches to be void of passion.
To be Religious as the ravenous Wolf,
Who loves the Lamb for hunger, and for prey;
To threaten our inferiors with our looks;
To flatter our Superiors at our need;
To be an outward Saint, an inward Devil;
These are the lectures that my Master reads.
This Key commands all Chambers in the Court;
Now on a sudain will I try his wit,
I know my coming is unlooked for.
He opens the door and finds Lorenzo sleep a loft. Nay sleep, Lorenzo, I will
walk a while.
As nature in the framing of the world,
Ordained there should be nihil vacuum;
Even so me thinks his wisdom should contrive,
That all his Study should be full of wit,
And every corner stuffed with sentences?
What Is this? Plato? Aristotle? tush these are ordinary,
It seems this is a note but newly written.

[He reads a note which he finds among his Books. Una arbusta non alit duos
Erithicos; which being granted, the Roman Empire will not su^fice Alphonsus
King of Castile, and Richard Earl of Cornwall his competitor; thy wisdom
teaches thee to cleave to the strongest; Alphonsus is in possession, and
therefore the strongest, but he is in hatred with the Electors, and men rather
honor the Sunrising than the Sun going down. I marry this is argued like
himself, and now me thinks he wakes.

Lorenzo Rises, and snatches at his sword which hung by his Bed side.] Loren.
What are there thieves within the Emperor's Court?
Villain thou dy'st; what make thou in my Chamber?

Alphon. How now Lorenzo, will thou slay thy Lord?

Loren. I do beseech your sacred Majesty to pardon me,
I did not know your grace.

Alphon. Ly down Lorenzo, I will sit by thee,
(...) is sharp and pi^rcing; tremble not,
Had it been any other but our self,
He must have been a villain and a thief.

Loren. Alas my Lord! what means your excellence,
To walk by night in these so dangerous times?

Alphon. Have I not reason now to walk and watch,
When I am compast with so many foes?
They war^, they watch, they cast, and they conspire*
To win confederate Princes to their aid,
And batter down the Eagle from my creast.
O, my Lorenzo, if thou help me not,
The Imperial Crown is shaken from my head,
And given from me unto an English Earl.
Thou know how all things stand as well as we,
Who are our enemies, and who our friends,
Who must be threatened, and who dallyed with,
Who won by words, and who by force of arms;
For all the honor I have done to thee.
Now speak, and speak to purpose in the cause;
Nay rest thy body, labor with thy brain,
And of thy words my self will be the scribe.

Loren. Why then my Lord, take Paper, Pen and Ink*
Write first this maxim, it shall do you good.

1. A Prince must be of the nature of the Lion and the Fox; but not the one
without the other.

Alphon. The Fox is subtle, but he wants force;
The Lion strong* but scorneth policy;
I Will imitate Lysander in this point,
And where the Lion's hide is thin and scant,
I Will firmly patch it with the Foxes fell.
Let it suffice I can be both in one.

Loren. 2. A Prince above all things must seem devou^; but there is nothing so
dangerous to his state, as to regard his promise or his oath.


Alphon. Tush, fear not me, my promise; are sound,
But he that trusts them shall be sure to fail.

Loren. Nay my g^od Lord, but that I know your Majesty,
To be a ready ^^u^ckwitted Scholar,
I would bestow a comment on the text.
3. Trust not a reconciled friend; for good turns cannot blot out old grudges.


Alphon. Then must I watch the Palatine of the Rhein,
I caused his Father to be put to death.

Loren. Your Highness has as little cause to trust
The dangerous mighty Duke of Saxony;
You know, you sought to banish him the Land;
And as for Cullen, was not he the first
That sent for Richard into Germany?

Alphon. What Is thy opinion of the other four?

Alphon. That Bohemie neither cares for one nor other,
But hopes this deadly strife b^tween you twain,
Will cast the Imperial Crown upon his head.
For Trier and Brandenberg, I think of them
As simple men that wish the common good;
And as for Mentz I need not censure him,
Richard has chained him in a golden bond,
And saved his life from ignominious death.

Alphon. Let it suffice, Lorenzo, that I know,
When Churfurst Mentz was taken Prisoner,
By young victorious Otho Duke of Brunschweige
That Richard Earl of Cornwall did disburse
The ransom of a King, a million,
To save his life, and rid him out of bands,
That su^ of gold did fill the Brunschweige bags;
But since my self have rained a golden shower.
Of ^right Hungar^an (...) and Cru^adoes,
Into the private Coffers of the Bishop,
The English A^gel^ (...) their (...) and (...);
My crosses b^ess his Coffers* and p^ead for me,
(...) Voice is mine, bought with ten ^un of Gold,
And at the meeting o^ the seven E^ectors,
His Princely doub^e-dealing holiness
Will spoil the English Emper^u^ of ^ope.
But I r^fer these matter to the sequel.
Proceed Lorenzo forward to the next.

Loren. I Am glad your grace has dealt so cunningly,
With that victorious f^ckle mi^ded Prela^e; for in election his voice is first
but to the next.

4. It Is more saf^ty for a Prince to be feared than loved.

Alphon. Love is an hum^ur pleases him that loves;
Let me be hated, so I please my se^f.
Love is an humor mild and changeable;
But fear er graves a reverence in the heart.

Loren. 5. To keep an usurped Crown, a Prince must swear, forswear, poison,
murder, and commit all kind of villainies, provided it be cunningly kept from
the eye of the world.


Alphon. But my Lorenzo that is the hardest point,
It is not for a Prince to ex^cute,
Physicians and Apot^ecaries must know,
And servi^e f^ar or Counsel-^reaking bribes,
W^^l from a Peasant in an hour extort
Enough to overthrow a Monarchy.

Loren. Therefore my Lord set down this sixth and last Article.
6. Be always jealous of him that knows your secrets,
And therefore it behooves you credit few;
And when y^u grow into the least suspect.
With silent cunning must you cut them off.
As for example, Iulio Lentulus,
A most renowned Neapolitan,
Gave me this Box of poison, it was not long
But therewithal I sent him to his grave.

Alphon. And what is the special virtue of the same?

Loren. That it is twenty d^ys before it works.

Alphon. But what is this?

Loren. This an infection that kills suddenly;
This but a toy to ca^t a man asleep.

Alphon. How? bing drunk?

Loren. No, being sme^t unto.

Alphon. Then smell Lorenzo, I did break thy sleep;
And* for this time, this lecture shall suffice.

Loraen. What have you done my Lord? you have made me ^afe,
For stirring hence these four and twenty hours.

Alphon. I see this charms his senses sudainly.
How now Lorenzo, half asleep already?
Aeneas Pilot by the God of dreams,
Was never lul^'d into a sounde^ tra^ce;
And now Alphonsus over-read thy notes.
[He reads. These are already at my fingers ends,
And lest the world should find this little Schedule,
Thus will I rend the text* and after this,
On my behavior set so fair a gloss,
That men shall take me for a Convertite;
But some may think, I should forget my part,
And have been over rash in renting it,
To pnt them out of doubt I study sure,
I Will make a backward repetition,
In being jealous of my Counsel keepers,
This is the poison that kills sudainly,
So did thou unto Julius Lentulus,
And blood with blood must be requited thus.
Now am I ^afe, and no man knows my Counsels,
Churfurst of Mentz, if now thou play thy part,
E^ning thy gold with cunning workmanship,
Upon the Bemish Kings ambition,
Richard shall shamefully fail of his hope,
And I with triumph keep my Emperie.
Exit.
Enter the King of Bohemia, the Bishops of Mentz, Collen, Trier, the Pallatine
of the Rhein, The Duke of Saxon, The Marquess of Brandenburg. Bohe. Churfursts
and Princes of the Election,
Since by the adverse fortune of our age,
The sacred and Impetial Majesty
Has been usurped by open Tyranny,
We the seven Pillars of the German Empire,
To whom successively it does belong
To make election of our Emperors,
Are here assembled to unite a new
Unto her former strength and glorious type,
Our half declining Roman Monarchy,
And in that hope, I Henry King of Bohem,
Churfurst and Sewer to the Emperor,
Do take my seat next to the sacred throne.

Mentz. Next seat belongs to Julius Florius
Archbishop of Mentz, Chancellor of Germany,
By birth the Duke of fruitful Pomerland.

Pal. The next place in election longs to me,
George Cassimirus Palsgrave of the Rhein,
His Highness Taster, and upon my knee
I vow a pure sincere innated zeal
Unto my Country, and no wrested hate,
Or private love shall blind mine intellect.

Collen. Brave Duke of Saxon, Dutchlands greatest hope,
S^ir now or never, let the Spanish tyrant,
That has dishonored us, murdered our Friends,
And stained this seat with blood of innocents,
At last be chastis'd with the Saxon sword,
And may Albertus Archbishop of Collen,
Chanc^lor of Gallia and the fourth Elector;
Be thought unworthy of his place and birth,
But he assist thee to his utmost power.

Sax. Wisdom* not word^, must be the sovereign salve,
To search and heal these grievous festred wounds,
And in that hope Augustus Duke of Saxon,
Arch-Marshall to the Emperor take my place.

Trier. The like does Frederick Archbishop of Trier,
Duke of Lorrain, Chancelour of Italy.

Bran. The seventh and last is Ioachim Carolus,
Marquess of Brandenburg, overworn with age,
Whose Office is to be the Treasurer;
But Wars have made the Coffers like the Chair.
Peace brings plenty, Wars bring poverty;
Grant Hea^ens, this meeting may be to effect,
Establish Peace, and cut off Tyranny.
Enter the Empress Isabella King John's Daughter,
Empress. Pardon my bold intrusion mighty Chur^ursts,
And let my words pierce deeply in your hearts.
O! I beseech you on my be^ded Knees,
I the poor miserable Empress,
A stranger in this Land, unu^'d to broyls,
Wife to the one, and Sister to the other
That are Compet^tors for Sovereignty;
All that I pray, is, make a quiet end;
Make Peace b^tween my Hu^band and my Brother.
O think how grief does stand on either side,
If either party chance to be miss;
My Husband is my Husband; but my Brother,
My heart does melt to think he should mi^carry.
My Brother is my Brother; but my Husband,
O how my jo^nts do shake fea^ing his wrong!
If both should dye in these uncertain broyls.
O me, why do I live to think upon it!
Bear with my interrupted speeches Lords,
Tears stop my voice, your wisdoms know my meaning*
Alas I know my Brother Richard's heart
Affects not Empire, he would rather choose
To make return again to Palestine,
And be a scourge unto the Infidels;
As for my Lord, he is impatient,
The more my grief, the lesser is my hope,
Yet Princes thus he sends you word by me,
He will submit himself to your award,
And labor to amend what is amiss.
All I h^ve said, or can device to say,
Is few words of great worth, Make unity*

Bohe* Madam, that we have suffe^'d you to kneel so long,
Agrees not with your dignity nor ours;
Thus we excuse it, when we once are set,
In solemn Council of Election,
We may not rise till somewhat be concluded.
So much for that* ^ouching your earnest sure,
Your Majesty does know how it concern^ us,
Comfort your self, as we do hope the best;
But tell us, Madam, where is your Husband now?

Empress. I left him at his prayers, good my Lord.

Saxon. At prayers? Madam, that is a miracle.

Pall. Undoubtedly your Highness did mistake;
'Twas sure some Book of Conjuration;
I think he never said prayer in his life.

Empress. Ah me, my fear, I fear, will take effect;
Your ^ate to him, and love unto my Brother,
Will break my heart, and spoil the Imperial peace.

Mentz. My Lord of Saxon, and Prince Pallatine,
This hard opinion yet is more than needs;
But, gracious Madam, leave us to our selves.

Empress. I go, and Heaven that holds the Hearts of Kings,
Direct your Counsels unto unity.
Exit.
Bohe. Now to the depth of that we have in hand;
This is the question, whether the King of Spain
Shall still continue in the Royal throne,
Or yield it up unto Plantagenet,
Or we proceed unto a third Eelection.

Saxon. E're such a viperous blood-thirsty Spaniard
Shall suck the hearts of our Nobility,
The Imperial Sword which Saxony does bear,
Shall be unsheathed to War against the world.

Pall. My hate is more than words can testify,
Slave as he is he murdered my Father.

Coll. Prince Richard is the Champion of the world,
Learned, and mild, fit for the Government.

Bohe. And what have we to do with Englishmen?
They are divided from our Continent.
But now that we may orderly proceed
To our high Office of Election,
To you my Lord of Mentz it does belong,
Having first voice in this Imperial Synod,
To name a worthy man for Emperor.

Mentz. It may be thought, most grave and reverend Princes,
That in respect of diverse sums of gold,
Which Richard of mere charitable love,
Not as a bribe, but as a deed of Alms,
Disburs'd for me unto the Duke of Brunschweige,
That I dare name no other man but he,
Or should I nominate an other Prince,
Upon the contrary I may be thought
A most ungrateful wretch unto my Friend;
But private cause must yield to public good;
Therefore me thinks it were the fittest course,
To choose the worthiest upon this Bench.

Bohem. We are all Germans, why should we be yoked
Either by Englishmen or Spaniards?

Saxo. The Earl of Cornwall by a full consent
Was sent for out of England.

Mentz. Though he were,
Our later thoughts are purer than our first,
And to conclude, I think this end were best,
Since we have once chosen him Emperor,
That some great Prince of wisdom and of power,
Whose countenance may overbear his pride,
Be joynd in equal Government with Alphonsus.

Bohem. Your Holiness has soundly in few words
Set down a mean to quiet all these broyls.

Trier. So may we hope for peace if he amend;
But shall Prince Richard then be joynd with him?

Pal. Why should your Highness ask that question?
As if a Prince of so high Kingly Birth,
Would live in couples with so base a Cur?

Bohe. Prince Pallatine, such words do ill become thee.

Saxon. He said but right, and called Dog a Dog.

Bohe. His Birth is Princely.

Saxo. His manners villainous,
And virtuous Richard scorns so base a yoke.

Bohe. My Lord of Saxon, give me leave to tell you*
Ambition blinds your judgment in this case;
You hope, if by your means Richard be Emperor,
He, in requital of so great advancement,
Will make the long-desired Marriage up
Between the Prince of England and your Sister,
And to that end Edward the Prince of Wales,
Has born his Uncle Company to Germany.

Saxo. Why King of Bohem is it unknown to thee,
How often the Saxons Sons have married Queens,
And Daughters Kings, yea mightiest Emperors?
If Edward like her beauty and behavior,
He Will make no question of her Princely Birth;
But let that pass, I say, as erst I said,
That virtuous Richard scorns so base a yoke.

Mentz. If Richard scorn, some one upon this Bench,
Whose power may overbear Alphonsus pride,
Is to be named. What think you my Lords?

Saxon. I think it was a mighty mass of Gold,
That made your grace of this opinion.

Mentz. My Lord of Saxony, you wrong me much,
And know I highly scorn to take a bribe.

Pal. I think you scorn indeed to have it known:
But to the purpose, if it must be so,
Who is the fittest man to join with him?

Collen. First with an Ox to plough will I be yoked.

Mentz. The fittest is your grace in mine opinion.

Bohem. I am content, to stay these mutinies,
To take upon me what you do impose.

Saxon. Why here is a tempest quickly overblown.
God give you joy my Lord of half the Empire;
For me I will not meddle in the matter,
But warn your Majesty to have a care,
And vigilant respect unto your person,
I Will hie me home to fortify my Towns,
Not to o^fend, but to defend my self.

Pals. Have with you Cousin, and adieu my Lords,
I am afraid this sudden knitted Peace,
Will turn unto a tedious lasting War;
Only thus much we do request you all,
Deal honorably with the Earl of Cornwall,
And so adieu.

Exeunt. Saxon. and Pals. Brand. I like not this strange Farewell of the Dukes.

Bohem. In all elections some are malcontent.
It does concern us now with speed to know,
How the Competitors will like of this,
And therefore you my Lord Archbishop of Trier,
Impart this order of arbitrament
Unto the Emperor* bid him be content,
To stand content with half, or lose the whole.
My Lord of Mentz go you unto Prince Richard,
And tell him flatly here is no Crown, nor Empire
For English Islanders; tell him, 'twere his best,
To hie him home to help the King his Brother,
Against the Earl of Leicester and the Barons.

Collen. My Lord of Mentz, sweet words will qualify,
When bitter terms will add unto his rage.
It Is no small hope that has deceived the Duke;
Therefore be mild; I know an Englishman,
Being flattered, is a Lamb, threatened, a Lion;
Tell him his charges what so e're they are
Shall Be repaid with treble vantages;
Do this; we will expect their resolutions.

Mentz. Brother of Collen, I entreat your grace
To take this charge upon you in my stead;
For why I shame to look him in the face.

Collen. Your Holiness shall pardon me in this,
Had I the profit I would take the pains;
With shame enough your Grace may bring the message.

Mentz. Thus am I wronged, God knows, unguiltily.

Brand. Then arm your countenance with innocence,
And boldly do the message to the Prince;
For no man else will be the messenger.

Mentz. Why then I must, since there is no remedy.
[Exit. Mentz
Brand. If Heaven that guides the hearts of mighty men*
Do calm the Winds of these great Potentates,
And make them like of this Arbitrament,
Sweet Peace will triumph thorough Christendom,
And Germany shall bless this happy day.

Enter Alexander de Toledo the Page. Alexand. O me most miserable ^O my dear
Father!

Bohem. What means this passionate accent? what art thou
That sounds these acclamations in our ears?

Alex. Pardon me Princes, I have lost a Father,
O me, the name of Father kills my heart.
O! I shall never see my Father more,
H'as taken his leave of me for age and age.

Collen. What was thy Father?

Alex. Ah me I what was a not?
Noble, Rich, valiant, well-belov'd of all,
The glory and the wisdom of his age,
Chief Secretary to the Emperor.

Collen. Lorenzo de Toledo, is he dead?

Alex. Dead, ay me dead, ay me my life is dead,
Strangely this night bereft of breath and sense,
And I, poor I, am comforted in nothing,
But that the Emperor laments with me,
As I exclame, so he, he rings his hands,
And makes me mad to see his Majesty
Excruciate himself with endless sorrow.

Collen. The happiest news that ever I did hear;
Thy Father was a villain murderer,
Witty, not wise, loved like a Scorpion,
Grown rich by the impoverishing of others,
The chiefest cause of all these mutinies,
And Caesar's tutor to all villa^ie.

Alex. None but an open liar terms him so.

Col. What Boy, so malepert?

Bohem. Good Collen bear with him, it was his Father,
Dutch-land is blessed in Lorenzo's Death.

Brand. Did never live a viler minded man.

Exeunt. Manet Alex. Alex. Nor King, nor Churfurst should be privileged
To call me Boy, and rayl upon my Father,
Were I wehrsafflig; but in Germany,
A man must be a Boy at 40. years,
And dares not draw his weapon at a Dog,
Till being soundly box'd about the ears,
His Lord and Master gird him with a sword;
The time will come I shall be made a man,
Till then I Will pine with thought of dire revenge,
And live in Hell until I take revenge.

ACT. II.
Enter Alphonsus, Richard Earl of Cornwall, Mentz, Trier, Prince Edward,
Bohemia, Collen, Brandenburge, Attendants, and Pages with a sword. Bohem.
Behold here come the Princes hand in hand,
Pleased highly with the sentence as it seems.

Alphon. Princes and Pillars of the Monarchy,
We do admire your wisdoms in this cause,
And do accept the King of Bohemia,
As worthy partner in the Government.
Alas my Lords, I flatly now confess,
I was alone too weak to underprop
So great a burden as the Roman Empire,
And hope to make you all admire the course
That we intend in this conjunction.

Richard. That I was called from England with consent
Of all the seven Electors to this place,
Your selves best know, who wrote for me to come.
'Twas no ambition moved me to the journey,
But pity of your half declining State;
Which being likely now to be repayr'd,
By the united force of these two Kings,
I rest content to see you satisfied.

Mentz. Brave Earl, wonder of Princely patience,
I hope your grace will not mis-think of me,
Who for your good, and for the Empires best,
Bethought this means to set the world at Peace.

Edward. No doubt this means might have been thought upon,
Although your Holiness had died in Prison.

Mentz. Peace, peace young Prince, you want experience;
Your Uncle knows what cares accompany,
And wait upon the Crowns of mightiest Kings,
And glad he is that he has shak'd it off.

Edward. Hark in your ear my Lord, hear me one word,
Although it were more than a million,
Which these two Kings bestowed upon your grace,
Mine Uncle Richards million saved your life.

Mentz. Youwere best to say, your Uncle bribed me then.

Edward. I do but say mine Uncle saved your life,
You know Count Mansfield your fellow Prisoner,
Was by the Duke of Brunschwig put to death.

Mentz. You are a Child my Lord, your words are wind.

Edward. You are a Fox my Lord, and past a Child.

Bohem. My Lord of Cornwall, your great forwardness,
Crossing the Seas with aid of Englishmen,
Is more than we can any way requite;
But this your admirable patience,
In being pleased with our election,
Deserves far more than thanks can satisfy,
In any thing command the Emperors,
Who live to honor Richard Earl of Cornwall.

Alpho. Our deeds shall make our Protestations good,
Mean while, brave Princes, let us leave this place,
And solace us with joy of this accord.

Enter Isabella the Empress, Hedewick the Duke of Saxon's Daughter, apparelled
like Fortune, drawn on a Globe, with a Cup in her hand, wherein are Bay leaves,
whereupon are written the lots. A train of Ladies following with Music.
Empress. To gratulate this unexpected Peace,
This glorious league confirmed against all hope,
Joyful Isabella does present this show,
Of Fortunes triumph, as the custom is
At Coronation of our Emperors;
If therefore every party be well pleased,
And stand content with this arbitriment,
Then daign to do as your Progenito^s,
And draw in sequence Lots for Offices.

Alphon. This is an order here in Germany,
For Princes to disport themselves with all,
In sign their hearts so firmly are conjoined,
That they will bear all fortunes equally,
And that the world may know I scorn no state,
Or course of life to do the Empire good,
I take my chance: My Fortune is to be the Forrester,

Emp. If we want Venson either red or fallow,
Wild bore or bear, you must be fined my Lord.

Bohem. The Emperor's Taster I.

Emp. Your Majesty has been tasted to so often,
That you have need of small instructions.

Richard. I am the bowr, Sister what is my charge?

Emp. Tired like a Carter, and a Clownish Bowr,
To bring a load of Wood into the Kitchen.
Now for my self, Faith I am Chamber Maid,
I know my charge; proceed unto the next.

Alphon. Prince Edward stands melancholy still,
Please it your Grace, my Lord, to draw your lot.

Emp. Nephew you must be solemn with the sad,
And given to mirth in sportful Company,
The German Princes when they will be lusty,
Shake of all cares, and Clowns and they are Fellows.

Edward. Sweet Aunt, I do not know the Country guise,
Yet would be glad to learn all fashions.
Since I am next, good Fortune be my guide.

Brand. A most ingenuous countenance has this Prince,
Worthy to be the King of England's Heir.

Edward. Be it no disparagement to you my Lords,
I am your Emperor.

Alphon. Sound trumpets, God save the Emperor.

Collen. The world could never worse have fitted me,
I am not old enough to be the Cook.

Empress. If you be Cook, there is no remedy
But you must dress one Mess of meat you self.

Branden. I am Physician.

Trier. I am Secretary.

Mentz. I am the Jester.

Edward. O excellent! is your Holiness the Vice?
Fortune has fitted you in faith my Lord,
You Will play the Ambodexter cunningly.

Mentz. Your Highness is to bitter in your Jests.

Alphon. Come hither Alexander, to comfort thee,
After the death of thy beloved Father,
Whose life was deer unto his Emperor,
Thou shall make one in this solemnity,
Yet e're thou draw, my self will honor thee,
And as the custom is make thee a man.
Stand stiff Sir Boy, now come thou to thy trial;
Take this, and that, and therewithal this Sword;
[He gives Alexander a Box on the ear or two. If while thou live, thou ever
take the like,
Of me, or any man, I here pronounce
Thou art a schelm, otherwise a man.
Now draw thy lot, and Fortune be thy speed.

Edward. Uncle I pray why did be box the fellow?
Foul lubber as he is, to take such blows.

Richard. Thus do the Princes make their Pages men.

Edward. But that is strange to make a man with blows.
We say in England that he is a man,
That like a man dare meet his enemy,
And in my judgment it is the sounder trial.

Alex. Fortune has made me Marshall of the tryumphs.

Alphon. Now what remains?

Emperess. That Fortune draw her lot.

She opens it, and gives it to the Emperess to read. Empress. Sound trumpets,
Fortune is your Emperess.

Alphon. This happens right: for Fortune will be Queen.
Now Emperor you must unmask her face,
And tell us how you like your Emperess,
In my opinion England breeds no fairer.

Bohe. Fair Hedewick the Duke of Saxons daughter,
Young Prince of England, you are bravely ma^ch'd.

Edward. Tell me sweet Aunt, is that this Saxon Princess,
Whose beauties fame made Edward cross the Seas?

Emperess. Nephew, it is; has fame been prodiga^,
Or over sparing in the Princess prai^e?

Edward. Fame I accuse thee, thou did niggardize,
And faintly sound my loves perfections.
Great Lady Fortune, and fair Emperess,
Whom chance this day has thrown into my arms,
More welcome than the Roman Emperess.

[ Edward k^^ses her. Head. See dodh, dass is it hier kein gebranch,
Mein G^t is it dass dir Englisch manier, dass dich.

Edward. What means this? why chafes my Emperess?

Alphon. Now by my troth, I did expect this jest,
Prince Edward used his Country fashion.

Edward. I am an Englishman, why should I not?

Emp. Fie Nephew Edward, here in Germany
To kiss a Maid, a fault intolerable.

Edward. Why should not German Maids be kissed as well as others?


Richard. Nephew, because you did not know the fashion,
And want the language to excuse you^ self,
I Will be your spokes-man to your Emperess.

Edward. Excuse it thus: I like the first so well,
That tell her, she shall chide me twice as much
For such an other; nay tell her more than so,
I Will double kiss on kiss, and give her leave
To chide and braul, and cry ten thousand dass dich,
And make her weary of her fretting humor,
E're I be weary of my kissing vein,
Dass dich a Iungfraw angry for a kiss.

Empress. Nephew, she thinks you mock her in her mirth.

Edward. I think the Princes make a scorn of me.
If any do, I Will prove it with my Sword,
That English Courtship leaves it from the world.

Bohem. The pleasant'st accident that I have seen.

Bran. Me thinks the Prince is chafed as well as she.

Rich. Gnediges ^rawlin.

Head. Dass dich, m^stich arm kindt ^n schanden (...) werden.


Edward. Dass dich I have kissed as good as you,
Pray Uncle tell her; if she mislike the kiss,
I Will take it off again with such an other.

Rich. Ey Lirbes frawlin nim es all fur gutt^
Es is it die Englisch manier Und gebrauche.

Head. Ewer gnaden weissts woll es is it mir ein gross schande.


Edward. Good Aunt teach me so much Dutch to ask her pardon.

Empress. Say so: Gnediges frawlin vergebet mirs, ich wills ^k^^ermehr thuen,
Then kiss your hand three times ^psy Dutch.

Edward. Ich wills (...) thuen, if I understand it, right,
That Is as much to say, as I Will do so no more.

Empr. True Nephew.

Edward. Nay Aunt pardon me I pray, I hope to kiss her many thousand times,

And shall I go to her like a great Boy, and say I Will do so no more.


Empress. I pray Cousin say as I tell you.

Edward. Gnediges frawlin vergebet mirss ich wills nimmermehr thuen.


Alphon. For wahr kein schandt.

Hedew. Gnediger hochgeborner Furst vndt herr
Wan ich konte so vil englisch sprechen ich wolt ewer Gnaden.
Fur wahr ein filtz geben, ich hoffe aber ich soll e^^mahl
So viel lernen dass Die mich verstrhen soll.

Edward. What says she?

Alphon. O excellent young Prince look to your self,
She swears she will learn some English for your sake,
To make you understand her when she chides.

Edward. I Will teach her English, she shall teach me Dutch, Gnediges frawlin, etc.

Bohem. It is great pity that the Duke of Saxon,
Is absent at this joyful accident,
I see no reason if his Grace were here,
But that the Marriage might be solemnized,
I think the Prince of Wales were well content.

Edward. I left sweet England to none other end;
And though the Prince her Father be not here,
This Royal presence knows his mind in this.

Emp. Since you do come so roundly to the purpose,
It Is time for me to speak, the Maid is mine,
Given freely by her Father unto me,
And to the end these broyls may have an end,
I give the Father's interest and mine own,
Unto my Nephew Edward Prince of Wales.

Edward. A Jewel of incomparable price,
Your Majesty has here bestowed on me,
How shall I ask her if she be content?

Empr. Say thus, is it ewer gnaden woll hiemit zufrieden.

Edward. Is It ewer Gnaden woll hiemit zufrieden.

Head. Wass ihr durleichtigkeit dass will dass will mein vattter vndt
Wass mein vatter will darmit muss ich zufrieden sein.

Alphon. It is enough, she does confirm the match;
We will dispatch a Post unto her Father,
On Sunday shall the Revels and the Wedding,
Be both solemnized with mutual joy.
Sound trumpets, each one look unto his charge,
For preparation of the Festivals.

Exeunt. Manent Alphonsus and Alexander. Alphon. Come hither Alexander, thy
Fathers joy.
If tears and sighs, and deep-fetcht deadly groans,
Could serve to evert inexorable fate,
Divine Lorenzo, whom in life my heart,
In death my soul and better part adores,
Had to thy comfort and his Prince's honor,
Survived, and drawn this day this breath of life.

Alexan. Dread Caesar, prostrate on my bended Knee,
I thank your Majesty for all favors shown
To my deceased Father and my self.
I must confess, I spend but bootless tears,
Yet cannot bridle nature, I must weep,
Or heart will break with burden of my thoughts,
Nor am I yet so young or fond withal,
Causless to spend my gall, and fret my heart,
It Is not that he is dead, for all must dye;
But that I live to hear his lives reproach.
O sacred Emperor, these ears have heard,
What no Sons ears can unrevenged hear,
The Princes all of them, but specially,
The Prince Elector Archbishop of Collen,
Reviled him by the names of murderer,
Arch villain, robber of the Empires fame,
And Caesar's tutor in all wickedness,
And with a general voice applaus'd his death,
As for a special good to Christendom.

Alphon. Have they not reason to app^aud the deed
Which they themselves have p^otted? ah my Boy,
Thou art too young to dive into their drifts.

Alex. Yet old enough I hope to be revenged.

Alphon. What will thou do, or whither will thou run?

Alex. Headlong* to bring them* death, then dye my self.

Alph^n. First hear the reason why I do mistrust them.

Alex. They had no reason for my Father's death,
And I scorn reason till they all be dead.

Alphon. Thou will not scorn my Counsel in revenge?

Alex. My rage admits no Counsel but revenge.

Alphon. First let me tell thee whom I do mistrust.

Alex. Your Highness said you did mistrust them all.

Alpho. Yea Alexander, all of them, and more than all,
(...) most especial nearest dearest friends.

Alex. All 's one to me, for know thou Emperor,
Were it thy Father, Brother, or thine Empress,
Yea were 't thy self, that did conspire his death,
This fatal hand should take away thy life.

Alphon. Spoke like a Son, worthy so dear a Father.
Be still and hearken, I will tell thee all,
The Duke of Saxon --

Alex. O, I thought no less.

Alphon. Suppress thy choler, hearken to the rest.
Saxon I say so wrought with flattering Mentz,
Mentz with Bohemia, Trier, and Brandenburg,
For Collen and the Palsgrave of the Rhein
Were principals with Saxon in the Plot,
That in a general meeting to that purpose,
The seven selected Emperors electors,
Most hainously concluded of the murder;
The reason why they doomed him unto death,
Was his deep wisdom and sound policy;
Knowing while he did live my state was firm,
He being dead my hope must dye with him.
Now Alexander will we be revenged
Upon this wicked whore of Babylon,
This hideous monster with the sevenfold head:
We must with cunning level at the heart,
With pierced and perished all the body dies:
Or strike we off her heads by one and one,
Behooveth us to use dexterity,
Lest she do trample us under her feet,
And triumph in our honors overthrow.

Alex. Mad and ama^ld to hear this tragick^doom,
I do subscribe unto your sound advice.

Alphon. Then hear the rest; these ^even dave but (...) ten
A nearer hand put it in execution,
And but I loved Lorenzo as my life,
I never would be^ray my dearest Wife.

Alex. What? what the Empress accessory to?

Alphon. What cannot kindred do? her Brother Richard,
Hoping thereby to be an Emperor,
Gave her a dram that sent him to his grave.

Alex. O my poor Father, were thou such an eyesore,
That 9. the greatest Princes of the earth
Must be con^ederate in thy tragedy?
But why do I respect their mightiness,
Who did not once respect my Fathers life?
Your Majesty may take it as you ylea^e,
I Will be revenged upon your Emperess,
On English Richard, Saxon, and the Palsgrave,
On Bohem, Collen, Mentz, Trier, and Brandenburg,
If that the Pope of Rome himself were one
In this confederacy, undaunted I.
Amidst the College of his Cardinals,
Would press, and stab him in St. Peter's chair,
Though clad in all his Pontificalibus.

Alphon. Why Alexander? do thou speak to me
As if thou did mistrust my forwardness?
No, thou shall know my love to him was such,
And in my heart I have pros^rib'd them all,
That had to do in this conspiracy.
The bands of Wedlock shall not serve her turn,
Her fatal lot is cast among the rest,
And to conclude, my soul does live in Hell
Till I have set my foot upon their necks,
That gave this spur of sorrow to my heart;
But with advice it must be managed,
Not with a headlong rage as thou intend'st,
Nor in a moment can it be performed,
This work requires long time, dissembling looks,
Commixt with undermining actions,
Watching advantages to execute.
Our foes are mighty, and their number great,
It therefore follows that our Strangems
Must branch forth into manifold deceits,
Endless devices, bottomless conclusions.

Alexan. What by your Majesty is prescribed to me,
That will I execute or dye the death.
I am content to suck my sorrows up,
And with dull patience will attend the time,
Gaping for every opportunity
That may present the least occasion;
Although each minute multiply mine anguish,
And to my view present a thousand forms
Of senseless bodies in my Fathers shape,
Yelling with open throat for just revenge.

Alphon. Content thy self, he shall not cry in vain,
I have already plotted Richards death.

Alex. That has my Fathers sacred Ghost inspired,
O tell me, shall I stab him suddenly?
The time seems long, till I be set a work.

Alphon. Thou know in griping at our lots to day,
It was Prince Richard's hap to be the bowr;
So that his Office is to drive the Cart,
And bring a load of Wood into the Kitchen.

Alex. O excellent, your Grace being Forester,
As in the thicket he does load the Cart,
May shoot him dead, as if he were a Deer.

Alphon. No Alexander, that device were shallow,
Thus it must be, there are two very ^owrs
Appointed for to help him in the Wood,
These must be bribed or cunningly seduced,
Instead of helping him to murder him.

Ale. Verbum satis sapient^, it is enough,
Fortune has made me Marshal of the sports
I hope to Marshal them to the Devils Feast.
Plot you the rest, this will I execute,
Dutch bowrs as towsandt schelms and gold to tempt them.

Alphon. It Is right, about it then, but cunningly.

Alex. Else let me lose that good opinion
Which by your Highness I desire to hold,
By Letters which I Will strew within the Wood,
I Will undermine the bowrs to murder him,
Nor shall they know who set them so a work,
Like a familiar will I fly about,
And nimbly haunt their Ghosts in every nook.

Exit. Manet Alphonsus. Alphon. This one nayl helps to drive the other out,
I slew the Father, and bewitch the Son,
With power of words to be the instrument
To rid my foes with danger of his life.
How easily can subtle age entice,
Such credulous young novices to their death?
Huge wonders will Alphonsus bring to pass,
By the mad mind of this enraged Boy;
Even they which think themselves my greatest friends,
Shall fall by this deceit, yea my Arch-enemies
Shall turn to be my chief confederates.
My sollitary walks may breed suspect,
I Will therefore give my self to Company,
As I intended nothing out these sports,
Yet hope to ^end most actors in this Pageant,
To Revel it with Rhadamant in Hell.
Exit.
Enter Richard Earl of Cornwall like a Clown. Richard. How far is Richard now
unlike the man
The crossed the Seas to win an Emperie?
But as I plod it like a plumper Bowr,
To fetch in Fuel for the Kitchen fire,
So every one in his vocation,
Labors to make the pastimes plausible;
My Nephew Edward jets it through the Court,
With Princess Hedewick Empress of his Fortune,
The demi Caesar in his hunters suit,
Makes all the Court to Ring with Horns and Hounds,
Collen the Cook bestirs him in the Kitchen;
But that which joys me most in all these sports,
Is Mentz, to see how he is made an Ass?
The common scorn and byword of the Court;
And every one to be the same he seems,
Seems to forget to be the same he is.
Yet to my roabs I cannot suit my mind,
Nor with my habit shake dishonor off*
The seven Electors promised me the Empire,
The perjured Bishop Mentz did swear no less,
Yet I have seen it shared before my face,
While my best friends do hide their heads for shame;
I bear a show of outward full content,
But grief thereof has almost killed my heart.
Here rest thee Richard, think upon a mean,
To end thy life, or to repair thine honor,
And vow never to see fair Englands bounds,
Till thou in Aix be Crowned Emperor.
Enter two Bowrs. Holla, me thinks there comes Company,
The Bowrs I troe that come to hew the Wood,
Which I must carry to the Kitchen Fire,
I Will lie a while and listen to their talk.

Enter Hans and Jerick two Dutch Bowrs. Je. Kom hier hans wore bist dow, warumb
bist dow so trawr^ck? biss frolic kan well gelt verdienen, wir will ihn bey
potts tawsandt todt schlagen.


Hans. Lat mich die brieffe sehen.


Rich. Me thinks they talk of murdering some body, I Will listen more.

Reads the Letter. Hans vnd Ierick, mein liebe freinde, ich bitte lasset es bey
euch bleiben in geheim, vnd schlaget den Engellander zu todt.


Rich. What Is that? Hans vnd Ierick my good friend, I pray be secret and murder
the Englishman.

Jerick reads. Hear weiter, den er is it kein bower nicht, er is it ein Iuncker,
vnd hatt viel gelt vnd kleinothen bey sich.


Rich. For he is no Bower but a Gentleman, and has store of Gold and J^wels by
him.


^eric. Noch weiter: ihr solt solche gelegenheit nicht versahmen* vnd (...) ihr
gethan habet, ich will euch sagen, was ich fur ein guter Rarl bin der euch raht
gegeben habe.


Rich. S^ip not this opportunity, and when you have done, I will discover who
gave you the Counsel.


Jerick. Wat sagst dow wilt dow es thun?


Hans. Wat will ich nich fu^ gelt thun? see potts tausendt, dar is it er.


Jerick. Ia, bey potts tausends slapperment, er ists, holla guter morgen, gluck
zu Iuncker.


Hans. Iuncker, der devil he is ein bower!


Rich. Dow bist ein schelm, weich von mir.


Jerick. Holla, holla, bist dow so hoffertick? Iuncker bower, kompt hier, oder
dieser vnd ^enner selleuch holen.


Rich. Ich bien ein Furst, bried mich nicht ihr schelms, ihr verrahters.


Bath. Sla to, fla to, wir will you furstlick tractieren.

Richard having nothing in his hand but his whip, defends himself a while, and
then falls down* as if he were dead:


Rich. O Got, nimb meine seele in deine haude.


Jerick. O excellent, hurtick he is todt, he is todt.

Lat vns see wat he hat for gelt bey sich, holla hier is all enough all satt,
dor is for dich, and dor is for mich, vnd ditt (...):


Ierick puts the chain about his neck. Hans. How so Hans Narhals, give mir die
kette hier.


Jerick. Ia ein dreck, dit kett stehet hupsch vmb mein hals, ditt will ich
tragen.


Hans. Dat dich potts velten leiden, dat soltu nimmer^^^r thu^ dow schelm.


Jerick. Wat solt dow mich schelm heit^n ^imb dat.


Hans. Dat ^ich hundert tonnen devils, harr ich will dich (...).


Jerick. Wiltud hawen oder stechen?


Hans. Ich will redlich hawen;


Jerick. Nun wollan, dor is it mein ruck, sla to.


They must have axes made for the nonst to fight withal, and while one
strikes, the other holds his back without defense. Hans. Nimb dow das, vnd dar
have mein ruck.


J^rick. Nach amahl: O excellent, ligst dow dar, ^un ^ill ich alles haben, gelt
vnd kett, vnd all mit einander, O hurtig, frisch-vp lustig, nun bin ich ein
hurtig Iuncker.


R^chard rises up again and (...) up the fellows hatchet that was slain. Rich.
Ne Hercules contra duos, yet policy has gone beyond them both.

Du hudler schelm, morder, ^ehre dich, feestu mich? gebe mir die kett vnd gelt
wieder;


Jerick. Wat bistu wieder labendig worden, so mus ich meren, wat wiltu stechen
oder hawen?


Richard. So will ich machen du schelm*


Jerick. Harr, harr, bistu ein red^^ch katle, so ^^ght redlich, O ich sterb,
ich sterb, lat mich leben!


Richard. Sagt mir dan were hatt die brieffe geschrieben?

Lie nicht sondern sagt die warheit:


Jerick. O mein fromer, guter, edler, gestrenger I^^cker, dar is it dat gelt vnd
kett wieder, you soll alles haben, aber were hatt die brieffe geschrieben, dat
wet ich bey meine^ seel^ nicht.


Rich. Lig dor still, still ich sag.
The villain swears, and deeply does protest
He knows not who incited them to this,
And as it seems the scrowl imports no less.
So sterb du mir schelm.

Jerick. O ich sterb, awe, awe, awe dat dich der ^ivell hole!


As Richard kills the Bowr. Enter Saxon and the Palsgrave. Saxon. Fie dich an
loser schelm, hastu dein gesellen todt geschlagen?


Palsgr. Last us den schelmen angreiffen.


Richard. Call you me shelme how dare you then
Being Princes offer to lay hands on me?
That is the Hangmans Office here in Dutch-land.

Saxon. But this is strange, our Bours can speak no English,
What bistum more than a damned murderer?
That thou art so much we are wi^nesses.

Rich. Can then this habit alter me so much,
That I am called a villain by my friends?
Or shall I dare once to suspect your graces,
That for you could not make me Emperor,
Pitying my sorrow through mine honor lost,
You set these slaves to rid me of my life,
Yet far be such a thought from Richard's heart.

Pals. How now? what do I hear Prince Richard speak?

Rich. The same: but wonder that he lives to speak.
And had not policy he^pt above strength,
These sturdy swains had rid me of my life.

Sax. Far be it from your Grace for to suspect us.

Rich. Alas, I know not whom I should suspect;
But yet my heart cannot misdoubt your Graces?

Saxon. How came your Highness into this apparel?

Rich. We as the manner is drew lots for Offices,
My hap was hardest to be made a Carter,
And by this letter which some villain wrote,
I was betrayed, here to be murdered;
But Heaven which does defend the Innocent,
Armed me with strength and policy together,
That I escaped out of their treacherous snare.

Pals. Were it well sounded, I dare lay my life,
The Spanish tyrant knew of this conspiracy;
Therefore the better to dive into the depth
Of this most devilish murderous complot,
As also secretly to be beholders,
Of the long-wisht for wedding of your daughter,
We will disrobe these bowrs of their apparel,
Clapping their rustic cases on our backs,
And help your Highness for to drive the Cart.
TO may be the traitor that did write these lines,
Mistaking us for them will show himself.

Richard. Prince Palatine this plot does please me well,
I make no doubt if we deal cunningly,
But we shall find the writer of this seroul.

Saxon. And in that hope I will disrobe this slave.
Come Princes in the neighboring thicket here,
We may disguise our selves, and talk at pleasure;
Fie on him heavy lubber how he weighs.

Richard. The sin of murder hangs upon his soul,
It is no mervail then if he be heavy.

Exeunt. ACT. III.
Enter to the Revels. Edward with an Imperial Crown. Hedewig the Empress.
Bohemia the Taster. Alphonsus the Forrester. Mentz the Gester. Empress the
Chambermaid. Brandenburg Physician. Tryer Secretary. Alexander the Marshal,
with his Marshals staff, and all the rest in their proper apparel, and
Attendants and Pages. Alex. Princes and Princes Superiors, Lords and Lords
fellows, Gentlemen and Gentlemen's Masters, and all the rest of the States here
assembled, as well Masculine as Feminine, be it known unto you by these
presence, that I Alexander de Toledo, Fortunes chief Marshal, do will and
command you, by the authority of my said Office, to take your places in manner
and form following, First the Emperor and the Empress, then the Taster, the
Secretary, the Forrester, the Physician, as for the Chambermaid and my self, we
will take our places at the neither end, the Jester is to wait up, and live by
the crumbs that fall from the Emperors trencher, But now I have Marshaled you
to the table, what remains?


Mentz. Every fool can tell that, when men are set to dinner they commonly
expect meat.


Edward. That Is the best J^st the fool made since he came into his Office.
Marshal walk into the Kitchen, and see how the Churfurst of Collen bestirs
himself.


Exit. Alex. Mentz. Shall I go with him too? I love to be employed in the
Kitchen.


Edward. I prithee go, that we may be rid of thy wicked Jests.


Mentz. Have with thee Marshal, the fool rides thee?


Exit. on Alex. back. Alphon. Now by mine honor, my Lord of Mentz plays the
fool the worst that ever I saw.


Edward. He does all by contraries; for I am sure he played the wiseman like a
fool, and now he plays the fool wisely.


Alphon. Princes and Churfursts let us f^olick now,
This is a joyful day to Christendom,
When Christian Princes join in amity,
Schinck bowls of Reinfal and the purest Wine,
We Will spend this evening lu^^ie up^ie Du^ch,
In honor of this unexpected league.

Empres. Nay gentle Forrester, there you range amiss,
His looks are fitly suited to his thoughts.
His glo^ious Empress makes his heart triumph,
And hearts tryumphing makes his countenance stayed*
In contemplation of his lives delight.

Edward. Good Aunt let me excuse my self in this,
I and an Emperor but for a day,
She Empress of my heart while life does last;
Then give me leave to use Imperial looks.
Nay if I be an Emperor I Will take leave,
And here I do pronounce it openly,
What I have lately whispered in her ears,
I love mine Empress more than Empery,
I love her looks above my fortunes hope.

Alphon. Saving your looks dread Emperor es gelt a bowl,
Unto the health of your fair Bride and Empress.

Edward. Sain Got es soll mi^ en liebe drunk sein, so much Dutch have I learnt
since I came into Germany.


Bran. When you have drunk a dozen of these bowls,
So can your Majesty with a full mouth,
Trowl out high Dutch, till then it sounds not right*
Dr^uff es gelt noch e^ns thr Maie^^at.

Edward. Sain Got lass lauffen.

Bohem. My Lord of Brandenburg spoken like a good Dutch Brother;
But most unlike a good Physician,
You should consider what he has to do,
His Bride will give you little thanks to night.

Alphon. Ha, ha my Lord, now give me leave to laugh,
He need not therefore shun one Beaker full.
In Saxon Land you know it is the use,
That the first night the Bridegroom spares the Bride.

Bohem. It Is true indeed, that had I quite forgotten.

Edward. How understand I that?

Alphon. That the first night,
The Bride and Bridegroom never sleep together.

Edward. That may well be, perchance they wake together.

Bohem. Nay without fallace they have several Bed^.

Edward. I in one Chamber, that is most Princely.

Alphon. Not only several Beds, but several Chambers,
Locked soundly too, with Iron Bolts and Bars.

Empr. Believe me Nephew, that is the custom here.

Edward. O my good Aunt, the world is now grown new,
Old customs are but superstitions.
I 'm sure this day, this presence all can witness,
The high and mighty Prince the Archbishop of Collen,
Who now is busy in the skullery,
Joined us together in St. Peter's Church,
And he that would disjoyn us two to night,
'Twixt jest and earnest be it proudly spoken,
Shall eat a piece of ill-digesting Iron.
Bride wilt dow dis nicht ben me schlapen.

Head. Da behute mich Got fur, Ich hoffe Eure (...) wills von mir mi^t,
begeran.


Edward. What says she behuie mich G^t fur?

Alphon. She says God bless her from such a deed.

Edward. Tush Empress, clap thy hands upon thy head,
And God will bless thee, I have a Jacobs staff,
Shall take the Elevation of the Pole;
For I have heard it said, the Dutch North star,
Is a degree or two higher than ours.

Bohem. Nay though we talk lets drink, and Emperor,
I Will tell you plainly what you must trust unto,
Can they deceive you of your Bride to night,
They Will surely do it, therefore look to your self.

Edward. If she deceive me not, let all do their worst.

Alphon. Assure you Emperor she will do her best.

Edward. I think the Maids in Germany are mad,
E're they be married they will not kiss,
And being married will not go to Bed.
We drink about, let us talk no more of this,
Well warned half armed our English proverb say

Alphon. Holla Marshal, what says the Cook?
Enter Alexander. Belike he thinks we have fed so well already,
That we disdain his simple Cookery.

Alex. Faith the Gook says so, that his Office was to dress a mess of meat with
that Wood which the English Prince should bring in, but he has neither seen
Dutch Wood nor English prince, therefore he desires you hold him excused.


Alphon. I wonder where Prince Richard stays so long.

Alex. An't, please your Majesty, he is come at length,
And with him has he brought a crew of Bowrs,
A hipse bowr maikins fresh as Flowers in May,
With whom they mean to dance a Saxon round,
In honor of the Bridegroom and his Bride.

Edward. So has he made amends for his long tarrying.
I prithee Marshall them into the presence.

Alphon. Lives Richard then? I had thought the had made him sure.


Alex. O, I could tear my flesh to think upon 't,
He lives and secretly has brought with him,
The Palsgrave and the Duke of Saxony,
Clad like two Bowrs, even in the same apparel
That Hans and Ierick wore when they went out to murder him,
It now behooves us to be circumspect.

Alphon. It likes me not; Away Marshal bring them.
Exit. Alexander. I long to see this sports conclusion.

Bohem. Is It not a lovely sight to see this couple
Sit sweetly billing like two Turtle Doves.

Alphon. I promise you it sets my Teeth an Edge,
That I must take mine Empress in mine arms.
Come hither Isabel, though thy roabs be homely,
Thy face and countenance holds color still.

Enter Alexander, Collen, Mentz, Richard, Saxony, Palsgrave, Collen Cook, with
a gamon of raw bacon, and links or puddings in a platter, Richard, Palsgrave,
Saxon, Mentz, like Clowns with each of them a Miter with (...) on their (...).
Collen. D^ead Emperor and Empere^s for to day,
I Your appointed Cook until to morrow,
Have by the Marshal sent my just excuse,
And hope your Highness is therewith content,
Our Carter here for whom I now do speak,
Says that his Axletree broke by the way,
That is his answer, and for you shall not famish,
He and his fellow bowrs of the next dorp,
Have brought a schinkel of good raw Bacon,
And that is a common meat with us, unsod,
Desiring you, you would not scorn the fare,
'Twil make a cup of Wine taste ^ippitate.

Edward. Welcome good fellows, we thank you for your present.


Richard. So spell fresh up and let us rommer daun^e^.

Alex. Please it your Highness to dance with your Bride?

Edward. Alas I cannot dance your German dances.

Bohem. I do beseech your Highness mock us not,
We Germans have no changes in our dances,
An Almain and an upspring that is all,
So dance the Princes, Burgers, and the Bowrs.

Brand. So daunc'd our Ancestors for thousand years.

Edward. It is a sign the Dutch are not new fangled.
I Will follow in the measure; Marshal lead.
Alexander and Mentz have the fore dance with each of them a glass of Wine in
their hands, then Edward and Hedewick* Palsgrave and Empress, and two other
couple, after Drum and Trumpet. The Palsgrave whispers with the Empress.
Alphon. I think the Bowr is amorous of my Empress.
Fort bowr and leffel morgen, when thou come to house.

Collen. Now is your Graces time to steal away,
Look to it or else you will lie alone to night.

Edward steals away the Bride. Alex. (Drinks to the Palsgrave.) Skelt bower.

Palsgrave. Sain Got.
The Palsgrave requests the Emp^ess. Ey Iungfraw help mich doch ein Iungfraw
drunck
(...) fcenudt ein frolecken drink.

Alphon. Sam G^^t mein frundt ich will gern bescheidt thun
( Alphonsus takes the Cup of the Palsgrave, and drinks to the King of Bohemia,
and after he has drunk puts poison into the Beaker.) Half this I drink unto
your Highness health,
It is the first since we were joynd in Office.

Bohem. I thank your Majesty, I Will pledge you half.

(As Bohem is a drinking, e're he has drunk it all out, Alphonsus pulls the
Beaker from his mouth.) Alphon. Hold, hold, your Majesty, drink not too much.

Bohem. What means your Highness.

Alphon. Methinks that something grates between my teeth,
Pray God there be not poison in the bowl.

Bohem. Marry God forbid.

Alex. So were I peppered.

Alphon. I highly do mistrust this schelmish bowr,
Lay hands on him I le make him drink the rest.
Whas is it whas is it wat will you nut me machen

Alphon. Drink out, drink out oder der devil soll dich holen.

Pals. Ey geb you to frieden ich will gein drink.

Saxon. Drink not Prince Pallatine, throw it on the ground,
It is not good to trust his Spanish flies.

Bohem. Saxon and Palsgrave, this cannot be good.

Alphon. 'Twas not for naught my mind misgave me so;
This has Prince Richard done t'entrap our lives.

Richard. No Alphonsus, I disdain to be a traitor.

Empress. O sheath your swords, forbear these needless broyls.


Alphon. Away, I do mistrust thee as the rest.

Bohem. Lord's hear me speak, to pacify these broyls;
For my part I feel no distemperature,
How do you feel your self?

Alphon. I cannot tell, not ill, and yet methinks I am not well.


Bohem. Were it a poison 'twould begin to work.

Alphon. Not so, all poisons do not work alike.

Pals. If there were poison in, which God forbid,
The Empress and my self and Alexander,
Have cause to fear as well as any other.

Alphon. Why did thou throw the Wine upon the earth?
Had thou but drunk, thou had sati^fied our (...).

Pals. I will not be enforced by Spanish hands.

Alphon. If all be well with us that schuce shall serve,
If not, the Spaniards blood will be revenged.

Rich. Your Majesty is more afraid than hurt.

Bohem. For me I do not fear my self a whit,
Let all be friends, and forward with our mirth.

Enter Edward in his nightgown and his shirt. Richard. Nephew, how now? is all
well with you?

Bohem. I lay my life the Prince has lost his bride.

Edward. I hope not so, she is but strayed a little.

Alphon. Your Grace must not be angry though we laugh.

Edward. If it had happened by default of mine,
You might have worthily laughed me to scorn;
But to be so deceived, so over reached,
Even as I meant to clasp her in mine arms,
The grief is intolerable, not to be guest,
Or comprehended by the thought of any,
But by a man that has been so deceived,
And that is by no man living but my self.

Saxon. My Princely Son-in-Law God give you joy.

Edward. Of what my Princely Father?

Saxon. OF my Daughter.
Your new be^roathed Wife and Bedfellow.

Edward. I thank you Father, indeed I must confess
She is my Wife, but not my Bedfellow.

Saxon. How so young Prince? I saw you steal her hence,
And as me thought she went full willingly.

Edward. It Is true, I stole her finely from amongst you,
And by the Archbishop of Collens help,
Got her alone into the Bride-chamber,
Where having locked the Door, thought all was well.
I could not speak but pointed to the Bed,
She answered Ia and began for to unlace her;
I seeing that suspected no deceit,
But straight untrust my points, uncas'd my self,
And in a moment slipped between the Sheets;
There lying in deep contemplation,
The Princess of her self drew near to me,
Gave me her hand, spoke prettily in Dutch
I know not what, and kissed me lovingly,
And as I shrank out of my luke warm place
To make her room, she clapped thrice with her feet,
And through a trap-door sunck out of my sight;
Knew I but her Confederates in the deed --
I say no more.

Empress. Tush Cousin, be content;
So many Lands, so many fashions,
It is the German use, be not impatient,
She will be so much welcomer to morrow.

Rich. Come Nephew, we will be Bed-fellows to night.

Edward. Nay if I find her not, I Will lie alone,
I have good hope to ferret out her Bed,
And so good night sweet Princess all at once.

Alphon. Godnight to all; Marshal discharge the train.

Alex. To Bed, to Bed the Marshal cries it is time.

Exeunt. Flourish Cornets, Manent Saxon, Richard, Palsgrave, Collen, Empress.
Saxon. Now Princes it is time that we advise,
Now we are all fast in the Fowlers gin,
Not to escape his subtle snares alive,
Unless by force we break the Nets asunder.
When he begins to cavil and pick quarrels,
I will not trust him in the least degree.

Empress. It may beseem me evil to mistrust
My Lord and Emperor of so foul a fa^t;
But love unto his honor and your lives,
Makes me with tears entreat your Excellencies
To fly with speed out of his dangerous reach,
His cloudy brow foretells a sudden storm
Of blood not natural but prodigious.

Rich. The Castle gates are shut, how should we fly;
But were they open, I would lose my life,
E're I would leave my Nephew to the slaughter;
He and his Bride were sure to bea^ the brunt.

Saxon. Could I get out of doors, I Would venture that,
And yet I hold their persons dear enough,
I would not doubt, but e're the morning Sun
Should half way run his course into the So^^*
To compass and begirt him in his Fort,
With Saxon lansknights and brunt-bearing Switzers,
Who lie in Ambuscado not far hence,
That he should come to Composition,
And with safe conduct bring into our tents,
Both Bride and Bridegroom, and all other friends.

Empress. My Chamber Window stands upon the Wall,
And thence with ease you may e^cape away.

Saxon. Prince Richard, you will bear me Compan^?

Richard. I will my Lord.

Saxon. And you Prince Pallatine?

Pals. The Spanish Tyrant has me in suspect
Of poisoning him, I Will therefore stay it out,
To fly upon it were to accuse my self.

Empress. If need require, I Will hide the Pallatine,
Until to morrow, if you stay no longer.

Saxon. If God be with us, e're to morrow noon,
We'll be with Ensigns spread before the Walls,
We leave dear pledges of our quick return.

Emp. May the Heaven^ prosper your just intents.

Exeunt. Enter Alphonsus. Alphon. This dangerous plot was happily overheard,
Here did thou listen in a blessed howr.
Alexander, where do thou hide thy self?
I Have sought thee in each Corner of the Court,
And now or never must thou play the man.

Alex. And now or never must your Highness stir,
Treason has round encompassed your life.

Alphon. I have no leisure now to hear thy talk.
See thou this Key?

Alex. Intends your Majesty that I should steal into the Princes Chambers,

And sleeping stab them in their Beds to night?
That cannot be.

Alphon. Will thou not hear me speak?

Alex. The Prince of England, Saxon, and of Collen,
Are in the Empress Chamber privily.

Alphon. All this is nothing, they would murder me,
(...) not there to night; see thou this Key?

Alex. They mean to fly out at the Chamber Window,
And raise an Army to beseege your Grace*
Now may your Highness take them with the deed.

Alphon. The Prince of Wales I hope is none of them.

Alex. Him and his Bride by force they will recover.

Alphon. What makes the cursed Palsgrave of the Rhein?

Alex. Him has the Empress taken to her charge,
And in her Closet means to hide him safe.

Alphon. To hide him in her Closet? of bold deeds,
The dearest charge that e're she undertook,
Well let them bring their Complots to an end,
I Will undermine to meet them in their works,

Alex. Will not your Grace surprise them e're they fly?

Alphon. No, let them bring their purpose to effect,
I Will fall upon them at my best advantage,
See thou this Key? there take it Alexander;
Yet take it not unless thou be resolved*
Tush I am fond to make a doubt of thee;
Take it I ^ay, it does command all Doors,
And will make open way to dire revenge.

Alex. I know not what your Majesty does mean*

Alphon. Hie thee with speed into the inner Chamber,
Next to the Chappe, and there shall thou find
The danty trembling Bride coutcht in her Bed,
Having beguiled her Bridegroom of his hopes,
Taking her farewell of Virginity,
Which she to morrow night expects to lose,
By night all Cats are gray, and in the dark,
She will embrace thee for the Prince of Wales,
Thinking that he has found her Chamber out,
Fall to thy business and make few words,
And having pleased thy senses with delight,
And filled thy beating vains with stealing joy,
Make thence again before the break of day,
What strange events will follow this device,
We need not study on, our foes shall find.
How now? how standst thou? have thou not the heart?

Alex. Should I not have the heart to do this deed,
I were a Bastard villain and no man;
Her sweetness, and the sweetness of revenge,
Tickles my senses in a double sense,
And so I wish your Majesty good night.

Alphon. God night, sweet Venus prosper thy attempt.

Alex. Sweet Venus and grim Ate I implore,
Stand both of you to me auspicious.
Exit. Alexander.
Alphon. It had been pity of his Fathers life,
Whose death has made him such a perfect villain.
What murder, wrack, and causeless enmity,
'Twixt dearest friends that are my strongest foes,
Will follow suddenly upon this rape,
I hope to live to see, and laugh thereat,
And yet this piece of practice is not all.
The King of Bohem though he little feel it,
Because in twenty hours it will not work,
Has from my Knives point sucked his deadly bane,
Whereof I will be least of all suspected;
For I will feign my self as sick as he,
And blind mine enemies eyes with deadly groans;
Upon the Palsgrave and mine Emperess,
Heavy suspect shall light to bruze their bones;
Though Saxon would not suffer him to taste,
The deadly potion provided for him*
He cannot save him from the Sword of Justice,
When all the world shall think that like a villain,
He has poisoned two great Emperors with one draught;
That deed is done, and by this time I hope,
The other is a doing, Alexander
I doubt it not will do it thoroughly.
While these things are a brewing I Will not sleep,
But sudainly break open the Chamber doors,
And rush upon my Empress and the Palsgrave,
Holla where is the Captain of the Guard?

Enter Captain, and Soldiers. Cap. What would your Majesty?

Alphon. Take six travants well armed and follow,

They break with violence into (...) Chamber, and Alphonsu trayls the Empress
by the hair. Enter Alphonsus, Empress, Soldiers, etc. Alphon. Come forth thou
damned Witch, adulteror Whore,
Foul scandal to thy name, thy sex, thy blood.

Emp. O Emperor, gentle Husband, pity me.

Alphon. Can thou deny thou were confederate,
With my arch enemies that sought my blood?
And like a Strumpet through thy Chamber Window,
Have with thine own hands helped to let them down,
With an intent that they should gather arms,
Besiege my Court, and take away my life?

Emp. Ah my Alphonsus.

Alphon. Thy Alphonsus Whore?

Emp. O pierce my heart, trail me not by my hair;
What I have done, I did it for the best.

Alphon. So for the best advantage of thy lust,
Have thou in secret Clytemnestra like,
Hid thy Aegestus thy adulterous love.

Emp. Heaven be the record 'twixt my Lord and me,
How pure and sacred I do hold thy Bed.

Alphon. Art thou so impudent to belly the deed,
Is not the Palsgrave hidden in thy Chamber?

Empe. That I have hid the Palsgrave I confess;
But to no ill intent your conscience knows.

Alphon. Thy treasons, murders, incests, sorceries,
Are all committed to a good intent;
Thou know he was my deadly enemy.

Emp. By this device I hoped to make your friends.

Alphon. Then bring him forth, we will reconcile our selves.

Emp. Should I betray so great a Prince's life?

Alphon. Thou holdst his life far dearer than thy Lords,
This very night have thou betrayed my blood,
But thus, and thus, will I revenge my self,
And but thou speedily deliver him,
I Will trail thee through the Kennels of the Street,
And cut the Nose from thy bewitching face,
And into England send thee like a Strumpet.

Emp. Pull every hair from off my head,
Drag me at Horses ^^yls, cut off my nose
My Princely tongue shall not betray a Prince.

Alphon. That will I try.

Emp. O Heaven revenge my shame.

Enter Palsgrave. Pal. Is Caesar now become a torturer,
A Hangman of his Wife, turned murderer?
Here is the Pallatine, what would thou more?

Alphon. Upon him Soldiers, strike him to the ground.

Emp. Ah Soldiers, spare the Princely Pallatine.

Alphon. Down with the damned adulterous murderer,
Kill him I say, his blood be on my head.
They kill the Pallatine. Run to the Tower, and Ring the Larum Bell,
That fore the world I may excuse my self,
And tell the reason of this bloody deed.

Enter Edward in his night gown and shirt. Edw. How now? what means this sudain
strange Allarm?
What wretched dame is this with bl^bbered cheeks,
And rent disheveled hair?

Emp. O my dear Nephew,
Fly, fly the Shambles, for thy turn is next.

Edward. What, my Imperial Aunt? then break my heart.

Alphon. Brave Prince be still; as I am nobly born,
There is no ill intended to thy person.

Enter Mentz, Tryer, Branden. Bohem. Mentz. Where is my Page? bring me my two
hand Sword.

Tryer. What is the matter? is the Court a fire

Bran. Whose that? the Emperor with his weapon drawn?

Bohem. Though deadly sick yet am I forced to rise,
To know the reason of this hurley burley.

Alphon. Princes be silent, I will tell the cause,
Though sudainly a grining at my heart
Forbids my tongue his w^nted course of speech.
See you this Harlot, traytress to my life,
See you this murderer, stain to mine honor,
These twain I found together in my Bed,
Shamefully committing lewd Adultery,
And hainously conspiring all your deaths,
I mean your deaths, that are not dead already;
As for the King of Boheme and my self,
We are not of this world, we have our transports
Given in the bowl by this adulterous Prince,
And least the poison work too strong with me,
Before that I have warnd you of your harms,
I will be brief in the relation.
That he has staind my Bed, these eyes have seen,
That he has murdered two Imperial Kings,
Our speedy deaths will be too sudain proof;
That he and she have bought and sold your lives,
To Saxon, Collen, and the English Prince,
Their Ensigns spread before the Walls to morrow
Will all too sudainly bid you defiance.
Now tell me Princes have I not just cause,
To slay the murderer of so many souls?
And have not all cause to applaud the deed?
More would I utter, but the poisons force
Forbids my speech, you can conceive the rest.

Bohem. Your Majesty reach me your dying hand,
With thousand thanks for this so just revenge.
O, how the poisons force begins to work!

Mentz. The world may pity and applaud the deed.

Brand. Did never age bring forth such heinous acts.

Edward. My senses are confounded and amazed.

Emp. The God of Heaven knows my unguiltiness.

Enter Messenger. Mes. Arm, arm my Lords, we have descried a far,
An Army of ten thousand men at arms.

Alphon. Some run unto the Walls, some draw up the (...),
Some speedily let the Purculless down.

Mentz. Now may we see the Emperors words are true.
To prison with the wicked murderous Whore.

Ex^^nt. ACT. IV.
Enter Saxon and Richard with Soldiers. Saxon. My Lord of Cornwall, let us
march before,
To speedy rescue of our dearest friends,
The rereward with the armed Legions,
Committed to the Prince of Collen's charge,
Cannot so lightly pass the mountain tops.

Richard. Let Us summon sudainly unto a Parley,
I do not doubt but e're we need their helps,
Collen with all his forces will be here.

Enter Collen with Drums and an Army. Richard. Your Holiness has made good
have to day,
And like a beaten Soldier lead your troops.

Collen. In time of peace I am an Archbishop,
And like a Churchman can both sing and say;
But when the innocent do suffer wrong,
I cast my rocket off upon the Altar,
And like a Prince betake my self to arms.

Enter above Mentz, Tryer, and Brandenb^rg. Mentz. Great Prince of Saxony,
what mean these arms*
Richard of Cornwall, what may this intend?
Brother of Collen no more Churchman now,
Instead of Miter, and a Crossier Staff,
Have you betane you to your Helm and Targe?
Were you so merry yesterday as friends,
Cloaking your treason in your Clowns attire?

Saxon. Mentz, we return the traitor in thy face.
To save our lives, and to release our friends,
Out of the Spaniards deadly trapping Snares,
Without intent of ill, this power is raised;
Therefore grave Prince Marquess of Brandenburg,
My loving Cousin, as indifferent Judge,
To you an aged Peacemaker we speak,
Deliver with safe conduct in our tents,
Prince Edward and his Bride, the Pallatine,
With every one of high or low degree,
That are suspicious of the King of Spain,
So shall you see that in the self same howr
We marched to the Walls with colors spread,
We will cashier our troops, and part good friends.

Brand. Alas my Lord, crave you the Pallatine?

Rich. If craving will not serve, we will command*

Brand. Ah me, since your departure, good my Lords,
Strange accidents of blood and death are happened.

Saxon. My mind misgave a massacre this night.

Rich. How does Prince Edward then?

Sax. How does my Daughter?

Collen. How goes it with the Palsgrave of the Rhein?

Brand. Prince Edward and his Bridle do live in health,
And shall be brought unto you when you please.

Saxon. Let them be presently delivered?

Coll. Lives not the Palsgrave too?

Mentz. In Heaven or Hell he lives, and reaps the merit of his deeds.


Coll. What damned hand has butchered the Prince?

Saxon. O that demand is needless, who but he,
That seeks to be the Butcher of us all;
But vengeance and revenge shall light on him.

Bran. Be patient noble Princes, hear the rest.
The two great Kings of Bohem and Castile,
God comfort them, lie now at point of death,
Both poisoned by the Palsgrave yesterday.

Rich. How is that possible? so must my Sister,
The Pallatine himself, and Alexander,
Who drunk out of the bowl, be poisoned too.

Mentz. Nor is that heinous deed alone the cause,
Though cause enough to ruin Monarchies;
He has defiled with lust the Imperial Bed,
And by the Emperor in the fact was slain.

Collen. O worthy guiltless Prince, O had he fled.

Rich. But say where is the Empress, where is my Sister.

Mentz. Not burnt to ashes yet, but shall be shortly.

Rich. I hope her Majesty will live to see
A hundred thousand flattering turncoat slaves,
Such as your Holiness, dye a shameful death.

Brand. She is in prison, and attends her trial.

Saxon. O strange heartbreaking mischievous intents,
Give me my children if you love your lives,
No safety is in this enchanted Fort.
O see in happy hour there comes my Daughter,
And loving son, escaped from the Massacre.

Enter Edward and Hedewick. Edward. My body lives, although my heart be slain,
O Princes this has been the dismall'st night,
That ever eye of sorrow did behold,
Here lay the Palsgrave weltring in his blood,
Dying Alphonsus standing over him,
Upon the other hand the King of Bohem,
Still looking when his poisoned bulk would break;
But that which pierced my soul with natures touch
Was my tormented Aunt with blubberd cheeks,
Torn bloody Garments, and disheveld' hair,
Waiting for death; deservedly or no,
That knows the searcher of all humane thoughts;
For these devices are beyond my reach.

Saxon. Sast dorh lic^es doister, who wart dow dicselbirma^^.

Head. ^is who who solt ich sem ich war in bette.

Saxon. Were dow allrin so wart dow gar vorschrocken.

Head. Ich ha mist audes gememt dam das ich wolt allrin gest flaffne haben,
abur vmb mitternaist kam mriner bridegroom, bundt si flaffet bey mir, bis wir
mit them getunnuel erwacht waren.


Edward. What says she? came her Bridegroom to her at midnight?

Rich. Nephew, I see you were not over-reached;
Although she slipped out of your arms at first,
You ceiz'd her surely, e're you left the chase.

Saxon. But left your Grace, your Bride alone in Bed?
Or did she run together in the Larum?

Edward. Alas my Lords, this is no time to jest;
I lay full sadly in my Bed alone,
Not able for my life to sleep a wink,
Till that the Larum Bell began to Ring,
And then I starred from my weary couch.

Saxon. How now ^ this ^imes not with my daughters speech,
She says you found her Bed, and lay with her.

Edward. Not I, your Highness did mistake her words.

Collen. Deny it not Prince Edward, it is an honor.

Edward. My Lords I know no reason to deny it;
TO have found her Bed, I would have given a million.

Saxon. Hedswick der Furst s^gt er ^^tt mi^t be dir schlafin.

Head. Es gefelt ihm also zum sagun aber ich habes woll gerfralet.


Rich. She says you are disposed to jest with her;
But yesternight she felt it in good earnest.

Edward. Uncle these jests are too unsavorie,
Ill suited to these times, and please me not,
Lab ich bin you geshlapen yesternight.

Head. I leff, warum snlt ihrs fragen.

Saxon. Edward, I tell thee it is no jesting matter,
Say plainly, wa'st thou by her I or no?

Edward. As I am Prince, true heir to Englands Crown,
I never touched her body in a Bed.

Head. Das haste gethan order holle mich der d^vell.

Richard. Nephew, take heed, you hear the Princess words.

Edward. It is not she, nor you, nor all the world,
Shall make me say I did another deed.

Saxon. Another deed? what think thou her a whore?

Saxon strikes Edward. Edward. She may be Whore, and tho^ a villain too.
Struck me the Emperor I will strike again.

Collen. Content you Princes, buffet not like boys.

Richard. Hold you the one, and I will hold the other.

Head. O her got, help, help, oich arms ^ind^.

Saxon. Soldiers lay hands upon the Prince of Wales,
Convey him speedily unto a prison,
And load his Legs with grievous bolts of Iron;
Some bring the Whore my Daughter from my fight;
And thou smooth Englishman (...) thee I speak,
My hate extends to all thy Nation,
Pack thee out of my sight, and that with speed
Your English practices have all to long,
Muffled our German eyes, pack, pack I say.

Richard. Although your Grace have reason for your rage,
Yet be not like a madman to your friends.

Saxon. My friends? I scorn the friendship of such mates,
That seek my Daughters spoil, and my dishonor;
But I will teach the Boy another lesson,
His head shall pay the ransom of his fault.

Richard. His head?

Saxon. And thy head too, O how my heart does swell!
Was there no other Prince to mock but me?
First woo, then marry her, then lie with her,
And having had the pleasure of her Bed,
Call her a Whore in open audience,
None but a villain and a slave would do it,
My Lords of Mentz, of Tryer, and Brandenburg,
Make open the Gates, receive me as a friend,
I Will be a scourge unto the English Nation.

Mentz. Your Grace shall be the welcom'st guest alive,

Collen. None but a madman would do such a deed.

Saxon. Then Collen count me mad, for I will do it.
I Will set my life and Land upon the hazard,
But I will thoroughly found this deceit.
What will your Grace leave me or follow me?

Collen. No Saxon know I will not follow thee,
And leave Prince Richard in so great extremes.

Saxon. Then I defy you both, and so farewell.

Rich. Yet Saxon hear me speak before thou go,
Look to the Princes life as to thine own,
Each perished hair that f^lleth from his head
By thy default, shall cost a Saxon City,
Henry of England will not lose his heir,
And so farwell and think upon my words.

Saxon. Away, I do disd^in to ^nswer thee*
Pack thee with shame again into thy Country,
I Will have a Cock-boat at my proper charge,
And send the Imperial Crown which thou have won,
To England by Prince Edward after thee.

Exeunt. Man. Rich* and Coll. Collen. Answer him not Prince Richard, he is mad,
Choler and grief have robbed him of his senses.
Like accident to this was never heard.

Rich. Break heart and dye, fly hence my troubled spirit,
I am not able for to underbear
The weight of sorrow which does bruze my soul,
O Edward, O sweet Edward, O my life.
O noble Collen last of all my hopes,
The only friend in my extremities,
If thou do love me, as I know thou do,
Unsheath thy sword, and rid me of this sorrow.

Collen. Away with abject thoughts, fie Princely Richard,
Ro^ze up thy self, and call thy senses home,
Shake of this base pusillanimitie,
And cast about to remedy these wrongs.

Richard. Alas I see no means of remedy.

Collen. The hearken to my Counsel and advice,
We will Entrench our felves not far from hence,
With those small powers we have, and send for more,
If they do make assault, we will defend;
If violence be offered to the Prince,
We Will rescue him with venture of our lives;
Let us with pa^ience attend advantage,
Time may reveal the author of these treasons,
For why undoubtedly the sweet young Princess,
Fowly beguild by night with cunning show,
Has to some villain lost her Maidenhead.

Rich. O that I knew the foul incestuous wretch,
Thus would I tear him with my teeth and nails.
Had Saxon sense he would conceave so much,
And not revenge on guiltless Edwards life.

Collen. Persuade your self he will be twice advised*
Before he offer wrong unto the Prince.

Rich. In that good hope I will have patience.
Come gentle Prince whose pity to a stranger
Is rare and admirable, not to be spoken.
England cannot requite this gentleness.

Collen. Tush talk not of requital* let us go,
To fortify our selves within our trench.

Exeunt. Enter Alphonso (carried in the Couch) Saxony, Mentz, Tryer,
Brandenburg, Alexander. Alphon. O most excessive pain, O raging Fire!
Is burning Cancer or the S^orpion,
Descended from the Heavenly Zodiac,
To parch mine Entrals with a quenchless flame?
Drink, drink I say, give drink or I shall dye.
Fill a thousand bowls of Wine, Water I say
Water from forth the cold Tartarian hills.
I feel the ascending flame lick up my blood,
Mine Entrals shrink together like a scrowl
Of burning parchment, and my Marrow fries,
Bring hugie Cakes of Ice, and Flakes of Snow,
That I may drink of them being dissolved.

Saxon. We do beseech your Majesty have patience,

Alphon. Had I but drunk an ordinary poison,
The sight of thee great Duke of Saxony,
My friend in death, in life my greatest foe,
Might both allay the venom and the torment;
But that adulterous Palsgrave and my Wife,
Upon whose life and soul I vengeance cry,
Gave me a mineral not to be digested,
Which burning eats, and eating burns my heart.
My Lord of Tryer, run to the King of Bohem,
Commend me to him, ask him how he fares,
None but my self can rightly pity him;
For none but we have sympathy of pains.
Tell him when he is dead, my time's not long,
And when I dye bid him prepare to follow.
Exit. Tryer. Now, now it works a fresh; are you my friends?
Then throw me on the cold swift running Rhyn,
And let me bath there for an hour or two,
I cannot bear this pain.

Mentz. O would the unpartial fates afflict on me,
These deadly pains, and ease my Emperor,
How willing would I bear them for his sake.

Alphon. O Mentz, I would not wish unto a Dog,
The least of thousand torments that afflict me,
Much less unto your Princely holiness.
See, see my Lord of Mentz, he points at you.

Mentz. It is your (...) and nothing else;
But were death here, I would dispute with him,
And tell him to his teeth he does unjustice,
To take your Majesty in the prime of youth;
Such withered rotten branches as my self,
Should first be lopt, had he not partial hands;
And here I do protest upon my Knee,
I would as willingly now leave my life,
To save my King and Emperor alive,
As erst my Mother brought me to the world.

Brand. My Lord of Mentz, this flattery is too gross,
A Prince of your experience and calling,
Should not so fondly call the Heavens to witness.

Mentz. Think you my Lord, I would not hold my word?

Brand. You know my Lord, death is a bitter guest.

Mentz. To ease his pain and save my Emperor,
I sweetly would embrace that bitterness.

Alex. If I were death, I knew what I would do.

Mentz. But see, his Majesty is fallen a sleep,
Ah me, I fear it is a dying slumber.

Alphon. My Lord of Saxony do you hear this jest.

Saxon. What should I hear my Lord?

Alphon. Do you not hear
How loudly death proclames it in mine ears,
Swearing by trophies, Tombs and dead^ens Graves,
If I have any friend so dear to me*
That to excuse my life will lose his own,
I shall be presently restored to health.

Enter Tryer. Mentz. I would he durst make good his promises.

Alphon. My Lord of Tryer, how fares my fellow Emperor?

Tryer. His Majesty is eased of all his pains.

Alphon. O happy news, now have I hope of health.

Mentz. My joyful heart does spring within my body,
To h^^r those words,
Comfort your Majesty I will excuse you,
Or at the least will bear you Company.

Alphon. My hope is vain, now, now my heart will break,
My Lord of Tryer you did but (...) me,
Tell me the truth, how fares his Majesty.

Tryer. I told your Highness, eased of all his pain.

Alphon. I understand thee now, he is eased by death,
And now I feel an alteration;
Farewell sweet Lords, farewell my Lord of Mentz,
The truest friend that ever earth did bear,
Live long in happiness to revenge my death,
Upon my Wife and all the English brood.
My Lord of Saxony your Grace has cause.

Mentz. I dare thee death to take away my life.
Some charitable hand that loves his Prince,
And has the heart, draw forth his Sword and rid me of my life.

Alex. I love my Prince, and have the heart to do it.

Mentz. O stay a while.

Alex. Nay now it is to late.

Bran. Villain what have thou done? the ast slain a Prince.

Alex. I did no more than he entreated me,

Alphon. How now, what make I in my Couch so late?
Princes why stand you so gazing about me?
Or who is that lies slain before my face?
O I have wrong, my soul was half in Heaven,
His holiness did know the joys above,
And therefore is ascended in my stead.
Come Princes let us bear the body hence;
I Will spend a Million to embalm the same.
Let all the Bells within the Empire Ring,
Let Mass be said in every Church and Chapel,
And that I may perform my latest vow,
I will procure so much by Gold or friends,
That my sweet Mentz shall be Canonized,
And num^red in the Bed-role of the Saints,
I hope the Pope will not deny it me,
I Will build a Church in honor of thy name,
Within the ancient famous City Mentz,
Fairer than any one in Germany,
There shall thou be interrd with Kingly (...)
Over thy Tomb shall hang a sacred Lamp,
Which till the day of doom shall ever burn,
Yea after ages shall speak of thy renown,
And go a Pilgrimage to thy sacred Tomb.
Grief stops my voice, who loves his Emperor,
Lay to his helping hand and bear him hence,
Sweet Father and redeemer of my life.

Exeunt. Manet Alexander. Alex. Now is my Lord sole Emperor of Rome,
And three Conspirators of my Fathers death,
Are cunningly sent unto Heaven or Hell;
Like subtilty to this was never seen.
Alas poor Mentz* I pitying thy prayers,
Could do no less than lend a helping hand,
Thou were a famous flatterer in thy life,
And now have reap^ the fruits thereof in death;
But thou shall be rewarded like a Saint,
With Masses, Bells, dirges and burning Lamps;
It Is good, I envy not thy happiness:
But ah the sweet remembrance of that night,
That night I mean of sweetness and of stealth,
When for a Prince, a Princess did embrace me,
Paying the first fruits of her Marriage Bed,
Makes me forget all other accidents.
O Saxon I would willingly forgive,
The deadly trespass of my Fathers death,
So I might have thy Daughter to my Wife,
And to be plain, I have best right unto her,
And love her best, and have deserved her best;
But thou art fond to think on such a match;
Thou must imagine nothing but revenge,
And if my computation fail me not*
Ere long I shall be thoroughly revenged.
Exit.
Enter the Duke of Saxon, and Hedewick with the Child. Saxon. Come forth thou
perfect map of misery,
Desolate Daughter and distressed Mother,
In whom the Father and the Son are cursed;
Thus once again we will assay the Prince.
'T may be the sight of his own flesh and blood
Will now at last pierce his obdurate heart.
Jailor how fares it with thy prisoner?
Let him appear upon the battlements.

Head. O mein dear vatter, ich habe in dis lang lang 30. weeken, welche mich
duncket sein 40. iahr gewesen, ein l^tte Englisch gelernet, vnd ich hope, he
will me verstohn, vnd show me a litte pity.


Enter Edward on the Walls and Iailor. Saxon. Good morrow to your grace Edward
of Wales,
Son and immediate Heir to Henry the third,
King of England and Lord of Ireland,
Thy Fathers comfort, and the peoples hope;
It Is not in mockage nor at unawares,
That I am ceremonious to repeat
Thy high descent joined with thy Kingly might;
But therewithal to intimate unto thee
What God expects from the higher powers,
Justice, and mercy, truth, sobriety,
Relenting hearts, hands innocent of blood.
Princes are Gods chief substitutes on earth,
And should be Lamps unto the common sort.
But you will say I am become a Preacher,
No, Prince, I am an humble suppliant,
And to prepare thine ears make this exordium*
To pierce thine eyes and heart, behold this spectacle,
Three Generations of the Saxon blood,
Descended lineallie from forth my Loins,
Kneeling and crying to thy mightiness;
First look on me, and think what I have been,
For now I think my self of no account,
Next Caesar, greatest man in Germany,
Nearly a lied, and ever friend to England;
But Women's sighs move more in manly hearts,
O see the hands she elevates to Heaven;
Behold those eyes that whilome were thy joys,
Uttering domb eloquence in Crystal tears;
If these exclames and sights be ordinary,
Then look with pity on thy other self,
This is thy flesh, and blood, bone of thy bone,
A goodly Boy the Image of his ^ire.
Turn'st thou away? O were thy Father here,
He would, as I do, take him in his arms,
And sweetly kiss his Grandchild in the face.
O Edward too young in experience,
That (...) not look into the grievou^ ^rack,
Ensuing this thy obstinate denial;
O Edward too young in experience,
That can not see into the future good,
Ensuing thy most just acknowledgement;
Hear me thy truest friend, I will repeat them;
For good thou have an Heir indubitate,
Whose eyes a^ready sparckle Majesty,
Born in true Wedlock of a Princely Mother,
And all the German Princes to thy friends;
Where on the contrary thine eyes shall see,
The speedy Tragedy of thee and thine;
Like Athamas first will I ceize upon
Thy young unchristened and despised Son,
And with his guiltless brains bepain^ the S^ones;
Then like Virginius will I kill my Child,
Unto thine eyes a pleasing spectacle;
Yet shall it be a momentarie pleasure,
Henry of England shall mourn with me;
For thou thy self Edward shall make the third,
And be an actor in this bloody Sc^an.

Head. Ah mine seet^ Edouart, mein herzkin, mine sch^rzkin, mein herziges,
einiges herz, mein allerleivest husband* I preedee mein leefe see me friendlich
one, good seete heart tell de ^rut: and at lest to me, and dyne allerlee^est
schild show pity! dan ich bin dyne, vnd dow bist mine, dow have me geven ein
kindelein; O Edoua^t, seete, Edouart erbarmet sein!


Edw. O Hedewick peace, thy speeches pierce my soul.

Head. Hedewick do you excellency hight me Hedewick seete Edouart you weete
ich bin yowr allerlieueste wi^e.


Edward. The Priest I must confess made thee my Wife,
Cursed be the damned villainous adulterer,
That with so fowl a blot divorced our love.

Head. O mein allerl^evester, hieborne Furst vnd Her^, dinck dat unser Herr
Got sitts in himmells ^rone, and sees dat heart vnd will my cause woll reckon:


Saxon. Edward hold me not up with long delays;
But quickly say, will thou confess the truth?

Edward. As true as I am born of Kingly Lineage,
And am the best Plantagenet next my Father,
I never carnally did touch her body.

Saxon. Edward this answer had we long ago,
See thou this brat? speak quickly or he dies.

Edward. His death will be more piercing to thine eyes,
Than unto mine, he is not of my kin.

Head. O Father, O mine Uatter spare mine kindt O Edouart O Prince Edouart
spreak now oder nim^er^mehr die kindt is it mein, it soll nicht sterben:


Saxon. Have I dishonored my self so much,
To bow my Knee to thee, which never bowed
But to my God, and am I thus rewarded?
Is he not thine? speak murderous-minded Prince.

Edward. O Saxon, Saxon mitigate thy rage.
First thy exceeding great humility,
When to thy captive prisoner thou did kneel,
Had almost made my lying tongue confess,
The deed which I protest I never did;
But thy not causeless furious madding humor*
Together with thy Daughters pitious cries,
Whom as my life and soul I dearly love,
Had thoroughly almost persuaded me,
To save her honor and belie my self,
And were I not a Prince of so high blood,
And Bastards have no scepter-bearing hands,
I would in silence smother up this blot,
And in compassion of thy Daughters wrong,
Be counted Father to an others Child;
For why my soul knows her unguiltiness.

Saxon. Smooth words in bitter sense; is thine answer?

Head. Ey vatter give m^^ mein kindt, die kind is it mein.

Saxon. Das weis ich woll* er sagt esist nicht sein; therefore it dies.


He dashes out the Child's brains. Head. O Got in seinem trone, O mein kindt
mein kindt.

Saxon. There murderer take his head, and breathless lymbs,
There Is flesh enough, bury it in thy bowels,
Eat that, or dye for hunger, I protest,
Thou getst no other food till that be spent.
And now to thee lewd Whore, dishonored strumpet,
Thy turn is next, therefore prepare to dye.

Edward. O mighty Duke of Saxon, spare thy Child.

Sax. She is thy Wife Edward* and thou should spare her.
One Gracious word of thine will save her life.

Edward. I do confess Saxon she is mine own,
As I have married her, I will live with her,
Comfort thy self sweet Hedewick and sweet Wife.

Head. Ach, ach vnd wehe, warumb sagt your Excellence nicht so before, now is it
to late, vnser arm kindt is it kilt.


Edward. Though thou be mine, and I do pity thee,
I would not Nurse a Bastard for a Son.

Head. O Edouard now ich mark your mening ich sholdt be your whore, mein Uatter
ich begehr upon meine knee, last mich lieber sterben, ade falce Edouart, ^^lce
Prince, ich begehrs nicht.


Saxon. Unprincely thoughts do hammer in thy head,
Is It not enough that thou have shamed her once,
And seen the Bastard torn before thy face;
But thou would get more brats for Butcherie?
No Hedewick thou shall not live the day.

Head. O Herr Got, nimb meine ^eele in deiner henden.

Saxon. It is thy hand that gives this deadly stroke.

Head. O Herr Sabote, das mein vnschuldt an tag kommen mocht.


Edward. Her blood be on that wretched villains head,
That is the cause of all this misery.

Saxon. Now murderous-minded Prince, have thou beheld
Upon my Child, and Child's Child, thy desire,
Swear to thy self, that here I firmly swear,
That thou shall surely follow her to morrow.
In Company of thy adulterous Aunt,
Jailer convey him to his Dungeon,
If he be hungry, I have thrown him meat,
If thirsty let him suck the newly born lymbs.

Edward. O Heavens and Heavenly powers, if you be just,
Reward the author of this wickedness.

Exit. Edw. and Iaoler. Enter Alexander. Alex. To arms great Duke of Saxony,
to arms,
My Lord of Collen, and the Earl of Cornwall,
In rescue of Prince Edward and the Empress,
Have levied fresh supplies, and presently
Will bid you bat^ail in the open Field.

Sax. They never could have come in fitter time;
Thirst they for blood? and they shall quench their thirst.

Alex. O piteous spectacle! poor Princess Hedewick.

Sax. Stand not to pity, lend a helping hand.

Alex. What slave has murdered this guiltless Child?

Sax. What? dare thou call me slave unto my face?
I tell thee vi^lain, I have done this deed,
And seeing the Father and the Grand^sires heart,
Can give consent and execute their own,
Wherefore should such a rascal as thy self
Presume to pity them, whom we have slain?

Alex. Pardon me, if it be presumption
To pity them, I will presume no more.

Sax. Then help, I long to be amidst my foes.

Exeunt. ACT. V.
Alarm and Retreat. Enter Richard and Collen with Drums and Soldiers.
Richard. What means your Excellence to sound retreat?
This is the day of doom unto our Friends;
Before Sun set, my Sister, and my Nephew,
Unless we rescue them, must lose their lives;
The cause admits no dalliance nor delay.
He that so tyrant-like has slain his own,
Will take no pity on a strangers blood.

Collen. At my entreaty e're we strike the battle,
Let Us summon out our enemies to a parle.
Words spoken in time, have virtue, power, and price,
And mildness may prevail and take effect,
When dynt of Sword perhaps will aggravate.

Rich. Then sound a Parley to fulfill your mind,
Although I know no good can follow it.
A Parley. Enter Alphonso, Empress, Saxon, Edward prisoner, Tryer, Brandenburg,
Alexander and Soldiers.
Alphon. Why how now Emperor that should have been,
Are these the English Generals bravado's?
Make you assault so hotly at the first,
And in the self same moment sound retreat?
To let you know, that neither War nor words,
Have power for to divert their fatal doom,
Thus are we both resolved; if we triumph,
And by the right and justice of our cause
Obtain the victory, as I doubt it not,
Then both of you shall bear them Company,
And e're Sun set we will perform our oaths,
With just effusion of their guilty bloods;
If you be Conquerours, and we overcome,
Carry not that conceit to rescue them,
My self will be the Executioner,
And with these Ponyards frustrate all your hopes,
Making you triumph in a bloody Field.

Saxon. To put you out of doubt that we intend it,
Please it your Majesty to take your Seat,
And make a demonstration of your meaning.

Alphon. First on my right hand bind the English Whore,
That venomous Serpent nursed within my breast
To suck the vital blood out of my veins,
My Empress must have some pre-eminence,
Especially at such a bloody Banquet,
Her State, and love to me deserves no less.

Saxon. That to Prince Edward I may show my love,
And do the latest honor to his State,
These hands of mine that never chained any,
Shall fasten him in fetters to the Chair.
Now Princes are you ready for the battle?

Collen. Now art thou right the picture of thy self,
Seated in height of all thy Tyranny;
But tell us what intends this spectacle.

Alphon. To make the certainty of their deaths more plain*
And Cancel all your hopes to save their lives,
While Saxon leads the troops into the Field,
Thus will I vex their souls, with sight of death,
Loudly exclaming in their half dead ears;
That if we win they shall have company,
Viz. The English Emperor,
And you my Lord Archbishop of Collen,
If we be vanquished, then they must expect
Speedy dispatch from these two Daggers points.

Collen. What can thou tyrant then expect but death?

Alphon. Tush hear me out, that hand which shed their blood,
Can do the like to rid me out of bonds.

Rich. But that is a damned resolution.

Alphon. So must this desperate disease be cured.

Rich. O Saxon I Will yield my self and all my power,
To save my Nephew, though my Sister dye.

Sax. Thy Brothers Kingdom shall not save his life.

Edward. Uncle, you see these savage minded men
Will have no other ran^ome but my blood,
England has Heirs, though I be never King,
And hearts and hands to scourge this tyranny,
And so farewell.

Emp. A thousand times farewell,
Sweet Brother Richard and brave Prince of Collen.

Sax. What Richard, has this object pierced thy heart?
By this imagine how it went with me,
When yesterday I slew my Children.

Rich. O Saxon I entreat thee on my Knees.

Sax. Thou sh^l^ obtain like mercy with thy kneeling,
As lately I ob^aind at Edward's hands.

Rich. Pity the tears I power before thy feet.

Sax. Pity those tears? why I shed bloody tears.

Rich. I Will do the like to save Prince Edwards life.

Sax. Then like a Warrior spill it in the Field,
My griefull anger cannot (...) appeaz'd,
By sacrifice of any but himself,
Thou have dishonored me, and thou shall dye;
Therefore alarm, alarm to the fight,
That thousands more may bear thee company.

Rich. Nephew and Si^ter now farewell for ever.

Ed. Heaven and the Right prevail, and let me die;
Uncle farewell.

Emp. Brother farewell until we meet in Heaven.

Exeunt. Manent Alphon. Edw. Emp. Alex. Alphon. Here Is farewell Brother,
Nephew, Uncle, Aunt,
As if in thousand years you should not meet;
Good Nephew, and good Aunt content your selves,
The Sword of Saxon and these Dagger^-points,
Before the Evening-Star does show it self,
Will take sufficient order for your meeting.
But Alexander, my trusty Alexander,
Run to the Watch-Tow'r as I pointed thee,
And by thy life I charge thee look unto it
Thou be the first to bring me certain word
I we be Conquerors, or Conquered.

Alex. With careful speed I will perform this charge.
Exit.
Alphon Now have I leisure yet to talk with you.
Fair Isabell, the Palsgrave's Paramour,
Wherein was he a better man than I?
Or wherefore should thy love to him, effect
Such deadly hate unto thy Emperor?
Yet welfare wenches that can love Good fellows,
And not mix Murder with Adultery.

Emp. Great Emperor, I dare not call you Husband,
Your Conscience knows my hearts unguiltiness.

Alpho. Did thou not poison, or consent to poison us?

Emp. Should any but your Highness tell me so,
I should forget my patience at my death,
And call him Villain, Liar, Murderer.

Alphon. She that does so miscall me at her end,
Edward I prithee speak thy Conscience,
Think thou not that in her prosperity
Sh'hath vexed my Soul with bitter Words and Deeds?
O Prince of England I do count thee wise
That thou will not be cumber'd with a wife,
When thou had stolen her dainty rose Corance,
And plucked the flower of her virginity.

Edw. Tyrant of Spain thou lie in thy threat.

Alpho. Good words, thou see thy life is in our hands.

Edw. I see thou art become a common Hangman,
An Office far nore fitting to thy mind
Than princely to the Imperial dignity.

Alphon. I do not exercise on common persons,
Your Highness is a Prince, and she an Empress,
I therefore count not of a dignity.
Hark Edward how they labor all in vain,
With loss of many a valiant Soldiers life,
To rescue them whom Heaven and we have doomed;
Do thou not tremble when thou think upon it?

Edw. Let guilty minds tremble at sight of Death,
My heart is of the nature of the Palm,
Not to be broken, till the highest Bud
Be bent and ti'd unto the lowest Root;
I rather wonder that thy Tyrants heart
Can give consent that those thy Butcherous hands
Should offer violence to thy Flesh and Blood.
See how her guiltless innocence does plead
In silent Oratorie of her chastest tears.

Alphon. Those tears proceed from Fury and c^rst heart.
I know the stomach of your English Dames.

Emp. No Emperor, these tears proceed from grief.

Alphon. Grief that thou can not be revenged of Us.

Emp. Grief that your Highness is so ill advised,
To offer violence to my Nephew Edward;
Since then there must be sacrifice of Blood,
Let my heart-blood save both your bloods unspilt,
For of his death, thy Heart must pay the guilt.

Edw. No Auut, I will not buy my life so dear:
Therefore Alphonso if thou be a man
Shed manly blood* and let me end this strife.

Alphon. Here Is straining curt^sie at a bitter Feast.
Content thee Empress for thou art my Wife,
Thou shall obtain thy Boon and die the death,
And for it were unprinceby to deny
So slight request unto so great a Lord,
Edward shall bear thee company in Death.
A Retreat. But hark the heat of battle has an end;
One side or other has the victory,
Enter Alexander. And see where Alexander sweating comes;
Speak man, what news* speak* shall I die or live?
Shall I stab sure, or else prolong their l^ves
To grievous Torments? speak, am I Conqueror?
What, has thy have bereft thee of thy speech?
Have thou not breath to speak one siliable?
O speak, thy dalliance kills me, wonn or lost?

Amazed lets fall the Daggers. Alex. Lost.

Alphon. Ah me my Senses fail! my sight is gone.

Alex. Will not your Grace dispatch the Strumpet Queen?
Shall she then live, and we be doomed to death?
Is your Heart faint, or is your Hand too weak?
Shall servill fear break your so sacred Oaths?
Me thinks an Emperor should hold his word;
Give me the Weapons, I will soon dispatch them,
My Fathers yelling Ghost cries for revenge,
His Blood within my Veins boyls for revenge;
O give me leave Caesar to take revenge.

Alphon. Upon condition that thou will protest
To take revenge upon the Murderers,
Without respect of dignity, or State,
Afflicted, speedy, pittiless Revenge,
I will commit this Dagger to thy trust,
And give thee leave to execute thy Will.

Alex. What need I here reiterate the Deeds
Which deadly sorrow made me perpetrate?
How near did I entrap Prince Richard's life?
How sure set I the Knife to Mentz his heart?
How cunningly was Palsgrave doomed* to death?
How subtly was Bohem poisoned?
How slily did I satisfy my lust
Commixing dulcet Love with deadly Hate,
When Princess Hedwick lost her Maidenhead,
Sweetly embracing me for Englands Heir?

Edw. O execrable deeds!

Emp. O salvage mind!

Alex. Edward, I give thee leave to hear of this,
But will forbid the blabbing of your tongue.
Now gracious Lord and sacred Emperor,
Your highness knowing these and many more,
Which fearles pregnancie has wrought in me,
You do me wrong to doubt that I will dive
Into their hearts that have not spared their betters,
Be therefore sudden lest we die our selves.
I know the Conqueror hasts to rescue them.

Alphon. Thy Reasons are effectual, take this Dagger;
Yet pawse a while.

Emp. Sweet Nephew now farewell.

Alphon. They are most dear to me whom thou must kill.

Edward. Hark Aunt he now begins to pity you.

Alex. But they consented to my Fathers death.

Alphon. More then consented, they did execute.

Emp. I will not make his Majesty a Liar,
I killed thy Father, therefore let me die,
But save the life of this unguilty Prince.

Edward. I killed thy Father, therefore let me die,
But save the life of this unguiltie Empress.

Alphon Hark thou to me, and think their words as wind.
I killed thy Father, therefore let me die,
And save the lives of these two guiltless Princes.
Art thou amazed to hear what I have said?
There, take the weapon, now revenge at full
Thy Fathers death, and those my dire deceits
That made thee murderer of so many Souls.

Alex. O Emperor, how cunningly would thou entrap
My simple youth to credit Fictions?
Thou kill my Father, no, no Emperor,
Caesar did love Lorentzo all to dearly:
Seeing thy Forces now are vanquished,
Frustrate thy hopes, thy Highness like to fall
Into the cruel and revengefull hands
Of merciless incensed Enemies,
Like Caius Cassius weary of thy life,
Now would thou make thy Page an instrument
By sudden stroke to rid thee of thy bonds.

Alphon. Have thou forgotten how that very night
Thy Father died, I took the Master-Key,
And with a lighted Torch walked through the Court.

Alex. I must remember that, for to my death.
I never shall forget the slightest deed,
Which on that dismal Night or Day I did.

Alphon. Thou wast no sooner in thy restfull Bed,
But I disturb^d thy Father of his rest,
And to be short, not tha^* I hated him,
But for he knew my de^pest Secrets,
With cunning Poison I did end his life:
Art thou his Son? express it with a St^bb,
And make account if I had prospered,
Thy date was out, thou wast alre^dy doomed,
Thou knewst too much of me to live with me.

Alex. What wonders do I hear great Emperor?
Not that I do stedfast^ie beli^ve
That thou did murder my beloved Father*
But in mere pity of thy vanquished state
I undertake this execution*
Yet, for I fear the spa^kling Majesty.
Which issues from thy most Imperial, eyes
May strike relenting Passion to my heart,
And after wound received from fainting hand,
Thou fall half dead among thine Enemies,
I crave thy Highness leave to bind thee first.

Alphon. Then bind me quickly, use me as thou please

Emp. O Villain, will thou kill thy Sovereign?

Alex. Your Highness sees that I am forced unto it.

Alphon. Fair Empress. I shame to ask thee pardon,
Whom I have wronged so many thousand ways.

Emp. Dread Lord and Husband, leave these desperate thoughts,
Doubt not the Princes may be reconciled.

Alex. 'T may be the Princes will be reconcil^d,
But what is that to me? all Potentates on Earth
Can never reconcile my grieved Soul.
Thou slew'st my Father, thou did make this hand
Mad with Revenge to murder Innocents,
Now hear, ^ow in the height of all thy pride
The rightful Gods hove powered their justfull wrath
Upon thy Tyrants head, Devil as thou art.
And saved by miracle these Princes lives;
For know, thy side has got the Victory;
Saxon triumphs over his dearest friends;
Richard and Collen, both are Prisoners,
And every thing has sorted to thy wish;
Only has Heaven put it in my mind
(for he alone directed then my thoughts
Although my meaning was most mischievous)
To tell thee thou had lost, in certain hope
That suddenly thou would have stain them both,
For if the Princes came to talk about it,
I greatly feared their lives might be prolonged.
Art thou not mad to think on this deceit?
I Will make thee madder, with tormenting thee.
I tell thee Arch-Thief, Villain, Murderer,
Thy Forces have obtaind the Victory,
Victory leads thy Foes in captive bands;
This Victory has crowned ^hee Emperor,
Only my self have vanquished Victory,
And triumph in the Victors overthrow.

Alphon. O Alexander spare thy Princes life.

Alex. Even now thou did entreat the contrary.

Alphon. Think what I am that beg my life of thee.

Alex. Think what he was whom thou have doomed to death.
But least the Princes do surprise us here
Before I have performed my strange revenge,
I will be sudden in the execution.

Alphon. I will accept any condition.

Alex. Then in the presence of the Emperess,
The captive Prince of England, and my self,
Forswear the joys of Heaven, the sight of God,
Thy Souls salvation, and thy Savior Christ,
Damning thy Soul to endless pains of Hell.
Do this or die upon my Rapiers point.

Emp. Sweet Lord and Husband, spit in's face.
Die like a man, and live not like a Devil.

Alex. What? will thou save thy life, and damn thy Soul?

Alph. O hold thy hand, Alphonsus does renounce.

Edward. Aunt stop your years, hear not this Blasphemy.

Empr. Sweet Husband think that Christ did die for thee.

Alphon. Alphonsus does renounce the joys of Heaven,
The sight of Angels and his Saviors blood,
And gives his Soul unto the Devils power.

Alex. Thus will I make delivery of the Deed,
Die and be damned, now am I satisfied.

Edward. O damned Miscreant, what have thou done?

Alex. When I have leisure I will answer thee:
Mean while I Will take my heels and save my self.
If I be ever called in question,
I hope your Majesty's will save my life,
You have so happily preserved yours;
Did I not think it, both of you should die.
Exit Alex.
Enter Saxon, Branden. Tryer, (Richard and Collen as prisoners) and Soldiers.
Saxon. Bring forth these daring Champions to the Block,
Comfort your selves you shall have company.
Great Emperor where is his Majesty?
What bloody spectacle do I behold?

Emp. Revenge, revenge, O Saxon, Brandenburg,
My Lord is slai^, (...) is doomed to death.

Edward. Princes make haste, fo^low the murderer.

Saxon. Is Caesar slain?

Edward. Follow the Murderer.

Emp. Why stand you gasing on an other thu^?
Follow the Murderer.

Saxon. What Murderer?

Edward. The villain Alexander has slain his Lord,
Make after him with speed, so shall you hear
Such villainy as you have never heard.

Brand. My Lord of Tryer, we both with our light Horse
Will scour the Coasts and quickly bring him in.

Saxon. That can your Excellence alone perform,
Stay you my Lord, and guard the Prisoners,
While I, alas, unhappiest Prince alive,
Over his Trunk consume my self in Tears.
Has Alexander done this damned deed*
That cannot be why should he slay his Lord?
O cruel F^te* O miserable me!
Me thinks I now present Mark Antony,
Folding dead Julius Caesar in mine arms.
No, no, I rather will present Achilles,
And on Patroclus Tomb do sacrifise.
Let me be spurned and hated as a Dog,
But I perform more direful bloody Rites
Than Thetis Son for Menctiades.

Edward. Leave mourning for thy Foes, pity thy Friends.

Sax. Friends have I none, and that which grieves my Soul,
Is want of Foes to work my wreak upon;
But were you Traitors 4, four hundred thousand,
Then might I satisfy my self with Blood.

Enter Brandenb. Alexand. and Soldiers. Saxon. See Alexander where Caesar lies
slain,
The guilt whereof the Traitors cast on thee;
Speak, can thou tell who slew thy Sovereign?

Alexan. Why who but I? how should I curse my self
If any but my self had done this deed?
This happy hand, blessed be my hand therefore,
Revenged my Fathers death upon his Soul:
And Saxon thou have cause to curse and bann*
That he is dead, before thou did inflict
Torments on him that so has torn thy heart.

Saxon. What Mysteries are these?

Bran. Princes, can you inform us of the Truth?

Edward. The Deed's so heinous that my faltering tongue
Abhorres the utterance. Yet I must tell it.

Alex. Your Highness shall not need to take the pains,
What you abhor to tell, I joy to tell,
Therefore be silent and give audience.
You mighty men, and Rulers of the Earth,
Prepare your Ears, to hear of Stratagems
Whose dire effects have gaul'd your princely hearts,
Confounded your conceits, muffled your eyes:
First to begin this villainous Fiend of Hell
Murdered my Father, sleeping in his Chair,
The reason why, because he only knew
All Plotts, and complots of his villainy;
His death was made the Bas^s and the Ground
Of every mischief that has troubled you.

Saxon. If thou, thy Father and thy Progeny
Were hang^d and burnt, and broken on the Wheel,
How could their deaths heap mischief on our heads?

Alex. And if you will not hear the Reason choose.
I tell thee I have slain an Emperor,
And thereby think my self as good a man
As thou, or any man in Christendom,
Thou shall entreat me ere I tell thee more.

Brand. Proceed.

Alex. Not I.

Saxon. I prithee now proceed.

Alex. Since you entreat me then, I will proceed*
This murtherous Devil having slain my Father,
Buz'd cunningly into my credulous ears,
That by a General Council of the States,
And as it were by Act of Pa^lement,
The seven Electors had set down his death*
And made the Empress Executioner,
Trans^erring all the guilt from him to you.
This I believed, and first did set upon
The life of Princely Richard, by the Boors,
But how my purpose faild in that, his Grace best knows;
Next, by a double intricate deceit,
Midst all his Mirth was Bohem poisoned,
And good old Mentz to save Alphonso's life,
(Who at that instant was in perfect health)
Twixt jest and earnest was made a Sacrifice;
As for the Palatine, your Graces knew
His Highness and the Queens unguiltines;
But now my Lord of Saxon hark to me,
Father of Saxon should I rather call you,
It Was I that made your Grace a Grandfather:
Prince Edward plowed the ground, I sowed the Seed,
Poor Hedewick ^ore the most unhappy fruit,
Created in a most unluckie hour,
To a most violent and untimely death.

Sax. O loathsome Villain, O de^ested deeds,
O guiltless Prince, O me most miserable.

Brand. But tell us who revealed to thee at last
This shameful guilt, and our unguiltiness?

Alex. Why that is the wonder Lords, and thus it was
When like ^ (...) he had taken his ^eat,
And that the fury of the Fight began,
Upon the highest Watch-Tow'^ of the Fort,
It was my office to behold (...)
The Wars (...), and having seen the end,
I saw how Victory with equal wings
Hang hove^i^g (...) the Battails here and there,
Till at the last, the English Lions fled,
And Saxon's side obtained the Victory;
Which seen, I posted from the turrets top,
More furiously than ere Laocoon ran,
When Trojan hands drew in Troy's overthrow*
But yet as fatally as he or any.
The tyrant seeing me, star'd in my face,
And suddenly demanded what is the news,
I, as the Fates would have it, hoping that he
Even in a twinkling would have slain 'em both,
For so he swore before the Fight began,
Cried bitterly that he had lost the day,
The sound whereof did kill his dastard heart,
And made the Villain desperately confess
The murder of my Father, praying me,
With di^e revenge, to ridd him of his life*
Short tale to make, I bo^nd him cunningly,
Told him of the deceit, triumphing over him,
And lastly with my Rapier slew him dead.

Sax. O Heavens! justly have you taken revenge*
But thou, thou murtherous adulterous slave,
What Bull of Phalaris, what strange device,
Shall we invent to take away thy life?

Alex. If Edward and the Empress, whom I (...),
Will not requite it now, and save my life,
Then let me die, contentedly I die,
Having at last reveng^d my Fathers death*

Sax. Villain, not all the world shall save thy life.

Edw. Had thou no^ been Author of my Hedewick^ death,
I would have certainly saved thee from death;
But if my Sentence now may take effect,
I would adjudge the Villain to be hanged
As here the Jews are hanged in Germany.

Sax. Young Prince it shall be so; go dragg the Slave
(...) the place of execution:
There let the Judas, on a Jewish Gallows*
Hang by the heels between two English Mastives,
There feed on Dogs, let Dogs there feed on thee,
And by all mean^ prolong his misery.

Alex. O might thy self and all these English Currs,
Instead of Mastive-Doggs hang by my side,
How sweetly would I tugg upon your Flesh.
Exit Alex.
Sax. Away with him, suffer him not to speak.
And now my lords, Collen, Tryer, and Barndenburg,
Whose Hearts are bruz'd to think upon these woes,
Though no man have such reason as my self,
We of the seven Electors that remain,
After so many bloody Massacres,
Kneeling upon our Knees* humbly entreat
Your Excellence to be our Emperor.
The Royalties of the Coronation
Shall be, at Aix, shortly solemnized.

Cullen. Brave Princely Richard now refuse it not,
Though the Election be made in Tears,
Joy shall attend thy Coronation.

Richard. It stands not with mine Honor to deny it,
Yet by mine Honor, fain I would refuse it.

Edward. Uncle, the weight of all these Miseries
Makes my heart as heavy as your own,
But an Imperial Crown would lighten it,
Let this one reason make you take the Crown.

Richard. What Is that sweet nephew?

Edward. Sweet Uncle, this it is,
Was never Englishman yet Emperor,
Therefore to honor England and your self,
Let private sorrow yield to public Fame,
That once an Englishman bare Caesar's name.

Richard. Nephew, thou have prevailed; Princes stand up,
We humbly do accept your sacred offer.

C^llen. Then sound the Trumpets, and cry Vivat Caesar.

All. Vivat Caesar.

Cullen. Richardus Dei gratia Romanorum Imperator, semper Augustus, Comes (...).


Richard. Sweet Sister now let Caesar comfort you,
And all the rest that yet are comfortles^;
Let them expect from English Caesar's hands
Peace, and abundance of all earthly Joy.

FINIS

