THE CHARACTER.
THe Lords and Commons having had their doom,
The banished Romans since supply their room,
And in full Herds they publicly appear,
Bearding both Protestant and Presbyter;
Yet do not so resent the soul Affront
To take up Arms and make Rebellion on it:
Nor do not sleep but by the Drum and Fife
To keep thy Throat from bloody Jesuit's Knife;
Though Murder be in us a bloody Fact,
In holy Priest it is an holy Act,
If Priest and Knife be consecrated, then,
By Blood and Massacre they Heaven win,
When we poor Souls ar damned for the same Sin
Who would not be a sacred Priest to Rome,
When they can save or give Eternal doom?
Make Virtue damned, and meritorious Vice,
They snatch from Hell and send to Paradise.
And more to complete their further Glory,
They call and take a touch in Purgatory.
Since that they Bugbear Parliament was fled,
Bold was the man durst say, That Godfrey's dead,
Or in Rome's Slaughter house his Blood was shed,
Or Priests contrived to have him murdered.
Or who dares say, The Temple was on fire
By the contrivance of some Priest or Friar?
To burn Commissions hid in Langhorn's Room,
To blind the Plot, and clear the Lords of Rome?
O! People all so weak as not to see
Your selves betrayed by your own Foolerie!
Contending with your King, his Laws and Power,
Intrenching on his Prerogative each hour;
Flying in the Face of his Supremacy,
With saucy Libelling and Ribauldry.
The seed o'th Serpent is abroad again,
To teach young Colt his black Rebellion,
Formed and begot in the old damned Stallion:
Whose pregnant Issue's quick and nimble sense,
Exactly copies their Syre's Impudence:
Treading his Steps with a full strong source,
Flies in the Face of Majesty in course:
The young out-throwes the old at least a Bar;
For they but only against the King made War:
But these young Start-ups in bold and thundering words,
Dare both the King, his Bishops and his Lords;
And would subvert at once, and at one hour
The Royal-Office and the Supreme Power;
Make King and Peers but Ciphers in the State,
And they the powerful Figures of Debate.
Traitor and Presbyter do seem two things;
But equal is the venom of their stings.
Against Prerogative they plead Privilege,
That Fatal By-blow with a double edge.
The Infatuated Jews, their sense being gone,
Made War among themselves, and still fought on,
Till they were conquered by Vespasian.
So You fall out, like senceless stones and stocks,
Flying at each other even like Dogs and Cocks:
To satisfy YOUR Pride, WE split on Rocks.
In short, Fanatique's Character is this,
THEY ARE Cursed Obstacles o'th Nations Bliss.
FINIS.

