THE CHARACTER OF A JESUIT.
HE is a Peccant Humor of the Body Politic, that disturbs the Constitution
with Intestine Malignity, and after, seizes the Head; if the dangerous Malady
had not been discovered by the Diligence of some, and Information of others,
its Effects had been Infallibly Pernicious and Destructive. He is the spurious
Issue of the Whore of Babylon and Antichrist; he was Born in a Tempest, and
brought up in a Wilderness; his Nurse was some Insatiate Bear, that mistook him
for her Cubb, and afterward lickt the helpless Lump into her own Deformed
Nature. He is an Injurious VVasp that always frequents the sweetest Soil; and
cannot be contented with his respective Delicacies, but will Sting you, though
you touch him not, and disturb your quiet with his angry Buzzings. He is an
Ominous Comet, and Portends War, Pestilence, and Famine to that Courtry where
he appears. He is an Ignis Fatuus that abuses his Deluded followers with his
seeming Luster, and instead of directing them to their Journeys end, he wilders
them in Ignorance, and leads them through Fenny Boggs, and Thorny Brakes,
whilst the Misguided wanderers must work out their Destruction with Toil and
Industry. He is a Cannibal, and accordingly Gluts himself with Protestant
Flesh, whilst his Horse-leech Thirst is altogether Insatiable. His Religion is
like that at Amsterdam, Universal and Unconfined, though particular upon
occasion. His Truth is French, and his Morals Irish: His Feet are swift to shed
Blood, and his Tongue to Perjure and Profane: His Forehead is hard and
lasting, but his Ears Transitory: His Eyes are unaccountable and asquint, this
looks to Rome, and that to Constantinople, but his Nose is Roman: His Head
is as bare as his Fortunes, and his Ears is as large as his Conscience: His
Coat is an Irish Freeze, and lined with Equivocation, made a purpose to turn
inside out: His Breeches are close kneed, to preserve an Oath of Secrecy, and
his Stockings are of a changable color, most suiting his Profession: He is
Sworn to Celibacy, yet can dispense with Plurality of Women: He Will come a
Pilgrimage to pay his Adoration to the Crutch of the poor lame Convert in the
Gospel, and after will use it to knock out the Brains of the next Cripple: He Will
Sacrifice Virginity to the rising Ghost of his own Lust, and will drown the
VVidow in the Tears of her Orphan: He Will Murder with Zeal and Devotion, and be
Villainous with Authority and License; an Oath with him is no more than a
Fashion, and accordingly he alters it at his pleasure. He is the repining Ghost
of his Banished Religion, that obscurely stalks about, and Angrily demands
satisfaction for the Injury Received, and unless he be Conjured down by a
Magestrates wand, and the circle of a Rope, with some lasting Tyburn charm, the
uneasy Goblin will continually disturb the Kingdoms quiet: an Epitomy of all
Villains comprised into a Method, are qualifications agreeable to one of his
Profession: He Will violate Chastity and Virgin Innocence upon the Alter, and will
stop the Mouth of the shreiking Sufferer with his Mass Book: He Will corrupt the
thoughts of the strictest Matron, and persuade her, that the abuse of her
Husbands Bed is Meritorious: He delights to welter in Blood and Butchery, and
will address himself to his great Judge with one hand up to Heaven, and the
other upon his Poniard: if his glutted Conscience after such a deluge in Gore,
should be nice and squeemish, one Dram of Indulgence will immediately digest
the Scruple, and prepare the Jaded Actor to attempt a fresh Sally. He is a
pernicious Caterpillar, that cannot be content to Feast his Senses with the
Luscious Sweets of the Garden, but meanly and basely, must destroy the choicest
Plants: He is the Spawn of the Old Serpent, and can wind himself into any
mysterious Curl or Figure, whilst under the gilded and spangled Skin, there
lies a poisonous Sting: He is a Villain by Birth, and is accordingly improved
by Art and Education; his Church does warrant his Attempts, and encourage his
proceedings; there is more Religion practiced on Shipboard, when the Foaming
Billows beat, and the busy Tarpawlins are in a stickle, or amongst a company
of loosing Gamesters, then in one of their Cloisters. I have Read of a Jesuit,
that after the Commission of such Enormities, as the most daring Sinner would
almost dread to repeat, that instead of confessing his long Muster-Roll of sins
to his Ghostly Father, condemned his Ignorance, and said, He Repented nothing,
but that he had not been a Columbus in Sins, and discovered new Worlds of
Iniquities. He is a Prodigy in Nature, and has destroyed Gods Image in himself:
His Principles are Devilish, and his Practices are suitable; but since he is
incorrigible, we will cease to Lash him with Satirical Invectives, and so leave
him to the Rod of Vengeance.

LONDON, Printed for J. Newton. 1681.


