To my Beloved Friends and Neighbors of the BLACKFRIARS.
Beloved Friends and Neighbors,
BEing my self converted, I thought it was my duty to strengthen my Brethren,
Luke 22. 32. And to this purpose, I have had a most strong impulsion of the
Spirit, to come and publicly declare amongst you, what the Lord has done for
my soul, and this not once, but many times; But being doubtful whether it were
a Message from the Lord, or the mere strength of Natural affection to my
Neighbors of the Place of my Birth, my Education and Abode: and having always
had a very reverend respect of Dr. Gouge from my Infancy; I contended with that
Motion, till at last it broke out into Letters, to desire his Resolution,
Whether the sprinkling of Infants were of God or Man? All the Answers I could
obtain under his hand was, that the Matter was very weighty, and of Public
Concernment, and that he desired to advise about it with others. This was the
28. January 1649.

Since which time. I have solicited him with three other Letters, Declaring
that it being his constant Practice, I knew he could not be unprovided of an
Answer; And it being held by all Divines, is one of the Distinguishing Marks of
the true Church of Christ from the false; It ought not to be practiced
doubtingly. And although it were required, that every one should be ready to
give an account of the Hope that was in him, and that we have all a most sure
Word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 2. 19. Gal. 1. 16.
to which we do well if we take heed, without consulting with Flesh and Blood;
yet I had given him time to conider of it, and to consult about it, and desired
that he would be pleased to let Mr. Case, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Marshall, Mr.
Goodwin, or the whole Synod assist him in it, to give me an Answer, to give me
Answer if he pleased: or Publicly to dispute it, or to let me declare what I
had learnt concerning it, and for him or them to take their Exceptions against
any thing, which I should speak contrary to the true meaning of the Scriptures.

And that, whether he respected me or himself, his people or God; I thought it
his duty in some way, to resolve or convince me; with several other Arguments
to the like purpose; But after all delays his last answer by my Son 12.
February, delivered by word of mouth (so far as I may credit my Son) was,
that he would give no other Answer than what was given by him at the first.

Now, Beloved friends and Neighbors, I have written you the Question and his
Answer, wherein he confesses it a matter of weight and Public concernement:
Wherein he implies himself ignorant, in that he must advise with others; yet
seems unwilling to (...) to Declare amongst you what I find manifested by the
Word of God. What could I have done more in faithfulness and respect to him,
or mine own soul? Wherefore I beseech you in the Lord, consider your Case. For
if the Blind lead the Blind must not both fall into Mat. 15 14.
the Ditch? The Lord give you Eyes to see?

Yours in the Lord, PETER CHAMBERLEN.


