Imprimatur. Liber hic cui Titulus ( A Parallel of Architecture the Antique
with the Modern) ut quod melius est eligatur.

Ex Aedib. Lambethanis Nov. 21, 1663. I. Franck S. T. P. Reverendissimo in
Christo Patri, ac Dom. Dom. Gilb. Archi-Ep. Cantuar. a Sacris Domesticis.

To the most happy Memory of Monseiur de Noyers Baron of Dangu Minister, and
Secretary of State.

A PARALLEL OF ARCHITECTURE BOTH ANCIENT and MODERN BY ROLAND FREART. Sr. DE
CHAMBRAY



A PARALLEL OF THE ANCIENT ARCHITECTURE WITH THE MODERN, In a Collection of Ten
Principal Authors who have written upon the FIVE ORDERS, Viz.
PALLADIO and SCAMOZZI, SERLIO and VIGNOLA, D. BARBARO and CATANEO, L. B.
ALBERTI and VIOLA, BULLANT and DE LORME,
Compared with one another. The three Greek Orders, DORIQUE, IONIQUE, and
CORINTHIAN, comprise the First Part of this Treatise. And the two Latin,
TUSCAN and COMPOSITA the Latter.

Written in French by ROLAND FREART, Sieur de Chambray; Made English for the
Be^^fit of Builders.

To which is added an Account of Architects and Architecture, in an Historical,
and Etymological Explanation of certain Terms particularly affected by
Architects. With Leon Baptista Alberti's Treatise of STATVES.

By JOHN EVELYN Esquire Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.



LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, for John Place, and are to be sold at his
Shop at Furnivals-Inn Gate in Holborn. MDCLXIV.

To the Most SERENE MAJESTY OF CHARLES THE SECOND.
SINCE the Great Augustus vouchsafed to patronize a Work of this nature which
was Dedicated to him by Vitruvius; I had no reason to apprehend Your Majesty
would reprove these Addresses of mine, if, in presenting You with those
Antiquities on which that excellent Master formed his Studies, I entitled Your
Majesty to a Work so little inferior to it, and so worthy to go in paragon
with it. And indeed to whom could I more aptly Inscribe it? a Discourse of
Building, than to so Royal a Builder, whose august attempts have already given
so great a splendour to our Imperial City, and so illustrious an Example to the
Nation! It is from this contemplation, Sir, that after I had (by the Commands
of the Royal Society) endeavored the improvement of Timber, and the planting
of Trees, I have advanced to that of Building as its proper and natural
consequent: Not with a presumption to incite, or instruct Your Majesty, which
were a vanity unpardonable; but by it to take occasion of celebrating Your
Majesty's great Example, who use Your Empire and Authority so worthily, as
Fortune seems to have consulted her reason when she poured her favors upon
You; so as I never cast my Eyes on that generous Designation in the Epigram
Credis ob hoc me Pastor opes fortasse rogare
Propter quod vulgus, crassaque turba rogat? etc.
Est nihil ex istis: superos, ac sydera testor.
Ergo quid? ut donem, Pastor, and aedificem.
Mart. Ep. L. 9.
-- ut donem, Pastor, and aedificem. without immediate reflections on Your
Majesty, who seem only to value those royal advantages you have above others,
but that you may Oblige, and that you may Build. And certainly, Sir, Your
Majesty has consulted the noblest way of establishing Your Greatness, and of
perpetuating Your Memory; since, whilst Stones can preserve Inscriptions, Your
Name will be famous to Posterity, and when those Materials fail, the Benefits
that are engraven in our Hearts, will outlast those of Marble. It would be no
Paradox, but a Truth, to affirm, that Your Majesty has already Built and
Repaired more in three or four Years (notwithstanding the difficulties, and the
necessity of an extraordinary Economy for the public concernment) than all
Your Enemies have destroyed in Twenty; nay then all Your Majesty's Predecessors
have advanced in an Hundred, as I could easily make out, not only by what Your
Majesty has so magnificently designed and carried on at that Your ancient
Honor of Green-VVich, under the conduct of Your most industrious and worthy
Surveyor; but in those Splendid Apartiments, and other useful Reformations for
security and delight, about Your Majesty's Palace at White Hall; the
chargeable covering, first Paving and reformation of Westminster Hall; care,
and preparation for Saint Paul's, by the impiety and iniquity of the late
confusions almost Dilapidated: With what Her Majesty the Queen Mother has added
to her Palace at Sommerset House in a Structure becoming her Royal grandeur,
and the due veneration of all Your Majesty's Subjects for the honor She has
done both this Your native City and the whole Nation Nor may I here omit (what
I so much desire to transmit to Posterity) those noble, and profitable
amaenities of Your Majesty's Plantations, wherein You most resemble the Divine
Architect; because Your Majesty has proposed in it such a Pattern to Your
Subjects, as merits their imitation, and profoundest acknowledgments, in one of
the most worthy, and Kingly Improvements that Nature is capable of. I know not
what they talk of former Ages, and of the now contemporary Princes with Your
Majesty; These things are visible; and should I here descend to more
Particulars, which yet were not foreign to the subject of this Discourse, I
would provoke the whole World to produce me an Example parallel with Your
Majesty, for Your exact judgment, and mervailous ability in all that belongs to
the Naval Architecture, both as to its proper terms, and more solid use, in
which Your Majesty is Master of one of the most noble, and profitable Arts that
can be wished in a Prince, to whom God has designed the Dominion of the Ocean,
which renders Your Majesty's Empire Universal; when by exercising Your royal
talent, and knowledge that way, You can bring even the Antipodes to meet, and
the Poles to kiss each other; for so likewise (not in a Metaphorical, but
natural sense) Your equal and prudent Government of his Nation has made it
good, whilst Your Majesty has so prosperously guided this giddy Bark through
such a Storm, as no hand save Your Majesty's could touch the Helm, but at the
price of their temerity. But to return to that of Architecture again (for it is
hard not to slide into the Panegyric, when once one begins to speak of Your
Majesty) I am witness not only how pertinently You discourse of the Art, but
how judiciously You contrive; and as in all other Princely and magnificent
things Your Notices are extraordinary, so I cannot but augure of their effects,
and that Your Majesty was designed of God for ablessing to this Nation in all
that can render it happy, if we can have the grace but to discern it, and be
thankful for it.

This is, Sir, the glorious Idea which I have conceived of Your Serene Majesty,
and which I propose for as emulous an Example as any Age has hitherto produced;
nor can there anything be added more, but that permanency which the rest of
Your Virtues do promise us: If such were those glorious Hero's of old, who
first brought Men out of VVildernesses into Walled and well built Cities, that
chased Barbarity, introduced Civility, gave Laws to Republiques, and to whose
rare Examples and Industry we are accomptable for all that we possess of useful
in the Arts, and that we enjoy of benefit to the Public; how much cause have
We in these Nations to rejoice, that whilst Your Majesty pursues these
Laudable Undertakings, that Race of Demy-Gods is not altogether extinct! And if
after the support of Religion, and the establishment of Laws, the Perfection of
Sciences be the next in order to the Well-being of a State, This of
Architecture (as one of the most beneficial, and useful to Mankind) ows her
renascency amongst Us to Your Majesty's encouragements, and to as many of those
Illustrious Persons as by their large and magnificent Structures transcribe
Your Royal Example; in particular, my Lord high Chancellor of England, my Lord
high Treasurer, and my Lord the Earl of Saint Albans, whose memories deserve
this Consecration;

I have now but one thing more to speak, Sir, and that is for the reputation of
the Piece I present to Your Serene Majesty: It is indeed a Translation; but it
is withal the marrow and very substance of no less than ten judicious Authors,
and of almost twice as many the most noble Antiquities now extant upon the
bosom of the Earth; 'twere else a difficult Province to conceive how one should
entertain Your Majesty without a Spirit and a Subject worthy Your application.
There is something yet of addition to it, which is new, and of mine Own, the
defects whereof do supplicate Your Majesty's pardon; to say nothing of the
difficulty of rendering a Work of this nature intelligible to the vulgar, and
not unworthy the Style of a Gentleman; seeing it is not the talent of every one
who understands a Language, unless he also understand the Art; But these may
seem to defer to my own Glory, which is conspicuous in nothing so much, as in
laying it at Your Majesty's Feet, and the permission of using that Sacred Name
to protect

Says-Court 20. Aug. 1664. SIR, Your Majesty's ever loyal, most obedient, and
faithful Subject J. EVELYN.

TO Sr. JOHN DENHAM, KNIGHT OF THE HONORABLE ORDER OF THE BATH, SUPERINTENDENT
and SURVEYOR OF HIS MAJESTY'S BVILDINGS and WORKS.
SIR,
IT is now some ten years since, that to gratify a friend of mine in the
Country, I began to interpret this Parallel; but other things intervening, it
was laid aside, and had so continued without thoughts of reasumption, had not
the passion of my worthy Friend Mr. Hugh May to oblige the Public, and in
commiseration of the few assistances which our Workmen have of this nature
(compared to what are extant, in other Countries) found out an expedient, and
by procuring a most accurate Edition of the Plates, encouraged me to finish
what I had begun; and to make a willing Present of my labor and of whatever
else I was able to contribute to so generous a design.

Sir, I am not to instruct you in the merits and use of this excellent Piece;
but it is from your approbation and particular influence, that our Workmen
ought to esteem it, and believe me too when I affirm it: That the Ten Authors
in this Assembly, which compose both so many, and (for not being vulgar)
unintelligible Volumes, will neither afford them so full instructions in the
Art, nor so well enable them to judge, and pronounce concerning the true Rules
and Maxims of it as this one little, but incomparable, Collection. You well
know, that all the mischiefs and absurdities in our modern Structures proceed
chiefly from our busy and Gotic triflings in the Compositions of the Five
Orders; and that an able Workman, who is Master of his Art, and has a true
relish indeed, carries on all his undertakings with applause and satisfaction:
That there is not in the whole Catalogue of Authors who have Written on this
Subject, a more safe, expedite and perfect guide than this Parallel; where,
from the noblest Remains of Antiquity accurately Measured, and perspicuously
Demonstrated, the Rules are laid down; and from a solid, judicious, and mature
comparison of modern Examples, their Errors are detected; so that were but a
little more pains taken by our young Architects and their Subsidiaries, about
the easier Principles of Geometry, the Rudiments of Perspective, and a ready
address of well Designing, we might by the conversation of this Author alone,
promise our Country, and the Age to come, a miraculous improvement of their
Buildings in a short time. Nor would this be in the least, to the augmentation
of their expenses; since there is nothing costs dearer, and displeases more,
than our undigested contrivances, and those intolerable defects which we have
enumerated. It is from the asymmetrie of our Buildings, want of decorum and
proportion in our Houses, that the irregularity of our humors and affections
may be shrewdly discerned: But it is from His Majesty's great Genius, and the
choice he has made of such an Instrument, that we may hope to see it all
reformed; it being in so worthy an imitation of that magnificent Emperor, that
touched with the like indignation at the Encroachments and Deformities of the
public Edifices and Ways, caused a like reformation also; so as we may now
affirm of London, as the Poet once of Rome, Nunc Roma est, nuper magna taberna
fuit. Abstulerat totam temerarius inst^tor urbem,
Inque suo nullum limine limen erat.
Iussisti tenues Germanice, crescere vicos;
Et modo quae fuerat semita, facta via est.
Nulla catenatis pila est praecincta lagenis;
Nec Praetor medio cogitur ire luto.
Stringitur in densa nec coeca novacula turba,
Occupat aut totas nigra popina vias^
Tonsor, Caupo, Coquus, Lanius sua limina servant.
Nunc Roma est, nuper magna taberna fuit.
Mart. Lib. 7. Epig. 60.
that it now begins to have the face of a City indeed. And truly it is an
improvement so extraordinary which it has received since His Majesty's gracious
influence upon it, that should I have been silent of His praises, I might
justly apprehend mox lapides clamaturos, that the very Stones would cry out and
become vocal: But neither here must I forget what is alone due to you Sir for
the reformation of a thousand deformities in the Streets, as by your
introducing that incomparable form of Paving, The particulars of that
reformation in Rome so much resembling what His Majesty has commanded for the
cleansing, and enlarging the Streets, the demolition of Bulks, and other
Obstacles, that the whole Epigram merits the application.
to an incredible advantage of the Public; when that which is begun in Holborn
shall become universal, for the saving of Wheels and Carriages, the cure of
noysom Gutters, the deobstruction of Encounters, the dispatch of Business, the
cleanness of the Way, the beauty of the Object, the ease of the Infirm, and
the preserving of both the Mother and the Babe; so many of the fair-Sex and
their Offspring having perished by mischances (as I am credibly informed) from
the ruggedness of the unequal Streets, etc.

But I know not Sir, how these Instances may be relished and valued amongst the
vulgar, nor am I much solicitous; sure I am, that more has been done for the
Ornament and Benefit of the Public in two years time, that your Self, with the
Commisioners who undertook the Inspection, have acted, then in five hundred
before: They were not a foolish or impolitick People, who from the very
Principles of humanity, destined for the ease of their Subjects, so many
spacious Ways, cool Fountains, shady Walks, refreshing Gardens, and places of
public Recreation, as well as stately Temples, and Courts of Justice, that
Religion and the Laws might be published with the more pomp and veneration: And
if his Majesty, with your pains and industry, has contributed to something of
all this, it is that for which the whole Nation becomes obliged; as the
promoting of such public and useful Works (and especially that of Building) a
certain Indication of a prudent Government, of a flourishing and happy People:
So that if there remain but one thing more to be desired in order to the
Consummation of its perfect felicity; how infinitely were it to be wished, that
whilst the beauty and benefit of the City increased in one part, the
Deformity and apparent Ruin of it might cease on the other: But this we are to
hope for, when, to bring this monstrous Body into shape, and scatter these
ungovernable enormities, either the restraint of Building irregularly shall
polish the Suburbs, or (which I rather could wish) some royal Purchase contract
and demolish them. But Sir, I have done, and I know you will pardon this Zeal,
and accept of this expression of my profound respects from

SIR, Your most humble Servant J. EVELYN.

Amico optimo and Charissimo JOHANNI EVELYNO Armig E. Societ. Regali Land. etc.
Jo. BEALE S. P. D. In ARCHITECTVRAM ab ipso Anglice redditam and Graphice
exornatam.
SIC, ubi de Coelo quondam primordia rerum
Effulsere, Chaos discutiente Deo,
Hortus erat primus: Tunc Tecta, and Moenia, and Vrbes:
Tandem and Pyramidum nobile furgit opus.
Hic aliquis molem subjungit: In aere pendet
Hortus; and unde venit, quaerere jure licet.
Nec satis est vitam ducamus in Arce beatam
Qualem agit aetherea Iuppiter ipse domo;
Sed Talis superesse juvat post funera longa,
(Quamvis hic cineres urnula parva capit)
Mausolaea exin coelos tactura sepulchra
Inscriptum Herois nomen ad astra vehunt.
Stat quoque, si favit Victoria, grande Trophaeum;
Attollensque apicem tunc Obeliscus ovat.
Mox spirare trucem poteris jurare Colossum,
Sic movet, ut trepident, and mihi membra labent.
Sunt quibus excidium laudi est, and lata ruina;
Atqui exornandi gratia major erit.
Parcite Mortales, Famam prohibete Nepotes;
Ni scelus in causa deteriore cadit.
Sunt quoque Taenariis quibus est suffulta columnis
Alta and larga nimis, fed minus apta domus:
Sumptibus hic turgent operosa palatia vanis;
Materia exuperat; splendour, and ordo deest.
Ecce Avibus nidos, Apibus compingere cordi est,
Pastor Aristaeus quos stupet ipse, favos.
Aurea sic textrix subter laquearea Arachne
Divini Artificis provocat ingenium.
Hospitium sibi quaeque parant animalcula gratum;
Solus Homo impensis plectitur ipse suis.
Machina quid praestet Thuscis tractanda peritis,
Angligenae ut discant, Clare Evelyne, facis.
Nec tantum debent Volsaeo pristina faecla,
Quantum debebunt posteriora tibi.
Creditur Amphion molimina saxea quondam
Thebarum in muros concinuisse Lyra:
Tu Saxa, and Sylvas (nam sic decet Orphea) plectro
Aurato in Regum Tecta coire doces.
To my most Dear BROTHERS JOHN FREART Esquire SIEUR DE CHANTELOU COUNSELOR to the
KING AND PROVINCIAL COMMISSARIE in Champagne Alsatia Lorraine and Germany. AND
PAUL FREART Esquire SIEUR DE CHANTELOU COUNSELOR and MASTER of the HOUSEHOLD in
ORDINARY to the KING.
My Dearest BROTHERS,
IT is by your commands, that I have finished this Treatise of the Ancient
Architecture compared with the Modern, which I had altogether laid aside, and
even effaced out of my mind since the decease of Monseigneur De Noyers to whom
I had devoted it, as to the Mecaenas of the Age, and more particularly, for
being indeed the true Author of this Book; since I had never taken it in hand
but by his special Order, and to afford him some little entertainment during
his Solitude of Dangu, where he was pleased, and indeed desired, I should
follow him after his retreat from the Court, there to enjoy with him that
sweetness and tranquillity of life, which we were never before acquainted with
during the time of his being Minister of State. But this blessed leisure, and
which you so often congratulated, was quickly interrupted by I know not what
unlucky Genius, and by an intempestive and precipitous death, which soon
extinguished this glorious light of Virtue. In this great loss (which was, my
dear Brothers, common to us all, since we all had the honor to be related to
him both by our services and birth) I only had the affliction to be present at
the lugubrous Object, and to behold it with mine eyes. This has often caused me
seriously to reflect upon the vanity and volubility of the fortunes of the
Court, of which I am now sufficiently disabus'd: For considering that so rare a
Personage, the greatest Minister, the most disinteress'd, most laborious, most
successful, of so extraordinary and approved a Probity, so universal in all
sorts of excellent qualities, and, in a word, so extraordinary, after a twenty
years service and employment in the greatest Offices of State, that a Subject
(I say) of so great merit should come to conclude his days in the Country like
an Exile: I confess, my dearest Brothers, whilst I think of this, all things
appear so transitory and uncertain in Greatness, that I find the Retreat of the
disgraced (provided they are honest men) infinitely preferrible to their
Favor. Could Merit and considerable Services have for ever fixed and
established a man at Court, or been a rampart against that envy and jealousy,
which are the immortal enemies and pests of Virtue, unhappily reigning in that
Climat: The late Monseigneur de Noyers was the most worthy to have finished his
days gloriously in his high Employments; since he alone performed more, in
less then ten years space, than all his Predecessors together had done in an
hundred; whether we have regard to Works which are necessary for the
Conservation and good of the State, or consider Those only which gave
splendor and magnificence to the Kingdom. It is not my design to repeat them
here for your instruction, because you know them much better then my self;
Only that I may leave some Memorials to the Public, I shall mention a few of
them. It may be affirmed in general, that he had in his time exalted the
noblest Arts to the supreamest degree of Perfection that was ever seen in
France: as Architecture both Civil, and Military; Painting, Sculpture, and
Printing which he then made truly Royal when be lodged it at the Louure; the
very first Productions whereof, were not only unparalled Masterpieces, but,
as one may say, Libraries complete; for in two years there were published
threescore and ten great Volumes, in Greek, Latin, French, and Italian; from
one part of which, one may judge of the rest, viz. that general Collection of
all the Councils, set forth in seven and thirty Volumes, which is certainly the
most noble, most useful, and royal Work that ever saw the light to this hour:
This incomparable Stamp was accompanied with another very rich one, I mean the
new Money, which Monseigneur de Noyers placed also in the same app^rtment of
the Louure, that he might allye together two of the most universal and most
permanent Monuments of Kings, spreading themselves over all Nations, and
remaining for so many successions of Ages. The excessive abuses which were
found in the years 1638, and 1639, both in the title and weight of the greatest
part of the Moneys as well of this Kingdom as of others, which had almost all
of them been changed or disfigured, stood in need of this excellent man to
reform them, whose affection and zeal to the Public might produce so
extraordinary effects: But as it was impossible to remedy it on the sudden
without putting Commerce into very great disorder, he, from the ill course of
these Moneys which for some time they were forced to connive at, well knew how
to derive the greatest advantages of State, and most signal honor to the King.
And in effect, 'twas none of the least pieces of Politiques, to permit and even
authorize this abuse by an Edict, which could not else have been so easily
opposed; whilst in the mean time, it invited the People of the neighboring
States in hopes of gain, to transport into France all the light Gold and Silver
which they had, and which remained there by reason of its being decry'd few
months after, bearing now the Arms of France, with the Name and Effigies of
Lovis le Just, by that noble conversion which he ordered to be made of it.
Whilst this strange Matter was uniting to ours, he sought out and discove'd
prompt and easy expedients of giving it that excellent Form which it now
bears, curing at the same instant, and by the same remedy, both the present
inconvenience, and that to come: Thus we see, that its just and equal
roundness, the Grenetis or graining which is about it, and the Politure which
is on the flat of every piece, not only defends it from the Clipping, the
File, and operation of Strong Water, but even renders its imitation in a
manner impossible to our false Coyners; so as one may affirm of this Money,
that it is the most artistly contrived, and the most commodious, that ever was
used in Commerce. He caused to be coined in less then four years above an
hundred and twenty Millions, and that after fifteen or sixteen years that the
War had lasted, and the State seemed to have been utterly exhausted by the
great and continual expenses which were incessantly made, laid out in
fortifying of places, paying of Armies, and the assistance of the Allies of the
Crown. At the same time was the Louure seen to augment, and the Royal House of
Fontainebleau, which owe not only a part of their Ornaments to the care of
this great Minister, but their conservation also and absolute restoration;
since but for him, they had been at present but one vast ruin, a very Carcass
of building, desolate and uninhabitable: The Castles of S. Germains and
Versailles, which were then the ordinary residence and delices of the King,
carry on them some marks of the same hand; The first by the Construction of the
noblest Stables and Manege which is in France, with diverse other accommodations
necessary for the lodging of a Royal Court; and the other, by a Terrasse de
Gresserie, which is of the kind an incomparable work, with a Circle of an
hundred and twenty yards diameter: But whilst he thus worthily acquitted
himself in the charge of Superintendent of the Royal Houses and Buildings of
France (with which the King was pleased to gratify him for four or five years)
he employed in the mean time his chiefest cares for the safety and enlargement
of the Kingdom, dispencing all necessary Orders for the Armies both of Sea and
Land; providing and furnishing the Magazines and Garrisons of Places, and a
good part of the Provinces: But as things useful and necessary are to be
preferred before splendor and magnificense, he first began with Military
Architecture which he caused to march before the Civil: All our Frontiers are
full of his Works; In Picardy the Port Royal of Calais, composed of two of the
greatest Bastions of Massonry, the most regular and noble that are in Europe:
all the Fortifications of Ardres; most of the Bastions of Peronne, of S.
Quentin, of Han, of La Fere, Dourlans, Amiens, and of Montreuil, especially an
Hornwork also of Massonry of extraordinary beauty, and magnitude; not to omit
that half Moon of Abbeville, where the Inhabitants not prevailing with him to
have his Arms set on it, in acknowledgment of the favor which they had by
this means received (permitting it in no place built by him, from a particular
sentiment of honor to the King, and out of a most singular modesty) planted
two rows of Walnut-trees, that under that Pretext they might call it by his
Name: In Champagne, the Fortress of Mount Olympus, which serves Charleville for
a Citadel; several other Works at Stenay, at Mezieres, Mouzon, and Rocroy.
Then, in Lorrain, the Citadel of Nancy; the Places de Vic, Moyenvic, and of
Marsal. In Normandy, Havre de Grace; where (besides the Fortifications of the
Place) he excavated a large Basin of Masons work in the Port, of near two
hundred yards long, and above sixscore wide, to contain Vessels always afloat:
Also at Brouage in the Isles of Xainctonge, which are two maritime Keys of the
Kingdom. In Italy, Pignerole, and all the new Fortications of Cazal. Now for
works and curiosities of Painting and Sculpture (which are as 'twere the two
Sisters of the Art I am now going to treat of) it would require a large
discourse to particularize them one after another; besides that, one could not
well do it, without a little reproach to our Nation, which (by reflecting on
sudden cessation of so many excellent things) one would almost believe had but
one only person capable of those rare Productions. It shall suffice then to
say in general, that he made the Louure the Center of the Arts whose concourse
thither in a few years began to render it the most noble and magnificent
Structure of the World. It was for this glorious Design, and for the decoration
of other Royal Houses, that the famous Monsieur le Poussin had the honor to be
sent for by the King at the beginning of the year 1640. It was then that the
late M. de Noyers dispatched us, You and my Self (dear Brother) toward his
Holiness about an important affair, with order at our return to make way for
France to all the greatest Vertuosi of Italy; and as he was their Lodestone,
we easily drew a considerable number after him, whereof the Chief was that
renowned and singular Painter M. le Poussin, the glory of the French in his
Profession, and, as it were, the Raphael of our Age: To this effect we likewise
used great diligence to get made, and collect together all that the leisure and
the opportunity of our Voyage could furnish us of the most excellent
Antiquities, as well in Architecture as Sculpture; the chief pieces whereof
were two huge Capitals, the one of a Column, and the other of an angular
Pilaster from within the Rotunda, which we chose as the most noble Corinthian
Models remaining of Antiquity: Two Medails of eleven Palms diameter, taken from
the Triumphal Arch of Constantine; threescore and ten Bas-reliefs molded from
Trajans Column, and several other of particular Histories, some of which were
the next year cast in Brass; others were employed in manner of incrustation
about the Compartiment of the arched Cieling of the Louure great Gallery, in
which M. le Poussin most ingeniously introduced them, and that with an
extraordinary address and consideration, to answer a certain design which was
then required of him, not as the most magnificent, and superb he could have
composed; but for an Ornament which should be speedily executed, and of
moderate cost, with regard to the time and the impatient humor of our Nation.
A little while after that, you returned (my dear Brother) to obtain the Popes
blessing of the two Crowns of Diamonds, and the Golden Babe carried by an
Angel, which their Majesty's sent you to present our Lady of Loretto in
acknowledgment and as a token of gratitude which they rendered to the Virgin for
the most happy and almost miraculous Birth of our Daulphin, the King which now
reigns; You continued to have diverse figures and Bass-relievo's wrought off,
particularly the Flora and the Hercules in Farnese's Palace, of which there is
now one cast at Paris: Two other Medails from the same Arch of Constantine, and
both the Colosses of Montecavallo with their Horses, the greatest, and the most
celebrated works of Antiquity, which M. de Noyers designed to have also cast in
Copper, to place them at the principal Entry of the Louure. You behold the
splendour which all this great Provision made in Rome, and how every body
wondered that the French, who were till now renowned only for their valor and
invincible courage in War, and seemed to be affected only to the Arts
Military, should show so much passion for These which assumed the reputation of
being the most glorious, by a Prerogative above others; as if the Hemisphere of
France had been lately changed, and Mercury in conjunction with Mars began now
to pour down new Influences upon her. For my own part, I can testify how the
report of it spread as far as Constantinople, whither Fame had born the name of
Monseigneur de Noyers with so much glory, that the Patriarch of that renowned
City writ him Letters full of profound admiration, which he addressed to
Monfieur de Villeray, a Noble Athenian Resident in France for the Duke of
Parma, delivering them to my Lord at Dangu after his Retreat from the Court,
and where I have had and kept them a great while, and read them to several of
my Friends. They take notice chiefly, how new and unheard of a thing it was
that there should be found a Grand Vizier of our Nation so transcendent in all
excellencies; of which some marks he had seen, easily persuaded him to believe
all the other marvels which were reported of him: (these Exemplars were the
Books of the Royal Press, and some Pieces of Coin) His Letter was somewhat
prolix, and written in a more polite Style then the vulgar Greek now spoken in
that Country: It were great pity that a thing so memorable and signal should be
buried in oblivion, and therefore I take notice of it with more circumstances
then many others. But during all these mighty Projects, there happened a
strange revolution which in less then six Months changed the whole face of the
State, by the death of that superlative Minister the great Cardinal de
Richelieu, the very Column and Ornament of Monarchy; and a short space after
that, by the Recess of Monseigneur de Noyers; and immediately upon this, by
that loss to all France, the King himself; so as all these noble beginnings had
none that followed them, there remaining not one of those which entered
afterward into the management of the public Affairs, who had, with their
affections, the Knowledge and the Talents which were requisite for the
continuation of these great Designs. We then presently beheld the work of the
Louure abandoned, the finishing of the great Gallery to cease; and generally
all the Fortifications in France, without hopes of seeing the Work reassumed
and taken in hand again of a long time, it being necessary, for such an
enterprise, to find assembled in the same person (as it was seen in that of M.
de Noyers) virtues and qualities both rare and extraordinary. Besides, to
produce such a one as he was, of an universal Genius and Capacity, that loved
the Arts with judgment, and cultivated them; that would neglect his proper
Interest, to preserve that of the State and of the Public, who, amids an
Authority and extreme Favor, retaining still the modesty of a private man,
thinks not of establishing his house, and, against the ordinary course so
natural to all men, should refuse to augment and heap up riches, or seek Titles
and Dignities for it, and that never took thought, or labored, as did he
during an employment of twenty years (for the latter six of which he had almost
the universal management of State affairs) but for the safety, enlargement, and
splendor of the Kingdom; For such a Masterpiece of nature, I say, there needs
the efforts of many Ages: The recompense of so many Virtues was very small on
man's part, but great and inestimable on God's who crowned this illustrious
life with a most happy death. I reserve as a treasure inestimable a certain
small Collection of the sayings of this holy Courtier, our most dear Master,
during the continuance of his Sickness, which was assisted by his Director the
R. P. de Saint Jure who was with him to the last; and as I have had the sad
consolation of being present at this last act of his life, during which I
remember to have heard from his own mouth all that is contained in this
recital, I am not able to read them without a great deal of tenderness, and
indeed without tears. He dyed in his Castle of Dangu on Friday the twentyeth of
October, at one a clock after noon, in the Year 1645. and in the six and
fiftyeth of his Age, two years and an half after his Recess from Court, his
body being transported to the Church of the Noviciat belonging to the Jesuits,
which he had built in honor of St. Xauierius, and destined for his Sepulcher.
This Church is looked upon as the most regular piece of Architecture in Paris;
and though it be not so exceedingly charged with Ornaments, as some others are,
yet it appears very noble in the eyes of Intelligent persons; all that is there
being done with an attention and care so extraordinary. But that which in it
excells all therest is a Picture of one of the Miracles wrought by St. Xauier,
which was Painted here at the same time, with that admirable Supper of the
Apostles (which he caused to be placed at the Altar of the Chappel-royal of the
Castle of St. Germains, where all the figures exceed the natural:) both of them
the Works of our famous Master le Paussine, and indeed worthy his Pencil,
though the first of them was Painted with extraordinary have, and during the
Winter.

You see (dear Brothers) a small draught of a part of the life of our most
precious and most honored defunct M. de Noyers, that incomparable Genius of
France never to be sufficiently praised, never enough regreted, because
comparable to the greatest examples of Antiquity. I would by all means place
him in the front of this Book of mine, to let the world see that I had no other
object in the finishing of this Work (of which he honored me with the charge)
then to render the same service and veneration to his Memory being dead, I
could perform to his Person were he yet alive. However, in reassuming it at
your request; My first ardour being much aloy'd, what was heretofore a liberal
and divertissant Study during the presence of my late Lord and Master, is now
become a difficulty and a kind of constraint; since I have been forced to
alter, and even retrench diverse particularities which were then very essential
to my design, but would now have been altogether useless and unseasonable.
Receive then (my dear Brothers) this Fragment of a Book, so much at least as
remains of it, and if there occurr any thing which may prove yet considerable
in such clear and discerning eyes as yours are, and that my designs seem worthy
of any place amongst your other curiosities, you owe the entire obligation of
it to our common Friend Monsieur Errard, who was pleased to take a great deal
of pains to see it perfected; and has not only persuaded me (as well as you) to
publish it to the world, but has more then this contributed likewise to it, of
his own labor and particular elucubrations.

From Paris the 22. of May 1650.
A PARALLEL OF THE ANCIENT ARCHITECTVRE WITH THE MODERN.
THE PREFACE.
READER,
BEFORE I do altogether resign this Book to thy judgment, I advertise thee,
that 'twas not my design in compiling it to teach any man, much less yet to
satisfy those Critical spirits which the World so much abounds with: nor, is
the Public at all beholding to me; I have no thought of obliging it, an
envious, and evil Judge: In a word, being nothing inclined to give them
satisfaction, I have easily gratified my labor with the desired success: My
principal drift was, First, to satisfy my self, nor has it cost me much
trouble; though we sometimes find certain humors that are more averse, and
difficult to themselves, then they would prove to others: For my part, I do not
so use, to treat my self: We have Enemies enough besides; and whatever I were
able to do, I expect that men should presently say of me, all that Jealousy
does commonly suggest in reproach of Novelty. That being no Artisan, it did not
become me to prescribe to others the rules of their Mystery; That I teach
nothing particular and extraordinary here; That the Books from whence I have
gather^d all that I say being common and much ampler then mine, there was no
need to have scumm'd them thus superficially perficially over; That it had been
better to have searched, and produced something which the World had not yet
seen: That the mind is free, not bound, and that we have as good right to
invent, and follow our own Genius, as the Ancients, without rendering our selves
their Slaves; since Art is an infinite thing, growing every day to more
perfection, and suiting it self to the humor of the several Ages, and Nations,
who judge of it differently, and define what is agreeable, every one according
to his own mode, with a world of such like vain and frivolous reasonings, which
yet leave a deep impression on the minds of certain half-knowing people, whom
the practice of Arts has not yet disabus'd; and on simple Workmen, whose Trade
dwells all upon their fingers ends only: but we shall not appeal to such
Arbiters as these. There are others to be found (though truly very rarely)
that having their first studies well founded on the Principles of Geometry
before they adventured to work, to afterward easily, and with assurance arrive
to the knowledge of the perfection of the Art: It is to such only that I
address my self, and to whom I willingly communicate the thoughts which I have
had of separating in two branches the five Orders of Architecture, and forming
a body a part of the Three which are derived to us from the Greeks; to wit, the
Dorique, Ionique, and the Corinthian, which one may with reason call the very
flower and perfection of the Orders; since they not only contain whatsoever is
excellent, but likewise all that is necessary of Architecture; there being but
three manners of Building, the Solid, the Mean, and the Delicate; all of them
accurately expressed in these three Orders here, that have therefore no need of
the other two ( Tuscan, and Composita) which being purely of Latin extraction,
and but forrainers in respect to them, seem as it were of another species; so
as being mingled, they do never well together, as those to whom I discourse
will soon perceive, when they shall have once put off a certain blind respect
and reverence, which Antiquity, and a long custom (even of the greatest
abuses) does commonly imprint in the most part of men, whose judgments they so
pre-occupate, that they find it afterward a difficult matter to undeceive
themselves; because they deferr too much, and hardly dare to examine what has
been received by the vulgar approbation for so long a time: Let them but
consider, that we find no antique example where the Greek Orders are employed
amongst the Latin, and that so many ages of ignorance have passed over us,
especially in the Arts of Architecture, and Painting, which the War, and
frequent inundations of Barbarians had almost extinguished in the very Country
of their Originals; and which were in a manner new born again but a few years
since, when those great Modern Masters, Michael Angelo, and Raphael, did as it
were raise them from the Sepulchers of their ancient ruins, under which, these
poor sciences lay buried; and I shall have fair hopes of their Conversion, and
to see them of my opinion. It is the very least of my thoughts to broach
Novelties; on the contrary, I would (were it possible) ascend even to the very
sourse of the Orders themselves, and derive from thence the Images, and pure
Ideas of these incomparable Masters, who were indeed their first Inventors, and
be instructed from their own mouths; since doubtless the farther men have
wandered from their Principles, transplanting them as it were into a strange
soil, the more they are become degenerate, and scarce cognoscible to their
very Authors. For to say truth, have we at this present any reason in the
World to call those three by the name of Orders, viz. Dorique, Ionique, and
Corinthian, which we daily behold so disfigured, and ill treated by the Workmen
of this age? to speak seriously, remains there so much as a simple Member,
which has not received some strange and monstrous alteration? Nay, things are
arrived to that pass, that a man shall hardly find an Architect who disdains
not to follow the best and most approved examples of Antiquity: Every man will
now forsooth compose after his own fancy, and conceives, that to imitate Them,
were to become an Apprentise again; and that to be Masters indeed, they must of
necessity produce something of new: Poor men that they are, to believe, that in
fantastically designing some one kind of particular Cornice, or like Member,
they are presently the Inventors of a new Order, as if in that only consisted,
what is called Invention; as if the Pantheon, that same stupendous and
incomparable Structure (which is yet to be seen at Rome) were not the Invention
of the Architect who built it, because he has varied nothing from the
Corinthian Ordinance of which it is entirely composed? It Is not in the retail
of the minuter portions, that the talent of an Architect appears; this is to be
judged from the general distribution of the Whole Work. These low and reptile
Souls, who never arrive to the universal knowledge of the Art, and embrace her
in all her dimensions, are constrained to stop there, for want of abilities,
incessantly crawling after these poor little things; and as their studies have
no other objects, being already empty, and barren of themselves; their Ideas
are so base and miserable, that they produce nothing save Mascarons, wretched
Cartouches, and the like idle and impertinent Grotesks, with which they have
even infected all our Modern Architecture. As for those other to whom Nature
has been more propitious, and are indu'd with a clearer imagination, they very
well perceive that the true and essential beauty of Architecture consists not
simply in the minute separation of every member apart; but does rather
principally result from the Symmetry and Economy of the whole, which is the
union and concourse of them all together, producing as 'twere a visible harmony
and consent, which those eyes that are cleared and enlightened by the real
Intelligence of Art, contemplate and behold with excess of delectation. The
misery is, that these noble Genius's are in very small numbers, whereas the
vulgar Workmen like to Ants swarm prodigiously in all places. Would but our
Grandees once divest themselves of that prejudice and disdain which they
conceive of the Arts, and of those who apply themselves unto them, and but
consider the necessity which they above all others particularly have of this of
Architecture, there would be great hopes we should yet see them reflourish, and
be born again as 'twere from New to Antique: We have had fresh experience of
this under the Reign of Francis the first, one of the most illustrious Princes
that History has recorded, and who from an affection extraordinary which he
bore to Virtue, and great Attempts, peopled his State with Persons the most
rare and accomplished of the age wherein he lived, who erected those glorious
Monuments to the memory of this incomparable Monarch. It is in my opinion, the
only expedient to re-establish all the Arts in that primitive splendour from
whence this unworthy neglect has precipitated them. The Greeks who were the
first Inventors of them, and with whom alone they happily arrived to their
supreamest perfection, preserved them in so high esteem amongst them, that the
Greatest Personages of their Commonwealths were not ashamed to make open
profession of them, but after a manner nothing Mercenary; Their Works were paid
with Honor; and as they proposed to themselves the glory only, and immortality
of their Name for recompense; so, nor did they make any thing save what was
truly great and magnificent. It would appear incredulous, to relate only what
we read of this Nation, were not the credit of their Ancestors altogether
irreproachable, and that there did not remain even to this very day, the most
visible marks of what is reported. There is not in the whole Universe any thing
worthy of renown, which that divine Country did not once produce in its height
of excellency. Those great Captains, so many Philosophers of all sects, Poets,
Orators, Geometricians, Painters, Sculptors, Architects, and, in sum,
whatsoever has stamped on it the Character of Virtue proceeded first from
thence. Would we now do worthily? Let us not then forsake the paths which
these excellent guides have traced before us; but pursue their footsteps, and
generously avow, that the few gallant, things which have yet reached down to
us, are due only as derived from them. This is the subject that has invited me
to assemble and begin this Collection by the Greek Orders, which I had first
drawn our of Antiquity her self, before I so much as examined the Writings of
our modern Authors: For even the very best- Books extant on this Argument, are
the Works of these old Masters which remain to this day, and whose beauty is so
perfect, and so universally received, as has for almost two thousand years been
admired by the whole World. It is to them we should repair to learn to accustom
the eyes, and to conform the imagination of Young Men to the Ideas of those
excellent spirits, who being born in the midst of the light and serenity of the
fairest Climat under heaven, were so defecate and inlightn'd, that they
discerned those things as 'twere naturally, which we discover with so much
pain, after a long and laborious indagation. I know it is free for every one to
esteem what pleases him best in the mixed Arts, such as is this, whose
Principles for being soly founded upon Observation, and the authority of
Examples, can challenge no precise demonstration, and therefore I shall make
bold to assume the same privilege which I leave to others, of judging
according to their fancy: For my part, I find so excellent, and particular a
beauty in the three Greek Orders, that I am hardly at all concerned with the
other two of the Latin in comparison; and the Station which has been assigned
them, sufficiently demonstrates that there was no place for them, but after all
the rest, as if indeed they had been refused by them both: The rusticity and
meanness of the Tuscan having exiled it from the Cities, has sent it to the
Country Cottages; and as unworthy of entering into Temples and Palaces, ^tis
become the very last, as even destitute of employment: For the other, which
would pretend to exceed, and refine upon the Corinthian, and what they name the
Composita, ^tis in my apprehension yet more irrational, and truly methinks
altogether unworthy to be called an Order, as having been the sourse of all
that confusion which has been brought into Architecture, since Workmen have
taken the liberty to dispense with those which the Ancients had prescribed us,
to Engotish (as one may say) after their own capricious humor an infinite many
which do all pass under this appellation. Honest Vitruvius in his time well
foresaw the ill consequence which those of the Profession would introduce out
of their love of Novelty, which already began it seems to incline them to
Libertinism, and the disdain of the Rules of that Art, which ought to remain
most sacred and inviolable; so that we must look on this as on a grey-headed
evil which grows worse and worse daily, and is become now almost incurable:
Notwithstanding, would our Modern Architects but yet fix any limits to the
freedom they have taken, and keep themselves within the precincts of the Roman
Order, which is the legitimate and true Composita, and which has likewise its
Canons and Rules as well as the rest, I should find no cause of complaint,
since we see instances of it among the Vestigia's and footsteps of the most
flourishing ages; as in particular, that of Titus Vespasianus; to whom the
Senate (after the sack of Jerusalem) erected a most magnificent Arch Triumphal,
composed of this Order: But then it should never be employed without mature
advice, and always alone by it self; for so we find the Inventors of this Order
used it, who well knowing its defects (compared with the rest) did ever forbear
to paragon them together: But our Architects never entering into this
consideration, have fallen into an Error which admits of no excuse, by forcing
the weaker to support the stronger. Scamozzi is the first that has spoken of
this in his Treatise of the five Orders, where he assigns to the Corinthian
the most eminent place: However, to avoid all contest, I find it safest, never
to mix them together at any time, seeing it was never practiced by the
Ancients; though Philibert de Lorme, and Sebastian Serlio fansy to have both of
them seen it in the Coloseum, and produce likewise a design for an Example of
their Composed Order. But believe it, the observation is very erroneous; for
they are indeed two Corinthians, the one over the other, and albeit in the
upmost, which forms the Corona of this great Coloss of Building, the Cornic
resembles not the other, as being very particular; yet are the Capitals for all
that of the same Order, as Scamozzi has not forgotten to observe. This may
therefore suffice to advertise us, not lightly to credit what is delivered to
us out of Books, when we have the opportunity of repairing to the fountain, and
to be satisfied of the truth from thence: For having oftentimes diligently
examined the designs of sundry Masters on the same subject, and made an exact
calculation of the measures which they establish, we seldom find them to agree
amongst themselves, notwithstanding that all of them profess to have accurately
observed them. But that we may wound no man's reputation, since every one does
the best he is able, and that we have ever some obligation to those who have so
freely imparted their Labors to us, I will forbear to exemplify. Let it
suffice to have given you this Caution: Those who shall be so curious as to
try, and which will (I assure them) be no fruitless attempt, shall soon find
difficulty enough in the extraordinary confusion of the different manners of
those Architects, who instead of working upon the account of the Models of
Columns (which is the most natural Method, and particularly affected to the
Proportions of Architecture) amuse us with Palms, Feet, and other general
Measures (as ^eer Masons would do) which so confounds the Imagination, that
it is extreme difficult to dis-intangle ones self out of them, and costs a world
of time ere one comes at last to reduce and apply them to the Scale of the
Model, without which, all their industry becomes fruitless, and to no purpose.
To this it is I have principally endeavored to apply a timely remedy, reducing
all the designs of this Treatise to one Common Model, namely, to the
Semidiameter of the Column divided into thirty Minutes, that so I may approach
the precise measures as near as is possible: There are happily some Workmen who
upon the sudden will not approve of it, as being not accustomed to so exact an
examen of the particulars which concern their employment: However (to prevent
their censure) I shall referr them to the writings of Andrea Palladio, and
Scamozzi, two of the greatest Masters which we have of the Profession, who in
their Treatises of the five Orders (taking the entire diameter for Model) have
assigned it no less then sixty minutes, which yet they frequently subdivide
into halfs, thirds, and fourths, according as they conceive it necessary, and
as will appear in this Collection, where I have punctually reported their
designs paralleled one with the other, by a Method so perspicuous, that one may
instantly perceive both in what, and how much they differ amongst themselves:
so that by help of this Comparison, every man has the liberty of pleasing his
own fansy, and following whether of the Authors I propose, as being all of them
within the common approbation. But to the end we may proceed solidly, and made
a judicious Election, it will first be requisite to be thoroughly instructed in
the Principles of Architecture, and to have applied our studies to Antiquities,
which are the very Maxims and Rules of this Art: Not as if generally the
Ancients were to be imitated indifferently; on the Contrary, there are but very
few of them good, and an infinite number of them bad, which is that has
produced this confused variety amongst our Authors, who treating of the Orders,
and their Measures, have differed so strangely from one another. It is
therefore undoubtedly the safest way to have access to the Sourses themselves,
and to follow precisely the Models and Proportions of such ancient Structures
as have the universal consent, and approbation of those of the Profession. Such
Examples we have at Rome in the Theater of Marcellus, the Temple of the
Rotunda, the three Columns near the Capitol, and some others of this sort,
whose several Profiles I shall produce on every of the Orders, and after them,
those of our more Modern Architects, that so in confronting them to these
glorious Examples which are the Originals of the Art, they may as to an
impartial Touchstone have recourse to them, for the trial and examination of
their Works, as I my self have done with extraordinary satisfaction in
compiling of this present Treatise, and which every one may do as well as I,
and at a far less expense by all that time I have spent in opening and
preparing for them the way. This is, Reader, what I thought fitting to inform
Thee of concerning my Labor, to the end thou may have a sincere, and
judicious estimation of it.

The First Part.
CHAP. I.
Of the Orders in General.
IT is sufficiently difficult to determine precisely, what the name of Order
may signify amongst our Architects, though it be indeed very necessary to
understand it well. Of all the Moderns who have written upon the five Orders,
there is none save Scamozzi, who has once remembered to give us the definition,
and it is in the 1. cap. of his second part, line 42. where he says, That it
is a kind of excellency, which infinitely adds to the shape, and beauty of
Buildings, Sacred, or Profane. But in my opinion, he had even as good have held
his peace, as the rest have done, as to have spoken in such wandering terms, and
with so little solidity. The Father Vitruvius in c. 2. l. 1. calls it
Ordinance, and the term is at present in huge vogue amongst our Painters: When
they would express the elegant composition of a Piece, or the distribution of
Figures in an History, they say, that the Ordinance is good: Notwithstanding
this is not yet exactly the intention of Architects; and Vitruvius (in pain to
express it to us) adds, That it is An apt, and regular disposition of the
members of a Work separately; and a comparison of the universal proportion to
the symmetrie. Another peradventure more subtle and penetrant than I am, might
find out the mystery of these words, which I confess I comprehend not; and
therefore it is, that I have thus translated them purely from the Latin text
word for word, that I may the more naturally propose them to those who shall
desire profit by them: Daniel Barbaro (who has given us two excellent
Commentaries upon this Author) has been very industrious to clear this passage,
which yet is not without some difficulty; Philander, on the same chapter, found
out a shorter way to say nothing at all, and amuses himself upon other matters
far more unnecessary: so that to get out of this Labyrinth we must even take it
in pieces, and consider the things apart, that so it may, as it were, touch our
imagination, and distinctly form its Idea's in us, which is the business we are
to enquire after: For the Art of Architecture does not consist in Words; the
Demonstration ought to be sensible, and ocular. It is very perspicuous to all
those of this Mystery, that the principal Piece of an Order is the Column, and
that its Entablature being once placed on the Capital produces the entire
Composition. If therefore we will define it exactly, and give the most express
meaning of it, we must, as it were, make a very Anatomy of the parts, and say,
that the Column, with its Base, and Chapter, crowned with an Architrave,
Frieze, and Cornice, forms that kind of Building which Men call an Order;
seeing all these individual parts do generally encounter, and are found through
all the Orders; the difference amongst them consisting in no other particular,
then in the proportion of those parts, and the figure of their Capitals. They
have yet indeed some peculiar ornaments, as Triglyphs, the Dorique; Dentelli,
or Teeth, the Ionique; and the Corinthian her Modilions; but they are none of
them of so general and indispensible obligation, but that even the most regular
of the Ancients themselves, have upon some considerations frequently dispensed
with them. For Ornaments are but accessories in the Orders, and may be diversely
introduced as occasion requires; principally in that of the Corinthian, where
Artists being to represent an effeminate and virginal beauty (as we may easily
deduce from what Vitruvius has recounted to us of Callimacus. 1. cap. 4. book)
ought to omit nothing which may contribute to the perfection and embellishment
of the Work: and the Ancients have prescribed us so many Examples of this
Order, in which they have been so profuse and luxurious in Ornaments, that one
would swear, they had drawn their imagination quite dry to crown this
Masterpiece of Architecture. But it is not with the other Orders after this
sort, where there is a more masculine beauty required; especially in the
Dorique, the solidity whereof is totally repugnant to the delicateness of these
Ornaments; since it succeeds so much better in the the plain and simple
regularity of its proportions. Garlands and Posies suit not with Hercules; He
is best adorned with a rough-hewn and massy Club: For there are Beauties of
several kinds, and those oftentimes so unlike, as what is agreeable to the one,
is quite contrary to the other. As for the Ionique Order, it is as it were in
the middle of the two extremes, holding in a manner the Balance 'twixt the
Dorique solidity, and gentileness of the Corinthian; for which reason we find
it diversely employed in ancient Buildings, simple and plain according to the
genius of the Architect, or quality of the Structure. So as these three Orders
may very well furnish all the Manners of building, without being at all obliged
to have recourse to the Tuscan Order, or that which is Composed, both which I
have therefore expressly reserved for the conclusion of this Treatise, and
separated from the rest, as in truth but Supernumeraries, and almost inutile.
For the excellency and perfection of an Art, consists not in the multiplicity
of her principles; but contrarily, the more simple they are, and few in number,
the more worthy are they of our admiration: This we see manifested in those of
Geometry, which is in truth the very foundation, and universal magazine of all
those Arts, from whence This has been extracted, and without whose aid it were
impossible it should subsist. Well therefore may we conclude, That the Orders
being no other then the very Elements of Architecture, and these Three first
which we have deduced from the Greeks, comprehending all the Species of
Building; it were but a superfluous thing we should pretend to augment their
number.

CHAP. II.
Of the Dorique Order.
IT is no small advantage for the Dorique Order, to demonstrate that it has
been the very first regular Idea of Architecture; and that, as the firstborn
and heir of this Queen of Arts, it has had the honor also to have been the
first builder both of Temples and Palaces.

The Antiquity of its Original (according to all those who have written
thereof) is, in a manner, immemorial; notwithstanding Vitruvius referrs him
(and that with sufficient appearance) to a Prince of Achaia, named Dorus; who
being Sovereign of Peloponesus, built in the famous City of Argos a magnificent
Temple to the Goddess Juno, which was the very first model of this Order: In
imitation whereof, the neighboring people erected diverse others; amongst
which, the most renowned was that which the Inhabitants of the City Olympia
dedicated to Jupiter, whom they furnam'd Olympicus. The Island of Delos built
another very famous one to the God Apollo, in memory of his Birth in that
place, and of which there is to this day some Vestigia's remaining. And in this
it was that the first Triglyphs were made in the form which we now behold them,
representing the Figure of an antique Lyre, of which Instrument this God had
been the Inventor. In Elis a City of the same Country there were diverse
memorable Fabrics consisting all of this Order, whereof the principal were a
large Peristyle or Porch, serving for a public place, having about it a triple
range of Portico's built on Col^mns, and three magnificent Temples, as
Pausanias in his fifth Book makes mention; the one consecrated to the Goddess
Juno, environed with huge Marble Pillars; the other to Dyndima, the mother of
the Gods; and a third to Minerva, which bore the name of their City: And this
last was without doubt a most incomparable Masterpiece, having been built by
the famous Scopas competitor with Praxiteles in the Structure of that
stupendous Mausoleum which the Queen Artemisia erected in memory of her
Husband. In his Preface to the seventh Book, Vitruvius makes mention of others,
amongst which he celebrates those of Ceres, and Proserpine in the City of
Elusina, as a work of prodigious Grandeur. But it would be but unprofitable for
us to make any further disquisition concerning these Edifices, since those who
have treated of them, have left us no particular remarks touching their form,
from whence we might derive any thing of advantage for our Imitation. They talk
much also of the names of many great Architects of this age, who themselves
writ the Rules of their professions, amongst whom, one named Silenus had
generally treated of the Dorique proportion; and a certain Theodorus made the
description of a Temple of the same Order, erected to the Goddess Juno by the
Inhabitants of the I Will of Samos, with sundry other mentioned in the same place,
whose Books and Works are not now to be found; so that after the loss of so
many incomparable Authors, who were the very source and fountain of the Art
whence we might at present extract the purity of its Original, we must of
necessity content our selves with the Observations and Conjectures which the
Moderns have made upon certain tracks and footsteps of Antiquity, which in this
conjuncture serve us instead of Books, and wherein all those Masters which I
have here assembled, as to an Ecumenical and general Council of Architecture
have finished and performed their Studies.

But for as much as naturally every man abounds in his own sense, and dresses
up a beauty after his particular mode, I conceived it expedient from the
Designs which they have left us for Rules, to have continual recourse to the
Ancients, as to the best and most invariable Compass which we can possibly
steer by; amongst whom we shall find sufficient variety, reasonably to satisfy
the Gust of such as are desirous of choice. And for this purpose, I shall upon
every Order exhibit two or three Examples drawn from the Originals themselves,
and very accurately measured by the account of the Modole of the Column, with
the very Division which I have observed in the Designs of other Masters; that
so all concurring in one Uniformity, and under the same Scale, the Comparison
and Examen may become the more easy and intelligible: For the multiplying of
Operations is ever disadvantageous by reason of the Confusion which it
ordinarily produces in the minds of those who work, and that it also wastes
more time; both which inconveniences are of very great importance. And when
all the fruit of my Travel in this Assembly of Authors should be of no further
profit to the Studious in this Art, then to have thus adjusted them together, I
conceive they ought to be very well satisfied.

But let us return to the Dorique Order, and consider its form, proprieties,
and difference from the others in gross, before we enter into the Parcels of
its Proportions, since general rules are ever to precede particular. Having
then proposed for a foundation, that this Order represents Solidity to us, as
its Specifique and principal quality, we ought not to employ it but in great
massy Buildings and Edifices of the like nature; as for Ports of Citadels, and
Fortresses of Towns, the outside of Churches or Public places, and the like,
where the delicateness of the Ornament is neither convenient, nor profitable;
for as much as the heroic and gigantine manner of this Order does excellently
well in those places, discovering a certain masculine and natural beauty, which
is properly that the French call la grand Maniere.

Upon this subject I am observing a thing which in my opinion is very curious
touching the beginning of the difference of Manners; whence it proceeds, that
in the same quantity of Superficies, the one seems great, and magnificent, and
the other appears poor and but trifling. The reason of which is very pretty, and
not ordinary. I say then, that to introduce into Architecture this grandeur of
Manner of which we speak, we ought so to proceed, that the division of the
principal Members of the Orders consist but of few parts, that they be all
great and of a bold and ample Relievo and Swelling; that the Eye beholding
nothing which is little and mean, the Imagination may be the more vigorously
touched and concerned with it. For Example: In a Cornice, if the Gola, or
Cy^atium of the Corona; the Coping, the Modilions, or Dentelli make a noble
show by their graceful projectures; and that we see none of that ordinary
Confusion which is the result of those little cavities, quarterrounds of the
Astragal, and I know not how many other intermingl'd particulars which produce
no effect in great and massy Works, and which very unprofitably take up place
to the prejudice of the principal Members; it is most certain, that this manner
will appear solemn and great, and that, on the contrary, become pitiful and
mean by reason of the multitude of these smaller ornaments which divide and
scatter the angles of the sight into so many beams, and so pressed together,
that the whole appears but a Confusion. And though one would judge upon the
sudden, that the multiplicity of the parts should contribute something to the
appearance of the grandeur and state; yet notwithstanding it happens quite
otherwise, as we may easily perceive in examining it by Examples, and in the
Designs of the Masters which I have here collected together, where in the same
instant a man may discern both the quality of their Genius's, and the variety
of their judgments: For some of them esteem that to be delicate and rich, which
others term mean, and confused; and that which seems to us of the Grand
maniere, in their eyes appears to be but gross and heavy; and indeed it would
so prove if one should exceed the terms of proportion, and did incline too much
to either extreme: But be this only spoken in Passage; We proceed now to our
Orders in general.

The Colomnes of the Dorique Order have this of remarkable amongst the rest,
that in the fairest Works of Antiquity in which they have been employed, we
find them without Bases; as in the Theater of Marcellus at Rome; in that at
Vicenza, and in a very magnificent Triumphal Arch at Verona; and Vitruvius
having treated of this very Order more exactly then of any other, speaks not so
much as a word of its Basis, albeit he has sufficiently described the measures
of the Ionique, and of the Attique for the Corinthian, without having so much
as omitted that of the Tuscane; though there is not one of our modern
Architects but make some cavil at it, forming one to themselves after their own
invention.

For my part, I should make a great scruple to condemn these old Masters who
did all with so much circumspection. One had much better endeavor to discover
their Intention, who did certainly proceed with great judgment; then to add any
thing preposterously to this Order, and which may prove repugnant to its
Principles.

Let us take therefore the thing from its original, and consider upon what
account they added Bases to the foot of Colomns, and what there they represent,
that thence we may infer whether they are likewise as proper to these we speak
of here, as they be to the other.

Vitruvius tells it us in the first Chapter of his fourth Book, and had not it
seems so much as once spoken of it, but upon occasion of the Ionique, which he
affirms to have been composed after the module of a feminine beauty, to which
he suits all the rest of the parts; as the Voluta's of the Capital to the mode
of the head-tire and tresses of Women's hair. The Vivo, or shaft of the Colomn,
to their airy and delicate shape: the flutings and Channelling to the plaits of
their Robes: and the Base to the buskined Ornament of their legs and feet.

In the same place he compare our Dorique to a robust and strong Man, such as
an Hercules might be, whom we never represent but on his bare feet: so as from
hence we may reasonably judge, that to the Dorique Order also Bases are no
ways proper.

But the custom which has licentiously been introduced amongst so many Examples
as we find among the Antiques, has so strangely debauched and prevented the
Imagination, by I know not what false appearance of Beauty; that it now
transports it quite besides Reason. Nevertheless such as are clear-fighted,
being advertised of this abuse, will soon rectify, and undeceive themselves:
and, as what seems most likely is then detected to be erroneous when it is
diligently examined; so also the appearances of Beauty, when they are against
Reason, become in fine but the more extravagant.

This Observatio being established upon those great Examples which I have
cited, and Reason serving for its guide, let it pass for demonstration.

But we will now consider the rest of the Order.

His Entablature is more massy, and tall, then any of the following Orders;
because the strength of the Colomn for being greater, prepares him also for the
greater burden. It has ordinarily one fourth part of the Colomn, whereas in
the other he has very often but a fifth, and sometimes less. The Cornice would
not be decked with and Foliage, or like trimming; but in case you allow him
Modilions, they should be square, and very plain. The Freeze has a regular
Ornament, which are the Triglyphs, the Compartiment whereof obliges one to a
very great inconvenience, and which was heretofore so cumbersome, that even the
skilfullest Masters had much ado to disengage themselves. But Vitruvius has
found a very sufficient Expedient, as may be seen in his fourth book Cap. 3. In
the interim let it suffice, to affirm here, that all the inconveniency consists
in so contriving the matter, that the Triglyphs be precisely placed over the
middle of the Colomn which it encounters; and that the Metops (that is to say)
the spaces twixt the Triglyphs, be perfectly square; for that is so effential
in this Order, that one should never dispense with it. That which renders the
execution difficult proceeds from the distribution of the Intercolumniations,
which have also their distances regular, and determined, which does not justly
quadrate and suit with those of the Triglyphs. See the second Chapter of the
third Book of Vitruvius, Commented by the Reverend Daniel Barbaro, where all
this is rarely well explained, both by discourse and figure.

The Architrave has also its Ornament particular, which consists in certain
pendent drops under the Triglyphs that seem after a sort, to be fastened to it,
as if they were all of a piece; for that one never sees the one, without the
other.

The entire body of the Architrave ought to appear solid and very substantial;
for which effect I would not have it exceed one full face, lest parting it in
two, it appear feeble and weak, according to the principle which we have newly
established upon the diversity of Manners; Nevertheless this is but of small
consequence here, provided one be careful not to break it in three faces as in
the other Orders they do; in which case, the fault would be remarkable.

Behold then in gross as 'twere a rough draught of the Dorique Order, upon
which one may with ease find out all the several parts of its members in
particular, with their respective measures, which is by this expedient found
always within the regular terms of its extent.

I shall touch some of the Principal only, that I may facilitate the way;
referring you for the rest, to the Designs, where every thing is so clear, and
punctual, that having once conceived the Model (which I make use of throughout)
to be the Semidiameter of the Colomn, divided into thirty Minutes; and, that I
continually begin to measure the projectures of every Profile from the Central
line of the Colomn, to have (in the mean time) with the proportion of the
Members, the right position, and just level of the Pillar, all the rest admits
not of the least imaginable difficulty: for presently you will find, that thirty
minutes making the semidiameter, sixty must compose the whole diameter, and
forty five the three quarter; forty, two thirds; twenty, one third; fifteen a
quarter, and so of the rest, as I have expressly observed it, that I may by the
same means make you comprehend, how I have reduced all the Measures of my
designs by minutes, without making use of the terms of Module, Diameter,
Thirds, Quarters, or the like proportions, to avoid perplexity, and cumbring
the designs with so much writing; and indeed, for that they are not precise
enough, and would have often obliged me to superadd the minutes, and to repeat
one Module and three Minutes, two thirds of a module and four minutes, a
quarter of a minute, half a module and two minutes, with a number of such like
fractions, which would have created much unprofitable labor, and bred infinite
confusion.

This established, let us proceed to the application, and take our Dorique
Order again in pieces. But lest the Variety which we frequently encounter
amongst the designs of the modern Authors that I have here collected, should
hinder us from resolving upon something fixed, and determined, I will only
pursue that Ancient Example taken out of the Theater of Marcellus, as being the
most regular of all the rest, by the universal suffrage of those of the
Profession; and so conformable to what Vitruvius has written concerning the
general proportions of this Order, that some are of opinion he was himself the
Architect of this magnificent work. But I must confess, I am not of their
faith, because of the Dentelli which are cut in the Cornice; for Vitruvius in
the second Chapter of his first Book, plainly interdicts them the Dorique
Order, as being naturally affected to the Ionique: but this Question concerns
not our present discourse. I find then that the whole shaft of the Colomn has
in length seven times its diameter; which on the foot of the division of the
half diameter in thirty minutes (for in all this Treatise I ever take the
semidiameter of the Colomn for the module of the Orders) make four hundred and
twenty minutes, which amounts to fourteen modules. The height of the Chapter
contains thirty minutes, which make one module; as does likewise the
Architrave; The Freeze with its Fillet (which is that flat, and thin band or
list which separates it from the Cornice) has one module and a quarter, which
are thirty seven minutes and an half; so that all these modules computed
together, and the number of their minutes reduced to a total sum, the altitude
of the entire Order amounts to eighteen modules and three quarters, which make
up five hundred sixty two minutes and an half; and the Entablature (which is
the Architrave, Freeze, and Cornice) being to contain one quarter part of the
Colomn (which is its regular proportion) comprehends just an hundred twelve
minutes and an half, which are three modules and three quarters; and which I
expressly repeat, that I may yet add, that though all the Examples of this Order
(which may be as well found amongst the Ancients, as the Modern) have not
always the Entablature comprehended within the same Terms of Modules that this
has here, they may yet notwithstanding be according to rule in the general
proportion; provided that the Entablature contain a quarter of the Colomn;
which is neither limited to fourteen Modules, nor yet to fifteen, but may
sometimes advance even to sixteen and more as occasion presents it self: So
that a Colomn of seven Modules shall have a higher Entablature then one of
fourteen. But then it is necessary, that all this difference of one Entablature
to the other happen only in the Cornice, in regard that the Freeze, and the
Architrave have always their precise and determinate measures: The one has a
Module; the other a Module and an half, without any respect to the different
height of the Colomns. Now the Cornice being to supply what is deficient to
arrive to the fourth part of the Colomn, it is evident that its particular
proportion must depend on that of the Colomn; and that the Cornice of one
Profile, can never serve for another, though it be of the same Order, unless
the height of the Colomns be likewise equal in them both, which thing ought
very diligently to be considered: that from this observation a man may arrive
to a good, and judicious examen of all those Profiles which the Modern have
given us of this Order; and understand such as are worthy the being followed;
For the general proportion being once defectuous, it is in vain to search for it
in the retail, or minuter parts; because that is necessarily relative, and that
the one, cannot possibly subsist without the other.

But to the end we may render what we have discussed easy to the Reader, who
happly, for want of practice may find himself at a loss, I am going to deliver
him a Method extraordinarily short and expedite, by means whereof, he may
instantly make it without the least disorder or confusion,

He must take the whole height of the Entablature of the Design which he would
examine, and thereof make a multiplication conformable to the proportion which
it ought to bear with its Colomn, having still a regard to the Order which it
represents. Put case, for example, one quarter, as in this of the Dorique; he
must multiply the Entablature by four; if it be a fifth (as we shall see in
some of the following Examples of the Corinthian) he must multiply it by five;
and so of the rest: For the total of this multiplication ought to give us
precisely the height of the Colomn; and wherever this does not quadrat, certain
it is, the Profile is irregular.

I should be too prolix if I pretended to decifer thus by smaller scruples, and
minutes all that belongs to these Principles, and whiles I think to render my
self intelligible, by a tedious discourse and Calculations, become in fine both
confused and troublesome to my Reader, who doubtless will sooner comprehend it
all by seeing my Designs, since Words are never so express as Figures.

CHAP. III.
A Particular remarkable in the Profile, drawn from the Theater of Marcellus.
I Admire that of all our modern Architects, the greatest part whereof have
seen, and spoken of this Examples, as of the most excellent Dorique model which
has been left us by the Ancients; there is not so much as one of them who has
followed, or perhaps well observed in the Original the just compartiment of the
members of the Capital, nor the height of the Freeze, the which I find here
visibly less then that which they allow to their Designs; though some of them
(particularly Vignola) have proposed the very same Profile for the Rule of the
Order; but with so much alteration in its members, that there is not one of
them remains entire: A man shall easily find it by conferring them together;
all the designs of this Assembly being therefore fitted to the same Scale. As
for the Capital, they do all without exception affect the dividing of it in
three parts, as Vitruvius will have it in his fourth Book, Chap. III. giving
one to the Hypotrachelion, or neck of the Pillar; the other to the Echinus
bracelets, or small mouldings; and the third to the Abacus or plinth of the
Capital; whereas they ought to have considered, that the Text of this Author,
besides that it is oftentimes suspicious, and especially then when he is not
conformable to the practice of the Ancient Masters his Contemporaries, it is by
no means just, he that should presume thus to carry it against such Examples as
this here, which is without all reproach and exception. It had been more
reasonable that they who propose it for their model, had at least been so
discreet as to have added nothing, but left him in his original proportion. As
for those others who have formed designs after their own fancies, they are no
more to be blamed for having followed the opinion of Vitruvius, and obliged
themselves to the terms which he has prescribed, though they might happily have
well dispensed with it, and with more reason have imitated the Ancients where
this irregularity is not to be found. The Crown of the Cornice is also
sufficiently observable for its extraordinary projecture, and which is after a
sort augmented by the sloops which the Architect has given to the drops which
compose the ornament of the nether face, and which fall on the Triglyphs. Now
albeit this piece of Optics be admirable in this huge Coloss of Building, yet
is it by no means to be indifferently used every where, and upon all occasions,
for in places much enclosed, where there is not ample space and freedom for the
Eye, as the inside of Churches, etc. it would produce but an ill effect.
Wherefore I have thought it necessary to propose here diverse ancient Examples
upon each Order, that I may thereby give opportunity to those of the Profession
to make use of them judiciously; regard being duly had to the Place, and the
Occasion.

CHAP. IV.
Another Profile taken from the fragments of the Dioclesian Bathes at Rome.
THIS Profile was one of the most excellent pieces of Architecture in the Baths
of Dioclesian as far at least as I am able to conjecture from a good number of
draughts which lie yet by me, all of them designed by the same hand very
neatly, and measured with extraordinary study; although some of them methinks
appear to be sufficiently licentious: But this Profile is of so noble a
composition, and so regular, that it is nothing inferior to that which went
before: And though the specifique proprieties of this Order are to be single
and solid; yet are the Ornaments here so very judiciously applied upon every of
the Members, that they conserve the one without the least violation to the
other.

It may serve upon some occasions where that of the Theater of Marcellus would
not be so proper, in as much as the projecture of its Cornice is a great deal
less; add to this, the curiosity of its mouldings which allure the eye to
consider them at a nearer distance.

The general Proportion of it is not absolutely conformable to that of our
first Example; and the difference makes me judge, that the Column belonging to
it contained eight diameters, that is to say, sixteen Modules; for so the
Entablature (which is of four Modules high) comes to make up a fourth part of
the Pillar.

That which is considerable in this Profile, as universally observed through
all the Moderns for the height of the Freeze, is, that in this partition of the
three members of the Entablature, the flat Fillet which forms the Capital of
the Triglyphs composes a part of the Cornice, and is not comprised within the
limits of the Freeze, though in that of Marcellus's Theater I have made it to
be a part, to the end we may religiously preserve our selves within the terms
of the general rules of the Order, which precisely requires that the height of
the Freeze should be of one Module and an half, that so the square intervals of
the Metops with the Triglyphs (which is indeed an inconvenience very great, but
withal most necessary) may be handsomely adjusted. To the rest, I will not
affirm positively that the Column of this Profile was without a Basis, for my
design gives me only the Entablature and Capital; though I might well be
inclined to think so for the reasons before deduced, and amply demonstrated in
the second Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Another very ancient Profile after the Grand Maniere elevated in Perspective,
and now extant at Albano near Rome.
I Conceived it very advantageous, and indeed in some sort necessary the better
to represent the beauty and goodly effect of this Profile, to give you one
elevated in Perspective; because I would gratify the eye with as much as Art
is capable to add to the real and natural Relievo, and show how it ought to
succeed in the execution.

This incomparable Dorique Masterpiece was discovered at Albano, joining to
the Church of St. Mary, amongst diverse other old fragments of Architecture very
curious, and of which I have a good number designed, and with great diligence
examined as to their measures, though drawn something in haste and as it were
in passing, by the hand of the famous Pyrrho Ligorio.

That which I particularly esteem in this is a certain grandeur of Manner
majestical and surprising which is altogether extraordinary; all which results
from its having but few members, and from the largeness of those which it has;
an account whereof I have already given, speaking of the difference of Manners
in the second Chapter. For the rest, the shaft of the Column stands simply on a
step which serves it instead of a Plinth, as I have here represented him.

Now to the end this design may not only prove agreeable to the eye, but
likewise profitable to those who shall desire to put it in practice, I have
also accompanied it with its Profile, and particular Measures.

I advertise moreover, that the Pillar has fifteen Modules in height, and the
Entablature three, with two thirds, which amount just to the quarter which is
the regular proportion of the Dorique Entablature with the height of its
Column: I have omitted the Profile of the Capital for want of space, as
likewise for that it is so little differing from the ordinary in its mouldings,
and so perfectly resembles it in proportion.

That which is most worthy remark, and indeed to be admired in this
Composition, is, the richness, and extraordinary form of his Modilions, which
lying plumb over the Triglyphs, and being as it were a king of Capitals to
them, produce a mavelous effect, which is yet much augmented by those great
Roses of the Sofitto or Eves of the Corona, which having an extraordinary
projecture, render the Order altogether Gigantique; and this is properly that
which they term the Grand Maniere.

CHAP. VI.
A Judgment in general upon all the Authors summoned together in this
Collection.
THAT the Reader may now come with some kind of preparation to the particular
Examen of the Designs which follow, I shall here endeavor to give him a
general hint of the several talents and abilities which I have remarked in
every one of those Masters we are taking a survey of in paragon one with the
other.

The first of all is without any contest the famous Andrea Palladio, to whom we
are obliged for a very rare Collection of antique Plans and Profiles of all
sorts of Buildings, designed after a most excellent manner, and measured with a
diligence so exact, that there is nothing more in that particular left us to
desire: Besides the very advantageous opportunities which he has had at Venice,
and in all the Vincentine his native Country do leave us such marks as clearly
showed him not only to have been a Sectator of these great Masters of
Antiquity; but even a Competitor with them, and emulous of their glory.

The Man who nearest approaches to him is also another Vincentine, Vincent
Scamozzi by name, a far greater talker (as well appears in his Books) but a
much inferior workman, and less delicate in point of design: A man may easily
perceive it by the Profiles which he has left us of the five Orders, the manner
whereof is a little dry; besides that, he is very poor and trite in his
Ornaments, and but of an ill gusto: He is notwithstanding this the nearest that
approaches him as to the regularity of his proportions, and the most worthy to
be paralleled with Palladio.

Sebastiano Serlio and Iacomo Barozzio surnamed Vignola hold of the second
Class; and albeit they have both followed contrary ways, and very different
manners, yet I forbear not to place them in the same range, and am indeed in
some difficulty to determine which of the two has deserved more of the
Public; were it not that one might say, the first had the good fortune to
work for Masters who needed only to be showed the Idea of the things in gross,
without having any thing to do with the retail of their Proportions; and that
the other only proposed to himself the instruction of young beginners, and to
deliver to them the rules of Art and good design: But it were of excellent
advantage for us all that Serlio's Book had been designed like that of Vignola;
or that Vignola's study and diligence in searching, had been equal to that of
Serlio.

The famous Commentator of Vitruvius, Daniel Barbaro Patriarch of Aquilea, whom
with very great justice we may fitly style the Vitruvius of our Times, shall in
this place be seated in the middle of all the Masters to be their President; as
being indeed the Interpreter and Oracle of the very Father of Architects: and
his Companion Pietro Cataneo (whom I assign only to preserve an equal
conformity in my designs of comparing Modern Authors) shall serve only as a
petty Chaplain in the retinue of this great Prelat, though he might well claim
Peerage even with the most part of the rest.

Among the other latter four, I have a particular esteem for one above the
rest, and that is Leon Baptista Alberti, the most Ancient of all the Modern,
and happly too, the most knowing in the Art of Building, as may be easily
collected by a large and excellent Volume which he has published, wherein he
fundamentally shows whatever is necessary for an Architect to know. But as to
the Profiles of the Orders themselves and his regulation of them, I cannot but
strangely admire at his negligence in drawing them no more correctly, and with
so little art himself being a Painter; since it had so notably contributed to
its recommendation, and to the merit of his works. But this I have reformed in
our following Collection, and believe in so doing to have performed him no
little service, as happly in danger to have otherwise never been followed;
there being hardly any appearance, that whilst the designs of his Book were so
pitifully drawn, being made use of in work, they should ever produce so good
effect.

To the most Ancient I would assign for Corrival, the most Modern, that by
confronting them to each other, we might the better come to discover whether
the Art it self improve and proceed to any further perfection, or do not
already begin to impair and decline. This last Author, namely Viola, is of the
Categorie of those which the Italians call Cicaloni, eternal Talkers to no
purpose. He, whilst he proposes to himself to write of the Orders and
Proportions of Architecture, of the Rules of Perspective, of some Elements of
Geometry and other the like dependencies on his principal Subject, amuses
himself, poor man, in telling stories; so that in stead of a Book of
Architecture, he has made (ere he was aware) a Book of Metamorphoses. Besides
he has this in common with Leon Baptist Alberti, that his designs are both very
ill-contriv'd, and executed; notwithstanding he follows a more elegant manner,
and conformable enough to that of Palladio; but the Method which he uses in his
partitions is so gross, and mechanique, that he reckons all upon his fingers,
and seems to have never so much as heard speak either of Arithmetique or
Ciphers.

Concerning the two which remain, a man cannot well affirm them to have been
inferior to those who preceded them, nor yet to have been of the same force
with the first, though I conceive they may well compare with three or four of
them at least. And

These are two French Masters sufficiently renowned both by their Works and
Writings; Philibert de Lorme, and Iean Bullant, whom yet I do not here place in
the last range as being at all their inferiors; but only that I may separate
them from the Italians who are in far greater numbers.

CHAP. VII.
Palladio and Scamozzi upon the Dorique Order.
LET us now then pass to the Ocular Demonstration of the precedent Chapter by
the Parallel of the Architects which I have there assembled together, and whose
designs I am hastening to examine by comparing them with our three Antique
Designs, that according to their more or less conformity with these Original
Models, we may pronounce concerning their merit, and see what esteem they
indeed deserve. From this consideration it is, that of all the choice of the
other Masters, I have extracted Palladio and Scamozzi, who having proposed to
themselves the imitation of the ancient Architects by studying those admirable
Monuments yet remaining in the City of Rome, have followed a manner infinitely
more noble, and proportions more elegant then those of the School of Vitruvius.

The first Profile of Palladio has a great affinity with our second example,
Antique, taken out of Dioclesian's Bathes; for excepting only the Dentelli
which he may have with reason omitted, all the rest of the Entablature is upon
the matter the same.

He has likewise been so discreet (being peradventure obliged to follow the
vulgar error, which will have the Base of a Column of this Order to be all one
with the others) to advertise before hand by an example which has none at all,
that the Ancients did never use it after this manner.

He allows but fifteen Modules to the Column, without Base, and with its Base
he makes it of sixteen, and sometimes proceeds even to seventeen and a third.
The rest of the measures are so distinctly marked upon the Profile, that it
were superfluous to explain them.

Scamozzi gives ever precisely seventeen Modules to his Columns, accommodating
it with the same Base that Palladio does; but to a great deal less purpose, in
as much as he thinks fit to deck the Tore's with I know not what delicate
foliages, which does not at all become the Order; no more then does the Ionique
fluting which is abusively employed in this place in stead of the natural
Dorique. His Entablature (as well as that of Palladio) sufficiently resembles
our second Model, to which he has only added a small cavity betwixt the Corona
and the greater round, a thing not at all considerable.

The Composition of his Profile taken in gross, and altogether simple appears
of a great Idea, but the Ornaments are to be rejected.

CHAP. VIII.
Serlio and Vignola upon the Dorique Order.
THESE two Masters are infinitely obliged to their Interpreters who produced
them first amongst the Tramontani and strangers, and particularly to our
workmen in France who hold them in very great estimation: And though they are
in truth highly worthy of it, nevertheless being compared to the preceding two,
they lose much of their luster, and come exceedingly short of them.

This the Reader may easily find by comparing the one to the other with the
Ancient Originals which I have prefixed as the Lantern and Compass of all true
Architecture. But it were not just we should treat Serlio in this Examen with
the same rigor we have done his Companion; for that intending to follow
Vitruvius (who is the most renowned and venerable Author of the Ancients) he
has worthily acquitted himself: Whereas Vignola who has pursued another course,
really a more noble, and the very same which I also observe here, knew not how
to proceed without deviation. The Dorique Profile which he here presents us, is
taken out of the first Order of the Theater of Marcellus, and the most worthy
example of this kind which is to be met with amongst all the Roman Antiquities,
and of which also I have made choice for the first model of this Collection,
with this only difference, that I have precisely observed all the measures and
allowances of the Original, which you will perceive in this Author to be
exceedingly changed, particularly in the Cornice and Capital: The comparing of
the two designs will in one instant afford more light to the Reader, then I can
do by the discourse of an entire Page.

Serlio gives here fourteen Modules only to his Column, comprehending the Base
and Chapter; and the height of the Entablature amounts to three Modules and a
little more then two thirds, insomuch as (contrary to his ordinary custom) he
extremely exceeds the quarter of his Column, which is the largest proportion
that the Ancients did ever practice; so as this great excess puts me in doubt
whether the Text of Vitruvius upon which he relies be not corrupted in that
place; or else, when he spoke of that Column, he did not mean the Shaft without
its Capital: for so by adding one Module more (which is the precise height of
the Chapter) the entire Column would be fifteen Modules, and consequently the
Entablature hold proportion conformable to the Ancients.

Vignola forms his Column of sixteen Modules, and the Entablature of four,
which is exactly the fourth part of the Column, and which makes it appear very
regular: As touching the Base introduced by the Moderns into this Order, I have
already declared my Opinion concerning it.

CHAP. IX.
Daniel Barbaro, and Pietro Cataneo upon the Dorique Order.
THIS is here the perfect School of Father Vitruvius, whose very name and
authority does extremely recommend it to us. Not that we are obliged
indifferently, and without choice to follow all those who pretend to have
understood this grave and abstruse Author; seeing every man strives to make
him of his own party, and to accommodate him to his particular Genius.

The very best of them all was without exception Daniel Barbaro, as well for
his excellent Commentaries, as for the exactitude, and cleanness of his
designs. A man may perceive by the Parallel of his Profile with that of Cataneo
his adjunct; of Serlio in the page before, and some others following this
Class, that he presides here as a Master among his Disciples.

It were an amusement to no purpose, and very impertinent should I quote every
minute and small difference of one design from the other; since the Reader may
better see it by one cast of his eye, then I can describe it to him in all the
rest of this Page.

I will add only this general advertisement, that the proportion of the
Colomn, with its Entablature, is the same here which Serlio gave us before,
without being necessitated to repeat my own opinion thereof; since my
Observation is upon Vitruvius, and not against those who have explained him.

Daniel Barbaro has judiciously introduced a Boucler in the angular Metop of
the Freeze, thereby signifying, that all Ornaments should be accommodated to
the Orders which they are applied to; and that this being of a robust, and
martial kind, one may as occasion requires, enrich it with Trophies of Arms,
Clubbs, Quivers of Arrows, and such like instruments of War.

To the prejudice of Cataneo's design, I find that the Gula of the superior
part of the Entablature is somewhat too great, that the Projection of the
Plinth of the Capital is a little too small and renders the whole Chapter mean,
and short, which extremely disfigures his Profile; besides, that the Base below
has that in excess, which is defective in the Chapter above.

CHAP. X.
Leon Baptista Alberti, and Josepho Viola on the Dorique Order.
AT sight of this first design of Leon Baptista Alberti whose Capital is
entirely Gotique, one might with reason wonder why I should speak so
advantageously of him in the general Examen which I have made of the modern
Architects, amongst whom I assign him one of the principal places; and in
earnest I cannot excuse him here of that ill relish, and of this so
ill-favored a Composition, however he pretends to have seen it, and to have
taken it from some ancient fragments: But suppose it true (for a man may meet
with bad ones enough) he might also have found others a great deal more
tolerable: That which falls out the most unluckily for him in this his first
production of skill, is, that it is of very great importance for a man to begin
well; since the first impression continues long, and introduces a consequence
for those who follow after. Nevertheless, be it what it will, every man is
obliged to accord with the truth, and to judge of things honestly, and without
preoccupation. And therefore to do him justice, having first condemned this
defective part in his Profile, we are not to reject all the rest for that
reason; seeing it is in truth very good, of a great and noble manner. It has
also much conformity with our third antique Example in the Modilions, whose
projectures put into work would produce a noble effect, as may be judged by the
Perspective which I have made of it. His Architrave and Freeze are both
regular, and the Entablature entire to its exact proportion with the Column;
for it consists of four Modules in height, and the Column of six. The
proportions of the Base are likewise very handsome, so as in the whole design
there is nothing scandalous besides the Capital, which may easily be supplied
by borrowing from his Colleague Vi^la, whose Profile is sufficiently correct,
and upon the matter the very same with that of Palladio whom I perceive he has
imitated in all the following Orders as well as in this here. But since he
endeavors to disguise his theft as much as possible in altering some of the
mouldings, or mutilating some member, he has here made a quarter round in stead
of the direct Cymatium or Ogee of the Cornice, which is but a thing
indifferent, or tolerable at least in the Dorique Order, that of Marcellus's
Theater being the very same.

CHAP. XI.
John Bulliant, and Philibert de Lorme on the Dorique Order.
IT IS not without some difficulty that I have been able to reduce the second
Profile of this Page to the terms you here behold it, Philibert de Lorme
having designed it so slightly, and in so small a Volume (though that in his
book be large enough) that it had been impossible to give any of the members
its due proportion without the assistance of the Text, upon which he has made
three large Chapters; whereas by the aid of some better draught, he might
easily have spared many words and letters of direction extremely confused
throughout his whole discourse, which he uses to express the particulars of the
proportions of each part of his Profile; and this makes me judge that the good
man was no great Designer, which is a very ordinary defect amongst those of his
Profession: But this does not much concern our Subject in hand, where we have
only to examine, whether the Dorique Order which he proposes, has any
conformity to the Antique, or at least to the Precepts of Vitruvius; as one may
perceive by the Parallel of his Companion John Bulliant, who has followed this
old Author in his Profile very punctually, though he also produce others from
Antiquity, in which I find him not so just and exact as I took him to be in the
meaning of Vitruvius.

I will not here stand to particularise the difference which there is betwixt
these two Architects, lest I my self fall into the same inconvenience which I
but now reprehended in Philibert de Lorme; and for that the exactness of my
designs have neither need of illustration or discourse: However, this I may add
in favor of John Bulliant, that he is the sole Sectator of Vitruvius who has
contained himself within the regular terms of his Master as to the height of
the Entablature, to which he allows three Modules and a half that precisely
make the fourth part of the Column, which ought to have but seven Diameters in
height, according to Vitruius Lib. IV. Cap. I. which amounts to fourteen
Modules.

CHAP. XII.
A very ancient Sepulcher to be seen near Terracina, at the side of the high
way leading toward Naples.
AT Terracina upon the confines of the State Ecclesiastic there is yet extant
the Vestigia and footsteps of this small Mausoleum sufficiently entire joining
to the Appian way, where that diligent observer of all these ancient Monuments
Pirro Ligorio having discovered and (as one may say) disinterr'd it (for 'twas
almost buried amongst the brambles of a wild and uncultivated place as himself
reports, at the foot of the design which he has made of it) took the plan most
exactly, and the elevation of the Profile, upon which I have taken my
directions to reduce it to that Ichnographical from which I here present you. I
was extremely glad to encounter an example so express and convincing against
the abuse of the Moderns, who have very inconsiderably introduced Bases to the
Columns of this Order, of which I have formerly discoursed sufficiently.

The four faces of the Edifice appear to have been all alike, and on that which
respects the West, there has been some kind of Inscription upon the Architrave,
but there now remains nothing legible.

The Massonry is of huge square Brick, and the Columns with their Entablature
are made of Tiburtine stone, the Pyramid being also of the same material.

The Diameter of the Columns is near upon two Palms, the Entablature makes a
fifth of the entire Order; that is to say, a fourth part of the Column, which
was but seven Diameters in height.

This Sepulcher seems to be fully as ancient as the very Appian way it self.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Ionique Order.
THE first productions of Arts have always been exceedingly rare, because it
is so difficult to invent; but it is not the same of Imitation: For after men
had once seen Regular Structures, and those famous Temples of the Dorique Order
mentioned by Vitruvius and some others, Architecture did not long remain in its
Infancy; the concurrence and emulation of the neighboring people advanced its
growth, and made it soon arrive to its perfection. The Ionians were the first
Competitors with the Dorics in this divine Art, which seemed to be descended
from the Gods themselves to gratify Mankind with more opportunity of honoring
them; and though these had neither the advantage nor the glory to be Inventors
of it, they endeavored yet to improve and raise it even above the very Authors.
Considering therefore that the figure of a Man's body, on which the Dorique
Order had been formed, was of a shape too robust and massy to fit holy Places
and become the representation of Celestial things, they would needs compose an
Order after their own Mode, and chose a Model of a more elegant Proportion,
wherein they had more regard to the Beauty then to the Solidity of the Work,
which gave the first occasion of calling it the Feminine Order, as indeed
degenerating toward an effeminate softness. And the truth is, the Order of the
Caryatides quickly sprung up after it, which was an extraordinary affront to
this poor Sex, and a very shame to Architecture it self, for having so
irrationally employed a feeble and delicate thing to perform an office where
strength and solidity were the only necessaries. Vitruvius, and diverse of the
Modern since him, mention the Original of this Order, and tell us, that the
Inhabitants of a certain City of Peloponnesus named Carya, having made a league
with the Persians against their own Nation the Greeks, after the rout of the
Persians, were afterward besieged by the Conquerours, and so barbarously
saccag'd, that putting every man to the sword, consuming the City to ashes, and
carrying the Women away Captive, their vengeance being not yet extinct, they
resolved to eternise their resentment by causing public Edifices to be
erected, wherein for a mark of the servitude of these Captives they ingraved
their Images in stead of Columns, that so they might overwhelm them likewise
under the weight of the punishment which they had merited by the guilt of their
Husbands, and leave an everlasting memory thereof to future Ages: This is the
Example which Vitruvius has made use of to prove how necessary it is that an
Architect should be knowing in History, to the end he introduce nothing
impertinently in his works, and without good reason. The Gotique Order, which
is the folly and very Ape of Architecture, in imitation of the Caryatides has
composed certain lame figured Mutils or Corbells in stead of Cartouzes
sustained by I know not what Chimera's and ridiculous Monkeys, to be met with
in every corner of our old Churches; but some of the Modern having (with very
good reason) found fault that such extravagances should be seen in holy Places
where reverence and modesty are so essential, and considering how much more
decent it were to fit those places with some devout Representations, without
any respect at all to their Profession, or for want rather of understanding the
propriety of the Orders of Architecture, have amused themselves to place the
figure of Angels and other Saints in stead of the Caryatides; making them like
so many Slaves to carry huge Cornices, and even entire Altars upon their
shoulders, testifying thereby how preposterously and without judgment they
consulted Vitruvius upon the occasion of the Original of the Caryatides: For
they would otherwise have understood that this Order cannot be employed or
indifferently enter into all sorts of Buildings, and that it requires no small
discretion to be aptly and discreetly placed: Above all, that it should never
be used in Churches, which are the Houses of God, and Asylum's of Mercy, where
servitude and revenge ought never to appear. They had proceeded much better to
have only used the plain Regular Order which we are now going to describe
according to an excellent Antique Example taken from the Temple of Fortuna
Virilis at present the Church of St. Mary the Egyptian in Rome, the Profile
whereof has been fortunately met with amongst some Papers of mine of that great
Antiquary Pyrro Ligorio; whose Manuscripts and Designs are conserved as a very
rare Treasure in the Bibliotheque of the Duke of Savoy, which has furnished me
with a means to examine and verify diverse Measures that at present a man would
hardly know where to take; and to repair the Cornice with its proper Ornaments,
which are now so impaired through age, that it is extremely difficult to
discern them. This is then the Model I shall follow, and which shall here serve
for the Rule of this Order, having with mature consideration, and for diverse
reasons preferred it before that which is in the Theater of Marcellus, from
whence I have taken the Dorique; which nevertheless I shall propose in what
follows, remitting others who concur not with my opinion to their own
affection and fancy.

But before I enter upon the retail of its proportions (for recommendation of
this Order, and the curiosity of the Reader) I will here recount to you the
names of some famous Temples built by the People of Ionia, whose antiquity is
at the least of two thousand years. The most memorable, though not most
ancient, is that renowned Temple of Diana, erected (as some think) by the
Amazons in Ephesus. This was a work of so stupendous a grandeur, that there
was spent above two hundred years in finishing it, all Asia contributing to
this inestimable expense. Vitruvius in his third Book, Chap. I. says, it was
of the dipteryque figure; that is, environed with a twofold range of Columns
in form of a double Portico: It was in length four hundred and twenty five foot
upon two hundred and twenty. All these Columns were of Marble seventy foot in
height. The Architect of this proud Edifice, according to the same Vitruvius,
was one named Ctesiphon, whom he mentions in his tenth Book, where he speaks of
an excellent Machine that he invented to transport the Columns of this Temple;
which for being of so prodigious a length, that no ordinary force was able to
move and bring from their quarries, had been all to no purpose, had not this
extraordinary Genius discovered some artificial forces to supply the defect of
others. This Structure is esteemed for one of the Worlds seven Wonders: There
were yet in the same City of Ephesus many other Temples of this Order; whereof
two (one dedicated to Apollo, the other to Bacchus) are principally remarkable,
as having been in some sort comparable to this first, had they received their
ultimate perfection; but they were left off unfinished, by reason of the wars
against the Persians, who were in conclusion the utter ruin and subversion of
this People: For Cyrus having subjugated Asia plundered all this Country,
faccag'd their Cities, demolished the Temple, and made so universal and
barbarous a devastation, that there hardly remained any thing of such an
infinity of stupendous Monuments which this noble Nation had erected
throughout all Greece: Notwithstanding this, he spared that of Diana of Ephesus
whose astonishing beauty served as a Bulwark to the fury and rage of this
mighty Conqueror. In Athens one of the most flourishing Cities of the World,
there was also of the same Ionique Order a very great number of Temples,
amongst which, that of the Delphic Apollo and his Son Esculapius were highly
celebrated. There is yet to be seen in the same place certain Vestigia's
reduced to the form of a Citadel, which they report to have been heretofore the
Temple of the Goddess Juno Attica. I could enumerate diverse others like these,
of which the Antiquaries we have cited report marvels; but in general terms,
and without any benefit to the studious of the Art, who stand in need of some
more essential remarks and instructions. I will therefore manage the rest of
this discourse in describing the Composition, and the parts of this Order,
conformable to the Profile which I have chosen for our Model, and which is
precisely taken from the Antique.

CHAP. XIV.
The Ionique Profile taken from the Temple of Fortuna Virilis at Rome, which is
at present the Church of St. Mary the Egyptian.
ACcording to the opinion of that threefold grand Antiquary, Painter, and
Architect Pirro Ligorio, of whom I have heretofore spoken, and from whom I have
borrowed this Profile, I may safely propose it for one of the most regular
Examples of the whole Ionique Order which is now extant of ancient
Architecture: Add to this the instance which Palladio makes of it in his fourth
Book and thirteenth Chapter, being the only one of this Order which he has
inserted amongst the whole collection of his Studies; so as these two great
Masters approving the election and judgment I have made thereof, it is not to
be doubted for a Masterpiece of supreme perfection. I will therefore make the
general description thereof, deducing the principal Members and proportions in
gross, without amusing my self with the smaller retail of the measures of each
particular part, which the Design ought to supply.

The entire Order from the Superficies of the Area to the Cornice, contains
eleven Diameters of the whole Column, which amounts to twenty two Models.

The Column with the Base and Chapter has eighteen Modules.

The Entablature (that is to say, Architrave, Freeze, and Cornice) contain four
Models lacking four Minutes, which are not considerable upon the total; and
this height making two nineths of the Column produces a proportionate
mediocrity 'twixt that of the Dorique Order before described (whereof the
Entablature composes one quarter) and that of the Corinthian (as we shall see
hereafter) to which the Moderns do ordinarily attribute a fifth part.

The Voluta of the Capital is after an oval form, producing a very noble
effect, notwithstanding that none of our Architects have put it in practice;
but the reason in my opinion, is, the difficulty of tourning it with a grace,
and for that they are generally accustomed to do all with the Rule and Compass,
which are here in a manner useless.

CHAP. XV.
Another Ionique Profile taken from the Theater of Marcellus at Rome.
SOME may imagine that I ought to have established mine Ionique Order upon this
Example, being as 'twere the twin-Brother of the first Dorique with which I
have commenced this Collection of Architecture, being both of them extracted
out of the same Edifice, which is the Theater of Marcellus. And to speak truth,
it was my first design: But second cogitations being ordinarily the more
judicious; I have since considered that the ampleness of the Entablature with
its extraordinary plainness, was a particular effect of the Architects
discretion, who resolving to place this Order in an exceeding large Building,
and also upon an elevated place, where the fight could hardly enjoy those
Ornaments wherewithal it is usually enriched, had regard only to the
reformation of that by a rule of the Optics, which the Eye might possibly find
fault with in the grace of its general proportions from the distance of its
Elevation; so that we may affirm of this Profile, that it does excellently well
in Work as it is placed in the Original; but would not succeed so well in
another of more mediocrity; and above all in a work of one only Order, unless
it were of a Colossean magnitude; which is yet in truth neither proper nor
natural to its feminine kind: However I will here present you with its
Proportions as well as with the others.

The height of the entire Order is twenty two Models, and two thirds.

The Column with her Base and Chapter has but eighteen, and those precise
enough; so as the whole Entablature consisting of four and two thirds, it
happens to be of an extraordinary grandeur, in as much as it exceeds a quarter
of the Order, which is the largest Proportion can justly be given even to the
Dorique it self.

The Projecture or Iette of the Cornice is also a little extravagant; but the
Architect has for all that showed himself very judicious, having respect in
that to the entire mass of the Building, and to the eminence of the fire of
this second Order: For the same reason he afforded but very little diminution
to the Column above.

The Voluta's of the Capital are Oval, as in the precedent Order, and this
shape of the Voluta's was much practiced by the Ancients; but the method of
tourning them with the Compass is somewhat difficult, and has never as yet been
demonstrated.

CHAP. XVI.
The Perspective Elevation of a Profile drawn from the Baths of Dioclesian at
Rome.
I Would needs make an Elevation in Perspective of this Profile, that so I
might add some variety to my designs, and for that likewise it is an
advantageous means to represent the Idea of an Order, and the effect which it
produces being put in Work, for their sakes who are not much practiced in the
Mystery. This piece stood in the Baths of Dioclesian at the angle or coinage of
a return of a Wall, as I have found out by a Design of mine very ancient and of
a good hand, where the Proportions as well of the Plan as of the Profile are
exactly noted, even to the least particulars. I have reduced and accommodated
them to the division of my ordinary Model, as you may perceive them on the
Profile which is under the Perspective Entablature.

The height of the whole Order, from the Base to the top of the Cornice,
amounts to ten Diameters and a fourth; which, according to our manner of
measuring contains twenty Models and an half; which being divided 'twixt the
Column and the Entablature takes up seventeen, and the three Models and half
remaining make up the height of the Entablature: Now though there be a
considerable difference in the altitude of our first Ionique Example, and this
here, it rather yet consists in the total quantity of the Order, then in the
proportion of their parts; for I find here that the Entablature compared to its
Column has also the same relation of two ninths; which is to say, that the
height of the Column divided into nine parts, that of the Entablature
comprehends two of them; which is a Symmetrie particularly affected to this
Order, as I have elsewhere showed.

The Voluta's of the Capital were turned with the Compass, after the manner I
shall hereafter describe in a Page by its self, and with which I shall conclude
this Order.

CHAP. XVII.
Palladio, and Scamozzi upon the Ionique Order.
THERE is so great a resemblance 'twixt the mouldings and the measures of these
two Profiles, that the difference is hardly considerable, unless it be in the
figure of the Capitals, which in truth is very different in shape, though
sufficiently resembling in proportion.

The Voluta of Scamozzi is particular, and by consequence has less of the
Antique then that of Palladio: But Scamozzi has excogitated this expedient,
that his Capital might front on all sides, not liking (it may be) this variety
of aspect which we find in the ordinary Volutas.

The altitude of the Column according to Palladio contains nine Diameters,
which make after our measure eighteen Models; of which he gives to the
Entablature but one fifth part, being the same proportion which hereafter he
assigns to his Corinthian: He had yet peradventure done better to have
contrived for this here a more proportionable Medium 'twixt the Dorique and the
Corinthian, proceeding by a certain gradation from the solid kind to the more
delicate. Moreover, I could have wished that the Cornice had rather been
toothed then Modilion'd, for the reason already rendered in the general Chapter
of the Ionique Order; which I mention only to advertise (by the way as 'twere)
what does in my judgment seem worthy to be observed in this Profile, which in
the rest of the parts is exceedingly rare, and in this very particular not
absolutely to be condemned; seeing things which may be improved, are not
therefore to be esteemed for ill.

As for Scamozzi, besides that the same observations which I have made on the
Profile of Palladius are repugnant to him, there is this yet worse, that the
Capital being a great deal more massy, in stead of giving a greater height to
his Cornice, and composing it of more ample members, he has contrarily made it
less, and cut off three or four small Reglets which renders it very dry and
trifling.

CHAP. XVIII.
Serlio, and Vignola upon the Ionique Order.
THE inequality of these two Profiles is so wide, that it is almost impossible
to approve of them both, and yet nevertheless there is in a manner as little
reason to condemn either the one or the other; for having each of them their
principles sufficiently regular, together with their Authorities and Examples.

The first, which is Serlio, having made a handsome Collection of all the most
considerable Antiquities of Italy, from whence he should have taken a noble
Idea of the Orders, is returned back to the School of Vitruvius, whither the
slenderness of his Genius has recalled him.

On the contrary, Vignola is fallen with excess into the other manner that we
name the Grand, which though indeed more noble and advantageous, has yet for
all that its just limits, which being once exceeded becomes vicious and
extravagant.

Now the great difference of these two Masters proceeds from Serlio's making
his Column but of seven Diameters and an half, allowing only a fifth part to
the Entablature; and Vignola's composing his of nine Diameters, and his
Entablature of a full quarter.

That which I chiefly reprove in this last, is, that he makes use of the Base
which Vitruvius composed for his Ionique; a thing not to be excused but in
those who follow him likewise in all the rest: For others who have endeavored
to imitate the Antique, have no reason to employ it, there being no president
for it. And in truth also it never has had the approbation of the ablest modern
Masters, who upon examination have greatly wondered that Vitruvius should impose
so vast a Torus upon so small Cinctures, charging the strong upon the weaker,
which being totally repugnant to the order of Nature, is very offensive to the
eyes of the Curious.

CHAP. XIX.
D. Barbaro, and P. Cataneo upon the Ionique Order.
YOU have here very same style that Serlio has observed in the precedent
Chapter; And though there be much resemblance in the Profiles of all the three
Masters, nevertheless we must reckon that as to the meaning of Vitruvius (to
whose Doctrine they have universally endeavored to conform themselves) Daniel
Barbaro is the Captain and chief Conductor, as may easily be discerned from the
pattern of the Contours only belonging to the Voluta of the Capital, which is
a most essential piece in this Order, and whose true draught was never so much
as known to our modern Architects before Daniel Barbaro, to whom we are obliged
for the recovery of this excellent Masterpiece of Ancient Architecture, though
he has had the goodness to divide the glory of it with his Contemporary and
intimate friend Palladio, by whose conference and help he acknowledges to have
been assisted in the delineation of all his designs.

I reserve it for the conclusion of the Ionique Order to make a Page apart of
this manner of Voluta, where I shall show a way to trace it regularly according
to our Author's intention. And since it is more compendious to paint then
describe it, I shall better give you the demonstration by Rule and Compass,
then by employing a tedious discourse about it.

I find nothing observable in these two Profiles besides a certain
over-simplicity and plainness: For the rest, the difference of the Entablature,
as well in relation to the height, as shape, is so small, that it is nothing at
all considerable: What is more worthy of remark in the design of Daniel
Barbaro, is this; that he gives to every face of the Architrave a certain slope
or kind of downward and inclining stroke, as it is expressly ordained in
Vitruvius's third Book, toward the period of the last Chapter: But I find that
the Rule of Perspective upon which he grounds it, is more refined and subtle
for its discourse, then any way solid in the execution, and besides, I never
saw an example of it in any work whatsoever.

CHAP. XX.
L. B. Albert, and Viola upon the Ionique Order.
THE conformity of these two Designs to those of Anderea Palladio and Scamozzi
is so conspicuous, that one may easily judge of their mutual assistance of each
other: viz. That Viola made bold with that of Palladio, as he did before in the
Dorique: and that Scamozzi has imitated L. B. Alberti who is his Senior above
an hundred years. For the rest, it were a difficult thing to decide which of
these two Profiles is to be preferred, in regard the Ionique Order has been so
diversely treated of by the Ancients, as may appear in the Examples I have
produced, of which there are some enriched with Mouldings and Ornaments, others
more naked and simple. That which I should have wished for here as conducing to
a greater and more exact regularity, should have been to have cut the Dentelli
upon the flat Band of L. B. Alberti's design; since he has omitted Modilions
there, which his Companion Viola for observing may the better be excused of:
Though for my part, I should have rather employed Dentelli there, as an
Ornament more particularly affected to the Ionique Order, and have reserved the
Modilions for the Order which follows next.

The Reader may remember, or else, looking back on some Pages, reflect upon
what I have there observed on the Profiles of Palladio and Scamozzi; because it
so much agrees with that of Viola here; To which I may yet superadd as a new
charge, that he has done ill to employ another Base different from that of the
Attique; since he saw how his Master Palladio had preferred it before that of
Vitruvius's Composition: He had also done much better to have followed
precisely the Proportions of the Cornice in the same design of Palladio; for in
attempting to disguise his imitation, by adding of some Members and changing of
others, he has in fine rendered it but the more mean and trifling.

CHAP. XXI.
Bullant, and de Lorme upon the Ionique Order.
THIS first Profile is exactly after Vitruvius, as well as that of Serlio
Cataneo, and Daniel Barbaro which you have already seen: But there is in the
other nothing at all worthy of our imitation, as being neither conformable to
any of the Antiques, nor to Vitruvius, nor in the least regular in its parts:
For first, the Cornice is camuse and blunt, the principal Members, viz. the
Cymatium and Cooping small and poor; The Freeze is larger then the Cornice, and
the Base of the Column changed both in shape, and the proportion of its parts,
as appears by the excessive dimensions of the Tore, compared with the two
Scotia's underneath; besides that extravagant repetition of the two Astragals
upon the Plinth. The Voluta of the Capital is also too gross, and so is the
Collar of the Pillar together with its List: In a word, the entire Composition
is deservedly ranged in this last place: But after all this, I cannot but
admire that a Person of this Authors Condition, who was so extremely
industrious (as may be easily deduced from what himself has published in his
Book of Observations made at Rome upon the Antiquities there) who had so great
a natural propensity to Architecture, and so many opportunities of studying at
his ease, and of instructing himself; Who proceeded by so direct a Method of
the Art, and in fine, was Master of so many handsome occasions of putting his
studies into practice; That I say a man furnished with so many advantages,
should nevertheless emerge so ordinary an Artist: But this shows us, that we
are many times deceived by our own Genius, and imported to Things for which we
have no manner of Talent.

CHAP. XXII.
The Order of the Caryatides.
I Intend not here to repeat the History from whence this Order has derived its
Original, having already so amply deduced it in the general Chapter of the
Ionique Order, whereof this is here but a Species; all the difference
consisting in the sole alteration of the Column metamorphos'd into the Figure
of a Woman, which for appearing sometimes incommodious to Architects from the
extreme over-largeness of the Vests and Garments cumbring and disordering the
Passage and Symmetry of the Intercolumniation, caused them to reduce it only
to the carving of Heads in place of the Capitals, where they adjusted and
composed the Dressing and Tire to the resemblance of Voluta's, without any
alteration in the rest of the Column, unless where they cut Channels or
Flutings on it, to represent after a sort the plaitings and folds of these
Matrons Garments; since this Ornament is found to change neither the Diameter
nor height of the Shaft, which are the Bases, and as it were foundations of
Architectonical Proportions.

That which I asserted before concerning the Caryatides in the general Chapter
of the Ionique Order, sufficiently discovers how few the occasions are where
they can be employed judiciously; notwithstanding so many of our modern
Architects take so great a liberty of introducing them indifferently into all
sorts of works: For not only the Palaces of great Princes without, and within;
but even the Houses of private Persons, Churches, and Sepulchers themselves are
filled with them, without any regard either to the reason of the History, or to
just decorum: Nay oftentimes, out of an insupportable extravagance, in lieu of
these poor and miserable Captives, they set the venerable figures of the
Virtues, Muses, Graces, and Angels themselves; whereas they should in truth
rather chain and confine the Vices there.

But it is sufficient to have advertised you of this Abuse without any further
declaiming against it.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Persian Order.
THOUGH the name of this Order be less known then that of the Caryatides, under
which it seems they would generally express all those Orders where Figures are
introduced to supply the places of Columns; yet ought we not to follow the
vulgar abuse, seeing Vitruvius has put a difference betwixt 'em in the same
Chapter where he speaks of the Caryatides: And in regard this here should be
somewhat more solid in reference to the Sex they ordinarily give him a Dorique
Entablature, in consideration whereof I had once intended to have ranged it at
the end of the Dorique Order, or placed him the first here; But considering
since, that Vitruvius does not treat of it till after the Caryatides, I thought
it became me not to innovate any thing in a matter of so small importance. I
shall therefore satisfy my self in advertising that the Romans very rarely
made use of the Caryatides; and truly we do not meet with so much as any
Vestigia's of them, though Pliny in his thirty fifth Book and fifth Chapter has
mentioned those of the Rotunda to the amusing of so many of our modern
Antiquaries, who, though all that Temple (and which to this day remains so
entire) can by no diligence find any commodious place nor appearance where they
should have been well designed: On the contrary, for these Captives after the
Persian there are extant sundry Examples, some whereof are yet to be seen in
the very places where they were set in work, as particularly in the Arch of
Constantine, and some others which have been transported into Gardens and
private Palaces, which were taken no body knows from whence. What is here
designed is from an excellent Original extant yet at Rome in the Palace of
Farnezi.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Contour or Turning of the Ionique Voluta.
THE body of this Capital without its Voluta or Scroul bears a great conformity
to that of the Dorique, as may be easily discerned by conferring their Profiles
the one with the other: For the diversity of their form which at first blush
appears so large to the eyes of such as have never examined the particulars of
the Members that compose it, consists altogether in the application of the
Voluta upon the Abacus, which gives a most advantageous variety to the Ionique;
in as much as the draught of its Contour does consist of the most industrious
operation of the Compass which is practiced in the whole Art of Architecture;
So as who ever of our modern Masters he were that retriv'd it (for 'twas a long
time lost, and totally unknown to those of the Profession) he has rendered
doubtless a very considerable piece of service to the Art.

That famous Painter Salviati, contemporary with the R. Daniel Barbaro, and by
consequent also with Palladio, printed a small loose sheet which he dedicated
to D. Barbaro as to the most famous Arbiter of Architecture in his time, who
also understood it, and had communicated it with Palladio who accidentally and
as it were by chance had been the first Investigator of the practice of it
whiles he met amongst some ancient Fragments a Capital of this Order, on whose
imperfect and rough-hewn Voluta he observed the thirteen Centers of this spiral
line which gives it so noble and so ingenious a Turn.

I will not here engage my self on a tedious discourse about its description,
it being so much a shorter and more demonstrative way to advance to the direct
Method of its delineation: Thus then in general you are to proceed.

The height of the Chapter, and partition of each Member being designed, one
must regulate the extent and proportion of the Abacus conformable to the
measure deciphered upon the Profile at the point 32, and at the point 28^ a
little beneath. Where the Cymatium encounters the List of the Scroul make a
perpendicular line so as it may pass through the very Center of the Eye of this
Voluta marked A, till falling upon a right angle by the co-incidence of another
line proceeding from the middle of the Collerine or Chaplet, the point of
intersection give you the just Center of the Eye: Then about this Center
describing a Circle of the wideness of the Collerine (which Circle (as was
said) points the precise dimensions of the Eye, and its true place of position)
you shall from therein a small Square, through whose Angles having drawn two
diagonals (which cut it into four triangles) divide each moity of the diagonals
into three equal parts, and each of these points shall serve for consequutive
Centers one after another by which to form those several quarters of Circles
which compose the spiral line of the Voluta. They are distinguished by numbers
on the design, according to the order by which you are to proceed.

CHAP. XXV.
A Portico of the Temple of Fortuna Virilis at Rome, which is now the Church of
St. Mary the Egyptian.
HAving thoroughly examined every part of the Ionique Order, and observed in
particular the shape and proportion of all its Members; It seems now in a
manner necessary, the better to conceive a perfect Idea of them, to place them
together in one entire body, that so we may contemplate the Symmetry and
conformity which they hold mutually to each other: I have to this effect made
choice of a Frontispiece the most noble and magnificent composition an Edifice
can possibly be adorned with: And to the end we may contain our selves within
the just limits which I have established, I shall here make use of the same
Antiquity from whence I extracted my first Model whereon I do principally found
the regularity of the Dorique Order.

Those who shall have the curiosity to examine the Plan of this Temple, with
its Measures, and Profile of the Door which is exceeding noble, may find it in
the fourth Book of Palladio Chap. XIII. and at the same time see one of the
most curious pieces of Architecture of that whole Book, which is the Plan of a
Capital he calls Angular, that being placed upon the Column of an Angle renders
a face of two sides, by which it preserves the same aspect with the rest of the
Capitals which are on the Wings and Front of the Structure.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Corinthian Order.
THE highest degree of perfection to which Architecture did ever aspire, was
erected for it at Corinth, that most famous and formerly most opulent and
flourishing City of Greece, although at present there hardly remains any
footsteps of the grandeur which rendered it even formidable to the people of
Rome it self, but which was also the cause of her ruin: For this Nation
impatient of Competitors, on pretense that the Corinthians had done some
displeasure to the Ambassadors which she had sent, took occasion of denouncing
War against her; so as the Consul Lucius Mummius going thither with a great
Army reduced their City to Ashes, and in one day destroyed the Work of more
then nine Ages from the period of its firth foundation.

It was from thence that our Corinthian Order assumed its Original; and
although the Antiquity of it be not precisely known, nor under whose Reign that
Callimachus lived, to whom Vitruvius attributes the glory of this excellent
Production; it is yet easy to judge by the nobleness of its Ornament, that it
was invented during the magnificence and splendour of Corinth, and not long
after the Ionique Order to which it has much resemblance, the Capital only
excepted; for there is no mention that Callimachus added any thing of his own
besides that stately Member.

Vitruvius in the first Chapter of his fourth Book reports at large upon what
occasion this ingenious Architect formed the Idea of this great Masterpiece
which has born away the Palm of all Architecture, and rendered the name of
Corinth immortal: And though the History which he there mentions may appear
somewhat fabulous in the opinion of Villalpandus, who treats also of this
Capital in his second Tome Lib. V. Chap. XXIII. nevertheless it were very
unjust that the particular conceit of a modern Writer should prevail above the
Authority of so grave an Author. Let us see then what Vitruvius says of it.

A Virgin of Corinth being now grown up, fell sick and dyed: The day after her
Funerals her Nurse having put into a Basket certain small vessels and trifles
with which she was wont to divertise her self whilst she lived, went out and
set them upon her Tomb, and least the air and weather should do them any
injury, she covered them with a Tyle: Now the Basket being accidentally placed
upon the root of an Acanthus, or great Dock, the herb beginning to sprout at
the spring of the year and put forth leaves, the stalks thereof creeping up
along the sides of the Basket and meeting with the edge of the Tyle (which
jetted out beyond the margin of the Basket) were found (being a little more
ponderous at the extremes) to bend their tops downwards, and form a pretty kind
of natural Voluta. At this very time it was that the Sculptor Callimachus (who
for the delicateness of his work upon Marble, and gentileness of his invention
was by the Athenians surnamed Catatechnos, (that is to say, Industrious)
passing near this Monument, began to cast an eye upon this Basket, and to
consider the pretty tenderness of that ornamental foliage which grew about it,
the manner and form whereof so much pleased him for the novelty, that he
shortly after made Columns at Corinth resembling this Model, and ordained its
Symmetries distributing afterward in his Works proportions agreeable to each
of its other Members in conformity to this Corinthian Mode.

You see what Vitruvius reports: But Villalpandus who will needs give this
Capital a more illustrious and ancient Original, pretends that the Corinthians
took it first from the Temple of Solomon, of which God himself had been the
Architect; and the better to elude what Vitruvious but now taught us, would
make us believe, that the Capitals of the Acanthus were rarely used by the
Ancients, who were wont ordinarily to carve them with Olive-leaves; and proves
in that which follows by Text out of the Bible, and some other Historians who
have given us the description of this divine Architecture, that the true
Originals of the Temple were of Palm-branches bearing Fruit, to which the
leaves of the Olive have a nearer Correspondence. The Design which we shall
hereafter describe with the whole Entablature of the Order, drawn precisely
according to the measures which Villalpandus has collected, and which I have
expressly followed, without regarding the Profile which he has caused to be
engraven, will better discover that I know not how to decry the beauty of this
composition: In the mean time, to be constant and preserve my self within the
terms of the Corinthian Architecture which has been practiced by those great
Masters of Antiquity as well Greeks as Romans, and of whom there yet remain
such wonderful footsteps and even entire Temples which may serve as so many
express and demonstrable Lectures of the Proportions of this Order; I have made
choice of one of the most famous amongst them, to which I totally conform my
self without any respect to the opinion of the modern Authors; seeing they
ought to have pursud the same Paths, and regulated themselves with me upon
these Original Examples.

The Rotunda (heretofore called the Pantheon) having ever obtained the
universal approbation of knowing persons, as being the most regular Corinthian
Work, and indeed the most famous among all the remainders of Ancient Rome,
appears to me to be the very best Model which I could possibly make choice of,
though there are indeed others to be found which are much richer in ornaments,
and of a beauty more elegant: But as our Gusts do generally differ, I have
preferred mine own, which rather affects things solid and a little plain, for
that indeed to me they appear fullest of Majesty. Nevertheless, for as much as
it is sometimes necessary that an Architect accommode himself to the Persons
humor which employs him; and for that one meets with occasions where
magnificence is proper, as in Triumphal Arches, Kings Palaces, Temles, and
public Bathes which were much in use among the Ancients, and in diverse the
like ample Structures, where splendor and profusion are chiefly considered, I
will produce some examples of the most renowned of Antiquity, the first whereof
shall be that great Relic of the Frontispiece of the Torre di Nerone so
called, which has been demolished within these late thirty years, to the great
reproach of this Age, by the avarice of some particular Persons.

This was one of the rarest pieces of Antiquity, as well for the beauty and
richness of its ornaments, as for the composures of the members of the Order,
which even in Paper it self appears bold and terrible; the judicious Architect
of this work very well understanding how to introduce a Grandeur of manner into
his design, which should equal that mass of stones he heaped up and contrived
into the structure of this Gigantique Edifice, whereof the Columns contained
six foot diameter.

It is not precisely known who it was that caused it to be built, nor yet to
what purpose it served: Some imagine it was a Temple erected by the Emperor
Aurelianus and dedicated to the Sun: Others that 'twas only a particular
Palace. The vulgar have a Tradition that Nero raised it of that height to
behold the Conflagration of Rome, which is very improbable, as being too great
a work to have been accomplished in so short a time: But whatever it were,
certain it is, that it has been the most magnificent and goodliest Order of
Corinthian Work which all Rome could boast of, as one may well perceive by the
design which I shall present you of it after that of the Profile of the Portico
belonging to the Rotunda, being the Model on which I regulate the Proportions
of the Corinthian.

The ensuing Design is a simple representation of the History of Callimachus
which I but now reported, and is placed here only for Ornament-sake.

CHAP. XXVII.
A Corinthian Profile taken from the Portico of the Rotunda at Rome.
THE whole height of the Order from the Base to the Cornice amounts to three
and twenty Models and two thirds, whereof the Column with its Base and Chapter
contains nineteen, and the Entablature four and two thirds; so as the whole
Entablature (which is the Architrave, Freeze, and Cornice) makes a quarter of
the Column: And albeit it may seem reasonable to follow the opinion of some
Authors, who allow him but a fifth; yet we find, that the most famous of the
Antique, for example, this frontispiece of Nero, and the three Pillars of Campo
Vaccino at Rome, which in the judgment of Architects pass for the noblest
relics of Antiquity, challenge an entire fourth part for their Entablature:
Upon this account, I conceive it safest to preserve our selves within the
limits of our Example from the Rotunda, lest endeavoring to render this Order
more spruce and finical, it become in fine but the more contemptible.

Behold here its composition in general, and the proportions of the principal
Members, of which the Model is ever the Semidiameter of the Column, divided
into thirty Minutes.

The entire height of the Order contains twenty three Models and two thirds,
which amount in Minutes to -- 710

The Base has one Module precisely -- 30

The Shaft of the Column fifteen Modules and two thirds, wanting two Minutes --
468

The Chapter contains two Modules and a third only -- 70

The Entablature, viz. Architrave, Freeze, and Cornice four Modules, and two
thirds, two Minutes over; -- 142

Concerning the small divisions of each part, it would be too tedious and
indeed superfluous to specify them here, since the Design demonstrates them
more intelligibly.

I have toward the end of the second Chapter of this Book taught how one
should make the Calculation of an Order for the examining the Proportion which
the Entablature bears with its Column, and thereby to see if it hold regular:
It would be no loss of time to the Reader did he make proof of his skill upon
every Profile: But I advise him before hand that there are three different
Proportions all of them beautiful, and which may very well agree with this
Corinthian Order: That is to say the Fourth, as in this and the following
Profile; The two Ninths, which are the mean Proportions of the fourth to the
fifth, as in the third Profile taken from the Baths of Dioclesian: and lastly
the fifth, as in the Profiles of Palladio and Scamozzi not so frequently
encountered amongst the Ancients.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Elevation in Perspective of an excellent Corinthian Profile, which was in
the Frontispiece of the Torre di Nerone at Rome.
ALthough this piece of Architecture were one of the most magnificent of all
Antiquity, as well for the excellency and the richness of its Ornaments, as for
the stupendiousness of the Work; yet could I never certainly learn what kind of
Structure this should have been, nor indeed under whose Reign it was built;
Some reporting it to have been a Temple dedicated to the Sun by the Emperor
Aurelian; Others, that it was only a private Palace built by Nero, in which
he placed that extravagant Coloss of Brass which fixed a non ultra to the folly
of the Sculptors of that Age, who out of a sacrilegious profanation of their
Art would deifie the Emperors, by erecting Statues to them of a prodigious
grandeur, as they did heretofore to the Gods to whom this honor was of right
to be reserved. Andrea Palladio conceived it to have been a Temple of Jupiter;
some others conjectured that it might be a Palace of the Cornelia's, thus every
one had his particular conceit: But since the truth of this question is very
indifferent to our Subject in hand which considers only what relates to
Architecture, I shall resign the debate thereof to our Antiquaries.

The Columns were ten diameters in height, every diameter of six foot, which
being of so excessive a bigness as transcended whatsoever had been built at
Rome either before or since it, inclines me to believe it might indeed be some
work of Nero's. The Composition of the Profile in general is of an excellent
Idea, and each member sufficiently regular: For the rest, I thought fit to
present it in Perspective, to show the stupendous effect of this manner of
design, which even upon paper it self, and without at all exceeding the limits
and proportions which the Art has prescribed, presents to the Eye a kind of
astonishing grandeur, proceeding partly from the extraordinary projecture of
the Entablature, whose Corona carries its jette a great way beyond the
Modilions, and which indeed makes the Columns to appear a little weak and
surcharged: But the Architects had provided judiciously for it, by making use
of that manner of Columniation which the Greeks have termed Pycnostylos, where
the Pillars are set very near to one another.

Now for that those who have only made their studies of Architecture but from
simple Profiles, may wonder to see here some of the Members extraordinarily
distant from their accustomed proportion; I advertise them that it proceeds
from an effect of the Optiques, which never presents things precisely to the
Eye, but diversifies them according to the various aspects and distances from
whence they are beheld; and the parts which thence receive a more sensible
alteration, are such of them whose superficies is most flexuous and circulary,
as the Gula or Ogee which composes the Crown of the Cornice, which being seen
from beneath, and more advanced upon the Plan, receives a considerable access
of height: The same reason also makes the Column to diminish, as being set
further within the Plan then any of the rest of the Members.

CHAP. XXIX.
Another Corinthian Profile exceedingly enriched and full of Ornament, taken
from Dioclesian's Baths at Rome.
AFTER this Corinthian Example we are no more to expect any thing rich in
Architecture, but it belongs to the judicious only to put it in practice, for
the abundance of Ornaments is not always to be esteemed, nor of advantage to a
building; On the contrary unless the Subject oblige one to it by considerations
very powerful, one should never be too profuse, since they but disturb the
proportions and produce a confusion among the Parts which offends the eye of
those who are truly knowing, and carries a certain antipathy to the very name
of the Order.

It is not therefore to be employed but in great and public Works, Houses of
Princes, and such Palaces as are built for magnificence only; as were
heretofore at Rome the Bathes of Dioclesian of Antoninus, and Trajan whereof
there are yet to be seen such goodly remainders, and from whence this Profile
had been taken notice of and designed by that famous Architect Pyrro Ligorio in
the year 1574; since which time these great Theaters of Architecture have been
dismantled of sundry of their Columns with their ornaments, and of a number of
other incomparable pieces, whose Designs I have from the hand of several
Masters who had there made very curious and profitable observations from many
noble things which are now no more to be found.

The Diameter of the Columns of this Profile amounted to four Palms; The
Chapter had this in particular, that its stalks and flexures of the leaves were
made in the form of Ramms horns, but the rest after the ordinary proportions
and foliage. In sum, the whole Ornament in general was so artificially
elaborated, and finished with that affection and politeness, that Pyrro Ligorio
having accomplished the design, writ this underneath it, That by the
delicateness of the work, one would believe, the Sculptors had wrought with
their Tools persum'd.

The Proportions of the Order.
The Column together with its Base and Chapter has twenty Models, which reduced
to Minutes (thirty whereof make a Model) amounts to -- 600

The Architrave has a Model and one Third -- 40

The Freeze in like manner one Model and a Third -- 40

The Cornice two Models within eight Minutes -- 52

The whole Entablature amounts to two ninths of the height of the Column, which
is a noble proportion, and shows handsomely in work.

CHAP. XXX.
A Corinthian Profile of the Temple of Solomon out of Villalpandus.
BEhold here a kind of Particular Order, but of an excellent Composition, which
though I dare not affirm to have been precisely the same Profile with that of
Solomon's Temple (the Model which I propose to my self) yet as near as one can
approach to that divine Idea from its decription in the Bible and some other
famous Histories mentioned in that great work of Villalpandus where all the
ornaments and principal proportions of each member are exactly specified, I
conceive it to be sufficiently conformable. The composition is perfectly
Corinthian, though the foliage of the Capital and its Cauliculi or branches are
of Palms, and the Freeze of the Entablature have borrowed the Dorique Ornament
which are the Triglyphs whose solidity bears but little conformity with the
tenderness of the Corinthian: But by what ever name you will call this Order
(notwithstanding that Josephus affirms it to have been the Corinthian) certain
it is, there was never any more perfect: and although the Corinthian be a very
soft and maidenly Order, which does not require the strength and virility of
the Dorique, symboliz'd by the Triglyphs; yet may one upon certain occasions
introduce it with that address and reason, as will not only render it
excusable, but very judicious: For instance, suppose one were to build Churches
or Altars in memory of those generous Virgins who from their tender age
vanquished the cruelty of Tyrants for the defense of Christianity, surmounting
all sorts of Torments by their Constancy, What could we imagine more expressive
and suitable to their Courage then this divine Order? It may also be proper on
some profane occasions, as in Triumphal Arches and the like Structures. In a
Word, since it gave Ornament to that famous Temple of Jerusalem, which never
yet had equal, we may with reason call it the flower of Architecture, and the
Order of Orders.

CHAP. XXXI.
Palladio and Scamozzi upon the Corinthian Order.
OF all the Corinthian Examples which I have formerly produced for the Rule of
the Order expressly chosen from the most excellent pieces of Antiquity, there is
not one of them of the proportion which these two Masters here observe, who
make their Entablature but of a fifth part of the Column: However when I
consider their great reputation (particularly that of Palladio, whose Works
even emulate the best of the Ancients) and the reasons which they allege for
discharging the Columns proportionably as they are weakened by the altitude and
diminution of their Shaft, according to the delicateness of the Orders, I can
neither contradict their judgment, nor blame those who would imitate them;
though my own Maxim be ever precisely to conform my self to the Gusto of the
Ancients, and to the Proportions which they have established.

Palladio makes his Column but of nine Diameters and an half, that is to say,
of nineteen Models; so as the difference of the height observed betwixt his
Entablature and that of Scamozzis proceeds from Scamozzis Columns being of ten
Diameters which is likewise an excellent Proportion, and indeed more usual then
the other among the Ancients.

CHAP. XXXII.
Serlio, and Vignola upon the Corinthian Order.
MEthinks I see here a Giant next a Pigmy, so monstrous is the disproportion
'twixt these two Masters; and the reason of this so extraordinary inequality
proceeds from two Causes; Whereof the first is, that Serlio allows to the
Entablature of his Profile but a fifth part of the Column, whereas Vignola
makes his own of an entire quarter, and exceeds even that by some Minutes: The
second is, That Serlio following Vitruvius, makes the altitude of his Column
but of nine Diameters, and Vignola gives his ten, the same which I formerly
observed in the Ionique Order, where we met the very same inconvenience. But
albeit the difference of these two Profiles be in general very considerable;
yet coming to the particulars, what we find in their Capitals is of greater
consequence, since we must of necessity condemn that of Vitruvius prescribed in
his fourth Book toward the end of the first Chapter; there being no reason to
prefer it alone to a number almost innumerable of most excellent Models which
remain of Antiquity, amongst which we meet with none in the same terms to which
he has reduced the height of his own; unless it be that out of respect to this
grave Author, who is indeed worthy the reverence of all those of the
Profession, and to avoid the invidious name of Critique, we should choose a
gentler way, which is to elude the question after their examples, who having
already observed the same mistake before us (either in effect or out of
modesty) believed the Text to have been corrupted in this place as well as in
diverse others where the alteration is manifest; so as assisting the sense a
little one may suppose that Vitruvius designing the height of the Corinthian
Chapter by the largeness of the Diameter of its Column, he should not have
comprehended the Abacus, which is the sole ambiguity of this Passage, and which
indeed deserves correction, or to be otherwise understood then Serlio
comprehends it.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Daniel Barbaro, and P. Cataneo upon the Corinthian Order.
OF all the four Orders of Architecture described by Vitruvius (for he speaks
not a Word of the Composita which is the fifth) This of the Corinthian appears
to me to be the most slightly handled, considering the nobleness and
magnificence of its Inventors, who having spared no cost to render it rich and
excellent beyond all the rest, were not likely to borrow any thing from those
amongst whom they were ranked. I conceive that Vitruvius therefore at the
beginning of his fourth Book had no reason to affirm, that they used to employ
the Entablature and the Ionique, and sometimes even the Dorique Column also,
without any other addition save the Capital of their own invention; since by
the ancient Examples of this Order we find the contrary: But the R. Daniel
Barbaro his Commentator whose design is before us, is by no means to be blamed
for it, whose province was only to express the meaning of the Master whom he
explained, and of which he has very worthily acquitted himself.

He has therefore fitted an Ionique Entablature to this Corinthian Profile,
forming the Capital of Acanthus-leaves conformable to the description and
history of its original mentioned by Vitruvius. I would not for all this advise
any Workman to make use of this Composition; without first considering the
relative proportion which the Entablature ought to have with the whole of the
Order, a thing that I find is here extremly changed and a great deal less then
it should be, by reason of the considerable height which the Column has
received by that of the Corinthian Chapter, which is two thirds higher then the
Ionique; but this is remedied by enlarging the Freeze, and by adding some new
Moulding to the Cornice 'twixt the Corona and the Dentelli, as a quarter of a
Circle of so, to carve the Eggs and Ankers in.

The Design of Cataneo has nothing in it remarkable, unless it be the
extravagant Projecture which he allows to the fillet of his Dentelli, as we
also find it in the Design of D. Barbaro: They have both in this followed that
Maxim which regulates the Projecture of every member to its height, but this
rule is not always to be received.

What I have said in the precedent Page touching the height of the Capital
according to Vitruvius would here be superfluous to repeat: It may therefore
serve both for this, and for all the rest that follow being of the same
Species.

CHAP. XXXIV.
L. Baptista Alberti, and Joseph Viola upon the Corinthian Order.
I Shall here need only to examine the design of Alberti, That of his
Companion Viola being but an imitation, or rather a perfect Copy after the
Profile of Palladio, which we have seen already, and to which I referr the
Reader as to its Original.

As touching that of L. B. Alberti, I find two remarkable particulars in his
design which seem worthy of reprehension: The first is the low proportion of
the Capital, which is only pardonable in the followers of Vitruvius, for we
find no Example of it amongst the Ancients since even he himself imitates a
Manner both greater and more noble then the Vitruvian: The other observable is
in his Cornice, to which he has given no Corona though it be a member so
essential and one of the principal in the Entablature: But though this liberty
be somewhat bold, and perhaps blameworthy, yet remains there one considerable
Example at Rome, in the Cornice of that famous Temple of Peace built by the
Emperor Vespasian, being one of the greatest and most superb Relics of
Antiquity.

The face likewise of the Modilions seems to me of the largest, and besides
that the Foliage which domineers in the Freeze holds not sufficient conformity
with the Cornice, as too simple and plain for so rich an Ornament: But the
remedy is at hand by adding a few Leaves or other Carvings on the Cymatium's of
the Cornice and Architrave, with Eggs upon the quarter round; unless it be that
you would rather save that work by abating somewhat of the Ornament of the
Freeze: There will yet remain this Objection still in the design; That the
Author resolving rather to fix upon the Capital of Vitruvius then on those of
the Ancients, he ought not to have carved them with Oliveleaves; since
Vitruvius does expressly order them of the Acanthus.

CHAP. XXXV.
Bullant, and DeLorme upon the Corinthian Order.
I Should do an injury to one of our prime French Architects John Bullant by
name, if by the Examen of this Prefile I should rank him with those of the
School of Vitruvius, since he has after this given us others of a nobler form,
which he has copied from the Ancients; but not finding him so perfectly exact
in the measures which he assigns them, I therefore omit 'em: He appears in this
design to have imitated Serlio, and indeed the difference between them is very
inconsiderable: notwithstanding I observe something in this of more refined, as
the Projecture of the Dentelli (or rather of the plain fillet on which they
should have been cut) which is extremely regular, whereas Serlio's is
excessive, besides the impertinent repetition of a small Ogee, which is thrice
within the space of the Cornice only, but which Iean Bullant has had the
discretion to diversifie: He also gives his Capital more grace, the leaves and
branches whereof are better shaped.

I could have wished for conclusion of our Corinthian Order, that De Lorme had
left us a more regular Design, and of a better relish: But the good man, though
very studious, and a lover of the Antique Architecture, had yet a modern
Genius, which made him look upon those excellent things of Rome as it were with
Gothique Eyes; as appears plainly in this Profile, which he pretends to be
conformable to those of the Chapels of the Rotunda. For the rest, his style is
so exceedingly perplexed, that it is oftentimes very difficult to comprechend
his meaning: The Reader will smile to see how he explains himself on the
subject of this Cornice ('it is in the fourth Chapter of his sixth Book) For
having cited all the measures of each part, piece by piece, he says, that as
to the height of the Architrave, he had divided it into three and forty parts
and an half, to give every thing its proportion, but that not falling out as it
ought, hes resolv^d to speak no more of it; and these are his very terms: As
to the Base of this Profile, I have taken it from the end of the second Chapter
of the same Book: And albeit its proportion be very extraordinary, he affirms
yet to have designed and measured it from certain Vestigia's very antique
(these are again his own expressions:) You may likewise take notice that the
stalks or Cauliculi under the roses of the Abacus rise too high in this
Capital: In sum, the Talent of this Architect, who has for all this acquired a
great deal of reputation, consisted chiefly in the contriving and surveying of
a Building; And intruth his chief perfection lay more in the art of squaring
stones then in the Composition of Orders; and of this he has indeed written
with most advantage and at large: But since him, and that very lately, the
Sieur Desargues of Lyens one of the most exquisite and subtle Geometricians of
this Age, whose Genius delights to render familiar and useful the most
excellent speculations of that Science, has exalted that Art to a much higher
perfection.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The Orthography of one of the Altars of the Rotunda.
NOT to leave the mind of our Reader altogether entangled amongst the Moderns,
and happly also deviating from the right path of Architecture, I am presenting
him with an Example from the goodliest Temple of Antiquity, which is one of the
Tabernacles now standing in the Rotunda; that so he may return and be again
reduced to this noble and perfect Idea of the Art which I have still been
proposing to him in my fixd discourse before every Order by the like Examples;
upon which, as upon the most permanent and immovable foundations, he ought to
fix and establish his Studies: For, compared to this, the writings of the
Moderns are but loose Earth, and illbottom'd, upon which one can erect nothing
that is substantial; and solid: But having already sufficiently treated of the
Modenatures and Proportions of the Corinthian Orders, and that the Design which
I here propose is too little for the precisely measuring of each member, I
shall only touch two or three particulars here which more import the general
composition of the Design then the regularity of the Order; The first whereof
is, That its now become as it were the mode, I should say rather an universal
madness, to esteem nothing fine, but what is filled and surcharged with all
sorts of Ornaments, without choice, without discretion or the least affinity
either to the Work or the Subject: so as the Composition of this Altar would be
esteemed very mean in the opinion of our small al a M^de Masters, who to enrich
it, would in lieu of the single Column which at each side sustains the
Frontispiece, make a pile of four or six and happly of more, with two or three
accumulations of Mouldings in the Cornice to break the Order and exact evenness
of the Members, whose regularity is anxious to them: One Fronton would be
likewise too few for them, they add frequently two and sometimes three, and
that one within the other; nor do they think it fine unless it be broken,
carved and frett with some Escutcheon or Cartouch at least: Nay even the
Columns themselves which are the props and foundation of the Orders escape them
no more then the rest; for they not only abuse and counterfeit them in their
Capitals and Bases, but in their very Shafts also: It Is now esteemed a
Master-stroak to make them wreathed and full of rings, or some other capricious
ligatures about them, which make them appear as if they had been glew'd
together and repaired: In fine, one may truly say, that poor Architecture is
very ill-treated amongst them: But it were not just to impute this great
reproach to our French Workmen only; The Italians themselves are now become
more licentious, and she us plainly that Rome has at present as well her
Moderns as her Antiques.

The End of the FIRST PART.


A PARALLEL OF THE ANCIENT ARCHITECTVRE WITH THE MODERN.
The SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.
Of the Tuscan Order.
It is an abuse so visible in the Architecture of the Moderns, their
confounding the Greek Orders amongst the Latin, that I am astonished at the
general inadvertency of so many Authors, as treating of their Symmetries, and
the Particularities of their Proportions, have so disposed of them as plainly
discovers how ignorant they were of their Proprieties and specifique
differences, without which it is so very difficult to make use of them
judiciously.

I had already hinted something in the Preface of the First Part of this
Treatise, to prepare the Reader for the new Order which I am here observing;
but which being contrary to the vulgar Opinion and current Practice will have
much ado to establish it self, and doubtless provoke many Adversaries. But
since the foundations of this Art are principally fixed upon such Examples of
Antiquity as are yet remaining, I hope, that in time my opinion may prevail,
seeing I tread but upon their footsteps, and rather demonstrate the thing then
discourse of it.

Hitherto all our Architects have generally held that the Tuscan Order was a
kind of Building which differed from the others but in the plainness of its
Mouldings, and solidity of its parts; but in the rest, consisting of the same
Members, and of like usage: And truly I should be injurious to condemn it,
since Vitruvius has in his fourth Book made a particular Chapter of the manner
how to build Temples after the Tuscan Order. Notwithstanding, however one might
interpret what he there says, it will be found very difficult to invent an
handsome Idea of Entablature fit to place upon those Columns: And therefore I
conceive that the only piece of this Order which deserves to be put in work,
and that can properly recommend it to us, is the simple Column it self without
any Architrave at all, as we find it employed by the Ancients: For whereas by
the ordinary usage of it, it is ever ranged in the last place, These great
Masters have assigned it one wholly independent from the others, and treated it
so advantageously, that it may for its beauty and nobleness stand in
competition with all the rest of the Orders: Nor will this I presume be denied,
when they shall well have considered that renowned Example which I am producing
of the Column of Trajan, one of the most superb remainders of the Roman
magnificence to be now seen standing, and which has more immortalized the
Emperiour Trajan then all the Penns of Historians. This Mausoleum, if so we may
call it, was erected to him by the Senate and People of Rome in recognition of
those great Services he had rendered the Country; and to the end the memory of
it might remain to all succeeding Ages, and continue as long as the very Empire
it self, they ordered them to be engraven on Marble, and that by the richest
touch that was ever yet employed. It was Architecture her self which was here
the Historiograph of this new kind of History, and who since it was to
celebrate a Roman, chose none of the Greek Orders, (though they were
incomparably the more perfect and in use even in Italy it self then the two
other Originals of the Country) lest the glory of this renowned Monument should
seem to be divided; and to instruct us also, that there is nothing so plain and
simple but what Art knows how to bring to perfection: She chose therefore a
Column of the Tuscan Order which till that time was never admitted but in gross
and Rustique works; and of this rude and inform mass made to emerge the richest
and most noble Masterpiece of the World, which Time, that devours all things,
has preserved and kept entire to this very Day in the midst of an infinity of
Ruins which even fill the City of Rome. And it is indeed a kind of miracle to
see that the Colosseum, the Theater of Marcellus, those great Circus's, the
Baths of Dioclesian, of Caracalla, and of Antoninus, that proud Moles of
Adrian's Sepulture, the Septizonium of Severus, the Amphitheater of Augustus,
and innumerable other Structures which seemed to have been built for Eternity,
should be at present so ruinous and dilapidated, that its hard even to divine
what their original forms were; whiles yet this Column of Trajan (whose
Structure seemed much less durable) remains extant and entire, by a secret of
Providence which has destined this stupendous Obelisk to the greatest Monarch
that ever Rome enjoyed, the Chief of the Church St. Peter, who possesses now
the Seat of that Emperor to whom it had been erected. But to preserve my self
within the limits of my subject, which is only to give you its description
according to the design of the Architect who was the Author of it, I shall
leave to such as are contemplative the moralizing on this so wonderful
Vicissitude; since it would be here from our purpose, and very impertinent to
the Art we are illustrating.

Let us then again return to our Column, and its singular use among all the
Orders of Architecture, where the rest of the Pillars do in comparison to this
appear but as so many Servants and Slaves of the Edifices which they support,
whiles ours is a Queen of that Majesty, that reigning as it were alone she is
exalted on the Throne of her Piedestal decked with all the treasures of glory,
and from whence she as freely imparts her magnificence to all those whom she
vouchsafes to look upon: The first and most illustrious of her Favorites was
Trajan, upon whose Monument I am now forming an Idea of the Order which I would
call Tuscan, without troubling my self with what all the Moderns have written
of it, who making no difference 'twixt it and the Rustique do no great honor
to the Tuscan while they gratify him with so poor an Invention: But lest our
Critics take it ill we should name that a Tuscan Order which had its first
Original in Rome, let them if they please call it the Roman Order; since they
may with much more reason do it then those who so name the Composita of which
we shall speak hereafter. For my part I regulate my self upon the Profiles of
the Capital and Base, which I here find to be the same Vitruvius attributes to
the T^scan Column: The most important difficulty in my opinion would be how our
Column having no Entablature, could be properly reckoned in the Catalogue of
Orders, that being so principal a Member, and in some degree the very Head of
the Order. But the Architect of this our Model well foresaw that something was
to be substituted in its place, and so contrived it after a most excellent
manner: He proposed doubtless to himself the imitation of those miraculous
Memphitic Pyramides which the Egyptians (those divine Wits to whom we are so
much obliged for many excellent Arts) had formerly erected to the memory and
Ashes of their Kings, who from the immense and prodigious greatness of their
Tombs one would believe had been Giants, and as it were Gods amongst Men: Their
Vrns and Statues crowned the summities of these artificial Mountains, from
whence, as from some august and terrible Throne, they seemed to the people
reigning after their death, and that with more Majesty then when they lived:
Our prudent Architect being to render the same honor to Trajan, the worthiest
Prince that till then had born the Title of Emperor, and whom the City of Rome
did strive to immortalize, reflected seriously upon these stupendous Works,
whence he drew this high and sublime imitation which we so admire, and which
has since become a Rule, and been followed on sundry other occasions: Two most
renowned Example of this are yet remaining; The Column of Antoninus at Rome
also, and that of Constantinople erected to the Emperor Theodosius after his
Victory against the Scythians; which sufficiently testify by their resemblance
to that of our Trajan, that this kind of Architecture passed currently for an
Order amongst the Masters of the Art, seeing they always employed it ever since
upon the same occasions, together with Tuscan Profilures both at the Base and
Capital: This established, the rest will easily follow, so as not to subject it
henceforward to the opinion and diversity of the Gus^o's of those the
Profession; since we have the Original for our Model to which we ought of
necessity conform lest we transgress the terms and regularity of the Order: Now
suppose an Architect be on some occasion obliged to introduce, or change any
thing in it, as the time and the quality of his design may require; he is yet
to proceed with extraordinary circumspection, and without in the least altering
the form of the principal Members; in which one shall perceive the address of
his spirit, and the gallantry of his invention: This is a Maxim so universal
through all the Orders, that without it one should never pretend to give Rules,
nor propose indeed any Example for imitation; so naturally obnoxious are our
inclinations to novelty, and so blind in our own Productions: See then from
what sourse the confusion of that Order sprung which they name the Composita,
and which the presumption and ignorance of Workmen has begotten like an
extravagant Monster blended with so many natures, and sometimes so averse and
contrary that it is impossible to distinguish their Species: I have reserved
their full Examen for the conclusion of this Treatise, where I shall make
choice of what I meet with of most conformity to the rules of Art and of good
Architecture, and where I shall produce some of the most famous Examples of
Antiquity, that at least men may have faithful Guides through this Labyrinth of
Confusion.

Our Trajan Column which we here substitute in stead of the Tuscan Order, by
the Prerogative of its excellent composition has this advantage above the other
Orders, that there seldom happning occasions worthy of it; that is to say, such
as are particular and noble enough to merit the putting it in practice; Our
small Masters incapable of so high an employment, have spoken nothing of it,
and by this means she has remained in her original purity: But the first which
was ever made in imitation of it, and that has exceedingly confirmed the
establishment of this new Order, was the Column of Antoninus which is yet very
entire, and the only Paragon to ours, though it concede somewhat to it in the
execution and magisterial handling; but in recompense of this it surpasses it
in the greatness of its Mass, a thing very considerable in this Order, whose
specifique beauty consists in being vast, and of a manner Colossale: for the
rest, the Composition and Ordinance of the whole design are very alike.

I will now show in general the effect and form of the principal members, and
of what one ought to be careful in the application of Ornaments, which are to
be disposed with great discretion, as being of the very Essence and body of the
Order: The first, and as it were the foundation of the whole Structure is the
Piedestal, which is here no less necessary then is the Cornice to the Columns
of the other Orders; and its proportion though square and solid requires an
enrichment of handsome Modenatures, and of all other sorts of ornaments at the
Plinth and Cymatium, but above all in its four faces, which are as it were the
Tables of Renown where she paints the Victories of those Heroes to whom she
erects such glorious Trophies: It is there that we behold all the Military
Spoils of the vanquished, their Arms, the Machins they made use of in fight,
their Ensigns, Shields, Cy^neterrs, the harness of their Horses and of their
Chariots,; their Habiliments of War, the marks of their Religion, and in a
word what ever could contribute to the pomp and magnificence of a Triumph: Upon
this glorious Booty our Column as on a Throne is erected and revested with the
most rich and splendid Apparel which Art can invent; and indeed provided the
Architect be a judicious person it cannot be too glorious: I repeat it again
that this ought in no sort to alter or in the least confound the Proportions
and Tuscan Profiles of the Base and Capital, as being the very keys of the
Consort and harmony of the whole Order. The last but principal thing, because
is sets the Crown upon the whole Work, is the Statue of the Person to whom we
erect this superb and magnificent Structure; This has an Vrn under his feet,
as intimating a renascency from his own Ashes like the Phoenix, and that the
Virtue of great men triumphs over Destiny which has power only over the vulgar.

As to what concerns the regular Proportion of this Figure and Vrn with the
altitude of the Column, I can here conclude nothing precisely, this part being
repaired in the Original, and that in a manner too modern and wide of the first
intention of the Architect to derive any advantage thence for our subject. It
may yet be said with likelihood enough, that since it is as 'twere the
Entablature of the Order one should allow it a fourth part of the Column as to
the Trabeation of the Dorique Order to which this bears a very great
resemblance: I conceive also that the Figure ought so to be proportioned by the
rules of the Optiques, that it may appear of a size somewhat exceeding the
Natural, and of an elegant Symmetry, that so it may be taken notice of above
all the rest; but with this discretion yet, that being of necessity to stand on
its feet, it appear of a firm position, and that the mass of the Vrn which
serves it for Piedestal have a solidness agreeable to this effect: For it is a
thing greatly obliging in Architecture, to make every thing not only solid and
durable, but that it likewise so appear and thereby avoid that Gotique
indecorum which affects it as a beauty, the making of their works seem as
'twere hanging in the air and ready to fall upon ones head, which is an
Extravagance too visible for us to spend any time in confuting.

By this time I think I have left nothing unsaid which concerns the general
Composition of our Column; As for the lesser retail of the Proportions and
Profiles of each Member, the Design shows them so perspicuously that 'twere but
a childish and impertinent labor to name them over by the piece, as those
first Inventors of Painting did, who to supply the weakness of the Art, not yet
arrived to so natural a representation of the things they imitated, were forced
to write under them, This is an Ox, a Tree, a Horse, and a Mountain: There will
be no need of this here, the effect of the Design having so far exceeded the
expression of all words, that it shows us more things in an instant, and that
with infinite more preciseness, then could have been described by discourse in
a very long time. I will therefore conclude by this rare kind of Language which
has neither need of Ears nor of Tongue, and which is indeed the most divine
Invention that was ever yet found out by man.

For the rest, you will in my Profile of the Trajan Column perceive with what
diligence and exactitude all these things conform to the Original, even to the
very least Ornaments, and thereby judge how exceedingly careful I have been in
other things of greater consequence. If the Reader be intelligent, and that he
have attentively viewed and with a Masterly Eye this rich and incomparable
Piece which I describe, the satisfaction he will derive from the accurate
Observations I have made and here present him will be proportioned to his
ability: For in these particulars our eyes do see no further then our
understanding purges them, nor do their admirable beauties reveal themselves at
once, nor to all the World in general; They will be curiously observed and
discovered with Industry: There are likewise several kinds which every one
considers according to the force of his Wit, and as they conform to his Genius:
Some there are who seek only the grace and neatness of Ornaments; Others
consider the nobleness of the Work and novelty of the Invention; The most
knowing having regard to the Proportions chiefly, and the regularity of the
Whole with its Parts, to the judicious Composition, the greatness and solidity
of the Design, and such essential beauties as are only visible to the eyes of
the most intelligent Architects; from whence it often falls out, that the same
Work in which all these parts are not equally perfect, is very variously
esteemed by those of the Profession (for there are but few like this of ours so
qualified as to merit an universal approbation,) and the misery of it is, that
the best things have for the most part many fewer Admirers then the
indifferent, because there are more Dunces then able Men.

The Modul of the following Design, and the Method of deciphering it is the
same with what went before; viz. That passing a Perpendicular through the
Center of the Column the whole height of the Order, I divide the Semidiameter
of the Pillar at the foot in thirty Minutes which compose the Modul upon which
afterward I regulate all the Members as well for their height as sailings over
and projectures of their Profiles, still beginning by this Central line of the
Column, that so the position of each individual part be exactly adjusted and
precisely in its place. This is so perspicuous, and has been so often repeated,
that there can remain no possible difticulty.

As to what now concerns the whole Mass, the Column contains seventeen Moduls,
comprehending the Base and Capital. The Pidestal with its entire Bassament,
Cymatium, and that Zocolo or Plinth above wrought with a festoon (which in my
judgment makes a part of it, as rendering it a perfect Cube, of all Geometrical
proportions the most regular and solid and consequently most agreeable to this
Structure) has in height three Moduls, a very little less: The Base of the
Column contains precisely one, and the Capital two thirds of a Modul.

CHAP. II.
Palladio, and Scamozzi upon the Tuscan Order.
HAving declared my opinion touching the use and form of the Tuscan Order after
the manner of the Ancients; I will now describe to you after what fashion our
Modern Masters have handled it, and in what reputation it is at present amongst
all our Workmen, who in regard of the meanness of so poor a Composition surname
it the Rustique Order, and that with reason, there being so little probability
that the Tuscans would ever own or acknowledge it in so wretched a condition.

Andrew Palladio, of all the Moderns the most judicious, and to whom in this
Collection we have assigned the most eminent place, presents us with two
Profiles; One whereof is so plain, that it has only a Summer of Timber covered
with another piece in stead of a Coping and Corona for the Entablature of the
Column; and I conceive he imagined it should have no other from what Vitruvius
has written of it. But finding this Composition too meanly handled to merit the
honor of an Order, this industrious Architect went and searched amongst the
old relics of Amphitheaters, which are those enormous masses of Architecture
where the solidity of the building was more requisite then the spruceness and
curiosity of the Orders; till in fine he discovered in the Arena's of Verona,
that of Polo, and other places, a certain Order which he conceived one might
call the Tuscan, in imitation whereof he composed this: For he did not tie
himself precisely to follow one rather then another; but from many he formed
and ordained this, which I have rather chosen then any of the other Masters.
That of his Companion Scamozzi might pass tolerably well had he not assigned
him a too great conformity with the Dorique, and so much as once mentioned
where he had seen any like it; so as being altogether Modern, and near as rich
in Mouldings as the Dorique it self, it were much better to make use of the
Antique; this being in nothing considerable for a building but for its
cheapness and the saving of time.

The height of the Column with its Base and Capital is of seven Diameters only
according to Palladio: Scamozzi allows to his seven and an half.

The Entablature contains always a fourth part of the Column.

CHAP. III.
Serlio, and Vignola upon the Tuscan Order.
WE have seen in the precedent Chapter the Tuscan Order of our Modern
Architects in its most advantageous luster; but methinks it is extremely
decayed here, especially in the Profile of Serlio, where the whole is indeed
too plain and particular, being the only Person who has allowed to every member
of the Order in general, Base, Captial, Architrave, Freeze and Cornice a like
altitude; this equality being here but a false kind of Proportion, and wholly
repugnant to what Architecture has borrowed from the Optiques.

Vignola has in this respect proceeded more rationally, adding to each Member
what it might diminish of its magnitude by the distance from the Eye; and
therefore he has made the Cornice somewhat higher then the Freeze or Architrave.

Serlio allows his Column but six Diameters; though Vitruvius (whom he always
strives to follow) gives it seven in his Chapter where he treats of building
Temples after the Tuscan manner, which is the seventh of his fourth Book.

Vignola, as to what imports the Column, conforms himself to Vitruvius; but for
the mouldings of the Capital and Cornice is governed wholly by his particular
fancy.

The Entablature both in the one, and the other of these two Profiles consists
of a quarter of the Column.

To the READER.
'TWERE altogether a fruitless study, and but labor lost to continue any
longer in quest of this Order after other Architects besides those four whose
Designs I have lately produced: I am therefore resolved to proceed no farther;
considering withal, that those who remain, are (for the most part) of
Vitruvius's School, from whence it is exceedingly difficult to collect any
thing more essential to the Tuscan Order then the mere simple form of the Base
and Capital which are already described in the Profile of Serlio, whereof the
repetition would be but superfluous. As to what concerns the Entablature, since
there remains extant no ancient, well-confirm'd, and positive Example, nor
indeed so much as any intelligible description of it in the writings of
Vitruvius, I shall make no great reckoning of their Inventions. I have likewise
observed, that Leon Baptista Alberti (the very best of those which remain after
Daniel Barbaro) has spoken of it but cursorily only, as in truth making no
account of it, and without giving us so much as a Profile. As little does he
esteem of the Composita, of which Vitruvius too has been altogether silent.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Compounded Order.
THE Compounded Order which has hitherto obtained the first rank amongst the
Moderns, will find it self extremely debased in this severe and exact review
which I have made upon the five Orders; and where (without at all regarding the
opinion of the Vulgar, and the judgment of others that have written before me)
I value nothing unless it be conformable to some famous and ancient Example, or
to the Precepts of Vitruvius that Father of Architects; that so (if possible) I
may at last reestablish the Art on its genuine Principles, and original purity
from whence those licentious Compositions of our late Workmen have so
exceedingly perverted it (under the pretext, forsooth, of this feigned Name of
the Compounded Order) that there hardly remains so much as the least Idea of
regular Architecture in it, so strangely have those Orders which contributed to
it degenerated into confusion, becoming even barbarous themselves by this their
extravagant mixture. But as it is a thing very difficult to subdue and reduce
some spirits to their devoire when once they have taken a bent and are
abandoned to libertinism; so nor do I pretend to gain any Disciples, or be so
much as heard by those who have thus presumptuously taken upon them to be
Masters, because they are either grown too old in their depraved gusto, or
ashamed to acknowledge their mistake; resolving rather to perish in their
opinion by obstinately defending it, then be so ingenuous as to reform it. I
address my discourse then to those Persons only, who having not as yet their
imaginations preposses'd preserve their judgment more entire, and are better
disposed to discern those charming beauties and originals of the Ancient
Architecture, acknowledged for so many Ages, confirmed by such a multitude of
Examples and so universally admired. Now for as much then as it is a thing of
main importance that we season our young spirits with an early tincture, and
begin betimes to settle in them these Idea's, I do ever at first propose to
them the same Models that have been left us by those great Genius's, as so many
Pilots and Compasses steering the direct Course to the Art, and saving them
from that propension which they naturally have to novelty, the very rock and
precipice of the first inclinations of the French, which being once
over-pass'd, reason does then begin to take the helm, to conduct and let them
see Things such as they ought to be, that is to say, in their Principles,
without which it will be altogether impossible to acquire more then a very
ordinary and superficial comprehension of them; and those who travel by any
other path grope like blind men in the dark, and walk insecurely, without ever
finding any real satisfaction in their Work: For the vain complacence of
ignorant men, be it that they take it from themselves (as commonly they do) or
that it be derived to them from such as are like them, it is so empty and false
a joy as it oftentimes turns to shame and confusion; whiles the true and solid
praise which is attributed to the merit of knowing Masters, and the excellency
of their Workmanship, is never obnoxious to this self-deception. Now how little
soever it be a man possesses of the Idea of this high manner of the Ancients
and the greatness of their thoughts, he shall soon perceive the meanness and
impertinency of our Modern Compositions, when in the midst of so many Examples
of the incomparable and only Architecture of the Greeks, which was the
ornament and splendor of the Ancient Rome (whose very Ruins and Vestigia's
render her yet august above all the Cities of the World) these wretched and
trifling spirits indigent in the midst of so great abundance, depart from the
right way which these great Masters have opened to them, taking a devious path
to pursue an abortive of Architecture, or the evil Genius of the Art rather,
which has introduced it self amongst the Order under the Title of Composita,
the favor of men's ignorance, and the indiscrect presumption of I know not what
pitiful new Architects, who have made it their Foolsbauble, and clad it in so
many apish and capricious modes, that it is now become a ridiculous Chin^era,
and like a Proteus not to be fixed to any constant form; so as it would be
altogether labor in vain, an idle and folish enterprise for us to search after
it here through all its wild and unlimited extent, since it has neither Rules
nor Measures, Principles, Species, nor particular Propriety, and so by
consequence not to be comprehended under the name of an Order. It would in
truth (in my opinion) be necessary for the good of the Art, and the reputation
of Architecture, that this Monster were altogether smothered, and that some
more pertinent and specifique name were given to those excellent Profiles which
we encounter amongst some Antiquities of the grand Design which (from I know
not what Tradition) are called of the Compounded Order; a Name altogether
novel, not so much as once mentioned by Vitruvius, and which is in earnest too
general and uncertain to suit with a regular Order: and that since they referr
the glory of its invention to the Romans, it were much more proper to call it
the Roman or Latin Order, as Scamozzi has judiciously enough done, and
moreover observed, that its Capital (by which alone it differs foam the
Corinthian) is of a more massy and less elegant Composition, whence he
conceives this Order should not be placed upon the Corinthian, left the weak be
burdened with the stronger: to which he might also add, that they can never
consist well in the same work together, as I have elsewhere demonstrated, and
this is so perspicuous that it admits of no possible extenuation: however those
who would take advantage of this evil practice and abuse of the Moderns to do
the contrary, might have a way to escape by this Asinine-bridge: For the
importance is very inconsiderable in comparision to that unbridl'd license
which nowadays reigns amongst our Compositers of the Composita, who not only
change the rank of the Orders, but reverse and overturn even all their
Principles, undermining the foundations of true Architecture to introduce a new
Tramontance more barbarous and unsightly then even the Gothique it self. But to
all this let us reply (in confusion of its Inventors) That an Architect should
no more employ his industry and study in finding out new Orders, to set a value
upon his Works, and render himself an able man; then should an Orator, to
acquire the reputation of being Eloquent, invent and mint new Words that were
never yet spoken; or a Poet compose Verse of another cadence and measure then
what are prescribed and are in use; this affectation being altogether puerile
and impertinent: Or, admit one would upon some occasion take any such liberty,
it ought to be with that discretion, and so to the purpose, that the reason
thereof should to any one appear immediately: Thus it was the Ancients made use
of it, but with so great caution, as that they have confined their entire
license to the sole form of the Capital, of which they have devised an hundred
gentile Compositions, and to some subjects peculiar, where they succeeded
incomparably, and out of whose limits one cannot (without manifest
impertinency) employ it in any work whatsoever. I will therefore choose two or
three Examples amongst a good number of Designs which lie by me of that most
famous Pyrro Ligorio, found out and observed by him in several places of Italy
with a diligence inestimable. But let us first conclude our prime Subject,
which is to form the Roman Composita, and make of it here as regular and
precise an Order, as any of the former Four. I propose (for this effect) two
antique Profiles, both of them excellent in their kinds; one very rich and full
of ornament taken from the Arch of Titus at Rome; and the other much plainer
indeed, but great and proud, being that of the Arco de Leoni at Verona.

If these two Instances suffice not our Reader, he may make his election of
others more to his liking, or fix upon any of those who best pleases him of the
Author's following, which I have therefore expressly collected together, and
amongst which I acknowledge my particular esteem for Palladio.

CHAP. V.
A Profile Composita taken from the Arco de Leoni at Verona.
BEfore I propose this Composita for Model, I shall first endeavor to prevent
and elude certain Objections which our Critiques may possibly raise, lest they
impute it to my inadvertency should I pass them by in silence. The first is,
That the Cornice is defective, for want of the Corona: The other is the naked
placing of the Dentelli, without any separation on the Freeze: Thirdly, the
excessive height of the Freeze: And lastly, that the three Faces of the
Architrave are all inverted from the ordinary position: And finally, that the
Plinth of the Base is a great deal too high being compared with the rest. To
all these Objections I might reply in a word, that in a business of
Architecture the reason is allowable since I produce an antique Example,
universally approved and such as this is: Besides I add, that the very name of
Compounded seems to infer a kind of Liberty, and that therefore an Architect
might sometime justly be permitted to take it, as occasion may suggest, either
by introducing into the Order or retrenching from it what he thinks most
conducible and proper to his Design; provided it be discreetly managed, as it
has been judiciously observed in this Profile, where the Author being to make
an extraordinary large Freeze for the more commodious placing of many Figures
which concernd his subject, would spare from the Cornice what he had usurped of
more then the regular proportion of the Freeze did permit him. To this purpose
it was he cut off and abated the Corona, though in truth a considerable Member,
but which is yet (as far as I can collect from other Instances) not absolutely
necessary; since in the Temple of Peace at Rome (one of the most stupendous
works of Antiquity) the Cornice though Corinthian has no Corona at all
notwithstanding that the Architect had the field so open before him. And L.
Baptista Alberti (whose authority is greatly prevalent amongst our modern
Masters) without other reason for it then that of his own gusto, has given none
to his Corinthian Order. Now as concerning the Compartiment of the Swaths and
Fascie of the Architrave, whose position here seems somewhat preposterous, it is
(to speak seriously) a little extraordinary, however I well remember to have
seen others which were like it, and Palladio produces us one Example of it
toward the end of his fourth Book taken from a Temple of Polo in Dalmatia, of
the Corinthian Order, the Architecture whereof is exceedingly rare and antique;
and there I also find that the Base of the Column has a Plinth likewife of an
excessive thickness, as indeed ours has, which supplied the place of a Zocolo.
Thus you have both reason and example sufficient for the answer of every
objection. But from hence one may also judge, that this Profile should not be
employed in work without extraordinary discretion, and indeed some kind of
necessity. That which I shall produce in the following instance is more regular
to particulars, and by consequent more agreeable to all forts of Works: But the
general Proportion both of the one and other is sufficiently equal. The Column
it self has ten Diameters, and the altitude of the Entablature amounts to a
fourth part of the Column.

CHAP. VI.
A Profile of the Composita taken from the Arch of Titus at Rome.
THE incomparable Idea of this Composita, and the richness of its Ornaments
makes me conjecture that the Inventor thereof might possibly accompany Titus at
the expedition and siege of Jerusalem; and that it was there he had
contemplated the divine Architecture of the Temple of Solomon, in imitation of
which (though in a very slender Copy, compared to that miraculous Edifice, and
especially in a different Order) he would show how studiously he had considered
it. This conjecture of mine has for its foundation that the Triumphal Arch from
whence I have drawn it is the very same which they erected to the glory of that
Emperor at his return from that famous enterprise: And the Architect who
happly contrived the Ordinance, and the whole Preparation of the Day of
Triumph, judiciously introduced into his work (which was to make the most noble
and lasting part of it) the Figures of the principal Spoils of the Temple, as
that of the Golden Candlestick with its seven Branches which stood in the
Sanctuary, and the Golden Table upon which was set the bread of Proposition
together with some other Utensils to this day extant in the Work.

Moreover the Arch has this considerable amongst others yet remaining of the
Ancients, That 'twas the first and very Original of this kind of Structure; and
albeit there have been since made some more sumptuous for greatness of bulk and
magnificence, this is yet of a better hand, and more exquisite Workmanship then
any of them.

I give you the Elevation in Perspective as well to gratify the Curiosity of
those who affect this Art, as that I may also contribute something to the
beauty of the Design; and besides that such as never saw the Original, may in
some sort judge of the Effect which it produces.

CHAP. VII.
Palladio, and Scamozzi upon the Composita.
ANdrea Palladio proposing this Profile of the Composita, which he also names
the Latin Order (to make it specifically differ from some others which bear
the same appellation) gives us a general Maxim for its proportion, which is to
make it resemble the Corinthian, the form only of the Capital excepted. And
though he add that this Order ought to be somewhat more decked and gay then the
Corinthian, it is to be understood in reference only to those who allow the
Corinthian Column but nine Diameters (as himself does) whereas this should ever
have ten.

Scamozzi's Profile has not so good a grace as that of Palladio, nor is it
indeed so exact in the regularity of its Entablature with the Column, where it
wants but three minutes upon the total to make it precisely a fifth; for though
this be a very small matter, yet since it had been better to have a little
exceeded then come short (the Ancients commonly allowing a whole fourth, or at
least two ninths) the defect is the more easily perceived. But what is yet
worse, is, that in the composition of the Cornice he has accumulated so many
small members one upon the other, as renders it trifling and a little confused.

CHAP. VIII.
Serlio, and Vignola upon the Composita.
I Am astonished at this last production of poor Serlio, who having till now
reasonably well conducted the first Orders of Architecture under the direction
and government of Vitruvius fails miserably at the very Port just as his Pilot
has deserted him: And what does most of all surprise me, is, that the man's
Genius (which was to imitate a mean and trifling Manner) should revolt in such
an instant and change into so strange an Excess. I was at first resolved to
have suppressed this Profile (for the Credit of the person) had it not been to
wrong his Competitor Vignola, and so frustrate him of the great advantage which
upon this occasion he has over him, since in the precedent Orders I have
sometimes conceived him his inferior. I shall not dwell long upon the
particulars which in this Composition to me seem defective; because I shall
sooner have finished in saying once for all, that there is nothing as it should
be, though the Cornice be taken from, and (as the Author pretends) followed
stroke for stroke after that of the fourth Order of the Colosseum, which is
indeed one of the most renowned Vestigia's of Antiquity and an admirable piece
of Architecture. But one had need of a very steady head to be able to climb
such an height without shaking ones judgment. He should have considered that
this Colossean Structure being a Mass of a prodigious altitude had need of some
Sophistications from the Optiques to make it appear regular to the eye; and
that therefore there would be an error and mistake in summing up the
dimensions and aequipondium of its members at a more moderate distance with the
same measures and proportions. This inadvertency had made him slip into another
fault much more gross and unpardonable; for he places upon a small and pitiful
Capital (after his own mode) the whole weight of the Colosseum, that is to say,
a Gigantine Entablature which composes the Corona of this prodigious Edifice.
This so monstrous medley appears more here then in the Author; because he has
designed it very slightly, and in so small a Volume (in his fourth Book and
ninth Chapter where he explains this last Order) that one can hardly discern
the form of the principal Members.

Vignola has proceeded with a great deal more exactness and judgment in his
Designs, which he has also Profil'd very neatly, and in a large Volume that
renders it commendable and of use to Workmen: He allows in this Composition the
same measures and proportions that he does to the Corinthian.

CHAP. IX.
Of a certain Ornament called the Fret.
ARchitecture is in all this Treatise so extremely jealous of those Libertines
that have the rashness of daring to corrupt the forms of her Profiles by their
capricious Inventions, that she even refuses entrance to all kind of Novelty
whatsoever: This it is which has put me in mind of the promise I made to
present you here with some extraordinary Designs of Capitals drawn from the
Antiques: But considering that they can serve for no use in any sort of
Structure at present, as being only proper to the Pagan Deities, and that we
have now no more Jupiters, Neptunes, or other Gods of that age, for whose
Temples these kind of Capitals were singularly appropriated, by representations
specifical to every Subject; I conceived it better to remove those baits which
served likewise but to awaken the ill Genius of our Workmen to imitate and copy
after them. To supply then their places with some other thing which should be
profitable and without reproach, I have made a very curious and rare Collection
of a certain Ornament which they call the Fret, and of which the Ancients made
great use, taking infinite delight in composing variety of sorts, as this
Design will show you. This Ornament consists in a certain interlacing of two
Lists of small Fillets, which run always in parallel distances equal to their
breadth, with this necessary condition, that at every return and intersection
they do always fall into right angles; this is so indispensable that they have
no grace without it, but become altogether Gotique. There is one (amongst the
ten I here present you) that consists but of a single fillet, which
nevertheless fills its space exceedingly well, and makes a very handsome show.
The Ancients did ordinarily apply them upon even and flat Members, as upon the
face of the Corona and Eves of a Cornice, under the Roofs, Planceres and
Cielings of Architraves; also about Doors, and on the Plinths of Bases, when
their Torus and Scotia's were carved; also they do rarely well about Platfonds
and upon Ground-works.

The End of the SECOND PART.
FINIS.


The INTERPRETER to the READER.
THE Author of this Parallel had at the end of his Treatise begun to explain a
few of the hard Words, Technical terms belonging to this Art, the Etymologies
whereof he thought necessary to interpret: And as I said they are but a few
indeed, compared to those which remain, about a dozen at the most; nor was it
necessary he should exceed that number in a Country where Workmen are generally
more intelligent in the proper expressions of the terms of the Arts unto which
they addict themselves, than ours for the most part are; and therefore if
waving the formal translation of that Page (for it exceeds very little more) I
have in lieu thereof considerably enlarged upon this Occasion by a more
finished and complete enumeration of the several Parts and members of the
Orders as they gradually succeed one another in Work, illustrated with more
full and exact definitions, than by any has yet been attempted for the benefit
of our Countrymen; I hope my Adventure may find both pardon and acceptance. Not
let any man imagine we do at all obscure this design by adorning it with now
and then a refined and Philological research; since whilst I seek to gratify
the politer Students of this magnificent Art, I am not in the least disdainful
of the lowest condescentions to the capacities of the most vulgar
understandings; as far at least as the defects and narrowness of our Language
will extend, which rather grows and abounds in complemental and impertinent
Phrases, and such forth (as Sir H. Wotton well observes from Gualterus Rivius's
incomparable Version of Vitruvius in the Germane-tongue) than in the solid
improvements of it, by either preserving or introducing what were truly
needful: and really, that very final conversation I have had in the Saxon
Writers, shows me clearly by what I find innovated or now grown obsolete, that
we have lost more than we have gained, and as to terms of useful Arts in
particular, forgotten and lost a world of most apt and proper expressions which
our Forefathers made use of without being obliged to other Nations: And what
care the French have taken upon this account only, may in part be judged from
that pretty, though brief Essay des Merveilles de Nature, and des plus nobles
Artifices, etc. wherein the proper terms of the most vulgar, as well as more
Polished Arts are most industriously delivered; whilst (to speak ingenuously)
I find very little improvement in the most pretending of our Lexicons and
Nomenclators yet extant, that of Bernardinus Baldus only upon Vitruvius
excepted, which yet is neither after my Method, nor for our Workmens turn,
being a Book of price, and written in the most learned tongue. It is a very
great deficient indeed, and to be deplored, that those industrious Compilers
did make it no more their business to gratify the World with the
Interpretation of the Terms of so many useful Arts, I mean the Mechanical:
Adrianus Junius has deserved well on this Occasion, to his great commendation,
and much it were to be wished that some universal and practical Genius would
consummate what he has so happily begun, and that not only in the Arts
Illiberal, as they are distinguished, and things artificial; but furnish us
likewise with more exact notices of the several and distinct Species of
Natural things; such as are the true Names of Birds, Fishes, Stones, Colors,
etc. since it is then, and not till then, our Lexicons, will have arrived to
their desired perfection, and that men will be taught to speak (like Orators
indeed) properly on all subjects, and obliged to celebrate their Labors.

J. EVELYN.

AN ACCOUNT OF ARCHITECTS and ARCHITECTURE, TOGETHER WITH An Historical, and
Etymological Explanation of certain TERMS particularly affected by ARCHITECTS.
THE knowledge of this sumptuous, magnificent, and useful Art for having been
first derived to us from the Greeks, we should not without infinite ingratitude
either slight, or innovate those Terms which it has pleased them to impose
upon the particular Members and Ornaments belonging to the several Orders; and
that as well for the veneration which is due to Antiquity, as that by
comprehending the signification of them, we may with the more facility and
address attain to the intelligence and genuine meaning of what the Masters in
this Profession have delivered to us in their several Writings and Works; not
to insist upon (what is yet not to be despised) the decorum of speaking
properly in an Art which the greatest Princes and Potentates of the Earth have
vouchsafed to honor by so many signal and illustrious Monuments as do to this
day consecrate their memories to posterity.

Since the Agent does always precede the Action, and the Person or Workman is
by natural Order before his Work, we are by an Architect Architectual.
to understand a person skilful in the Art of Building: The word is (...), a
Compound in the original, and signifies Fabrum praefectus, or if you will,
Informator, which the President, superintendent, or Surveyor of the Works does
fully express; his (...) being relative to the Fabri that are under him, as the
Operae or Laborers are subservient to them.

Budaeus calls him, Structorum Princes, and such a Person as a capable of
rendering a rational and satisfactory account of what he takes in hand.
Ratiocinatio autem est, quae res fabricatas solertia ac ratione proportionis
demonstrare atque explicare potest. Vitr. l. 1. c. 1. So our Master; and such a
one it seems was that Philo the Athenian Architect, of whom the Orator, Neque
enim si Philonem illum Architectum, qui Atheniensibus Armamentarium fecit,
constat perdiserte populo rationem operis sui reddidisse existimandum est
Architecti potius artificio disertum, quam or atoris fuisse, de Orat. 1. Seeing
his knowledge and ability in this faculty did not at all eclipse and diminish
has Eloquence and other excellent parts, but rather added to them; and this I
urge to show that it was no mean thing for a man to arrive to the talents of an
accomplished Architect, as he that shall take his Character out of Vitruvius
will easily conclude; Itaque Architecti (says he) qui sine literis
contenderunt, ut manibus essent exercitati, non potuerant efficere ut haberent
pro laborius Authoritatem, as if hands could do little in this Art for their
credit without letters: nay, so universal will this great Dictator have him,
that in those duodecim necessaria he sums up no less then twelve rare qualities
which he would have him furnished withal; Itaque eum and Ingeniosum, etc. I
will but only touch them. 1. He must be docil and ingenious. 2. He must be
literate. 3. Skilful in designing and drawing. 4. In Geometry. 5. Optics. 6.
Arithmetic. 7. History. 8. Philosophy. 9. Music. 10. Medicine. 11. Nay, in
Law; and 12. Astrology; and really, when (as in the following Chapter) he
there assembles his reasons for all this, you will be both satisfied with them,
and justify his curiosity. Not that an Architect is obliged to be an accurate
Aristarchus in Grammar, or an Aristoxenus in Music, an Apelles, or a Raphael
for Designing; in sum, an exact Professor in all these Faculties, sed in his
non imperitus; Sufficient it is he be not totally a stranger to them; since
without Letters he cannot consult with Authors: Without Geometry and the
Graphical Arts, he will never be able to measure out, and cast the Area; draw
the Plot and make the Scale: Being ignorant of the Optics he can never well
understand the due placing of his Lights, distance, magnitude and dimensions of
his Ornaments: By the assistance of Arithmetic he calculates the proportions
of the several Orders, sums up his Accounts and makes an estimate of the
Charge: being read in History he comes to discourse of the reasons, and
original of many particular Members and decorations, the height, improvement,
and decay of his Art; why the Greeks instituted the Order of the Caryatides,
and the Persian Entablatures were supported by Slaves; how the Corinthian
Capitels came to be adorned with foliage, the Ionique with a Matron-like
Voluta, etc. By the study of Philosophy he arrives to the knowledge of natural
things, and is able to discern the quality of the Elements, and the materials
which he makes use of: From some insight in Medicine he can reason of the
temperature and salubrity of the Air, and situation: Music will assist him in
contriving how in Churches, Tribunals and public Theaters men may with best
advantage hear the Preachers, Magistrates, and Actors voices: Without some
Tincture in the Laws he cannot be secure of his Title: and being wholly
ignorant of Astrology, position and influences of the Celestial bodies, the
Days, Winds, Weather, Equinoxes and course of the Heavenly Orbs (like Bruits)
pass over without observation, benefit, or prevention of their effects. To this
purpose (though much more at large) Vitruvius: But by this you may see how
necessary it is, that an accomplished Master Builder should be furnished beyond
the Vulgar, and I have been the longer in the repetition, not only that I may
advance his reputation, and for encouragement; but to show that in the proper
notion, and as the great Plato has somewhere defined him, Nullus Architectus
utitur manuum opera, sed utentibus praeest. No Architect is to be presumed for
the commonly illiterate Mechanic (which may bring it into contempt) but for
the Person who Superintends and Presides over him with so many advantages: Yet
neither is this to the dishonor of the meanest of those excellent Workmen who
make use of their hands and tools in the grosser materials, since God himself
and Nature the universal Builders, are by translation truly styled Architects,
both as to what they have excogitated so wisely, and wrought so artificially.

Be this then spoken of the Superintendent in particular, whom for distinction
sake and the Character assigned him we may name Architectus Ingenio: For since
to the perfection of an accomplished Building there were three transcendencies
required: 1. Strength, 2. Vtility, and 3. Beauty, for the apt Distribution,
Decor and fitness, Symmetrie and Proportion, there was likewise necessary as
many capacities, and that besides the judicious head there should be a skilful
hand, to which let us add Architectus Sumptuarius, a full and overflowing
Purse: Since he who bears this may justly be also styled a Builder, and that a
master one too, as being the Person at whose Charge, and for whose benefit the
Fabric is erected, and it is indeed the Primum mobile which both begins and
consummates all designs of this nature; for if that ingredient come once to
fall short, Men build their Monuments, instead of their Houses, See 21. Eccles.
8.
and leave marks of dishonor, for Tables of renown, Homo iste caepit
aedisicare, and nequivit perficere, This man began to build, and was not able
to finish. Yet thus have I known some excellent Persons abused, who trusting to
the Computation of either dishonest, or unskilful Artists, have been forced to
desist, sit down by the loss, and submit to the reproach: Vi^^. in P^ae^. lib.
But so it seems would not the Greeks suffer themselves to be over-reached,
when those great Builders the Ephesians (who knew sufficiently what a mischief
it was to the Public, as well as to private men) ordained it for a Law, That
if a Clerk undertook a Work, and spent more then his Calculation amounted to,
he should be obliged to make it good out of his own Estate, whilst, they most
liberally and honorably rewarded him if either he came within what was first
designed, or did not much exceed it. And this was esteemed so reasonable (upon
consideration how many noble Persons had been undon, and magnificent Structures
left imperfect) that Vitruvius writing to the great Augustus concerning this
subject, 2. Reg. 22. 7.
wishes the same Constitution were in force at Rome also. But thus I have done
with our Architectus Sumptuarius, I come to the

Manuarius the third and last, but not the least of our Subsidiaries, for in
him I comprehend the several Artizans and Workmen, as Masons, Stone-cutters,
Quarry-men, Sculptors, Plasterers, Painters, Carpenters, Ioyners, Smiths,
Glaziers, and as many as are necessary for the carrying on of a Building till
it be arrived to the perfection of its first Idea. But though it is not (as I
said) expected that these should trouble themselves with much Learning, or have
any thing to do with the Accomplishments of our Masters Superintendent: Yet,
since an exact and irreprochable Piece of Architecture should be (...) totius
Mathese^s the Flower and Crown as it were of all the Sciences Mathematical, it
were infinitely desirable that even every vulgar Workman whose calling is
conversant about Building, had attained to some degree of competent knowledge in
the more easy and useful principles of those lineary Arts, before they were
admitted to their freedom, or employed in designs of moment. And truly, if a
through insight of all these (as undoubtedly they are) be necessary to a good
Artist; I know no reason but such a Person (however it has pleased our Schools
in Universities to employ and decree their Chaires) might with very just reason
be also numbered inter liberalium disciplinarum Professores, and not thrust out
as purely Mechanical, inter opifices, a conversation hitherto only admitted
them; as if talking, and speculation about words, were comparable to useful
demonstrations: Great pity I say it is, that amongst the Professors of
Humanity (as they call it) there should not be some Lectures and Schools
endowed and furnished with Books, Instruments, Plots, Types and Modells of the
most excellent Fabrics both in Civil and Military Architecture, where these
most noble and necessary Arts might be taught in the English and Vulgar Tongue,
re^riv'd to their proper, and genuine significations; and it is to be hoped,
that when his Mojesty shall perfect his Royal Palace of White Hall according to
the design, he will in emulation of those Heroes, Francis the First, Henry the
Fourth, Cosimo de Medices, the Dukes of Vrbin, Richlieu and other munificent
Spirits, destine some Apartiments for the ease and encouragement of the ablest
Workmen in this, as in all other useful, Princely and Sumptuous Arts: I mean
for Printers, Painters, Sculptors, Architects, etc. by such liberal honoraries
as may draw them from all parts of the World to celebrate his Majesty by their
works to posterity, and to improve the Nation: For from such a bounty and
provision as this it appears to have been, which made Vitruvius Vitruv. in
pr^s^c. ad lib. 1.
to leave us those his incomparable Books, that we have now enjoyed for so many
ages; for so he acknowledges it to the great Augustus, Cum ergo eo beneficio
essem obligatus, ut and exitum vitae non haberem iopiae timorem, etc.

I might upon this occasion speak something here concerning the Matter and Form
of Buildings, which after the Persons who undertake them, are their most solid
and internal Principles; but I purposely pass them over at present, because
they do not properly belong to this Discourse, but to some more entire Treatise
of the whole Art than is yet extant amongst us, and to be delivered by some
industrious Person who shall oblige the Nation with a through examination of
what has already been written by Vitruvius l. 2. c. 3. ad 9. Palladio 1. c. 2.
Leon Albert^ l. 2. c. 45. 46. Dan. Barbato l. 11. Sir H. Wotton in his concise
and useful Theorems, etc. and in what shall be found most beneficial for our
Climat; it were I say, becoming our great needs that some ingenious Person did
take this in hand, and advance upon the Principles already established, and not
so acquiesce in them as if there were a Non Vltra Engraven upon our Columns
like those of Hercules, after which there remained no more to be discovered; at
least in the apprehension of our vulgar Workmen, who for want of some more
solid directions, faithful and easy rules in this nature, fill as well whole
Cities as private dwellings with rubbage and a thousand infirmities, as by
their want of skill in the profession, with the most shameful incongruities and
inconveniences in all they take in hand; and all this for want of Canons to
proceed by, and humility to learn, there being hardly a Nation under heaven
more conceited of their understanding and abilities, and more impatient of
direction than our ordinary Mechanics: For let one find never so just a fault
with a Workman, be the same of what Mystery soever, immediately he shall reply,
Sir, I do not come hither to be taught my Trade, I have served an
Apprenticeship, and have wrought ere now with Gentlemen that have been
satisfied with my work, and sometimes not without language of reproach, or
casting down his Tools, and going away in wroth; for such I have frequently met
withal. I do not speak this to diminish in the least from the capacity and
apprehension of our Nation who addict themselves to any of the most polite and
ingenious Professions, but to court them to more civility, and to humble the
ignorant: For we daily find that when once they arrive to a through-inspection
and address in their Trades, they paragon, if not exceed even the most
exquisite of other Countries; as we may see in that late reformation and
improvement of our Lock-Smiths, work, Ioyners, Cabbinet-makers and the like,
who from very vulgar and pitiful Artists, are now come to produce works as
curious for their filing, and admirable for their dexterity in contriving, as
any we meet with abroad, and in particular for our Ioyners, they excel all
other Nations whatsoever.

But as little supportable are another sort of Workmen, who from a good conceit
of their abilities, and some lucky jobb (as they call it) do generally ingrosse
all the work they can hear of, while in the mean time they disdain almost to
put their own hands to the Tool, but for the most part employ their
Apprentices, of some other ignorant Iourney-men; as if the same of their
Masters abilities did any thing contribute to the well performance of Work
undertaken, whilst in the interim he hardly appears himself till all the
faults be slubber'd over, the remedy either impossible or expensive, and our
Master ready to receive his Money, which such Gentlemen-Mechanicks commonly
consume on ease and bravery, being puffed up with an empty conceit of their own
abilities, which ( God knows) is very indifferent, and the less for want of
exercise and humility: a practcie so contrary to the usage of all other
Nations, that even such as by their knowledge in this kind, have meritoriously
attained to the Titles of Military Dignity, have notwithstanding pursued their
Employments and Callings in personal cares and assiduous labors, to their
eternal same so long as one Stone shall lie upon another in this World; as I
could abundantly exemplify in the works of Cavalieri Fontane, Bramanti,
Sansovino, Baglione, Bernini, Fiamingo, etc. whose egregious labors, both
before, and since the accumulation of their honors, do sufficiently justify
what I report concerning them. And that all such may know I reproach no man out
of spleen or the least animosity to their Persons (for such as are not guilty
will never be offended at my plainness, or take this for a Satyr) I cannot but
exceedingly redargue the want of more acquaintance in these so necessary and
becoming Arts even in most of our Nobility and Gentry, who either imagine the
Study of Architecture an absolute non-necessary, or forsooth a diminution to
the rest of their Education, from whence proceeds that miserable of loss of so
many irrecoverable advantages during their Travels in other Countries, as
appears at their return; whereas if it were truly considered, there is nothing
which does more properly concern them, as it contributes to their external
honor, then the effects of this illustrious Art: Besides, these being Persons
of better parts, are most likely to be furnished with the best abilities to
learn, and so consequently enabled to examine, and direct such as they shall
set on Work, without reproach either to their convenience or expense when they
at any time Build, not forgetting the Ornament and Luster which by this means
rich and opulent Structures do add to the Commonwealth; their remaining at this
day no one particular, for which Egypt, Syria, Greece, nay Rome her self
(beheld in all there State, Wisdom, and Splendour) have been more admired and
celebrated, then for the Glory, Strength, and Magnificence of their
incomparable Buildings; and even at present, the most noble Youth of Italy are
generally so well furnished with instructions touching this laudable Art, that
the knowledge of Architecture (and to speak properly in its terms etc.) is
universal, and so cherished, even in men of obscure extraction, that (as is
already instanced) Architects (I mean the Manuary as well as Ingeniary) have
been, and are yet often rewarded with Knighthood, and the Art professed as a
most becoming and necessary accomplishment in diverse of their Academies: Add
to this the Examples of so many great and illustrious Persons as (without the
numeration of those our Master has recorded in the Preface to his seventh Book)
I might here bring upon this Theater famous for their skill and encouragement
of this sumptuous Art: Emperors, Kings, Popes, Cardinals and Princes
innumerable, who have all of them left us the permanent Monuments of it in the
several places of their Dominions, besides the infinite advantage of well
managing of great and public expenses, as well as the most private and
Oeconomical, an handsome and well contrived house being built at a far less
charge, than commonly those irregular congestions, rude and brutish inventions,
which generally so deform and incommode the several habitations of our Gentry
both in City and Country.

But I have done, and I hope all that love and cherish these Arts, and
particularly that of Architecture, will not be offended at this Zeal of mine in
bespeaking their esteem of it, since if I have said any thing in reproof of the
errors either of the Persons who pretend to it, or of the Works which they do
to its disgrace; I have only spoken it that both may be reformed and made the
better. But least whilst I thus discourse of the Accomplishments of our
Artists, and defects of the Pretenders, I my self be found Logodaedalus, and as
they say, Architectus Verborum only, I proceed from the Person to the Thing.

Architectura, Architectura.
derived from the Greek Substantive (...), and which is by some taken for the
Art it self, by others for the Work, aedificio ipso and opera, by us for both,
is thus defined; Scientia pluribus disciplinis, and variis eruditionibus
ornata, cujus judicio probantur omnia quae a caeteris artibus perficiuntur,
opera. Architecture (says our Master Vitruvius) is a Science qualified with
sundry other Arts, and adorned with variety of Learning, to whose judgment and
approbation all other Works of Art submit themselves. Or rather in short and as
effectual, cujus praeceptis diriguntur, and judicio probantur, etc. for so it
seems to be more explicit, since in a Geometrical Problem there are both the
Construction, or Direction Operis faciendi, which these Praecepta define; and
also, the Demonstration or Probation Operis jam facti, which is specified by
the Iudicium in the Vitruvian definition. I conceive therefore the first part
to be the more Essential and inseparable; the latter to be but the result of
the former, and no more ingredient into the Art then the image of a Man's face
in a Glass is constitutive of him.

But to forbear any farther gloss, you see what a large dominion it has, and I
might go on: Ea nascitur ex fabrica and ratiocinatione, to show that she is the
Daughter of Building, and Demonstration: Demonstratio.
Then, (for so I affect to render it) that Building is the result of an
assiduous and manual practice upon apt materials according to the Model
propounded; and lastly, that our Ratiocination is an ability of explicating
what we have done by an account of the just proportions; In a word, it is the
Art of Building well, that is, handsomely, solidly, and usefully; for so (to
omit many other Elogies and Definitions) I find it established; and therefore
the learning of our Architect without the diligence of our Workman, umbram, non
rem consecuta videtur, may serve to rear a Tabernacle, not build a Temple,
there being as much difference between speculation and practice in this Art, as
there is between a Shadow and a Substance; but with what advantages those
persons proceed who both know, and can apply, I have already demonstrated; and
when we consider that the whole Art consists in the most exact and elegant
order imaginable, it is not to be wondered there have been so few able men of
the Profession: Sir H. Wotton, who reckons those two parts for one, that is,
the fixing of the Model to a full expression of the first Idea, passes (with
our Master) to the species or kinds of this disposition; whose learned names
since our politer Workmen do commonly retain, I think meet to interpret for the
benefit of the less knowing. The first is,

Ichnography, Ichnogra.
by which we are to understand the very first Design and Ordinance of a Work or
Edifice, together with every partition and opening, drawn by Rule and Compass
upon the Area or Floor, by Artists often called the Plan or Plat-forme as in
our reddition of the Parallel: The Greeks would name it (...) Vestigii
descriptio, or rather Vestigium operis, the superficial efformation of the
future Work, which our Ground-plot does fully interpret. This is properly the
Talent and Work of the chief Architect or Surveyor himself (and indeed the most
abstruse and difficult) by which he expresses his conception and Idea for the
judicious collocation, idoneous and apt disposition, right casting and
contrivement of the several parts and Rooms according to their distinct
offices, and uses; for as Ordination imports the quantity, so does this the
quality of the Building. To this succeeds

Orthography, Orthographia.
or the erect elevation of the same in face or front described in measure upon
the former Idea: Some do by this comprehend the sides likewise (but so will not
I) to be seen as well within as without the Model. It is in truth but the
simple representation of that part opposite to the eye of the beholder, and
thence by Italians l' Alzato or l' impiedi, facciata and Frontispiece, without
shadows or other deceptions, and the second species of disposition. The last is,

Scenography, Scenographia.
or (as some) Sciagraphy, which is the same object elevated upon the same
draught and center in all its optical flexures, diminutions and shadows,
together with a fore-shortning of a third side, so as the whole Solid of the
Edifice become visible in Perspective (as they say) because composed of the
three principal lines used in that Art, viz. that of the Plan or Plot,
belonging to the first Idea; that of the Horizon or eye-line, which denotes the
second; and the line of distance which makes the third with all its
adumbrations and shadowings, which distinguishes it from what they call the
Profile Prophile.
signified by the edging strokes and contours only, without any of this solid
finishing. From these three Ideas it is, that same Eurythmia, Eurythmia.
and Venusta species Aedificii does result which creates that agreeble harmony
between the several dimensions, so as nothing seems disproportionate, too long
for this, or too broad for that, but corresponds in a just and regular Symmetry
Symmetria.
and concent of the Parts with the whole, as the due make of each member in the
body denominates the compleatness of the figure, by it in Statue, or the Life.
Lastly,

Decor, Decor.
which is not only where the Inhabitant, and habitation, suite, seeing that is
many times accidental; but where a Building, and particularly the Ornaments
thereof, become the station, and occasion, as Vitruvius expressly shows in
appropriating the several Orders to their natural affections; so as he would
not have set a Corinthian Column at the Entrance of a Prison, nor a Tuscan
before the Portico of a Church, as some have done among us with no great regard
to the decorum: Here therefore it is, that the Judgment of an Architect ought
to be consulted, since even in the disposition of the Offices of our most
private houses, we find no where greater absurdities committed, whilst we many
times, find the Kitchen where the Parlour should have been, and that in the
first and best story, which should have been damned to the lowermost and the
worst.

Philander seems to be in some doubt whither the Architect did after all this
make a Model Mode^lam.
of his future Work, but resolves it in the affirmative for many reasons, ita
enim futura deprehenduntur errata, and minimo impendio, nulloque incommodo,
etc. for so (says he) future errors may be timely prevented, with little cost,
and without any trouble before the remedy prove incorrigible. There is nothing
certainly spared to less purpose, and more to the detriment of Builders then
the small expense of making this Prototype, which I would have framed with all
its Orders, and Dimensions, by the assistance of some skillful Ioyner, or other
ingenious Artist in some slight material, which may be to remove, uncover and
take in pieces, for the intuition of every Contignation, Partition, Passage,
and Aperture without other adulteration by Painting or Gaudy artifice, but in
the most simple manner as Sir H. Wotton prudently advises, for reasons most
material and unanswerable; but from all which we may deduce how absolutely
necessary it is, that an Architect have more than a vulgar dexterity in the Art
of Designing and Drawing, Quae autem conferant, imo, quae sint Architecto
penitus necessaria ex artibus, haec sunt, Pictura and Mathematica; in ceateris
doctusne sit, non laboro: So the Patriarch, lib. 9. upon that of our Master,
lib. 1. c. 1. Peritus Graphidos, etc. and then concludes, Necessaria igitur est
Architecto Graphidis (i. e.) designationis ut Itali dicunt peritia, as being a
thing altogether indispensable; but of this already, for by the Method of this
Institution I should now proceed to the more particular distributions of this
Art, whither in respect to private or public Buildings, but I leave it for the
next Edition of what remains of the incomparable Palladio, when either by the
same it is begun, or by some other charitable hand, it shall be taught to speak
English; and the title of this Discourse, which minds me of a through
explanation of the more dificult terms of this Art, for being principally, if
not only conversant about the five Orders and their Ornaments (the subject of
our learned Parallel) calls me back to a distinct Survey of them, and I will
begin at the Foundation.

Properly Foundation Fundamtutum.
is the very Cofer or ground-bed searched ad solidum, and in solido, as our
Master advises, and upon which a wise man would only Build and raise the
Proto-substruction, or first beginning of his Wall. This the Greeks called,

Stereobata Stereobata.
for its artificial firmeness, as immediately succeeding the underfilling of
the former (for so we name those dry Materials upon the Surface) to be the
Bases of the whole Edifice: I am not ignorant that some contend about this
Office, confounding it with the Stylobata and Pedistals of Columns, assigning
them a regular thickness of half as much more as the Orders they support; and
then the Italians call it the Zoccolo, Pillow or Die (because of its Cubique
and solid figure:) But I rather take it for the Basamento of the whole which I
would therefore rather augment than contract to that stinted dimension: The
Reverend Daniel Barbaro, c. 8. l. 2. describes us all the kinds of them, and
calls this in particular (and which confirms this division) the conceiled
part, or fondatio in imo: And then by this elegant distinction defines
Structura to be that of Fronts; Instruction, Structura. Instructio. Substructio.
that of the middle parts; and Substruction, of the lower; though this last
notion does likewise many times import some vast and magnificent Building, for
so Baldus has cited that passage in Liu. l. 6. where he names the stately
Capital a Substruction only, and other Authors Substructiones insanas, for such
vast and enormous Fabrics: But that we may not omit the Pedistal (though of
rarer use amongst the Ancients) I come next to the

Stylobata; Stylobatum Pedistal.
For our Pedistal is vax Hybrida (a very mungrill) not a Stylo, as some
imagine, but a Stando, and is taken for that solid Cube, or square which we
already mentioned to be that to the Column imposed, which the Superstructure is
to this. It is likewise called Truncus the Trunk (though more properly taken
for the shaft or body of an Order) contained between the Cornice and Base (for
Pedistals have likewise those Ornaments inseparably) also Abacus, Dado, Zocco,
etc. which is sometimes Carved with bass-relievo in Historical Emblems, as that
of Trajans at Rome: Poggio, from its office of supporting, and then it is
constantly adorned with a Cornice consisting of a Cymatium on a Corona with
Lifts, and sometimes Scotia or shallow cavities and an addition of an upper
Zocco or Plinth of a smaler hollow and part of the Cymatium, upon which the
Scamilli impares Vitruviani were set, if designed for Statues: Or, if without,
for Columns. The Base has likewise an Ornament of a Cynatium inverted upon a
Plinth, as may be seen in the Corinthian Stylobata. But, as we affirmed, the
Ancients did seldom use Pedistals unless where Railes and Balusters were
requisite, and Parapet walls for Meniana, Pergolas and Balconies, and where
they served for Podia or posaries of a leaning-height for which they had a
slight Cornice assigned them; and this minds me of the (...) among the Greeks,
as indeed seeming to have been derived from the Eastern (...) used, and to the
Jews (we read) enjoined upon their flat-roofed houses, these balusters being in
truth but a kind of petty Columns under the Railes or Architrave between
Pedistal and Pedistal for that moral reason, the security of the Walkers,
especially at what time they used to spread Tents upon them, as frequently they
did: But if (as we said) for the better eminence of Figures, then with the
imposition of

Scamilli impares, Scamilli.
of which there is so much contention amongst our hypercritical Architects,
though in fine they prove to be but certain Zoecos or Blocks elevating the rest
of the members of an Order, Column, Signum or Statue from being drowned or lost
to the Eye, which may chance to be placed below their Horizon; that is, beneath
the Projectures of the Stylobata Cornices and other Saillies, by an agreeable
reconciliation of Geometry with the Optics: In a word, the Pedistals of
Statues do well express them, and those halfe-round elevations, or other
unequal eminencies upon the Stylobata, be they one or more Plinths like so many
steps succeeding one another for the advantage of what stands upon them. But to
proceed to the Orders and their several Members as they naturaly rise in Work.

The Base B^s^s.
derived from the Greek Verb (...) imports the sustent, prop or foot of a
thing, and is in Architecture taken not for the lowermost member of an Order,
but for all the several ornaments and mouldings from the Apophyges or rising of
the Columns shaft, to the Plinth: Sometimes also for the Spire, Spir^.
which lying on the Plinth like the Coile of a Cable derives thence its name,
though something improperly methinks, considering these members do not run
Spiral but obliquely rather and in orben: In sum, the Basis is to the Column
and its Intablature, what the Stylobata is to the Basis, and the Stereobata to
the Pedistal. But to come to each particular,

The Plinth Plinthus.
is the first, and very lowest member of the Base. The Word denotes a Brick or
square Tyle of which happly they were usually made, but rather for the
resemblance, because of the weight it was to bear, and therefore more probably
of something more solid to preserve the foot of the Column from rotting, when
first Pillars were made but of the tapering bodies of Trees, as we shall show
hereafter: Plinth is likewise taken for a like member about the Capital, but
then always with its adjunct, the Plinth of the Capital, etc. because placed
just above the Echinus as in the Doric, Ovolo, or quarter round in the other
Orders. The Italians familiarly name it Orlo, which importing a round Welt, Hem
or Brim, methinks is not so properly applied ot it. The next is,

Torus, Torus.
the third member of the Base (of which there is superior and inferior in the
Bases of all the Orders, the Tuscan excepted) comes from (...) denoting the
roundness and smoothness of it; Torus enim quicquid rotundum, or rather as
Scaliger, quod artificialiter elaboratur and tornetur, because artificially
made so; but why not from its swelling and brawniness: It much resembles the
shape of a round Cushion, torques or Wreath, thence (...), and the imposed
weight makes it seem to swell out as if indeed it were stuffed, and that with
reason say the Critics for the more easy and safe position of the

Trochile, Trochilos.
from (...) or (...) a rundle or Pully-wheele which it much resembles, and is
that Cavity appearing next to the Torus: The Italians name it Bastone, or more
properly Cavetto, and Cortice, tanquam baculi cortex, the hollow rind of a
Tree, as Barbaro. Our Workmen retain the ancient Scotia, Scotia.
from (...), its obscurity proceeding from the shade of the hollowness, but
more vulgarly they call it the Casement, and it is ever the Cavity between the
former Torus's, and also beneath the Doric Cornice separated from the plain
Margen or regula called Mentum and Corona by a small Cymatium, or sometimes a
List only: The Capital letter C. is a perfect resemblance of this Moulding, and
it is indeed frequently bordured or rather shut in with lists. Lastly,

The Astragal, Astrogolus.
which besides diverse other things (as the Stem spinae Vertebrae near the neck)
has here its analogy from that done a little above the Heel, whence the French
name it the Talon or Heel it self (as our Author of the Parallel) nor
improperly; but by the Italians il Tondino being a kind of half Torus,
sometimes wrought in the richer Orders like an over-cast hem or edg to the
larger Tore, which frequently is placed between, as in the Ionick Base with two
Scotias, and sometimes (though rarely) just about the Plinth of the Base, as
some marshal it: Otherwhiles again it is taken for the Cincture or Collar next
the Hypotrachelium and diminution of a Column listed on both edges; and it runs
also under the Echinus of the Ionick. Our Englisher of Hans Bloome names it a
Boltell, of Fillet in any part of a Pillar, but I take a Fillet to be more
flat, this more swelling and (as I say) Torus-like. Moreover we sometimes find
it dividing the Fascia of the Corinthian Architrave where it is wrought in
Chapletts and Bends or Berries: and finally in two places, both above and
beneath the Lists joining immediately to the Square or Die of a Pedistal where
Stylobata is introduced; and so we have done with the ornaments and mouldings
of the Base.

The Columns Column^.
are next, which being of five denominations or Orders are to Architects what
the Modes be in Music, and the Corminum genera among Poets, all Buildings
whatsoever being under the regiment of some one of them, or at least ought to
be. It is here properly that round and long Cylinder diversely named by Authors,
Scapus, Vivo, Tige, Shaft, Fust, Trunk, etc. containing ^he body thereof from
the Spire of the Base, or lately mentioned Astragal, to the Capitel: Sometimes
for the substance and thickness of the bottom of the Pillar, and in Authors for
the Checks of a Door Secundum Cardines and Antepagmenta, of which consult the
learned Baldus in the World Replo de Sig. Voc. Vitr. also the perpendicular
Post of a Winding-staires; but for the most part for that solid of a Column
which being divided into three parts, has (as some delight to form them, but
without any reason or good authority) an Entasis Entasis.
or Swelling, and under the Collerine or Cimbia of the Capital, a Contracture
and comely diminution, by workmen called the breaking of the Pillar. But the
primary issue or rise of the Shaft next the Astragal and nether Cincture is
Called the Apophyges Apophyges.
from the Greek word (...), because in part the Column taking as it were a
rise, seems to emerge and fly from the Bases like the processus of a bone in a
man's leg; and so it is now and then applied to the Square of Pedistals
likewise. In short, it is no more then the rings or feruls heretofore used at
the extremities of Woden Pillars, when formerly they were made of that
material, to preserve them from splitting, afterward imitated an Stone-work as
an inseparable part thereof; and thence doubtless it is they took their
original contraction: Such trees as grew in the most upright tenor and comely
diminution, being chosen for this employment.

These being resembl'd in Stone (that is of one entire one) by Solidae were
distinguished from the Structiles, or were such Pillars as were compounded of
many:

But it is not only that these rings have place, but next the above described
Astragal likewise, and wherever encountered by the names of Amulus, Cincta,
Climbia, Listello, Fillets, Regula, etc. broader or more narrow as best suits
with the consecutive member; like those very small Listellos or Anulers under
the Echinus of the Doric Capital, by the Italians called Gradetti, Degrees, and
by the interpreters of P. Lonazzo, Rulers; and so in like manner the Cimbia
beneath the Astragal immediately above the Contraction. But Regulae and Fillets
are somewhat larger in places where they edg and shut in the Cymatium of a
Cornice, Abacus, or Voluta: Moreover I note, that Listello and Cincta are
broader than Annulets which I take to be the very least of all the Mouldings in
an Order.

Now, before we enter upon our Capitel, which seems to be the next collective
Member; we may do well to observe, that the several Parts, Members and
Projectures we have hitherto described, and such likewise as remain, receive
all their dimensions, and proportions from one universal Scale, called by our
Artists the Module, which though sufficiently described in the beginning of the
Parallel, I think fit to interpret once for all, to employ the Senidiameter of
a Column of any Order at the rise to its Shaft upon the superior member of the
Base, and divided into thirty equal parts which we call Minutes. Minutes.
The Term in Vitruvius seems to be Ordinatio, which he explaines modic^
Commoditas, and I take for a Module, Modulus.
part or quantity by which to calculate, adjust and compose the rest of the
Members of an Order: For instance, In the Ionic Column the Diameter of the
thickest part is that proportion, as if it have 14. such Modules, the Base
shall challenge One, and so the rest of the parts according to their several
proportions. Note, that to distinguish it from Model (by which I would signify
the solid Type of representation of a Building) I read it Module with the fifth
Vowel as the former is with the second.

Toward the upper part or diminution of a Column (which is always the less
abated if very tall (as is also to be observed in the Chanelling of those
Orders where it is proper) because the distance effects that in them, which Art
produces in the lower) is the

Hypotrachelium, Hypotrachelium.
which from the Greek (...) colli parts infra cervicem denotes the neck of the
Column, being that part of Scapus below the Astragal: It is as 'twere the
Freeze of the Capitel, and so by some termed, as also the Collar and Gorgerin,
where the Pillar seems as if it is were strangled, and my well be taken for a
part of the Capitel it self, having both in the Tuscan and Doric another
Annulus or Cincta about it next to the

Echinus, Echin^^^.
a Bottle cut with an edg, as in our Bloome it is rudely explained: It is indeed
a quarter round, and sometimes more, swelling above the Cinctures, and commonly
next to the Abacus, Carved with Ovals and Darts (by our Workmen called Eggs and
Ankers as little politely) which is frequently shut up with a smaller Ovolo of
Beads and Chaplets, or like ornament; but so adorned, it commonly runs under
the Ionic Voluta and that of the Composita, and next the Doric Abacus; as in
that singular example of the Trajan Column it creeps under the Plinth of the
Capitel. Such as pretend to Etymologies for every thing they hear, will have it
(...) or (...) because of a kind of self contraction; others more rationally
from the resemblance and roughness in the Carving (...) as bristling with its
darts like a Hedg-hog: Under this, as we said, is a smaller Bracelet again
which incircles the Capitel under the Voluta in the Composita, taken for the
Fuserole; and so likewise in the other Orders where the Ovolo or Echinus
properly enter, having a small moulding beneath it by Palladio named Gradetto,
but of this already: In the Corinthian an Echinus frequently comes in 'twixt
the Corona and Dentelli.

The Voluta, V^luta
or as we term it properly enough, the Scroul, is not the derivative of any
Greek Word, but the Latin, Voluta, a Volvendo, for that it indeed seems to be
rolled upon an Axis or Staff: It is the principal, and only appropriate member
of the Ionic Capitel in imitation of a femal Ornament, as both our Master
Vitruvius, and the Author of the Parallel have learnedly illustrated. The Face
of it is called Frons the forehead a little hollowed between the Edg or List,
and the Return or Pillow betwixt the Abacus and Echinus resembles the
side-plaited tresses of Women's hair, to defend as it were the Ovolo from the
weight of the Abacus (over which the Voluta hangs) and superior Members, by the
same reason as was intimated in the Torus of the Base.

There are also Voluta's in the Corinthian and Compounded Capitels, but they
consist rather of certain large Stalks after a more Grotesco design, as may
be gathered from those Rams horns in the Capitel of the Columns taken out of
the Bathes of Dioclesian: and in truth they are only the pretty flexures and
scrowlings of Vitici like the tendrells of Vines, whereof the four larger ones
bend under the Horns or corners of the Abacus, the other four of lesser size,
just under the middle of the Arch thereof, beneath the flower: then the bottom
or foot of the Calathus or Panier (for that is divided into three equal parts as
will hereafter appear) shows in front two entire Leaves, and as many half ones,
viz. at the angles, and 'twixt those again two Stalks, which, with a tall one
in the middle (that touches the midst of the Arch where (as we said) it puts
forth a flower upon the brimm of the Abacus) make in all sixteen in number. To
be yet as accurate as may be in so nice and florid an Ornament, these Leaves
did of old resemble either the Acanthus (though a little more indented and
disguised) from the inventor Callimachus, or (as some) the Olive and Palms,
for so it is warranted by Villalpandus from that Capitel of his description
standing in the Temple of Solomon. At the extremes of these leaves do issue the
Caules, and Codds breaking with the Helices, the rest of the Stalks adorned
and furnished with budds and tender foliage by the discretion and invention of
the ingenious Carver. But the domineering Tendrells and Flexures consist of
greater, or smaller Volutas, emerging from between the Abacus and Echinus in
smaller Leaves and Stalks, middling, and inferior foliage, as they are
distinguished by Workmen in the three above named divisions of the Calathus;
but instead of those Helices, at our Corinthian horns, the Composita has her
Voluta much more resembling the Ionica, and in lieu of those, diverse Capricious
fantsies, as Horses-heads, Eagles, and the like; sed ea doctis non probantur,
they are rejected by all good Architects, says Philander.

Now the Center or Eye of the Ionic Voluta is made by Artists with a Cathetus,
Cathetus
which (not over nicely to distinguish from Perpendicular because the operation
of them proceeds from distinct terms) is meant by a Line let down from above,
intersecting the Line of the Collar (as it is demonstrated in Chap. 24. of the
Parallel, with the History of its investigation) and that small circle at this
point of intersection is Metaphorically Oculus, the Eye, from whence the
perfect turning of the Voluta has been after an exquisite manner (though by few
observed and practiced) found out; it being here indeed that our Workman will
be put to the exercise of his Arithmetic, as appears by that accurate
Calculation in Nicholas Goldmanus's restitution of this becoming ornament.
Lastly

The Abacus (...)
(from (...) or (...) which signifies a square Trencher, or Table) is that
quadrangular piece commonly accompanied with a Cymatium, and serving in stead
of a Corona or drip to the Capitel, whereof it is the Plinth and Superior, as
has already been noted. This it is which supports the nether Face of the
Architrave, and whole Trabeation: In the Corinthian and Composita the Corners
of it are named the Horns, the intermedial Sweep and Curvature the Arch, which
has commonly a Rose or some pretty Flower Carved in the middle of it.

Thus we have finished that Head of our Column, which being taken in general
for all these Members together, is commonly distinguished by the name of
Capitel, taken, I say, (...)
for the entire Ornament from the Astragal and first Cincture of it, to the
Plinth which bears up the Architrave: But it is not to be omitted, that the
main body of the Corinthian Chapter (of which we have given a large description
under the Title of Voluta) consists of a Bell, or Basket rather, which is that
plain and solid part under the Cauliculi, Stalks and Flowers already mentioned,
and which in order to their triple Series of Foliage (which seems to include
and shadow the body of it as it is represented in that curious design of
Callimachus's invention) is divided into three equal parts: But of this
abundantly. There is likewise another Capitel, or rather a Diminutive of it,
by the Greeks called (...), which does not only signify (as sometimes) the
former Calathus and Basket, but more properly that Braid or List above the
Triglyph in the Freeze.

Moreover, to the bodies or Shafts of some Columns appertain

Striges, Striges.
which (not to insist upon what the Learned Voss^us and other Critics have
contended) are those excavated Channells, by our Workmen called Flutings and
Groeves: These are particularly affected to the Ionic Order (rarely the Doric)
uti stolarum rugae, in imitation of the Plaits of Women's Robes, as our Master
resembles them; and some of these Channells we find to go winding about
Pillars, etc. but it is not approved. Between these are the Striae, Stri^.
we may properly English them Rays or Beams; which being twenty (or as some
24.) in number, are those plain spaces between the Flutings in the Ionic,
Doric, Corinthian and Composed Orders; which three last have (with some small
difference) borrowed this Ornament from the Ionic. And in some of those (as in
that Dioclesian Doric Example) they are so made, as to reduce the Rays to a
sharp edg only, by their contiguity without any spaces at all. But sometimes we
find the Striges to be filled up with a swelling, a third part from the Base,
and these we may call Stav'd, or Cabl'd-Columns; for so I think fit to
interpret the French Embastone, and Alberti's Rudens. Thus we find some
Corinthian Pillars often treated; the Stria being commonly a third or fourth
part of the widness of the Flutings, and diminishing with the Contraction of
the Scapus, unless the Shaft be very high, in which case the distance does it
without the aid of the Workman; sometimes also we have seen them totally
filled. We should now come to the Entablature, but a word of.

Pillasters, Para^^^^.
called in Greek Parastatae, and by the Italians Membretti, for Modul and
Ornament observe their entire Columns if they stand alone; but so they do not
for their prominencie, which being to gain room, reduces them sometimes to the
square, whereof the narrower side is frequently applied to Walls, by which
alone some will only have them to differ from Pillars themselves; but that
ought to be understood of such as have no Imposts and Arches, upon which
occasions the Lights they let in do much govern their proportions, as Palladio
has judiciously showed in l. I. c. 13. etc. Likewise, where they happen to be
at Angles, and according to the surcharged weight; and therefore a Rustic
superficies (as Sir H. Wotton has discreetly observed) does best become them,
as well as a greater latitude, for so they have sometimes been enlarged to
almost a whole vacuity; unless where for their better fortifying, we find half,
and sometimes whole Columns applied to them. Where they support large Cornices
and Freezes in Wainscoted Rooms they do properly and handsomely, provided their
due proportions be observed, without those ridiculous disguisements of
Pedistals and idle fancies which we find frequently wrought about them. Also in
Chimny-pieces, Fronts of Buildings, Galleries, and Door-cases from whence they
were named Antae: Ant^
The.

Imposts (by Vitruvius called Incumbae) Incumi^^.
which I mentioned,. are nothing but their Capitels or more protuberant heads,
upon which rest the ends of the Arches; but where they exceed the Square and
regular thickness, they were named

Pilae, Pilae.
and their Quadra's or Tables (as we yet see them in ancient Altars and
Monuments) were employed for Inscriptions; but if shorter, and more massy,
they served for the Arches of Bridges, for Buttresses and the sustentation of
more solid works.

Arches consist commonly of simple halfe-Circles, Fornices.
and now and then of some lesser point, according to the occasion: At Venice,
Pisa and other Cities in Italy they are formd to an incredible and admirable
fiatness by the wonderful address of the Workman, for the ease of such as pass
over the Bridges, and without interruption of the Streams. The Masonry at the
front of these being cut by a peculiar slope of the Stone is called Pennanted,
till it come to join with the

Mensula, Mensula
which (quast (...)) seems to be locked to the Pennants in guize of a Wedg,
and therefore by our Artists named the Key-stone: But if Vaults are made, two
Arches intersect, which is the strongest manner of Cameration. And here I think
not amiss to note, that the Ancients very seldom made use of Arched Doors or
Windows, unless at the entrance of Cities, and Triumphal intercolumnations for
the more commodious ingress of Horsemen arm^d with Spears, and Ensigns, etc.
This Barbarity therefore we may look upon as purely Gotique, who considering
nothing with reason, have introduced it into private houses, and been imitated
but by too many of our late Architects also, to the no small diminution of the
rest which is better conducted. By Intercolumnations I do likewise comprehend
all Terraced and Cloistered- Buildings, Porticos, Galleries, Atria's, etc.
contiguous to, or standing out from the body of Edifices in which cases they
are becommingly proper: And this does naturally lead me to our Pillars again,
and to consider the spaces between them.

Intercolumnation Intercolumna^^d.
signifies the distance or void between Pillar and Pillar, but this not
sufficiently explaining the various distance of the several orders in work,
renders it, even in diverse of our English Authors where they treat of this Art,
of sundry denominations: For thus it was usually called

Insulata Columna, Insulata.
where a Pillar stood alone like an Island or Rock in the Sea,. the one
environed with Air as the other with Water:

Arcostylos Arcostylos.
belonging chiefly to the Tuscan Order, was where the Intercolumnation is very
wide, as at the entrance of great Cities, Forts, etc. upon which occasions at
the least four or five Modules may be allowed.

Diaslylos, Diaslylos.
though sometimes improperly taken for any Intercolumnation, is most natural to
the Doric and may have three or four Diameters, nay sometimes six in the Ionic,
as fittest for Gates, Galleries, and Porches of Pallacex or lesser Buildings,
and thence were called Tetrastylos and Hexastylos.

The Systylos named also Pycnostylos Systylos. Pycnostylo^.
(as much as to say thick of Pillars because seldom alow'd above a Module and
an half, though some distinguish the first by a Module more) belongs chiefly
to the Composita, and it was used before Temples, and other public and
magnificent Works of that nature: But where in such structures the
Intercolumnation did not exceed two, or two and a quarter (as in the Corinthian
and especially the Ionic, the proportion of distance was so esteemed for its
beauty and other perfections, that it was by a particular eminence termed
Eustylos, Eustylos.
as being of all other the most graceful. Where the sides had ranges of
Columns, as in those large Xystas, Porticos, Atrias and Vestibula of the Greeks
and Romans, which were certain Arched or plainly Architrav'd building in form
of Cloisters and Galleries, commonly standing out from the rest of the Edifice,
and now and then alone, the Ancients named it Antyprostylos, Peristylos, etc.
These (for being already explained by Paulus Lomatius, and long since made
vulgar) I have only touched for the benefit of our Country Workmen, who do
frequently, even amongst our English Translators of Architectonical Treatises,
meet with those hard names without their interpretation; when they discourse of
these open and Airy Ornaments, whether adjoining to, and supporting more
Contignations and Stories; or invironing them, and prominent from them; and
because it is for this, that our Master Vitruvius so passionately wishes that
his Architect should be (as of old they styled Callimachus) Philotechnos, an
industrious searcher of the Sciences, which is the same that a good Philologer
is amongst our Literati.

Moreover instead of Columns the Ancients (as now the Modern but too often)
used to place the whole Figures of Men and Women to support and bear up entire
Cornices, and even huge masses of Buildings; but of this at large in Cap. 22.
23. of the Parallel. Part I. These they also named Telamones or Atlas's, the
French Consoles where they usually set them to sustain the Architrave,
Architrave.
which for being the next Member in order to the Capitel we come next to
explain.

The Greeks named that Epistylium, Epistylium
. which we from a mungril Compound of two Languages (...) -- Trabs (as much as
to say the principal Beam and Summer) or rather from Arcus and Trabs, call
Architrave; Vt velint trabem hanc Arcus vices sustinere qui a Columna ad
Columnam sinuari solet, as Baldus with reason from its position upon the
Column, or rather indeed the Abacus of the Capitel. It is the very first Member
of that which we call Entablature in our translation of the Parallel; and
formerly in the Tuscan Order framed for the most part of Timber in regard of
the distant Intercolumnation: It is also frequently broken into two or three
divisions, called by Artists

Fascia^, Fascia^
or rather, plain Faces, a little Prominent, the lowest being ever the
narrowest: These Breaks arriving sometimes to 17. sometimes to 18. Minutes in
breadth, some rather choose to call Faces then Fascias, Swathes, Fillets, or
Bands, by which they are usually distinguished into first, second, and third,
especially in the three latter Orders, for in the Tuscan and Doric they do not
so properly enter, though our Parallel yield us two approved examples: These
are frequently, and indeed for the most part, separated with a small Astragal
cut into beads or sum such slight Carving; the Fascias of the Architrave
likewise curiously wrought, as in that wonderful Instance of a Corinthian
Entablature taken out of Dioclesians Bathes. Fascia, in the notion I would
rather take it, should be for that narrower band about the Tuscan and other
Basis as some call it; or rather the square list under the superior Torus in
some Pedistals named Supercilium, and not properly the Torus it self, as in
diverse English Profiles they erroniously make it; Supercilium.
for Supercilium seems to be a kind of Corona or drip to the subjacent Members.
In Chimneys the Architrave is the Mantle; and over the Antepagmenta Antepayment^
or Iambs of Doors and Lintells of Windows the Hyperthyron which the Italians
call Soppra frontale, Hyper^^yron.
and our Carpenters the King-piece immediately under the Corona to supply the
Freeze, especially in the Doric Order.

The uppermost fascia of the Architrave for the most part is, and indeed
always should be (the Tuscan only excepted) adorned with a Lysis, Lysis
or

Cymatium Cymatium.
inverted, which is no more than a wrought or plain O-gee as our Workmen
barbarously name it; The term is (...) undula, and signifies a rouling Wave to
the resemblance whereof it is molded. By some it is called the Throat, as from
the Italian and French, Gola, Geule or Doucine, and of these there are two
kinds, the first and principal that always its Cavity above, and does
constantly jett over the Corona or drip like a Wave ready to fall, and then is
properly called Sima; Sim^.
the other has its hollow below, and is named inversa: The Letters {thus placed
do reasonably well express these kind or mouldings, which not only enter into
the Member of the Architrave where it is ever inverted, but (as was said)
perpetually above the Corona, where they do frequently encounter and meet
together with a small Regula between them, but then the nether is ever the
reversed, and very narrow; though ofttimes both of them Carved and adorned with
Foliage, etc.

Cymatium is also about the heads of Modilions and constitutes a part of them,
as likewise it enters into Abacus, and on Pedistals as in Stylobatae Corona,
and the Base thereof, where we find them both inverted; though I remember to
have seen the upmost with the recta also in the Cornice above mentioned. But in
stead of Cymatium separating the Architrave and Freeze, Taenia oftentimes
supplies the room,

Taenia Taenia,
is properly Diadema, a bandlet or small Fillet with which they used to bind
the head; or rather those Lemnisci and rubans which we see carved and dangling
at the ends of Gyrlands. The Interpreter of Hans Bloome names it the top of a
Pillar, but very insolently; it being indeed the small Fascia part of the Doric
Architrave sometimes (but seldom) with a narrow Cymatium, or Regula under it,
as that runs under the Triglyphs: Some call it the nether Taenia (as Philander
frequently) to distinguish it from the bandage which composes the Capitelli of
the Triglyphs and continues between them over the Metops and not seldom under a
Cavetto or small Cymatium with which Suidas and other learned Critics many
times confound it. In a word, it is that which separates the Epistylium or
Architrave from the

Freeze, the Word in Greek is (...), Freeze ^opho^^^.
and does genuinely import the imaginary Circle of the Zodiac depicted with the
twelve Signs, but by our Architects it is taken for the second division of the
Entablature above the Columns, being like a fair and ample Table between the
former Teniae, and which though oftentimes plain should be Pulvinatus pillow'd,
or swelling in the Ionic Order; but in the Doric enriched with the Triglyph and
Metops, and with a thousand Historical, Grotesque and other stored inventions
in the rest of the Orders ( Tuscan excepted) especially the Corinthian and
Composita. Our term is derived from the Italian Freggio which denotes any
Fring or Embroidered Belt: Philander says a Phrygiones, not from the Phryges a
people of the Minor Asia as some erroneously, but Phrygionibus, a certain
Broidery or flourd Needle Work, as one should say Troy-stitch (whence happily our
True-stitch) in imitation whereof they wrough Flowers and compartiments upon
the Freeze.

Besides this of the Entablature, the Capitels of both Tuscan and Doric have
the Freeze likewise commonly adorned with four Roses and as many smaller
Flowers, for which cause ^tis called the Freeze of the Capitel also as we
noted, to distinguish it from the other; likewise Hypotrachelium from its
posture between the Astragal and the Regula or Annulus of the Echinus: This
Tuscan Freeze is plain and very simple; but in the rest of the Orders it is
employed with the Echinus, as in the Ionica, and the Capitel Cauliculi or
stalks in the other two, these Roses are also sometimes Insculped under the
prominent Horns or angles of the Doric Abacus.

The Triglyphs Triglyphus.
which I affirmed to be charged on the Doric Freeze is a most inseparable
Ornament of it. The Word (...) in Greek imports a three-Sculptur'd piece, quasi
tres habens glyphas: By their tringular Furrows, or Gutters rather, they seem
to me as if they were meant to convey the Guttae or Drops which hang a little
under them; though there are who fansy them to have been made in imitation of
Apollo's Lyre, because first put in Work (as they affirm) at the Delphic
Temple: You are to note that the two angular hollows are but half Chanell'd,
whence they are called Semicanaliculae, to distinguish them from the Canaliculi
whose flutings are perfect, and make up the three with their interstices or
spaces, being as many flat and slender Shanks for so we may interpret the
Latin Femora: The Italians name them Pianetti small Plains, and so do we; and
they constantly reach the whole Diameter of the Freeze being crowned with the
formerly mentioned Capitel, part of the upper Taenia, and determining with the
nether, where it intercepts them from the prominent

Guttae (...).
or Drops. It is certainly the most conspicuous part of the Dori^ Freeze,
supposed to have been at first so Carved upon boards only that had been clapped
on the extremities of the Cantherii or Rafters ends which bore upon the upper
Fascia of the Architrave to take off from the deformity. How indispensably
necessary they are to be placed in a just and due square from each other, and
perpendicularly over their Columns, the Author of the Parallel has showed;
Chap. 2. Part. I. as in that of the Temple of Solomon according to
Villalpandus's design, how they have been admitted into the Corinthian Freeze,
but without the Guttae; and so in the Persique. These Guttae are as I said
those six appendant Drops or Tears affected only to the Doric Order, seeming as
it were to trickle down and flow from the Channels and Shanks of the Triglyp^s
through the nether Taenia, and small Reglet or Moulding under it.

Guttae are sometimes made in shape of flat Triangles, sometimes swelling like
the Section of a Cone or Bell, and therefore so called by the French
Architects. They are also under the flat Modilions which support the Corona
eighteen in number, as in that most conspicuous elevation of the Profile after
the stately relic at Albano near Rome, than which nothing can be imagined
more noble and magnificent. Alberti calls these Guttae, Clavos, as conceiving
them to be in resemblance of Nails, but without any reason for his conjecture.

Metopae, Metopae.
are the next in order, and are nothing else save those empty spaces in the
Freeze 'twixt the Triglyphs in the Doric Order, either purae and plain, or
figured, for that is not necessary always. The Word is derived of (...) and
(...) which is foramen, intervallum inter Sculpturae cava, or if you will, the
Intertignium, as importing here rather the forenamed spaces, than what those
pretend who will fetch it from the (...) or forehead of the Beasts whose
Sculles (remaining after the Sacrifices) were usually Carved in these
intervals; because in these vacuities were the passages for the ends of the
Ioysts, Timbers and Rafters which rested upon the Architrave, and where to fill
up that deformity, they usually made it up with some such ornaments, suppose of
Skulls, Disbes, and other Vessels, nay sometimes with Jupiters Squib or
Thunderbolt, Targets, Battleaxes, Roses, and such other Trophies, as was found
most apposite to the occasion, and not preposterously filled them as our
Workmen too often do, without any relation to the subject; so as I have
frequently seen Oxes heads Carved on the Freeze of an House of Pleasure in a
Garden, where Roses and Flowers would have been more proper. There are sundry
other ornaments likewise belonging to the Freeze; such as Encarpa, Festoons,
and Frutages typed to the Horns of the Skulls with Taeniae and Ribbans
tenderly flowing about this member, and sometimes Carried by little Puti, Boys,
Cupids, and a thousand other rich inventions to be found in good examples. But
we are now arrived to the third and last member of the Entablature separated
from the Freeze by the superior Taenia, the Cornice.

The Cornice, Coronix Cornix.
as it is collectively taken for its several and distinct Mouldings and
Ornaments, comprehands a small 1. Regula, 2. Cymatium, 3. Dentelli, 4. Ovolo or
Echinus, 5. Modilions or Bedding-mouldings which support the Corona, 6. Sima
recta and inversa (rarely a Cavetto) 7. and lastly another Regula which
concludes the whole Order. We will begin with the first, being sometimes a
small Scotia consisting of an half or quarter round, that now and then also
both in the Tuscan and Dorica divides the Freeze from the Cornice in place of
the Taenia, as does the Cymatium in the rest of the Orders. The Ovolo Ovolo.
is next in the plainer Orders, but it is enriched in the Corinthian like the
Echinus, which (if you please) you may take for the same thing in an Italian
dress: In the Tuscan and Doric it is turned like a Scima or Cymatium, and is
substituted for support of the Corona, but in the last it is usually accompanied
with a slender Regula above it, and in the Corinthian both above and beneath,
where it is likewise frequently Carved and adorned with a broad Welt like a
Plinth.

Dentelli, Dentelli.
are the Teeth immediately above the Cymatium of the Freeze, by some named also
Asseri from their square form; I say in the Corinthian and Ionic, etc. for in
the Doric Order they were not anciently admitted, or rather not properly,
according to the opinion of our Master, though we must needs acknowledge to have
found them in the most authentical pieces extant: As for their Dimensions they
kept to no certain rule, but made them sometimes thicker, sometimes thinner,
square, or long, and more in number, but commonly the spaces less by an half,
sometimes by a third part then the Teeth, which were themselves twice as high
as their breadth, and frequently (especially in the more polite Orders)
beginning with the Cone of a Pine, pendent at the very point over the angular
Column: Lomatius is yet more precise in this particular, and gives them as much
height as the middle Fascia of the Architrave, Projecture equal, Front twice
the breadth of their height, and a third part less than their breadth for
vacuity. The Dentelli have oftentimes a small Regula, and now and then more
then one, as usually in the Ionica, where it has likewise an Ovolo or Echinus
for the bedding of the Corona; but if enriched, and that two of them encounter,
one should be simple and plain, as where it happens to be inserted beneath it:
Next to this superior Echinus are the Modilions, but instead of them Dentelli
are thought to have been first instituted, and for that reason superfluously
joined where Mutules are; and therefore where we find Taenia under Modilions it
is not properly divided into Teeth, nor is it rashly to be imitated, though we
have some great examples to countenance it. That of the Pantheon may safely
guide us herein, where it is left plain for this very cause, and that the
reason of the thing does not in truth allow it: However, it must be
acknowledged, nothing has been more grosely abused even amongst our most
renowned Masters.

Modilions, Modilioni.
being certain supports in form of Corbells, Cortouzes and Mutules are a king
of Bragets to the Corona, and in those Orders where they enter, supply the part
of the Bedding-moulding as our Workmen style the Ovolo in this place, for so
they frequently do in the Doric and Ionic, but then without any other ornament
than a slight Cymatium to edg them, and to be always placed over the
Triglyphs: In the Corinthian and Composita they are enriched with all the
delicateness and curiosity imaginable, capp'd, as I said, with a curiously
Carved small Cymatium where they are contiguous to the Planceere of Roof of the
Corona. Our ordinary Workmen make some distinction between Modilions and those
other sorts of Bragets which they call Cartells and Mutules, usually Carved
like the handles of Vessels Scroul'd, Flowered and sometimes Sculptured with
the Triglyph; and such were the Ancones amongst the Greeks: That there should
be no Guttae under Mutules is the opinion of diverse learned Architects, though
(as was said) we frequently find them Chanell'd like the Triglyph, and that in
authentic Examples: Philander is for it, and pronounces them more proper than
even under the purest Triglyph, for signifying (says he) Cantiorum Capita,
unde stillicidum fieri certum est, drops and I sicles commonly hanging at the
ends of our Rafters upon every weeping shower, whereas Triglyphi import only
the Projectures of the Beams and Tunbers nothing so much exposed: But this I
leave to the more judicious.

Mutules quasi (...) have their name from their defect, Mutull.
as being made thinner and more abated below than above, and therefore
naturally and discreetly destined to places where they are but little burdened
with weight, as here under that little remainder of the Cornice; and so where
they are set under the Pedaments and Lintels of Doors and Windows: Most
prepostrous therefore and improper is our frequent assigning such weak
supporters to such monstrous jetties and excessive Superstructures as we many
times find under Balconies, Bay-Windows and long Galleries, where instead of
Mutules the Ancients would have placed some stout Order of Columns: But by
these unreasonable Projectures it comes to pass, that in time our strongest
Houses are destroyed, and drawn to their irrecoverable ruin. For the
proportion of Mutules, I commonly find them a fourth part higher than their
breadth, their Intervals being as wide as two; but neither do I find these so
constantly regular, only that there be ever one placed at the corners, and
returns of the Corona, and then if they interchangably differ as to the spaces
and as the Rafters direct, there are examples abundant for their justification.

I shall not need to define what is meant by Projectures Projectur^^.
when I have said it is the same our English Authors call the Sailings over and
out Iettings of any Moulding: The Italians name them Sporti, the Greeks
Ecphoras, and for the same reason all Margents whatsoever which hand over
beyond the Scapus of a Column are Projectures.

Corona, Corond.
is the last considerable Member remaining of the entire Entablature, and seems
indeed to set the Crown upon the whole Work: I say Considerable, because being
regularly placed on the uppermost Ovolo, or Mutules, it serves to defend all
the rest of the Edifice from the Rain and injuries of the Weather, and
therefore has its Projectures accordingly. It is sometimes taken for the entire
Coronix or Cornice with all its ornaments, but strictly, for this superior part
of it 'twixt two Cymatiums; for even the Ovolo or Echinus forms an Ogee by a
turn under the Planceere. We find the Corona omitted and quite left out of that
stately Arco di Leoni, but it is worthily reproved by our Author of the
Parallel, as being a member of indispensable use. Corona is by some called
Supercilium, Supereilium.
but rather I conceive Stillicidium the Drip, and with more reason, so the
French Larmier, Gocciolatotio and Ventale by the Italians to denote its double
office of protecting both from Water and Wind: For this reason likewise have
our Latin Authors named this broad Plinth Mentum a Chin, because it carries
off the Wet from falling on the rest of the Entablature, as the prominency of
that part in men's Faces keeps the sweat of the brows, and other liquid
distillations, from trickling into the Neck; and in imitation hereof the
Ancient Potters invented the brimming of their Vessels, by turning over some
of the ductile Matter whem the Work was on the Wheel. Sometimes there have been
two Corona's in a Cornice, as in that Corinthian Instance of the Rotunda, and
so it is frequently used in Stylobatae under Gula inversa; and truly it may be
justly repeated, as the exposure and occasion requires (so it be not too near
one another) all Projectures being but a kind of Corona to the subjacent
members.

The under part of the Roofs of these Corona's (which are commonly wrought
hollow, by sometimes (as we said) making part of the Cymatium) are by our
Artists called Planceeres, Planceeres
and those the Cofers Cofers.
wherein are cut the Roses, Pomgranades, Flowers or Fretts, which adorn the
spaces 'twixt the heads of the Modilions and Mutules. This Ceiling the Italians
name Soffito, and it signifies not only that part of Corona which failies over,
but the Lacunar, Lacus or Plain of all other Roofs made of Tabulations and
Boards appearing between the Ioysts, and which (as now, especially in other
Countries) were also formerly Gilded, Carv^d and most magnificently Embossed
with Fretts of wonderful relievo; nay sometimes to the excess of Inlayings with
Ivory, Mosaique and other rich and chargeable Works. Pliny l. 35. cap. 11.
tells us of one Pamphilius the Master of Apelles to have been the first which
brought this, Roof-painting into vogue: But I refer the Reader who thirsts
after more of this, to the learned Salmasius on Solinus p. 1215. Nor is yet the
Corona perpetually plain as we commonly see it; sometimes (though rarely
indeed) I find it Carved also, as in that incomparable Composita of Titus's
Arch, and that of Dioclesians Bathes in the Corinthian Order, and as is indeed
every individual member of that entire Entablature to the utmost excess of Art;
but how far this may be imitable, consult the Judicious Parallel, while it is
yet considerable that it is there but with a kind of Sulcus or Channel, in
imitation of Triglyph, or a short Fluting rather, being indeed more proper for
the carrying off the Water, than any other Work could have been devised. Corona
has over it a small Regula, or an inrichmen^ of some slight Chaplet in the
Corinthian, etc. after which Cymatium, as in that of Titus's Arch before
rehearsed; sometimes likewise with an Ovolo or Echinus cut with Ovals, and
Darts, as in that example of Nero's Frontispiece, and upon this again the
double Cymatium, whereof the first is inverted, and ever the neathermost and
most narrow, the other Recta, very large and prominent, being now and then
adorned with Lions heads placed just opposite to the Modilions (of which see
that curious research of the learned Dr. Brown in his Vulgar Errors) though
sometimes they are adorned with Foliage only. Lastly, for a final (...) or
Super-imposition (if I may be indulged so to name it) we are now clim'd to the
most supreme Projecture, and ultimate part of the whole cornice, namely the

Regula, Regula.
which some make a part of the Sima or Gula recta, by Palladeo the Intavolato,
and which I think to be the sole Member which I never remember to have seen any
where Carved, but always Plain, though in some of the Orders of near eight
Minutes in breadth. It is very true, that Scotia (which I now and then call
Cavetto or a small hollow) does in some laudable examples support this Member
in stead of Cymatium, but not so frequently; and that the Tuscan Cornice
terminates in a Cymatium without this Regula, or rather in an Ovolo as in those
examples after Sebastian Serlio, etc. but it is not after a true gusto, and the
fancy is particular. Regula, called also Listello, Cincta, etc. (of which
something already has been spoken) is always that Supercilium or superior
member of the Cornice, though it be likewise taken for that which is by some
called Quadra, being those two Lists commonly including Scotia, as we find it
in the Ionic Spira both above and beneath: Sometimes also it signifies the
Rings or small Feruls begirting the Scapus of a Column near the Apophyges, or
the Plinth of a Pedistal: Therefore I distinguish them, though yet they may be
accounted the same, seeing they usually import any small plain Fillet dividing
greater Members; for so Philander calls almost all simple parts broader or
narrower, which like Fillets encompass the rest; as in the Doric-Trabeation,
Regula, Sima, Cymatium, etc. In the Capitel, Regula, Cymatium, Plinthus: In the
Cornice of the Stylobata also Regula, Cymatium, Astragalus: But where it is no
less conspicuous, is in that part of the Triglyph, which jets out under the
Taenia, and from which the Guttae depend, where it seems to be a part of the
very Architrave it self.

And may thus much suffice to have been spoken of the Cornice or upper Member
of the Trabeation, Trabeatio.
which we mean by the Entablature, for both these terms signify but one and
the same thing, viz. The Architrave, Freeze and Cornice; which I therefore the
more precisely note, because some Writers apply it only to the very cover and
upmost top of the Orders; but so does not our Countryman John Shute, whose
Book being Printed Anno 1584. (and one of the first that was published of
Architecture in the English tongue) keeps rather to the Ancient Terms than by
mixing them with such barbarous ones as were afterward introduced, endanger
the confusion of Young Students and such as applied themselves to the Art.
Finally, to reform another mistake, I think good to note that where we find
Coronix in our Authors, it is rather meant for all that Moulding projecting
over the Dye or square of the Pedistal (by some called also Cima) Cima.
than this conclusive superior member of the Entablature which we name the
Cornice: But I have done, nor needs there more be added for the perfect
intelligence of the most minute Member and Ornament mentioned in this Parallel,
or I conceive in any other Author whatsoever treating concerning this Art, and
naturally applicable to the Orders: Notwithstanding, inasmuch as there do yet
happen some Super structures which both in Works and Books of this magnificent
Science have likewise names of doubtful signification, and to satisfy all that
may be farther desired for the rendering of this undertaking more useful and
instructive, I will in brief proceed to what is used to appear further in
Buildings, where they did not flatten the Roofs and Cover of Edifices, and
which is certainly of all other the most graceful.

Those Roofs which exalted themselves above the Cornices had usually in face a
Triangular plain or Gabel (that when our Workmen make not so acute and pointed
they call a Pedament) which the Ancients named

Tympanum, Tympanum^
but this is to be taken now and then for the whole Frontispiece from the
Cornice to the upmost part of the Fastigium or superior Angle of it, and is
commonly circumscribed with the same Cornice that the subjacent Order is of. At
the Cima or very point, and also at each Angle of this, stood smaller
Pedistals, for the placing of Statues, Busts, Vrnes, Lamps of Fire, Pine Cones,
Bowls, or the like Ornaments, and these Stylobata were called

Acroteria, Acroteria.
from (...) summa pars, we may properly name them Pinacles, for so Pinnae and
Batlements were made sometimes more sharp, Towering or Spiry, as pleased the
Workman; but where they stood in ranges (as not unfrequently) with Rail and
Balausters upon flat Buildings, they still retained their name, with this only
difference, that such as were placed between the Angular points were (like
ranges of Pillars) styled the Median or middle Acroteria.

They did likewise sometimes cover (especially Temples, and such magnificent
and sacred Buildings) with a Cuppola, Cuppola.
which is that Dome or Hemisphaerical Concave made in resemblance of the
Heavens, and admitting the light at the top Center or Navil only, without any
Lantern, as is to be seen in that incomparable piece of the Pantheon yet
extant: This is much in vogue yet in Italy, especially at Rome and Florence,
but it is commonly with the Lantern and other Appertures. to let in day without
exposure to the Weather, as appears by that on the summit of Saint Peter's; but
it takes away, in my poor judgment, something from the solemness, and natural
resemblance of the other, which yet are happly better to be endured in the more
Eastern Countries where the Weather is constant; as we see it practiced in what
the Pious Helena erected in the Holy Land, and her Son Constantine the Great,
on that his magnificent Structure of Santa Sophia yet remaining at
Constantinople, and to this day imitated by the Turks for the Covering of their
Mosques; and that it was an Oriental Covering and invention, the (...) of the
Greeks was doubtless derived from the Hebrew (...) Thala Thalas.
signifying to Suspend or hang as it were in the Air; but the Italian name
seems to come from Cuppa a Cvue or great washing Boul, to which it much
resembles. They do form some of those Goverings in other shapes and make them
mult-angular, but they are nothing so graceful.

Other Accessories and Ornaments are also used in Buildings which I will only
touch.

Niches, Niches.
quasi Nidi, Neasts, of old Concha, Concha.
are a kind of Pluteus or smaller Tribunals (as they are yet called in Italy)
wherein Statues are placed to protect them from the down right injuries of the
Weather, as well as for ornament to plain and simple Wales: These have their
regular Sections, and were usually Escalop'd above, either cut into the solid
Stone, or wrought in Plaster: When they were made very much larger and higher,
beginning from the Pavement, they were called

Tribunals, Tribunal.
as of old it seems applied to all high and eminent places: We have a noble
resemblance of this in that magnificent Throne described 1 Reg. 10. 19. built
by Solomon, which seems to me to have been such an ample Nich in which a
Principal person might sit, as it were half Canopied over within the thickness
of the Wall.

In Walls likewise did they insert many noble and most exquisite Sculptures and
Historical Fables, half wrought up, Embossed and swelling, and sometimes more
then half, which eminencies they now call in Italy by the name of Basse, and
Mezzo relievo: Relievo.
These were sometimes wrought in Marble, as in that famous Abacus and
Stylobata, yet extant, of Trajan's Pillar. Their ordinary placing was in the
Fronts of Edifices, as is yet to be seen in diverse Palaces at Rome, and
especially in their Villas and Retirements of pleasure, which are frequently
incrusted with them, but vilely imitated in our exposed Fretworks about London,
to the reproach of Sculpture, especially where it pretends to Figures on the
out sides of our Citizens Houses. But not only the Roofs of Houses and their
Fronts had their adornments, but the Floores also were inlay'd with Pavements
of the most precious materials, as of several Colored Stones and Woods, and
this they called

Emblema, Emblema.
continued to this day by the Italians in their Pietra Comessa; of which the
most magnificent and stupendous Chapel of Saint Laurence at Florence, Paul
the First's at Sancta Maria Maggiore in Rome, are particular and amazing
instances, where not only the Pavement, but likewise all the Walls are most
richly incrusted with all sorts of precious Marbles, Serpentine, Porphirie,
Ophitis, Achat, Rants, Coral, Cornelian, Lazuli, etc. of which I can number
near thirty sorts cut and laid into a fonds or ground of black-Marble (as our
Cabinet-makers do their variegated Woods) in the shape of Birds, Flowers,
Landskips, Grotesks and other Compartiments most admirably Polished, a glorious
and everlasting magnificence: But where it is made of lesser Stones, or rather
morsels of them, assisted with small Squares of thick Glass, of which some are
Gilded, it is called Mosaic-work, Mosaic^^.
and it does naturally represent the most curious and accurate sort of
Painting, even to the life, nor less durable than the former, as is most
conspicuous in that front of Saint Marks Church at Venice, the Cappula of Saint
Peter's at Rome, and the Altarpiece of Saint Michael near it: These are the
Tessellata and Vermiculata or Pavimenta asarota of the Ancients, but of which I
do not remember to have seen any public Work in our Country. It is yet not to
be forgotten the very Floorings of Wood which her Majesty the Queen Mother has
first brought into use in England at her Palace of Sommerset House, which has
some resemblance to these magnificencies; because it is exceeding beautiful and
very lasting: And this puts me in mind of that most useful Appendix joined to
Mr. Richards late Translation of the first Book of Palladio, and those other
pieces of la Muet the French Architect, wherein, besides what he has published
concerning these kinds of Timber-floors, etc. you have at the conclusion of
that Treatise a most accurate account of their Contignations and Timberings of
all sorts of Stories, Roofings, and other Erections, with their use, Scantlings
and proper names, which, for being so perspicuously described, deserves our
commendation and encouragement.

Eum Architectum oportet usu esse peritum and solertem, qui demere, aut
adjicere praescriptis velit.

J. E.

FINIS
To the READER.
THERE is no man pretending to this Art, or indeed to any other whatsoever, who
does not greedily embrace all that bears the name of Leon Baptista Alberti, who
was a Florentine Gentleman of illustrious Birth, great Learning, and
extraordinary abilities in all the Politer Sciences, as he stands celebrated by
Paulus Jovius, and for which he became so dear to that great Mecenas Lorenzo di
Medici, who chose him, with Marsilius Ficinus, Christopherus Landinus, and
other the most refined Wits of that Age, to entertain his Academic retirements
and Solitude of Camaldoli: You have an ample Catalogue of his learned Works,
Latin and Italian, published at the end of his Life by Rafael du Fresne that
great French Virtuoso, together with the History of those many incomparable
Structures designed and conducted by this rare Genius, extant at this day in
Florence, Mantoa, Rimini and other Cities of Italy; as being indeed one of the
very first that polished the now almost utterly lost and extinguished Art of
Architecture; in which how successfully he joined Practice to Speculation,
there are abundance of examples, some whereof are wrought by his own hands. He
composed three Books, De Pictura, full of incomparable researches appertaining
to that noble Art: This of Statues was first written in Latin, but it having
never been my hap to find it (and I think it was never Printed) I made use of
this Version out of the Italian, as it was long since published by that
ingenius Person Cosimo Bartoli, and have sub joined it to this Discourse of
Architecture, not only because they cannot well be separated, but for that the
Author, being one of our Parallel, the Argument appeared so apposite and full
of profitable instruction to our Workmen, who for want of these or the like
Rules, can neither securely work after the life, or their own inventions, to
the immense disgrace of that divine Art. This brief Account I thought fit to
present thee, Reader, concerning this Piece of Alberti's, it being the very
first of the kind which ever spoke in our Language.

EVELYN.

COSIMO BARTOLI To the most excellent Architect, and Sculptor BARTOLOMEO
AMMANTI.
ALTHOUGH I am perfectly assured (my most ingenious Bartolomeo) that you, who
are so universally accomplished, and in particular, so skilful, and well versed
in Architecture and Sculpture, have no need of those Rules and Precepts, which
the most judicious Leon Baptist Alberti has published concerning Statues; Yet I
easily persuaded my self that this address of them to You, would not be a thing
unacceptable, as being to a Person so well able to judge of that rare fancy, and
incomparable worth of the said Leon Baptista, who in a time wherein little or
nothing of Sculpture was known (all good Arts and Sciences being then in a
manner annihilated and wholly extinct throughout Italy, by reason of the many
inundations of Barbarians) employed the utmost of his abilities to open an easy
and secure way for our Youth, who though unexperienced themselves, delighted in
this most noble Art; and to incite them to join diligent practice, with the
observation of sure and unerring Rules. No wonder therefore, if from that time
forward such wonderful Progress has been made in this Art, as has brought it to
that perfection wherein it is seen flourishing at this day: So as in this Age
of ours, we have no need to envy those so much admired Statues of the most
celebrated Sculptors of the Ancient Romans, when we shall well consider what
has been performed by our Countryman Donato, and not many years since, the
Divine Michael Angelo Buonaroti, as after him, by Baccio Bandinelli, Benuenuto
Cellini, and lastly, by Your Self; whereof, that I may produce some Instances
(besides those many Statues which are extant of all your hands) proclaiming
your singular Merits to the admiration of all men, there are to be seen in the
Piazza of their Highnesses royal Palace, the most beautiful Judith; the most
stupendous Colosso of David, the robust and fierce Hercules; the most masterly
handled Perseus, together with all his rare and curious adornments; and which
is indeed the greatest of all the rest, Your own Neptune, with the other three
Statues accompanying it, cut our of one entire piece of Marble, and frain'd
with so magisterial a height of Art, as not only produces wonder in all that
attentively behold it; but does as it were wholly astonish then to contemplate
the Ingenuity, the Science, the Industry, the Diligence, the Affection, and in
fine the never to be sufficiently celebrated Skill of the Artists. Vouchsafe
therefore that these (however impolish'd) Instructions, so much conducing to
the information of unexperienced Youth, be recommended to the public view
under Your Name and Protection: And as it has ever been Your Custom heretofore,
Love your Friends, amongst whom I conjure You to esteem me none of the least.

Farewell.
LEON BAPTISTA ALBERTI OF STATUES.
I Have often thought with my self that the several Arts, whereby men at first
Industriously set themselves to express, and represent by Work of hand, the
shapes and similitudes of bodies, springing from natural procreation, took
their beginning from the accidental observation of certain Lineaments either in
Wood, or Earth, or some other sorts of materials, by Nature so disposed, that
by altering or inverting some thing or other in their form, they appeared
capable of being made to resemble the Figures and Shapes of living Creatures;
and thereupon, having seriously considered and examined what course was best to
take, they began with utmost Diligence and Industry to try and make experiment,
what was necessary to be added, or taken away, or in any other kind performed,
for the bringing of their Work to such perfection as might cause it exactly to
resemble the intended form, appearing, as it were, the very same thing; ever
marking as they wrought, to see if they had failed in any thing, and still
mending as they found occasion, sometimes the Lines, sometimes the Superficies,
Polishing and Repolishing, till at length (not without much pleasure and
satisfaction) they had accomplished their desire: So that it is not a thing so
much to be admired, that by frequent practice in Works of this nature, the
fancies and ingenuities of men have been from time to time improved, and
advanc^d to that height, that at last (without taking notice of any rude
Draughts in the Material they wrought upon, to help them in their intended
Designs,) they became able by their skill to Design and express upon it
whatsoever form they pleased, though in a different manner, some one way, some
another; for as much as all were not taught, or applied themselves to proceed
by the same rule or Method. The course that many take to bring their intended
Figures to perfection, is both by adding to, and taking from the Material; and
this is the way of those that work in Wax, Plaster or Clay, who are therefore
termed Maestri de stucco, others proceed by taking away, and carving out of
the Material that which is superfluous, whereby it comes to pass that they
produce out of whatsoever Mass of Marble, the perfect shape and figure of a Man
which was there hiddenly but potentially before; and those that work this way,
we call Sculptors: next of kin to whom are they that grave in Seals the
proportions of Faces, that before lay hid in the Matter out of which they were
raised. The third sort is of those that perform their Work by only adding to
the Material; as Silver-Smithes, who beating the Silver with Mallets, and
distending it into thin Plates of what fashion or size they think fit, lay
thereupon their Superstructure, adding and enlarging till they have fashioned
and brought to perfection their intended Design. And here perhaps some may
imagine, that in the number of this last sort of Artists Painters are to be
reckoned, as those who proceed by way of adding, namely by laying on of
Colors; but to this they answer, that they do not strive so much to imitate
those lights and shadows in Bodies which they discern by the Eye, by the
adding or taking away of any thing, as by some other Artifice proper and
peculiar to their way of Working: But of the Painter and his Art we shall take
occasion to speak elsewhere. Now, as to those several kinds of Designers which
we have here before mentioned, though they go several ways to work,
nevertheless they all direct their aims to this end, namely, that their labors
may appear to him that shall well observe them, as Natural, and as like the
life as may be; for the bringing of which to effect, it is most evident, that
by how much the more exquisitely they follow some certain determined rule or
method (which Rule we shall afterward describe) so much the sewer defects will
they be guilty of, so much the fewer errors commit, and in all manner of
accounts their Works will succeed and come off with the greater advantage: What
shall we say of Carpenters? What would they perform to any purpose, if it were
not for the Square, the Plummet, the Line, the Perpendicular, and the Compasses
for the making of Circles, and by the means of which Instruments they Design
their Angles, their Streight-Lines, their Levells, and other their Proportions,
thereby finishing and completing all they take in hand with the greater
exactness, and without which they would be able to do nothing substantially? Or
can we rationally imagine, that the Statuarie could perform such excellent and
admirable Works by chance, rather then by the help of some certain and
Infallible rule or guide, drawn from reason and experience? Wherefore this we
shall lay down for a Maxim; That from all Arts and Sciences whatsoever, there
are Drawn certain Principles, Rules, or natural Conclusions, which if we shall
apply our selves with all care and diligence to examine and make use of, we
shall undoubtedly find the benefit of, by the perfect accomplishment of
whatsover we take in hand: For as we were first instructed by Nature, that from
those lineaments which are found in pieces of Wood, Earth, Stone or other
Materials, may be drawn (as we said before) the forms of whatsoever Body or
Creature the concourses of those Lines resemble; so also the same nature has
taught us certain helps and means, by which we are guided to proceed securely
and regularly in what we undertake, and by the constant observing and use
whereof, we shall most easily, and with the greatest advantage, arrive at the
utmost perfection of the Art or faculty we strive to attain. It now remains
that we declare what those helps are which Statuaries are chiefly to make use
of; and because their principal part is to make one thing to imitate and
resemble another, it will be requisite to speak first of Resemblance, a subject
our discourse might be abundantly ample in, since Resemblance is a thing so
natural and obvious, that it offers it self to our view and observation in each
visible object; not only every Animal, but even all things whatsoever that are
of the same Species, being in some respect or other correspondent and alike: On
the other side, there are not in the whole race of Mankind any two to be found
so exquisitely resembling each other, as not to differ some one tittle in the
tone of the Voice, or the fashion of the Nose, or of some other part; to which
we may add, that those Persons whom, having first beheld Infants, we come to
see Children of some growth, and afterward at the age of Manhood, if at length
we meet them when grown Old, we shall find them so changed and altered by time,
that we shall not be able to know them; for as much as the aptitude and
position of those numerous Lines and Features in the Countenance still alters,
and vary's from time to time, as Age comes on; nevertheless in the same Visage
there remains a certain natural and peculiar form, which maintains and keeps up
the resemblance inhaerent to the Species: But we shall wave these things, as
belonging rather to a particular discourse, and return to pursue what we first
took in hand to treat of.

The Design and Intention of making resemblances among Statuaries, I take to be
twofold; the first is, that the Design or Work intended for the resemblance of
any sort of Creature (for example, suppose it a man) be so framed, that it come
as near in similitude as may be to the said Species, without regarding whether
it represent the Image of Socrates more then that of Plato, or any other known
individual Person, since it is enough that the Work resembles a man in general.
The other Intention proceeds farther, and aims not only at the representing the
likeness of Man in general, but of this or that particular Man; as namely, of
Caesar, or Cato, not omitting to describe the very Habit he wore, the Posture
he affected, and the Action he used; whether sitting in his Tribunal, or making
Speeches to the People: It being the proper business of those who addict
themselves to this last way of representation, to imitate and express every
Habit, Posture and Air, peculiar to the Body of that known Person whom we
intend to represent. Answerable to these two Intentions, (that we may handle
the matter as briefly as is possible) there are especially required two things;
that is to say, Proportion, and Limitation. In treating therefore of these two
particulars, that which we have to do, is to declare. First, what they are:
Next, to what use they serve for the bringing of our Design to perfection:
Besides which, I cannot but by the way, take notice of the great benefit that
is to be made of them in respect of the wonderful and almost incredible effects
which they produce; insomuch that whosoever shall be well instructed in them,
shall be able by the help of some certain infallible marks, exactly to observe
and point out the lineaments, situation and positure of the parts of any Body,
though it were a thousand years after, so as not to fail to place it exactly
at his pleasure, in the very same direction and posture it should have happened
to have stood in before; and in such sort, as there should not be the least
part of the said Body, which should not be reduced and resituated toward the
very same point of Heaven against which it was originally directed: As if, for
example, You would point out the place with your finger where the Star of
Mercury or the new Moon would rise, and it should happen to rise in a direct
angle over against the point of the Knee, Elbow, Finger, or any other part;
most certain it is, that by these means and helps all this may be done, and
that so precisely that there should not follow the least failing or error
imaginable; nor need there any doubt be made of the certainty hereof. Besides
this, suppose I should take one of the Statues of Phidias, and so cover it over
with Wax or Earth, that none of the Work could be discerned, and that it should
appear to be only a mere shapeless trunck, You might by these rules and helps
certainly know how to find out in one place, by boaring with a Wimble, the
pupil of the Eye, without doing it any harm by touching it; and in another
place the Novel, and finaly in another the great Toe, and so other parts in
like manner; by which means you will gain a perfect knowledge of all the Angles
and Lines, whether far distant one from another, or nearly concurring together:
You may also, beginning which way you will, and whether following the Original,
or the Copy, not only Draw or Paint, but also put down in Writing, the various
course of the Lines, the circumferences of the Circles, the positions of the
parts, in such sort that by the aforesaid helps and means you need not doubt
the being able to produce with ease such another figure perfectly resembling,
and of what size you please, either less, or just of the same magnitude, or of
an hundred Fathomes in length; may, I dare be bold to say, that were there but
Instruments to be had answerable to so great a Design, it were not only not
impossible, but even no hard matter, to make one as big as the Mountain
Caucasus; and that which perhaps you may most wonder at, is, that according as
the matter might be ordered, one half of this Statue may be made in the Island
of Pharos, and the other half wrought and finished in the Mountains of Carrara;
and that with such exact correspondence, that the joyntures and commissures of
both parts perfectly sitting each other, they may be united into one complete
statue resembling either the Life, or the Copy after which it shall have been
figured: And for the performing of this so stupendous a Work, the manner and
method will appear so easy, so perspicuous and expedite, that for my part I
conceive it almost impossible for any to err but those that shall
Industriously, to make trial of the proof of this assertion, work contrary to
the rules and method enjoined. We do not hereby undertake to teach the way of
making all kind of resemblances in Bodies, or the expressing of all those
various aspects which result from several differing and contrary passions and
affections; since it is not the thing which we profess to show, how to
represent the Countenance of Hercules when he combats with A^^^us, with all the
height of Magnanimity and fierceness which would be requisite upon such an
occasion; or casting an obliging, cheerful and Smiling air, when he Courts his
Deianira; so as that the Countenance of the same Hercules should upon several
occasions be represented with as various aspects: But our purpose is rather to
take notice of all the different figures and postures that are incident to a
Body from the diverse situations, Gestures or Motions of the several members or
parts thereof; for as much as the proportions and outward lines are one way
terminated in a Body that stands upright, another way in him that sits, another
way in one that is lying down, another way in those that turn or incline
themselves toward this or that side; and so, in like manner, in all other
gestures and motions of the Body, of which way of representation our intention
is at this time; that is to say, in what manner, and by what certain and
infallible rules, these gestures and various dispositions of the Body may be
imitated and represented; which rules, as we said before, are reduced to two
principal heads, namely, Proportion, and Limitation: And first we shall treat
of Proportion, which is indeed no other then a constant and certain
Observation, by examining the just number and measures, what habitude,
symmet^ie and correspondence all the parts of the Body have one toward
another, and that in respect of every dimension of the Body, both as to length,
breadth and thickness.

This Observation is made by two sorts of Instruments, a large Ruler, and two
moveable Squares; with the Ruler we take the lengths of the parts, and with the
Squares we take their diameters and all the other proportions of the said
measures. Upon this Ruler then let there be a line drawn of the length of the
Body which you would measure, that is to say, from the crown of the Head to the
sole of the Foot: Whence note by the way, that to measure a Man of a short
stature, you are to use a shorter Ruler, and for one of a longer stature, a
longer Ruler: But whatsoever the length of the Ruler be, it is to be divided
into fix equal parts, which parts we will name Feet, from whence we will call
it the Foot-measure; and each of these Feet shall again be divided into ten
equal parts, which we may term Inches.

The whole length therefore of this Model or Foot-measure will consist of 60.
Inches; every one of which is again to be sub-divided into 10. equal parts,
which lesser parts I call Minutes; so that through this division of our Measure
into Feet, Inches, and Minutes, the total of the Minutes will amount to the
number of 600. there being in each of the 6. Feet 100. Now, for the measuring
of a man's Body by this Instrument, we are thus to proceed: Having divided our
Ruler according to the foresaid manner, we are to measure and observe by the
application thereof, the distances of the parts of the said Body; as for
instance, how high it may be from the sole of the Foot to the crown of the
Head, or how far distant any one member is from another: As, how many Inches
and Minutes it may be from the Knee to the Navel, or to the cannel bone of the
Throat, and so in like manner any other parts; Nor is this course to be at all
slighted or derided either by Sculptors or Painters, since it is a thing most
profitable, and absolutely necessary; for as much as the certain measure of all
the parts being once known, we shall have gained a most easy and speedy
determination how to proceed in our work with any of the said parts or members
without committing the least error: Never think it a matter worth regard or
notice, if any capricious humorist shall peradventure find fault that this
member is too long, or that too short; since your Model or Foot-measure (which
is the rule that must always direct and govern your work, and then which you
cannot go by a more infallible guide) will soon determine whether you have
proceeded well or ill; and doubtless when you shall have maturely considered
and examined these things, you will not be to seek in those infinite other
advantages wherein this Foot-measure will prove serviceable, especially in
knowing how with absolute certainty to limit and determine the longitude of the
parts in a Statue of a greater magnitude, as well as in one of a lesser.

So as if it should happen that you were to make a Statue of 10. Cubits, or
what ever other dimension, it would be requisite to have your Ruler, Model, or
Footmeasure likewise of 10. Cubits, and divided into six equal parts, which
should have the same correspondence one with another, as those of the lesser
Ruler: In like manner should the Inches and Minutes be proportioned, whence
also the use and manner of working would be the same with the other; since half
the numbers of the greater have the same proportion to the whole entire, as
half the numbers of the lesser have to the whole Entire of the lesser.
Wherefore according as the size of your work happens to fall out, your Ruler is
to be made proportionably.

We come next to treat of the Squares, which are to be two; the first of which
shall be made after this manner: Let two Rulers, in the nature of straight
lines, i. e. A. B. and B. C. be joined together so as to make a right angle;
the first Ruler A. B. falling perpendicular, the other B. C. serving for the
Base: The bigness of these Squares is to be so ordered, that their Bases
consist of at least 15. Inches, according to the proportion of your main Ruler,
which, as we have said before, is to be made bigger, or lesser answerable to
the proportion of the Body you would measure: These Inches therefore with their
points and Minutes (however they may fall out) being taken exactly from the
said Ruler, you must set down upon your Base, beginning to rockon from the
point of the Angle B. and so Proceeding on toward C.

The Square being thus marked and divided, as is to be seen in the example A.
B. C. there is to be adjoined unto it another Square made after the same
manner, according as it is demonstrated by the letters D. F. G. so as that G.
F. may serve both for straight Line and Base to both. Now to show the use of
these instruments, I undertake to measure the Diameter of the thickest part of
the Head H. I. K. by bringing the two straight Rulers A. B. and D. F. of each
Square exactly opposite to each other, to touch the two opposite points of the
thickest part of the Head, and by applying interchangeably to one and the same
Level, the Base-lines of the said squares; by which means from the points H. I.
which are touched by the straight Rulers of the said Squares, we shall discover
the exact Diameter of the Head.

And after this manner, the thickness and bigness of any part of the Body
whatsoever may with great ease and accurateness be found out: Many uses and
advantages we could reckon up, which might be made of this Ruler and these
Squares, were it needful to insist now upon them; there being several other
ways, much after the same manner, which the meanest capacity may of himself
find out, for the measuring of the Diameter of any part; as for example,
suppose one would know how much the Diameter is from one Ear to the other, and
where abouts it intersects the other Diameter which passes from the Head to the
Nuca, or the like. Lastly our Workman may safely make use of this Ruler and
these Squares as most faithful guides and counselors, not only for the
performing of any part of his Work, but also at the very first, and before he
sets upon it, he will receive much light by the help of these Instruments, how
to begin and go about it; in so much that there will not be the least part of
the Statue he is to make, which he will not before have examined and considered
and rendered most easy and familiar to him; For Example. Who but a very
arrogant person would take upon him to be a Master-Ship-wright that had not the
perfect knowledge of all the several parts of a Ship, and how one kind of Ship
differs from another, and what those particular parts are which belong to one
Ship more then to another? And yet who is there of our Sculptors, let him be a
man never so subtle and experienced in his Art, who if it should be demanded
of him, upon what ground or consideration he has made this Member after this
manner, or what may be the proportion of this or that Member to the whole
structure of the Body? I say, who is there so diligent and accurate as to have
well considered and observed all that is requisite, and which becomes that
Person to know who would perform as he should do the Art whereof he makes
profession? whereas doubtlesly all Arts and faculties are most advantageously
learned by rule and method, and by the knowledge of some demonstrable operation
that is to be performed; nor shall any one attain to the perfection of any Art
whatsoever, who has not first comprehended every several part and branch of
the said Art. But thus having sufficiently treated of Measure and Proportion,
and after what manner it is to be found out by the Ruler and Squares; it
remains that we speak next of Limitation or the prescribing of Bounds: This
prescription of Limits is the determining or fixing of a certain period in the
drawing of all our Lines, so as to direct to what point they are to be
continued, whether extended out in length, or reversed; how Angles are to be
fixed, how parts are to be raised, or depressed by Alto, or Basso Relievo, as
Artists term it; each Line, Angle and Reliev having their due and certain
places assigned them by the conduct of a sure and perfect rule: And the best
way to put this rule of Limitation in practice, will be by a Line and Plummet,
falling from a certain determinate Center placed in the middle, whereby the
distances and extremities of all the lines may be marked out and taken notice
of, as far as the utmost bounds every way of the said Body extends: But between
the measure described above, and this assignation of Limits, there is this
difference, namely, that that Measure looks farther backward, and springs from
a more native and original consideration, as grounded upon more common and
universal principles, which are by Nature more firmly and substantially
inhaerent in all Bodies; as the lenght, largeness and thickness of the parts;
whereas the prescribing of Bounds is grounded upon the present and accidental
variety of postures, resulting from the different dispositions and motions of
the several parts of the Body, showing the manner how to limit and fashion
those postures, according to the maxims of Rule and Art.

Now, for the better performance of this last part of Regular Operation, we
shall recommend this following Instrument, which is to consist of three parts
or branches; that is to say, an Horizon, a Style, and a Plumb: The Horizon is a
Plane designed upon a Circle, which Circle is to be divided into equal parts
marked with their several members, and their subdivisions set over against each
part: The Style is a straight Ruler, one end whereof is fixed in the center of
the said Circle, the other end moves about at pleasure, so as that it may be
easily transferred and directed from one division of the Circle to another: The
Plumb or Plummet is a line or thread which falls parallel from the top of the
Style down to the Floor or Plane, upon which the Statue or Figure stands whose
members and lineatures are to be measured and limited: For the manner of making
this Instrument, let it be thus; Take a Board well plan'd and smoothed, upon
which let a Circle be drawn having three Foot diameter, and let the extremity
of the said Circle's circumference be divided into equal parts, according as
Astrologers divide their Astrolabes, which parts we will call Degrees; and let
every of these Degrees be subdivided again into as many other parts as shall be
thought fit; as for example, suppose every Degree be subdivided into six lesser
parts, which we may call Minutes; to all which degrees adjoyn the several
numbers, viz. 1. 2. 3. 4. with the rest in order, till the numbers belonging to
all the degrees be set down. This Circle, thus made and ordered, we called the
Horizon, to which we are to fit our moveable Style, being also to be made after
this manner; Take a thin straight Ruler, three Foot in length, and fasten one
of the ends thereof (with a pegg) to the center of its Horizon or Circle, in
such a manner, that though the said end is not to be moved from the Center, yet
the pegg that fastens it is so far to be relaxed, that the whole Ruler may have
liberty to move and play about from one part of the Circle to another, whilst
the other extreme extends it self a good way beyond the circumference of the
said Circle about which it is to be moved: Upon this Ruler or Style, mark out
the Inches it is to contain, distinguishing them with several points between,
after the manner of the Module or Foot-measure above mentioned; and these
Inches must also be subdivided into lesser equal parts, as was likewise done in
the foresaid Foot-measure; and then beginning from the Center, adjoyn to the
Inches also their several numbers, viz. 1. 2. 3. 4. etc. Lastly, to this Style
annex a line and Plummet. This whole Instrument thus described consisting of
Horizon, Ruler, and Plummet we shall call our Definitor.

This Definitor is to be made use of in this manner: Suppose the Original, or
Copy, the limits of whose parts we would determine, were a Statue of Phidias,
holding with the left hand, on one side of a Chariot, the Raines of a Horses
Bridle: This Definitor is to be set upon the head of the Statue in such sort,
that it may lie exactly level upon the plane of the Center, being placed just
upon the very midst of the head of the Statue, where it is to be made fast with
a pegg: Then note that point where it is fastened upon the head of the Statue,
and mark it by setting up a needle or pin for the Center of the Circle: Next,
by turning the Instrument about from the determined place in the Horizon, make
out the first designed degree, so as you may know from whence it is moved;
which may best be done after this following manner: Bring about the moveable
Ruler, which is the Style, upon which the thread and Plummet hangs, till it
arrive at that place of the Horizon where the first degree of the Horizon is to
be set down; and holding it fast there, turn it about together with the whole
Circle thereof, until the line of the Plummet touch some principal part of the
Statue, that is to say, some member particularly noted above all the rest, as
the Finger of the right Hand or so.

Which may serve as the appointed place from whence upon every new occasion the
whole Definitor may be moved, and afterward brought back again to the same
place where it stood at first upon the said Statue; yet so, that by the turning
of the Style about the Pin, which pierces from the top of the head of the
Statue, through the Center of the Definitor, the Plummet which before fell from
the first degree of the Horizon, may return to touch the foresaid Finger of the
right Hand. These things thus ordered and designed, suppose that we would take
the angle of the right Elbow, so as to keep the knowledge of it in mind, or to
write it down; the way is as follows: Fix the Definitor with its Center which
is upon the head of the Statue, in the place and manner aforesaid, in such
sort, that the Plane whereon the Horizon is designed, may stand firm and
immovable; then turn about the moveable Style, till the line of the Plummet
come to touch the left Elbow of the Statue which we would measure: But in the
performing of this sort of Operation there are three things to be observed,
which will much conduce to our purpose: The first is, That we mark how far the
Style in the Horizon comes to be distant from the place where it shall have
been first moved, taking notice upon what degree of the Horizon the Style lies,
whether on the twentieth, thirtyeth or whatsoever other: Secondly, Observe by
the Inches, and Minutes marked in the Style, how far distant the Elbow shall be
from the Center of the Circle: Lastly, take notice by placing the Module or
Foot-measure perpendicularly upon the Plane whereon the Statue stands, how many
Inches and Minutes the said Elbow is raised above the said Plane, and write
down these measures in a Book or piece of paper: For example, thus, the angle
of the left Elbow is found in the Horizon to be 10. Degrees and 5. Minutes; in
the Style or Ruler 7. Degrees and 3. Minutes; that of the Plane in the Module
amounts to 40. Degrees and 4. Minutes; and thus by the same rule may be
measured and computed all the rest of the principal parts of the said Statue or
Copy; as for instance: The angles of the Knees, and of the Shoulders and other
such like parts that are to be reckoned among the Relievi: But if you would
measure Concavities, or those parts which recede inward, and are so removed out
of the reach of sight and easy access, that the Plummet-line cannot come to
touch them (as it happens in the Concavities beneath the Shoulders, in the
regions of the reins, etc.) the best way to find them is as follows: Add to the
Style or Ruler another Plummet-line which may reach as far as the said
Concavitie; how far distant it be from the first, it is not material, since by
these two Plummet-lines falling perpendicularly, and being intersected by the
Gnomon of the plain Superficies above to which they are fastened, and which
extends it self as far as the Center of the Statue, it will appear how much the
second Plummet-line is nearer then the first to the Center of the Definitor,
which is therefore called the middle perpendicular.

These things thus demonstrated, being once sufficiently understood, it will be
an easy matter to comprehend what we before commended to your Observation;
namely, that if the said Statue should chance to have been covered over to a
certain thickness with Wax or Earth, you might yet by a Piercer, with great
ease, readyness, and certainty come to find out whatsoever point or term you
would desire to find in the said Statue; for as much as it may be clearly
demonstrated, that by the turning about of this Gnomon, the Level makes a
circular Line like the Superficies of a Cylinder, with which sort of figure the
Statue so superinduced as aforesaid, seems to be enclosed and incircled: This
Position established, you may safely infer, that as by making way through the
Air (the Statue not being covered with Wax or Earth) you guide your Piercer
directly toward the Point T. (which for example's sake we will suppose to be
the Relievo of the Chin) by the same reason, if the Statue were covered over
with Wax or Earth, might you by boaring through the said Wax or Earth attain
the point aimed at, the Wax or Earth possessing but the same place which
otherwise the Air would have done: From what has been thus discoursed
concerning these things, it may be concluded, that the effect we mentioned
before concerning the making of one half of the Statue in the Isle of Pharos,
and finishing the other half in the Mountains of Carrara, is a thing not only
not impossible but very easy to be performed; For let the said Statue or Model
of Phidias be divided into two segments, and suppose, for example, this Section
of a plain Superficies be made in the Wast or Girdling place, doubtless by the
only assistance of our Definitor it will be easy to mark out in the Circle of
the Instrument whatsoever points shall be thought fit, belonging to the divided
Superficies: These things granted to be feasible, you shall not need to make
any question of being able to find out at pleasure in the Model, any part
whatsoever you shall desire to find; and that only by drawing a small red line
in the Model, which serves in stead of an interfection of the Horizon, in the
place where this segment should terminate, if the Statue were divided; and the
points so marked will direct you the way how the work may be finished: And in
like manner may other things be done, as has been said before. Finally, by the
whole discourse here made concerning all these particulars, it is sufficiently
evident, that all Measures, Proportions and Limitations are to be taken,
whether in the Life, or Copy, by a most certain and infallible rule for the
bringing of any work to perfection in this Art; and we could wish that this way
of proceeding were more seriously intended by all our Painters, and Sculptors,
since, if it were, they would soon come to find the extraordinary benefit of
it: But because all things are most illustrated by example, and that the pains
we have already taken in this matter may conduce to the greater advantage; we
have thought fit to bestow yet a little farther labor in describing the
measures of all the principal parts in man's Body; and not only the parts of
this or that particular man, but as far as was possible, even the very
perfection of all beautiful and excellent proportions; the several parts
whereof having observed in several humane bodies, some excelling chiefly in
this, some in that external gift of Nature, we have thought material to set
down in writing; following the example of him, who being employed by the
Crotoniati to make the Statue of their Goddess, went about collecting from the
most beautiful Virgins (whom, among many, he with great diligence searched out)
those proportions and handsome Features wherein each of them principally
excelled, and applied them to his own Statue. Since much after the same manner
we, having taken the Draught from those Bodies, that of diverse others were
judged, by the most sagacious in this inquiry, to be the most exactly built and
composed, with all their several measures and proportions; and comparing them
exactly together, to observe wherein they excelled, or were excelled each by
the other, have made choice out of this variety of models and examples, of
those middle proportions which seemed to us most agreeable, and which we have
here set down by the lengths, bignesses and thicknesses of all the principal
and most noted parts; and in the first place the lengths are these following.
The heights from the Ground. Feet. Degrees. Minutes. The greatest height from
the ground to the Instup of the Foot. 0 3 0 The height up to the Ankle-bone on
the outside of the Leg. 0 2 2 The height up to the Ankle-bone on the inside of
the Leg. 0 3 1 The height up to the recess which is under the Calf of the
Leg. 0 8 5 The height up to the recess which is under the Relievo of the
Knee-bone within. 1 4 3 The height up to the Muscle on (...) outside of the
Knee. 1 7 0 The height up to the Buttocks and Testicles. 2 6 9 The height up to
the Os Sacrum. 3 0 0 The height up to the joint of the Hips. 3 1 1 The height
up to the Navel. 3 6 0 The height up to the Wast. 3 7 9 The height up to the
Tea^s and Blade-bone of the Stomach. 4 3 5 The height up to that part of the
throat where the Weezlepipe begins. 5 0 0 The height up to the knot of the
Neck where the Head is set on. 5 1 0 The height up to the Chin. 5 2 0 The
height up to the Ear. 5 5 0 The height up to the roots of the Hairs in the
Forehead: 5 9 0 The height up to the middle Finger of a Hand that hangs down. 2
3 0 The height up to the joint of the Wrist of the said Hand. 3 0 0 The height
up to the joint of the Elbow of the said hand. 3 8 5 The height up to the
highest angle of the Shoulder. 5 1 8 The amplitude or largenesses of the parts
are measured from the right hand to the left. The greatest breadth of the Foot.
0 4 2 The greatest breadth of the Heel. 0 2 3 The breadth of the fullest part
beneath the jettings out of the Ankle-bones. 0 2 4 The recess or falling-in
above the Ankles. 0 1 5 The recess of the mid-legg under the Muscle or Galf. 0
2 5 The greatest thickness of the Calf. 0 3 5 The falling-in under the Relievo
of the Knee-bone. 0 3 5 The greatest breadth of the Knee-bone. 0 4 0 The
falling-in of the Thigh above the Knee. 0 3 5 The breadth of the middle or
biggest part of the Thigh 0 5 5 The greatest breadth among the Muscles of the
joint of the Thigh. 1 1 1 The greatest breadth between the two Flanks above the
joints of the Thigh. 0 0 0 The breadth of the largest part of the Breast
beneath the Armpits. 1 1 5 The breadth of the largest part between the
Shoulders. 1 5 0 The breadth of the Neck. 0 0 0 The breadth between the Cheeks.
0 4 8 The breadth of the Palm of the Hand. 0 0 0 The breadth and thickness of
the Arms, differ according to the several motions thereof, but the most common
are these following. The breadth of the Arm at the Wrist. 0 2 3 The breadth of
the brawny part of the Arm under the Elbow 0 3 2 The breadth of the brawny part
of the Arm above, between the Elbow and the Shoulder. 0 4 0 The thickness from
the fore-parts to the binder-parts. Feet. Degrees. Minutes. The length from the
great Toe to the Heel. 1 0 0 The thickness from the Instup to the Angle or
corner of the Heel. 0 4 3 The falling-in of the Instup. 0 3 0 From the
falling-in under the Calf to the middle of the Shin. 0 3 6 The outside of the
Calf of the Leg. 0 4 0 The outside of the Pan of the Knee. 0 4 0 The thickness
of the biggest part of the Thigh. 0 6 0 From the Genitalls to the highest
rising of the Buttocks. 0 7 5 From the Navel to the Reins. 0 7 0 The thickness
of the Wast. 0 6 6 From the Teats to the highest Rising of the reins of the
Back. 0 7 5 From the Weezlepipe to the knot or jointure of the Neck. 0 4 0 From
the Forehead to the hinder part of the Head. 0 6 4 From the Forehead to the
hole of the Ear. 0 0 0 The thickness of the Arm at the Wrist of the Hand. 0 0 0
The thickness of the brawn of the Arm under the Elbow. 0 0 0 The thickness of
the brawn of the Arm between the Elbow and the Shoulder. 0 0 0 The greatest
thickness of the Hand. 0 0 0 The thickness of the Shoulders. 0 3 4

By means of these measures it may easily be computed what proportions all the
parts and members of the Body have one by one to the whole length of the Body;
and what agreement and symmetric they have among themselves, as also how they
vary or differ one from another; which things we certainly conclude most
profitable and fit to be known: Nor were it from the purpose to particularize
how the parts vary and alter, according to the several gestures incident to
humane Bodies, as, whether they by Sitting, or Inclining to this, or that side:
But we shall leave the more curious disquisition into these things, to the
diligence and industry of our Artist. It would also be of very much
conducement, to be well informed of the number of the Bones, the Muscles, and
risings of the Nerves; and especially to know how, by certain rules, to take
the circumferences of particular divisions of Bodies, separately considered
from the rest, by an inspection into those parts which are not outwardly
exposed to sight: In like manner as if a Cylinder should be cut down right
through the middle, so as out of that part of the Cylinder which is visible
throughout, there should be separated, by a circular section through the whole
length of the figure, an inward consimilar part which was before unseen, so as
to make of the same Cylinder two Bodies, whose Bases should be alike, and of
the same form, as being indeed wholly comprised within the same lines and
circles throughout: By the observation of which sort of Section is to be
understood the manner of separation of the parts and Bodies before intimated;
for as much as the design of the line by which the Figure is terminated, and
by which the visible Super^^^es is to be separated from that whichlies hid from
the sight, is to be drawn just in the same manner; and this design being
delineated on a Wall, would represent such a Figure as would be much like a
Shadow projected thereupon from some interposing light, and which should
Illuminate it from the same point of the Air, where at first the beholders Eye
was placed: But this kind of division or separation, and the way of designing
things after this manner, belongs more properly to the Painter then the
Sculptor, and in that capacity we shall treat of them more largely elsewhere.
Moreover, it is of main concernment to whatsoever person would be eminent in
this Art, to know how far each Relievo or Recess of any member whatsoever is
distant from some determined Position of Lines.

The End.
ERRATA,
THe exquisiteness of this graceful Character, and handsome Graving of the
Plates, besides the ^are^^^s of the Subject, will merit of the Reader that he
pardon some ^ew slips of the Pross. As by mistaking Capital for Capital, Colo^^
for C^lo^^, c. ^ etc. Models for Modul, c. 27. 29. etc. and in some of the
rest; the most material being in Epist to St. J. Den. ^. reassumpti^^.
Commissioners. p. 48^ l. 6. for ^ixt^ first, p. 118. l. 40. r. Alber^^. p. 102.
l. 5. ^. for want, p. ^ 21.^. 16. r. Pracep^is. p. 130. ^. 22. r. which for
Modul. p. 140, ^. 29. 1. Pan^been. etc.

Courteous READER, These Books following are Printed for John Place, and are to
be sold at his Shop at Furnivals-Inn Gate in Holborn.
Books in Folio.
THE History of the world, by Sir Walter R^leigh Knight, the last Edition in
the Press.

^ishop Ha^ls third To^^, with Partners.

Things New and Old, or a (...)-house of Similies, Sentences, Alleg^rits (...),
Apologies, Divist, Moral^ and Political, by John Spencer of Sion College.

Observation on C^s^rs Commentaries, by Sir Clement Edm^nds Knight.

The Reports of the learned Judge Popham, sometimes Lord chief Justice of
England.

The Reports of the learned Judge Owen, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

The Reports and Cases of Law, by William Le^nard, Esquire in three parts, with
a complete Table.

L^^ch his Reports.

The Reports of Sir John Bridgman Knight, sometime Chief Justice of Chester.

The Reports of diverse Resolutions in Law, Collected by the Right Honorable
Sir James Ley Knight and Baronet.

C^wells interpreter of hard Words in the Law, the last edition.

Maxims of ^^ason; or the reason of the Common Law, by Ed^^ wingate Esquire;
late one of the Benchers of Gray's Inn.

L^^dinopoli^^, or an History of the Cities of London and Westminster, by James
How^ll.

The History of Swedes, Gubes, and Vandalls, by Olaus Maguns Bishop of Vpsall.

The president for Illustrious Princes, or a History of the Wars between the
Houses of York and La^^caster, by W. H. Esquire.

The Minister of State, in two Volumes, wherein is showed the true use of
Policy, by Mo^^^ur de Si^^^n Secratary to Cardianl Richlew Englished by Sir
Henry Herbert Knight.

Beclesia Resta^^^^a, or the Re^ormation of the Church of England, by Peter
Heylin.

The History of Italy in it is original Glory, Ruin, and Revival, by Edmun
^^^^^pp Esquire.

Books in Quarto large and small.
The Grand Abridgment of the Law Continued, by William Mugh^s Esquire, in these
Volumes.

The Complete Clerk, containing the best forms of all sorts of Presidents, the
second Edition with many Additions, throughout the whole Work, 1664.

Commentaries on the Original Writts, in Natura Brevi^m, by William H^ghes of
Grayi-I^^^ Esquire.

Gregory's Moot-Book, with Additions, by William Hugbe^^.

Declarations and Pleading in English, etc. in the Kings Ben^^h, by William
Small of Furnivals. I^^

Regal argumenta Cousilii, or a Collection of Authentic Arguments, Suaveolent
Speeches, and prudent Reasons; delivered and seriously debated in Parliament.

The Faithful Councellor, or the Marrow of Law, by William Sheppard Esquire,
the second Part.

The Deed speaking, or the living man Revived, in a Sermon Preached at the
Funeral of Mr. Samuel Oliver, by Mr. Chitwind M. A.

The Floating Island, by Dr. Strowd, acted at Oxford,

The Tragedy of the fair Irene, by Gilbert Swinnoe Esquire.

Books in Octavo.
Book of Entries of all manner of Judgments in the Kings Bench and Common Pleas.

The Grounds and Maxims of the Law, by M. Hawke of the Middle Temple.

A perfect guide for a Studious young Lawyer, by Thomas Fidell of Fernivals-Inn
Gent,

The Arraignment of the A^abaptist; in a Dispute at Aberga^^^ny in
Monmouthshire, by John Cragg M. A.

A Cabinet of Jewels, etc. Set forth in eight Sermons, with an Appendix of the
nature of Tithes, and expedience of Marriage by a lawful Minister, by John
Cragg M. A.

The Royal Prerogative vindicated, to which is Annexed the Kings Supremacy in
all causes Ecclesiastical, and Civil, by John Cragg M. A.

The Country Court enlarged by William Greenwood of Furnivals. Inn.

M^^hiavels Discourses, to which is added his Prince, in 12.

Ross his Epitome of Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World, in 13.

The office and duty of an Executor, by Tho. Wentworth.

The Abridgment of the Lord Dyers Reports, by Sir Thomas Ireland.

Observations on the Office of a Lord Chanc^llor, by the Lord Elesmert, late
Lord Chancellor.

Justice Restored, or a Guide for his Majesty's Justices of Peace.

Justice of Peace his Vade Mecum, together with an Epitome of St^^^ords Ple^s
of the Crown.

Ihe Lay-mans Lawyer, by Thomas Foster Gent.

Transactions of Chancery, collected by W. Tocbell.

Brook^ Cases in English, by I. Marsh of Orayt-Inn Barrester.

Perkint of the Laws of England in English.

An exact Abridgment of Doctor and Student.

Principles of the Law reduced to practice, by W. Philips.

Invisible World, and the Mystery of Godliness, by Joseph Hall, Bishop of
Norwich.

Bishop Hal^'s Imposition of hands.

Dr. Prestens Saints Infirmities.

A Treatise of Ph^^^^o^omy.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Sir James Penyma^, by Allen Smalwood.

A Comment on the times, or a Character of the Enemies of the Church of
England, by Thomas Well, M. A.

A Catechism containing the Principles of Christian Religion, written by Moses
Wall.

Poems by Matthew Stevenson.

Clarestella, by R. ^eath Esquire.


