Some few Considerations, supposed Useful; Concerning the vote of the House of
Commons, Friday the 24. February upon the Bill, For the Hindering the
Exportation of Gold and Silver, and the Melting down of the Coin of this Realm,
humbly Proposed by Dr. Hugh Chamberlain, to the Wisdom of the Honorable House
of Commons.

1. Gold and Silver, as all other Commodities, whether Foreign or Domestic,
must be considered with respect to their real natural Value, and the
Market-price, which are both very variable, and not to be governed by Laws.

2. The real natural Value of all Commodities, is the Expense of labor, Charge
and Hazard, in raising and bringing the same to a Market, and this Varies it
accordingly, for Gold does not cost so much in Peru and Guiny, as it does in
London, Paris, or Amsterdam. The Market-price varies according to the Multitude
or Paucity of Chapmen, and the plenty or scarcity of the Commodities.

First, The multitude or paucity of Chapmen, are commonly governed by their
several Necessities and Pleasures in the use of the Commodities: Thus we see,
where Gold is not the measure of Trade, as in some parts of the East and West-
Indies, and in Africa, Iron is much more valuable, because they have much
occasion for the one, and little or no use for the other; neither for Vessels,
Ornaments, or Money. So likewise tho Gold should cost you 3 l. per Ounce, if you
can find but few Chapmen, you must sell it for 40 s. if you can get no more,
and your Necessities compel you to sell: and if it should cost you but 40 s.
per Ounce, if you have multitude of Merchants, you may sell it for 3 l. 10 s.
more or less, for it is not what Charge it stands you in, but the greater or
lesser number that has occasion for it.

Secondly, The plenty and scarcity of Commodity varies the Price, tho much
above the natural Value, or below it. Thus a piece of Bread in a Siege of a
Penny natural Value is often sold for 5 s. and on the contrary, a Diamond
formerly sold for 10 l. when scarce, has by clogging the Market yielded but 5
l. tho possibly less than the Charge expended, which is the natural Value.

4. Nothing can possibly bring Gold or Silver, being of Foreign Growth into
England, but the Exportation of Commodities of our own Growth or Manufacture;
or what our Natives can return from Foreign Service for their Labor, or what
Foreign Travelers spend here to see the Country.

5. Nothing can possibly carry our Gold and Silver out of England, but the
consuming more For^^gn Commodities at prime cost, then we get in Value for the
Sale of our exported Merchandise, or what Foreign Merchants, and Mechanics by
their labor and Thrist can save he^^ to return to their own Country; Or what
our Nobility and Gentry spend abroad in their Travels, or what our Ambassadors,
Foreign Ministers, or our Armies in Foreign Countries or Mercinary Allies draw
out of the Nation.

So that it is neither changing the denomination of our Coin higher or lower,
above or under ^he ^^^ural Value and Market-price of the material, which
quantity and use will regulate, can ^ither gain, keep, or drive away our Gold
and Silver, but only the abovementioned balanc^ of Trade, over or under which
like Necessity will overruled all Laws.

7. That which makes the variety of Value here at home, betwixt Gold, Silver
and Bullion, is the disproportion among themselves, according as, they exceed
the settled proportion by the Standard, in Use or Quantity. For Example, When
there is more use for Gold, or less ^uantity in proportion than for Silver,
Gold shall be dear, and exceed the Standard in the Market-price, tho the
natural Value continues the same. And when there is more use for Silver, or
less quantity in proportion than for Gold, Silver shall be dear, and exceed the
Standard in the Market-price, tho the natural Value were the same. And when
there is more use for Plate than for Money, Plate shall be Dearest and exceed
the Standard in Value, and Coining shall not only stand still, but very often the
Coin shall be melted down: For, if the qantity of Gold exceeds in proportion
the Silver, Gold shall be Cheap: If Silver exceeds Gold, Silver shall be Cheap:
If Money exceeds Plate, Money shall be Cheap, If Plate exceeds Money, Plate shall
be Cheap. And tho Money still retains the same Denomination, it does not always
the same Value, being also overruled by the plenty or scarcity of other
Commodities, for a Crown is not of the same Value When it will purchase but
half a Bushel of Wheat, as when it can a whole one, there being then either
less Corn, or more need of it, or more Chapmen that come with more Money; but
this Variety is no prejudice to the Nation, in respect of the quantity of Gold
and Silver, that being always the same; for when we have more Money, we have so
much the less in Plate, and if more in Plate, we have the less in Money: But
notwithstanding, it is a very great damage to Trade, because Money is living
Riches, Plate but dead; the one being capable of turning and improving Trade,
but Plate is not.

The Nobility's hoarding and carrying of Gold in their Pockets and the great
Gaming with Gold, will raise the price above Silver, tho the proportion remains
the same.

From the Premises may be concluded, that raising the value of our Money,
cannot keep it, but will give our Merchants some trouble to adjust the Parr in
their Exchange and Trade abroad: Nor lowering it cannot drive it away, without
bringing as much or more in the room; but if we take no care to exceed in
Exportations, all we can do, will never keep our Money; and if we do exceed in
Exportations, all Foreigners can do, can never draw is away. Exportations must
be sufficient to answer the Charges that foreign Payments, of Allies, Armies,
Ambassadors, English Travelers, and returning strange Dealers, requires as
well as importing Foreign Commodities, or we must still Decline. Which
regulation of Trade it is humbly conceived, may well deserve the serious Care of
this Honorable House. This Duty I thought I owed my Country, and hope 'twill
give no Offense if I have been mistaken, I Will thank any that will rectify me.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1691.


