A TRUE RELATION OF THE Unjust Proceedings, VERDICT (so called) and SENTENCE OF
THE Court of Sessions, AT MARGARETS HILL IN SOUTHVVARK, Against diverse of the
Lord's People called Quakers, on the 30 th. day of the 8 th. Month, 1662.

Published for the Honor of GOD, the Vindication of the Innocent, and the
Information of People. By JOHN CHANDLER.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

A true Relation of the unjust Proceedings, Verdict (so called) and Sentence of
the Court of Sessions, at Margarets Hill in Southwark, against diverse of the
Lord's People called Quakers, on the 30th. day of the 8th. Month, 1662.
AFter our appearance at the Sessions at Kingston, having been Prisoners at the
White Lion in Southwark above nine weeks, we were indicted, for unlawfully and
tumultuously gathering and assembling our selves together, by Force and Arms,
etc. under pretense of performing Religious Worship, etc. Which Indictment,
Richard Onzlow (who sat Judge of the Sessions) said, was according to a
Statute made in the 35th year of Queen Elizabeth (the late Act of Parliament,
made purposely against the Meetings of the Quakers and others, being by them
laid aside) whereunto, although most of us were willing to plead, and desired a
Trial, as knowing our Innocence as to what was laid to our charge; which,
although it was at first, promised us; yet at last, would not be granted us;
but except we would give Bond to answer at the next Quarter Sessions, we were
to return to Prison again, and there to remain till that time: At length,
through urgency and importunity for a present Trial, that Justice might not be
delayed (as it ought not to have been) the Sessions was adjourned till the 28th
day of the 8th month; and because we could not come under Bond for our
appearance, contrary to our Christian Liberty and Consciences, we were remanded
to Prison till that time. So when we, to the number of thirty two persons,
appeared before the Court, in the Sessions House at Magarets-hill, on the 30th
day of the same month, for Trial; the former Indictment (unto which, for not
giving Bond to appear to plead, were committed) was laid aside, and another
Indictment was drawn up against us, and presented to the Grand Jury upon the
same Statute; the form whereof is as follows.

Surrey. THe Jurors for our Lord the King do present upon their Oath, that
Arthur Fisher, late of the Parish of S. Olave, in the Borough of Southwark, in
the County of Surrey, Yeoman; Nathaniel Robinson of the same, Yeoman; John
Chandler of the same, Yeoman, and others, being wicked, dangerous, and
seditious Sectaries, and disloyal persons, and above the age of sixteen years:
who on the 29th day of June, in the year of the Reign of our Lord Charles the
second, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
and the fourteenth; have obstinately refused, and every one of them has
obstinately refused, to repair unto some Church, Chapel, or usual place of
Common Prayer, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom of England,
in the like Case set forth and provided, (after forty days, next after the end
of the Session of Parliament begun and holden at Westminster on the nineteenth
day of February, in the year of the Reign of our Lady Elizabeth late Queen of
England, the thirty fifth, and there continued until the dissolution of the
same, being the tenth day of April in the 35th year abovesaid) To wit, on the
third day of August, in the year of the Reign of the said Charles King of
England, the fourteenth abovesaid, in the Parish of S. Olave aforesaid, in the
Borough of Southwark aforesaid, in the County aforesaid; of themselves, did
voluntarily and unlawfully join in, and were present at an unlawful Assembly,
Conventicle, and Meeting at the said Parish of S. Olave, in the County
aforesaid, under color and pretense of the exercise of Religion, against the
Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom of England, in contempt of our said Lord the
King that now is, his Laws, and to the evil and dangerous example of all others
in the like case offending, against the Peace of our said Lord the King that
now is, his Crown and Dignity, and contrary to the form of the Statute in this
same case set forth and provided.

This Indictment being read, it was replied, That this was not the same
Indictment with that at Kingston, unto which we desired to plead: Richard
Onzlow answered, that they had quashed or nulled that, and that they had power
to quit one Indictment, and to draw up another, if the former were not
sufficient: Then it was required that we might be tried by the late Act of
Parliament; Whereto he answered, They might try us by what Act they would, that
was in force. So, after we saw their bad intent toward us, the Country was bid
to take notice, that there was another Indictment formed against us at
Kingston, to which, we pleaded, Not guilty; and some (that is, six Baptists)
were tried and cleared by that; which they perceiving, refused to try us
according to their Promise; but adjourned the Court, that so they might draw up
another, and that, for ought we knew, if some of us should be cleared by this,
they would draw up another, that so they might ensnare us: To which Richard
Onzlow said, we should all be tried by this. Then it was desired, that that
Statute might be read, to see whether it contained all the particulars of this
last Indictment: So then he caused but a part of the Statute to be read, saying
to the Clerk, it was enough: whereby, the penalty, and other particulars, were
concealed from the Prisoners, and from those that were to be of the Jury. Then
it was openly declared, as a Testimony against that wicked Law, that the
Parliament that made that Act, did at that time, take counsel against the Lord,
and against his Anointed. Also, that it was made in the time of ignorance, when
that people were newly stepped out of Popery, but now there was more knowledge.
Also, by this, the Reader may take notice, how unjustly and falsely the first
Indictment was framed on the same Statute, which mentions nothing of
tumultuously gathering and assembling together, or by Force and Arms, etc. or
of performing Religious Worship.

After this, we were urged to plead, guilty, or not guilty, to the Indictment.
Then one desired a Copy of the Indictment, and the Court promised it him; but
instead of giving him the Copy, they thrust him out of the Court, because he
did not plead guilty, or not guilty, before he had the Copy, notwithstanding
they promised it him, and so bad, take him Jailer; and bad the Clerk to give
the Copy to another, because he understood it, it being in Latin. Then calling
another, who standing in the fear and counsel of the Lord, not daring to answer
hastily, they bad, take him Jailer. These, with others, to the number of ten,
were violently haled out of the Court, as taken (as they say) pro confesso, or
for guilty, and thereupon were soon sent back to Prison again. The rest of us,
being twenty two in number, knowing our selves to be most falsely charged, were
free to join issue, and plead, not guilty: Then the Jurymen were called, who
were men fit for their purpose; yet were we hardly allowed the liberty of
common Malefactors, (as also the liberty that the Court allowed to the six
Baptized persons at Kingston, as was re-minded to Richard Onzlow) which is, to
except against many persons, without showing any cause; but we passed five,
before we excepted against any; and when we excepted against one, Richard
Onzlow seemed to be offended, and said, we must show a lawful cause, or else we
should not except against him; it was answered, Where we saw envy and
prejudice, or a light, vain deportment in any man, it was a cause sufficient;
but he did not like of such a reason. Then another was excepted against, which
he would allow of, without showing a reason: to which it was answered, that
that man was heard to say, that he hoped ere long, that the Quakers should be
arraigned at the Bar, and be banished to some Land where there was nothing but
Bears: at which the Court made a great laughter, and the man was put by: So, we
made little more exception, seeing what manner of persons we were to choose out
of. Then they were sworn, and two Witnesses were called, who could but testify
at most, that such persons, whose names were specified in writing, they took in
such a place met together, but that no words were spoken. After this, we spoke
to particulars contained in the Indictment, on this wise. First, the Jury was
bid to take heed, how they did sport or dally with holy things; and that those
things which concerned their and our Consciences, could not be denied, but to
be holy things: and as a man was not to sport with the health of his Neighbor;
so not to sport with the Liberty of, or Banishment of his Neighbor. And
whereas we were accused for wicked, dangerous, and seditious Sectaries; that
was not true: for we were not wicked, because we lived soberly, righteously and
godly in the world; and that it was so, we appeal to themselves: neither were
we seditious; for that was to be tumultuous; but we were peaceable. And whereas
we were charged, for not coming to bear the Common Prayer without any lawful
cause, for one month after the 29th of June last; we made it appear, that there
was none to hear if we would have come; for the Service Book was not quite
printed for several weeks after the said 29th of June, (yea, they made haste to
have it finished by that which is called Bartholmew-tide, which was the time
enjoined by the late Act of Parliament, for the Priests to read it) Also, that
it was the rigor of the Law, or summum Jus, which was confessed by themselves
to be summa Injuria, or the greatest wrong, for the Act to be in force against
as before the publishment thereof, as Rich. Onzlow said, it was, and would have
it to be: whereby the Reader may take notice, how like unto the blind and cruel
Egyptians, this Court of Justice (so called) did act; who required their full
tale of Brick of the Israelites, and yet would not allow them Straw. They would
have us also, to prove, that we had come to hear Common Prayer, they having no
Witness to prove the contrary, if it had been read; Whereto it was replied,
That it was according to the Law of the Land, in all Criminal Causes, for
positive Evidence to be brought against the Prisoner accused; which Rich.
Onzlow could not positively deny: wherefore he told the Jury afterward, that
he thought we must prove we did come, because the coming to Common Prayer did
excuse the meeting. But let the Reader know, that the Judge of a Court is to
declare the Law by a positive Assertion, and according to knowledge, and not
his own thoughts. It was also insisted on the word, Heretic, that it was such
a one, who after Conviction of his Error, wilfully took it up and maintained it
against the Truth; and therefore the Apostle said, such a one was condemned in
himself. Rich. Onzlow (...) off that, with the word Sectary, the word Heretic
not being in the Indictment, although in effect, it is both as one: for that
word which in the Acts, is rendered Sect, is 'Airesis, or Hiresie. Then it was
answered, that a Sectary is taken for one that divided or separated in
contempt, which he did not deny; but we did not separate in contempt of any
man. And indeed Reader, if thou art not wilfully blind, thou can not but
conclude, that whatsoever is done in Conscience to God, is not done in
obstinacy or contempt. Thou may also here take notice, of the great
partiality of these men, who in what might make against us, would keep exactly
to the form of words in the Indictment; but would not keep to the form of words
therein, although essential to the thing in hand, in what made for the
justification of our Cause, as plainly appears by this: for whereas we were
charged for an unlawful Assembly, Conventicle and Meeting, under color and
pretense of the exercise of Religion, we insisted on the word pretense, as that
it came from a word which signified to cover over; So that a pretense is a
false cover, and so, to cover Danger and Sedition under meeting together; which
was false; for we came from a good intent, and not from a pretense, as our
Consciences bare us witness, namely, to wait upon the Lord, as being in his
fear wherever we are, according to those sayings, Be thou in the fear of the
Lord all the day long. And wait upon thy God continually. And that a good
intent was good in it self. Now although a man might do evil, that good might
come of it, which he ought not to do; yet, Whoever did really good, that evil
might come thereof? For, ex vero, nil nisi vera sequuntur; Of Truth, nothing
but true things do follow. Also, that the word, intent, was not mentioned in
the Indictment. And as for pretense, they could not prove any thing either by
word or deed, whereby they might gather any pretense; for there was an exercise
of Religion mentioned in the Indictment: Now we truly pleaded, that an
exercise, as to man, did imply some visible action, either of the tongue, hand
or knee; for the Mind was as invisible Being, and therefore the exercise
therereof was not discerned by man: but at the time of our assembling, there
was no action, either of Prayer, Exhortation, Doctrine, Prophecy,
Thanksgiving, or the like; therefore there was no exercise. One thing also is
not to be forgotten; that when it was queried, How could the going a stones
cast or two from ones dwelling, only to a place, be a breach of the King's
Peace? Rich. Onzlow answered impertinently thereunto, unto this purpose,
saying, Yes; for if a man did go over or through another's Ground, he committed
a trespass, although he did nothing else: But the Reader may observe, that this
was a going in the Highway, and not out of the Common-path, to our own proper
place and ground: neither was it a fit similitude; because we were charged in
the Indictment with Wickedness, Danger, and Sedition, under color and pretense
of an exercise of Religion as aforesaid, and so in truth, it was a wresting of
Judgment. Also, it was minded to the Jury, that the doors were open, which,
according to their own Law, is said to excuse from a Conventicle, which is
taken for a meeting to a bad intent, and wherewith we were charged. This was
the substance of what was pleaded to the Particulars charged against us in the
Indictment, from the first to the last, till the Jury brought in their ultimate
Verdict (so called) which appeared to be so sufficient for a just defense unto
impartial Judges, and a judicious and conscientious Jury, that the standers-by
generally thought we should have been brought in not guilty.

The Jury going out of the Court, they continued a certain time; then coming
again, the Bailiff said they had a Verdict: They being asked, if they were
agreed? said, Yes. They asked, whether Arthur Fisher and the rest of the
Prisoners at the Bar, were guilty, or not guilty? They said, They were guilty
in part, and not guilty in part. Then Richard Onzlow said, they must either be
guilty of the whole Indictment, or else not guilty; They answered, they could
not find us guilty of the whole, but only guilty of meeting; which meeting;
they said, they could not find to be upon pretense of Worship, because there
were no words spoken: Neither could they find as guilty for not coming to hear
Common Prayer, because it was not to be heard before their Imprisonment: but
this Verdict would not be accepted of, although Richard Onzlow had told them,
that if they could not find us guilty of all, then, not guilty: and they said,
they could not find us guilty but in part; So that, according to his own words,
we ought to have been cleared; but Judgment was turned backward, and Equity
could not enter; but they would force the Jury to bring in another Verdict.
Then one of the Justices that committed us, was sworn, as to what our
Confession was when we were committed, who said, we confessed, we met in the
fear of the Lord; and this was the best Evidence that he could give: then the
Jury was sent out again, where they stayed long, insomuch, that the Court
adjourned until the third hour, about which time, they sat again, and asked if
the Jury were agreed: the Bailiff said, No; but said he, Master Pound is here
now; whereupon Richard Onzlow casting his eye up toward the window (the Jury
being in an upper room) said, his Evidence was nothing now: The Reader may take
notice, that this Pound was the Constable that accompanied the Soldiers to
fetch us out of the Meeting. Then in a little space after, the Jury came again,
and being asked as before, they answered to the same effect; which Verdict
would no more satisfy the Court, than the former: Then Pound was called and
sworn, whose Evidence, Richard Onzlow had said to be nothing now; neither did
we judge it legal to swear Witnesses for either party, after the Jury had gone
out twice before: but we knowing our Cause to be just, and our selves innocent,
we mattered not what any could say or swear against us; and his Evidence, as to
what he saw, agreed with the others; but they asked him, if he heard us say, we
met to worship God, or upon pretense of Religious Exercise: he said, he heard
us say nothing; but we did not deny that we met to worship God; So they took it
for granted: But it was told them, that a not denying, was not a confessing of
any thing: and we spoke to the Jury to mind the fear of the Lord (it was also
told them, He that justified the Wicked, and he that condemned the Righteous,
both those were abomination to the Lord) insomuch that Richard Onzlow told one
of us, he should be bound to his Good-behaviour. And thus, all people may take
notice of the unjust dealings of the Rulers of this Nation; for when it seemed
very probable that we should have been cleared, because the Evidence could
prove nothing against us, Richard Onzlow said, Well, my Masters, if ye be not
found guilty now, ye will be found guilty shortly: whereby he manifested the
intent of his heart; for his words did imply, that if the Jury did clear us, we
should be ensnared by some other means; for he knew not, that all we should
ever be brought to any more such Trials. Then the Jury going out again,
returned quickly. Then it was asked, as before, whether Arthur Fisher, and the
rest of the Prisoners, were guilty as they stood indicted, or not guilty? they
said, Guilty. How are they guilty, said he? Guilty of meeting, said the
Foreman: But said Richard Onzlow, are they guilty according to the form of the
Indictment? he answered, Yes. Then they cried, Look to them Jailer. Then they
began to hale us away, without passing any Sentence upon us: Then we desired to
hear our Sentence, which Richard Onzlow pronounced, as follows: That we
should return to Prison again, and there lie three months without Bail; and if
in case we did not make Submission according as the Law directs, either at or
before the end of the aforesaid three months, that then we should absure this
Realm; but in case we refused to make Abjuration, or after Abjuration made,
should forbear to depart this Realm, within the time limited, or should return
again without License, we should be proceeded against as Felons.

An ADVERTISEMENT.
One of the Jury has since said, that George Snelgrove the Bailiff of the
Hundred, told the Jury, they must fine for the King, or else they would be
fined themselves; for the King was not to be cast in any Suit; and of this,
seven of them said, they would take their Oaths.

There was also an honest man, who was at the hearing of our Trial, that since
affirmed in the Prison, that he heard one of the Jurymen say, as they were
going up the stairs to consult; Here is a deal of do indeed to condemn a
company of innocent men.

After the Jury had delivered their final Verdict, before Sentence given, a
holy Courage arose in the Prisoners, and as one of them who stood by the Table
was haling away, they bad he should be brought again; to whom Richard Onzlow
said, Notwithstanding this, there was a way to escape the penalty, which was by
Submission. Then the Prisoner asked him, what their Submission was? He said, to
come to Common Prayer, and resrain these Meetings: Unto whom, when the said
Prisoner had given his Reasons (in the fear, power and wisdom of God) of denial
of both, and being desirous to hear the penalty; he said, we must abjure the
Land: To whom when the Prisoner answered, to abjure is to forswear: one of the
Justices (so called) preventing the Prisoner) said, smilingly or laughingly,
And ye cannot swear at all; as though he was delighted, that we were taken in
such a snare as to our lives.

Other things were uttered amongst us, as christianly witnessing a good
Confession before their Judgment Seat; and if any one particular of us, through
a forward Zeal, rather than from any evil desire toward the Court of Jury, (for
we do pray for our Persecutors) uttered any words that might give our Enemies
any just occasion, for the honor of Truths sake, we declare a disowning of it,
and that the Light of Jesus Christ, to which our minds and hearts are turned,
judges and condemns it.

But whereas Richard Onzlow, about the beginning of our Trial, voluntarily said
unto us, that at Kingston we complained that we had not Justice; but now they
had brought the Sessions hither, that we might have Justice; and we found the
matter so far otherwise, that we concluded, as in the Scripture is said, Their
words are as smooth as Oil, but they have War in their hearts.

A few Words to the Jury, who contrary to their Oaths brought in a false
Verdict (so called) against the Innocent.
TO every Individual, as well the Promoters of, as Consenters unto that unjust
Verdict, these few lines are directed; desiring that ye may read them with
patience and moderation; and consider what you have done, and repent and humble
your selves before the Lord, before it be too late, even before the Anger of
the Lord (who is patient and long-suffering) break forth upon you, and you be
utterly cut off and perish in your sins, and you be for ever deprived of the
presence of the Lord, and have your portion amongst Murderers and Unbelievers,
which will assuredly be your portion, except you repent. And truly, this I can
say, that my soul has been grieved, and my spirit full of heaviness for you,
and with tears have I besought the Lord never to lay this sin to your charge,
having learned to bless them that curse, and pray for them that despitefully
use us: But truly, your sin is very great; for you have not only made your
selves Murderers (if the Lord prevent it not) of twenty two Persons, to the
ruining of our Wives and Children; but also have made your selves a President
unto others in the like case; you being the first and most hardly that ever
durst bring in such a Verdict amongst us in our Generation.

And now I desire to expostulate a little with you, to know what was the very
ground and cause of your so dealing, seeing there was no Evidence to prove any
thing against us.

And first, you the Promoters, Was this your end, to have the Righteous cut off
from the Earth, that so you might live in Swearing, Drunkenness, Whoredom, and
all manner of Profaneness and Debauchery, without once being reproved? Or, was
it for fear of Finement or hope of Favor? or, did you expect some Reward? or,
did you believe that your bringing us in guilty, would (as it did) extend to
the depriving of us both of Liberty, Life and Estate? and did you hope to be
sharers thereof? or to advantage your selves by destroying of us? Which of
these was the reason? deal plainly with your own hearts and consciences, and
think not to hide any thing from the all-seeing eye of the Lord, nor from such
as walk in his Light, and abide in his Counsel.

And now to you the Consenters, who for a season withstood your fellows, I have
a few words to write; That although your end was not so bad, nor your envy so
great as the others, yet your reward will be the same, and you must drink of
the same Cup, except you speedily repent; and it is well if a place of
repentance be found for you; for, you have not only betrayed the Lives of
honest men, but also have betrayed your own Consciences, and done despite
against the Spirit of Grace that strove in you, and through cowardice and
slavish fear consented to condemn the Innocent: for the Scribes and Pharisees
could not compass the death of Christ until Judas betrayed him; no more could
those blood-thirsty-men have compassed ours, but by your consent. Oh that you
would consider, and lay these things to heart, and remember the saying of the
Servant of the Lord; What is required of thee, O man, but to do justly, show
mercy, and walk humbly with thy God? but you have dealt unjustly, you have
showed no mercy; and now for you to repent and walk humbly with your God, would
indeed be the rejoicing of my soul, who desires, that the Lord may show mercy
unto you all, though you have not done justly toward me nor the rest of my
Brethren.

Written at White-Lion-Prison; by one who knows well, and also is well known
unto many of you, by name, Nathaniel Robinson.

A Collection of some of the Particulars of the Proceedings of the Court at
Quarter Sessions, holden at Margarets Hill in Southwark, upon the 11th. day of
the 9th. Month, 1662. as follows.
THe Court being sat, there was brought; before them thirteen of the People of
God, called Quakers, who being brought to the Bar, an Indictment was read,
which was grounded upon an Act of Parliament of the thirty fifth year of Queen
Elizabeth, for the punishment of wicked and seditious Sectaries. The Indictment
being read, the Prisoners were asked, Guilty, or not guilty? Several of the
Prisoners seeing their wicked intent, had not freedom to answer to that limited
form of words, [viz. guilty, or not guilty] we said, it was all one whether we
plead or not, seeing they had determined what to do, as we had experience in
the former Trial, yet we spoke to the same effect, denying the substance of the
Indictment, and declaring it to be a pack of lies and forgeries. Then several
of us being suffered no further to plead, were committed back to Prison, and
but five only remaining whose Plea the Court accepted; whose Plea could hardly
be received: for, when they asked us, Guilty, or not guilty? some of us
answered, That we did believe that they knew in their own consciences that we
were not guilty of that Indictment, and that it was lies and forgeries, and
that we were not guilty of that Charge. They said, it was a sign our Cause was
not good, we were so loath to put our selves upon a Trial. We answered, we did
not question the honesty of our Cause, but we did question the honesty of those
that were to try our Cause; and that we knew that such men who feared God, and
trembled at his Word, could not judge us Evildoers in this matter. Reply was
made; Were not those men that feared God? (meaning the Jury) We replied to John
Lenthal, that if he could say, in Truth and Righteousness, that he was a man
that feared God, and trembled at his Word, we would refer our Cause to him; but
if he was not such a one, he was not fit to sit there as Judge over us: And
whereas we declared against the Forgery contained in the Indictment, they said,
we were uncivil: We said, it was not uncivil to say a Lie was a Lie.

The Jury being called and sworn, they also swore two Witnesses. The first
swore we were at a Meeting at Horsey-Down, to the number of about threescore.
The Court demanded what we were doing? He said, we were doing nothing, nor he
heard nothing spoken.

The second Witness, whose name is Crosswell, he swore we were met at
Horsey-Down, to the number of about an hundred, and that a Woman was preaching
before he came into the Meeting, and continued speaking a good while after he
came in; although the former Witness, being asked how long he came in after
Crosswell. He said he came in within three minutes after him, and heard nothing
spoken; And when it was demanded of Crosswell, what was spoken; he could give
but a slender account, but said she spoke out of Jeremiah. But this Testimony
was forged by the Devil the father of lies in the heart of this his servant,
which was signified to the Jury; and also, that this Crosswell, who lives at
the Horns in Kent-street, is generally known to be a very wicked man, and to
keep a wicked house of entertainment for Drunkards and all manner of wicked
persons; who was a Constable at the time when we were brought to Prison, he
took us out of our peaceable Meeting, where we were in silence waiting upon the
Lord, which was testified in open Court; and this false Witness was objected
against, as not being a Competent Witness, because he is known to be a man of a
wicked Conversation, and one that is a Common Swearer, and not making
conscience of an Oath. It was also pleaded to the Jury, that they ought to take
notice of the Confutation of the Witnesses; the first affirming that nothing
was spoken, the last affirming that a Woman spoke.

It was also questioned, whether that Court had any lawful Authority to proceed
against us, seeing it is enacted in a Statute, made and provided in the first
year of Queen Elizabeth, That no matters of Religion, or Causes Ecclesiastical,
shall be judged Error, Heresy, or Schism, but by Ecclesiastical Authority by
especial Commission, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England. The
Court said, that Statute of the thirty fifth was since. To which it was
answered, that this Statute of the first of Queen Elizabeth, is not repealed,
but is yet in force. John Lenthal said, that should not hinder their
proceedings. John Lenthal asked us, wherefore we were met together? We said,
the end of our meeting together, was to wait upon the Lord, to feel his Power
and Presence in our hearts, and that we were neither wicked, seditious, nor
Heretics, but were in the fear and counsel of God, bearing Testimony against
those things in our Conversation, whereof we were accused in the Indictment.

Then John Lenthal said, directing his speech to the Jury, that one Witness
said, we were at the Meeting; and the other said, that a Woman spoke; and
thirdly, that we confessed that we were there worshipping of God, which he
charged against us as matter of fact; They also charged us of obstinately
refusing to hear the Common Prayer: Some of us said, we were in Prison before
it was in being: Others of us bid them produce Evidence that we did not hear
it. They answered, that we should prove that we did hear it. We said, that did
not belong to us, nor the Law does not require it.

Then we, directing our speech to the Jury, bid them take notice of the
Confutation of the Evidence, and that it was a weighty matter they went upon;
that not only our Liberty, but our Lives also were concerned in it, for they
sought our Blood; and that the End and Issue of it was to take away our Lives;
for we see the end of their Proceedings, by this Act, is, to make us abjure the
Realm, which is, to swear, which we must rather die than do; (Oh! must you so,
said the Crier) We said, we were innocent men, fearing God, and because of that
they sought our lives; but if we had been Drunkards or Swearers, we might have
our Liberty. They said, if we would conform, we might have our Liberty. It was
answered, we might obtain our Liberty for our bodies for a time, and bring our
souls in bondage to all eternity. So they sent forth the Jury, who remained
together till the Court adjourned to Dinner, and after they were set again, the
Jury came down; the Court asked them if they were agreed? They said, No. Some
of them questioned, whether a Woman speaking might be called the Worship of
God. John Lonthal said, it was all one for that, whether Men or Women: But
after some time, the Jury came in again, and brought us in guilty, as the Court
said. We demanded their Verdict, but they would give us no answer. Then John
Lenthal pronounced the Sentence, That we must return to Prison for three
months, without Bail or Mainprize; if in that time we did not recant, we must
abjure the Realm. We asked them what benefit we might obtain by such
Submission? They answered, we might have our Liberty. We answered, that they
could afford us no more than the Divil offered Christ; All this will I give
thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. One of them said, that was not a
fit comparison. Whereupon we answered, If we should say that with our mouths,
which we did not believe with our hearts, we should be Hypocrites and Children
of the Devil, falling down to worship him. So as we passed from before the
Court, we bid them remember Cain, who was the first that persecuted about
Sacrifice and Worship, who flew his righteous Brother.

Now let the impartial Reader take notice of the slender ground that either the
Jury had to bring us in guilty of that Indictment, or the Court to pass such a
cruel Sentence, there being only two Witnesses. The first swore, that a Woman
was speaking before he came into the Meeting; and a good while after; and the
other came within three minutes after, and heard nothing spoken. This was all
the Evidence that was against us, as the Auditors that were present at the
Court can witness. Now whether this Evidence was a sufficient ground for such a
Verdict (so called) and Sentence, let all sober-minded people judge: they could
not prove us either wicked, dangerous, seditious, nor Sectaries; neither have
the effects of our meeting ever at any time tended to any such consequence; but
our Meetings do, and always have tended to Peace, and to the rooting out the
ground of Wickedness, Sedition, and Heresy; therefore not guilty of this
Indictment. Secondly, There was no Evidence against us, that we did obstinately
refuse to hear Common Prayer; neither was it in being at those places which
they call Churches and Chapels, till after we were in Prison; therefore we are
not guilty of this Indictment. Thirdly, They did not swear that we were met in
pretense of Worship; therefore we are not guilty of this Indictment. Fourthly,
The Evidence did not swear that we were met in Contempt of the King, his Laws
and Statutes; for we were met in the Fear and Counsel of God, which is not an
evil, but a good Example to others; not against the Peace, but against the
ground of strife; not against the King's Honor and Dignity, but in the ground
of all true Honor and Dignity; therefore not guilty of that Indictment: Our
Meeting-doors were open; and therefore by the Law not a Conventicle, which is
to plot and contrive mischief, which it is manifest to all People was not our
intent; therefore not guilty of that Indictment, nor deserving such a cruel
Sentence.

Now all People who have any sense or seeling of the measure of God's Spirit in
their hearts, may see and discern that this persecuting spirit is no other, but
that which was in Cain when he slew his Brother about Sacrifice and Worship;
for, no other but that same spirit has persecuted about Religion and Worship,
from Cain to this day; who, because of that spirit, are and ever have been
driven out of God's presence, as Cain was, and so are become open Enemies to
that Innocent Life in all the Faithful, which was in Abel, whose Sacrifice God
accepts at this day, as he did his.

GIve ear, O King, O Parliament, O Judge,
And Justices, who bear the Saints a grudge,
Who have or may promote, as men of strife,
A wicked Statute for to take their Life.
Behold! all People of the English Nation,
A Law set forth against the Separation,
Made by a Council, Signed by a Queen,
Long laying dormant, now revived ageen;
Horrid Design, ever to be accursed,
To leave the late Act, and to take the worst;
Which blames a harmless People, by its Lies,
As wicked and seditious Sectaries,
And such like falsehoods, which the Priests, with all
Ill Magistrates, possessed have, and shall,
Until the Beast and Prophet false are cast
Into the Lake, when they have done their last.
The while, let us talk a littl' of your abuse,
To leave y' at least the more without excuse:
What have we said, or done? we fain would know
Before we die (the Land we cannot forgo)
That ye should thus us sentence right or wrong,
Sure, not by God's Law, but your own so strong:
Did ever men just Judgment more pervert,
Christians in name, but Hypocrites in heart!
If we should hold our peace; the Stones might cry
With rumbling voices to the Heavens hie.
What do ye say to Christ and Christians
In Ages past, inhabiting all Lands,
Who separated from the wicked train
Of Idol people, where they did remain?
What to the Sect declared of in the Acts?
And Paul accused by the Jews of heinous facts?
Who being spoke against in every place;
Yet you will not dare in words them to deface.
See then how like your Fathers ye do walk,
Who of the Scriptures then did prate and talk,
Who justified the Saints that went before,
And yet condemned the present ones as sore.
Repent, repent, be humbled in the dust,
And bite those tongues that did condemn the Just:
Yea, rather rent your hearts, which took content
To Prison, Banish, kill the Innocent:
For if we felt not Light, Life, Truth and Love,
We durst not thus so boldly to reprove.
Well, come what will, Glory to God on High,
That we three Months in Prison are to lie,
Wherein, if not submit, the Cross to fly,
Then to forswear these Lands, or else to die.
But we must hearken to our Master's Call,
Who says within us, Swear ye not at all;
For he has brought us unto Yea and Nay,
And him we are resolved for to obey;
'Cause we through Grace, are sure to gain by loss,
This makes us love the Seed, and kiss the Cross.
O Immortality, most glorious sight!
Which through the Gospel, God has brought to light:
O hellish darkness, and eternal pains!
For all the impenitent (reserved in chains)
And persecuting Antichristians,
Both Great and Small, who do defile their hands
With blood, or any thing that may offend.
The Lambs of Christ that hold out to the end.
The All-powerful Mighty Judge to such will say,
Within their Consciences, Depart, away
Ye cursed ones, into eternal fire,
Prepared for evil Angels in mine ire:
For ye not only have not visited
My Babes and Brethren dear, when hard bested;
But wronged them much by various enmity,
And doing thus y' have done it unto me.
Come, come ye Blessed, shall Christ Jesus speak,
Within his Flock, whose hearts now melt and break
For the Abominations committed,
And who by Suffering now, for him are fitted;
Receive the Kingdom and the endless Life,
I Will be thy Bridegroom, thou shall be my Wife;
For thou have holp my Poor in want and need,
And born the burdens of the Suffering Seed,
And loved me above all Earthly thing;
So I into this Glory do thee bring.
Then ye that know the Father and the Son,
And Sp'rit, that brought you out of Babylon,
What the good Husbandman in you has sown,
See that it grow, and do not smite your own
Fellows, nor eat and drink with the drunken, but
Feed them, lest he do you in sunder cut,
As Hypocrites; for it is a sudden Day;
See how it dawns, Hark how he comes away.
Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. JOHN CHANDLER.

THE END.

