A CABINET of Grief: OR, THE French MIDVVIFE'S Miserable mean for the Barbarous
Murder committed upon the Body o^ her Husband*

With the manner of her Co^veying away hi^ Limbs* and of her Execution; She
being Burnt to Ashes on the 2d. of March in Leicester-Fields.

the burning of the French midwife

Licensed accordin^ to Order

Blare, at the Looking-Glass on London Bridge. 1688.

A Cabinet of GRIEF; OR, The French Midwifes miserable moan, etc.
UNder a sense of that Horrid and Hellish Sin of Murder, which I lately
committed; I desire to leave to the World this following Treatise.

First, the Cause of my Provocation: Secondly, the manner in brief of the
Murder: And thirdly, my hearty and unfeigned sorrow for my Offense, which I
hope may stand as a Monument to succeeding Ages, of that Unmerciful Murder,
which brings me to my Miserable End.

First of the Cause; Since the time I became the Unhappy Wife of that miserable
Man, his Unnaturalness and Cruelty has been such, that no Tongue is able to
express the daily sorrows that I underwent: from my unhappy Destiny let every
Man and Wife be warned, let not sin and Satan provoke your passions, but learn
to live in Love and Unity one with another, for where it is otherwise, there is
little hope of a happy life, or a blessing from God, as I by sad Experience
know full well.

Dennis my Husband, whom I Murdered, through the bad Company he kept, and the
abuses he gave me, caused great confusion between us. Time after time would he
ransack and rifle me of what I earned by my industrious Care; then would he
ramble into Foreign parts, till he had wasted and consumed the same. This
being done, he would return to me home again, with promise of amendment of
lif^, yet in few days he would run into the same Extravagancy, to my great
discontent, though I often endeavored to persuade and reconcile him, yet it was
all in vain; for the more I entreated the more he would revile me, vowing, That
for the future it should be worse and worse: this aggravated my sorrows, and
made them more than I was able to bear; so that groaning under the burden of
my afflictions, I knew not what course in the World to take, to ease my self of
that miserable bondage I was in. At these times the Devil was busy with me, so
that I often before this time attempted to do the same, but was prevented by
the assisting grace of God; but he still running on in this race of Wickedness,
it gave fresh occasion of the same temptations again; but yet the sorrows and
sufferings that I underwent I own to be no Argument that I should make my self
guilty of his Blood; yet wanting the fear of God, I gave way to the Temptation,
the which has proved the Ruin of us both: my unhappy Husband has fallen by my
hand of Cruelty, and now I for this bloody Fact do wait for my just Punishment;
which is, to end my days in Flames, in view of thousands that will be there to
see my end.

A Brief Account of the manner of Commiting this Crime.
JAnuary the 26th. in the Morning, when he had been all the foregoing Night in
such bad company as he kept, he returned to his home, the Door being left for
his coming in; he entered the Room while I was in a sweet sleep; free from the
thoughts of all manner of Evil, but he being disguised in Drink, fell foul upon
me, and bitterly abused me with blows, which did exasperate my Spirits to that
height of Passion, that I resolved in my Heart to be Revenged of him, although it
proved my overthrow: and in this manner did I contrive my desperate Design: he
going into his Bed and falling into a sound sleep, I took my fair opportunity
in this wise.

A Pack-thread being near at hand, the which he had used for a Garter, the same
did I take, and putting of it round his Neck, made a Noose and Strangled him in
his sleep, though he strugg'ld for his life, yet I hardened my Heart against him,
and resolved to go forward with my design: He being dead, continued in our
Lodging from Thursday till the Monday f^llowing, during which time, the Horror
of Conscience so tormented me, that I could not be at rest until I had revealed
it to some of my Friends, whom I thought I might trust with such a Secret; but
instead of their siding with me in this black and bloody Crime which I had
committed, they blamed me for my Unnatural Cruelty, and was abhorred and held
detestable in their sight.

Monday the 30th. of January, I having contrived this following means to convey
him away, I resolved then to put it into practice: for the more ease of
conveying him out of our Lodging, I first cut off his Head from his Shoulders,
after that his Arms and Legs from his Body, then taking the Trunk of his Body,
I wrapped it up in a Cloth, and lugg'd it forth my self by Night, throwing it
upon a Dunghill in Parkers Lane, and then his Limbs I threw into an House of
Office in the Savoy, over the side of the Thames; the Head into a Vault, near
the Strand.

This being done, I concluded all was safe and well, bat the Carcass was soon
sound, and the next day the Limbs, which bloody Tragedy put the whole Town into
a Consternation, wo^dring who might be the Actor of so bloody a deed; but I
remained un-apprehended till the Thursday following at Night, when being seized
on by an Officer, I trembled, for Conscience began to afflict me: I was soon
brought to Examination, then hurried to Prison, where I bitterly bewailed my
unhappy state.

During the time of my Imprisonment, I began to consider with my self what I
had done, and likewise what I had brought my self unto, at which serious
Consideration, I was afflicted in my Mind, wounded in my Conscience, and
drowned in my Tears; the Guilt of my Crime was the Cause of my Grief; often did
I earnestly desire of God that he would make me sensible of my sins, and
likewise truly sorrowful for the same. Upon my bended knees often did I present
him with a broken Heart, truly humbled under a sense of urfeigned sorrow for
that black Crime* that I had committed, earnestly begging of God to pardon my
offenses, and receive me into his f^vour. The short time I have in this world,
I purpose, with Gods assistance, to spend in Holy Meditations, and the company
of such whose good Instructions may help to prepare my Soul for Eternity;
having so few Minntes in my Glass, there is no time to dally and let them slip,
but so to make a full Improvement of the utmost of them, that I may find the
comfort and benefit of the same to Eternity.

Being brought to the Court of Justice, in order to Trial, the Fact I confessed,
and Guilty was all I could plead, but the Court in tenderness bid me put my
self upon Trial, notwithstanding all I had said, but Conscience told me 'twas
true, I only pleaded Guilty, which was Recorded, and so I received the due
Sentence, To be burnt till I was dead, which was the most terrible and
astonishing sound in my Ears, that ever I heard in my Life.

For the better impressing of this Subject on your Hearts and Minds, take these
following Lines, which may be Sung to the Tune of, The Pious Christians
Exhortation.
A Lack! my very heart does bleed,
to see my woeful Destiny,
You that my Dying Lines shall read,
I pray you all to pity me.
A Murder here I did commit,
for which I have deserved Death,
This Crime I never shall forget,
as long as I have life or breath.
With grief and sorrow am I slain,
to see the Race that I have run,
A thousand times I wish in vain,
this Wicked deed I had not done.
It was my Husband whom I killed,
and Mangled at so strange a rate,
The World may be with Wonder filled,
while I this Tragedy relate.
In sorrow here my hands I wring,
on Wrack of Conscience am I rolled,
What did provoke me to this thing,
in brief to you I will unfold.
With care and grief I was oppressed,
e're since I did become his Wife,
And never could have peace or rest,
but led a discontented life.
No Tongue is able to express
what I with him did undergo,
He Cruel was and pittiless,
which now has proved our overthrow.
From time to time he Riffl'd me,
scarce leaving any Clothes to wear,
Besides his Acts of Cruelty,
this drove me into deep Despair.
My heart was ready then to break,
in private I shed many a Tear,
As knowing not what course to take,
my sorrows they were so severe.
Against me his whole heart he set,
and often vowed my Blood to spill,
Morning and Night when e're we met,
confusion was our Greeting still.
When him I strove to Reconcile,
saying, thou know how it is with us,
Maliciously he would me Revile,
and swear it should be worse and worse.
Though he to Wickedness was bent,
and showed himself so cross and grim,
I own this was no Argument
that I, alas! should Murder him.
But Sin and Satan so took place,
by living so from time to time,
For want of Gods preventing Grace,
I did commit this horrid Grime.
When Man and Wife lives at discord,
they may expect both fear and dread,
For there is no Blessing from the Lord,
where such a Wicked life is led.
For coming from bad Company,
when I was in a sweet Repose,
He from the sleep did waken me,
with many cruel bitter Blows.
This did the height of Anger raise,
when he did such unkinkness show,
That I resolved to end his days,
although it proved my overthrow.
To Bed he straight ways did repair,
as soon as he these Blows did give,
Thought I thy life I will ensnare,
thou have but little time to live.
I vowed no favor to afford,
to him that used me so amiss,
Straight he I Strangled with a Cord,
when as he little thought of this.
Although he strugl'd for his life,
as surely very well he might,
Yet I his cruel-hearted Wife,
resolved to expel my spite.
Thus him of life I did deprive,
then in his Bed some days he lay,
My greatest care was to contrive,
how to convey his Corpse away.
To bear him forth my self alone,
I cut off Head, Arms, c'ry Limb,
Had I not had a Heart of Stone,
I could hot thus have Mangled him.
His Head into a Vault I threw,
his Carcass on a foul Dunghill,
His other Limbs into the Thames,
and then I thought all things was well.
Safe was I then, as I did think,
yet seized I was in a short time,
For Heavens Justice would not wink
at such a black and bloody Crime.
Then to a Prison was I sent,
there to bewail my wretched state,
And there in Tears I did lament,
but this was when it was too late.
To Justice was I brought indeed,
where Conscience in my face did fly,
Guilty was all that I could plead,
I knew I did deserve to Dye.
O then my sad and dismal Doom,
soon after this I did receive,
It was in Fire to Consume,
which made my very heart to grieve.
Alas! I knew not what to say,
it is Death alone must end the strife,
Behold this dreadful dismal Day,
the which must end my dearest Life.
Although I Weep and make sad moan,
as being Wounded to the heart,
I cannot choose but needs must own
it is no more then my Desert.
To see me go some Thousands throng,
and thus in shame and much disgrace,
Through many Crowds I past along,
unto the Execution place.
Lord, though my Body here must Burn,
for my sad Crime so gross and foul,
Yet when I shall to Ashes turn,
receive my poor Immortal Soul.
FINIS.
public execution of the French midwife in Leicester Fields


