THE Character of a Grumbletonian, OR, THE New Malecontent.
A Grumbletonian! What Is that -- in the Popes Name? Why, it is the First and
Second Part of Hickeringhil -- a mere Composition of Curse-ye-meroz, and The
Black Non Conformist, as full of contradictions as of Nonsense: an absolute
Civil Quaker, that finds as many faults with the State as he with the Church,
and both for the same No-Reason. It Is a Hodgpodge of Malice, Scurrility, and
Illnature, who has seldom Wit enough to keep him from Slavering, or if he does
now and then Stumble on some pleasant Notion; han't manners enough to keep his
Wit from Stinking. It Is a thing that was never Born to be contented -- he is
always Twisting and Wrigling, and has a Worm in his Tail as long as that in his
Head, -- see but how tenderly he Treads, you would think he was under Harry Hills's
Course of Penance, and had all his Pea's in his Shoes without Boiling 'em.
It Is a hard matter that is the Truth on it, to tell what he is, since he hardly
knows it himself, nor, does the froward Chit know what 'twoul'd have, though if
any thing, it must be some Bawble or other that quiets him. He handles the
Government as the Turks do Slaves, when they come to be Sold -- Peeps all round
it -- Trys and Gropes, whether it be Sound Wind and Limb -- Looks Mavelous
earnestly on its Physiognomy, pretending to Read its Fortune, and if he has any
skill 'twon't be long-lived, -- and yet after all his prying as sharply as the
Jesuit with his Prospective, all the Wise Faults he can find in it are, that
the Nose and Complexion on it don't please him. He Is hard to be found, and yet
every where, for he is as diligent and indefatigable, as another that runs too
and fro on the same business, and for the same Reason too, because he knows his
time is short. And now we talk of the Devil -- there is a certain place within a
Mile of an Oak, where you are very likely to find him, Settleing Church and
State over a Dozen Bottles of Claret! He Is very ready at Quoting Presidents
when they please him, and pretends to carry as Humble an Implicit Faith about
with him as e're a Catholic of 'em all, -- and Reason too -- for this he finds
a good Lazy Compendious way of Grumbling, without the long Fatigue of Enquiry
and Argument. By his Commending Tenderness of Conscience in others, you would be
almost Tempted to believe he had some such thing himself, -- and indeed who
would think any Man wou^d forswear himself by way of Civil Conversation or so,
a Hundred times a Day, and yet all of the sudden Start and Bogle at one single
Oath of Allegiance? one would think he owned a God too when he seems afraid to
Invoke his Name to a Lie, or believed a Hell, when he says he dares not comply
for fear of Damnation.

He Is an Irish Man Double gilt, -- a mere Teague Christianiz'd, and Reformed
into somewhat that looks like Humanity, -- but with much using the Gilding
wears off again, and Mistress Puss must have a touch at the Mouse, though she
leaves her Spark Catter-wawling for the loss of her. There Is so much Discontent
and Ingratitude, and Baseness, mixed with such a Profound Twang of Laziness and
Cowardice in the very Constitution of him, that Nature has as perfectly marked
him out for Slavery, as if he had great Lips and a Flat Nose -- he mainly
Resembles the Inhabitants of the Cape -- bring 'em into any Country, Dress 'em
and give 'em Food fit for Humane Creatures, they will do nothing but lie upon the
Ground, and Pine themselves to Death for their old beloved Hogsty, and long as
passionately as a Teeming Woman, for a Sovoury Mouthful of their old Guts and
Garbage. He Is of a very Ancient Family that is the Truth on it, and can run ye up
his Pedigree as high as Peter Heylin could his own, or a High-lander his
Princes, for he will tell ye, (if Modesty don't a little Confound him) that some
of his Relations had a strong Party among the Israelites in the Wilderness --
and great Men in the Congregation, he can assure ye some of 'em were -- no less
Names then Korah, Dathan and Abiram. They called 'em Murmurers then, but that is
but an old word for Grumbletonians. Though he is heavy enough in some things where
have is required, yet he is Nimble enough in others -- Woe would be to a
Sergeant at Arms if he was obliged to follow him a whole Day to take him into
Custody, for he has a Thousand Disguises, and is almost at once in as many
places. -- Here he appears in the Shape of a Gentleman, and Squats him down in
a Coffee-House like the Toad at Eves Ear: Shakes Empty Poll very Emphatically
-- takes up the Votes, finds fault with one Damned Clause or other in 'em,
Bites off the corner of 'em, and throws 'em down in Dudgeon again -- Snatches up
the Gazet -- Men of Merit are not Preferred -- (ay, there it is) here is a Company
of I known't who got in, and he has nothing -- not that he would Act -- no -- not
for a World -- he cannot accept -- his Conscience -- O -- it Grumbleth most
Obstreperously, and there is no quieting of the same. -- Look sharp Mr. Officer
-- he is pulling up his Hatch, and if ye don't have a care the Gentleman will be
a Baker, and his Calash a Cart before ye can call the Constable, -- for now all
of the sudden he is an honest Country Farmer, and mightily aggrieved that the
Affairs, of the Nation are settled without his Spade and Flail to lend
Assistance -- thinks he has Sweat and Voted, and Stunk in a Crowd to some
purpose -- Scratches his Head, and with some dry Bob of good King James -- Exit
Hobbinol -- but would ye think it -- who is now at the turning of the next
Corner? If these Cheating Eyes don't deceive me he has got a Parsons Gown on to
hide his Cloven-Foot -- nay, -- he will pretend to be Hamet -- Bon -- Hamet, -- a
Parsons Son too, -- he has his Ticket in's Hand, and you will see him at the
Feast to Morrow, when the Sons of God met together, we know who came among them
-- Unfrock the Rascal for shame, and let him not abuse that Venerable Order --
do you see, he is in the Pulpit already -- his Prayer is not long -- somewhat the
shorter because ye hear no King William and Queen Mary, -- his Sermon -- the
Ingratiude of this our Age -- prepare for Persecution -- Two or Three silent
Smiters more -- and he is Vanished into the Tavern -- where that Disguise is
soon thrown off, and he gets another -- and yet what Reason should there be to
say a Man's Disguised when you may Peep into the Soul of him, -- for now he
appears in his proper Shape. -- Now keep out of the way -- for he Vomits all
his Soul out -- O this Parliament -- here is Arbitrary with a Vengeance, -- Hoc
est Parliamentum -- Habeas Corpus where art thou? -- this will never do -- we
will not suffer our King to be thus -- these Oaths -- these -- certainly they will
never go down without Buttering -- Ay, Ay, -- the Lawn Sleeves down next -- ye
may see what they would be at -- these Pack of -- and then he Tumbles under Board
-- and next Morning as soon as his Head's Cool dispatches Packets to this
Mayor, and the other Alderman in the Country, to Wheedle or Fright 'em into as
great Knaves or Fools as he is himself. -- There Is one Infallible Mark more, by
which you may be sure of knowing him through all his Disguises -- as soon as he
takes up this Paper -- (a better Looking-Glass then his own) he Starts back at
the sight of his own ugly Face -- falls a foming like a Sweet Singer, and
Swears heartily the Authors a Fanatic, though as Friend Ratcliff says, He might
as well have Guest him a Mohammedan.

Licensed according to Law, May the 1. 1689.

LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in
Paternoster Row. MDCLXXXIX.


