A SERMON PREACHED September 9th. 1683.

Being the Day of THANKSGIVING FOR God's Wonderful Providence and Mercy in
Discovering and Defeating the late Treasonable Conspiracy against his Sacred
Majesty's Person and Government.

By JOHN CHAPMAN, M. A. and Minister-of Bernard-Castle in the Bishopric of
Durham.

1 Pet. 2. 7. Fear God; Honor the King.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, Jun. for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-luce
over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. M DC LXXXIV.

TO THE READER.
THE Author's great distance from the Press, and his no less Averseness to
appear in public, tho at last overcome by the Importunity of Friends, have
occasioned the Delay in publishing the ensuing Discourse: and yet perhaps it
will be thought, that, in regard to his Years, to the Treatise it self, and to
its small importance to the Public, he ought rather to apologize for his
Forwardness now in exposing it. But however this his Undertaking may be
censured by some, on the former Account, as late and unseasonable, or by others
on the latter, as vain and inconsiderate; he hopes, betwixt them he may find
those who will put a more favorable Construction both upon the Discourse it
self, and the Inducements to print it.

As for those who may account him too severe in it, if their own Consciousness
make them think so, either they are duly sensible of their own Guilt and its
Demerits, or they are not; if they are, they cannot but at the same time be also
sensible that their Crimes have deserved Severity; but if they are not yet
sensible, they deserve it for not being so: and there is no other way but that
left (since gentler means toward them have proved ineffectual) to convince
them. And as for those, who tho they may not find themselves so concerned in
it, yet wish the Author had been more sparing; he hopes, when they consider the
Occasion, and the Seasonableness, or rather, Necessity of such Discourses
thereon, they may in a great measure excuse him; however, that they will
forbear to censure him for that which he has not used toward them.

A SERMON, PREACHED September the 9th. 1683.
2 Samuel 22. 24. The former Part of the Verse. Thou also have delivered Me from
the Strivings of my People.
DEliverances from Enemies have always been esteemed by all sober and
considering Men, as the gracious Effects of God's providential Power and
Goodness; and therefore solemn Thanksgivings to Almighty God upon such
Occasions, have been very ancient and usual. And tho it may have fallen out as
to such God's Deliverances, as it did in cleansing the ten Luke 17. 18.
Lepers, that scarce one of ten can be found where Glory has been returned to
him for them; yet have we this Practice recommended to us by very many great
and illustrious Examples and Presidents recorded in sacred and profane
Histories. For, when the Faithful Patriarch, Abraham, returned Genesis 14. 18, 19,
20.
from the Conquest and Slaughter of the four Kings, and offered the Tenths of
all to Melchisedech, Priest of the most high God, he was entertained and
blessed by the Priest, who blessed God too, on his Behalf, for delivering his
Enemies into his Hands.

The miraculous Passage and Escape of the Children of Israel, and the fatal
Overthrow of Pharaoh and of all his Host in the Red Sea, were no less solemnly
and joyfully celebrated by Moses; and all the People. And Exodus 15.
when the Lord had discomfited Jabin and Sisera, with all their Forces, then
sang Deborah and Barak that memorable (...), or Judge. 4.
Song of Triumph, recorded in the fifth Chapter of Judges. Nor may it seem
improbable, Judge. 5.
that in the Book of the Lord's Battles, referred to by Moses, Numb. 21. 14.
and in the Book of Jashar, mentioned Jos. 10. 13. and 2 Samuel 1. 18. as also in
those many other Books of the Acts of the Kings of Israel and Judah, mentioned
and referred to elsewhere in Scripture, (all which are lost) very many Passages
of this Nature were set down at large.

Many, indeed, and great, were the Troubles Psalm. 34. 19.
and Dangers of Righteous David, but yet the Lord delivered him out of all; and
he forgot not to praise him for it, as is evident from the several Psalms of
Praise and Thanksgiving composed by him on those Occasions; and tho his wise
and peaceful Son, and Successor, had not those Occasions his Blessed Father
had, yet we find him in dedicating the Temple, which was accomplished with
Prayers, Praises, and Sacrifices, and with all Solemnities suitable to the
Beauty, Magnificence, and Use of the Building, blessing God also that had given
Rest unto his People 1 Kings 8. 56.
Israel.

And when the Inhabitants of Ammon, Moab, 2 Chronicles. 20.
and Mount Seir, came up against Jehoshaphat, he did not only apply himself to
God for his Aid and Succor by Prayer and Fasting; but when the Lord had so
signally owned his Cause, and absolutely gained the Victory to himself by
turning the Enemies Hands against one another. He was so sensible of the
Deliverance, and (assembling all the People for the purpose) returned such an
unanimous and solemn Praise, that it gave Name to the Place where it was
performed, and it was thenceforth called the Valley of Blessing.

Neither were the Heathens wanting in consecrating part of their Spoils, in
offering Sacrifices, in singing triumphant Hymns, in erecting Altars and
Temples to their Gods, for their Victories over, and Deliverances from their
Enemies. And when Christianity had taught to ascribe to the Lord the Honor due
only to his Name, and the Roman Emperors had submitted their Scepters to that
of Righteousness, then were they no less careful and punctual to appoint and
observe set Times of public Thanksgiving to Almighty God for his Mercies to,
and Protection over them.

Such great and pious Presidents has our most Gracious Sovereign for blessing
God in this manner; and indeed, he wants not among his own Royal, Religious,
and Renowned Ancestors, for good Examples of such his Piety. And, tho it is true
their Thanksgivings were for Victories over Foreign Enemies, and Formidable
ones too, which magnified God's Deliverances toward them, and signalized those
good Occasions of their Thankfulness; yet has not His Present Majesty less
Cause to bless God, who has delivered him from Domestic Foes, from the
Strivings of his own People.

My Text is part of that Psalm of Thanksgiving, which as the Title thereof
speaks, the Royal Prophet sang in the Day that the Lord delivered him out of
the Hand of all his Enemies; and how proper it is on this Occasion, I suppose
it will not be difficult to discern, from the Parallel of Holy David 's and our
Gracious Sovereign's Troubles and Dangers, and from their respective
Deliverances. For, they were both trained up in the School of Affliction, and
smarted for some time under the like severe Discipline: after that, they both
enjoyed a Time of Settlement, Peace, and Prosperity; after which again, their
Enemies brake forth afresh, and were much alike, and their Deliverances many
and signal, and parallel in none more than in this Instance in the Text, from
the Strivings of their own People.

The Text affords these two Considerations:

First, Of the Nature of the Deliverance, and that is from the Strivings of the
People.

Secondly, Of the Author of it, Thou have delivered, etc.

First, To set forth the Deliverance, 'twill be necessary to show the Nature
and Quality of the Danger from which it was; and it is very fitly here expressed
by the Strivings of the People: by which Term we may understand, all the
Contention, Opposition, and Faction of the People. In David's Case it includes
all the Insolences and Violences his People used toward him, as the Railing of
Shimei, the Treachery and officious Cruelty 2 Samuel 16.
of Doeg, the Sedition of Sheba, the Subtilty 1 Samuel 22. 9. 17. 2 Samuel 20. 1. 2 Samuel 16. and 17.
and Defection of Achitophel, and the Ingratitude and Rebellion of Absalom.

By the Strivings of the People, in the Circumstances of our David, we must not
only understand some Risings, Stirs, Heats, and Disorderly Things, as some
would mince the Matter, but therein are implied all the Factious Bandyings and
tumultuary Bustles for making Parties in Petitioning, and at Elections, all the
Heat and Violence, all the Noise and Clamor in running down the Friends to the
Government, in summoning, hurrying up, and restraining in an arbitrary and
grievous manner their fellow Subjects, in unkind and undutiful Votes toward
their Sovereign, and some of them of an ill Aspect and Tendency, as is since
manifestly proved by the Event. But further;

By the Strivings of the People, may well be understood all the Riots, Tumults,
and Uproars of the Mobile, when they are set a madding. Those which David, who
was not unacquainted with them, most fitly joins with the raging of the Sea,
and the noise of Psa. 65. 7.
its Waves; for, a turbulent Rabble being moved by the stormy Breath of
ambitious Politicians, who love to fish in troubled Waters, are as giddy and
unconstant, as noisie and boisterous, as outrageous and unruly as that
ungovernable Element. They indeed, as well as the Wicked, may be compared to
the troubled Sea, that cannot rest, Isa. 57. 20.
but casts up Mire and Dirt; for they cast up Dirt too, and discharge it in the
very Face of Authority, in the Face of the chief Officers in Church and State,
and then persuade themselves that it is their natural Complexion. In fine, the
gross Calumnies, the terrible Menaces, the various and inconsistent Clamours,
the desperate Insolences of such a furious Crew, may well, sure, if any thing
can, be termed the Strivings of the People. But furthermore:

Under this Notion of the Strivings of the People, may fall all the cunning
Managery and politic Preparatives of the People for Mutiny, Sedition and
Rebellion by false News, scandalous Reports, malicious Representations of the
Governors and Government, rendering the one odious, and making the other seem
grievous to the People; complaining of Persecution, Oppression, Tyranny, ill
Management of Public Affairs, the Advancement of ill Men, and the like;
possessing the People, that their Religion, their Liberties and Properties, are
invaded, and in danger to be lost; upbraiding them with Tameness, and animating
them to assert their Liberties as becomes Englishmen. With these Pretenses
they make the People think they feel what there is only a Possibility to fear,
and fear what it is next to impossible they should ever feel. It Is those stale
Pretenses of Popery and Arbitrary Power, that are made use of as Glasses to
contract and approximate the most wide and remote Fears and Jealousies, and
also to enlarge and improve the smallest Cloud of a Grievance, tho no bigger
than that which the Prophet's Servant espied, viz. than a 1 Kings 18. 44. 45.
Man's Hand: so that as that did, it shall immediately overspread the most
Serene and Halcyon days; and with it then too they can raise the most dreadful
Storm either to hang over, or to fall upon the Peoples Heads: and it is in such
lowering and cloudy Regions, or rather indeed in their own more cloudy and
superstitious Fancies, they persuade them they see dismal Apparitions and
frightful Specter, to assault and destroy them: and no doubt those that are
thus studious and industrious to impose upon the Senses and Understandings of
the Vulgar, are not less zealous and active to manage their Wills and Passions.
And as the Commonalty of England are lately very well described to be a People
that fear every thing they hear, and nothing that they see, so questionless,
those who are so solicitous to have them fear every thing, would at last bring
them to fear nothing; I mean, Those who would render them so timorous of
suffering any thing from the Government, would at last bring them not to fear
to do any thing against it: for 'twas the late Royal Martyr's Observation,
that, When the Peoples Eyes are (...). 15.
once blinded with such Mists of Suspicions, they are soon misled into the most
desperate Precipices of Actions; wherein they do not only not consider their
Sin and Danger, but glory in their zealous Adventures.

And these are the Strivings of some People in the main, whilst others have
their more distinct Posts and Instructions to carry on the same Design: Some
are laboring toward the Press, and have their particular Subjects to treat
upon, as original Liberty and Power from the People, coordinate Power in the
Three Estates, the King's being Major Singulis, Minor Universis, the Doctrine
of Self Preservation extended, of Resustance in Case of Religion, or Rights in
vaded, justified, passive Obedience exploded, Dommion founded in Grace, and the
like; while others in a Club or Coffee-House, and in all public places, are to
argue and maintain these several Tenets.

And it is from this strife and licentiousness of the Tongue and Pen, as from
two plentiful Sources, that most of our late Misunderstandings, Oppositions,
and Strivings, have sprung and been derived; and it were easy to trace them in
their several Courses and Channels where they have poisoned honest Principles,
embitter'd good Blood, intoxicated weak Heads, and in fine, bred all sorts of
ill Humors in the least sensible parts of the Body Politic. And tho the
Fountains or Authors of these Mischiefs, like Nile, hid their Heads, yet a
visible Brood, as monstrous and pernicious as any that out of Slime and Mud
were ever bred on that River's Banks, were in like manner produced here, by the
overflowings of their Gall, and the Risings of their Spleen.

And for the same purpose, no doubt, it was, that the License of the Pulpit was
as much endeavored, as those of the Tongue and Press were abused; that by a
more solemn, compendious, and infallible way, Men might be pulpited out of that
Sense, Religion, and Loyalty, which the other had left them. For the Press
indeed may publish and vend Doctrines tending to Sedition or Rebellion, but the
Conventicle reveals, teaches, and recommends them to practice: In a Club or
Coffee-House treasonable Maxims and Tenets may be discoursed or whispered, and
more may be implied by politic Nods, Faces, and Motions; but in a Conventicle
they are trumpeted, alarmed, proclaimed: In short, the Coffee-pot may retail a
little Stanch, profane and apocryphal Sedition, or Rebellion, but the Tub
broaches them wholesale, sanctifies and renders them Orthodox and Canonical.

It Is there Meroz is cursed, and cursed bitterly too, Whosoever he be that is
not ready Judge. 5. 23.
to come forth to the Help of the Lord, to the Help of the Lord against the
Mighty. It Is there the People have been taught to rage furiously together, and
to imagine vain Ps. 2. 1.
things, as that the King was just standing v. 2.
up in an Arbitrary Way, and the Rulers, his Ministers, taking Counsel together
with him, against the Lord, against the Reformed Religion, and against his
Christ, that so they might bring in Antichrist, i. e. Popery, into the Nation.
And then it was time, they thought, to remonstrate to the King, and to inveigh
against the chief Oracles of the Law with a Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings,
and be learned ye that are Judges of the v. 10.
Earth. And because they did not take their Advice, the next Step they made
was, (calling themselves all the while His Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal
Subjects) to break the bonds of Allegiance in sunder, and to cast away the
Cords of Duty from them; and then they began to speak unto them in their Wrath,
Let us, said they, bruise them with a Rod of v. 5.
Iron, and break them in pieces like a Potter's Vessel; and that we may not
want a religious Pretense, let the Praises of God be in Psalm. 149. 6.
our Mouths, and a two-edged Sword in our Hands, to be avenged of the Heathen,
and to v. 7.
rebuke the People, to spoil the Egyptians, to drive out the Canaanites before
us, to bind their Kings in Chains and their Nobles with v. 8.
Links of Iron; and then as Success attended them, they stamped upon their
Cause, as upon their Coin, God with us; and the most desperate Execution of
their prosperous Villainies were preached up, and commemorated with a Such
Honor have all his v. 9.
Saints: and such as these are the Religious Strivings of the People.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum! And thus are they taught by their
Spiritual and Temporal Leaders, that it is not only lawful, but expedient, nay,
even their Duty, to rebel, and persuaded that their religious and civil
Interests do both call upon them to discharge it, possessing them that both are
at stake, and in the utmost danger, even when they are in the greatest
Security, and the making them believe that they are in a desperate Condition,
makes them really desperate. And then it is no wonder if the common People,
under such Misrepresentations of Things, lose the Substance to catch at
Shadows, part with a present, real Happiness, in pursuit of a delusive one; and
to prevent an imaginary Evil in Futurity, bring a present certain Evil upon
themselves, and perhaps entail it on their Posterity.

Thus when in the midst of Safety and Prosperity, as to the Government, they
have possessed the People that they (...) in extreme Jeopardy and Misery, the
next thing is to mark out, and brand the Authors and Occasions of these
pretended Evils; and those we may be sure, must be all the Friends to the
Government, especially the chief Ministers of State, and Officers in Trust, and
the King himself is brought in with a side-Wind, as being a good Man, but led
away; and then over against these, they point out and rank the Leaders and
Deliverers of the People, the Defenders of their Religion, the Vindicators of
their Rights, the Redressors of their Grievances, the Patriots of their
Country, the Moseses and the Joshuahs that must lead them through the Red Sea
of Blood, and through a Wilderness of their own making, to the Promised Land of
Ease and Plenty.

Then he that has no Brains shall be set up for the Head of the People; those
that have no Religion, for the Defenders of the Protestant; those that have no
Virtue, especially not that of Continence, for the Scourges of the Lewdness of
the Court, and of the Vices of the Times; those that have no Honesty, for the
Maintainers of Liberty and Property; those that have no Loyalty, for the King's
Friends; and those whose guilt and dread of Punishment make them fly their
Country, to be the Patriots of it; and in a Word, one that had no Principles,
but had winded and shifted to all the Points of the Compass, to be the only,
stable, wise, and faithful Subject and Counselor; and the Counsel which he
counseled, as it was said of that of Achitophel, was 2 Samuel 16. 23.
esteemed by them, as if a Man had enquired at the Oracle of God: and the
Reason of all this is obvious, for the Cause elects, justifies, and sanctifies,
all it is respective Instruments.

These were the Strivers in Petitioning, Remonstrating, Protesting, Feasting,
and Associating together; and being too forward and desperate to proceed in the
slow Methods of Sedition, caball'd, plotted, and conspired against His most
Sacred Majesty, (whom God long preserve) against his Royal Brother, against the
Established Government in Church and State, and against the most Loyal and
eminent Subjects in both; to tear out the very Bowels of their Mother Country,
to turn the Land into an Aceldama, a Field of Blood, to involve all in Ruin
and Confusion: in short, to act over again the most bloody and dismal Tragedy
of a Civil War, which we of this Nation have the most reason in the World to
dread, having so long, so lately, and so severely, smarted under that Rod; and
therefore one would think should not be very fond, or easy to be persuaded to
play the old Game, and to try the fatal Experiment over again.

Upon the whole matter, such as these have been the Strivings of some of our
Gracious David 's People; and how parallel they are to those from which good
King David was delivered, is very easy to make out to any that will remark and
apply things. How there has not wanted in his Days a Doeg that would still be
ready to betray the King's Secrets, and to expose him to the Malice of his
Enemies, nor a factious Sheba to blow the Trumpet of Sedition, and 2 Samuel 20. 1.
to tell the People, they had no part nor inheritance in our David; possessing
them, that the King had ill Thoughts of, and ill Designs upon them: neither yet
a despiteful Shimei with all the outward Expressions of Contempt and Rancour,
to reproach, even with Cruelty, a most merciful Prince. Nor has there wanted a
cunning Achitophel, who being turned out of the King's Counsels, degraded from
his Offices, and, like Lucifer, thrown from the Pinnacle of his Ambition, grew
discontented, malicious, and revengeful, and employed all his Policy, Malice,
and Interest, fully to do Mischief to the King and the Government, and to all
those who were under his malevolent Influence; for neither did there want an
Absalom to be seduced, who being instructed to act the popular Part, by showing
himself on all public Occasions, and by bowing to the Rabble, was to steal
away the Hearts of the People; and at last conspired against a most Gracious
and Affectionate Sovereign, and a most tender and indulgent Parent.

Now it having pleased Almighty God, of his infinite Goodness to our most
Gracious Sovereign and to his Kingdoms, to deliver him from such Strivings of
his People, and Him and Us from this horrid and hellish Conspiracy, concerning
which we may say what was said of Absalom's, the Conspiracy was strong; and his
Majesty having thought 2 Samuel 15. 12.
fit to appoint this Day for Solemn Thanksgiving for such his miraculous and
happy Deliverance, of which that we might be the more sensible, having also
published his Royal Declaration concerning the Preparatives to, the Methods and
Progress of this Treasonable Conspiracy, and ordered it to be twice read in our
Churches; we ought, as in Duty bound to God, the King, and our Selves, to
return our most devout and humble Thankfulness to the Divine Author of this
great Deliverance. Which is the second Particular I am now to consider: Thou
have delivered me, etc.

Tho David, when he withdrew from Jerusalem, had, besides his Household
Servants, 2 Samuel 15. 18.
six hundred of his Guards about him, all experienced and valiant Men, and such
as were thought sufficient by Absalom, and all his Counselors except
Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17. v. 7, 8, 9. 10.
upon Hushai's Advice, to make a considerable Resistance, if not to endanger
the Overthrow of the Forces to be sent out after him. Tho he had sent back
Hushai a 2 Samuel 15. v: 32, 33, 34.
wise and trusty Counselor, with Instructions to apply himself to Absalom, and
to fall down and worship the Rising Sun, and so to fall in with the
Confederates, and by pretending himself one of the Association, to have thereby
an Advantage to pierce into their Counsels and Resolutions, and so to make them
known to the Priests in Jerusalem, v. 35, 36.
whom the King had left there to advertise him of what should happen. Tho he
had gathered up those Forces that in 2 Samuel 18. v. 6, 7.
pitched Battle in the Wood gained the Victory over Absalom and the Rebels, yet
he ascribes the Honor of all this to the Lord, and celebrates him, in this
Psalm, under all the Characters that might speak Defense and Refuge, Strength
and Security. For, says he, v. 2. and so on, The Lord is my Rock, and my
Fortress, and Deliverer; The God of my Rock, in him will I trust. He is my
Shield and the Horn of my Salvation, my high Tower and my Refuge, my Savior.
Thou savest me from Violence. And he goes on, I will call on the Lord who is
worthy to be praised, so shall I be saved from mine Enemies.

And tho His Sacred Majesty has many Hearts to wish him well, and to pray for
his Preservation, many Eyes to discover, and many Hands to oppose all
Conspiracies and Attempts against him; tho he be well provided of Guards, Forts
at Land, and Ships at Sea; tho he be well stored with Arms and Ammunition, yet,
for all these, he owes his Safety to God; for it was God that delivered him
from the Strivings of his People.

And our Good King was so sensible of the Divine Mercy to him thereon, that, as
it came from a very good Hand, in the hearing of much People, with no less
Piety than Wisdom he declared, That it was a Blessing of God he had no ways
merited, but that God knew his Heart, and he believed had preserved him for the
good Intentions he had always had to his People.

And surely no less sensible ought all his good Subjects to be of his
Preservation, in whose their own is so nearly concerned: nay, methinks his very
Enemies should stand amazed at his miraculous Deliverance, and confess that it
was the Lord's Doing, and Psalm. 118. 23.
therefore it should be mavelous in their eyes. For, that in their most
zealous and active forming and carrying on the Conspiracy there should happen
such unaccountable Delays, that in their repeated Designs they should meet with
so frequent and strange Disappointments, that at last God should make an
Accident, as it then seemed, subservient to his Gracious Purpose, that a
particular Fire should prevent a general Combustion, that his Anointed should
be as a Firebrand plucked out of the Burning, that tho some Amos 4. 11.
few may suffer Loss, yet that, as the Apostle speaks upon another account, he
himself 1 Cor. 3. 15.
should be saved, yet so as by Fire, and that thereby the Conspirator's Works
should be v. 13.
revealed, that one of the hottest and most furious of the Accomplices should
be the first touched with Remorse of Conscience, to make a Discovery; insomuch,
that as the Psalmist speaks, Their own Tongue should Ps. 64. 8.
make them to fall. Such signal Instances, as these, of God's gracious and
miraculous Protection of his Anointed, together with all those providential
Preservations of him through the whole Course of his Reign, should, one would
think, be a means to bow down the stiff Neck, and the Iron Sinew of his most
obdurate and rebellious Enemies, and to discourage the most daring of those
Sons of Violence for the future, who have not hitherto been able to do him hurt.

Even the obstinate Egyptians perceiving, tho late, the bad Success of their
Pursuit after, and Attempts against the Israelites, were so wise as to say, Let
us flee from the face of Israel, Exodus 14. 25.
for the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians.: and Gamaliel very well
advised the Council that they should take heed to themselves Acts 5. 35.
what they intended to do, as touching the Apostles, for that if the Council or
the Work were of God, they could not overthrow it; lest v. 39.
happily they should be found even to fight against God.

And surely they must be more hardened than those Egyptians, and more obstinate
than those Jews, who shall still persist to conspire and attempt against him
whom God has so signally and constantly preserved; or as the Psalmist expresses
it, To devise how to put Ps. 62. 4.
him out, whom God will exalt. Who shall think to tire out that Providence of
God which has been unwearied in working Miracles for his Vicegerent's
Preservation; and to weary out his Majesty's lasting Clemency, of which they
have had but too great and long Experience to make such ill use, and therefore
may well be thought unworthy of it for the future.

But as his Enemies Malice, so his own Goodness, and God's Gentleness, as it is
in the 36th v. of this Psalm, together with his good Subject's Affections, will
assuredly make him great; Great, as he is Good, and as much the Joy on Earth,
as he is the Care of Heaven. And as those repeated and illustrious Evidences of
God's Power and Goodness, in the many and great Deliverances of the King and
People of England, afford the fullest and most effectual Answer to the like
Question the Persian Emperor put to Daniel, Is thy God whom thou servest
continually able to deliver Dan. 6. 20.
thee? So in correspondence to the Tenor of the Decree made by Darius upon
Daniel's Deliverance, ought both King and People to fear and tremble before the
Living God, who is steadfast for ever, and his Kingdom that which v. 26.
shall not be destroyed, and his Dominion even unto the End; Who delivers and
rescueth, and works Signs and Wonders in Heaven, and in v. 27.
Earth; and who then delivered Daniel from the Power of the Lions, and now has
delivered our David from the Strivings of his People. And so I proceed to the
Application. And

1. Seeing it is God who has delivered our David from the Strivings of his
People, we ought in due Acknowledgment of such his Mercy, to return our most
solemn and devout Thankfulness to him: and surely the Prospect of those
Miseries, wherein, had their execrable Design taken effect, we had all, e're
this Day, been involved, ought in a suitable Measure, to inhance our Gratitude
to our gracious Deliverer, who has done so great Things for us; and, according
to the excellent Form of the Collect, we ought to yield him Praise and
Thanksgiving for our Deliverance from those great and apparent Dangers
wherewith we were compassed; and to acknowledge it his Goodness that we were
not delivered over as a Prey unto them. For had not he infatuated their
Counsels, and blasted their Designs; had not he turned the Wisdom of Achitophel
into Folly, and made Absalom's Progresses come to nothing; the Policy of the
one, and the Popularity of the other, together with the desperate and restless
Machinations of the traitorous and blood-thirsty Sons of Violence, who were not
afraid to stretch forth their Hands to seize, or to destroy, the Lord's
Anointed, would soon, as indeed therein they had summed them up, have brought
upon this Land, all the ensuing Calamities. And therefore if the Lord himself
had not been on our side, Ps. 124. 1.
may England, as well as Israel, say, when such Men were for rising up against
us, we had surely fallen into their Hands, whose tender Mercies are cruel. And
so, not unto us, O Lord, Ps. 115. 1.
not unto us, but unto thy Name, we give the Praise of this our happy
Deliverance.

2. Seeing it is God who has delivered our David from these Strivings of his
People, as we ought to praise him for our past Deliverance, so we ought to pray
unto him for the Continuance of such his Protection; and as we acknowledge it
his Goodness that we were not delivered over as a Prey unto them, so we must
beseech him to continue such his Mercy toward us: and as he has been a strong
Tower of Defense to us now against the Face of our Enemies, so that he may be
our strong hold Ps. 71. 2.
whereto we may always resort: and as he has sent forth his Strength, so, that
he would stablish Ps. 68. 28.
the Thing that he has wrought for us. For tho the King has deservedly the
Hearts and Affections of the most and best of his People, and Men's Eyes being
now opened, daily gains more and more; yet it is the Lord that opens the
Eyes, and turns the Hearts of all Men, whithersoever he will. And though the
King has his Guards, and places of Strength, yet, except the Lord keep the
City, the Watchman Ps. 127. 1.
waketh but in vain: And if he keep it, no Storm nor Assault can force it; no
Treachery can betray it, no Works can undermine it, no loss of Men, or want of
Provisions, can necessitate it to a Surrender. There is no Creature able to
resist his Power, there is no Policy, or as the wise King speaks, Counsel or
Understanding Prove. 21. 30.
against the Lord. He can abate the Pride of the most haughty and ambitious, he
can assuage the Malice of the most implacable and revengeful, and he can
confound the Devices of the most subtle and politic; Tho Hand join Prove. 16. 5.
in Hand, they shall not go unpunished. Tho, as the Prophet Isaiah speaks, They
associate themselves, Isa. 8. 9.
they shall be broken in pieces, tho they take Counsel v. 10.
together, it shall come to naught; tho they speak the Word, it shall not
stand. For God is with us.

But, seeing it is God that makes Men to be Ps. 68. 6.
of one mind in an House, seeing it is he that Prove. 16. 7.
makes even our Enemies to be at Peace with us; seeing it is he that can make
our present Distempers subservient to our future Health; and he, that can
command Light to shine out 2 Cor. 4. 6.
of Darkness, can also out of our Divisions and Distractions produce Unity and
Settlement; we ought to pray unto him, that he would unite our Hearts to
himself, to the King, and to one another, that we may all live in the Unity of
the Spirit, and in the Bond of Peace, that his Majesty's Reign over us may be
long Ephesians. 4. 3.
and prosperous, and that under him we may live a godly and quiet Life; for,
Obedience to God and the King is the best Expedient to secure such Blessings to
us; and among the chief of them, the Blessings of a good King, who, in the
utmost Extent and height of the Character, is the Minister of God to us for
Good. And therefore, out of Policy and Interest, as well as Obligation and
Duty, we should fear God, and honor the King. To this purpose 1 Pet. 2. 17. 1 Samuel 12. 24.
, let us hearken to good old Samuel's Advice, to fear the Lord, and to serve
him in Truth, considering how great Things he has done for us, lest v. 25.
if we still continue to do wickedly, we be consumed both we and our King.

3. And lastly, seeing God has delivered our David from the Strivings of his
People, let us not only praise him for the Deliverance, and pray unto him for
the Continuance of his Protection; but let us endeavor to establish our most
Gracious Sovereign's Throne, to make his Reign safe and comfortable to him by a
sincere and dutiful Allegiance and Subjection, and by a ready and zealous
Offering of our Lives and Fortunes when his Majesty's Occasions require.

Let us never on any Pretense, or in any Exigence, disown him whom God has so
powerfully, and so miraculously owned. In a word, Let us, by our strict and
uniform Obedience to the Church of England, endeavor to reduce the Dissenters
from her and by our steady Loyalty to the King, endeavor to win, or awe the
Factious and Rebellious; to which end, since Rebellion is as the Sin of
Witchcraft, let us 1 Samuel 15. 23. Ps. 58. 5.
stop our Ears against those politic Charmers that would seduce us from our
Allegiance, charm they never so wisely. For let them pretend what they will,
the King's Enemies, are ours, and they are God's Enemies too.

To conclude, Let us observe those good Rules of the Apostle, to mark those
that cause Romans 16. 17. 1 These. 4. 11.
Divisions among us, and to avoid them; Let us study to be quiet, and to do our
own Business: and to these let us add the seasonable and wholesome Counsel of
Solomon, To fear the Lord, and the King, and not to meddle with them that Prove.
24. 21.
are given to change.

FINIS.

