Loves Victory: A TRAGI-COMEDY.

BY WILLIAM CHAMBERLAIN Of Shaftsbury in the County of Dorset.

-- Odiumque perit,
Cum jussit amor, veteres cedunt
Ignibus irae --
LONDON; Printed by E. Cotes, and are to be sold by Robert Clavell at the
Stags-head near St. Gregory's Church in St. Pauls-church-yard. 1658.

To the Right Worshipful Sir WILLIAM PORTMAN, Baronet.
SIR,
ERe diverted by more serious Studies, which the benefit of an excellent
Education espoused to a natural ingenuity, will soon render the rathe-ripe
fruits of Your pregnant Wit, I hope it will in me appear no unbecoming boldness,
whilst your youth claims the privilege of Recreations, to present you with
this, which though trivial in it self, improved b^ your acceptance, may become
worthy the view of others; who beholding your Name beautify its front, may
give it as fair an esteem as if they saw it adorned with all the advantages of
the Public Stage; which since this rigid Age has silenced, (if I may be so
happy to obtain) I shall value your single acceptance beyond the loud applause
of a Theater. If the Reading afford you but as many minutes as the Composure
did me hours of retired content, I shall think these low delights of youthful
fancy worthy the esteem of my maturer thoughts, to which the burdens of
employment ha^ now added (if not more Judgment* yet more Solidity. Nor shall I
repent to have rowz'd it from its so long lying dormant, it being then in the
embryo, when with us, War first made the present Age unhappy, so may have
something to exscuse the roughness of its style* its production being whilst I
sacrifice to Minerva in the Temple of Mars Deities, which we have fair
Prognostics may be both propitio(...) future Achievements; for which, together
with an affluence of all other perfections, shall ever be sacrificed the hearty
prayers of

SIR, Your Devoted Servant William Chamberlain.

To the Reader.
SInce by this active Age't has been thought best
With their grave earnest to crush Plots in jest;
The mourning Stage being silent, justly I
May change a Prologue to Apology;
That so in private each Spectator may
Singly receive his welcome to a Play.
But here expect no parasite, that sin
Justly condemned the Stage, though since't has been
Hugged by pretense with such hot zeal, as pickles
Mad Sectaries for midnight Conventicles.
Yet though I bring no Opiate to allay
Thy feverish guilt, nor tune my Muse to play
Thy soul into a Lethargy, here lies
No Satyr, less, hid in some sins disguise,
Which should thou but seem startled at, 'twould be
An argument of some affinity
Betwixt thy thoughts and that. They foolish hate
That rails at those, raised by whatever fate
Above their wishes, does but vainly show
By their own wounds what they intend their foe;
Whilst graver wits, who by afflictions thrive,
Make Balm of what was meant a Corrasive.
That sickly genius whom no lines can please
But those that rail their Author to disease,
May still frown here; For know, I durst not write
An ages ruin in an hours delight.
Though this imperfect embryo was begot
Whilst Clamorous wars wild fury was so hot
It dried up Helicon, and in distress
Forced the sad Muses to a wilderness,
Which enraged man (that worst of Beasts) had made
A Scene of blood, where guilty hands invade
Poor trembling innocence, 'twas brought to light
Unlike that ghastly Parent, since none fight
Within these lists, but such as only prove
Their Valor where the Victory is Love.
A Catalogue of the Actors.
The King of Sicilia. Oroandes General of his Army. Zannazarro a young Lord in
Rebellion. Arratus an old Courtier. Carlo a rich Citizen. Vanlore a Noble
Gentleman, but of a low fortune. Buffonie a simple Clown, Nephew to Arratus.
Gudgeon his man. Creon and Lewcippus two cheats. Heroina Princess of Regium
Mistress to the King. Glorianda Princess of Cyprus Mistress to Zannazarro.
Eurione Sister to Zannazarro Mistress to Oroandes. Theocrine Daughter Carlo
Mistress to Van lore. The Father and Mother (...) Buffonie, Priests, Soldiers,
and Attendants.
Loves Victory.
Actus Primus. Scena Prima.
A Funeral march: A Goffin born over the Stage. Oroandes and his followers in
mourning. Ex. Enter Cleon and Lewcippus. Cre. THis is the place, is it not
Lewcippus?

Lew. The same, nor will our under-officer delay us long.


Cre. If this Goose prove not well featherd, our hopes
Are blown up: our only happiness is, we have our
Limbs to help us, whilst others must halt out their
Wants in a Hospital.

Lew. Yes, and have their pensions paid them in rotten
Tobacco, and carved bonelace sticks for bread.

Cre. Thou art in the right, for the better rewards are
Reserved for the deca^ed sons oth' shop, or decaled
Placket squires, fellows that dare not not look in a glas^
For fear they they should be frighted with the ruins
Of a nose.

Lew. Well, it was our wisdom not to fancy this
Grinning honor, in the mean time I would sell
My forged Commission for a bankrouts bill of exchange.

Cre. And I my buff coat for a freese jerkin, and all
My airy honors for the greasy steam of a Cooks shop.

Lew. Here he comes Enter a Sergeant and Buffonie.
Like the captive Knight of the golden Image;
Don dell P^oebo -- welcome.

Ser. Fie -- Fie -- A Soldier and tears!

Buf. Do lie -- that do, cham no Zodier,
Cha been better bred then zo.

Lew. It Was thy own proffer friend.

Buf. Yes, but when I wonder? when chad took a pot too much at market, and was
a little tox^cated.


Cre. Thou shall have a sober time of repentance:
S. death! what is here? Enter Buf mother followed by her husband and Gudgeon.
An Incubus^

Lew. Or else a sury frighted out of her wits.

Cre. She wants but a perriwig of Snakes to lead the dance of Hobgoblin^.


Mot. Why Whore, be these Rogues here? I have been
Frighted out of my naked bed to follow them:
What do thou amongst these Varlets?
Come home -- come home you whoreson lout.

Hus. Nay wife, good wife, do not anger the worshipful Captains.


Mot. Pew, you dotard, do think I will be frighted out of my Boy, ti^ sign
thou have but small share in the begetting of him, that thou can so willingly
part with him --


Cre. Sergeant away with him, how vermin do you bark?

Lew. To the guard with him, and lay him neck and heels; S. death -- affronted!


Fa. Captain -- I beseech your honorable worship.

Lew. What say old Cropshin?

Cre. Go hire thy Beldame a house in a Churchyard,
That when she has bequeathed her garments to a Pape(...)
She may walk there to fright Sextons.

Fa. Good Sir bear with her, for when she is up she is
A devil in Carrion, but I will disburse here;
Here is v^rty old Angels, and a good vitty fellow
For a supply --

Mot. How! -- part with thy gold! why the Palsy has shook thy wit out at thy
nostrils: must Angels fly to fetch him back? I Will do'^ without, or I Will scratch
their eyes out.


Cre. Peace good matron, and go water the furrows of thy cheeks in ^^ars,
'twill look most religiously.


Lew. Thou have been so long hung to roof, th(...)
O^herwise thou will choke the worms,
And in the next age be sold for mummy.

Bu. I took my Mother to be good for nothing.

Lew. Old fellow we incline to pity thee, but the supply looks something
wretchedly, there must be some additionall advance.


Fa. We will not stumble at that.

Cre. Did ever handle arms friend? Sergeant, try him.

Good. Chwas nere thus hampered before, cham afeard tont come ofe.

Ser. Come, handle your arms.

Good. Ich amt well skild in these guns, chave seen them at Mouster set it a
vier with the end of a cord, sure these snipper snappers be a new fashion,
beant they?


Cre. Nere fear, there is no hurt. The powd^r fi^ing he (...).

Enter Vanlore disguised. Van. Save you Gentlemen;
Lives there one Cosmo Buffonie here?

Fa. I am the man you spy for friend, vor want of a better.


Buf. Look Gudgeon -- what spark is that?

Van. I have a letter from the Lord Arratus;
What it concerns, the contents will inform you.

Fat. Pray master Captain read it, we beant book learned.

Mot. No -- whose fault was that you old knave, the Boy had dossety enough and
thou would ha put him toot.


Lew. He here sends you word how he desires to have his Nephew your Son sent
forthwith to Syracuse, for he intend^ to adopt him his Heir.


Mot. How! why then we are made for ever? Gudgeon thou go too.


Van. Creon and Lewcippus, the city cheats. Van. aside.

Cre. But hear, you friends, you first must disingage from us.


Van. How stands he Sir engaged to you?

Lew. How -- fellow, go meddle with your horse comb saucy groom: Sergeant --
away with him.


Fat. Nay -- worshipful Captain -- I will disburse.

Van. For what? keep up your money, who dares touch him?


Cre. So bold, my livery creature? Il^ make thee know Thou't not in the stable,
where thou command'st ore horse boye^; Unhand him, or by heaven --


Van. What will you do Sir? do' think I fear plundered Coats and big looks?
Strikes up his heels and disarmes him whilst Creo


Lew. Devils and fiends,
Shall I endure this!

Van. Yes, and this too. Kicks ki^

Van. Come, your ransom is paid.

Fa. Blessings on your heart, come son Buff.

Exeunt, Om. A vollie of shot within, the mourners enter, a trumpet sounds, a
herald reads Oroandes Com. Om. Heavens crown the actions with success!

Oro. My gratitude divides
It self amongst you all, the only mean
Of recompense, until some welcome beam
Of opportunity shall light my wishes
To a requital of your early loves.
But now the minutes languish in sad have,
And from the sad performance of these duties
To our deceased General we must
Remain griefs debtors, whilst we sati^fie
Importunate revenge. You dismal badges
Of their despair, tell us we have an enemy
Whose resolutions are as high and bloody,
As their condition sad, if they refuse
This last act of an injured Princes mercy.

A parle sounded: Enter as on the walls Zannazarro and attendants. Zan. What
means this hasty summons? is your anger
So swift in motion, that it not admits
Due rites unto the dead? The doleful hours
In which we mourned our Fathers funerals
Has scarce left seals on the records of time.
Yet though the grief sit heavy on our souls,
It Is not of kin to fear, we dare to draw
Our swords ere we have wiped our eyes, and in
A peal of Canons, more harmonious then
The solemn Bell, thunder his funeral peal.

Oro. It Is pity a resolve thus fortified
With valor, should unravel all its glory
In an unlawful cause. This desperation
Valors blind hieroglyphick, wherein naught
Appears but monsters only, serves to fright
Deluded fancy from supreme commands.
Oh do not then precipitate a family
Which may outlive approaching ruin, to
Stand the supporters of this State, when those
That prop it now, are sunk with weight of age.
Nobility, like heavens bright Planets, waits
Upon the Sun of Majesty, whilst none
But Comets drop from their usurped spears.
Then rectify your reason, and let us now
Conclude this war without a greater flux
Of blood then is already spent, that so
Rebellion may not add more sables to
What mercy yet may pierce.

Zan. You might have spared this labor, though we lost
The strongest Citadel of all our hopes
In our dear fathers death, those high resolves*
He dying left as legacies to us
Are so much cherisht, that should I consent
To stifle those brave flames, his angry ghost
Rowz'd from the silence of a dormitory,
Would reassume its seat to chide my floath.
I Have only with me those few wounded men
Which from the last loud stroke of war escaped
With life, not health, to serve me; yet though their arms
Grown weak with the late frequent loss of blood,
Sell not our lives at honors highest rate,
We Will fall no humble sacrifice to death.

Oro. I Am sorry Sir,
That my advice, proceeding from the love
I bear your worth, has mist its wished for ends.
-- Farewell -- All happiness
But that which waits on victory attend you.

Zan. The like to thee brave soul, since part we must;
When next we meet, 'twill be in blood and dust.

Ex. from below: an Alarm within, at which Ex. hastily from above. Whilst the
battle continues, the stage hung with lights and pictures represents a Temple.
Enter Eurione, a book in her hand, she having kneeled a while, Ent. a Lady
hastily. Lady. -- Oh Madam! -- whither will you fly?
The day is lost, your noble brother taken,
Wars furious Godesse, fierce Enyo stands
Over your battered gates, and wheeling round
A dropping pine about her bloody tresses
^ends with its dismal light an entrance to
The ministers of death, the unclaspt power
Of the rude Soldier, like a deluge broak
Over a rich field, the last and fatal blow
Is giving, all our dying hopes. The battlements
Sweat often in flames, whilst loud confusion fills
The enlightened air with outcries, and our shricks
Choked in the embryo of our prayers can find
No way to angry heaven: the infant dies
Whilst in the po^ch of life, and natures webs
Decayed by age, are rent from out the the looms.
Imaculate Virgins to each touch betrayed
Lie in a tembling agony, their beauties
Like a rich Mine lavisht to vulgar hands,
The injured prize of every impious slave.

Eur. Weep not my dear companion, thou that have sha^'d
A like with me in every change of fortune,
If fate ordains this the Catastrophe
Of all those tragic scenes, which these late wars
Made us unwilling, though sad actors in,
To us our virgin innocence shall be
Protection safer then the united swords
Of earths most powerful monarchs.

Outcries within. Lad. Oh they are entering, let us fly dear Madam.

Eur. Whither? when slaughter runs through all
What place can give protection unto us? Ex. Lad.

En. Oroandes wounded, a Surgeon. Oro. To thy charge, my hurt's but slight.

Sur. Yet will deserve your care Sir. Ex. Sur.

Oro. Hah! what place is this!
Hung round with stately pictures, starr'd with lights!
With what an awful majesty it looks!
-- sure it inshrines some deity -- what is she?
-- with such a face
Troy's tutelary angel looked, when all
Her crown of turrets dropped their flaming heads.

Eur. kneels to the altar. Eur. If those blessed spirits, which freed from all
the crimes
Cast on them by mortality, and made
Fit for celestial palaces, retain
A thought of us, as else our faith deceives us,
Oh let the white soul of some sainted Virgin
Descend for my protection.

She speaks. He draws nearer. She rising from the Altar kneels to him. Eu. What
ere thou art that in this dreadful shape
Come to profane this hallowed place with blood,
If in your breast there dwell a humane thought
Telling you that a woman was your mother,
For her sake pity a distressed Virgin.
Not for my life I beg, but only that
My honor kept unblemisht you would ease
Me of that tedious burden.

Oroandes stands a while silent, lets fall his sword. Oro. A chilling frost
unnerves my joints, sure this is
Divinity or Magic that has thus
Deposed my reason to let Rebel passion
Triumph in the injured throne -- Rise Lady
-- there is a religious ice about my heart
That chains up all my fury -- I shall rather
Slight the commands of an injured Prince,
Then violate ought which the dictates of
My soul proclaims for sacred.

Eur. Oh lead me then to some polluted place
That Is grown drunk with blood, and there let mine
Increase the purple deluge rather then
Let life add yet more burdens to my soul.
-- I shall not always be protected by
This places sanctity; or if I were,
Find few of so much virtue to be with
Religious reverence awed.

Oro. Do not, dear soul,
Mistrust the gentle smiles of fate, my power
Secures you from all future violence
Which in the lowdest storm of fury can
Fall from the steepest precipice of rage.

Zannazarro retreating, Soldier* laying at him. Eur. Oh my dear brother.

Soul. Kill -- kill the gaudy whore.

Oro. Hold -- I command you hold:
This is a place too sacred to be made
A scene for such a bloody act, and would
Style what our cause calls justice sacrilege,
Heaven being it self profaned in the abuse
Of what its power for sanctity devotes.
His wounds seem large enough already to
Let life fly out through all the gards of nature;
Or if they are not, to preserve him will
Be but the glimring of a Taper ere
Blown out by the formalities of Law.
-- Hear -- search his wounds, and let it be your charge
To use all diligence in their recovery.
Sound a retreat, and you, that bear command
See the rude Soldiers violence be drawn
Within the bounds of mercy. Victories stained
With too much blood are blessings but profaned.
Ex. Zanna. and Soldiers, ma. Oroan. and Eur. Do not my dear too much afflict
thy self,
Each tear you shead drops from my heart in blood.
-- I Am conquered in this victory, and become
A captive to my prisoner. Come Lady, dare you trust
Your self to my protection, your guardian Angel
Robbed in virginity, is not whiter then
Those thoughts which clothe my soul when they reflect
On so much suffering virtue. Were my lust
Hot as the womb of Aetna, yet there lies
A secret magic in this touch to cool
Those most intemperate fires. The morning pearls
Dropped in the Lillies spotless bosom, are
Less chastely cool, ere the meridian Sun
Has kissed them into heat; yet since the ice
Of Anchorites by religious flames may be
Warmed into holy Calentures, Oh give
My passions leave to move within the orb
Of your Celestial beauty, whilst no line
Tends (...) the center of a thought unchaste.

Eur. Alas my Lord -- this is
No time to play with Love (that child of peace)
When war and death fit by and hold the stakes.
The impious mirth of the bold Atheist, that
Riots at funerals, and undaunted sits
Whilst heaven in plagues drops vengeance round about him,
Unvests his soul of no more modesty
Then such wild love would mine, whose growth must needs
Be fatal when sown in a field of blood.
-- Yet I confess --
If heaven did e're lend balm to cure a grief
So vast as mine, even whilst the orifice
Was warm with blood, this cordial favor would
Perform the cure: but I am lost to all
The future hopes of dull mortality;
The habitation of my soul is grown
Too great a burden, since so often wet
With miseries ere to be born with ease.

Oro. If all my service to my Prince has merited
Ought worth requital, he must show it in
Mercy to you, or by a blacker doom
Shake my obedience off. But only grant
Me thus much satisfaction, that when time
Has purged your griefs malignity, and for
These thorns strewn the soft roses of content
Within your Virgin bosom, that you would
With pity then on my afflictions look.

Eur. I were ungrateful else: Know noble Sir,
I so much prize your virtues, that if ere
My frowning stars smile on my fate again,
Their powerful'st influence shall reflect on you
In so much thankful gratitude, you shall
Acknowledge it the eldest child of love.

Oro. My joy grows equal with my wishes; Come Let Us in my dear, and see thy
wounded brother.


Ex. Oro. and Eu Ent. Vanlore alone. Van. My plot has thrived thus far, I have
discovered
A rival in my love to Theocrine -- but such a one
That nature in such haste did huddle up,
She gave him scarce the Characters of man.
How purblind is the world, that such a monster
In a few durty acres swadled, must
Be mounted in opinions empty scale,
Above the noblest virtues that adorn^
Souls that make worth their center, and to that
Draw all the lines of action! Worn with age
And wounds to a neglected skeleton
The noble Soldier sits, whilst in his Cell
The Scholar stews his Catholic brains for food.
The Traveller returned, and poor may go
A second pilgrimage to Farmers doors, or end
His journey in a Hospital: few being
So generous to relieve where virtue does
Necessitate to crave. Harsh poverty,
That moth which frets the sacred robe of wit,
Thousands of noble spirits blunts, that else
Had spun rich threads of fancy from their brain.
But they are souls too much sublimed to thrive
Amongst those crudities of men, that fill
The nauseous stomach of the times with flesh
Unsalted with the active souls of men.
But I Am no Satyr, rather now possessed
With Loves more gentle spirit, which has charmed
Me into strangs attempts; assist me Fate;
Few days will ruin or advance my state. Ex.

Soldiers pass the Stage, Creon and Lew. dragging in Buff. and Good. in new
clothes. Cre. Nay, now you are hampered Rogues: disobey authority!


Bu. -- Oh Gudgeon -- they wool dirt our new clothers.

Lew. Lie close you vermin. They bind them.

Good. I ha not known hop monday at this time oth' year.

Bu. Stand upon thy guard page. They gag them.

Cre. Gape Gudgeon -- so, now do not talk
Your selves hoarse, this heavy carriage
Shall not trouble you. Pick their pockets.

Lew. Farewell -- farewell -- do not defile your lodging. Ex.

Enter some straggling Soldiers with Wenches. Wen. -- A prize -- a prize my
lads;
How came you hither Sirrah -- ha?

Bu. Oh -- Oh -- Oh!

Wen. What can not speak, the rogues are gagged.

1. Sou. Alas poor fellows -- help unbind them

Wen. Hang them vagabond rogues, they are some rich Bores I Will warrant them,
that have abused poor Soldiers: -- here puny -- change thy hat and thy sword.

2. Sou. These are some relics of their Grandfathers
Blades that have been tried in the first Punick war;
Here, shall have mine in exchange -- and liberty to boot.

Wen. Nay, no have to be gone Sir, this Coat will sell
To the next Country Landlord -- yet again,
These Boots will serve an honester man.

1. Sou. Nay, thou art unmerciful --

Wen. Marry gip you milksop fool, thou were best
Go barefoot so thy conscience wear socks; why man,
This is the farmers eldest whelp, coupled with
A carter, they know how to swaddle their legs
In straw -- do you not boobies --

Buf. Yes -- forsooth Mistress.

Wen. Nay, I should teach you manners, had I the tutoring of you. Ex. Soldiers
and Wenches.

Enter Zannazarro and Eurione. Eur. Do not, Brother, venture too boldly on this
piercing air.


Surg. It Is dangerous; Sir, and may recall your fever.

Zan. I thank your care, but owe so much unto
Your art, that my recovered spirits tell me
They are strong enough to strugle with disease,
Yet I Will not long tempt danger, only a while
Sit and behold you greedy flames convert
My Fathers palace to his funeral pile.
-- Oh Eurione, Ex. Surg.
To what sad period drives our hasty fate!
We -- we of all our house remain to be
The mockery of fortune. Poor girl -- we must
Ere long be led to grace the triumphs of
A lawrel'd Conqueror, through the throng
Of the insulting multitude, whose mirth
Our miseries will be, from thence be haled
To ignominious death, and far removed
From the famed urnes of our dead ancestors,
With thieves and murderers mix our injured dust.
In all their Annals, our wronged names shall be
Branded with ignominious Epithets.
Our guardian Angels vainly did protect us
Beyond the ruins of our family;
That shower of blood dropped precious balm, compared
With those prodigious ills that fall in this.
-- Why did I suffer all those channels to
Be stopped that drained the crimson sea of life?
Were not my hands chained in my love to thee,
I would again rend open each orifice
And set those conduits going, which are now
Locked in restrictive medicines.

Eur. Do not Brother
Unthrone thy soul with this unmanly passion,
Prop with disdain, that falling pyramid
Which in the lowest ebb of fortune may
Sit high as Sceptred Kings, and by the strength
Of passive fortitude repel the beams
Of our malignant stars, though darted down
With barbed vengeance on us. Those calm souls
Feel not the war of fierce affliction, which
Preserves heavens peace within their quiet breasts.
The bitterest pills earth steeps in gall, are but
That healthful physic, which the sickly mind
Distasts, but languishes without into
A swift consumption of its former virtues.
I know thy breast filled with too great a spirit
To let in such ignoble ghests as fear.
And should thou nurse a meaner thought of me,
'Twould strike a blush upon the ashes of
Our noble Mother, which could never conceive
So mean a thing in great Z^ranzas bed.

Zan. Now thou art sister to the noblest thoughts
My soul extracts from weak humanity.
-- *This balm has cured all mine internal wounds.

Eur. Then prithee take a care not to offend thy other.

Zan. My honored Guardian -- Enter Oroan.

Oro. Brave Zannazarro, I Am glad to see the blood
Sit in such healthful symptoms on thy cheeks,
My Princes mandates now enforcing me
Unto a swift removal -- Fair Eurione
I have more offerings here to pay, but yes
Am too unsanctified.

Eur. Those vows, my Lord, my death will soon discharge.

Oro. I am commanded by a power above me;
But should my victory dip her laurels in
Your bloods, my own should wash the ^incture off,
And with your Cypress wreath their withered branches.
But fairer hopes in my thoughts busy wars,
Support the ruins of my falling stars.

Actus Secundus.
Enter Creon and Lewcippus, one in the habit of a Soldier, the other of a
Dancing master. Cre. S-death! thou look as if thou were newly unfettered
Lewcippus, since thou skip'st into this Dancing suit, but methinks thy legs are
hardly fine enough for thy profession. Can caper? -- Let Us see.


Lew. As well as thou can toss a pike my
Valiant Hector -- thou walk'st in such state
As if thou come Crowned from Olympus;
Or for a reward of thy va^or were to be
Elected King of the Romans.

Cro. No, a Knight of Malta would serve the turn*
And that if our design prosper, I may bid fair for.

Lew. We shall no more need to march in back-lanes to shun Catch-poles -- hist
-- here comes the old Courtier and new Lord --

Enter Arratus
Ar. Save you noble Gallants, and my very Good Friends.


Cre. That he never saw before.

Ar. Let the word of a Gentleman confirm you welcome.

Lew. We had rather have the deeds.

Ar. You shall be both respectively entertained.
In your several functions.
For thou my nimble Lad --
We Will dance Levalto's lighter then the air
When it cuts capers from the mountains tops.
My Nephew's hours of mirthful recreation
Shall by thy lighter genius be dispo^'d.
But there is valor in the Boy that will
I doubt disdain the sport, I know his humor
If he be of the right blood of the Buffonies,
He will be all for Tournaments, and fighting duels
-- I will seem not to like it, but it was my
Own humor when I was young, I believe the
Country has bestowed education on him in that kind*
According to his natural worth --
-- Wherefore -- my noble Corydon --

Cre. I am no Shepherd Sir.

Ar. I cry thee mercy, my brave Herculean soul,
I mean, what de'e call them* -- the followers of
The ^ullen* Greek that would not fight for the loss of his wench.

Lew. Achilles and his Myrmidons.

Ar. Thou have hit it -- thou have hit it
My single sol'd Rascal, I mean the Myrmidons:
Pox on it! I forget these hard names; truth is,
I hold it beneath a man of quality to spend
His time among moth-eaten books, and leave the
More generous recreation of Dogs and Hawks; some
Shreds of Poetry picked up among the scoundrel
Players are all that I make use of;
Yet I honor men of Art and Gallantry.

Cre. It Is not my use to boast my own perfections,
I Have seen some petty portions of the world,
Served under Caesar in the British wars,
Assisted Crassus in the Parthian Conquest,
Been with Porsenna at the ^iege of Rome,
With Xerxes when his Army swallowed Greece,
And fought for Pompie in Pharsalla's field,
But my last piece of service was to fight
For brave Adrastus in the Theban war.

Ar. Now by my soul a noble warrier;
But how met you with this man of art?

Cre. In my travels -- and I protest stangely;
As I was passing over the Lybian deserts, I lighted upon the Grand Signiors
Court, and being invited by him into the Seraglio to see his Concubines, there
skipt into this Gentleman's acquaintance, he being one of those rare Artists
kept to edify the doxies.


Ar. Now by my honor a strange encounter:
-- What are these -- Ent. Buf. and Good.

Ser. Your Nephew Sir A Servant.
And his attendant --

Ar. How, are you son to Carlo Buffonie?

Bu. I am the young Gentleman Sir, and as simple
As I stand here, chad better clothers
When Is come from home.

Ar. And how came you to lose them Cousen?

Bu. We met with some vermin Zodiars that plundered us*

Ar. Alas poor Cousen! and who furnished you
With these new fashioned Boots?

Gu. They are the workmanship of my own hands.

Bu. My man Gudgeon is right, a man of knowledge
Nunckell ^^e warrant you.

Gu. I will serve your worship in the same kind
Upon any occasion, I have not been a servant
To your brother honest Gotfer Carlo so long for nothing.

Ar. Thou say well friend, I shall employ thee.
My noble friends, I shall refer my kinsman to
Your care, call for what money you shall see
Occasion of to furnish him with all the gallantry
He is yet capable of; I could wish he had
Been better prepared for tutors so ingenious,
But hope to see the sudden effects of your skill.

Lew. Sir, we shall do our best indevours --
Come my ill clad gallants, we will change your
Rusty Swords for glittering Rapiers,
Your Russets into Scarlet, and feed
Your horses with your boots.

Buf. What becomes of our breeches then Gudgeon?

Gu. We will send them home to old Master,
They will serve for a change. Ex. Om.

Enter the King, an Ambassador as from Cyprus. Kin. How full of fatal changes
are our lives!
What is it to be a Monarch, and yet live
Trembling at every blast of passion thus!
When all my thoughts in the fair hopes were calmed
Of Heroina's safe arivall, then
Even then to have them smothered in this cloud
Of cur'st* intelligence -- Oh Glorianda!
Each star is dropped out of my heaven of joy;
All our intended triumphs must convert
To funeral obsequies, our Laurels be
Wreathed over with Cypress, and the Tyrian robe
Strike all its splendour to an Ebon vail.

Glo. Your grief is yet but weak suspicions birtch,
And happily may prove abortive, Sir.

Kin. Poor girl!
Thou fain would into comfort flatter us,
But the malignity of sorrow can
Admit no cordials, when its meager fist
In all her functions grasps the struggling soul.
Hear him unravel the black clew that led
Me into this dark labyrinth of grief,
And tell me then where I have ever lest
Hopes to escape the Minotaure of pastions.

Glo. Shall I my Lord
Burden you with the weight of this sad story.

Emb. Your will commands each motion of my soul,
Though to a sad obedience -- Know then fair Princess
When first our full spread sails were pregnant grown
With prosperous gales of wind, and all our hopes
Swelled equal to their full strecht wombs, and we
With joy beheld proud Aetnaes gloomy top
And sleighting Neptune did begin to pray
To our domestic Lars, even then
A spightful storm strech't on the wings of all
The clamorous winds, proclaims a combat, and
Chooses our latitude the fatal lists.
The Suns fair mirror curles her even brow,
Whilst white armed waves catch at the clouds, and fall
Like liquid Mountains on our sinking Ships,
Our rent sails hang on tops of rocks, our cords
Crack like the fibers of a dying heart,
The frighted Sailer more distracted then
The elements into confusion startles,
The Master vainly calls for help, till by
An angry wave washed off, he loses all
His hopes in the Seas unfathomed womb. Whilst in
These full mouthed oaths natures intemperate so^
Swore our destruction, a calm gales soft breath
Fans off despair, we now behold none but
Pacifick Seas, but in this new born light
No beam of comfort dwelt we by it seeing
Naught but the scattered ruins of our Fleet
Which dressed the flood in funeral pomp, but wha(...)
Stroke most amaze, that Vessel where we had
Treasured our hopes, the Princess ship was lost.

Glo. A sad relation.

Kin. Oh but too true, too true my Glorianda,
Dev^uring Seas have cousen'd our embraces.
-- But shall I lose her thus? go gather all
Those Ships that owe obedience to this I Will
And let their squadrons cloud the Sea, until
You find her out, or else, by all that is good,
Thy life, though an unworthy sacrifice,
Shall fall an offering to her fathers loss.

Emb. I go -- though in despair to speed. Ex Emb.

Enter Oroandes, Zannazarro, Eurione. Oroandes kneeling, presents the
prisoners. Or^. Thus only may your enemies encounter
Those beams of sacred majesty that shine
Through you from the Sicilian diadem.

Kin. Rise noble Soldier, high in our love as wonder
-- Thus joy encounters grief, but is to weak
For such a foe -- are these thy victorious trophies?
There Is something in their looks that argues worth,
Were it not clouded in Rebellions mask.
But that is a sin whose black infection strikes
Damps to the heart of Monarchy, and cannot
Be nursed within a States ejecting womb
Without distempering every vital part.
It was thy mercy when the obstructed sword
Like lightning fled, and left their lives untoucht,
And now our justice must perfome that task.

Glo. I more then doubt poor Zannazarros safety,
Some of loves old ingredients yet remain.

Kin. -- Why so much woman, Glorianda?
Thou but mispend'st thy pity, foolish girl,
Upon an object, which if not removed
Would soon eclipse the brightness of our stars.
-- Go call the Priests of Mars and Pallas hither.

Oro. At what wild fury reaches this discourse?
If at his anger hell lights torches to
Lead them into destruction, there must fall
Some showers of blood to quench them.

Enter Priests. Kin. Here take the prisoners to your charge, and let
Those ceremonies be performed, by which
The tainted blood of sacrifices are
Made incense for the gods; see them prepared
Ere the next morning gilds the earth, delay
Shall pluck no feathers from the wings of vengeance.
-- S-death! what does't curd your bloods? go bear them off,
That brow that dares contract it self into
A frown had better meet a thunderbold.

Glo. O they are lost, for ever lost! Ex. Zan. Eurio.

Oro. Is It grief, or reverence that unnerves me thus?
-- Oh my soul -- thou art too weak -- too faintly weak
To move beneath the Chaos of these woes!

Kin. Now Oroandes I have time to embrace thee,
And hug this cabinet of virtue, which
Contains those jewels by whose soverain price
Our safety was redeemed. But I have not
In all thy absence let thy goodness drop
Out of my thoughts, witness this Lady, in
Whose virgin breast I Have strove to plant thy worth,
Until her sympathizing virtue might
Nursed to maturity, which to improve, I Will leave
You to Loves fair Elysium, Privacie.

Oro. I am -- your vassal Sir, but cannot pay
Oblations due to so immense a love. Ex. King.

Glo. Whither starts my degenerate spirits! -- I was born
Of Parentage high as Sicilies King;
And though their death made him my Guardian, yet
May be allowed the freedom of my choice.
The conversation of our youth had nursed
A Cupid in each eye, ere Zannazarro
For^'t by a fathers high aspiring pride
Forsook's obedience to the Crown, and then
A mutual love mixed our souls currents in
One silver stream of joy, and shall I now
Buy it with pride, 'cause his dejected state
Unvested of its gaudy honor stands?
-- No -- let his titles sacrifices fall
Unto his guilt, so I may him in joy.

Oro. -- She weeps -- sure there is more in this
Then yet my thoughts can fathom:
If it be love to Zannazarro, perhaps we may
Prevail by our united prayers -- Pardon Lady
My unbecoming rudeness, I have sorrows
That like my evil Genius on my soul,
Sit clothed in sables that obscure the light
Of beauties rays*

Glo. You need no mask to walk ith* Moonlight Sir,
But were there flames to quench you, I should shed*
Tears large enough to quench the rising fire.

Oro. We are not like to thrive in love that plant*
The sprightly fruit in such a watery soil.

Glo. Yet our affections are perhaps of kin,
Did we discover their original.
-- Let Us both disvellop truth my Lord, I blush not
To let you know these tears are only shed
To mollify those stubborn deities
That sway brave Zannazarroes fate -- And think
Yours sympathize in a relation near
As is 'twixt him and fair Eurione.

Oro. Oraculous truth! -- Dear Lady, let me kiss
This hand the index to so brave a heart,
And on it seal allegiance to your heart.
Our souls could nere have met a nearer way*
But in the rode of wedlock, this has claspt
All the black lines of our affections in.
One volume, though by natures hand transcribed
In different chara(...) but oh! it lies not
In our united pra(...) for to release
The objects of our love from those strict bands
Our Princes rage ^etters their safety in.

Glo. All violence would wear the ugly brand*
Of Sacrilege, else I would try the power
Of all my Kingdom to support their fates.
R^egium holds many active spirits that would
Bear his proud anger with as high a flame,
Should I but stir what now conceals their hate.

Oro. -- I have an Army too
Not yet disbanded, which would gladly kindle*
Their discontents at the least beam of mine,
The airy weight of a few would set
The fatal engine going; but my blood
Shrinkes to its center at rebellions name,
And as if tainted with the thought from thence
Scatters an ague through my limbs. If all
Our prayers, when mounted on the wings of love,
Cannot prevail, let us mix our blood with theirs,
And Martyrs die to our adored saints.

Glo. I shall do something too, something that may
Preserve my name in sanguin characters.
But first let us visit him, perhaps those engines
That batter heaven, may shake his marble breast.

Oro. My prayers shall wait on yours; and if denied,
A lover die, not live a regicide. Ex. om.

Enter a Tailor with a new suit, a Hatter, Shoemaker, Spurrier, with other
Tradesmen. 1. Tra. Come neighbors, shal's crack each one's our Kan before the
Gentleman comes.


2. Tra. Our Kans, hang the muddle horsedrench,
Let Us drink each of us our groat square off
Brisk sack, this forain liquor but
Adulterates our bloods.

3. Tra. As many of your wives does your beds.

1. Tra. How this coxcombly boy p(...)
Because he has nere a one of his ow(...)
We shall shortly have him buy the fee(...)
Of a piece of land, that has been broke
Up to his hand in the Country.

3. Tra. Did your easy entrance inform you,
Your own was such?

2. Tra. Go to Sirrah, you are a saucy boy
To prate thus to ancient men and thy betters.
I tell thee, both my neighbor and
My self are town-born children,
And have born offices,
And before thy head was hot to some of us.

3. Tra. But not before your own was horned Sir.

1. Tra. How you impudent rascal! a little more would make me lay my yard
about your ears.


3. Tra. But take heed you do not break him; for I have heard though you are
double yarded, your wife wants her full measure.


1. Tra. I protest I will complain to the officer and make him prove it.


2. Tra. Hist -- you prating coxcomb -- here comes the Gentleman.

Enter Lewcippus.
1. Tra. God save your good worship.

2. Tra. We are glad to see your worship well.

Lew. Come -- what have you brought here? -- let us see your bills, thou
should be a man of might by the largeness of thy weapon, but without help
of thy shears I will pare off half -- there, nay take it without grudging, and
set thy hand to the receipt.


1. Tra. Nay, I beseech your good worship to consider a poor Tradesman, our
taxations are heavy.


Lew. Tush! you were born to be made slaves off, come, thy hand.


1. Tra. To the whole bill Sir?

Lew. S-death! you cross legged c^r, do you snarl? thou were better eat thy
pressing iron then reply another word -- come you with the ta^^aty face, thy
blew apron ^its not methodically friend -- I protest thy conscience is made of
sarcenet, pure and tender as thy wives new blancht cheeks -- have thou set thy
hand to the bill? -- how! my money will not hold out -- but I will send anon --
that satisfies.


2. Tra. Most abundantly, an't please your worship*

Lew. My jolly C^ispin, thou must grant the same courtesy.

3. Oh Lord ^ir, your worship may command.

Lew. Thou deservest to be heir apparent to Sir Hue, and to have thy apron a
perpetual winding sheet to his bones; come along with me, and transport your
commodities, it is your Indiaes.

Ex. om.
Enter Arratus, Carlo, Creon. Arr. Signiour, you are welcome.

Car. I thank your Lordship -- intruth so shall your Nephew be to my house --
and to my daughter too -- or she and I shall square, but I would fain see the
sprightly gallant, -- as ^ame as I am, I have walked thus far on purpose.


Arr. He will not long be absent Sir, but is that wild head Vanlore dead?


Car. This Gentleman can best inform you.

Cre. It was my fortune to close his dying eyes.

Car. Captain, not a word of our bargain. Car. aside.

Cre. Swounds! do you think my neck itches for a halter?
Poor Vanlore -- he was a Gentleman whose memory
My love to worth ingages me to honor.
Was this not well dissembled old boy? Aside.

Car. Rarely -- thou may be secretary to the Devil.

Arr. My Nephew -- Sir --

Enter Buff. Lew. Gudgeon. Car. God save you noble Sir -- you are happily
encountered.

Buf. Would the old fellow beg something Tutor?
We will give him Gudgeons old clothers, they are better then his.


Lew. Not too loud -- this must be your father -- law.

Arr. Nephew, take notice of this Gentleman, you may hereafter call him father.


Good. He should ha better clothers first and I were as my Master -- he had as
good a father as this at home.


Buf. Peace fool and let your Master talk -- how like this Cloak -- and sword
-- and boot old boy -- ha!


Lew. You are too rude -- observe his gravity.

Buf. Why, no matter as long as I talk loud enough;
Do keep any dogs old boy? I Will course my fathers
Crop-^ar'd bitch with thee for vorty groat^.

Lew. Fie -- fie, you must lay no wagers under pounds.

Buf. Why then pounds let it be -- or we have a* forehorse of our own breed
shall draw with ere a horse in Syracuse.


Lew. Fie, this is discourse too vulgar.

Buff. Why, did you not tell me 'twas Gentleman like
To talk of nothing but Dogs and Horses?

Good. Yes, and Whores too Master.

Buf. Thanks good memory -- I Will begin.

Lew. -- Not for a world before your uncle Aside.
That is discourse for Taverns -- betwixt the drinking scenes,
Whilst men take breath to throw away estates;
There you may vie obscenity, and lard
Your dry discourse with oaths -- but must be civil here.

Car. His Tutor's giving him good counsel.

Arr. He is a Gentleman I Am woundrous happy in, for wholesome precepts.


Car. Will you not give him leave to visit my poor house?
My Lord -- his company will be precious,

Arr. Sir I intended he should wait on you home.
Captain it is our pleasure, you attend him.
The Citie's full of swaggerers, and he something rash.
-- Nephew -- we will leave you to attend this Gentleman;
Bring me wor'd how thou like fair Theocrine. Ex.

Car. Come Signior, will you walk?

Buf. Nay pray Sir go before. Ex. om.

Enter Oroandes alone. Oro. All yet is silent, dark and secret, as if
The powers of night did favor my intent.
Pardon you Gods that have a residence
Within this sacred roof, if I profane,
You are the authors of it, if you own
Affections clothed in robes immaculate
As martyred Saints embrace their sufferings in,
Such sure are mine, witness that blood -- which when
Warmed with the pride of victory did grow
Too cold to hatch the embryoes of a sin,
Though there were flam(...) beauty large enough
To thaw an Anchorite. Pity me then, just powers,
And spare your guiltless sacrifice. This hour,
This dismal silent hour, is near the time
In which the Priest, with hidden mysteries
To purge his offering from all the staynes
Of secret thoughts, into this Temple comes -- I do not know
What earthquakes cold divinity may breed
Within my breast, but sure he must be more
Then man that b(...) her hence, unless he wears
My life upon his sword -- But I am vain,
Naught but the Gods armed with destructive thunder
Are gardians of this place, which if this act
Be black and sinful, will, when purpl'd in
The guilt on'(...) hurl me into hell* if not
Protect my bold indevors -- They come

He withdraws. Enter Eurione led by the Priest of Minerva, in his hand a Censer
burning, at which having lighted the tapors he unvailes her. Pri. Hail noble
Virgin -- more to be adored
Then she whom our fond superstition makes
Our Commonwealths Protectresse.

Eur. What language do I hear? -- are you her Priest,
And dare profane your own Miverna thus?

Pri. I would not have your judgment Lady look
On us with much deluded eyes, to think
We pay a private adoration to
This gilded marble, only deified
By some unperfect souls unworthy fear
Whose reason darkened, flew to fancy for
Relief, and from those vain idea's framed
Those tutelary powers, which wiser men
Pretend devotion ^o, only to awe
Irregular humanity into
A dull obedience to their power, which were
Mad to adore those deities they make.

Eur. Oh horrid blasphemy!
Are these the hallowed mysteries you use
To sanctify your offerings with, or is it
Your Cruelty now I am near the steep
And dangerous precipice of death to stagger
A feeble woman's faith, that so your mortal
May pass to an eternal punishment?
Had I no drop of blood but what had been
Fi(...)d with a fever of hot lusts, the grave(...)
Cold damps unfettered by your Princes doom
Had long ere this extinguished them. My soul
The warm embraces of her flesh is now*
Even now forsaking, this frail body (...)
Like a lost feather fall from off the wing
Of vanity, ere many minutes lie
A lump of loathed corruption, foul enough
Without being with so black a sin deformed.

Pr. Deluded innocence! think you that fate should rob
Me of the glorious treasure of your beauty,
Soon as I had enjoyed it? What though you are
With your heroic Brother destined to
Confirm a simple Princes zeal; I know
Ways to evade it that shall make him tremble
To touch this sacred beauty, with a reverence
Holy as that he pays unto the Gods,
Whilst you (though now) ordained to die a Martyr
Shall live a Saint among the sacred number
That in this temple spend their happy hours
In silent close delights, such as do make
The amorous soul spring in the womb of fancy:
Here every hour that links the chain of life
We fill with pleasures, yet nere feel their surfets,
Degenerate to that pale disease of fear
The ignorant world calls Conscience.

Eur. How strangely lies the ^evill here disguised
Within the masque of age and holiness?

Pr. Of age! -- look here Eurione,
Throws off his ornaments. Is this a face to be despised? -- be not amazed,
The holy reverence which the people bear
Unto my office, keeps me so much stranger
Unto their knowledge, that I still may be
Secure within the shade of a disguize,
Pleasing the sprightly Ves^als, which my youth
Knows better how to do then feeble age.
Had not that excellence of beauty which
Appears in you bright as men fancy Angels,
I had not stoop't to this discovery, but
With the severity of my office led
You to inevitable death, which now
My love redeems yo(...)om, if with a fair
Consent you meet the vigor of my passion.

Eu. Witness you Gods that see my soul disvellop^d
From every thought of earth, how much more willingly
I would submit my self to the embraces
Of crawling worms, the cold inhabitants
Of silent dormitories, then to have
My dying hopes warmed into life again
By those wild fires of thy prodigious lusts.
No impious villain -- when ghastly horror makes
A giddy circle round thy deathbed -- and
Thy sins like Furies all appear to fright
Thy trembling soul from her last stage of life,
When thou shall curse thy birthday, and implore
Eternal darkness to obscure thee from
Heavens all discerning eye, this sin shall not
Make up a link o'^h everlasting chain.

Pr. Must I be then denied, fond girl! -- thou have
Precipitated all the hopes of life
By this abortive virtue, unless thou can
Command a guard of those imaginary
And helpless dei^ies to circle thee
In forms more dreadful then the night, or death
Presents them to our sears, no power shall save thee,
Thy prayers are sown on unrelenting rocks
Mixed with a wilderness of air -- through which
Thou Wilt never find them in their wished effects.
Tush! this weak resistance is in vain
The Virgin Goddess stirs not.

She flies to the A^tar. Eu. Oh hear -- hear me you sacred powers,
And from your thrones look on an injured maid.

Pr. Poor fool -- they are deaf to thunder.

Eu. Some pitying God protect me.

Oroandes discovers himself and drawing his sword, run^ at him. Oro. -- Hold --
hold,
There Is thy reward -- mist thee!
Sure there is no god protects thee.
-- Impious Devil! --
Can thou ere hope to shun me?

Eu. Oh gods! -- why was I waked to life again
To see the ruin of my honor?
-- My Oroandes! --
Or has some pitying deity
Possessed thy shape to rescue me?

Oro. Eurione -- my hallowed Eurione,
I Am too profane to touch thee yet, until
Cleans'd in this villains scalding blood, which must
Be shed an offering to thy injured virtue.

Offers at him, he falls on his knees. Eu. Oh hold my Oroandes,
o not defile thy hands in humane blood
Before such sacred witnesses as these,
Let his worse punishment be to survive
An act so wicked, till the dictates of
His conscience does anticipate his hell.

Pr. My guilt amazes me, nor do I know.
Whether with greater confidence to beg.
Pardon from heaven, or you; so black, so foul
Are my attempts against both: but if confession
May be the harbenger of penitence
Although deformed with sin, I shall dis^obe
The blackest secrets of my soul, these flames
Of lust, whose dreadful blazes light me to
Future destruction, may perhaps conduct
You to a throne of safety. Hoping to
Obtain my black desires, when fear of death
Should be my moving advocate, I had
Laid counterplots for to prevent the fall
Of the intended stroke. If you make use
Of these contaminated robes, which I
Have more abused, you will find their operation
In wonders seeming ominous, as those
Which drive men to devotions last retreat.
Not that I wish for life, but fear to die
In The youthful vigor of my sins, before
Repentance has inseebl'd them, I beg
Life from your mercy, which shall never be
Lavisht in pleasures more, removed from all
The noise and business of the world, I Will live
Attended only with my sorrow, where
My private sorrow may no object find
But my own gangrened sins to work upon.

Oro. The gods are pityful, and thou may live to merit life eternally.

Can thou (my dear Eurione) forget thy wrong?


Eu. I else should fear to go where is fate conducting me.


Oro. Farewell -- may thou acquaint thy soul with heaven.

Takes up the Priestsrobes. Come my fair sacrifice, these robes can be
Never profaned, worn to deliver thee.

Ex. om. The end of the Second Act.
Actus Tertius.
Officers belonging to the Temple set forth an Altar, others prepare a Throne,
loud music. Enter the King crowned, Glorianda and attendants, the King ascends
the Throne, the rest place themselves. Kin. THou look too sadly Glorianda,
Though funerals do attend the day we are not
To wear the sables of our souls, whilst we
With sacrifices feast the deities.

Glo. My sadness is not grief Sir, only fear
How my frall temper may endure a sight
So full of horror --

Kin. We will support thee, here now only wants
Sick Oroandes, I hope it is not love that troubles him.

Glo. He is too wise Sir, inconsiderate women
Are greatest sufferers in that tyranny.

Kin. Yet let it not afflict thee girl,
He will do well again --

Loud music, the Priest of Mars enters (...) one side of the Altar leading
Zannazarro, his arms bound in a crimson scarf, crowned with bays, after him
two boys with Censers and sacrificing instruments. Softer music, at which
enter Oroandes dressed like the Priest of Pallas, leading in Eurione, her robe
crimson, her arms bound with a white scarf, Virgins in white bearing Censers.
Kin. My rage begins to melt, I could even wish
They might survive the rigor of their doom.

Glo. Must I see this and live?
No Zannazarro -- here is my convoy to thee.

Draws a poniard. The Priests lead the sacrifices above the Altar, where
unbinding their arms, they give them liberty of mutual embraces. Zan. So --
now we have ended, my Eurione,
All our employments on the earth -- this is
The last of all our mortal enterviews.
The wheels of time worn on the road of age,
Will lose their motion, ere we shall again
Meet in the robes of flesh, which must ere that
Change to a thousand shapes its varied dust:
Yet still ( -- dear girl) our souls unseparable
Shall walk together to eternity.

Eur. Farewell dear Brother -- if thy soul do take
Its flight ere mine -- stay for me in the clouds.
They are bound and led to the Altar, where whilst they kneel a Song from
within, the Chorus by the attendants to the Priests, who light the fire for the
sacrifice. The SONG.
See, each wind leaves Civil Wars,
The gods approve your Sacrifice,
And to behold it, all the Stars
look through the curtains of the skies.
Peace reigns through every element, Chorus.
Whilst this fair pair to heaven are sent.
Sparta's dear Iphigenia died
A spotted sacrifice to this
Bright Nymph compared, whose Virgin pride
Says nature naught has done amiss.
And yet this flower so choicely made Cho.
By deaths untimely stroke must fade.
Romes honored Decii might have fought
Under this youths command, yet been
More famed then when their valor brought
The blood of foes, to imbalm it in.
Yet this brave soul must fall before Cho.
With ages frost he is tinsel'd over,
What Is falling now shall rise more pure,
The fatal stroke but sinks the Mine,
Whose oar this flaming calenture
Shall only for heavens Mint refine.
Go then and live where time shall be Cho.
Confounded in eternity.
Prepare, prepare the fatal stroke
Which their fair threeds must separate:
Goodness may pity, not revoke
The inevitable doom of fate.
What their crimes were, let men forget, Cho.
No letters but heavens alphabet,
When mortals are from virtue fell,
Their vices should in censure spell.

The Song ended, the Priests prepare to strike. A clap of thunder, groans, and
shrieks throughout the Temple, the Priests robes dropped over with blood, the
Images of the gods reverst. Kin. What horrid prodigies are these?
The gods are sure grown angry with our prayers.

Pri. I have been long attendant on those powers
Within this place adored, yet never saw
The gods thus moved before. We have profaned
Something their knowledge calls Angelical.

Kin. Be gone these gaudy trappings of my pride,
This lowly dust looks lovelier then a throne.
Lies here no charm Throws off his crown and robe.
To release our fears?

The Priest unties their scarfes, at which soft music from above, both the
images turning again. Pri. Here -- here lies the guilt of our impiety,
The gods are pleased again, and those whom we
Intended Martyrs must our Saints survive.

Oroandes throws off his robes and discovers himself. Kin. Hah -- Oroandes --
what damned imposture's this!

Glo. To what extent of miracle grows this!

Oro. The arguments of mercy from the gods
Imbolden me to seek the like from you.
My violent passions forced my love into
Strange labyrinths of attempts. But what I first
Trembling with guilt did undertake, these miracles
Have proved legitimate. Armed with a high
But inconsiderate heat of fury, when
Eurione into the inmost room
Was of the temple brought, resolved to bear
Her from the rigor of her doom, I had
Thither in private first conveyed my self
Attending on the hour in which the Priest
With his sad charge should enter, which arrived
I that come there to offer sacrilege
Unto that holy function, saw my self
Ordained the instrument of heaven to free
Her from the hands of a foul ravisher,
The hallowed lights being only kindled to
Make way to the injured object of his lust,
His prayers to blasphemies, his sacred unction
To prophanations more obscene then those
That revell in the sinks of sin were turned.
The badges of a reverend age -- (these robes
The sacred livery of heaven) thrown off
Appears a sprightly gallant, fitter for
A champion to the stews, then servant of
The injured gods, whose violence had not
My presence rescued her, had cozened heaven
Of your intended sacrifice to please
His own exuberate lust.

Kin. This dreadful story
Strikes trembling earthquakes through all my veins.
To what vast monster will our sins unchain'd
From fear of vengeance grow!

Oro. That this is true, witness those powers which owned
That cause which I (though rashly) undertook.

Kin. Pardon me you diviner powers -- I have
Been too neglective of the charge you gave me,
But will redeem it in my future zeal.
That villains blood forced out by torments shall
Begin the purple deluge -- For you fair souls
I must forget those crimes heaven has been pleased
Thus freely to forgive -- rise higher in
Our favor then was that exalted story
From whence your father fell.

Oro. Mountains of grief fall from my burdened soul
In their delivery: but your sovereign mercy
Must either with one cordial more relieve
My sickly hopes, or I am lost for ever

Kin. Thy actions speak thy wishes -- here Oroandes
Take from my hand this gift of heaven -- she is thine
By their decree. Gives him Eurione.

Glorianda kneels. Glo. Ere your extended mercy shall contract
Its liberal hand, let me be happy in
The full fruition of my joys -- My love
To Zannazarro, though long smothered in
His fates obscurity, must now break out
In cataracts of prayers, until you make
Me so much sharer of the blessings of
This happy day to meet my hopes in him:

Kin. Thy thoughts arrive clothed in the robes of joy.
Here Zannazarro -- Embrace in her thy happiness.

Zan. With such a trembling pleasure bodies shall
Encounter with their separated souls.

Kin. Now all your seas are calmed -- only my bark
Still d^gs her wings beneath a tempests weight;
Yet will I strugle with my griefs to show
How much we to this days delivery owe.

Ex. om. Enter Theocrine and her maid. The. Good wench no more, thou'st ti^'d
me with this story.


May. But had you seen it Mistress you could never have been weary, it was the
sump^uousest sight that ever eyes beheld, the Kings good grace (God bless him)
is a brave man -- by my troth my thought it did me good to see him, but we were
all overjoyed when the sacrifices were releast.


The. Prithy no more -- the sacrifice releast,
Happy are they -- but I must die a sacrifice to love,
No helpful Angel will vouchsafe to look
From his blessed throne on me; my Vanlores ghost
Is now triumphing amongst the Saints, and sees
Or else regards not mine afflections here.
A cruel Father first divorced what now
A harsher fate eternally divides.
But know my dear, where ere thy wandering spirit
Roves unappeas'd with sacred sunerall rites;
Thy Theocrine lives but to pay her tears
Oblations to thy memory, and will
Never put off sorrows sable robe until
The mourning wreath shall knit my winding sheet.
-- These were the bands wherewith we once confirmed
Pulls off a bracelet. The obligations of our love -- but now
Are seals of my affliction -- sent me back
As messengers of his untimely fate.

Enter Carlo, and Vanlore disguized like a Mountibanck. Car. Look yonder she
is, in one of her fits I protest:
I doubt she is crazed, good Doctor behold her.

Van. Love -- love -- I see it by the beating of her pulse.


Ca. Why how now daughter, never out of these quandaries?
Thou will spoil a good face with this puling.

Van. Your tres humble servitor Madam.

Car. Nay do not look so slightly on him,
He has promised me to cure thee wench,
He is a man of art -- come forth of a strange country,
And knows more then a thousand of our dull Ilanders.

Van. Foh -- they are buffones -- horsleaches,
Know nothing more den the Farrier, how to give
A great drench -- pig enough to break de horse
Belly -- begar mere pisse-prophets,
De very spawn of de white which, fellows
Dat use no medicine but what day pick out
Ofde hedge -- not so virtuous as Madams
Old book of receipts --

The. Sir did you bring this fellow here to rail?

Car. It Is but his humor, Theocrine, give him way.

Van. Me scorn de stinking drugist, have no use of his horse, loads of trash --
Mine be de pure extract -- de spirit of de Mineral, here be de Chimical pill,
here de quintessence of balsom -- dat which cures all solution of continuity
though in de ventricles of de heart -- but here be de grand Elixar, the
sovereign medicine -- that cured the great Mogul when he had been seven year
sick of a Lethargy.


Car. Doctor -- I Will leave her to your care.

Van. Me warrant dat shall cure her -- come Madam
Begar you but dissemble -- dis is no inveterate
Disease -- me see no symptoms of it in your face,
Dear is no giddy rolling of the eye -- no swelling
Of de veins about de forehead -- nor does the
Pulse inform me but the systole and diastole
Keep due time -- dis love to Vanlore be but a
Pretense, to free your self from him, you hate
The more deserving Buffonie.

The. If grief for him be my disease -- thy honesty
Is as recoverable, now practice has
Made the malignity inveterate,
Keep thy strange terms of injured art to fright
The Ague or a toothake off -- My griefs
Are grown beyond imaginary cures.

Van. Pishaw -- suppose you did once love him,
He be dead, and dear be better men dat seek your love,
I have encounterd with dat Vanlore in my
Peregrination, and found him to be a kickshaw
-- A man of no worth.

The. Thou art a villain to abuse the dead,
Had his deserts crauled on the earth like thine,
It Is baseness to depresse them now he is
Above or else beneath all mortal hate;
But were he living, thy invectives might
Sully the Sun as soon as spot his fame.
Go then, and let the wondering multitude
Admire thee on a stage, come here no more
To scare away my private thoughts, the worst
Of which more pleases then thy company.

Van. You will be of de oder mind, when I have freed You of all de grief for
Vanlore.


The. It must be by some speedy means to cast
This flesh into the grave that mould of death,
There to be modeled for eternity,
Within whose everlasting springs we shall
Meet with those joys whose blasted embryo's were.
Here made Abortive. If thou have a poison
Subtle as that the eyes of Basilisks
Shoots forth destruction in, with more delight
^^e take it then ere a fainting Patient did
Receive thy promised Cordials.

Van. What stronger confirmation needs then this? aside.
She Is constanter then times vicissitudes.
-- Yet I Will make good my word, Throws off his disguize.
-- Receive my Theocrine
The promised cordial, and approve my art.

The. My Vanlore! -- may I believe my eyes intelligence,
Or is this joy deluded fancies birth?

Van. Real as our affections, when we first
Assimilated souls in sacred vows.

The. My joy has almost rarefied my spirits
Into a substance volatile as that*
Which souls begin their separation in.
Support me, friend, with the relation of
Thy fatal story, or this surfeit will
Be near as dangerous as the dearth of hope.

Van. For fear thy father should prevent our story,
I must shrink under this dark vail again.
Puts on his disguize. It Is a relation, Theocrine, will raise
Thy virtue in a blush -- thy Father, Love --
-- Thy cruel Father.

The. I always doubted 'twas his wretched spirit
That raised this dangerous storm.

Van. It was -- and by a means so full of wickedness
I tremble to relate it -- whilst I lay
In The Leaguer at Ardenna, he corrupts
Creon and Lewcippus, two mercenary slaves,
To do what he too long expected had
From the wars doubfull fortune, but those villains
By his gifts thawed from their poverty,
Let forth in streams of luxury their sins
Wild Catarracts, until the channel grew
So big it bore the Boys of reason down,
And lets this secret in their midnight cups
Flow undescreetly out, which by a friend
Of mine informed of, from their poison I
Received my antidote, and knowing where
They had designed the place to steal my life,
Thither prepared for my defense repair.
The place was clothed in privacy enough
To warrant them a safe retreat, if in
Their black design successful, hoping to
Surprise me unawares; they here being hid
Attempt my life, but finding me prepared,
Had with a guilty baseness fled if not
Inforc'^ by me, first to unravell all
This knot of villainy, confessing how
Corrupted by thy fathers gold, they had
Sworn my destruction, which repenting, now
To merit mercy, they engage as far
Toward my assistance, vowing to obey
What ever I commanded; and to show
Their faiths example, this dear relic of
Shows a Bracelet. Our first affections give me, which received
With those strict bonds of base soul'd cowards (threats)
Chaining up their obedienee to my will.
I then instruct them with what message they
Should cheat thy Fathers willing faith, thy token
Although the choicest Jewel of my soul
Trusting them with to strengthen impudence
At their return, which done, I left the Army.

The. But were unkind,
Thus long to let me languish in despair.

Van. That only cast a cloud on the design,
Those villains lavishing the time until
Detected vice made them forsake the Army,
Whilst I to live unknown repaired unto
A troop of wild Bandets, amongst whom I have
(Though honored with their Captains title) lived
Till weary of their sins, yet keep them still
Friends to protect me when with thee I make
A safe retreat unto those desert haunts.

The. Teach me the way my Vanlore, though it lie
Through dangers greater then the midnight fears
Of sickly brains sully their fancies with,
Through all I Will follow thee.

Van. Then my good angels cannot stay behind,
Thou must, my dear, pretend to love this fool,
Nay more, consent to marry him.

The. How! -- do not run dangerous hazards.

Van. We must or else lie still at anchor here.
When thy consent ripens thy fathers joy*
Ours will grow near maturity -- this disguize
Will furnish me with means enough to know
The night-walks of his thoughts -- by which we may
Proportion all our actions -- he comes
This kiss, and bid thy Vanlore then farewell.

Enter Carlo. Car. A skillful man I protest, what store of implements he has?
Gally pots, Glasses, and Ventosses, I hope he has done the wench good -- save
you Doctor; how thrives your endeavor? --


Van. Prave -- prave -- better then we expected;
But me scorn to pipe forth mine own praises.
Madam speak for your self, and inform de ^old
Mounsieur your vader --

Car. -- How is it Theocrine? -- ha! --

The. Well Sir -- as the harmonious music of the spirits
Supplied with air sprung from well tempered blood,
Composes all the organs of the soul.
Only in this calm sea of health I find
Some pleasing spirits hover 'bout my heart,
Things that till now I was not sensible
Of, since I first did love forgotten Vanlore.

Van. Now de magical potion begins to work.

The. Forgive my disobedience Sir, She kneels.
My hate unto that worthy Gentleman
Your wisdom had provided for me, shall
Pay for redemption all the powers of love,
So you will not punish it in the denying
That blessing which till now I called a curse.
Shall your consent tell me I Am pardoned Sir?

Car. With as much pleasure as I got thee girl.
Now thou have reconciled my thoughts, my gold
Is not more cordial then this blessed change,
Now I shall live to see thee happy in
Possession of a vast estate.

The. The man is unto me more pleasing Sir.

Car. So I would have him as long as he has an
Estate to boot, I do not like when love grows
Daring, and encounter poverty, because they
Imagine the threedbare suit adorned with a few
Needless virtues.

Van. Vat dinke you now Signiour?

Car. That you are a man of art incomparable,
As Aeseulapius sell -- 'twas a cure easily done,
And therefore I hope will not stand me in much.
-- My good word shall be ready.

Van. Me be not mercenary, de generous Artist
Scorns all reward but what comes willingly.

Car. Say thou so? then thou art for my turn,
I like when men will not exact -- Come, we will
Dine together, and then go visit the Lord Arratus
Sprightly kinsman -- Come my girl.

Enter Creon, Lewcippus, Buffonie, Gudgeon, Wenches, Servants, a Bawd. Cre.
Come grannum, are they fresh and wholesome, such as may be tilted at and not
endanger the head of the Lance?


Baw. Away you wag, do you think I would furnish Customers with ware that should
not be for their turn? I protest they came to town but yesterday. Since I dealt
in the fleshly occupation I have not had better.


Buf. Thou shall be paid well for them Punk,
There Is gold -- and here is more left yet.

Baw. This is a Boy of mettle.

1. We. Let us alone to melt it mother, Come sir, you are sad.
If any service -- of mine might please you, I will
Strive to show activity in your content, let me lead
You to the private lists of Venus, where
We Will make the blood dance measures through our veins
Till warmed with the delitious sport it glews
Our wreathed embraces in extracted balm.

2. Wen We Will kiss you into ecstasies, and make
Our breasts the pillowes to repose your head.

1 Wen We Will please each sense with some delight. Your eyes
With unvailed beauties whiter then the Alps,
Your touch with skins like polisht Ivory smooth,
Your taste shall surfeit on the balm of lips,
For Indian gums, the fruitful valley that
Lies underneath fair Venus mount shall send
Far more delightful perfumes, and when tired
With these delitious sports, we will sing
Your wearyed spirits into rest.

2. Wen. And whilst you sleep our nimble fancies shall
Study some undiscovered passage through
The coral banked straights of love, with which
We Will entertain your naked innocence.

1. Wen. Our Banquets shall be all on Cordials, sauc't
With strong provocatives, whose sprightly power
Each minute shall create new appetites.

Lew. The Wenches have ravished him.

Buf. Who would not spend Estates upon these Ladies?
But have you never an ordinary bit for my man Gudgeon?
I would not have him sit idle.

Baw. Rather then he shall want employment, I will
Venture my self to give him a heat;
But he has more mind to a Country dance
I see he is putting his feet in measure.

Good. I wou't we had a Fiddler here, I could foot it, I says.


Baw. Shal's have a dance Gentlemen, I have an old Stallion within that can
play.


Buf. Call him good Grannum, and let us to it, can you dance Ladies?


Wen. We will do any thing that tends to your delight Sir.

Ent. Fiddler.
Baw. Come twist thy guts up old squeaker.

Fid. Couple your selves, I am in tune.

Lew. Woot dance Creon?

Cre. Not I, the sport's too light, let Gudgeon supply my place.


Baw. Come Gudgeon -- thou and I -- Play the shaking of the sheets.

They dance. Knock within. Within -- Ho -- house -- ho -- what, all asleep!

Baw. Hark the Colonel, and the rest of the Blades
Are come -- shall I call them hither?

Cre. No, we will wait on them, come Pupil,
We will acquaint you with the City Gallants.

Ex. om. Enter three Bandeets, three Sailers meeting them. 1. Sai. Save you
Gallants -- where is our Captain?
Here is a prize for him worth a bording.

1. Ban. -- A lovely beauty -- S-death! how came you by her?


2. Sai. Where we found store of other treasure, nay our
Trade at Sea will prove better then yours at Land.
But is not our Captain to be spoke withal?

2. Ban. Not now, he is employed, but where we know not.


3. Ban. We expect his speedy return, but till then I am his Viceroy in our
Commonwealth.


3. Sai. Then take charge of this Lady, but let her be
Preserved untoucht for him -- and hark you Sir,
Be careful of it -- if her complaints inform
Him otherwise, you will dearly suffer for it. Whispers.

Hero. What dreadful precipice of misery are
My sullen sates descending -- Can I hope
My honors safety, whilst my body is
Commanded by these that no Law controuls?

1. Ban. Come Lady, you must now be a wild inhabitant
Of these dark woods with us, yet do not weep,
Though our profession seem to promise none,
Here you may find civility.

Her. Pray heaven I may, my journey hither has.
Been full of strange misfortunes -- I have found
Crowned expectations for captivity
Unhappily exchanged.

Sai. Valiant Bandeets farewell -- look to your charge.

3. Ban. With as much care as we would strive to keep
Jewels, whose loss would ruin all our hopes. Ex. Sai.,

3. Ban. Come noble Lady -- if your birth has clothed
Honor in higher attributes, forgive
Our rudeness, since the child of ignorance.

Her. Alas! what ere my birth has been, I Am now,
A slave to you, and must forget those vain
Airs of ambitious honor, so I may
But find civility enough to be
Protectress of my Virgin honor, all
My others will most willingly be spared,
Yet they are such that were I known I might
Perhaps repair these broken fortunes which
Thus makes you run the hazard of the Law.

1. Ban. We wish this curtain of your fate may be
Swiftly withdrawn, till then, let all our vows
Prevent your fears, the rudeness of our lives
May be your trouble, but shall never grow
To a disease more dangerous.

Her. I live in hopes to gain ability
Of an extent so large as recompense. Ex. om.

Enter three Blades, Buff. and Gndgeon drunk, Drawers with Wine. 1. Bla. Stand
up brother -- come, our brains are not warm enough yet -- fill out -- here
noble brother.


Buf. Thanks brother Colonel -- I will pledge thee were it a Tub full -- and
pay for it too -- here is gold enough.


2. Bla. Here -- a health to my Lord Arratus.

Buf. Come to my Nunckel -- there lies my hat.

3. Bla. Here Gudgeon, thou must have it too.

Good. I ha more already then I can carry upright.

1. Bla. Round with another health -- here
To my brother Buffonies Lady.

Buff. That Is the two young Gentlewomen of the house --
These be Gallants Gudgeon -- sons of fame.

Good. She blew them from her breech.

2. Blad. House -- more Wine. here, where be these Vermin?


Buf. What will they not hear? -- let us break down the doors Brother,
Or fire the house -- nay I am valiant too.

Knocks, a Wench looks out a the window. Wen. Why, what do you mean there
Gentlemen to beat my mothers doors down?


Buf. Some Wine and Wenches you Cockatrice.

Wen. You have too much already Sir, to sleep --

1. Bla. Why you harpy, do think we will be confined to the Lobby.


Wen. You will have the greater benefit of the air Sir.

2. Bla. Swounds we will not be bafl'd thus.

Buf. No that we will not brother, I feel the spirit of Wine in my brains, and
will not be bafl'd.


1. Bla. We Will scale your windows you Whores.

Buf. Brother -- let us -- brother Colonel -- I Will in first.


2. Bla. We will not put you on a matter of such danger Sir.


Buff. Danger -- I scorn the word -- I fear it not brother, I Will do it -- I and
my valiant sword bearer.


Good. I Will not creep in at windows, not I, amongst Whores to have my eyes
scratch't out -- not I.


Buff. How -- not venture? why thou will not turn coward and fear scratching? --
shall not be said but we Country boys are as valiant as the best of them.


3. Bla. But the window is narrow, and will spoil your new suit.


Buff. Come, come -- prepare -- help me and I Will put them off.


2. Bla. Valiant brother, thou shall have the honor to enter first.


Buff. I and my squire will enter this enchanted Castle,
And relieve the imprisoned Ladies.
Gudgeon let us untrusse and prepare for the combat.

1. Bla. I Will help my brother whilst you prepare Gudgeon.
-- Now for the boots.

Buff. My foot is at thy service noble brother,
Nay off with my breeches too -- I have drawers on.

2. Bla. Have thou drawers too Gudgeon?

Good. I, but I had as leave a been hanged as ha come to this.


Buf. Come now, your helping hands, I Will scale the walls,
Attendant be at hand with my weapon.

1. Bla. We Will second thee immediately venturous brother.
Come Gudgeon follow thy Master.

Put them in at the window. Outeries within. Buf. Oh -- oh -- help us brother
Colonel,
Draw up thy forces.

1. Bla. The conflict is begun -- we will leave them to the mercy of the Wenches,
and now the guls are uncas't make use of their feathers -- here is a prize lads.


2. Blad. The Golden fleece was but stinking sheepskin to it.


3. Blad. Come let us be gone, the Bloud-hounds will pursue.

Ex. om.
Enter Creon and Lewcippus. Cre. Pox on the slaves they are gone.

Lew. This Devil Lust has undone us.

Cre. It Is no now time to dispute it;
Let Us rather bethink our selves of some course
To preserve our credit with his uncle.

Lew. There Is it, and I am deceived, if I have not found it out; thou know
the opinion he has of his valor: I will home, and possess him that he
privately withdrew as we fear to fight, and that thou were in quest of him
whilst I come to inform his doting Lordship.


Cre. Blessed be thy pregnant brain,
Be gone and thrive, I will return upon my cue. Ex. om.

Enter Buffonie and Gudgeon in their shirts -- both bloody, wenches following.
Baw. Out of my doors you Rogues.

Buf. Good reverend Matron -- we heartily repent -- Gudgeon our clothes --
what is become of our brother Colonel, and the rest of the Blades?


1. Wen. Faith even sheathed in your scabards by this time, you ignorant Rogues
to come to abuse a civil house and be cozened of your clothes.


Good. Oh we shall die with cold.

Buf. Good Gentlewomen give us some slender garments, my Nunckel shall give
satisfaction -- Oh Gudgeon my Hat and all my fine Ribbons, and my Sword --
all is gone.


Good. I woot we had our old ones here.

1 Wen. But faith it is pity to turn them off thus,
The puppies will catch the pip -- have you no old breeches?

Baw. By my fay nothing that belongs to man, but an old armor that a beggarly
Soldier pawned -- and that I Will fetch.


2. Wen. And I Will lend the page an old petticoat and wastcoat.

Bring forth an Armor and clothes.
Buf. We shall be bound to pray for you.

1. Wen. Go arm the Knight whist I prepare the Lady of the lake.

Put the Armor on Buffonie, the petticoat and wastcoat on Good.
Good. I doubt we shall not pass the street for the Scoundrell boys.


Buf. Put it on Gudgeon, and be thankful.
Any thing to hide thy nakedness, good Gudgeon.

Good. I have played maid Marrian ere now.

1. Wen. So now you are provided, my honored Don.

Buf. We kindly thank your good Ladyships, we shall be bound to pray for you --
it is not so cold as 'twas.


2. Wen. Come, march my valiant Hector.

1. Wen. Nay faith here is each of them an old pair of slippers too.


Buf. Good-be-wy my honorable young Ladies.

Ex. Buf. and Good. Baw. So now let us in and share. Ex. om.

Enter Arratus, Carlo, Theocrine, and Lewcippus. Arr. I wonder at this -- when
saw you him last?

Lew. Some three hours since, when leaving him at a Play, whilst we went to
dispatch some business in the City, at our return we mist him -- I perceived
some difference betwixt him and a blade oth' town, and doubt the sword has
disputed it.


Car. It Is most like that is it, he is resolute.

The. Must I then be so unhappy when I first began to cherish love to lose its
wished for object?


Arr. Grieve not Lady -- I hope all is well.

The. I doubt his valor will betray him to
Some desperate quarrel, in whose fury all
My hopes of him may perish.

Car. I will go send my servants abroad,
We cannot be too careful of his safety.

Arr. Trouble not your self Sir -- I have took order.


Enter Buff. and Good. Buf. -- Ah -- ah -- ready to die with cold.

Arr. What have we here? a prologue to the mask of Witches?


Car. Some intended sport without question,
Which now will come out of season.

Buf. Ha! forgot me Nunckel -- I am your poor kinsman.


Arr. Thou art my shame, and make me grieve that ever
I entertained a thought of raising thee
So much beyond the pitch of thy deserts.

The. Let not your anger Sir
Add waights to his unhappiness.

Arr. Sure she is bewitched -- you are a moving advocate,
But so it render him not lost within
The place he did in your affections hold,
I shall be easily wrought to pardon him.

The. That were a love too much depending on
The accidents of fortune to be thought
Worthy of him -- I on this Armor look
As spoils got from some conquered enemy,
His garments lost by stealth, not from him took
By any force of man.

Buf. She is in the right Nunckel, my brother Colonel stole them, whilst my
squire and I scaled the walls.


The. I thought 'twas some such desperate attempt;
Let me disarme thee love, and see thy wounds.

Car. Rare Artists! this Philter works wonders.

Arr. He has met with some cheat for Knights,
And the nails of whores for steel.

The. Let me wipe off the blood, and thy poor servants too.


Good. I will not trouble you Mistress, I use to heal such slight wounds as this
by washing them in mine own water.


Buf. I had rather go in out of the cold.

Arr. Thou make me blush unmanner'd fool:
Why do not with more thankfulness embrace
The tender of her love? -- Lewcippus have them
In, and see them once more clothed.
I can impute as much to youths irregularity
As others can: but if he leave not this,
My hate may ruin what my love has built.

The. I hope your wisdom Sir will look on this
But as an error, which correcting age
May easily reform.

Car. -- This is an ill sign -- I doubt he will spend all.

Arr. I shall do much for your sake Lady.
-- Let Us in and see him, though 'twere amiss,
To make him mend, it is to laugh at this.

Ex. om. Actus Quartus. Scena Secunda.
Enter the King in a night gown, two Pages with lights, one bearing uhe picture
of Heroina, the other of Eurione, set down the light and pictures, and ex.
Pages. Kin. Be gone, and let me gaze my self to marble here.
Oh I have lost the quiet of my soul,
All peaceful harmony. My eyes have sucked
A subtle poison, and dispersed it through
My souls oreflowing rivolet. Oh Heroina
I have defiled those noble thoughts in which
I should have clothed the memory of this
-- Fain would I smoother this proud flame --
-- But vainly strive --
It has laid hold on reasons battlements.
-- This is Heroina's -- Looks on her picture.
The same whose fair Idea until now,
I only entertained within my thoughts --
And must I let this glorious angel fly
From the polluted temple? -- I must
-- Here lies a spell that charms me Oopens Eurione's picture.
-- What did I say --
Pardon thou fair commandresse of my soul,
I did blaspheme -- this sacred beauty is
Fit for loves highest Altar, where my heart
If sacrificed dies in Enthean fire,
Pure as the Elements, when quintessene't
Into perfection shall communicate
To bodies glorified --
-- These bloudlesse shadows hold no symmetry
In their proportion, this interior orb
Sits like a smaller Planet near the Sun.
-- I should not thus sharpen a Scorpions sting,
If not already Basilisk'd to death.
-- But I like Atlas vainly struggle to
O'^ethrow a world of fancy -- I Am resolved.
Knocks, enter Page, takes him a Letter. Convey this speedily to Oroandes.
The cure is dangerous, but where the sharp disease
Breaths naught but desperation, it is in vain
Through reasons Limbeck to extract our thoughts.
Mufi'd in clouds of sin and shame I go
To grope for light, or sink in endless woe. Ex. King.

Enter Vanlore leading in Theocrine. The. Be not too confident my Vanlore,
They Are desperate gamesters
That throw their whole stock at one trembling cast.
If in this mornings progress we are maskt,
Time never will lend a beam to light us forth
Of sorrows subtle labyrinth -- should thy plot
Crampt with prevention halt behind thy hopes,
And I be married to this wretch -- we may
Go then aside, and sacrifice our tears,
Our fruitless tears unto those Gods for whom
We have prepared our holy vows -- but never
Must meet in warm embraces.

Van. Do not doubt
The powerful influence of our stars -- should what
I have prepared to combat their design,
Be by some sullen spy betrayed, -- I have
Fitted a friend ordained for action in
This Comic Scene, whose sword has glister'd amongst
A throng of braver enemies then they;
By whose assistance, if they durst oppose,
He cut the cordage of that hand although
Before the Altar, that lays hold on thee.

The. I would not have that silver feathered dove,
On whose pure wings we first raised our affection,
Her yet immaculate pinnions dip in blood.

Van. Yet must we not
Tamely let Vultures prey upon our hearts.
I hear thy Father, Ceugh within.
And must betake my self to canting.

Enter Carlo, servant leading him. Car. Oh -- oh -- oh!
Help me good Doctor:
Oh this tormenting Gout, my joints are racked.

Van. Mark you Mounsieur -- you must be -- paesant till my me-di-cine can
operate.


Car. Oh I can hold no longer, set me down softly Geafery.

Van. And lay up de leg Sh-free --
Here on de Cushoone -- so -- no, easy now.

Car. Not much -- not much -- how now girl?
Have thou sent to invite thy ghests?

The. I have Sir, but doubt your want of health will much obstruct their mirth.


Car. We Will have the fewer girl, 'twill save charges.
I do not like these costly feasts,
They but undo young couples -- Oh my joints!
Doctor, we shall have your company.

Van. Me be very sorry, me cannot be your servant,
But de number of de patients dat call upon me.

The. We shall excuse you Sir, but could your time permit, you should be ranged
with the best of our friends.


Van. Me humbly thank you Madam.

The. We will be free, though my husband be not Courtly.


Car. Not Courtly say, marry the better wench, it puts me in hope I shall not
live to see thee want, the swaggering Gallant goes out like a snuff, when the
constant housekeeper gives the best light at last -- Oh -- oh -- oh! my pain is
intolerable --

I would not have him hearken to this paltry poetry, nor visit ^^arlotry
playhouses. Let his employments be to read the Statutes. -- oh -- 'twill do him
good -- the knavery of a Lawyer, or the cunning of a Bankrout shall never undo
him.


Van. And tose as I have heard be diseases Epidemical -- but be de law de
special antidote.


Car. It Is our last refuge, but in these parts not thoroughly prosecuted, I
have now at the least fifty suits depending, and many of them I know to be poor
rascals and not able to pay -- oh now -- now -- And yet I can have no further
recompense then throwing them in Jail -- Oh my knee! -- where they shall lie
till they rot, if they pay not.

Enter a servant.
Ser. Some Tradesmen Mris. Theocrine
Desire to speak with you. Ex. The.

Car. Do not buy thy garments too gaudy,
Gold is better in thy purse then on thy back.
Take example by thy aged father, Theocrine.
Oh now it tugs again -- now -- now!

Van. Be of good comfort, it is but de acerbity of de humor -- I will to my
poison mixers, and prepare de richest ingredients.


Car. I think an ointment of good Foot oil were good,
It is cheap and easily got, I would not
Be at too much charges -- lead me in
Geofry -- oh! -- farewell good Doctor -- oh!
This double charges will undo me.

Van. Thou never wilt be so happy, wretched Miser,
To have that file polish thy cankerd soul.
The generous spirits punishment would be
To thee the effects of mercy. Is Theocrine,
My virtuous Theocrine, descended from
So vile a Father? Sure her Mother was
Some Angel clothed in flesh, that could not be
Corrupted with the affinity of vice;
Else had the rudeness of his nature planted
Some thorns within that Paradise, which now
The amorous Myrtles tender branches dress
In such soft lovely robes, her passions are
Sharpn'd with anger, but like thorns placed
To guard those roses Virgin modesty.
Nor can pale fear in her more refuge seek,
Then to improve the Lillies on her cheek.

Enter Theocrine. The. Come follow me Vanlore,
I have prepared thy habit -- let us hasten. Ex. om.

Enter Buff. Godg. Creon, Lewcip. Cre. Fie, fie!
Not ready yet, and to be a Bridegroom ere break of day?

Buf. I cannot tie my bond-strings.

Lew. Assist him Gudgeon -- S-death! what do gape for?

Good. Cham't thoroughly awaked yet, chad rather
Be at whom again, a keeping of Sheep,
There chad time to fetch out my full sleep,
Here cham tottered up all hours of the night.

Cre. Why, thou do not grumble Rascal, give me -- come, p^x on thy gouty
fingers, they are fitter to tie sacks --


Good. It Is no matter for your frumps:
Chon't be thus abused long, chill get me home, and be a paultry Servingman no
longer, to lick trenchers and live upon scraps.


Lew. Why, how now slave, were thou ever thus fine before?


Good. Yes in a pranked suit, it is much credit sure, e'n as much as the slit in
our hawked Bullocks ear, or a mark in the side of a Sheep.


Buff. Come Tutor, now come help me trusse my points, Chwas never thus troubled
with harnessing my self before, and this be the fruit of marriage, I will marry
no more yet in have. If my Nunckel had been a man as other men be, he might ha
married her his self, and ha saved me this labor, but no matter Gudgeon, we will
have about at trull-me-dems when the Parson has done.


Enter Arratus. Arr. I to my grief have heard all this.
Unmaner'd slave! are these the fruits of all
My ill bestowed expenses? I see it lies not
In The power of art to polish thee, I have
Ransacked the City for the choiest wits,
They rackt invention to improve thy knowledge,
And yet thou still remainst a senseless block.
-- Pox on your ugly looks -- you sleepish clown,
Pull up thy spirits -- or by heaven -- Kicks him.

Good Master, give the testy old fool a clowt o'th car.

Arr. What, art thou barking connsell to him?
Never were there such a couple of whelps
Harl'd together, hell take you both for muddy slaves;
He rather leave my revenues in the walls of a Hospital,
Or build Temples for the next Faction to pull down,
Then bestow it on such a puppy.

Cre. 'T will become your discretion, Sir, to smother
Your anger for the present, let this days
Business be past over ere you nourish the flame;
Then if you see no reformation, we shall not
Counsel to ought your judgment approves not of.

Lew. Should you so untimely withdraw your love,
His disgrace would reflect on your reputation.

Arr. You shall prevail for this once, come Sirrah
-- See thy behavior redeem thy credit
-- Or thou art lost --

Good. -- Lost! hey -- it is no matter and we were
Both lost, so we could find some of our old
Mates again -- Ich cannot abide these Courtnowles. Ex. om.

Enter Zanna. leading Glory. Oroandes Eurione. Zan. Must we part here?

Glo. Yes there are some ceremonies yet to come
-- Ere you enter farther --

Oro. -- To morrow night
No Cherubin will guard the gates that lead
Unto our blisful thrones, these Ivory temples
Will dedicated both to Janus stand
Open in all the Civil wars of love.

Eur. How Oroandes -- thou art wanton friend,
We yet are clothed in thoughts as pure and white
As new created Vestals, such discourse
Will not be harmony -- when fettered in
Your bridal beds, we willing captives lie.

Oro. Nor discord my Eurione -- the modest blush
Corals the Virgin cheek no longer then
The treacherous light betrays her to the view
Of the delighted Paranymphs.
The curtain'd bed presents unknown delights
Clothed in unpractic't nature, which improved
By loves assimilating virtue warmes
The unformed embryo into full blown joy.

Eur. What shall I call this, experimental or imaginary?

Oro. Thy virtue best knows what --

Glo. I see my Lord the active wars afford
Sometime to melt in passive thoughts, your steel
Soft love may polish to a looking glass.

Eur. Yes, and work the waving plume into a fan.

Glo. The stubborn helmet into lawn, and strew
Bodkins and pins for rapiers round their beds.

Zan. Why, Ladies -- though we have been
Immured in steel, we are no Cyclopes yet,
Our joints are supple, though not weak as those
Whose knees are oftener to his Mistress bowed
Then to his God, who measures out his life
In wanton Galliards, and a fidlestick
Knows better how to handle then a sword,
No stand of pikes their bristled squadrons place
About our chins, nor are our lips hedged in
With quickset beards which thatch a Scythians face.
The Soldier when he'th stewed his bowels in
The blood, and sweat of enemies, is then
Most fit to kiss the balmy lips of peace;
His fresh and lusty appetite digests
What glutted Courtiers surfeit on, and makes
They labor his refreshing exercise.

Glo. We cannot doubt the softness your limbs,
As long as flints will break on feather beds.

Zan. Thy active wit my Glorianda sports
In our rude fancies deserts.

Oro. Let her friend, to morrow night she must
Impaled within the narrow circle of
Thy arms bebarr'd that liberty, and then
Her world of Virgin thoughts will all conclude
In the possession of Elyzium,
Her Lillies and thy Laurel both will be
Oretopt by Cupids Myrtles. The Phoenix
And warlike Eagle to a wilderness
Untrod by fancies future steps may fly,
Whilst Venus D^ves are harbored in your breasts.

Enter a Page. Page -- My Lord --

Oro. To me! -- thy business. Gives him a Letter.
From his Majesty.
It naught contains but what must be obeyed.

Page I shall return that answer Sir. Ex Page

Oro. They must not see this, it may contain
News that may ruffle all their calm delights.

Eur. What was this fellows business Oroandes?

Oro. The King has sent for me. Go virgin friends,
This night lie shivering in your native ice,
The blooming spring approaches, which must change
Your snow to beds of roses -- goodnight
-- Blessed Angels clasp their wings about your beds.

Ex. Oro. Zan. Come -- I Will only wait you to your Chamber door,
And there -- leave my best wishes to attend you further.

Ex severally. Enter the Priest of Hymen, two Maids leading Buffonie, Creon and
Lewcippus leading Theocrine, Carlo born in a chair, Arratus with lights and
attendants. Car. Carry me gently -- oh that my pain should so vex me at this
good time!


Being come to the middle of the Stage, the candles begin to wax out, flashes
of light within the curtain, Vanlore in manner of a ghost appears, and suddenly
draws back within the curtain. Pri. What prodigies are these?


(Arr.) The light appears again.


Car. It is some spectrum.


(Buf.) I hope the Devil wo' not forbid the banes.


He appears again, at which the bearers letting fall Carlo's chair, ^un hastily
forth all but Carlo, who lies sprawling on the ground, to him enters one
disguized in a dreadful shape representing the Devil. Dev. -- Prepare --
prepare
I come to bear
Thy body where
No eye shall ere
Behold thee more, but those that share
With thee in everlasting care.

Car. -- Oh! -- Oh! -- I cannot rise,
Some good body save me from the spirit.

Dev. Come -- come away,
Hell hates delay,
I sent the day,
And dare not stay,
Lest light my ugly form betray,
Ghosts may not see what mortals may.
Theocrine above. Be gone foul fiend, there are some saving drops
Of mercy yet hang over him and stops
Thy eager have.

Dev. Oh do not wast
Thy time in the air, heaven his eternal doom
Has sealed with Orphans blood, but will no room
For such damned souls admit,
Thou art called up to sit
Circl'd with glory amongst the blisful thrones,
But he cast down, down, where in hollow groans
His sins shall still complain.

The. Tears will wash off their stain,
There needs no flames to purge them Live -- live then
But only to repent on earth -- which when
Performed, come rest with me.

Car. Where art? oh let me see.

The. That is not in my power to grant -- to thin
Unbodied air I am resolved, which in
This region only hovers
Till time and fate discovers
What will become of thee.

Dev What but to go
Wi^h me where floods of flaming sulphur flow,
Through dark and souty caves,
Where endless madness raves,
Where living flame in everlasting night
Still dying burns, but burning gives no light?
The busy Furies there
His restless bed prepare
Of molten gold spread over with burning flakes,
Curtain'd with horror, and begirt with Snakes.
Then cease, and have unto
Those white souls that have flew
Above my reach, which I have only power
To envy not to hurt.

The. But can the hour
Not be a while prolonged?

Dev. Then destiny were wronged.

Shaking his chains he runs toward him, at which enter the Priest in his
pontifical ornaments, as he begins to read, the Devil roaring runs forth.
Pri. I thought thou durst not stand-to encounter with So brave an enemy as this.


A noise within, at which Carlo rising runs halting forth. Ex. Priest. Enter
Vanlore, Theocrine, and two Bandeets. Van. They Are gone -- and too much
frighted to return in have.


The. Our plot has equal to our wishes thrived.

Van. I am indebted -- brave Bandeets to you,
But will requite it in the like attempt
When ere occasion shall require my aid.

1 Ban. We are so much your creatures Sir, that it is
The child of duty, when our gratitude
Offers all service to so loved a master.

Van. Time will admit but small commerce of words,
My actions still shall speak me yours --

The. Dear Vanlore let us be gone;
They will pursue as soon as they have collected
Their yet unrallied spirits.

Van. Thou art the loadstone Theocrine, by whose
Attractive power the Compass of my thoughts
Directed by thy wit, their Needle, steers
My almost Shipwrackt hopes, into a safe
And quiet harbor of content. Ex. om.

Enter Oroandes alone reading a note. Oro. -- The hour five -- the place the
plain beneath the
Hermits rock.
I have not mist in either circumstance,
Unless my haste anticipated time -- it yet is not full five
-- The morning has not lost her virgin blush
Nor step, but mine soild the earths tinsel'd robe.
-- How full of heaven this solitude appears,
This healthful comfort of the happy swain,
Who from his hard, but peaceful bed roused up
In's morning exercise saluted is
By a full quire of feathered Choristers
Wedding their notes to the enamored air.
Here Nature in her unaffected dress,
Plaited with valleys and imbost with hills,
Enchac't with silver streams, and fringed with woods,
Sits lovely in her native russet, whilst
Lame Art to hide her known deformity
With painting surfets each discerning eye.

Enter the King disguized. Oro. It Is he, but strangely changed.

Kin. Oroandes, you're now a loyal Subject.

Oro. All my ambition never flew higher Sir,
Then in that region of your thoughts to thrive.

Kin. There it was grown to full maturity
Ere thou wrotest man, my Oroandes, but I must
Like wanton Nero either ruin all
The glorious structure of thy hopes, or live
Imprisoned in thy loyalty, thy life
Till now my strongest fortress is become
The fatal engine of my ruin.

Oro. -- Heaven -- what have I done to merit this?

Kin. Nothing but been too virtuous, and by that
Centered affections, which I must remove
Or shake thee into Chaos.

Oro. This language blasts me, sure I have no sin
Ponderous enough to boy your vengeance up
Unto this dangerous height. Did I but think
One Viper lodged in my remotest thought,
I Would tear each fiber of my heart to find
The monster forth, and in my blood imbalm'd
Throw it as far as life's short span can reach.
But heaven my witness is, no flame of zeal
But has been yours in the second magnitude,
My vows of kin to those I paid the gods,
My prayers, but love, and duty, fired into
A holy Calenture. Yet if all this
Like a small Stars kind influence governed by
A regal Planets cross aspects, must drop
Its fading beams into that house of death
Your fierce destructive anger, let me show
The latitude of my obedience, in
Dying at the command of him for whom
I only wish to live. Did all my friends
Look on the object through their tears, the ghost
Of my dead Mother, capable of grief
As of eternity, and yet clothed in
Humanities most frail affections, all
Those rivolets of sorrow should not wash
The sanguin stain of my resolves, so they
If executed could procure a calm
In this high tempest of your soul.

Kin. Thy virtue fathomes not my depth of guilt,
Such a prevention of my anger would
Only exchange the active passion for
Sorrow as insupportable; those characters
Which must unfold the sables of my soul
Are in dark Hieroglyphics hid, through which
Thy strength of judgment cannot pierce.

Oro. You speak in misty wonders, Sir, such as lead
My apprehension into wild Meanders.

Kin. This will unriddle all our doubts -- draw.

Oro. Against my Sovereign! an act so wicked would
Re^ort the guilty steel into my breast.
Fear never yet marbled a cowards blood
More then obedience mine, that breath has locked
In ice the panting channels of my heart,
No spirits dare from their cold center move.

Kin. Will you deny -- when I command?

Oro. Pardon me royal Sir; had such a voice
Legitimated my attempts, I had
Not paused at the encounter of a danger
Horrid as all the wars oth' elements,
When ruffl'd into storms could present;
I would bestride a cloud with lightning charged,
In's sull carreer affront a thunderboult,
Leap through the clefts of earthquakes, or attempt
To prop the ruins of a falling rock,
Yet count all this my happiness, so I
Met death in the white robes of loyalty.
But to encounter such a ghastly foe
In the black shadow of Rebellion, shakes
The strongest pillars of my soul. You are my King,
My King -- whose frowns should be
More dreadful to me, then oraculous truths
When threatening sudden ruin; your sacred person
Is circl'd with divinity, which without reverence
To touch is sacrilege, to look on sin
Unless each glance is ushered with a prayer.
Kings are but living / temples, wherein is
As in the Nations center, the chief seat
Of their protecting God, and shall I then
Pollute my hands in blood, whose every drop
Would swell my Countries tears into a flood?

Kin. Are my attempts prized at so cheap a rate?
Wears not my sword a danger on its point
As well as thine? -- draw -- or I shall conclude
It Is fear, not loyalty, that charms thy hand.

Oro. This stirs my blood -- were you a private man
That only had his better genius to
Protect him, though allied to me by all
The ties of Nature and of friendship, yet
Being thus far urged, our Swords long since should have
Made known whose Stars the brighter influence had.

Kin. I have unfettered all those legal bonds -- draw,
For thy denying now but sleights my power.

Oro. Then -- since there is no evasion, Or. draws.
Witness ye Gods -- my inocence is wronged.
-- But gracious Sir -- Kneels.
Before I fall -- or stand, less fortunate
To see you overthrow, oh let me know
What fate, -- what cruel fate has robbed me of
The treasures of your love: I never yet
Sullied my soul with any thought that might
Deserve your hate, heaven is my faithful witness
I harbor none of you, but such as are
More full of zeal then those pure orizons,
Which martyred Saints mix with their dying groans.

Kin. And must such goodness die! -- know noble youth,
I am so far from calling it desert
In thee, that has unsheathed my sword, that in
This midnight storm of fancy, I can shead
Some drops of pity too, pity to change
So true a subject for a treacherous ghest.
I come not rashly to attempt thy life,
But long have strugl'd with my hot desires,
Stood fiery trials of temptations, which
Have sublimated reason till it is grown
Too volatile to be contained within
My brain, that overheated Crucible.
I am diseased, and know no way to health
But through a deluge of thy blood.

Oro. There needs not then this storm to break down
The bays that verge the crimson sea -- this stroke
Shall open all the sluices of my blood.

Kin. Hold -- or else thou rob'st me of my fixed resolves.
-- There is a cause --
Commands me die in the attempt, or kill thee.

Gro. Dear Sir, reveal it --
That ere I fall my penitential tears
May from that leprous crime expunge my soul.

Kin. Alas brave youth, thy innocence needs not
The layer of a tear, thy candid thoughts
White as the robes of Angels are, but mine
The dress of Devils, I that should protect
Am come to rob my best of subjects, to rob
Thee of thy dearest treasure; I know thy love
To fair Eurione inseparable
As goodness from a deity -- yet must
Deprive thee of this darling of thy soul.

Oro. With pardon, royal Sir, I cannot think
The Cyprian Princess is so soon forgot,
With whom compared, my poor Eurione
Though bright to me, to more discerning eyes
Shine dim as the pale Moon when she lets fall
Through a dark grove her melancholy beams.

Kin. Dorst thou affect her, yet dispraise a beauty
That in its orb contracts divinity?
This profanation, what had else been sin
Will render meritorious -- guard thy self.

They fight, Antellus wounded. Oro. -- Hah -- thou bleedest.

Kin. Oh but too slowly -- if your wound admits
No other medicine, this will near be balm.

Fight again, the King wound. Oro. I doubt that thrust --

Kin. It was a gentle one, and has concluded
The business that we met for.
Now we are friends again; friends till death. Falls.

Oro. Oh do not faint,
Call up your spirits Sir, there yet is hopes of life.

Kin. None -- my vital powers fail -- they are heavy leads,
My eyes are bowing to eternal night,
My heart beats thick alarmes, yet can rally
No troops of scattered spirits -- oh -- oh! -- I faint.

Oro. And I grow wild with horror, wilder then
A flame provoked by angry winds.
-- What shall I do? or whither fly,
To leave behind me this pursuing guilt?

A noise within. Kin. -- Oh -- oh -- be gone -- be gone Oroandes.
Some company draws near.
May thou live long and happy in the embraces
Of her, whom I unjustly strove to have.
My dying wishes waits upon your joys.

Oro. Angels attend your latest hour, I go
From hence, but to my everlasting woe. Ex. Oroandes.

Enter four Bandeets. 1. Ban. S-death! I Will not loose my share.

2. Ban. Nor I, by heaven, although I search
For what is my own through my opposers blood.

3. Ban. Swounds! what do you quarrel for trifles?
Pox on you for covetous Rascals, take all mine.

4. Ban. And mine too, so you will be content.

1. Ban. Another prize, the spoil of this will reconcile us.

2. Ban. He bleeds -- Sh-ho -- he stirs not, let us strip him.


3. Ban. There Is life in him -- let us bear him off.
I have heard the captive Lady speak of a precious Cordial she has, if it
recover him, his ransom may be better worth then these gaudy clothes --


4. Ban. Here, lend your hands.

They lay the body on a Cloak, and ex. Enter Buff. and Gudg. Buf. Oh Gudgeon we
are undone, there is no recovering of her -- what shall I do for another wife?


Good. Shall I let her cry Master?

Buff. Ah, do good careful servant, some of these honest people may chance to
know of her, aloud good Gudgeon.


Mounts on a stool. Good. -- Oh yes -- oh yes -- oh yes
If any man -- in City -- Town -- or Country,
Can tell any tidings of a strayed Lady.

Enter Arratus and Carlo. Arr. What Is this? A hobbyhorse dance?

Buff. Oh no Sir -- good Nunckel be quiet --
My man Gudgeon is only making known my loss.

Arr. Is this thy grief, unpolisht clown?

Buff. Why should I cry my self as long as I had a man?

Arr. Thou art a scandal which will ever stick
Like a corroding cancer on my name
-- Be gone -- Kicks him.
Back to thy rustic father, and there spend
Thy time amongst beasts less savage then thy self.

Buff. Why then farewell, a turd for all such Nunckels.
Come Gudgeon we will even go home to plow again.

Good. Ay, and whistle better tunes then ere we learned at Court. Ex. Buff. and
Gudg.


Enter a Messenger. Car. Oh save me brother,
Here comes the ghost.

Mess. My Lord Arratus, you are suddenly expected at the Court.


Arr. Why good friend? -- what is the matter?

Mess. The King and my Lord Oroandes are missing.

Car. How! lost! -- I hope my daughters messenger has not transported them,
was it a ghost carried them away friend? speak man -- I hear them still.


M^ss. I come not to jest Sir, my Lord, are you ready?

Arr I will follow thee -- how am I perplexed?
Come brother I will see you to your Chamber.

Car. We will not go through the Gallery,
The place smells of Brimstone. Ex. om.

Enter Zannazarro, Glorianda, and Eurione. Zan How sad a change is this! this
morning was
Appointed for more joyful enter views.

Glo. When last nights slumbers robbed our wakeful hopes
Of the delitious births of fancy, 'twas
With fairer promises, else our closed eyes
Had not been then m^de floudgates to these tears.
-- Poor Eurione, I fain would comfort thee,
But my own griefs make me a stranger to
-- That balmy language.

Zan. Dear Sister -- thy passions are too violent,
The messengers are not yet all returned,
Not have we spoke with Arratus, some of which
-- May happily bring news of them.

Glo. They may Eurione, stifle thy passions until then.

Enter Arratus. Zan. My Lord, you either come to share in grief
With us, or ease ours by some blessed discovery.
-- You Have heard what royal mineral let fly this damp.

Arr. Our Sovereign's lost.

Glo. Too sad a truth.

Arr. My largest intelligence lies within the walls of the
City, and there he has not been yet heard of.
Is none with him my Lord?. --

Zan. Yes, Oroandes --

Arrr. I will go have the City searched.

Eur. That has already proved a fruitless labor.
Vain as the glimmerings of our hope, they are gone
Beyond the reach of our industrious care,
Some cruel fate has laid an ambush to
Betray the strength of all our joys in them.

Enter a Messenger. Zan. Here comes our last of hopes, speak thy success.

Mess. Not good my Lord, we have traverst all the fields
That circle losty Erix, and yet seen
No cheerful beam of wished intelligence,
We le^t no traveller unaskt, no Cottage lay
So unfrequented but we found it out,
And into strict examination took
Its rustic honor. Yet our journey was
Often by the dangerous excursions of
Troops of Bandeets obstructed, safe from whom
Our speed not strength conveyed us, all we found
Worthy to fix an observation, was
A place beneath the Hermits rock, which stained
With store of blood, did by that blush confess
So late a guilt, no cloud had since 'twas shed
Dropped tears enough to wash it off, we searched,
The purple grass, but no vestigia found,
'Less this may do it, to inform us whence it came.

Shows a bloody handkerchief which they find to be the Kings. Eur. Oh my
Prophettique fears!

Zan. Our Sorrows are confirmed.

Glo. They are, in bloody characters.

Arr. I will go and secure the Citadel, and cry treason*

Ex. Arratus. Zan. -- Sorrow outgrowes all my resolves.

Eur. And my heart rents with this divided grief.

Zan. This is an act of these untamed Bandeets,
These plagues of Sicily, but if the force
Of Syracuse can bay their power, we will have
Their heads to build a temple ore his grave.

The end of the fourth Act.
Actus Quintus.
The King led in by a Bandeet, Heroina preparing to dress him. Kin. I Have now
got strength enough to render thanks
Unto the fair preserver of my life.
-- Were is she Sir?

Her. Here, ready to second my first weak indevours.

Kin. They then were strengthened by some power above
The common reach of art, my weakness else
Had yet confined me to my sickly bed.

He sits whilst she dresses him. Ban. Let me assist you Lady --

Her. Your change of color argues faintness Sir,
This will recall your spirits -- Gives him a Cordial.
Do You feel no alteration?

Kin. Yes my spirits stir, as if they would shake off
The sluggish weight of weakness, I am grown
Active as if the vigorous strength of youth
And health were wedded in my heart, my blood
Runs as it scorned to be confined within
The channels of my veins, yet is allayed
By th'even temper of my soul. Sure this
Rare Cordial was some deities rich gift.

Her. The fitter to be given to those they love,
For such you are, else my poor medicines had
Never thus effected miracles.

Ban. Am I no longer useful here? if not,
My business calls me hence.

Kin. Sir I should wrong your courtesy to draw
You from the front of time, if ought that may
Concern your self commands you hence.

Ban. Then I will take my leave.

Kin. My thanks attend you Sir. Ex. Band.

Her. How much in every turning of the ^ie
Does he resemble my heroic love? Aside.

Kin. You're sad sweet Lady.

Her. I have a cause, and such a one that did
You know, your goodness would commiserate
My wretched fortune.

Kin. Reveal it Lady, I perhaps may be
Enabled then to give your Cordials back
In some such courtesy as may deserve
To be a thankful handmaid unto yours.

Her. I was resolved to weep away my time
In private sorrow, but discovery can
Not aggravate my woe, besides I may
Venture to lodge a secret, where I have found
Such temperate virtues the souls portals bar,
I Will only with this question usher in
My own discovery, ^s Sicily your place
Of birth or not?

Kin. It is, and breeding both.

Her. I Will not demand what were the Parentage
Where I find virtues plant Nobility,
Yet would be loath to a Plebeian breast
To trust what I must now divulge.

Kin. You may be confident, I am a Gentleman
As well by birth as education Lady.

Her. I do presume it Sir, and therefore wish,
Of all I now remain amongst to be
Known unto you alone --
You never had relation to the Court?

Kin. There was my breeding.

Her. Near the person of the King?

Kin. One of his Bedchamber, and it is no boast
To say as well beloved of him as any,
There being in the opinion of the Court
A near resemblance of our looks.

Her. Then sure my name is not a stranger to you,
Have you not heard of the Cyprian Princess?

Kin. The beauteous Heroina.

Her. The wretched Heroina, such I Am sure
Is my condition in my present state.

Kin Pardon this child of ignorance, my rude Kneels.
And unbecoming boldness.

Her. Rise Sir, we are companions yet,
And hope we shall be, till your royal Master
Possess, what was long since intended his;
By what disaster I was cast upon
This dreadful precipice of danger, as
We are withdrawing I Will relate, but not
To tempt a danger stay you longer here.

Kin. Your care can have no satisfaction but
A loyal servants prayers. Ex. om.

Enter Oroandes and a Surgeon. Gro. Not find the body say? --

Sur. No Sir -- yet by the large effusion of his blood
Had a too sad assurance of the place,
Some Mountaineers have certainly c^nveyed
His body thence to burial; those bloody characters
Are arguments of no less ill then death.

Oro. -- Then I am lost eternally -- lost to all
That bears a show of goodness, heaven, and earth
Will both strive to forget they ever knew
A soul desorm'd with wickedness like mine.
-- My feverish sins dry up the dews of mercy
In their descent, and blast all virtue that
Approaches near me, I shall never find
A Saint in heaven, or Fiend on earth but will,
As a dire prodigy, created to
Scatter infection through the world, forsake
My ha^ed company, as fit to mix
With none but the society of Devils.

Sur. Sir I wish I in ought ^lie could serve you.

Oro. I thank thee friend -- Ex Surgeon.
-- Heaven --
What an unweildy monster am I grown
Since by this act swelled to a regicide --
-- Oh my accursed stars that only lent
Your influence to light me to damnation,
Not all my penitential tears will ere
Wash off the spots from my stained soul, this gangren
Is cured by no Lixivium but of blood.
My heart is lodged within a bed of Snakes
Such as old fancies armed the Furies with.
Conscience waits on me like the frighting shades
Of ghosts when ghastly messengers of death.
My thoughts are but the enforced retreats
Of tortut'd reason to a troubled fancy.
-- Hah! -- am I surprised --

Enter Surgeon. Sur. Sir not by me, I only finding that
You were much troubled at this accident,
Am come to lend you my assistance in
Concealing of your person, until by
The mediation of your friends you may
Open these harsh obstructions of your fate.

Oro. This is a courtesy I never merited
Either from heaven, or thee their messenger.
My hopes are yet not wholly ruined, I will
Along with thee, and in some dark disguise
Expect the clouded rays of better things.

Ex. Sur. and Oroandes. Enter Vanlore, Theocrine, and Bandeets. Van. Now
Theocrine I boldly may engage
My promise for thy safety, we are past
All habitable places --

The. Were not thy company my best security,
This deserts wild inhabitants would fright
Me more then all my fathers Scouts, to whom
Without a blush my innocence would dare
Disrobe my actions, now I fear no fate
So sad as the preventing my desires.

Van. Thou art the joy and comfort of my life;
More cheerful then the suns society
To winter starved Scythians; -- Come my Love
This bed of Violets courts us to repose.
Now, -- now within the circle of my arms
I grasp a gem, by me more prized then all
The worlds five zones embraces, now we live
I'^h' upper sphere of fancy, and spin out
The evenest threeds of all our mortal web.
These are the sugr'd minutes of our lives,
The balmy drops that cure the minds sad wounds.
Since man lost Paradise, he knew no place
To emblem heaven, but in a woman's face.

The. Why thou art wanton friend, this is discourse
For Love that has not out-grown infancy,
Ours now is too mature --

Van. Nor ever will, when we are both grown old,
Thy polisht ivory furrowed over with age
In silver robes on beauties ruins placed
Our mutual wonder still shall last, but I
Must bind up all the gaudy flowers of love
In threeds of admiration, no epithites
Such fragrant virtues separated from
The general name of good, can ere again
Pick out and bind them in due praises up.

The. I can be well content to hear thee talk
On any argument, but a less pleasing
Thou could not well have taken. Enter a Bandeet.

Ban. S-death! Captain, what do you mean?
This is no place of safety, the ways are all beset
With troops of horse, our Scouts beat in from all parts
Wounded and bloody, if we all betake not our selves
To our arms we are lost in an instant.

The. Oh prithy Vanlore hasten hence.

Van. I only fear thy safety. Ex. om.

Enter two Bandeets wounded. 1. Ban. S death! we must be gone.

2. Ban. It Is not our use to run.

1. Ban. Pox on it, the odds is unreasonable.

2. Ban. Swounds, I think they have horst all the Carters in the Country, the
thick skinned rogues my Rapier could hardly pierce them.


2. Ban. But theirs pierced us, I have a wound here yawnes like a Dragon --
let us hasten to a Surgeon.


Enter a Bandeet bleeding and falls. 3. Ban. Hell perish all the slaves,
I Am killed by a rustic dog.
And what torments me most, fall unrevenged.

1. Ban. Poor Brother we would help thee, but want it our selves.


3. Ban. Yet bear me from the villains, and if your time
Permits, bury me like a Soldier, I was born
Of noble parentage, but drove by want
To these unlawful courses, and have this,
This for my punishment -- One hollowes within.

2. Ban. Hark -- Swounds, we shall be surpised
Here right ere long --

They bear off him that fell, and ex. om. Enter Heroina alone. Her. What
desperate wretches do I live amongst?
Terror allarums them from every side,
Their Scouts bring no intelligence but death
Approaching at their backs, and yet
They bathe in riot, and with bloody oaths
Stab heaven betwixt each word they speak, their prayers
Are only for damnation, though they breath
Their souls forth with that fearful wish.

Enter a Bandeet drunk. 1. Ban. -- Dam me -- A short life and a merry.
Swounds if we die -- we die -- let us be
Merry whilst we live --

Her. I tremble at this Villains sight. Offers to go forth.

1. Ban. Whether now Doxie -- S-death! you
Whore come hither -- Pox on your squeamish face,
Lie down -- or I Will cut thy throat.

Her. You will not offer to abuse me thus.

1. Ban. Dam me, I Will do'c, and thou were my sister,
Thy puling shall not save thee.

Her. Upon my knees I beg thee not to touch me.

1. Ban. Thou will be heard better lying upon thy back.

Her. Thou know not whom thou injurest;
-- I am a Princess.

1. Ban. The better, then the boy I beget will be noble
By the Mothers side -- Swounds, will you not bend?

Her. Is none more civil near?

Enter the King. Kin. What villainy is this, --
Forbear unhallowed slave, Snatches forth the Bandeets sword.
This weapon shall revenge her if thou durst
Abuse her with the least uncivil touch.

Enter two Bandeets. 1. Ban. Swounds, help me here,
This Rascal has got my sword.

2. Ban. Dares the thawed snake to sting?
Deliver him his sword --

Kin. I will, so you will promise he shall use
It not to force resistlesse women's honor,
As late he did attempt this noble Virgins,
And if by me not timely rescued had
Made it the prize of his oremastering strength.

3. Ban. Must you Sir make conditions? They both draw and lay at him.

Whilst they are fighting, enter Vanlore and Theocrine. Van. What is the cause
of this?
Sheath your Swords, that man
That dares proffer another blow,
Forfeits his life for tribute to my sword.

Her. This was a timely rescue, and has by
The fair redemption of my honor, more
Then satisfied all those arrears, your life
D'd stand engaged in to my useful art.

Kin. The brightest stars that rule my fate did light
Me to the blessed employment, but had all
Set ere their influence had attained its end,
Had not this Gentleman's assistance lent
New vigor to their fading beams.

Her. I must confess a debt of thanks to him,
Which if irregular opinion prove
No enemy to his own safety, shall
Be suddenly discharged -- You may perceive Sir
How black a storm waits on the lives of all
Your wild associates, wherefore if you have
An overswaying power amongst them, choose
The now presented opportunity
To free you from all future fears, which thus
I Will light you to, draw up your company,
And let those persecutors of my honor be
My convoy to the Court, you will find a Prince
To be entreated, when your advocate
Bears Heroinaes name.

Vanlore kneels. Van. Pardon me best of women, and impute
My rudeness, to my ignorance,
If any service can extenuate
Crimes of such monstrous growth, our bloods shall pay
The forfeit of our disobedience, in
The not performing it.

Her. Your hopes of safety prompts me to believe.
-- Come Sir -- you shall attend us to the Court.

Kin. I am your vassal Madam, proud to have
Such a command to usher my desires. Ex. om.

Enter Oroandes alone in the habit of a Forrester. Oro. -- Not yet -- not yet
at quiet -- no disguise
Is dark enough to curtain over my guilt,
Pale as the ghastly looks of men condemned
It sits upon my Conscience. I see there is
No place affords that soul a safe retreat
That is pursued by a sharp-sented sin.
The prosperous murderer that has clothed his guilt
In royal Ermins, all those furs of state
Cannot preserve from trembling, he looks on
Dejected wretches, as assasinates,
And each petition for a poniard fears.
-- Yet these are more secure then I, they may
Pretend to merit in their wickedness,
And call their crimes the cure of sickly states;
But I am left no refuge, less to know
The depth of horror can no further go.
-- Alas poor virtue, all thy white winged zeal
Is wrought into a bed of sables, since
Leaving thy heavenly dictates I betrayed
My self unto these sooty gards of hell,
Whose black inhabitants already call
Me one of their society; -- my eyes
Are grown more killing then the Basilisks,
And each vein filled with poison, since these hands,
These cursed hands were stained with royal blood.
-- Hah -- all this is true --
But do I want more desperation yet?
Are there not fiends enough now waiting on me
To guide my trembling hand until it reach
The center of my life? -- Draws a sword from behind the curtain.
This fatal weapon slew my Prince
-- This was his blood that stains it, --
The blood that warmed those brows a crown embraced
-- Let forth by me t'embalm the earth, and in
Warm vapors spend the precious breath of life,
Which mounting upwards sent persumes to heaven; --
-- But now thou must be dipped in that which will
Leave a perpetual rust upon thy steel
More fretting then a canker. -- blast all that near it grows,
And as it cools infect the ambient air
With blasts more deadly then the steams of hell --
-- How it pants to come forth! --
Sets the Sword to his breast. -- Hah! -- something stays my hand
My better Angel sure has left me quite
-- How ever I will not do it,
Although that every blast of air I draw
Be more tormenting then the gasps of death. --
-- No, I will live -- live till disvellop'd guilt
Makes me a public spectacle of hate -- and then
Fall with my sins about me, when each tongue
Adds to their ponderous weight a full mouthed curse.
-- The subtle spirits, that like lightning fly
Through my blood, has yet not suffered me
To parle with sleep since the unhappy act,
-- I find them something calmed, and will attempt
To reconcile them in this gentle shade.
Lies down, having lain still a while enter two Bandeets.
1. Ban. We have lost our company.

2. Ban. No matter, we shall find the way to Court,
I fear nothing but how we shall do to live honest.

1. Ban. The place requires it not, at most 'twill be Enough to seem so.


2. Ban. Though we never used it much, I doubt not
But Hypocrisy is an art easily learned.

1. Ban. Come let us hasten, I would willingly see thee
Between the King and the captive Princess.

2. Ban. Her captivity is like to be our redemption.

1. Bad. If it prove not so, we must dance off the
Stage in a halter -- What do they call her name?

2. Heroina -- daughter to the Cyprian king,
Betrothed to ours a long time since, when he
Was abroad in his travels.

1. Ban. 'Twill be a joyful meeting unto them.

2. Ban. Had we not had ill luck, a Bandeet had been his
Taster.-.- They discover Oroandes.
How now, what have we here
-- So ho -- what art? --

1. Ban. Tush, some drunk Forrester, let him alone.

Ex. Bandeets. Oroandes rises. Oro. Heroina! -- A Princess!
-- And carrying to the Court by Bandeets!
It is the unhappy Lady that was betrothed
Unto my murthe^'d Sovereign -- lighted on
In their excursions by these rennegadoes.
-- Poor Lady -- I have spoiled her entertainment there;
-- But I will follow them, and with my blood
Crimson the sables that must cloud the day. Ex. Oroan.

Enter Arratus, servants setting forth two thrones, the one richly adorned, the
other covered in mourning, before the black throne a table, on which a Crown is
laid on a mourniug cushion, before the other throne is placed the picture of
the King. Arr. Come -- come -- see all things in order
The Princess is at hand -- fie -- fie,
This is an unexpected trouble --
-- A way you gross witted rascal -- do not see
We strive to paint our sorrow in checkered work,
But this it is when women sit at the helm of state,
They square all Court entertainments to the fashion
Of the last Romance they heard. Shout and acclamations within.
Hark, they are entered the
Palace, I hear the Cannon --
Go off from the Forts -- be gone -- and make way.

Loud music, the Lord high Marshall, his white rod wreathed in black ribbon,
next him, the King and Vanlore leading Heroina, her train born up by Theocrine.
At the other door (whilst a soft and melancholy music plays within)
Zannazarro, Glorianda, and Eurione all in mourning; Zannazarro kneels, and
having kissed Heroina's hand is raised by her, she saluting the other Ladies.
Zan. The best of welcomes this sad place affords
Waits on your Graces entertainment.

Glo. And we^ to do what service lies within
The verge of our indevours --

Her. I thank you both sweet Ladies, and must first
Employ your service in declaring what*
These silent emblems of a sorrow mean.
I have not seen grief in the like disguise,
The laurel and the sunerall Cypress here
Have wreathed their ill met branches, and contends
Whose leaves shall Crown the Syracusian queen.

Zan. Will It please you ascend your throne, and there
Lend your attention to the saddest story
That ere did yet Siciliaes Annals blot?

She ascends the throne. Zannazarro draws the curtain from before it, and
discovers the picture of the King. Zan. Behold, great Princess,
All but the memory of his living fame
Of Syracusiaes Monarch. She sounds and falls from the throne.

Glo. Oh help -- help the Princess.

Eur. Madam -- dear Madam.

Her. Oh -- oh -- God! --

Arr. Bear her forth, and give her more air.

Her. Hold -- I am better here -- if any thing
Revive my spirits, 'twill be this that puts
Me in the mind of my deceased Lord.
-- Unhappy woman, first to know -- then love,
Engage thy faith, yet never to enjoy!

Enter Oroandes in his own habit. Her. Why stand you thus amazed (...)

Zan. Pardon us Maclam -- had the united dust
Of some dead friend, whose memor(...) ^ear forgot,
Visited earth in his known shape again,
Our wonder could not have arrived unto
A higher pitch --
Let me embrace thee friend*

Eur. -- My dearest Or(...) --

Oro. Stand off -- yet farther off;
You know not what you touch,
You safer far may grapple with a flame,
Or in his midnights walk affront a fiend
Armed with full vials of destructive wrath.
The graves inhabitants, when folded in
Corruption, are not more defiled then I.

Zan. What tends this language to?

Oro. Destruction -- Zannazarro.

Eur. How have thou lost thy temper Oroandes?
P^ithee look on me friend, or am I grown
A stranger to thy knowledge? --

Oro. Leave me Eurione, thou art of kin
Unto those hallowed Angels that did once
Attend my actions, and must now with them
A stranger to thy Oroandes grow.

Eur. Neglected thus! -- Alas -- where shall I weep?

Her. You are to me a stranger Sir, yet in
Your look I something read that may concern
Your absent Prince, collect those scattered spirits
Now roaving in confusion, and relate it.

Oro. I would, but that it has a sound so full
Of trembling horror, 'twill unnerve your joints,
-- Yet I must do it, no other way can lead
My soul from out this wilderness of flesh
-- He Is murdered.

Zan. -- By whom? --

Oro. This cursed hand; do you start?
I thought 'twould strike the blood out of your cheeks,
And make you paler then the act made me.
'Twas I -- 'twas I, that when your blooming hopes
Cheered with the sun of Majesty, were grown
Big with expected favors, did eclipse
The glorious light in a black cloud of death.
I cut the heartstrings of the Land, and fed
The groaning earth with blood, whose purple had
Been by an ancient stock of ancestors
Died into royalty.

Van. Ungrateful slave, why are our swords so slow
-- To execute the villain?

Eur. Oh hold, believe him not -- he raves,
These are the births of a distempered brain.

Oro. Thou have but injured me Eurione
In staining their just fury -- farewell,
Rest in E^izium whilst I roar in hell. Eurione falls.

Zan. -- Oh brother, if this be true, thou have undone us all.


Oro. True -- do not think
It Is any natural distemper that
Spreads this malignant vapor through my veins,
Which naught but the poison of my guilt corrupts.
-- No I have done it brother,
And you are all bound as you love your Prince
To see it revenged with torments, here is a note
Will when I Am dead direct you where to find him.
And now I Have done my business on the earth,
I Will give the first stroke to revenge, and here Sets the Sword to his breast.
Open a passage for your Swords to enter.

As he is offering to stab himself the King stays his hand. Oro. What bold
hand is that?

Kin. One that here may claim a privilege, Throws off his disguize.
-- Rise thou mirror of true loyalty,
-- Never higher in our favor.

They all kneel. All. Our gracious Sovereign! --
-- Welcome -- oh welcome royal Sir!

Kin. You are all my much loved Subjects, such in whom
Never was king more blessed -- Madam
Your presence crowns our blessings -- now I stand
Exalted in the zenith of my fate.
Who would not pass a stormy night, to be
Thus courted by a lovely glorious day?
-- You all are sharers in my heart,
-- But thou my Love -- To Heroina.
The great commandresse of that royal fort.
-- Off with these night p^^c't curtains, no such vail
Shall cloud the perfect beauty of our joys.
Pulls off the black from the throne. Ascend this throne, a place too humble for
Virtues so near allied to heaven as thine.
Now you expect the story of my fate
In Syracus^s seeming Widowhood,
But the full sea of pleasure cannot yet
Contract its swelling waves, tumultuous joys
Cannot be reconciled into discourse,
Till Hymen's topour to possession lights
Our just desires, that eldest child of hope.
-- I only have a promise to perform
Before you all unto this Gentleman,
And then will hasten to discharge the Arrears
(...)and engaged in to your loyalty.
-- Are the Prisoners ready?

Van. They wait at the door Sir.

Kin. Go fetch them in, thou must my dear Ent. 2 Band^e^s leading Carlo.
Meet my first known embraces, in the seat
Of long neglected Justice, set forth the Prisoners.
-- My Lord -- read the Indictment --

Reads. Vincentio Carlo, you are here accused of a murder committed on a
Syracusian Gentleman, his name Vanl^re, the act done by two Soldiers whom you
hired in the Camp at the siege of Ardenna: Guilty or not guilty?


Car. Not guilty and please your good Grace, alas I never knew the man, I! --
therefore I beseech your Majesty to be good to me, I am a poor ignorant man,
and full of grief for the loss of my only daughter --


Kin. That will be proved an act of your own, -- Read on.

Reads. My Lord Arratus, you are here accused to be of confederacy with Signior
Carlo in the murder of his daughter Theocrine.


Arr. Who I! -- why I! -- who dares?

Kin. Bandeets lay hold of him, where are the witnesses?

Enter two officers leading Creon and Lewcippus going lame and bound about the
head. Cre. Oh -- oh -- so weak, I am hardly able to go to the Bar.

Lew. I doubt we shall find it a harder march
To the Gallows, but this I may thank thy villainy for.

Cre. Thou lie Rascal, thou promptedst me to all.

Kin. Read their accusations.

Reads. Creon and Lewcippus, you are hear accused for murdering Vanlore, at
the siege of Ardenna, and being accessory to the death of Theocrine, daughter
to Vincentio Carlo; Guilty or not guilty?


Cre. Not guilty -- my Lord, I confess I was with this villain Lewcippus hired
to do it, by this wretched Carlo, but had no hand in the murder, it was
Lewcippus committed it.


Lew. I hope your Majesty will not believe him,
For the Varlet is composed of falsehood,
In the death of Vanlore he was as far forth
As my self, but for the loss of Theocrine
We neither of us had any hand in it,
It was a plot contrived by Carlo, and my Lord
Arratus, but for what ends we know not.

Arr. I hope my good service to your Majesty
Has merited better then to have my reputation
To be called in question by a common Rogue.
I protest I will sue the Rascal for a slander,
-- I will slave -- by mine honor I will.

Kin. Swear not my Lord, by what you have abused;
Honor (that venerable title) was
Slain when to the law you forfeited your life,
Bleeding to death at those unworthy wounds
Which these low actions to high titles gave.
-- Stand all forth, and attend your doom.

Car. Be merciful -- oh good my Liege, be merciful.

Arr. Swounds! I see I shall be cheated of my head.

Kin. Your actions merit none, yet since it is
The best companion of a Judge, we will in
Her virgin zone the sword of Justice wear.
-- Discover your selves -- Pulls off the veil from Theocrine, at which Vanlore
discovers himself.
Here are the witnesses, brought to affirm our accusation.

Car. Oh let me go -- they are Spirits,
Ghosts -- Hobgoblins -- I will not stay,
This is some enchanted place.

1. Ban. Nay Sir, you are too fast to stir.

Arr. S-death! what jugling's this?

Vanlore and Theocrine kneel to Carlo. Van Sir recollect your spirits -- and
bestow
A blessing on us, both your children now.

Car. Nay it is no point of my Religion to pray for the dead.


The. Sir we still live, and live to want your prayers.

Car. I want my money more that these two Rogues have
Cousened me of, I hope your charity will
Make them restore it again, I am
An old man and like to come to want,
And every one hales what he can catch from me.

Kin. Cursed Miser, the Law will free thee from the fear of want;
For though thy damned intentions did not wade
So far as action into guilt -- thy life
Is forfeited for the intended sin. Vanlore and Theo. kneels.

The. If we were ever gracious in your eyes,
Let us beg pardon for him.

Kin. Their lives are yours, yet justice must not be
Robbed of all interest in them, for your sakes
We'll miti gate their punishments. All Carloes wealth,
That Devil which did tempt him to this sin,
Being by the Law made forfeit unto us,
We with his daughter, the fair Theocrine,
Wholly bestow on Vanlore.

Car. Oh I am undone -- I am undone,
I had better been hanged out of the way
Then to have lived to have seen my goods
Thus gave away before my face.
-- Oh that ever I was born!

Kin. For Arratus -- because he valued wealth
More then his honor, he shall ever lose
Those glorious titles, now grown burdensome
Unto his age, which may betake it self
To needful rest, whilst all his places of
High trust are by the worthier Vanlore managed.
On whom, as but a just reward unto
His merits, we bestow them.

Van. Your Majesty will by your goodness teach Me future gratitude --


Arr. And me perhaps repentance when too late.

Kin. For these two villains, the base instruments
Unto your guilt, since we desire to have
No blood defile this days solemnity,
Let them by public Edict be for ever
Excluded our Dominions. And now we have sheathed
The sword of Justice, let me open wide
The arms of Friendship, unto you that have
Been masqu'd in this Meander of our fate.
My debts are great to all, but must remain
In full arrear, until my offerings paid
To sacred Hymen, gives me liberty;
Whose Altars now we will all prepare to warm
With the purest flame that ere Sicilia saw.
Come Heroina, let us conduct them to
The Temple, where united hands shall prove
Our cares are conquered by Victorious Love.

THE END.

