A Brief APOLOGY IN Behalf of the PEOPLE In Derision Called QVAKERS.

WRITTEN For the Information of our Sober and Well-inclined Neighbors in and
about the Town of Warminster in the County of Wilts.

BY Will. Chandler, Alex. Pyott, Io. Hodges, And some others.

By honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as deceivers and yet
true, as unknown and yet well known, as dying and behold we live, 2 Cor. 6.8,
9. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in Lumbard-Street, and
are to be Sold by William Longford, Bookseller in Warminster, 1694.

A Brief Apology, etc.
IT is not that we love Contention, or desire Controversy, or are impatient in
bearing Reproaches, that we appear thus public; but such have been the
repeated high Charges, and smart Lashes that our Adversaries (more especially,
some of the Presbyterian Assembly,) have of late taken a liberty, liberally and
lavishly to bestow upon us; that we find our selves concerned, to Clear and
Vindicate the Truth and Innocence of our Christian Profession from those black
Aspersions, that have rendered it so frightful and formidable, as though 'twere
only a mere complication of pestilent Errors, as well as to satisfy the Minds
of such of our piously inclined Neighbors, as may be desirous to hear us speak
for our selves, as also for the information of those who may have been imposed
upon, by that dress wherein our Opposers have represented us. And although
these can Object nothing material against us now that has not been long since
over and over offered by some of the same Persuasion, and have as often
received Answers from some or other of our Friends; (some of which have never
yet been by them replied unto) yet forasmuch as those may not have come to the
view of many of our Neighbors, for whom this is chiefly intended, we thought
it fit briefly to say so much as we think may be accommodate to the present
occasion; and which perhaps with unprejudiced Minds may bespeak our Creed not
so unsound and erroneous, Esth. 3.5.
as our somewhat different deportment has rendered us obnoxious and
contemptible, as well as distasteful to those who either ambitiously affect
honor and respect, Joh. 5.44. Mat. 23.10.
and love greetings, or think a complaisant compliance to the Fashions,
customs, and complements of the Age, to be one of the chiefest felicities of
this Life, and best expression of their Civility and good Manners.

We therefore desire our well-disposed Neighbors, heartily to weigh what we
have to allege against the Clamours of those, who to be sure will not set us
out to our best advantage, and to receive an Account from our selves, what we
are, and what we believe and hold for Christian Truths; who certainly must
needs know better our own Belief, than those who perhaps never examined it, to
any other end than to find fault, if ever they did it; and also that you will
not think it strange, that we express not our Belief in some particulars, in
the affected Terms of other Professors of Christianity, but think it more
reasonable and safe to content our selves with that Dress of Language, in which
the Holy Ghost thought fit to hand them to us in the Holy Scriptures. Those
most Excellent and Divine Writings, which above all others in the World,
challenge our Reverence and most diligent Reading, those Oracles of God, and
rich Christian Treasury of Divine saving Truths, which were written for our
Learning, To. 15.4.
that we through patience and comfort of them may have hope, and are profitable
for doctrine, reproof, correction, 2. Tim. c. 3. v. 15, 16, 17.
and instruction in righteousness, to the perfecting and thoroughly furnishing
of the Man of GOD to every good Work, making him wise unto Salvation through
Faith which is in Christ Jesus; containing all Christian Doctrins necessary to
be believed for Salvation, and are a sufficient external standard and
touchstone to try the Doctrins of Men; and we say with the Apostle, Gal. 1.8.
whosoever shall publish, and propagate any other Gospel and Faith than is
therein testified of to us, by those inspired Penmen who were the first
Promulgators thereof, though he were an Angel let him be accursed; all which,
and whatsoever is therein contained, we as firmly believe as any of you do; and
as it is the duty of every sincere Christian, we are heartily thankful to God
for them, who through his good Providence has preserved them to our Time, to
our great benefit and comfort.

We Believe in that Great Omnipotent God, that made and created all things, and
gave us our Being, whom in sincerity of heart we fear, reverence and worship,
being seriously concerned for our souls welfare to eternity. We believe that
Great Mystery, that there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, 1 John 5.7.
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that these Three are One in Being and
Substance: And as do ye, so do we also hope for and expect Salvation, only and
alone through the Son of God our blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST of
Nazareth; believing that God the Father has ordained him for Salvation to the
ends of the Earth; Isa. 49.6. Act. 13.47. and 4.12.
and that no other Name is given under Heaven, by which Men shall be saved; who
being conceived by the Holy Ghost, in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, was born of
her at Bethlehem; 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Heb. 4.15.
as also his Holy and Exemplary Life, perfectly free from sin; his Doctrine,
Miracles, Sufferings, and Death upon the Cross, without the Gates of Jerusalem;
his Resurrection from the Dead, and Ascension into Heaven, To. 8.34. 1 Timothy
2.5, 6. 1 Jo. 2.12.
where he is at the Right Hand of God the Father, perfect GOD and perfect Man,
and the alone Mediator between GOD and Man, and is our Advocate with the
Father, and ever lives to make Intercession for us; and also shall judge both
Quick and Dead: Act. 10.42
All which, and whatsoever else is recorded of him in the Sacred Scriptures, we
firmly believe.

This Jesus, Col. 2.9.
in whom dwelt the fullness of the Godhead, we believe offered up himself
according to the Will of the Father, Ephesians. 5.2. 1 John 2.2. Heb. 10.12.
an acceptable Sacrifice to God, and became a Propitiation for the sins of
Mankind, to the end of the World, and died for all Men, Romans 5. v. 12.18.
as all died in Adam; through whose Blood God proclaims Redemption and
Salvation to Man, 2 Cor. 5.19. To. 3.25.
and offers to be reconciled, and freely for his Sons sake to remit, forgive
and pass by all past Offenses to as many as shall truly and heartily repent of
their Sins, Luke 24.47. Acts 10.43. and 26.20. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. To. 8.3, 4.
2. Cor. 5.15.17. Tit. 2.14. Joh. 14, 15, 21, 23, 24. and 15.10. 2 Timothy 2.19. 1
Pet. 4.1, 2, 3. Jam. 2 12. to the end.
and turn from the same, and shall so believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and
love him as for the future to live a holy Circumspect Christian Life, and obey
his Commands, thereby continuing in his love.

Which Holy Life so much Celebrated and strictly kept to in the Primitive Ages
of Christianity, (that whosoever named the Name, or took the Name of Christ
upon them, were to depart from Iniquity;) we believe ought to be inseparable
from a true and faithful Christian, as ever accompanying a true living and
active Faith; and it seems was thought no less necessary, by those, who
composed the promise, that should be made in behalf of Infants, before they
were admitted into that once sacred Catalogue, (to wit) that as they came to
Years of discretion, Tit. 2.11, 12.
they should forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of
this wicked World, Luke 1.75.
and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and keep Gods holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all ^he days of their lives: To. 6.18,
19.22. 2 Cor. 7.1. Ephesians. 4.24. 1 These. 3.13. and 4.7. Heb. 12.10.14. 1 John 4.4.
This we be^eve to be the bounden Duty of Man^ind, and though our Opposers have
^coft us, and branded us with error for holding Perfection, because (in
plead^ng for a Holy Righteous Life, as that which is well-pleasing to God, and
avouching his power to be stronger in Man, as Man believes and cleaves to it,
^o rescue him from under the power of Satan, than is, that of the Devil to
retain him in Thraldom,) we have sometimes made use of the Words of Christ and
his Apostles, as be you perfect, Mat. 5.48. Col. 4.12. 1 John 3.3.
as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect; he that has this Hope in him,
purifieth himself even as he pure; etc. Yet have we never pretended to a Moral
Perfection beyond what is contained in the above Promise; which is sound and
true in it self, and is that which God requires of us; and therefore it is that
we frequently press it is necessity, and fervently exhort People to its
performance. Neither do we expect to be exempt from Temptations, while we
inhabit these frail Tabernacles, Heb. 4.15.
which is no Sin, provided we consent not. Christ himself was likewise tempted,
yet he Sinned not; for tho both Good and Evil is presented to our Thoughts, yet
we appropriate neither, but as we entertain and embrace it: So that tho the
number of Thoughts may sometimes press us, and the nature of some grieve us;
yet they don't otherwise affect us, or is Sin thereby conceived, i^ our Wills
don't close with, and join to them by assenting; but if we consent, we are
culpable in the sight of God, tho it proceed not to an open immorality. And as
we cannot prevent the forming of some Thoughts, so we cannot wholly avoid the
presentation of some Evil ones, while our common Enemy is busy with his
Baits; but yet the more we resist, and the more the Lusts and Affections of
the Flesh (which is the part that entertains them) is mortified, the more their
Habit is weakened, their Assaults Feebler, and we the less infested by them.

And notwithstanding we have hence been falsely accused, that we expect to be
saved by our own works as being Meritorious, yet we don't acknowledge a Holy
Life as the Efficient and procuring Cause of our Salvation; which we no less
than you totally refer to the free Grace, Ephesians. 2.8.
and Mercy of God in Christ, without any Merit in Man; but we esteem it as a
constant Companion thereto, James ^.18. to the end.
and a necessary ^ondition on our part, in compliance with God's gracious
Offer, without which we may not obtain it, Heb. 11.6. To. 12.1, 2.
being ^nseparably annexed to that Faith, which only pleases God, and is but
our reasonable Duty.

And we believe that although Christ thus offered up himself once for all, Heb.
2.9. and 10.12.
for the Sins of all Men to the end of the World; thereby rendering Repentance
and Amendment of Life prevalent with God; yet that the Traditional Belief of
that alone is not sufficient to entitle us to that common Salvation that comes
by him; but that it is of necessity that we truly Repent and be Converted from
the evil to the good; Act. 3.19.
and therefore it is no less necessary for us now than 'twas for Believers in
the Apostles Days, and 26.18.20.
that we be turned from Darkness to Light, or in other terms, from the dark
power of Satan, to the power of God who is light, that thereby we may every one
know the work of Redemption and Salvation, wrought in and for our selves: For
it is not enough to believe that Christ died, if we feel not the blessed Effects
of his Death, who came to save us from our Sins, and bless us by turning us
from our Iniquities, Mat. 1.21. Act. 3.26.
and gave himself for us, Tit. 2.14.
that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
People, zealous of good works.

Genesis 2.17. To. 5.12. 2 Cor. 5.14. Genesis 6.5. To. 7.5.
For we believe such to be the natural State of Man in the fall, that by Nature
we are dead as to God, at a distance from him, prone to Evil, and to gratify
the Desires of our Sensual Minds, swayed by the corrupt and sinful Lusts of the
Flesh, Ephesians. 2.2.
and under the power of a strange King, ruled by the Prince of the Power of the
Air; 2 Timothy 2.26.
so that our inward Man being thus Dead from God, we cannot exercise our
Spiritual Senses toward him, nor can this natural Man perceive, know, or
savor the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.
which only are Spiritually discerned: Wherefore, notwithstanding our Savior
died for us, we are yet by Nature in a miserable undone condition, in Captivity
to our Souls Enemy, 1 Cor. 15.45.47. Ephesians. 2.1.5. Col. 2.13. To. 8.11. Ephesians.
5.13.14. Joh. 1.9. Ephesians. 2.3. and 5.6.
except we know the Second Adam the Lord from Heaven, that quickening Spirit, to
quicken our Souls, and make us alive to God again, that being restored to the
use of our inward Senses, we may by the assistance of his Divine Light
(wherewith for that end he has blessed all the Sons and Daughters of Men) see
our selves in ^his sad and lost state under the wrath ^f God, and abhor our
selves therefore, and under this living Sense (wherein things will appear with
another aspect ^han before,) cry to God for delive^ance therefrom, 2 Cor. 7.10.
with such an inward ^earty Sorrow, as works a true Re^entance for the same.
It Is not our ^eing sprinkled, when Infants, that will make us true Christians,
convert us from being Children of Wrath, Joh. 1.12.13. To. 8.14.
to be^ome Children of Grace, and Sons of God, and Members of Christ's Church,
and invest us in an Interest in him; it is not learning our Catechism, and
subscribing to certain Articles of Faith, though never so Orthodox, and being
educated in a Historical Belief of what Christ did for us above Sixteen Hundred
Years ago; it is not this only that will administer a sufficient, true, and
saving knowledge of Christ, and really interest us in his Death and Sufferings;
all which People may talk of, and please themselves withal, and yet continue as
fast bound under the Dominion of Satan (who still rules where disobedience is)
as those less perfect in that Lesson: But the true and saving Knowledge of
Christ, is to know our selves turned from Darkness to Light, Act. 26.18
from the power of Satan to the power o^ God, Col. 1.13.
that by it we may be delivered from the power of Darkness, and be translated
into the Kingdom of his dear Son; to know his saving power really to rescue and
redeem us from under the power of him that has enthralled us, Joh. 8.32.36.
Mar. 3.27.
and leads Captive at his Will those who lives in the vanity of their Minds; to
know him bind this strong Man, Mal. 3.2, 3.
to spoil his Goods, and dispossess and cast him out; to know Christ to sit in
the Soul as a Refiner, Luke 3.16, 17. To. 15.16. Joh. 13.8. 1 These. 5.23. 1
Cor. 1.2. Joh. 14.23. Heb. 13.21.
to burn up, consume and destroy, to purify and thoroughly to purge out
whatsoever is contrary to him, to wash us, and make us clean, that we may have
right to a part in him, that being cleansed and sanctified, he may take up his
abode with us, exercising his Kingly power, and working in us both to will and
to do of his good pleasure. The Mind being thus disentangled, and having cast
off its former Yoke, the old things being done away, 2 Cor. 5.17. Ezekiel. 36.26.
all things now become new; a new tender Heart of Flesh according to the
Promise, new Thoughts, Desires, Inclinations, Affections, Words, and Actions;
this new inside producing a new outside also, Mat. 23.^6.
even throughout a new Creature; now in Christ indeed, and ^eally entitled to
those Benefits that ^erue to Men through him. That li^ing Faith that pleases
God, Jam. 2.18. to the end.
and gives Victory, and is ever fruitful to him in ^ood Works, being begotten,
and this work of Redemption and Regeneration thus wrought in the Soul by Jesus
Christ, Heb. 12.2.
together with that most pre^ious Sacrifice he offered up, when his Precious
Blood was shed upon the Cross for us, we believe compleats the Salva^ion of
every Soul that is thus awakened, and made alive, and set free, To. 6.11.13.
by the power and Spirit of him that ^s the Way, the Truth, Joh. 8.36.
and the Life of every Soul that truly lives to God, to walk in that Holy way
of Life, Truth and Peace, Isa. 35.8, 9.
that was prepared of old for the Ransomed and Redeemed to walk in.

And we believe that he graciously waits with exceeding great kindness, and
long suffering, that Men may Repent, knocking at the Door of every Man's Heart,
freely offering, Rev. 3.20.
but not imposing his Assistance to this most concerning work and change in the
Minds of Men; Mat. 23.37.
so that in the day wherein God will judge the World by Jesus Christ, and every
secret thing will be made manifest, God will be justified and clear of the
Blood of a Men; and every Mouth will be stopped, and every Man's Condemnation
will be of himself; for having rejected the Day of his Visitation, (where in
God calls to Man,) and offers to be reconciled to him; for resisting the
strivings, and slighting the Reproof^ of his Spirit, Neh. 9.20.
which in matchless Mercy he has given Man to instruct him, and show, and lead
him in the way of Life and Peace.

We believe, that though the pravity of Man's Nature in the Fall is such, that
the Natural or Carnal Man, that is enmity against God in the state of mee^
Nature, To. 8.5.7, 8.
minds only the things of the Flesh, and naturally brings forth the Works
thereof, and cannot please God, nor keep and observe his Laws, but is prone to
evil; yet that those who embrace the Visitation of God, 1 Pet. 1.23.
and are really Regenerated, and born again of incorruptible Seed, Heb. 4.12.
by the Word of God that lives and abides for ever, that ingrafted Word that is
quick and powerful, Jam. 1.21. Joh. 17.17.19.
and able to Save and Sanctify the Soul, are born into a new Life, and invested
with another and higher power, and becomes Spiritually minded, Joh. 3.6.
and by the Spirit are set at liberty to walk after the Spirit, and bring forth
it is fruits, and receive ability from the Spirit to serve God acceptably, To.
8.14.15.
being now led by the Spirit of God, and become his Children, taught of him,
and through the Spirit of Adoption received into their Hearts, 1 Cor. 12.3. To.
8.13. and 6.6. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. Gal. 5.24. Col. 3.9.10.
have right to call God Father, and Jesus Lord: For having through the Spirit
mortified the Old Man or first Nature, with his corrupt and depraved
^nclinations, and evil Deeds, and put him off, having crucified the Flesh, with
the affections and lusts thereof, they put on the New and Heavenly Man, which
after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness, and being renewed in
the Spirit of their Minds, To. 6.4. and 7.6.
they now walk in Newness of Life, and are really in Christ, and therefore are
changed and become new Creatures; and now think and act under the conduct of a
principle Superior to that which formerly governed them, having their Minds
raised to a Region above that of fallen Nature; so that now the stream of their
thoughts, desires and actions, runs in another current, and the bent of their
affections are after those things, that are above where Christ is; Col. 3.1, 2.
that Eye being now opened that sees a more transcendent beauty and
desireableness in the invisible and durable treasures of him, than all the
transcient felicitles of this World can afford.

^ To. 13.14.
And we believe, That whosoever expects the blessed imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, ought thus to put on the Lord Jesus, and to be thus clothed
upon, and covered with his Righteousness, and in measure have his Holy Life
brought forth in and through them, and know him to enliven and influence their
Minds, Isa. 26.12. Phil. 2.13. and 4.13. Joh. 15.5.
and to work in and for them; and that without him they can do nothing; but
through him that strengthens them, they can do whatsoever he commands them;
that as they abide living branches in him, through that sap and virtue they
daily receive from him, Joh. 15.5, 8.
they are made able to bring forth fruits well-pleasing to God, whereby he is
glorified. For though God the Father accepts us in Christ, and for his sake;
yet is the New Birth the indispensible Qualification, and true distinguishing
Mark of those that are really in him. He that is in Christ is a new Creature: 2
Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15. 1 John 2.6. and 39.7, 8, 9.
Old things are past away, behold, all things are become New. John says, He
that says he abides in him, ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked.
We ascribe nothing to Man, as having any power or ability in or of himself to
please God, Joh. 15.4, 5.
but attribute all power to do that which is good to Christ alone, in whom only
the Father is well-pleased. It Is through him that Men so love and fear God, as
to eschew evil, Acts 10.34, 35.
and work that Righteousness which is acceptable to him; upon whom therefore
Man's dependence ought to be daily, to receive from him such suitable supplies,
as through a constant watchfulness may enable them so to walk, as to continue
in his favor, and enjoy his smiles. For it is not, as too many seem either to
imagine, or would gladly have it to be, that they may live in sin and
disobedience here, and indulge their corrupt inclinations; 1 Pet. 4.18.
and yet hereafter have Christ's Righteousness imputed to them. For though we
are not under the Mosaical Law, so as to be obliged to its Ordinances, diverse
Washings, and Levitical Priesthood, Christ our High Priest having offered up
himself once for all, and abolish't it; Mat. 5.20.
yet are we not so under Grace, as to be discharged from living well; though we
are not tied to its Rites and Ceremonies; yet are we obliged to fulfill its
Righteousness; which Christ came not to destroy but to establish: To. 3.31. and
8.3, 4.
For though God be gracious and merciful^ to forgive us our Trespasses through
the mediation of Christ, upon our true and hearty Repentance, Isa. 55.7.
and turning from them; yet it is not that we should take a liberty to go on in
Sin and Rebellion against him. We are not to sin because he is gracious, To.
6.1, 2.
that his Grace may abound; if so, Where is the straitness of this way? If this
be to take up a daily Cross to our own Wills that we may perform his. Pray
where is the liberty of the Flesh? Those that are vertually in Christ, which
renders them acceptable to the Father, and completely espoused to him, must
needs have resigned their Wills, as an effect of true love, and requisite to so
strict an union; opposite Wills being inconsistent therewith, whence Obedience
necessarily follows. The Apostle John, after having signified that God is
Light, and that those that would know the Blood of cleansing, 1 John 1.5, 7.
and true fellowship with him, and one another, ought to walk in the Light as
he is in the Light, tells the young and weak in the Faith, whom he calls
Children, that he writ those things, that they should not sin; but yet if any
through weakness or inadvertency should sin, and so fall under the Fathers
displeasure, he tells them, that Christ the Righteous is both a Propitiation
and also an Advocate that intercedes with the Father; Chap. 2. and first 6
Verses.
and that their keeping his Commands, was the surest evidence of their knowing
and being in him; but of the strong, whom therefore he calls young Men, he
says, That the word of God abode in them, and that they had overcome the Evil
one.

These things may soon be spoken and comprehended in the Understanding; but to
experience them fulfilled in our selves, is our highest interest, and only can
make us sharers in them. The essence of Christianity, and happiness of
Christians, don't consist in having our Heads stuffed with knowledge, only to
lodge there and feed upon; but to have our Hearts filled with divine love, Joh.
14.21, 23.
which animates us to diligence, and inspires us with courage and vigor to
observe and perform the Will of God; who looks not at what People profess only,
or by what name they are called, but regards the Heart, and what Principle
governs there: People may make a profession of the best things; and yet
continue alive to themselves; they may alter Opinion or Persuasion, and yet not
turn from Darkness to Light, from the power of Satan to God. There has not
been wanting a very large and splendid Profession of Christianity, adorned with
curious, elaborate, and elevated Notions, polished with Rhetoric and Oratory;
but that power and life that reaches the Heart, and gives Victory and Dominion
over its lusts and affections, which war against the Soul, is that which too
many are yet strangers to: When yet to know our lapsed Souls restored from
their first fallen state in Adam, and raised to a station where we may both
perceive the things of God, and receive power to work his Will; to know our
Minds redeemed, and that power vanquished which led us captive, and we leavened
by the Heavenly Gift, into its own nature; as it is the very Life and Marrow of
that Religion, about whose exterior parts the world is filled with Noise; so
it is the proper and most concerning-business of our lives, to find this great
salvation accomplished in us. The experimental working out whereof in the
Heart, by the saving Grace and Spirit of God, that is given to Man to profit
with, Gal. 6.3, 4.
will yield more satisfaction and true contentment to that Soul, that sincerely
seeks the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof, in whom it is begun
and carrying on, than to hear or read all their days of what God has done
through all Ages, for those that truly love and fear him: For want of which
it is, that the profession of Christianity is generally so empty and barren in
producing a real Pious Life, attended with the fruits of the Spirit, and a due
Obedience proceeding from the birth of the Spirit, without which the most
refined Methods of Worship and Devotion will not recommend us to God, who is
inaccessible by the birth of the Flesh. Nor do we believe that it is acceptable
to God for People to sing before him those Songs and Psalms, that were the
Experiences and spiritual Exercises of Holy Men in times past, without having
some living Experience of the same things in themselves; or that People can
properly and truly speak more, or farther of the things of God, than what they
have known and experienced.

Where amongst all these sound Gospel-Scriptural-Truths, is lodged that latent
Venom so much feared and talked of by our Adversaries, that is so dangerously
contagious, and apt to infect the Minds of those that shall incline to converse
with Us, or our Books, touching our Belief in these necessary Points of
Christianity? Which of them is it, that being imbibed, As said Tho. Vincent.
is more mortal and destructive to the Soul, and defiles it more than drinking
a Draught of Poison, or going to a Bawdy House? Where are those damnable
Opinions and Heresies wherewith you have been terrified? Which of them is it,
that being persisted in, does necessarily lead to Damnation, and for which the
T. R's unsavory and uncharitable Expression.
Devil must needs carry us a pick-pack to Hell? Is it in that we hold forth the
infinite Love of God to Mankind, in not only freely of his mere Grace and
Favor, providing a Sacrifice, through which an Atonement is made for the past
Transgressions of Man, who was never at all in a capacity to make any for
himself; Joh. 3.15, 16. Act. 10.43. 1 Cor. 12.7.
which is applicable to every one who shall believe, repent and return; but
has also afforded to all the means of Faith, Repentance and Conversion; for
God requires not impossibilities of Men, but expects they should improve those
talents distributed to them: In not only sending forth the Son of his love to
dye for their Sins, that they should no longer live therein, but also in
sending forth his Light and Spirit of Truth into their Hearts, Joh. 14.16, 17,
26. and 16.13.
to lead and guide them into all Truth; and causing his Grace that brings
Sal^ation, Tit. 2.11, 12.
to appear to all Men, to in^truct and teach them to deny all Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, to forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities
of this wicked World; to rescue and save them from ^iving in the sinful Lusts
of the Flesh, and help and strengthen them to return to their Obedience, and
live a Sober, Righteous and Godly Life; to keep God's Holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of their Lives.

Which Gift from God to Man, the Holy Scriptures plentifully testify too,
under various denominations, as Spirit, Light, Word, Grace, Seed, Leaven,
Anointing, etc. By all which we understand that Spirit or Heavenly Talent, Mat.
25.14, 15.
with which God has endowed Mankind in some degree or other, that he may
profit with it; in the improvement whereof, by a diligent Co-working therewith,
to the answering those holy ends for which we receive it, we doubt not but to
be happy in rendering a good account of our Stewardship, and entering finally
into the Joy of our Lord. Our Opposers themselves also pretend to the Spirit
and Grace of God, or else what means their Praying for its Assistance, and
those plausible fine-spun Discourses of it, wherewith they sometimes entertain
their Auditory: We Charitably hope it is more real, than only to beautify and
recommend them to the Hearers, as what they cannot well avoid, for that the
Scriptures are so full of that Language and if indeed it be real, why is that
a^ Fault and Error in us, which is so sound and ornamental in them? And we
think it very strange that they should apprehend any incongruity in granting
this Divine Principle to be a Divine Light to the Mind; since its proper Office
is to teach and instruct, to manifest and point to us our Duty, as well as to
dispose and enable us to perform it; and ought to be our Leader and Governor.
If the Godly Admonitions, Tit. 2.11, 12. Joh. 14.17, 26. and 16.7, 8, 13, 14. 1 John 2.27.
and Exemplary Lives of Good Men, were rightly called Lights to the World,
surely much more properly may this, whose Fountain is Light, (and does more
nearly illuminate and inform the Understanding, and renders those effectual,)
justly challenge that necessary and acceptable appellation. If then the Grace
and Spirit of God be in the Hearts of Men, surely it is not wholly unactive
there, ^^t will be making some Attempts ^^wards accomplishing the end for which
it is placed there; 'twill be at ^^mes attacking the Enemy, and endea^^uring to
supplant its contrary, for ^^ing holy and pure in its Nature, its ^ver
reconcilable to Sin and Evil, ^t ever strives against it, and may, as ^^en
regard it, be infallibly known by ^^e nature of its efforts. And we dare ^ppeal
even to all Mankind, whether ^^ey find not something placed in their ^inds and
Consciences, which though ^erhaps not regent there, yet never ^ingles with, nor
consents to their e^^ deeds, but always remains undefi^^d, and testifies
against them, and con^^icts, reproves, Joh. 3.20, 21. Ephesians. 5.13.
and condems them for (...); and also oft-times in the cooler ^emper of their
Spirits, manifests their ^ates to them, and as 'twere Reasons ^ith them,
discovering the evil of their ^ays, secretly calling to them to come ^ut of it;
begetting Desires and Incli^ations, sometimes to seek after God, and to make
their Peace with him. Now since Man in his mere natural ^tate, is totally Dead,
and fallen from God, that he cannot as of himself think (...) good Thought; and
that God only ^s essentially good, and as that which is truly so, must needs
proceed from him; Joh. 16.8, 13.
this Principle in us that ever co^victs us for Vice and Evil, whether (...)
Thought Word or Deed, and dispose^ us to consider of our latter end, Prove.
14.13.
an^ often makes Men sigh in the midst (...) Laughter, reminding them, that f^
those things they must give an A^count; that draws us Heavenward and inclines
us to Virtue and Goodness, to do to all Men as we would b^ done unto; to be
Just, Sober, Merciful, Temperate, etc. Must needs b^ something that is not of
us, but (...) pure and immaculate, and of a divine nature; ever aspiring, and
raising the Mind toward its Original.

Whence it cannot be a Natural Light or mere light of Nature, as very man^
would have it, who yet talk of the Spirit of God being in Man; for it is a^
undoubted truth, that no Agent can act beyond its own sphere, and raise its
object to a state more noble that it self, nor produce effects of a Nature more
sublime than its own Original Besides, it is very clear and evident from
Scripture, Job 21.17. Psalm. 18.28.
that the Mind of Man is often lighted by a Light superior to that of mere
Reason, and that Man by the utmost power and extent of Humane Reason and
Speculation, (though (...) may arrive to an implicit know^^dge that there is a
God, yet) can ^ver attain to a true, spiritual and ^^ving knowledge of God,
without the ^oncurrence of a Divine and Super^^tural Agent: To. 1.19. 2 Cor.
4.6. Prove. 20.27. Luke 24.45. Joh. 1.9. Ephesians. 5.13, 14, 17. Psalm. 36.9.
For though the Mind (...) Man as a Rational Being, be that ^apacity or Candle
that is to be Light^^, yet it is Christ that must so en^^ghten it, as to give us
a true dis^^rning of those things, that appertain ^o him and his Kingdom; and
by ad^ering and yielding Obedience to its Discoveries, Prove. 4.18. 1 Cor. 2.10.
to the end.
we shall know an Accession ^f more Light. And the Apostle speak^ng of what God
by his Spirit had re^ealed to them, says expressly, that ^he spirit searches
all things, yea the deep things of God; and that as none knows the things of a
Man, save the Spirit of Man which is in him, so the things of God knows no Man
but the Spirit of God: That the Natural Man neither knows nor receives the
things of the Spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned, and to
that end they had received the Spirit which is of God. The Light of Nature is
occupied about natural Objects, those things that are within its own Region,
acting within its own prop^ Orb; but reaches not to that knowledge of God, which
is Life Eternal, except our natural Powers, or human Capacity be illuminated by
the Rays o^ Divine Light; for the World by Humane Wisdom knows not God. An^
Christ says very plainly and positively, 1 Cor. 1.20.
That none knows the Father but the Son, Mat. 11.27.
and he to whom the Son reveal^ him.

That these strugglings in us should be the suggestions of Satan, that he
should disquiet and disturb People for their Sins, for serving him, and put
them upon endeavoring to be freed from their vassalage under his power, were
absurd to imagine; no, our Savior puts that beyond a Question, when he asks,
Mark 3.24, 27. Luke 11.21.
Can a Kingdom divided against it self stand? And by and by says plainly, That
whilst the Strong Man armed keeps the House, his Goods are at peace, till a
stronger than he comes to bind him, etc. So that it is clear it is not the Devil,
but the approaches of a Superior Power, that breaks the peace of People for
Sin, and that follows and condemns them for Disobedience and Transgression; and
is the same that would, and only can redeem their Minds ^^t of that miserable
state, and bind ^at Strong Man, and break his power, and cast him out, would
they but join ^ereto, and accept of Deliverance by (...).

Nor does its being extended to all Men, through all Ages from their Youth
^pwards, bespeak it to be therefore natural or contemptible; but on the
contrary, of the greater moment to all Men: For besides that the Apostle says,
(...) manifestation of the Spirit is given ^o every Man to profit withal, 1
Cor. 12.7.
the Bles^ings and Gifts of God are free and valuable from their intrinsic
worth; God in nature ordained nothing in vain, ^ut by how much any thing is of
the greatest use to us, for sustaining and accommodating our natural Life, the
more common it is, as the Sun that gives Light to all through all Ages, etc. It Is
we fondly rate things according to our Fancies, and esteem and prize them more
for their Rarity and Curiosity, than Usefulness; but God bestows most
universally that which is of the absolutest necessity to Man. Are not all Men
that are born, Strangers and Enemies to God, in the dark, and at a distance
from him, in the State of Nature, and must therefore be enlightened, Jo. 3.3, 5.
converted, and born again, and beco^^ Spiritural, before we can be reconcile^
to him; shall not God then, that would have all Repent and be Saved, 1 Timothy
2.3, 4. 2 Pet. 3.9.
cau^ the Light of the Son of Righteou^ness to shine upon all, and give measure
of his Grace and Spirit to a^ to assist them in the accomplishment o^ that in
themselves, which they cannon do of themselves, and yet is of indi^pensable
necessity to our Salvation Wherefore, God by his Spirit strive with Man so long
as his day of Visitation lasts.

Since then our Opposers acknowledge the Spirit and Grace of God which also is
Light to be in Man, unless they can show it, by its manifestly different and
superior nature, tendency and operation, to be contradistinct, from that we
have been speaking of; we see neither absurdity nor error in concluding it to
be one and the same grace and free-gift of God to all, which is always the same
in nature, though it differs in degree; and is that Heavenly Treasure, which
God has committed to our trust. And blessed will they be, who rightly employ
and improve it, Mat. 13.31, 32.
and give place and room to this seed of the Kingdom in their Hearts, where,
though it may appear at first contrary to the expectation of Man, little, mean
and contemptible, scarcely regarded amongst the stuff, wherewith Men's Minds are
filled; yet ^oyn but to it, that it may exert its power and energie, and 'twill
grow and increase; Mat. 13.33. Luke 13.21.
let but this leaven have its perfect work, and 'twill leaven the whole lump
into its own Nature.

Be pleased to consider, whether we have justly merited the invidious
invectives of our Adversaries, Jer. 17.10. To. 8.27. Rev. 2.23. Amos. 4.13.
in believing that the Lord searches the Heart of Man, and shows him his
Thoughts; that he has and will remember this ^atter Age of the World; and has
not forgotten to be gracious in performing those bountiful Promises made in
times past to the Offspring of the Gentiles, Jer. 31.33.34. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
Joel 2.28, 29. Act. 2.16, 17, 18. Isa. 54.13. Mat. 11.27. Isa. 42.7. and 61.1.
^n placing his Law in our Hearts, and putting his Truth in our inward parts;
^n pouring out of his Spirit upon all the Sons and Daughters of Men; in
becoming our Teacher; and giving us the knowledge of himself, through the
Revelation of his Son Jesus Christ; who ^s come to open our blind Eyes, and to
bring us, that were bound in darkness, ^ut of the Prisonhouse, who has
promised to be with his People to the end of the World; Joh. 14.16, 17, 26. and
16.7.
in believing that God has sent us the Comforter, the spirit of Truth, to be
our Remembrancer, and to guide and direct us in the way of Truth; in attesting
the sufficiency and utility of the Teachings of this Holy Unction, 1 John 2.20,
27.
sent into our Hearts; in believing that though Christ be in his glorified Body
in Heaven; yet that he is present also in the Hearts of his People; Joh. 14.17,
20, 23. and 17.23, 26. Isa. 57 15. 2 Cor. 6.16. Prove. 8.31.
who is King of Saints, and shall he not then rule in them? The High and Holy
One that inhabits Eternity, has promised to dwell also with the Humble and
Contrite, to revive and comfort them; shall not he, whose Presence fills Heaven
and Earth, be present in the Heart of Man? Shall not he that rejoices in the
habitable parts of the Earth, and delights in the Sons of Men, reside in his
People? Are they not Members of him, 1 Cor. 6.15, 17, 19.
and he their Head? Can there be a more intimate Union and Communion than
between the Head and the Body, Joh. 15.4, 5.
the Vine and the Branches? The same Spirit of Life that is in the Head, is the
Life of the Body also, and acts it; he that is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit; does not the Life that is in the Root, pass to the Branches also, and
preserve them living? Are not all dead Branches, in whom this Life is not?
Whosoever has the Son of God, Joh. 6.56, 57. 1 Jo. 5.12.
and feeds on him, has Life by him; and those that have not Christ, who is the
Life of his Saints, have not Life: How could his People in all Ages partake of
him, if he were not present in them? Surely this Doctrine don't deserve to be
scoft, but is most comfortable to those who are sick of Love, and thirst
ardently after the Enjoyment [not Hear-say] of him.

Consider seriously these things which are agreeable to Scripture, To. 10.6, 7,
8. 2 Cor. 13.5. Col. 1.27.
and with what reason People have derided us for our Belief herein; terming it
the Quakers Christ; as though his manifesting himself in our Hearts were
another, or distinct from Jesus Christ of Nazareth, that is glorified with God
the Father in Heaven, which we deny: For though he be ascended into Heaven, and
sits at the right hand of God, far above all Principalities and Powers; yet is
not he so circumscribed, but that (as by him all things were made and created
so) he is the Life and Fullness, Col. 1.16. Ephesians. 1.23. and 3.9. and 4.10.
and fills all in all in his Church and People. Is the Divinity and Humanity
of Christ divided? Is not their inseparable Union the true and entire Christ?
Can then his Godhead be present, and he who is the Heavenly Man be absent?
What think you of him that appeared to John, and gave him his Commission to the
Seven Churches? whom he describes, Rev. Chapter 1. who says, Behold, I stand at
the door and knock, Rev. 3.20. and 2.23.
if any Man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will
sup with him, and he with me. The same says, I am he which searches the reins
and hearts, and I will give unto every one of you according to your works: Was
not this the true Christ the Mediator, Act. 17.31. To. 2.16.
by whom God will judge the World? And can he make this near inspection into
the innermost part of the Minds of Men, so as no Thought can escape his notice,
if he be not present there? What made Paul desire that our Lord Jesus Christ
might be with Timothy's Spirit, 2 Timothy 4.22. Joh. 1.16. 1 John 4.13.
if he thought it impossible? Do not all acknowledge the Spirit of Christ, who
is the Anointed, to be in his People, and is he then absent? Is its being a
Mystery, far beyond our comprehension to conceive how it can be; a sufficient
Argument, that therefore it is not so? Ought we not in such cases to exercise
Faith? and acquiesce in the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, expressed in the Sacred
Scriptures, rather than interpose with our nice and curious Subtilties? prying
unnecessarily into things that are too high for us; remembering that Secret
things belong to God; and that those that know most here, know only in part the
things that are invisible; 1 Cor. 13.9, 12.
and see them but as through a Glass. Shall Men that neither know themselves,
nor have any intuitive knowledge of the Essences, even of the meanest things,
wherewith Nature everywhere presents us, which are obvious to our Senses,
aspire to those yet more abstruce, and undertake to account for that which is
beyond the reach of the most pregnant Wits to penetrate.

Nor do we thus celebrate Christ's inward and spiritual appearance in the Soul
of Man, with the least intent to diminish the true value and efficacy of what
he did without us, or transacted for us as God manifested in Flesh, but in
concurrence with it, and pursuant to it, for the completing the Salvation
intended in it; neither is it, in opposition to him, as he is without us; but
we believe in him, as he is inwardly revealed in measure, and also as he is in
his own immense fullness without us, both as he is the one Offering for Sin, and
also as he is that quickening Spirit, and immortal Seed by which we are
begotten again, and made alive to God; and the Author of that Living Faith,
through which it is savingly applied to us. For though he offered up himself
once for all, and sat down at the right hand of God, yet it is of absolute
necessity that he thus appear and operate in the Hearts of his People through
all times, or otherwise they can never be happy, nor they receive the full
advantage of his Death. But that he does thus appear and work, is most evident;
for since he is the alone Savior, and none are saved but those who are
Regenerated, that Grace or Operative Divine Agent (that is the Efficient of
true saving Faith and Regeneration,) must needs be Christ in us, our Hope of
Glory. Wherefore it is that we so frequently invite People to regard, believe
in, close with, and submit to him, as he is the true Light, discovering Evil
thus manifested in their inward Parts, for the full accomplishing their
Redemption and Restoration, that they may taste and see for themselves, that
the Lord is good and gracious; and to Christ within, otherwise than thus, a
measure of the anointing from the Anointed, we don't pretend, whatever People
have apprehended concerning us. Which truth our very Opposers are obliged to
acknowledge, notwithstanding they so ridicule it in us.

We hope it is no Error to avouch the Power of Christ to be stronger than that
of the Devil, Genesis 3.15.
that he is able really to bind him, to bruise his Head, and break his Power,
to dispossess and cast him out; to fulfill to the uttermost the end of his
coming; to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to save those from their Sins,
who shall have true Faith in his Name and Power: Surely it is not inconsistent
with Christianity, to believe that Christ can or will, thoroughly purge his
Floor; that he can indeed deliver out of the Prisonhouse, 1 These. 5.23.
and restore Man out of the Fall to God again, and give him power to forsake
the Devil, and all his Works, etc.

We find it consonant to Scripture, and the Gospel Dispensation, to believe
that those who are regenerated and born again of the Spirit, To. 6.6, 7, 11. 2
Pet. 1.4.
have through the Spirit mortified the first carnal corrupt Nature, which
cannot please God; and if dead, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. Col. 3.9, 10.
and slain, and buried too, surely then it no longer lives, but the Mind is at
liberty, and restored to act in a new Life; to walk after the Spirit, and
fulfill the Righteousness of the Law; the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, To. 8.2, 4.
having set them free from the Law of Sin, and Death which is its Wages. It Is
for want of Peoples experiencing this real Birth of the Spirit brought forth,
and knowing Freedom in themselves by it, which no Duties or Performances in the
Will of Man, nor entertaining of the most refined Opinions in Religion can
administer, short of the Law of the Spirit of Christ in their Hearts; it is for
want of this, that People are so very apprehensive of difficulty, even to
impossibility, of living a Holy Righteous Life; which yet is so necessary to
our Salvation, Mat. 5.8. Heb. 12.14.
that without it we cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven, nor see God. Nor is the
way broader, or its Passage less strait and difficult than they imagine; nay,
it is utterly impossible for them to walk therein, while they are immersed in
their first, corrupt unbridled Nature, which cannot keep the Law of God; while
their Lusts and Passions are rampant, their Affections inordinate, and Wills
unsubjected, and follow the Desires and evil Inclinations of their Minds
without restraint. But if they come to know another Principle and Power to
govern their Minds, to create in them new clean Hearts, to regulate and subject
their Wills, to subdue and tame their Passions, to limit their Desires, and
direct their Affections and Inclinations wholly after that which is good, to
meliorate their Spirits throughout, and make them Heavenly Minded, having an
aversion to all Evil, and a great love to Virtue and Goodness: Being thus
perfectly transformed, where is the extreme difficulty now, for the good Man,
Mat. 12.35.
out of the good Treasure of his Heart, to bring forth good things? Will not
this new well-inclin'd inside, that now detests Evil, and loves and delights in
Righteousness, as naturally follow after, and bring forth that which is Good,
as before he did Evil? Here is no force upon Peoples Natures, but they are
converted, and thoroughly leavened into another Nature, and are in their
measures Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4
which only can work the Will of God.

We request our piously-inclined Neighbors, well and seriously to weigh and
consider, the absolute necessity there is for every true Christian, thus to
know their Minds molded and fashioned anew, by the Power and Spirit of Christ,
working mightily in them, Col. 1.29.
in order to their pleasing God by a Holy Righteous Life, having escaped the
corruption that is in the World through Lust; and considering that it is not so
soon attained, as apprehended in the Understanding to be necessary: That with
all diligence they address themselves to the performing that which is the main
and proper business of our Lives. Wherefore as it has pleased the Divine Power
to give us all things pertaining to Life and Godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. Tit. 2.11,
12. Phil. 2.12, 13.
so let us with a vigilant attention to, and co-working with that Grace, which
to that end is given, work out our Salvation with a reverend fear; since a good
degree of attainment herein is soon lost, except there be a constant sedulous
watchfulness upon the Mind amidst all Business and Concerns, to have a check
upon our Words and Thoughts, and a diligent pressing forward: Mat. 26.41.
For while we live in this World, we are liable to Temptations, and may enter
there^nto also, without a strict care and watchfulness; our Senses presenting
many Baits to our Minds on every and, which Satan makes use of to ^eguile, and
many Provocations offer themselves in our Pilgrimage; 2 Cor. 12.9.
against ^ll which God's Grace is sufficient Armor, as our Minds are seasoned
by ^t; so that where any shortness is, it is through Insincerity, Negligence, or
In^dvertency.

Or is it a dangerous heinous Heresy that we with very many Professors of
Christianity, Psalm. 145.9
believe the Universa^ity of the Love of God to all Mankind; that God (who is
good to all, whose Mercies extend to all the Works of his Hands;) is sincere in
his Intention, and Attestation thereof, and does not design to delude us, when
he affirms, That as certainly as he lives, he desires not the death of a
Sinner, Ezekiel. 33.11. and 18.23. Joh. 3.14, 15, 16, 17. Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17.
To. 5.18.
but rather that he would return and Live; that God, whose Love and Mercy is
unlimited, does graciously and generously offer Salvation, through Jesus
Christ, (upon certain Conditions to be performed on our part) to all Mankind,
to every individual Man and Woman upon the face of the Earth; which is the true
Gospel-message, Luke 2.10, 14.
good Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all People, Peace on Earth, and
good will toward Men; good cause indeed to rejoice, Isa. 55.7. Ezekiel. 18.21,
22, to the end. Act. 10.34, 35. 1 John 2.2. Heb. 2.9.
that all are within the verge of Mercy and free Pardon; that God is indeed no
Respecter of Persons but among all Nations and People, he or she that fears
him, and works Righteousness, is of him accepted, and that Christ died for the
Sins of the whole World, yea, for every Man; surely then all for whom he died,
Tit. 2.11.
are thereby put into a capacity for Salvation; 1 Cor. 12.7. See Pro. 1. from
20, to the end.
that Saving Grace has appeared to all Men, and a Manifestation of the Spirit
is given to every Man to profit withal. And that none are Reprobated, but those
that continue to be deaf to the Calls of this Grace, Mat. 23.37
and resist the Spirit, and hide and neglect their Talents till the day of
their Visitation be over; and Christ so withdraws himself, as to cease longer
to strive with them; Neh. 9.20, 26.
so that the means being taken away, they are left to themselves, Isa 63.10.
Psalm. 81.11, 12, 13.
and given up to Hardness of Heart; that being absent, that should prepare,
tender and mollify it, that now they cannot Repent, Believe and be Converted.

If thus to believe, be a dangerous and pernicious Error, we confess we are
Guilty, and not like to be otherwise; for we cannot persuade our selves to
embrace that Anti-evangelical Opinion, That God from all Eternity has
personally and inconditionally, without respect to their accepting or rejecting
the Salvation offered in Christ, elected some, and reprobated others by an
immutable Decree, so that those who are so elected shall certainly be saved,
let them do what they will, for God's Decree cannot be reversed, let the
unstable Mind of Man vary as it will: And those that are Reprobated, were in in
effect damned Thousands of Years before they were born; so that their Salvation
is put beyond all hope, let them seek it never so earnestly and diligently, and
be never so desirous to serve and please God. For besides, that this sad
Tidings, instead of glad Tidings, if it were really true in it self, puts an
end to the whole business of Religion, by rendering all Worship and Devotion,
all Preaching, Praying, Assembling together, and Holy Living as 'twere useless,
by invalidating all whatsoever on Man's part, as nothing contributing (as a
necessary Condition on his part to be performed or neglected) toward his
Salvation or eternal Destruction. We dare not take up an Opinion so
diametrically opposite to the very Attributes of God, and his repeated
Protestations to the contrary, and with some Men thus presume to arraign his
Justice, Mercy and Goodness, We cannot believe that God who is Love it self,
and Goodness it self, and has always manifested a wonderful Care and Concern
for Man as his darling Creature; Wis. 12.15, 16.
(it being disagreeable to his Justice, to condemn those that have not deserved
to be punished, and having no pleasure in the death of him that dies, Ezekiel.
18.32. Wis. 11.23, 24.
) should yet make the major part of Mankind with design to damn them,
unprovoked thereto, without ever tendering them Salvation; or that he would make
the far greater number wholly incapable of accepting the Salvation tendered
them, by putting it out of their power to perform those Terms upon which he
offers it, and then condemn them to eternal Misery, for not complying with
those Conditions, that 'twas impossible for them to observe. Isa. 45.22.
For he don't only call to all the ends of the Earth (which implies all
Mankind) to look to him, and be saved; but he has given to every one a Portion
of his Spirit to enable them so to do; he has not only sent forth the Son of
his Love to shed his Blood for every Man, Joh. 3.14, 15, 16.
to be lifted up as Moses lifted up the Brazen Serpent, that whosoever
believes in him, Joh. 6.44, 45.
should not perish; but he also draws them, and as they will receive it,
touches them with that Divine Magnet that only can incline and empower them
effectually to turn to that Pole, in which all our true Happiness centers.

But this is the condemnation, Joh. 3.19, 20.
that Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather than Light,
Ephesians. 5.^^.
because their Deeds are evil; and hate the Light, and will not bring their
Deeds to it, lest it should reprove them; for whatsoever is reprovable, is made
manifest by the Light, but Men love their own broad ways, to pursue the sight
of their Eyes, and desire of their Minds, Eccl. 11.9.
and therefore hate to be controlled therein and reformed. The Apostle stirring
up the Ephesians to Purity of Life, and to avoid several Evils there mentioned,
says expressly, Ephesians. 5.6, 7.
Let no Man deceive you with vain Words: for because of these things comes the
wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience. And in another place, To. 8.13.
That those who live after the Flesh shall die. So that it is for want of
Peoples embracing the Means, and bringing their Deeds to the Light of Christ in
their Hearts; and heeding the Reproofs of Instruction, Pro. 6.23. Gal. 6.8.
which is the way of Life; for want of sowing to the Spirit, and by it
mortifying the Deeds of the Flesh, that People are lost and sentenced to
Perdition; and not because they were personally and inconditionally reprobated
from all Eternity. God who is Lord of all, 1 Timothy 2.3, 4.
is gracious unto all, and would have all Men to be saved; but they disobey the
Call of God, and reject his Offers, and resist the Strivings of his Spirit, and
are deaf to those Knocks of our Savior for Reception and Entertainment in
their Hearts, Rev. 3.20.
and choose and prefer the present World, and will not deny themselves to
follow Christ. It Is not as these Men say, because Salvation was never within
their reach; if 'twere not, what must we think? Were those feigned Tears then,
Luke 13.34. Mat. 23.37.
that our Savior shed over Jerusalem, when the Day of its Visitation was over?
Saying also, How often would I have gathered thee, as a Hen gathers her
Chickens, but you would not; not you could not.

But if any Men can be so hardy as to entertain an Opinion so derogatory to the
Justice, Mercy, Love and Paternal Care of God, and repugnant to the
Gospel-message; we cannot but admire what should induce them to obtrude it upon
others, and urge it as though 'twas a necessary Point to be believed in the
Christian Religion; for we cannot apprehend how this begets Love to God,
increases Faith in Christ, and raises our Veneration for him, excites to
Diligence, and encourages Piety, which is that which advances true Religion;
but on the contrary, it is plain, that it tends to the indulging some in a
Security, and procure in others a slight Esteem of the Death and Sacrifice of
Christ, as being partial, and casts them into Despond; and probably may
encourage both to gratify the Desires of their Minds to the full extent, since
nothing can alter such a supposed Decree of God one way or the other. Yet we
deny not the Prescience of God, who fore-knows all things; things past,
present, and to come, being at once present to him: so that it may be said,
such who believe in Christ with that living active Faith, that works by Love,
and excites to Obedience, and persevere therein unto the end, and so know
Salvation by him, are in him in whom the Election is before the World began;
and that those who so believe not, but reject the Tenders of his Love, and by
persisting in Disobedience, neglect so great Salvation, are condemned already.
Nor do we deny such a Preference, as that some are made Stewards over more, and
some fewer Talents, according to which their Improvement ought to be: Where
much is given, much is required; and where less is given, less is required; for
God is just and equal in all his Ways, he is not a hard Master, Mat. 25.14, to
the 28.
that he should exact or expect more than the Improvement of his own: Had he
that received but one Talent, employed it, and made it Two, we doubt not but it
had been accepted; for we believe that none are from Eternity absolutely
excluded without any Talent, and that a Day also is afforded, wherein it is
possible for them to improve it. So that though the Grace may work more
powerfully in some than in others, yet are all left without Excuse.

There is yet another Opinion dependant on this, which we cannot receive
neither, as they state it, for which our Opposers think very ill of us; that
is, once in a state of Grace and ever so; that there is no total or final
falling away from Grace. How this Doctrine promotes true Zeal and Piety, and
improves Christianity, we cannot understand; nor see no other reason why its
Votaries should be so fond of it, but because it is concordant to that of
Personal Election and Reprobation; so that those who embrace the one, are bound
to believe the other: But otherwise, certainly it tends rather to slacken than
spur on People to that care and diligence, and constant unwearied watchfulness
to Prayer, which our Lord so much exhorted to, and the Apostles so solicitously
press the Saints everywhere to be found in, as of absolute necessity. What
else means those Promises of Reward in the Revelations, to those who should
overcome, and hold out to the end, but to engage them to a constant
Perseverance? Or what needed it, if 'twere impossible for them to fall short;
whom we suppose none will deny to have been in a state of Grace? And the Church
of Ephesus was threatened to have their Candlestick removed, Rev. 2.5. and 3.16.
if they repented not, and did their first works; and that of Laodicea, to be
spewed out of his Mouth. Who can say those foolish Virgins in the Parable were
not once in a state of Grace, whose Lamps were once lighted and burning, as
well as trimmed, or else they could not properly be said to be gone out. Mat.
25.8.
Or that those were not called by Saving Grace, in whose Hearts the Heavenly
Seed sprung up, and for a time prosper'd, Luke 8.7, 8, 14, 15.
'till the Briars and Thorns, the over-care and concern about the things of
this Life, choked it; 'twas not, that they had no day of Visitation from God,
wherein they might have wrought out their Salvation, had they continued to make
the Kingdom of Heaven, and its Righteousness, their first and chiefest Choice,
and placed their Treasure there, and disintangled themselves from those
unnecessary Cares; the Seed that was sown and sprung up, was the very same with
that, which in the honest Heart brought forth Fruit abundantly.

Surely Paul that Great Apostle was not of these Men's Opinion, when after he
had long labored in the Gospel, takes care to keep under his Body, least while
he Preached to others, 1 Cor. 9.27.
he himself should be a Castaway; whom yet we doubt not, but they will grant
was then effectually called, and in a state of Grace. And the Author to the
Hebrews writing in the Third Chapter, to those he calls holy Brethren, and
Partakers of the Heavenly Calling, Verse the 12th, exhorts them to take heed,
lest there was in any of them an evil Heart of Unbelief in departing from the
Living God. And again, Chap. 4.1. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being
left us of entering his rest, (surely then not eternally reprobated) any of you
should seem to come short of it. Verse 11. Let us labor therefore to enter
that rest, lest any Man fall after the same example of Unbelief. Again, Chap.
6. Verse 4, 5, 6. speaking of those who had been enlightened, and had tasted of
the Heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and that had
tasted the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, (shrewd signs
that they were effectually called, and in a State of Grace) that if they should
fall away, 'twould be impossible to renew them again to Repentance; not because
they were eternally reprobated, but because they Crucified to themselves the
Son of God afresh, because they grieved his good Spirit, and rejected the
Means. Has not the Lord said, Ezekiel. 18.24, 26. and c. 33. v. 18.
If a Righteous Man turns from his Righteousness, he shall die: Who can be
Righteous without the assistance of God's Grace? No Man can make himself so;
it is not in Man to direct his own Ways; and yet it seems it is possible for him
to fall from it, after he has lived so long under its conduct, as by it to be
made Righteous; and one would think, should then be sanctified too. Our Savior
says of himself, John 15.1, 2, 5, 6.
I am the true Vine, ye are the Branches; my Father is the Husbandman, every
Branch in me that bears not Fruit, he takes away. Again, If a Man abide not
in me, he is cast forth as a Branch, and is withered. Surely those who are
Branches in Christ, while so, are accepted of the Father; and yet it seems it is
possible for them to fall away, and be cut off as withered Branches; whence he
often repeats this Condition, if ye abide in me; and presently he says, Joh.
15.10.
the way to continue in his Love, was to do his Will, as he had that of his
Father's, and continued in his Love. But though we cannot embrace their Opinion,
for their Reasons, and as they state it; but own that it is possible for People
to make a considerable Progress in Grace, and yet for want of a careful and
constant Watchfulness to that Grace, they may fall away: Yet we believe such a
State and Growth in Grace, through a vigilant Attention thereto, and such a
degree of Faith attainable, as that there is no more going forth.

Though we speak of God's tendering, and Man's accepting or rejecting the Offers
of his Love, yet far be it from us to assert, that fallen Man in his own
Natural Estate, can of himself think a good Thought, much less will a good
Deed, or in his own power convert his own depraved Will to God, any more than
the Needle can turn and direct it self toward the Pole, without being
impregnated by the Loadstone. For though Adam's Fall introduced no such real
change in the Faculties of Man's Soul, as to subvert their natural order, and
so destroy the natural liberty and freedom of his Will, but that what he wills,
he wills freely, and not by constraint; yet forasmuch as he died from that
Divine Life to which he was united, and thence derived power and ability to
will and do that which was good, he became thenceforth utterly incapable so to
do as of himself, otherwise than as he is influenced by, and assents, and
yields to the drawings of that Divine Grace, which God in his great Love has
liberally bestowed on Mankind, both to illuminate their Understandings, and
also incline their Wills: Which is both sufficient, and freely offers to
reclaim Man, and convert his Will, and finally unite his Mind to it self, and
therein restore to him the power of willing and doing good, which Man never
had, nor never can have, ^ut in conjunction with this pure principle of Divine
Light and Life; but ^e may, and is most inclinable to slight ^ts Offers, and
resist its Endeavors, and while so, cannot experience that power and virtue
that is found in it, where it freely exerts it self. So that as it must be
acknowledged, that Man acts as a free Agent, and as having an Elective Power,
and that God in his various Dispensations treats him as such; yet is this Gift
of God the first mover in all his motions toward that which is truly good and
acceptable to him; which is always so near and ready to help and assist a Man,
(while it continues to strive with him) that probably none that neglect its
assistance, and do evil, but upon reflection, plainly perceive they may do
otherwise. Whence it is clear, Man's destruction is of himself, and his only
sufficiency and help is in God; who never requires any Duty of him, but he
furnishes him with a suitable power to perform it, would he but regard and
close with it.

But that which seems to be our capital Error, and the top of all their Charge,
and that which is to silence all Plea's in our behalf, is our omitting the use
of the Ordinances (so called) of Baptism, and Bread and Wine. John indeed as
the next immediate Forerunner of Christ to prepare his Way, gave an Alarm to
the Jews, that were so secure under the Law of Moses, and proclaimed the
Kingdom of Heaven at hand; Mat. 3.2. Act. 17.30.
and the time come wherein God commanded the Jews, as well as others, every
where to Repent; 'twas not sufficient for them to go on in sinning, and then
offer those respective Sacrifices which the Law enjoined them for the same; but
now the Wrath of God was near to be revealed from Heaven against all
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men; To. 1.18.
'twas not sufficient to deck and make clean the outside of the Cup and
Platter, Mat. 23.25, 26.
but the inside was to be cleansed, and then the outside would be clean also.
The Axe was now laid to the Root, Mat. 3.10.
and every Tree that brought not forth good Fruit, was to be hewn down. The Law
of Moses took hold on exterior Acts, Heb. 9.9. 2 Cor. 10.5.
and could not make perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience; but now that
Dispensation was about to be established that comes nearer home, James 1.15.
and takes cognizance of the very Thoughts, that Sin be not so much as
conceived ^y the Wills joining thereto. Wherefore John was sent to administer
the Baptism of Repentance, as a lively ^igure of that which was presently after
to follow; for John's Baptism was not capable to produce this Effect upon the
Mind: And he himself testifies, That though he baptized them with Water, yet he
that came after him, that was before him, and more honorable than ^e, should
baptize them with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire; Mat. 3.11, 12.
that his Fan was ^n his Hand, and that 'twas he should thoroughly purge his
floor. Which is the great Work that is to be done under his
Gospel Dispensation, to take away the Sins of the World, 1 John 3.8.
and destroy the Works of the Devil, to purify Peoples Hearts, and make them
spiritually minded; this is the proper effect of Christ's lasting Baptism; not
the washing away of the Filth of the Flesh, 1 Pet. 3.21.
but the answer of a good Conscience toward God, to purge our Consciences from
dead Works, to serve the Living God in Newness of Life. The Baptism of Christ
is but one, Ephesians. 4.5.
and those who by it are Baptized into Jesus Christ, To. 6.3.6, 7, 8, 11.
are Baptized into h^ Death, and their Old Man Crucifie^ with him, that the
Body of Sin man be destroyed, and they no longer serv^ Sin; because they that
are dead wit^ Christ, are freed from Sin, and mad^ alive to God, to live a Holy
Righteous Life. These are the blessed Effects of the Baptism of the Holy Ghost
and Fire, 1 Cor. 12.13. Zech. 13.1.
and Benefits that redound to those who are in truth washed by Christ in that
holy Laver which entitles us to a part in him; it is our chiefest Concern to
know this inward spiritual Baptism of Christ, tha^ our Hearts may be Washed,
Purified and Sanctified by the Spirit of God; 1 Cor. 6.11.
and that we really put on Christ, and are in him, who is the Substance, in
whom the Types ended. John knew and foretold himself, that he must decrease,
Joh. 3.30.
but Christ must increase; he does not say, I shall cease presently at once, so
soon as Christ's Baptism takes place; but I must decrease; but were
Water Baptism to continue always amongst Christians, then would not John
decrease: Nor will it solve this Allegation, That 'twas abolished as John's,
and instituted a new as Christ's: for then has Christ his different
Gospel-Baptisms, which is erroneous.

We grant that some of the Apostles did use Water Baptism for a time; but we
believe 'twas rather in compliance with the Circumstances of Time than of
Necessity, and in condescension to the Weakness of Believers in the very
Infancy of the Church, and even the same Age wherein John Baptized; who was not
only a true Messenger of God in his time, but had gained great Credit among the
People, and his Memory and Message could not soon be forgotten; nor was it
easy to draw them from a Practice, that but just before was acknowledged to be
of Divine Authority. For we find the Apostles tolerated the believing Jews to
live in certain Rites and Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law, notwithstanding the
Messiah was come in the Flesh and abrogated them; so difficult it is to
disengage People from those things, wherein they have been educated, and to
which their Minds are once glewed; and some of them would have had the
believing Gentiles come under that Yoke, and be Ci^cumcised; which Paeul their
great Apostle withstood, seeing beyond a^ those things, knowing that the
Kingdom of God was not Meats and Drinks but Righteousness, To. 14.17.
Peace, and Joy i^ the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 4.20.
and not in Word bu^ Power, not diverse Washings, and carnal Ordinances which
were Shadows and to perish; Col. 2.14, 16, 17, 22, 10. Heb. 9.9, 10. Gal. 5.2.
but the Body is o^ Christ, and those that are in him, are in him complete;
believing that if they were Circumcised, Christ should profit them nothing; and
yet we see such was his Condescension, that he himself notwithstanding,
Circumcised Timothy; and when he was at Jerusalem, shaved his Head, Act. 21.20,
to the 28.
etc. behaving himself as a Jew, for the sakes of those who saw not so far as
himself. And notwithstanding he was such a laborious and zealous Publisher of
the Gospel, yet we find he Baptized but very few, 1 Cor. 1.14.
and thanks God that he Baptized no more, (surely 'twas not then essential to
the Gospel,) but says plainly, 1 Cor. 1.17. Col. 1.13.
That he was not sent to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel; to turn People from
Darkness to Light, from the Power of Satan to God, who ^ad delivered them from
the Power of Darkness, and translated them into the Kingdom of his dear Son;
it is this that is of absolute Necessity to our Salvation; he did not then
Baptize because some others did it, which yet is as large a Commission, as
perhaps any pretend to nowadays. Of which we say as he did of Circumcision,
(though we don't grant it is the Seal of the Covenant, and introduced in room of
Circumcision, as some will have it, but without Scripture-authority,) neither
Baptism nor no Baptism avails any thing short of a New Creature; which is the
truest Sign of possessing the inward Spiritual Grace, and of being in Christ;
and is beyond all visible Signs whatsoever.

The Apostles having thus indulged it, it is no wonder that 'twas continued, and
since got footing under the Degeneracy; for as Corruption entered the Church,
and was increased, the Spirit and Life of Christianity was more and more
eclipsed, and the Minds of its Professors grew darker; and then adhered more to
external Performances; and not only continued that, which had been used by
their Predecessors, or at least something (...) its stead; but by degrees added
mo^ Rites and Ceremonies; and at leng^^ began to trim and deck that Religion,
that in it self was plain, simple and homely, and consisted more i^ Power and
Divine Love, than outward Observations: Which in process of time was so dressed
and garnished, that its August Splendor becam^ inviting to others. Under this
Degeneracy in degree sprung up Infant Baptism; a mere Humane Invention without
any Scripture-authority, either by Precept or Practice; wherefore for those who
don't use Baptism, as 'twas instituted under its proper Dispensation, to
upbraid us for neglecting it, is absurd and unreasonable.

But that which makes the loudest Outcry of all, is our Dis-use of the
Sacrament, so called, of Bread and Wine; it is this is that pestilent mortal
Error that in our Opposer's Account, renders us worse than the Papists,
whatever it is that makes us the Spawn of the Jesuits; which with several
others, are Epithets, that to be sure were calculated (though unjustly) to render
us as odious as may be to the People, and carry a great deal of Rancour in
them, and savor of too much Gall, to proceed from the meek Spirit of
Christianity, that teaches to be at Peace with, 2 Timothy 2.22.
and have Charity for all that call on the Lord out of a pure Heart. But
whether upon the whole Matter, we deserve this severe bitter Censure; or
whether those that so liberally bestow it upon us, have a just right to cast
the first Stone, is what we desire our sober Neighbors to consider, and not
judge us also merely from an implicit Belief of what others say of us. We are
not ignorant of the great Noise and Stir there has been about this in
Christendom, to the scandalizing Christianity among both Jews and Turks: The
Papists have improved it to downright ^dolatry, affirming it is the real Body
and Blood, and as such adore it; (one would think 'twere better let a^one:)
Others, that Christ is in it, though they know not how: One faith it is this,
another it is that; while they all seem to expect that from it, which ^t does
not necessarily administer; for want of distinguishing between that Bread of
Life that came down from Heaven, Joh. 6.51, 56.
(that Flesh and Blood of Christ that gives Life to all that fee^ thereon, by
which they dwell in him and he in them;) and that Supper which was eaten by the
Primitive Christians, in Commemoration of his Death and Sacrifice; which are
not so con^ next, as that the one, necessarily in cludes the other, as
Experience abundantly testifies; would People but b^ true to themselves herein:
how man^ are there that receive this from Yea^ to Year, who yet complain all
their Lives of Deadness, Dryness and Leanness of Soul, and want of Power; no^
receiving that renewing of Life, and Spiritual Strength that is proposed i^ it,
and so but an empty Shadow indeed: For how can they in truth expect to feed on
Christ Spiritually i^ their Hearts, Joh. 14.20, 21, 23.
who will not admit tha^ he really dwells in his Saints, but esteem it an Error
in those that do However, we believe all People ough^ to be well persuaded in
their ow^ Minds, and seriously considerate in these and other Religious
Practices; and no^ take up things merely traditionally because others do it;
nor ought they to be vehemently pressed to or against things not absolutely
essential to Salvation, in which their Understandings are not clear: Nor should
any be scoft or reproacht for those things which to them are Matter of
Conscience, (and therefore Sacred; though to others it may appear of less
moment) a Practice that ^s a great Shame among People professing Christianity.
Nor do we judge and condemn those that are found in the Practice either of this
or Water Baptism, as 'twas primitively used; whose Sober, Christian,
Circumspect Lives, witnesses to their sincere Intentions herein, who may be
conscienciously tender in it, and fearful to omit it, till they are otherwise
fully persuaded: But for us, to whom the bar^enness and emptiness of these
outward visible Things are manifest, we cannot continue therein; they yielding
no true Soul-satisfaction, nor administering any ^nward Spiritual Grace to us. 1
Pet. 2.2, 3.
Wherefore having tasted that the Lord is good and gracious, we wait for the
sincere Milk of that Word, by which we have been begotten to God, that we may
receive strength thereby, 2 Pet. 3.18.
and grow in Grace, and the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and a greater
Acquaintance with that true inward Spiritual Communion and Fellowship with him,
wherein he sups with his Saints and they with him, Rev. 3.20.
and receive Life by him, who dwells in them, and they in him; as the Members
are joined to the Head, Ephesians. 5.30. Joh. 15.5.
and partake of its Life, and live by it; or the Branches to the vine, which
receive Life, Virtue and Nourishment from him, whereby Fruit is brought forth
to the glory of God and well-pleasing to him. It Is not sufficient that we
participate hereof once a Month or Quarter, but as the Jew^ had their Manna,
Exodus 16.21.
fresh every Morning so ought we to receive a daily Supply, and renewing of
Strength in our inward Man, by eating that Heavenly Bread, that nourishes up
to Eternal Life, and drinking plentifully of that Well of Living-Water, Joh.
4.14.
which in the Saints springs up to Life Eternal; for as in God we live, move,
and have our very being; so is Christ the true and proper Life of the inward
Man, by which it truly lives to God, nor can it live but by him. Those that are
begotten to God by the Word of Life, and are born again of the Spirit, are
prlvileged thus to feed on Christ, and enjoy him; which none can do that are
not first quickened and made alive by him; none can receive Life, Sap and
Virtue from him as Head and Vine, that are not first joined to him as Members
and Branches of him; nor is it sufficient to make People Members of Christ, and
give them admittance to feed on him, in that they were sprinkled when Infants,
etc. as we have already expressed, though they should eat Bread, and drink Wine
all their Days.

Since then we no less enjoy the Substance without the Sign, why may we not
omit it, as either being but temporary, or not of absolute necessity; as well
as our Opposers do that which was instituted (to use their own term) at the
same time, and with as great solemnity, and greater formality, and was no less
positively commanded under the same pretense? Why may not the same Authority
absolve us from the use of this, and exempt us from being chargeable with the
breach of a Command of Christ, as discharge them from washing one another
Feet, Jo. 13.4, 5, 8, 14, 15.
and secure them from the like censure? As also that of the Apostles, Acts
15.20, 29.
concerning things strangled and Blood; and that of James, Jam. 5.14, 15.
anointing the Sick with Oil? Why should they be thus partial? Have we not good
reason to conclude, that if these had not been long since laid down, they would
have cleav'd as close to them; and that had those of Baptism, and Bread and
Wine been then discontinued also, they would be now as easy under its
omission? For Tradition, Custom and Education, makes greater impressions on
Men's Minds, than perhaps every one may be sensible of; nor is it an easy task
at first, to move them from those things to which they have been fastened by it.
Would but People wholly relinquish these Prejudices, and consider it
impartially; it is probable there may appear no such real difference, as justly
to omit the one, and yet with equal reason to continue the other; since it is
not that Bread that gives Life to the Soul, nor does necessarily include it;
but that Christ may be and is received, and fed on without it. Nor that those
can be thought to forget his Death and Sacrifice, Tit. 2.14.
who sensibly partake of the Benefits thereof, and pursue its Ends; who are
taught and assisted by him to live a Godly Righteous Life, Gal. 1.4.
and bear about in them the Marks of the Dying of our Lord Jesus; who died for
all, Mat. 1.21. 2 Cor. 5.15.
that those who live, should no longer live to themselves, fulfilling the
Desires of their Minds, but to him that died for them; Phil. 3.10.
that through the power of his Resurrection they may mortify the Deeds of the
Flesh, and have Fellowship with his Sufferings, in whom his Life is made
manifest. Neither can those who acknowledge his Death and Sacrifice, and
partake from time to time of this Bread and Wine in memory of it, and yet are
not by him redeemed from a vain Conversation, and made conformable to his
Death, and so feed on him, as to participate of that Life that comes by him, in
any wise escape Damnation, let their Pretensions be what they will.

Since then God has replenished our Hearts with his Grace, and has not
withheld his Heavenly Manna from us, but daily owns us by his comfortable
Presence, to our great satisfaction, under the Omission of these things;
supplying our Wants and Necessities, as we have recourse unto him, in that
which ever has access unto him, having our continual Dependancy on him, who
enables and strengthens those of us For we intend not to Apologize for those
who though they may be called by our Name, yet live loosly and walk disorderly,
and are Blemishes and a Grief to us; which yet ought to be imputed to their
Insincerity or Unwatchfulness, and not to the Insufficiency of the Principle
they pretend to.
that retain our Primitive Sincerity and Integrity, to lead a Sober, Pious,
Christian Life, as becomes the Gospel of Christ, which is the certain Product
of Spiritual Grace; and forasmuch as our Opposers acknowledge it to be but an
outward visible Sign, and dare not say that the inward Spiritual Grace is tied
to it, nor that it is of absolute necessity to Salvation; with what Reason do
they Unchristian us, and so load us with Calumnies and Accusations on this
Account; using it as an Instance to blacken us, and condemn in gross our whole
Christian Profession, principally from hence; as though 'twere the chief thing
that constitutes a Christian, and entitles him to the Benefits that come by
Christ.

What shall we think then of perhaps more than Two parts in Three of their own
Assembly, who no more practice this than do we, and yet are many of them as
sober People, and if we may know (as Christ directs us,) by their Fruits, are
doubtless as near the Kingdom, and no less in a State of Grace, than are those
who so exult in, and value themselves upon this Performance; which however it
may bound and distinguish particular Societies and Communions, it is certain no
Observations nor Performances short of being ruled and governed by the Spirit
of Christ, as Head, can entitle us to a Membership in him; we may make a
specious show, and carry a System of Divinity in our Heads; but if he rules not
our Hearts, we are none of his. 'Twere well they were as thoughtful to fulfill
all Righteousness in every respect, and as zealously careful and concerned to
observe and punctually perform all the Commands and Injunctions to which the
Christian Religion obliges them, and to qualify themselves to be rightful
Inheritors of those Blessings and Promises pronounced by our Savior, as they
tenaciously adhere to this; as though 'twere indeed the Sum both of Men's Duty
and Enjoyments, and that their Salvation turned upon this very Pin; which yet
People may perform, while their Wills are unsubdued, and Lusts unmortified. But
we find that Men have been apt enough to be busily employed about Mint, Annis,
and Cummin, whilst they neglect the weightier Matters, to run into, and cry up,
and maintain those exterior parts of Religion, that are reconcilable to an
Unconverted State.

If the Professors of Christianity were less taken up about Signs and Shadows,
and nice and unnecessary Scrutinies and Distinctions, wherewith they perplex
it, and more devoted to observe the weighty, important, and indispensable
Precepts of Christ, and demonstrate the Power that Christianity has over their
Minds, by affording signal Instances of their being his true Disciples, and
rightful Heirs of his Kingdom, being in measure invested with his Divine
Virtues and Graces; we should have less Envy, Variance, Backbiting, and
Detraction, which weaken the common Interest and Piety, and give our common
Enemy an advantage; and more Christian Love, Peace, Concord and good
Neighborhood amongst us. If all that mean well, did but pursue Virtue, love
it, and encourage it, wherever it appears; and hate Vice and Evil in all, and
discountenance it every where; and make these the Measures of their Christian
Charity, rather than Parallel Opinions in lesser Matters, 'twould bring us
nearer together, and more advance True Piety, than all their contending about
different Apprehensions in things far less essential. God, who regards not
Names, but Natures, knows among all Nations and People who are his; and the
Rule he left us to know also, was their Fruits, their Actions being the
exertion of their Wills; all Mankind are either under the Power and Conduct of
the Spirit of God, or else of the Devil; all are either Carnal or
Spiritual-minded; and as is the spring and bent of their Desires and
Affections, so is their Actions; each Birth have their proper Products, which
are contrary to each other. So that let what Notions or Opinions soever possess
Men's Heads, they live according to that Spirit and Principle that governs their
Hearts. We cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles; no Fountain
sends forth bitter Water and sweet at the same time It Is an Evangelical Truth,
Gal. 5.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
Those that live in Envy and Strife, and bring forth the Fruits of the Flesh,
are of their Father the Devil; Ephesians. 5.9.
and those who by the Spirit, mortify those corrupt Lusts and Affections, and
bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit, adorning the Doctrine of God our Savior,
by a Sober, Godly, Righteous Life, are of God; 1 John 3.10.
for herein the Children of God are manifest from the Children of the Devil.

Thus have we heartily, though briefly, expressed our real Opinion and Belief in
those Points, in which we apprehend our Adversaries have endeavored most to
expose us; which we hope may prove satisfactory to those, who are not resolved
to think ill of us: But to speak fully to every critical, trifling Objection,
were a tedious Task, as well as vastly beyond the Extent of our Design. We
request our serious Neighbors to hear and see for themselves, and not take
things upon trust from others, and judging the things they know not, condemn us
by hearsay. Don't be imposed upon, by those whose peevish Humors would have
all do like themselves; who either look not at all, or but very coyly into the
Books of those, they have taken a Pet against, whose Persuasion in some things
differs from what they have pronounced Orthodox; as though Truth were their
peculiar enclosure; which yet certainly argues either a great deal of
Prejudice, or a feeble and fleeting Judgment, that dares not trust it self.
Were our Books stuffed with such palpable Errors as is suggested, surely 'twere
not so dangerous Reading them: Who fears to read the Alchoran? But on the
contrary, it is a strong indication that they contain much truth; for as it is
the proper Object of the Understanding; so where it appears with a clear
Evidence, answering to Peoples own Experience, it is very forcible and prevalent
upon the Minds of those who diligently seek it for love of it, and willingly
deposit all pre-ingagements of Mind in its disquisition. Be then so just to us,
and kind to your selves, as to relinquish all Prejudice and Prepossessions, and
impartially examine the truth of these things; search the Sacred Scriptures
diligently, with an inclination rather to find and embrace Truth, than to
support a received Opinion; try whether it is so or not; comparing it with your
own Experiences, and the Witness of God in your own Hearts. Though our Belief
in some of these Particulars don't exactly quadrate to that of our Opposers, it
don't therefore necessarily follow, it is not agreeable to Truth and Scripture:
Nor can they give us any infallible assurance, that their Conceptions are a
true Standard of Truth, notwithstanding they vend their Apprehensions as the
only Orthodox; yes, and are displeased too with those that cannot be determined
by them.

We have no Design carrying on behind the Curtain, howsoever our Sober
Demeanor may be uncharitably (not to say maliciously) insinuated as only a
Cover of Sheeps Clothing upon the Wolves Nature; and our most Solemn
Declaration of our Belief in several Religious Points (being undeniable
Truths,) construed, and suggested by some Men as only a fair Cover wherewith we
guild over our Poison, that it may pass the less suspected, and be the more
glibly swal^owed. What think you, is not this ^he height of Prejudice, and
Envy in ^he abstract? Would they themselves be content to be thus interpreted?
We have no intent to decoy and tra^an People, that we should walk under a
Disguise; which Intreagues usually have interest at one end of them, which
cannot be our case, who neither give nor take Money for Preaching? so that the
increase of our Numbers will not fill our Coffers. We have no other Interest to
promote, but the Advancement of True Piety and Christianity: And having Love
and Good Will to all People, more especially to those whose Minds are awakened,
and Hearts warmed, having true fervent Desires, and living Breathings toward
God, thirsting after a nearer and more satisfactory knowledge of, and
acquaintance with him, than barely a profession and hearsay of him; and
therefore what we have found advantageous, assistant and satisfactory to us, in
our unwearied pursuit after Peace with him, that we recommend to others. We
call People home to the Gift of God in themselves, which only can do them good;
that every one may know the good Shepherd and Bishop of Souls for themselves,
and hear and know his Voice in them, from that of a Stranger, and learn of him,
and follow him, who is pure, and ever leads to Purity and Holiness; that so his
offering up of himself for them, may be of benefit to them, and they experience
the great Salvation of God. For impress this upon your Minds, and take it along
with you; That notwithstanding our Savior has paid a Ransom for us, and made
an Atonement through the precious Blood of his Cross; yet if we experience not
the end of his Coming, and Death effected, and answered in our selves, it shall
avail us nothing; except we know him a Savior and Supporter near; except we
know a Principle of Divine Light and Life, to illuminate our Minds, to revive
and warm our languishing Hearts, to beget and increase true Love to God, and
the living Faith that gives Victory, to convert us, and govern our Thoughts, to
renew and regulate our Wills, and limit our Desires, and bridle our Tongues, to
excite holy Inclinations, and keep up a due Heat in our Christianity, and
strengthen our Minds in that which is good and well-pleasing to God: Except we
know these things in and for our selves, all our outside show of Religion is
but vain, and our profession of Christ shall profit us nothing; but we shall
lie down in sorrow at last. For none are Christ's, To. 8.9, 14.
but those that have his Spirit, and are influenced by it; nor are any Children
of God, but those that are led by the Spirit of God; which begets in the Mind a
detestation of Sin and Evil, and a love to Purity, Goodness and Virtue.
Wherefore, laying aside all Strife and Animosities, all Envying and
Evil-speaking, let us abhor that which is Evil, To. 12.9.
and cleave to that which is Good, and address our selves with a due and humble
Application to the accomplishment of that most concerning and important Affair
of our Lives, the working out our Salvation. And let every one follow the Lord
faithfully, according to what is made known to them; knowing that we shall be
judged according to our Knowledge, and that 'twill be happy for those whose
Wills and Performances correspond with their Understandings, in that Day when
all must stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and give an Account of their
Deeds done in the Body, and receive a Sentence thereafter, either, Come ye
blessed, or Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity. It will not be then of what
Congregation or Confession of Faith, or of what Persuasion amongst the many
wast thou: Among all which there will then be but Two sorts, the Sheep and the
Goats; those that heard the Shepherd's Voice, and followed him, who were guided
and governed by the good Spirit of God in their Hearts; and those who wrapping
their Talent in a Napkin, stifled Convictions, and neglecting the Day of their
Visitation, continued under the dark Power of the Evil One. One may go a great
way, and make a fair show of Religion and Piety, and yet be turned to the left
Hand; it is not having our Heads filled with curious sublime Notions, though of
never so fine and elevated a Speculation; let us trim and garnish our Lamps
never so finely, 'twill not administer an entrance without the Heavenly Oil,
without that Holy Divine Unction fills our Hearts, enlightens our Minds, and
inslames our Affections to a due Watchfulness and Obedience to its Teachings;
which are the most assured Marks of our being really in Christ, in whom only
our acceptance is.

That you with us, and we with you, may so circumspectly live up to our Light
and Knowledge given by Christ, as that our Consciences may not condemn us; but
that, having finished our Days here with comfort, we may lay down our Heads in
Peace, with a well-grounded Hope of a Joyful Resurrection, and have Boldness in
the Day of Judgment; is our Hearty Desire.

For howsoever People may have been possessed with the contrary, by those who
probably have left nothing unattempted, which their invention could supply, to
fix an Odium, and scare People from us, we believe the Resurrection as
delivered to us in the Holy Scriptures; and our Adversaries cannot reasonably
pretend to know more; in which we willingly acquiess; content that Faith supply
the defect of Demonstration; esteeming it consentaneous to Reason, to forbear
even the most abstracted reasoning about that which is above Reason. We doubt
not in the least either the reality or excellency of it; but our great care,
and necessary concern is, that if by any means we may attain to the
Resurrection of the Just; and then it is sufficient that when our Lord appears,
we shall be like him: 1 John 3.2, 3.
Which hope, and expectation ought to excite in all, most servent Desires, and
vigorous Pursuits after Purity and Holiness.

If what we have Written for your Information, may find some place with those,
who being impartial, and inquiring, have room to receive it, and that it
contributes to their Benefit and Satisfaction, we have our End: But for those
who are full, or are Critical, and ready to Carpe at every Word or Sentence
that is not placed to their Mind, if not also pre-judge it, as it is not
intended for them; so we don't suppose 'twill prove to their good Liking, nor
meet with a Reception amongst them. For we don't propose to reconcile our whole
Belief and Persuasion in Religious Matters to that of our Opposers; who
notwithstanding, what we have writ, we expect will yet accuse us of Error.
However, having thus far declared our selves in the most necessary Points of
the Christian Religion, we don't think our selves farther obliged to answer the
Cavils and Criticisms of such who may appear Contentious, and will never want
something to object against those that comes not up in all things exactly to
their Level. Whom yet we advise, rather to be quiet, and study to know and
govern themselves, according to that Religion that is Pure and Undefiled before
God, Jam. 1.27.
and leads to Visit and Assist the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction,
and to keep themselves from the Spots and Defilements of this World. Were this
(as it ought) our Principal Care and Concern in our Conduct, we should have
little mind or leisure to differ about Matters of less moment: And while we
seem zealously to contend about Religion, frustrate its end. We should not be
taken up in disputing what that Principle is, which God has placed in us to do
us good, and in mean time neglect its Assistance, and obstruct its Operation
upon the Mind; but be given up to be leavened and changed by it, tha^ we may
partake of the Blessings there of; 1 Cor. 3.11, 12, 13, 14.
and with it build on the Foundation which God has laid, that which may abide
the fiery Trial, To which we recommend you, and remain your peaceable and
loving Neighbors,

W. C. A. P. J. H, etc.

THE END.

