THE CONSTITUTION OF THE ffice of Land-Credit, DECLARED IN A DEED
By Hugh Chamberlen Senior, M. D. and Others, Joint Undertakers and Managers
thereof; Enrolled in Chancery, Anno Dom. 1696.
The Parties.
1. TO all, to whom these Presents shall come, Hugh Chamberlen Senior, of
Essex-street, in the Parish of St. Clement-Danes, in the County of Midlesex,
Doctor in Physic: And, as Honorary Managers of the Undertaking, herein and
hereby Mentioned and Intended, viz. The Right Honorable Charles Earl of
Monmouth; Arthur Earl of Torrington; Henry Earl of Romney; Charles Earl of
Arran of the Kingdom of Ireland, and Baron of Weston in England; Robert Lord
Viscount Lisle, Son and Heir Apparent to the Right Honorable Philip Earl of
Leicester; Thomas Lord Wentworth, Baron of Raby; Almeric Lord De Courcy, Baron
of Kinsale, of the Kingdom of Ireland; Hildebrand Lord Allington Baron of
Killard, of the Kingdom of Ireland; The Honorable Peregrin Bertie Esquire,
Vice Chamberlain to his Majesty; And William Bridgeman Esquire, Secretary to
the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty: And likewise as,
Undertakers and fixed and constant Managers, of the said herein and hereby
mentioned and intended Undertaking, viz. The Honorable Charles Egerton of
Lincolns Inn, in the said County of Middlesex; Thomas Aston of Aston, in the
County Palatin of Chester; John Weston of Ockham, in the County of Surry; Peter
Smith of the Parish of St. Ann, in the Liberty of Westminster, in the said
County of Middlesex; Oliver Salusbury, of the middle Temple, London; Richard
Robinson, of the Parish of St. Giles in the Feilds, in the said County of
Middlesex, Esquires; Andrew Prime Senior, of London, Merchant; Samuel White of
Lincolnes Inn aforesaid Gent. William Prewett of the Parish of St. Martin in
the Fields, in the said County of Middlesex; Charles Nicolas Air of the Parish
of St. James in the Liberty of Westminster aforesaid; and Peter Chamberlen of
Essex-street aforesaid, in the aforesaid Parish and County; Esquires; Send
Greeting.

2. Preamble.
Whereas the use of Credit in Trade and Dealing, has by insensible Degrees
much obtained, Especially for an Age last past, or there abouts, throughout
Europe, Benefit of Credit to Trade.
and most of the Civilized, and Trading part of the World, to the very great
Benefit, Ease, and Convenience, of no small part of Mankind.

Bills of Credit Superior to Money.
3. And whereas Notes or Bills of Credit, have by experience been found, of
very great use; and, being well secured by a good Fund, are properly accepted
and taken as Ready Money; and, being preferable to the usual Money in many, and
equal to it in all, Respects, may therefore justly be accounted a Superior
Species of Money.

4. The Author of this Contrivance and his Motives.
And whereas the said Hugh Chamberlen, for above Thirty Years last past, having
taken into Serious Consideration, the nature of Banks, and of Credit in
general; and the necessary, convenient, and various uses and kinds thereof in
diverse Kingdoms and States, as also here in England; and observing the great
Utility of sound and good Credit, and the deplorable and many Mischiefs
frequently resulting from uncertain, mistaken, personal, and precarious Credit;
to the utter Ruin of multitudes, and sometimes to the indangering the public
Safety.

5. And further, Considering that Lands, and Hands, are the Material and
Efficient causes of all true, genuine, and natural Riches; Material and
efficient causes of Riches.
and that Money, as such (though very good and useful in its first intendment,
however since Subjected to Abuses) is but imaginary, or at most but political,
Wealth; Money is but polilitical, not real Wealth.
and therefore inferior to natural Riches; and consequently as such ought to
attend the service of Land and Trade; and not prey upon, both the Lords of the
Soil, and the Industrious Merchants, by that corroding and destructive Canker,
Usury.

6. And the said Hugh Chamberlen, also further reflecting, that Credit, rightly
founded upon Land, must evidently be more secure than any other sort of Credit:
Land Credit more Secure.
And that, since Gold and Silver, are not of the product of this Kingdom,
Inconveniences of Gold and Silver for being the common Measure of Trade, where
they are not the native product.
they might by foreign Orders, by Edicts of Princes, or States, by a wrong
Balance of Trade, or by other Artifices or Incidents thereof, or by some other
uncommon Accidents, become scarce and rare in this Kingdom; which could not
happen, but to the very great damage of the Public; as being the common
Measure, Medium, Pledge, and Account of Trade.

Ends and Motives of the Doctors pains.
7. The said Hugh Chamberlen, upon these and other such Reflections, and with
an earnest desire, to serve his Native Country, in so great and general a Good,
applied himself, with the utmost intensness of mind, to contrive a general
Credit, to be so founded upon Land, as to give it the greatest Safety and
Convenience, that in its own nature it is Capable of; and to make a Credit,
that should not only be a Succedaneum to Money, but in diverse respects, more
noble and useful, and indeed a Superior Species, endued with all the Uses and
Excellence of Metaline Money, and in several Regards, exceeding the same; and
particularly herein, that in its own Nature it should be Local, without the
Restraint of Laws.

The Doctor communicates his thoughts, etc.
8. And whereas the said Hugh Chamberlen, at diverse times Communicated these
his Conceptions and Designs to diverse persons, and in particular to the Lords
and Gentlemen herein before mentioned, in order to Mature and Ripen such his
Thoughts, and make them more Effectual for the Common Avail.

The late Encouragement of Banks by this Nation, is the effect of the Doctor's
Endeavors.
9. And whereas the said Hugh Chamberlen, has made several Attempts and
Essaies to bring his said Thoughts and Intentions into Practice, for the Common
Good; but, by reason of the great and many Difficulties, that generally
Accompany all great and good Designs, has not hitherto been able to effect
the same; but yet the long, many, repeated, and unwearied Attempts and
Endeavors of the said Hugh Chamberlen, and those at Sundry times, Conjoined
wirh him therein, have so far awakened this Nation at first (and long, by him
Experienced to be wholly) averse to thoughts of this sort, that within the
Reign of his present Majesty, several Banks have been set up and attempted;
though all of them on a far less Basis, both as to Extent and Benefit, than what
has been diverse times offered and Endeavored by the said Hugh Chamberlen: And
indeed all the said Banks (as can well be made out) manifestly owing themselves
to the Models, frequently proposed and attempted, both in Print, and
Manuscript, and publicly, and privately, and freely imparted by him, to all
that thought fit to Inform themselves.

10. But for as much as Men Naturally Embrace the greater Good, rather than the
less, as soon as they distinguish them aright; and since the Land Credit,
Proposed and Intended by the said Hugh Chamberlen, and his present Friends,
Associates, and Joint Undertakers therein, can be Demonstrably made out, to be
far Superior to any other sort of Credit, in being, or attempting in the World:
And since diverse Noblemen, Gentlemen, Merchants, and others, have been so far
Sensible of the great and general good, of the hereby intended Credit; of its
great extent, and Advantage to Trade; of its manifest Tendency to the immediate
Raising the real Worth and Value of the English Lands; to the preservation of
the Honors Estates and Families of our Ancient Nobility and Gentry; to the
Increase and Perfection of all manner of Arts, Sciences, and Manufactures among
us; to the highest Improvement of all our Possible produce; to the Extirpating
of Poverty, Baggary, Vice, and Sloth; and to the Great Encouragement of Virtue,
Ingenuity, and Industry: Tendency and Benefit of this undertaking.
The said Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, have already Actually Subscribed
Land Estates, for the Annual Payment of about One hundred thousand pounds Rent
Charges, Diverse have Subscribed to it.
to the hereby intended Office of Land Credit; which subscriptions will be
further Continued to Two hundred thousand pounds per Annum, or more, as
occasion may require: And since the said design is now entirely perfected in
its Idea, Scheme, and Model; and all Matters and Things are now Framed, and
Matured, for the Speedy and Actual reducing thereof to Practice, with all the
dispatch that will well Consist with the Safety, Establishment and Honor of so
great an Undertaking.

11. Now for the better Effecting this Matter;
Now for the better Effecting the good Ends and Purposes herein before premised
and intimated, and herein after to be further mentioned and explained, These
Presents Witness, and the said Hugh Chamberlen, and the Lords and Gentlemen
aforesaid, as joint Undertakers and Managers of the Office of Land Credit,
hereby intended, Do hereby Declare, That forasmuch as the necessity of Credit
in Trade, is evidently such, that Men daily venture upon what is uncertain,
rather than want the use of it; It is Declared that there is want of good
Credit.
and when it is made secure beyond possibility of Loss to any, it is then Money
under another Name, and can equally with Money become the Measure, Pledge, and
Account of Trade: Good Credit is Money under another Name.
And since it is most certain, That Credit, having all the Essentials of the
Usual Money, and some other Additional Advantages, wants nothing but a coercive
Law, enforceing its currency, to enable it to assume the Name of Money, being
already in possession of all its Nature, Uses, and Qualifications: Which
Proposition is Sufficiently Illustrated by rightly defining Money. Money
therefore is no more than a Legal secure and common Pledge, instituted to
supply the defects of Barter, What Money is.
and to be the Measure, Medium, and Account of Trade: Or in other terms, Money
is only a secure Pledge, of a known Value, that a Man shall be repayed in the
same, or in some other Commodity, for the Commodity that he parts with; and it
serves but to Supply the Intervals of time, between the selling of one
Commodity, and the buying of another: All which Offices, can be equally
performed by sound and good Credit, as by the Usual species of common Money.

12. And further, forasmuch as Credit, founded upon Land, and secured by more
than a double Value, must undeniably be safe in its self, and good and
effectual to all the Intents of Trade and Dealing, to the great benefit of all
in general, and without Loss or Damage to any by it. And since it is most
certain, that such as are Possessed of Estates, in Fee simple, etc. Have already
by Law, an undoubted Right, of making whatever Settlements of such their
Estates, they shall think fit, and to what ends and purposes they please; Those
possessed of Estates in Fee Simple, etc. can by Law settle them to what Uses
they please: except in certain Cases.
Except where Criminal Designs, Superstitious Uses, or Illegal Mortmains, are
thereby pursuing, or some Invasion thereby made of another Right. And since
the happiness of this Nation is such, that a Law cannot pass in England, that
can prove a Violation of Property. Property sacred by Law.
This being so; and Land well conveyed, being Universally allowed to be the
best Security; Land the best Security.
and being also the true Mother from whom by Industry all Wealth is born; The
Mother of all wealth.
and the Landed Men, or Lords of the Soil, being (upon the matter) the Body of
the Nation, the Natural Defenders of English Rights and Liberties, and a chief
Support of the expense of War, Landed men how Considerable.
and Splendour of Peace.

Ends of this Undertaking.
13. They the said Hugh Chamberlen, and the rest of the Joint Undertakers and
Managers before Mentioned; Do hereby, further declare, That this Undertaking
(in order to public and private Good, and to free our Lands from the Servitude
and Tyranny of Devouring Usury) offers to all Land-Proprietors, a Way how to
settle Estates, so as to raise One hundred Years Credit upon every Estate, to
be settled for the ends of this Undertaking; What it offers.
to be disposed in manner following; that is to say, To the Proprietor Seventy
Years value, for the Rentcharge by him payable for 100 Years; of which said 70
Years value, only 40 Years value is to be Paid to the Proprietor, To raise 100
Years Credit: of which, Seventy to the Proprietor, viz. 40. to himself:
and that by four Payments in three Years; which four Payments are thus to be
made, viz.

Upon Sealing the Conveyance. 10 Years Value. At the end of One Year 10 Years
Value. Two Years 10 Years Value. Three Years 10 Years Value.
which is in all -- 40 Years Value.
Manner of paying the forty Years value.
14. The other thirty Years value, residue of the said seventy Years value
above Mentioned, is to remain in the joint Stock of Trade, And the remaining
thirty Years value, to the joint stock of Trade.
herein after further Mentioned and Expressed to be belonging to the whole Body
of the Proprietors of the Land Subscribed to this Undertaking. In which joint
Trade, every Person therein concerned is to have his Proportional Dividend of
the Profits: Profits of it to be proportionably divided.
But the Capital is not to be drawn out, Capital to remain.
till the hundred Years be expired; nor is any Man's stock in Trade alienable
or transferable, but together with the Estate on which it was raised: Not
transferable, but with the Estate.
And its use is such, that at the Moderate Estimate of ten per Cent. profit, it
will not only pay the several Annuities, but double as much Yearly to each
Proprietor: by which means, the Estates Settled on this Office or Undertaking,
will become in effect Exonerated, and only a Collateral Security; and such
Settlement, though for One hundred Years, will thereby be (not a Burden but) a
Benefit to such Estates: Use and benefit of the joint stock.
And at the end of the said One hundred Yearly payments of such intended
Annuities, each respective Proprietor may withdraw his share of the said joint
Stock in Trade.

15. And they the said Undertakers and Managers, Do hereby further declare,
that to assist the more ready Circulation of this Credit; especially in the
beginning, and till Time and Experience shall have shown the true worth and
solid Fund thereof, ready Money is to be provided by the said Undertakers in
the best manner they can, Money at first necessary to circulate the Credit.
and by such Expedients, Ways and Means as they shall Judge proper to that end.
The Undertakers to find Expedients for Money, in the best manner they can.
And for assisting the said Undertakers to raise Money, in order to such
Circulation of the hereby intended Bills of Credit, they the said Undertakers
are to have and employ, Ten Years Value of the said Hundred Years Credit, so as
aforesaid to be raised on each Estate, so to be settled as aforesaid on the
Office or Undertaking hereby intended; the other Twenty Years Value, residue of
the said One Hundred Years Credit, so as aforesaid to be raised, And to have 10
Years Value of each Annuity, to assist them to raise such Money.
being to the sole, proper Use, Benefit and Behoof of the Undertakers hereof,
for support of all the Charges and Expenses, Ordinary and Contingent, for
Managing and Carrying on this Undertaking, during the whole term of the
Continuance thereof.

16. And it is hereby further declared, That this Undertaking Teaches, to
advance or anticipate One Hundred Years Revenue, The Hundred Years.
and to call it back by equal Portions in One Hundred Years; by which means,
the Nation has the Use of so great an Additional Treasure pro interim, the
Increase whereof cannot (by Necessary Consequence) but be great by Trade; and
its Return, from whence it issued, will be by slow and easy gradations.
Benefits thereby.


17. From a due Consideration of the whole of this Undertaking, and all its
parts, as contained in the Constitution thereof herein and hereby settled and
declared, it will be most evident, That no Money Bank is or possibly can be
either so safe, or the Credit of it so well secured, as will be the Land Credit
issued by and from this Office or Undertaking. Preference of this Credit to
that of Money Banks.
For First, All Money Banks are far more liable to Rapine and Seizure; and
next, It is apparent that Ten Thousand Pounds Credit, issued upon Ten Thousand
Pounds in Money, can have no greater Value of Security than its Original Fund
of Ten Thousand Pounds in Money; which yet (as is most Notorious) few (if any)
Banks have, whatever they pretend: But Ten Thousand Pounds Credit, issuing by
and from this Office or Undertaking, is firmly secured by Twenty Two Thousand
Five Hundred Pounds Value; every Rentcharge of One Hundred Pounds per Annum
for One Hundred Years, being to be secured (above all Reprises) by One Hundred
and Fifty Pounds per Annum, in Land, for One Hundred and Fifty Years; and
(since the Ten Thousand Pounds Credit issued, upon thus securing the Payment of
One Hundred Pounds Annuity or Rentcharge for One Hundred Years, is not to be
called for at one Time, and in one Sum, but Annually, in small and equal
Payments, for an Hundred Years) the Security is unquestionably good, for such
Payments to be duly made in such a term: The Bills therefore have thus most
evidently a more than double Real, Solid, and Intrinsic Value, inseparably
adhering to them: This Credit more than doubly secured.
The Land must Annually call for them, till the Hundred Years be out: The Land
must Annually call for these Bills.
The Office must Annually destroy them as they come in for Rent: And the Office
must Annually destroy them.
At the end of the Hundred Years they will therefore be all destroyed; These
Bills will all be cancelled at the end of 100 Years.
their annexed Value making them (beyond all just Exception) safe to all pro
interim. Since therefore the Advantages accruing by the said intended Bills of
Credit, are so many, so great, and obvious; and since none can possibly lose by
them, there can be no just cause of Doubt, but that Safety and Convenience must
necessarily give them a general Esteem and Currency.

18. Why must this Credit continue no more nor less than 100 Year?
But to such as enquire, why these Rent Charges are to continue for the Term of
One Hundred Years just, and not for Fifty Years, or Two Hundred Years, or more,
or less: It is hereby answered, Answer.
That One Hundred Years is found requisite and necessary to the good Ends
intended by this Office of Land Credit, and to the Support and Safety of it; so
as to make all things bear, and answer, not only the very great Expense and
Charge absolutely necessary therein, but also the Security, Profit, Advantages
and Intentions of it; and therefore a less Term were incompetent, and a greater
Term (though possibly it might be done yet) is not wanted now; and may (if
thought fit) be done hereafter, when time shall by Experience have shown the
Benefits of such a Credit. If any shall wonder, how the same Land can securely
raise One Hundred Years Value, that may be Bought in Fee for Twenty Years
Purchase: How 100 Years Value can be raised upon Land, that will sell but for
20,
It is also answered, Answer.
That when a Sum of Money is to be repaid at once with Interest, then it cannot
securely much exceed one half, or two thirds of the common Purchase of the
Land; but where the Money is to be repaid by equal Annual Payments only, there
a Year and half in Rent can well secure a Years Rent, and so in proportion of
Time and Value.

19. How this Credit secured.
And whereas this Undertaking raises, by Advance or Anticipation, the Value of
One Hundred Years on the Land; it also firmly secures the Annual Repayment of
it in equal Portions, by one third more in Time or Term of Years, and one third
more in Rent or Value: And thus Ten Thousand Pounds, raised by advancing One
Hundred Years Rent of One Hundred Pounds per Annum in Land, is secured to be
repaid in One Hundred equal Annual Payments, 10000 l. therein is secured,
by Land, of One Hundred and Fifty Pounds per Annum for One Hundred and Fifty
Years, which produces Twenty Two Thousand Five Hundred Pounds, By 22500 l.
which is therefore a more than double Security, that such Credit shall be duly
Discharged.
and is therefore, without all peradventure, plainly and evidently, a more than
double Security, that the Ten Thousand Pounds so raised, must be recalled and
discharged, by equal Annual Payments in One Hundred Years, in Payment and
Satisfaction of the Credit so raised on such Land by Anticipation as aforesaid.
Which Point being thus firmly settled and secured, beyond any possibility of
Reasonable Doubt, none that take this Credit can possibly lose by it; which is
all that is expected from the Usual Species of Money, and from the best
Security.

20. The Premises illustrated by an Example.
To illustrate this more clearly, what follows is a plain and full
Demonstration of the Validity and Security of the Bills of Land Credit hereby
intended, viz. A. settles One Hundred and Fifty Pounds per Annum on Trustees
for a Year and half, to secure the Payment of One Hundred Pounds (above all
Reprises) at the end of One Year. The Trustees do thereupon issue their Bill of
Credit, for One Hundred Pound, chargeable on such Land, and payable at a Year:
This Bill is paid out to One Hundred several Persons within the Year; and
consequently does the Office of so much Ready Money: At the end of the Year,
the Bill is either brought to the Trustees, to be Exchanged for Money, and so
cancelled; or (which is the same thing) it comes to the Hands of one that Owes
One Hundred Pounds to the Trustees, who therefore accept it in lieu of their
Debt, and cancel it. And none can reasonably deny, but that this Settlement,
and the Bill of Credit so issued thereupon, were a great Convenience to the
Landed Man, and answered his Occasions as well as Ready Money; and as secure,
and greatly useful to all who received it. Now it is most certain, by parity of
Reason, that at least an equal Service, Benefit, and Security, will attend
Bills of Credit secured by Land, though settled for One Hundred Years; and though
they should all circulate for the whole Term: Bills for 100 Years may be safely
current the while, and as useful as those payable at a short Term.
For they differ but as Majus and Minus, save that the Bills issued for One
Hundred Years, have thereby a further Security and Advantage, by reason of the
Joint stock in Trade; which will at least exonerate the Land from any Payment,
and probably may besides put double the Money Yearly into the Proprietor of the
Lands Purse; and is the result of extending the Term of Years so long.

21. The Security of these Bills grows stronger yearly.
But further, the Security of the Bills for One Hundred Years (though equal at
first to the Security of the Bill for One Year, as is clearly made out) grows
stronger every Year as the Bills come in: For that all the same Lands are still
tied, as at first, to make good the Bills to the very end and expiration of the
whole Term of One Hundred Years. Had the instance of the Bill payable at one
Year, been made to consist of One Hundred Bills, payable in equal Portions, and
at equal Distances in that One Year, it had then been so for parallel in
Security with the Bills of One Hundred Years; because both Securities had then
been alike strengthened, by the gradual paying in of the Bills: But still, both
the Security and Benefit of the Bills for One Hundred Years are far superior to
the other, from the Necessary Consequences of the great Benefits accruing by
means of the Joint Stock in Trade; of which Advantages, the other sort of Bills
are wholly incapable. And this (as is conceived) amounts to a full
Demonstration, that the hereby intended Bills of Credit are not barely equally
secure with any other sort of Bills, but are more secure, and more valuable;
and that because they are extended to One Hundred Years; which yet some
Ignorantly, and others Maliciously object as a fault in them. And thus, though a
part be not greater than its whole, nor a term than a perpetuity, yet a part of
one thing, may be greater than the whole of another; and a part of the same
thing has often, by Improvement, become more Valuable than its whole was
(either by Estimation, or in Reality) worth, without and before such
Improvement. A part may be improved to a greater Value than the whole was
before, or can be without, such Improvement.
Hence it is, that a Term of Years, as applied by this Undertaking, is really
far more Valuable than the perpetuity of the same Estate, without such
Application. And a Term thus applied is better than the Perpetuity not so
applied.


22. And that, though it is acknowledged, that indeed common Mortgages are a very
Ancient sort of Credit upon Land; Mortgages a very ancient sort of Credit; But
troublesome;
but yet because they cannot be transferred without Trouble, Hazard, Charge,
and Loss of Time; and because they are generally in Sums not so well suited to
common or frequent occasions, And not well suited to general Occasions.
they are still (as their Name imports) but dead Pledges, and a very lame and
imperfect Credit; Dead Pledges, and but an imperfect Credit.
and therefore Interest is justly required upon them, to compensate for those
Defects and Inconveniences. Interest necessary upon Mortgages, and why. But not
upon these Bills, and why.
Whereas the Bills of Credit to issue by and from this Office or Undertaking,
are so many living Pledges, and readily, and securely circulating Mortgages,
qualified with all the Essentials of Current Money; they are also transferrable
as Money it self, by the bare Act of Payment, Tale, or Delivery; and being in
their Values and Denominations well suited to the general Uses of Trade and
Business, it follows by plain and evident Deduction, that no Demand of Interest
can fairly be made upon them; and that they do well and perfectly answer all
that is pretended of them by the Undertakers; which is, the whole advantage of
sound and safe Credit. Were this Undertaking Calculated purely for little,
narrow, selfish, sinister, and by-ends, This Undertaking not calculated for
narrow or sinister Ends.
then indeed the Undertakers would contrive (under pretenses specious enough)
to allure Men to load their Estates to a Debt of three fourths of the full
Value, principal Sum, leaving them subjected to a designed Foreclosure and
Sale, which in such case would no doubt be the necessary and inevitable
Consequence. But such are the Benefits tendered and intended by this Office of
Land Credit, that it will entirely free the Estates of those concerned in it;
and lead them besides into a gainful Trade. The Noble and Advantageous
Contrivance of this Office.


23. And they the said Joint Undertakers and Managers, do hereby most solemnly
declare, That great Care and Caution shall be had, in the Examining of every
Title to be received into this Undertaking. Care against Bad Titles.
That the Land Proprietors shall and may hold and enjoy their Lands to be
settled for this Undertaking, Proprietors to be always in possession of their
Lands thus settled.
and receive and take the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof peaceably and
quietly, during the whole Term of Years for which such Lands shall be so
settled, without any Let or Interruption by or from this Undertaking, or by
reason or means thereof, or of the Settlement of such Lands thereon; unless
such Land Proprietors become Two Years in Arrear of their Rent Charges, Unless
two Year in Arrear.
or Annual Payments; in which Case only, this Office or Undertaking may Enter
and Hold such Estate or Estates, until due Satisfaction shall be made of such
Arrears, and no longer. For then, the Office may Enter and Hold, till
Satisfaction.
But that during the time this Office shall be in Possession of any such
Estate, no Damage, Waste or Spoil shall thereon be wittingly or willingly
committed or suffered by this Office, or any belonging to it: But to do no
Damage;
Nor shall this Office Under-lett, Impair or Disparage any such Estate, Nor
Vnder-lett:
but shall rather Use, Improve and Occupy the same, to the most and best
Advantage for the good of the respective Proprietor; But rather improve the
Estate;
and shall peaceably and quietly restore such Estate, at any time, upon Demand,
and upon full Satisfaction And restore it at any time, upon Demand and Payment.
made, of all Arrears of Rent, and of all reasonable and needful Charges and
Expenses for Seizing and Holding such Estates; the Office duly accounting for
Profits received. Accounting for Mesne profits.
And that if any Estate so as aforesaid to be settled, shall hereafter become
considerably and solidly improved in its true Value, above what it really was
when so settled as aforesaid, that then the Proprietor of such Estate, may
either raise more Credit thereupon, in proportion to such Improvement, or to
such part of it as he shall think fit; Upon Improvement of any Estate, the
Proprietor may raise more Credit:
or may have such part of his Estate freed and discharged from this Office, Or
may free such Overplus, from the Engagement to the Office.
as shall be more than the requisite Security for the Credit at first raised
and issued on the whole of such Estate. That this Office being duly secured,
The Office being safe, things to be interpreted in favor of Proprietors:
by the Conveyance for the settling of any Annuity on this Undertaking, as the
Nature of each Case may respectively require; no farther Advantage is to be
taken of any thing, omitted, implied or expressed in or by such Conveyance, in
prejudice of any Land Proprietor; but the Office being safe, all things else
are to be taken most favorably for the Proprietor; and Proprietors are at all
times (before or after any Entry by or for this Office) to have Power to make
any Lease or Leases, of all, or any part of such their Estates, so as not to
injure the Title, or to lessen the Rent, that secures the Annual Payments to
this Office. Who (before or after Entry) may make Leases, not hurting the
Title, or lessening the Rent.
That Counterfeit Bills of Credit cannot be imposed on the Office, or upon
others, without the apparent Negligence of such as receive them. Bills so
contrived that none need be deceived with false.
That no Bill of Credit can possibly be issued, but what is duly founded upon
Land. No Bill can be issued without a due Fund.
That all Bills of Credit, that come in for the Annual Payment of the Rent
Charges shall be duly cancelled; All Bills must be cancelled; as their Fund
ceases.
so that none shall remain, upon the same Fund, after One Hundred Yearly
Payments of such Rent Charges. That a due Provision shall be made for the
support of the Office in all its parts, Provision for support of the Office.
for the whole One Hundred Years, in all its Charges, Ordinary and Contingent.
That the Joint Stock in Trade shall be fairly managed, and in such sort, that
the good of the Nation in general shall be always regarded, and no Engrossing
or Monopolizing suffered to the hurt of the People. Nature of the Management of
the Jointstock.
That the Books, Accounts, and Papers of the said Joint Stock of Trade, shall
be open at Convenient Times to the Visitation, Inspection and View of all
concerned; as also of the Members of Both Houses of Parliament; of all great
Officers and Ministers of State, and of the Royal Household; of all Privy
Counselors; and in general, of all Persons of Quality, Honor, or other
Eminence; or to any Eminent Merchant or Trader; to obviate all possible
Umbrage, from any reasonable Doubts, of Sinister and Clandestine Actions. All
its Books and Proceedings may be enquired into, when fairly desired.
That the Checks and Comptroul upon this Undertaking, be by those concerned in
Honor and Interest to suffer nothing Injurious to the Public, or to
Particulars; all which, will further and more plainly herein after appear.

24. And they the said Joint Undertakers and Managers do hereby further agree
and declare, That the Grand and Essential Constituent Parts, and the fixed and
general Management and Economy, of the Settlement and Constitution hereby
mentioned and intended to be, by these Presents agreed, settled, and declared,
shall for ever unalterably be as follows, viz.

25. The Undertaking consists of three principal parts.
The whole Undertaking hereby intended, shall consist of the Union of these
Three, Principal Parts, Members, or Branches, viz. First, The Branch of the
Settled Lords, or Noble Visitors. Secondly, The Branch of the Land Subscribers,
and Proprietors. Thirdly, The Branch of the Undertakers, and Managers. Of which
in their Order.


26. First, the Lords Visitor..
First, There shall be Twelve fixed and settled Lords, or Noble Visitors, viz.
Great Officers or Ministers of State, or Noblemen in public Employment, if
they please to accept and perform the same, else others of Honor, and Eminent
Dignity or Quality, fit to Undertake so great a Trust, are to be nominated and
settled by the Undertakers. What is submitted to their Care.
These Noble Visitors shall or may have a Personal Superintendance, the first
Wednesday in every Month, between the Hours of Nine and Twelve in the Forenoon,
being twelve times a Year certain, for each, and oftener if they please; and
then (when oftener) jointly or separately, as they shall think fit; and likewise
at any time upon the humble Request of the Branch of Undertakers and Managers;
the Branch of Land Subscribers and Proprietors; the Chamber of Comptroul; the
Chamber of Trade; and the Chamber of Trustees, or any Three, or more of them
the said Branches and Chambers.

27. Quorum of the Visitors.
And that such three or more of the Branch of the Noble Visitors as shall be
present at the Hour and Place appointed for any of the Meetings of or for the
said Branch, may proceed to Business, and have and exercise the same Powers, as
if all the Members of the said Branch were present; except in the Case of the
Admonition mentioned in the next ensuing Paragraph.

28. Visitors Power, and manner of redressing what is amiss.
And that this Branch of the Noble Visitors have the Visitation, Inspection and
Examination of all Matters and Things in general, relating to this whole
Undertaking, and may thereupon, by their Admonition in Writing, under the Hands
of any Seven, or more of them, require the Redress of what they shall judge
amiss; having first heard the Respective Branch, Office, or Chamber; and that
such their Admonition be either obeyed, or such Reasons given to the contrary,
as shall be agreed to be satisfactory by the said Branch of Visitors; or by the
Branch of Undertakers and Managers, the Chamber of Trade, and the Chamber of
Comptroul, or any Two of them. And this Superintendance of this Branch of the
Noble Visitors, is hereby settled and constituted, to the Intent that the Lords,
or others, composing this Branch, may thus have always in their Power, to
prevent or remedy the transacting of any thing by this Office and Undertaking,
that may be hurtful or injurious to the Government, or to the People. Intent of
their Superintendance.


29. And that any Member of this Branch of the Noble Visitors, absenting
himself from the said Monthly Meetings at any time for Six Months together,
shall ipso facto cease to be a Visitor, Visitor ceases to be so, if Six Months
absent.
and his Place shall and may be supplied, or filled up by such Person,
agreeable to this Constitution, as the Undertakers shall thereto Elect. His
Place, how supplied.


30. Choice of their Auditor.
And that the Auditor, herein after mentioned, for this Branch of the Noble
Visitors, shall be Elected by a Majority of such of the said Visitors as shall
be present, at the time of Election: Choice of their Comptrolers, and Governors
of Trade:
But that each Member of this Branch of the Visitors, have the Nomination and
Appointment, in Writing under their Hands, of One apiece of the Comptrolers,
and Governors of Trade, herein after mentioned, for their Branch: All which,
shall continue for Life, unless removed by a Majority of the said Visitors, or
otherwise according to this Constitution; All which, for Life, unless, etc.
and the Vacancies of such Officers are to be filled in Course by the said
Visitors in their several Turns; no Visitor presenting twice to any such
Office, till all have presented round. And that in all Questions and Votes for
the Branch of Visitors, each Member have but one single and equal Voice. Each
Visitor, one Vote.


31. Their Comptrolers.
And this Branch of Visitors do also superintend this Undertaking continually
by Comptrolers, being Persons of known Worth and Quality, chosen by them, in
manner as is herein before mentioned, upon convenient notice by the Chamber of
Undertakers; In case the Visitors neglect to choose them.
otherwise by the Undertakers and Managers equally with the Governors of the
Joint Stock in Trade, and Chamber of Comptroul abovementioned, or any Two of
them; Comptrolers Employment.
which Comptrollers are (by direction of, and in subordination to the said Noble
Visitors) to be Witnesses between the Government; the People in general, and
the Land Subscribers and Proprietors in particular, of the just and fair
Management of the said hereby intended Office and Undertaking. The said Noble
Visitors, do also upon like convenient notice, choose (in manner herein
beforementioned) one third of the Governors of the Trade, Governors of Trade
chosen in proportion by the Visitors:
and an Auditor: Or for want of such choice, the Chambers of Managers, of
Trade, and of Comptroul, or any Two of them are to appoint them. And an
Auditor; in case the Visitors neglect such choice.


32. Chamber of Comptroul.
It is to be adverted, That the Chamber of Comptroul is to consist, not only of
those Members thereof so as aforesaid to be chosen by the said Noble Visitors,
but also of an equal number of like Worth and Quality chosen by the Branch of
the Land Subscribers, and likewise a like Number, and of like Worth and Quality
chosen by the Branch of Managers; which three sorts of Elected Comptrollers are
together to make one Chamber; Business of the said Chamber.
and to take effectual Care, that no Credit be issued without a due Fund; that
is to say, that Credit for One Hundred Years, and no more, be issued upon
Estates made over for One Hundred and Fifty Years to the Trustees for this
Undertaking, according to the intention of this Constitution: That the Credit
paid back for Rent be duly cancelled: And that there be a sufficient Provision
for the due support of the whole Undertaking, during the whole Term of its
continuance, in all its Charges stated and contingent; and they are to have a
superintendance over the Governors of Trade, so far as to prevent the
Embezelling, or imprudent Hazarding of the Joint Stock.

33. Secondly, The Land Subscribers and Proprietors choose one third of the
Governors of Trade, an Auditor, and Comptrolers, as before; Secondly, the
Landproprietors, they choose their Governors of Trade, an Auditor, and
Comptrolers.
in which Election, every Proprietor shall have one Vote, and no more; which
Vote may indifferently be given in Person, or by Proxy; Comptrolers Duty.
and the Comptrolers thus to be chosen, by this Branch of the Land Subscribers
and Proprietors, are to join with those chosen by the Lords Visitors, as
before; and those chosen by the Undertakers; and to exercise together the
several Powers and Trusts beforementioned, in the three last preceding
Paragraphs or Articles. The Land Proprietors, or any of them, may at any time
(upon their Request, and at their Charge) exchange their Subscribed Estates for
others of equal Value; Land-proprietors may exchange their Securities.
such other Estates passing through all the forms of the Office, as the first
settled Estates shall have done: And at any time, within the first Five Years
after opening the said hereby Constituted Office of Land Credit, and the Actual
issuing of Bills by the said Office, they may (Conveening in a Body) draw out
of the Office, by the Major Votes of three fourths, or more of them; And may
upon Jointagreement, within the first five Years, withdraw their Securities.
and upon paying back the Bills of Credit issued, by the said hereby intended
and constituted Office or Undertaking, on their Estates according to this
Constitution, shall have back their Estates, paying only after the Rate of Six
per Cent. per Annum, as Interest for the Credit so raised on their Estates as
aforesaid; or any single Subscriber may at any time (upon his Request in that
Behalf, and at his Charge) after the said first Five Years from opening the
Office, have back his Estate, upon payment to the Office the Credit, Any single
Subscriber may, upon request, withdraw at any time after.
issued as aforesaid, upon his Estate, together with Interest for the same, as
aforesaid, after the Rate of Six per Cent. per Annum.

34. Thirdly, The Branch or Chamber of the Undertakers and Managers shall
retain Learned Council for the strict Examining of Titles, Thirdly, The
Undertakers and Managers choose Council at Law:
and due Settlement of Estates; and shall Nominate and Choose certain Persons,
on whom the Estates Subscribed to this Undertaking are to be legally settled, in
Trust for the due payment of the Annuities for One Hundred Years, Trustees for
Estates:
as aforesaid. The said Branch of Managers have also the Nomination and Choice
of one third part of the Governors of Trade; A third of the Governors of
Trade:
as also of one Auditor, and of Comptrolers to join with the Comptrolers chosen
by the Lords Visitors, An Auditor; and Comptrolers.
and those chosen by the Proprietors. There is to be an equal Number of these
Comptrolers, chosen by each of the said Three Principal Parts composing this
Office of Credit; and such Comptrolers are together, to exercise the several
Powers and Trusts, as in the preceding Clause relating to the Power and Office
of the Branch of the Noble Visitors.

35. And the Undertakers, in particular, are to make due provision for support
of the whole Undertaking, Undertakers are, in particular, to make due provision
for the Expense of the Office.
in defraying (out of the Twenty Years Value reserved for that end out of the
said Hundred Years Credit, so as aforesaid to be Raised on the Estates settled
for this Undertaking) all the Charges stated and contingent, (except those of
the Joint Stock in Trade, which are to be defrayed as herein after) during the
said Hundred Years; and likewise to provide, in the most effectual manner, to
prevent and detect Counterfeit Bills, To prevent and detect Counterfeit Bills:
and to take Care of and for the Just and Regular Execution and Economy of the
whole, And for the just Administration of the whole.
and all its parts, and that all be transacted with Justice and Impartiality.

36. And it is hereby provided and constituted, That this Branch of Undertakers
and Managers, shall consist of at least Eleven Persons, and at most of One and
Twenty; besides the Ten herein named Honorary Managers, which are only
Temporary, and not Essential to the Undertaking. This Branch to consist of at
least 11, and at most 21, besides the 10 herein named Honorary Managers, which
are only Temperary.
And that any Five or more of this Branch (whereof Three or more to be of the
Number of the first Eight Original Undertakers, or such as legally represent
them) shall be such a Meeting or Committee, by a Majority of whom, all Matters
appertaining to this Branch are to be decided by Vote, Scrutiny, or Balot;
wherein each Person is to have only one single Vote. How many Transact.
And that all the fixed and constant Undertakers and Managers shall have as due
notice of Meetings as may be, and are duly to attend the Service; but that the
Honorary Managers be at their Liberty to come when, and as they please. And
that all new Members of this Branch, be only chosen by the Chamber of
Undertakers; New Members Chosen.
but that none be Elected, till first proposed in Three several Meetings of the
said Chamber, and then such Elections to be decided by the Balot; and that no
Person, so to be Elected, shall be admitted or accounted as a Member of this
Branch, unless first Signing to such previous Orders, as shall be thought fit;
upon failure whereof, such Election is to be Null and Void.

37. Undertakers make Rules and Orders.
And that the said Chamber of Undertakers have full Power, in such their
Meetings, to make Resolves, Rules, Orders, Establishments, and Regulations, for
the well Governing of themselves, and for the General Direction and Economy of
the whole Undertaking; with regard to the common Prosperity thereof, and
pursuant to the tenor and true meaning of this Constitution. And that every
Member of this Office and Undertaking, do Act Conform to such Rules and Orders,
upon pain of Suspension, Deprivation, or Expulsion, and of utter Incapacity of
Readmission into this Office or Undertaking, or into any of the dependents
thereof, as the case may require.

38. And that the said Chamber of Undertakers, do choose all manner of Officers
and Servants, in any sort regarding this Office of Land Credit, And Choose all
officers:
that are not Expressly limited in and by this Constitution to be otherwise
chosen. And that in the said Undertakers do reside, the sole Power to provide
all appartments, for all the Branches and Chambers of this Undertaking; except
for the Chamber of Trade; as also all Stationary Ware, Candles, Fuel, and
other Conveniences, and Necessaries: And to defray, out of the rising Profits
of this Office of Land Credit, all constant Incident and Contingent Charges;
and order payment thereof, and of Salaries Bills and Expenses thereto relating:
Not herein limited to be otherwise chosen; And do provide, and defray.
except of the Trade: And likewise to Employ the Fund, set apart for Support of
the Office, in the most prudent Manner to that end, to the best of their
Judgments; And have a general Care and Inspection.
and with the Advice and Consent of the Chamber of Comptrol. And that this
Branch of Undertakers and Managers, do take a particular care, that all Persons
belonging to this Undertaking, do discharge their several Duties. And that this
Branch, do also hear Examine and Redress, all Complaints and Grievances of all
manner of Officers belonging to this Undertaking, either directly under this
Branch, or by appeal from any other Branch or Chamber, alone, or jointly with
some other Chamber or Chambers, as the Nature of the case may require,

39. And they the said Undertakers and Managers, do hereby further agree and
declare, that for the better Diffusing the Good intended by this Undertaking,
Credit may be raised, not only upon Lands in Fee, as before, but also, upon
Leases, and upon Houses; The Credit extended to Leases and Houses.
with these Restrictions, viz. As to Leases, that none be Admitted for a less
Term than thirty Years to come; nor of less value than Fifteen pounds per
Annum; and such a Lease (if of Land) may secure Ten pounds per Annum, for
twenty Years; which is two thirds of the Rent, for two thirds of the Term; or
it may secure four Ninth's of the Rent, for the whole Term; the Security being
both ways equal, and more than double; and such a Lease is therefore to receive
the several Quotas of Credit, in proportion with Lands in Fee, as herein before
is particularly set forth and declared. And on what Terms, as to Leases.


As to Houses to be Insured against Fire.
40. And that as to Houses, not only they are to be Insured from Fire, But
likewise for as much as Houses are, by decay and Dilapidation, Subjected to
more and greater Hazard and Contingency than Lands; therefore a double Value in
Houses is required, by this Undertaking, to Secure the Credit to be Issued
thereon.

Provision against Negligence, or Damage, by any relating to this Constitution.
41. And for the better and more Effectual prevention, of any hindrance,
impediment or obstruction, in the affairs and business of this great
Undertaking, that may arise by the Default. Willfulness, Perverseness,
Obstinacy, or voluntary, Negligence, of any Person or Persons whatsoever, from
time to time to be Employed in this Office of Land Credit, or any of the
Branches or Chambers thereto belonging; It is hereby further declared to be an
Essential of this Constitution, that if any one of the said three Principal
Constituent Members or Branches thereof, do or shall, at any time hereafter,
Plainly, Openly, or Wilfully, neglect their duty, in Matters of Consequence,
and do not rectify the same, upon Notice given by both, or either of the other
Branches, or by the Chamber of Comptrol as Representing the Branch of Visitors,
or by the Chamber of Trade, as Representing the Branch of the Land Subscribers
and Proprietors, or by the Chamber of Undertakers, that then the other two
Branches of this Undertaking, or the Respective Chambers of Trade, and of
Comptrol, the first as Representing the Branch of Proprietors, and the Second
as Representing the Branch of Visitors, as the case shall require, shall and
may Supply such defect pro interim and may Pro natura commissi vel delicti,
Suspend or remove such Person or Persons, as upon Inquiry and Examination,
shall appear to be faulty therein; whose places are to be Resupplied by their
respective Branch or Chamber, according to the true meaning of this present
Constitution.

42. Freedom reserved to Dr. Chamberlen, the Undertakers, or Managers, and
Comptrolers, to be present at the debates of any of the several Chambers.
And also, that the said Hugh Chamberlen, or any Member of the Chamber of
Undertakers, or Branch of Managers, as also any of the Comptrolers, may be at
any time present in any of the Branches, Chambers, or Offices, belonging to
this Undertaking; and may there freely, Ask, Inquire Move, or Offer whatever
any of them shall Judge to be Conducing to the General Good.

43. Governors of Trade, the Constant Representatives of the Proprietors.
And it is hereby Declared to be also an Essential of this Constitution, that
the Governors of the Trade, are to be the Constant Representative of the Branch
of the Land Subscribers and Proprietors; and to do all acts for them, in the
Intervals of the Session of that Branch; to prevent the Trouble and
Inconvenience of too frequent Assembling so great a Body without Just and
Necessary Cause.

Yet that the Body of the Proprietors may, upon occasion, assemble, or be
assem^led, in person, or by Proxy.
44. Yet that the Body of the Proprietors may by Order of one, or both of the
other Branches, or of the said Chamber of Undertakers, be assembled in Person,
or by Proxy; or the said Body of Proprietors may also be assembled, at the
Request of any Fifty Person, or more, being Proprietors for one third, or more,
of the whole of the Rent-Charges, that for the time being shall be vested as
aforesaid, in the Trustees for Estates settled for the Service of this
Undertaking. And that the said Branch of Proprietors being so Assembled, may,
at their pleasure, freely inquire into, and examine all Books, Papers, Accounts
and Proceedings, in any wise belonging or appertaining to this Undertaking, or
any of the Branches, Chambers or Offices thereof; and may prepare and give into
the Chambers of Managers and of Comptrol, or either of them, What the
Proprietors being assembled may do.
Memorials of whatever they shall judge fit and proper; which done, that
Assembly is, for that time, dissolved; and thereupon the Chambers of Comptrol,
of Trade, and of Management, are forthwith to deliberate, thereon de die in
diem, till Resolutions be taken by the said three Chambers, or any two of them,
in every point contained in such Memorials: which Resolutions, with the Reasons
whereon they were Founded, are to be Entered fair by the Secretaries of those
three Chambers. Their Memorials remitted to the Judgment of the three Chambers
of Comptrol of Trade, and of Management.


45. And it is likewise hereby Provided and Constituted, that the Land
Proprietors do at first meet as Subscribers only, and do then choose the
Auditor, Comptrolers, and Governors of Trade for that Branch; in order to
Settle these three Chambers, and give a beginning to the Undertaking: First
Meeting of the Land Subscribers.
Which Elections made, that Assembly is Dissolved, and no more to be
Reassembled as mere Subscribers: But, within one Year after two hundred
thousand pounds per Annum, shall be Actually made over to this Undertaking, all
the then so settled Land Subscribers and Proprietors, are to be Re-assembled,
Their second Meeting.
in a General Meeting of that Branch; which till then is to be in all things
Represented by the Chamber of Trade as at first settled. Till when, represented
by the Chamber of Trade.
This Branch, thus Re-assembled, are to Elect their Auditor, Comptrolers, and
Governors of Trade, either de novo, or the same Persons, or any of them, that
shall then be found in the Administration of those Employments. What they do at
their second Meeting.
The said Branch may also then Proceed, to Frame any Remonstrance or Memorial,
they shall Judge Proper to the Good of the Undertaking, and may transmit the
same to such Consideration as herein before, on like occasion, is directed to
be done; and are then, for that time, dissolved.

46. How the Branch of Land Subscribers to be Summoned.
And that, the Summons or Notice for Assembling of this Branch, shall be by
affixing Papers of the time and place of Meeting, at and in all or most of the
Appartments of the Several Branches or Chambers of this Undertaking; at the
Royal Exchange in London; at Westminster Hall; at the four Inns of Court; at
Temple Bar; at Charing Cross; at St. James's; and So-Ho; and at other Eminent
and Public Places in and about the Cities of London and Westminster; and
likewise by causing Notice of such Meeting to be put into the Gazett; or other
public News Papers, if the same will be permitted on the Usual Terms of Common
Advertisements: And that at Least fourteen Days Notice be given of every such
Meeting; and that such Notice having been so given, any fifty or more of them
appearing, are to have as full Right and Power to proceed to Business, as if
all were present.

Number of Votes in the Chamber of Trade.
47. And it is hereby further declared, that in the Chamber of Trade, the Six
and thirty Governors (of which Number that Chamber is to Consist) are but three
distinct Votes, that is to say, the Twelve Governors chosen by the Lords
Visitors, or any three or more of them, are one vote; the Twelve Governors
chosen by the Land Subscribers or Proprietors; or any three or more of them,
are also one vote; and the Twelve Governors, or any three or more of them,
chosen by the Office Chamber or Branch of Managers are likewise one Vote; and a
Quorum is to consist of three or more of the Governors for each Branch. Their
Quorum.


48. Votes in the Chamber of Comptrol.
And that in the Chamber of Comptrol are Likewise to be but three distinct
Votes, that is to say, one for each of the three aforesaid chief and
Constituent Branches; and a Quorum is to consist of any three or more of the
Comptrollers for each Branch. Their Quorum.


49. And it is hereby declared to be Absolutely and Indispensibly Essential,
that the Hands of three of the Comptrolers, (viz.) of one for each Branch, are
to be to every Bill of Land Credit to be Issued by this Office or Undertaking,
One Comptroler of each Branch, to attest every Bill.
in Attestation to all Men, that they are duly and bona fide founded upon
Land, according to the tenor and true Intent and Meaning of these presents. And
that such Bills of this Credit, as shall return back to this Office, for and in
lieu of the Rent Charges or Annual payments, as aforesaid, shall be Annually
Cancelled; And that the Bills be duly Cancelled.
and an Authentic Registry or Entry thereof made, by or in presence of one or
more of the said Comptrolers for each of the said three Branches; who shall
sign such Entry or Registry thereof, and cause the same to be Countersigned by
the Secretary of that Chamber.

50. And it is hereby further declared, that the most exact care and caution,
shall from time to time be taken, for Security of the Treasure belonging to
this Office or Undertaking, Care of the Treasury.
to prevent any Loss or Embezlement thereof: And care is to be taken, that the
Treasury Chamber do pay and dispose the same according to proper Orders,
Treasurers duty.
being careful to take due Vouchers to Discharge it self thereof, according to
the Tenor or true intent and meaning of this present Constitution, and such
Establishment and Orders as shall be made in pursuance hereof.

51. Comptrolers and Governors of Trade, belonging to the Visitors, or
Subscribers, are to fill up the Vacancy of any Office of their respective
Branches.
And that the Comptrolers and Governors of Trade, for the Lords Visitors, or
Proprietors, may severally and respectively fill or Supply, the Vacancy of any
Office belonging to their several and respective Principals; which Choice shall
or may be laid before such Principals at their next Assembling, to be Confirmed
or Annulled at their pleasure; saving to the Lords Visitors, the Power of
Presenting or Choosing Comptrolers and Governors of Trade from time to time as
is herein before particularly Mentioned.

Place of paying the Rent Charges; and the time.
52. And further, That the several Rent-Charges, or Annual Payments to this
Undertaking, are to be made payable at the Chamber of Comptroul, in Easter Term
Yearly, or within Forty Days following, till the end of the Term of Years for
such Annuities, or Yearly Payments; and the first payment thereof is to be
made, in the first Easter Term from and after the end of the first Year, When
the first Payment is to commence.
from the Conveyance of each Estate to this Undertaking, by the respective
Subscriber or Proprietor; or within Forty Days after the said last-mentioned
Easter Term.

53. And further, That the Chamber of Trade is solely to be defrayed in all its
Charges, stated and contingent, out of one fourth part of the Neat Profits
arising by such Trade: Joint Stock is to defray its proper charge and expense,
out of the fourth part of the neat Profits.
Out of which fourth part, the Six and Thirty Governors thereof (as Men of
Worth and Value employed in so great Affairs, and to encourage their utmost
Application, and sincere Transacting, in discharge of their Trusts, without
making any private, clandestine, or other Profit to themselves, over and above
the Allowance to them hereby appointed) are to be allowed Five Hundred Pounds
a-piece per Annum, for their standing Fee; Salary of the Governors of Trade.
in case the same exceed not one third, of the aforesaid fourth part, of the
Neat produce of the said Trade, before hereby allotted for defraying all manner
of Charge, stated and contingent, relating to, or affecting the said Chamber of
Trade.

54. Contingent Perquisites to the Governors of Trade.
And that as a further inducement to the Application and Industry of the said
Six and Thirty Governors, Ten Shillings in the Pound shall be further allowed,
out of all Profits to arise by such Trade, over and above Ten per Cent. per
Annum: Of which Poundage, one half shall be divided equally among the said Six
and Thirty Governors; and the other half shall be distributed, among such
Subordinate Officers or Servants belonging to the said Chamber of Trade; or
among such other Person or Persons that shall render any Eminent Service in
particular to the said Chamber of Trade, or in General to this Undertaking, in
all or any of its Parts or Branches; And to their Subordinate Officers, and
others, for Eminent Service.
such Rewards, to be given according to the several and respective Merits of
every, or any such Person or Persons, whereof the said Governors of Trade are
to be Judges: Of which, the Governors of Trade are to judge.
Yet so, that an Appeal may be made to the Office or Chamber of Management, and
to the Chamber of Comptroul, by any who are aggrieved by the distribution of
such Rewards: Yet an Appeal lies, and when.
Which Chambers, shall thereupon take those Matters into Consideration; and
such Order therein shall stand and be decisive, as the said Three Chambers, of
Comptroul, of Management, and of Trade, or any Two of them, shall think fit to
agree and determine.

55. And further, That the said Chamber of Trade, shall also have full Power to
choose all their own Officers; Chambers of Trade choose their own Officers.
except their Secretary, who is to be chosen by the Chamber of Undertakers; and
whose Salary, of Five Hundred Pounds per Annum, is to be paid by the said
Chamber of Trade, out of the aforesaid one fourth part of the Profits of the
Joint Stock: And the said Chamber of Trade, is to make all Rules and Orders for
it self, Officers, and Dependents; and to deliberate and determine upon all
Matters and Incidents relating to their Trade; Powers of the Chamber of Trade.
yet so, as that the said Chamber, at any time upon Demand or Request in that
behalf made, by the Lords Visitors, by the Branch of Proprietors, by the Branch
of Managers, and by the Chamber of Comptroul, or Chamber of Undertakers, or by
any of them, shall at any time communicate and impart to them, or any of them,
so desiring, all Matters and Things whatsoever, that shall be demanded or
desired: Subject to an Enquiry, by the several Branches, and Chambers, of
Comptroul, and of Undertakers.
And if the said Lords Visitors, Proprietors, Undertakers, Managers, and
Comptrolers, or any three, or more of them, the said Branches, Chambers or
Offices, shall disagree to any Project of Trade, pursuing or intended by the
said Chamber of Trade, as too hazardous in its self, or as any way prejudicial
to the English Crown or Nation; then such Project of Trade shall be forthwith
wholly discontinued, or laid aside, and no further practiced or pursued. And
the Reason why.


56. And further, That the said Chamber of Trade, are never to Endeavor the
becoming the sole Trader to any part or place, or in any Commodity, exclusive
to others; Against Exclusive Ingrossings, to the public prejudice.
nor are at any time to ingross any sort of Commodity, Goods or Merchandise,
unless in order to serve the Nation better and cheaper than would otherwise
have been done: And then that the produce of such Trade do not in any such Case
exceed Twenty per Cent. per Annum; nor more than Ten per Cent. per Annum, at
the utmost, Profits limited, in case of Engrossing, to 10 per Cent. in some
cases, and to 20 in others.
in Commodities of Necessity to the support of Life, or Goods, or Merchandise,
for Service of the King in his Fleets or Armies.

57. Care for Monied Persons, Widows, and Orphans.
And it is hereby further declared, That for the Accommodation of such Monied
Persons, whether Widows, Orphans, or others, who know no better way to Employ
their Stocks of Money, they may at all times bring into the Joint Stock of
Trade, what Sum or Sums of Money they please, either by way of Loan, at Five
per Cent. Interest; or by way of Profit and Loss in the Trade: So that no
Fractional Sums, but only even Hundred Pounds, be so brought in; and no less
Sum than One Hundred Pounds. And so, that what shall be brought in upon Loan,
shall continue for One Year certain, and after at Six Months notice from the
time of Interest being payable: And also that the Money so to be brought in to
Trade upon Profit and Loss, shall not be drawn out, but may at any time be
transferred in the Books of the Chamber of Trade: Upon which Consideration,
such Money so to be brought in upon Profit or Loss, shall be admitted to
proportional Dividends, with Land Proprietors, of the Profits to arise by the
Joint Stock of Trade, so as aforesaid to be settled and erected: And this
provision is thus made, to the intent that none may be necessitated to keep
Money by them dead and unimployed; and thereby be forced, to their Loss, to
live upon their Principal: The reason for their Admission.
And also to the end, that Persons ignorant of Trade, and otherwise
incapacitated for it, may yet receive the Benefit of it, without the Trouble,
and without the Hazard of being wronged or defrauded therein; because of the
strict Checks upon this Trade, and the frank and open procedure of it; wherein
no secret, clandestine Practices will be permitted, nor any of the narrow,
selfish and sinister Arts, of some cunning Merchants, who postpone fair
Dealing, and the public Good, to their private and sordid Lucre.

58. The time for the Joint Stock to Account.
And further, the said Chamber of Trade, shall Yearly make up their Books to
Midsummer; so that in Michaelmas Term Yearly, all Persons concerned may see, to
what amounts their several and respective Quotaes of the Dividend of Profit;
and may accordingly receive the same, at any time upon Demand, at the Treasury
of the said Chamber of Trade.

59. Office to be held in or about London, etc.
And moreover, That the constant Residential Apartments, of the Head or General
Office for this Undertaking, that is to say, of the three Principal or
Constituent Branches, and of the Chambers of Undertakers, of Trade, of
Comptroul, of Audit, of Counsel, of Treasury, of Trustees, of the Secretaries,
Survey, Register, of the Bills, Agent, and others on them depending, shall be
held within the Cities or Liberties of London, and Westminster, or one of them;
or within the Parts or Places comprised within the London Weekly Bills of
Mortality.

Business of every Chamber, to be therein hung up in Tables.
60. And also, That to prevent the imposing upon any Person, who shall Transact
or Negotiate any Matters or Things with this Undertaking, the Authority, Power,
and Business of every Chamber or Office, shall, with all convenient speed, be
hung up therein, fairly written in Tables, and so always continued, in some
public Place of each Chamber or Office, so as to be freely and easily Read by
all that please.

61. All Officers for Life; except, etc.
And that all manner of Officers, Superior, and Subaltern or Inferior, be for
Life; (except those Chosen, the first time, by the Branch of Land Subscribers,
who are to be subject once to a New Election, as is herein before expressed)
unless suspended, or removed, in case of wilful and obstinate Neglect or
Malversation, having been first admonished, and always heard in their
Vindication, before Censure pass upon them.

62. The Salaries to go out of the Profits.
And likewise, That all Salaries are to go out of the Profits to arise by this
Undertaking; that for the first Year, to be accounted from Midsummer, 1696,
only bare Subsistence is to be paid, Only Subsistence to some, for a Year from
Midsummer, 1696.
to such as cannot be without it: That half Salary be paid to all, as soon as
One Hundred Thousand Pound Annuities shall be settled for the Ends of this
Undertaking; and that full Salary, according to the Establishment, with all
Arrears, including also the first Year from Midsummer One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety and Six, be constantly paid, as soon as Two Hundred Thousand Pounds such
Annuities shall be so settled. How payment of Salaries afterward.


63. Confirmation of Orders already made.
And further, That all Resolves, Regulations, Rules, and Orders, made, agreed,
or declared, by the Eight Original Undertakers, on the Thirteenth Day of March
last, or at any time since by the Chamber of the said Undertakers made, to the
Day of the Date hereof, be valid and obliging to all the Parties to these
Presents, and to all others properly concerned therein.

64. Provision against Election of Vnqualified Persons for Auditors,
Comptrolers, or Governors of Trade.
And Moreover, It is hereby Provided always, That if any such Auditor,
Comptroler, or Governor of Trade as aforesaid, at any time chosen for the
service of this Undertaking, shall, in the Judgment of the Branch of
Undertakers and Managers, seem unqualified to answer the Character and Station
to which such Auditor, Comptroler, or Governor, shall be respectively elected;
whereby the good ends and purposes of this Undertaking, may be in danger to be
thereby Obstructed or Impaired; And if the same shall be so resolved, upon a
Scrutiny therefore to be made by Balot, in a Meeting held for the said Branch;
for which Resolve, the said Branch, or any Member thereof, shall be obliged to
render no other Reason or Account, than the result of such their Scrutiny by
the Balot, as aforesaid; that then the Election of every such Person shall be
to all Intents and Purposes absolutely Null and Void; and such Vacancy shall be
supplied by the former Elector or Electors, or otherwise, according to the
Tenor and true Meaning of these Presents; so that such Scrutiny be therefore
made, within one Month after the Inrollment of these Presents in some Court of
Record, or within one Month next after Report made to the said Branch of
Undertakers and Managers, of the Election of any such Auditor, Comptroler, or
Governor of Trade.

65. Reserve for furthe(...) Deed, for better Explanation, etc.
And lastly, That the said now Undertakers and Managers, or the Undertakers and
Managers at any time hereafter for the time being, may at any time hereafter,
by Advice of Council Learned in the Law, Make, Seal, and Execute any further,
or other Deed, or Instrument, for the better Explanation or Execution of all,
or any of the Clauses, Articles, Trusts, and Powers, in and by this present
Constitution and Settlement mentioned or intended.

In Witness whereof, the said Undertakers and Managers herein before first
abovenamed, have hereunto set their Hands and Seals. Dated at London, the
Fifteenth Day of July in the Eighth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque Dom. 1696.
FINIS.
London Printed, and are to be Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Gracious-Street. 1696.


