AN ANSWER OF HVMPHREY CHAMBERS, D. D. Rector of PEWSEY, in the County OF WILTS,

To the CHARGE of WALTER BVSHNEL, Vicar of BOX, in the same County.

Published in a Book of his entitled; A Narrative of the Proceedings of the
Commissioners appointed by O. Cromwell for ejecting scandalous and ignorant
Ministers, in the case of Walter Bushnel, etc.

With a Vindication of the said Commissioners annexed.

Humbly submitted to public Censure

Job 31. 35, 36. O that mine Adversary had written a Book!
Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a Crown to me.
1 Cor 4. 4, 5. I know nothing by my self, yet am not hereby justified, but he
that judges me is the Lord.
Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Johnson, at the Golden-Key in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

TO THE HONORABLE, Sir Anthony Ashlie-Cooper, Knight and Baronet: AND, John
Earnly Esquire; Knights of the Shire for the County of Wilts: As also to the
Honorable, the Citizens and Burgesses returned for this present Parliament,
for the respective City and Buroughs of the same County.
Honored and Honorable Gentlemen,
I Account it my great happiness that Mr. Bushnel of Box having published a
heavy charge against the Commiss. of the County of Wilts, appointed for the
ejecting of scandalous and ignorant Ministers, and therein bent himself most
fiercely against me as a most grievous offender, has, by dedicating his
Narrative to you, put a necessity upon me, (unless I would plead guilty to
all he charge me with) to publish my answer, and make you the Judges (which
I do with all readiness and cheerfulness) between him and me. I will not
speak a word to fore-stall your judgment, but humbly beg your pardon for my
enforced boldness, in directing this my Answer unto you, at whose feet I lay,
and leave it and my self with all content. Whereas Mr. Bushnel, toward the end
of his Narrative, having immediately before spoken of me, by name, and the
Commissioners, writes in his Scoffing Dialect, and Character, Page 208. These
men (as godly as they are) love dearly to be fingring money; for my part (I am
sure) I never fingred a farthing, but spent many a pound whilst I was employed
as an Assistant to the Commissioners; and I cannot otherwise apprehend but that
all the Commissioners are so free from fingering a penny in the execution of
their Commission from first to last, that they are all ready (as I have heard
some of them protest they are, and by name Mr. Blisset) to purge themselves by
oath from this crime, and challenge any man to speak, who can testify the
contrary of them; I will no further trouble you who are taken up in the weighty
affairs of the Nations, wherein that the Lord would graciously direct and
assist you, and that Honorable Court whereof you are members, to act to his
glory, the honor of his Majesty, and the happy establishment of peace, truth,
and righteousness in our Land, is the earnest prayer of

Your most observant (though unworthy) servant, Humphry Chambers.

TO THE Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
IF ever a Book has come under thy view and perusal, entitled, A Narrative of
the Proceedings of the Commissioners appointed by O. Cromwell for ejecting of
scandalous and ignorant Ministers, in the case of Walter Bushnel, Clerk, Vicar
of Box, in the County of Wilts, thou have then received a heavy charge against
my self, amongst others, into one of thy ears, all that I shall beg of thee,
is, but to keep the other ear open to hear the Answer, and then be thou an
impartial Umpire between us. Si accusasse sufficiat, etc. If a charge go for
proof, none can be innocent. Mr. Bushnels Book came first to my hand and view
on Thursday the sixteenth of August, in the evening; Friday I spent in reading
of it, on Saturday I employed as much time as I could spare from my studies
preparatory to the Lords day, in writing my Answer, which on Tuesday, August
21. I delivered to a friend to be transcribed for the Press; I acquaint thee
with this, only, to show that Truth (needing no invention or art to set it
off) may speedily be spoken without any long study. I shall add no more but
those never to be forgotten words of our blessed Savior; Judge not according
to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

Thine in the Lord HUMPHREY CHAMBERS.

AN ANSWER to a CHARGE against the Commissioners, for ejecting scandalous and
ignorant Ministers, in the County of Wilts, published in Print by Walter
Bushnel Vicar of Box, so far as it concerns Humphrey Chambers, Rector of
Pewsey, submitted to public censure.
ALthough I have no fear, that what Mr. Bushnel has written, will impair my
Reputation, with those to whom we are both known (who are not a few) seeing
we were born, and for diverse years lived within few miles one of another; And
though I desire not to put Mr. Bushnel to bestow any more of his invention and
eloquence upon me, by replying upon what I shall write, yet being told by one
who is a common and real friend Mr. Carter of Marlebrough.
both to Mr. Bushnel and my self (before I had read this Book) That I was so
deeply concerned in the Charge contained therein, that if I did not some way
vindicate my self, Religion would suffer greatly through me; and finding the
same apprehension in some other Christian friends, I was induced to write this
Answer for my self, leaving others to clear themselves from the crimes
objected, as they shall see occasion, which I conceive without much difficulty
they may do.

Pa. 225.
Mr. Bushnel says, that he had no revengeful thought, nor had he in the
publication of his Narrative, any aim to asperse those of whom he wrote, which
if any (who reading his book) can believe to be true, I shall not persuade
them to the contrary: Certain it is, that he is without hesitation, to be
credited in his whole Narrative, if what he writes in his Epistle Dedicatory
were true, viz. I have not charged them with a syllable which I am not able by
proofs to make good upon them. This brings the business to a direct and short
issue, which I heartily desire it may be put upon, as far as I am concerned in
it; and wish for no other Judges, than those Honorable Gentlemen to whom Mr.
Bushnel has dedicated his Narrative. I do not intend to varnish or puzzle the
business with multitude or affectation of words, but with affected brevity and
plainness, to lay down Mr. Bushnels Charge against me, that he may apply his
proofs to the several branches of it, and then let all wise and good men judge
between us.

Epist. Ded.
So it was, that some of the Commissioners, Ministers, Witnesses and others,
who have eaten my bread, have, and do still, upon all opportunities offered or
sought, report me to the world for such a one, so scandalous and ignorant, as
altogether unfit either to return to my own living, or to be admitted to any
other.

Answ.
This I say is utterly and wholly untrue as to my self, and it rests upon Mr.
Bushnel to prove,

1 That I did ever eat a bit of his bread, yea, I bless the Lord I know not
that (in the late Troubles) I was ever possessed of what any other man had a
legal right to, unto the value of one penny.

2 That I did ever (to bate him that of all opportuniti^s offered or sought)
report him to be so ignorant, and so scandalous, as to be altogether unfit to
return to his own, or to be admitted to any other Living; I am well assured
that no such words ever passed from my mouth.

Epistle to the Reader.
These respective persons* I shall charge, and make good this Charge upon them:
First, The Ministers, that they were ever meddling with that which they had
nothing to do withal. And page 216, 217. It may be upon this very account,
might the Doctor, and Mr. Byfield intrude so much and act so fiercely as the^
did in matters of that cognizance which they had nothing to do withal: And
after, All which notwithstanding none took so much upon them in matter of
scandal, as these two.

Answ.
This, as to my self, is a palpable and through untruth, as all the
Commissioners, the Council, and the Officers, who attended the business, can
well testify: I have many a time left the Commissioners, when there was no
business of examination about insufficiency before them, and have hardly spoken
in a whole day to any matter of scandal, when I have been present. It lies on
Mr. Bushnel to prove the contrary, to make his words good, which I am sure he
can never do.

Epistle to the Reader.
I charge them all, Commissioners, Ministers, Clerk, for countenancing and
encouraging infamous persons, such who had forsworn themselves, and touching
some of themselves, in their hearing, etc.

Answ.
This I utterly deny as to my self, and am confident he will never be able to
prove it, against my self, or any the Commissioners, which will be better
tried, when we come to particulars included in this general.

Page 5.
Writing of John Trevers, (who exhibited the first Articles against him) as a
mercinary wretch, says, And, for some such kind of man was he looked upon by
Mr. Chambers himself when he first delivered in these Articles against me,
who (as he has reported) called for the Articles, with a purpose to have torn
them, because they were exhibited by such a hand.

Answ.
I trust Mr. Bushnel intended not this as any part of his Charge against me,
seeing it pleads strongly and truly for me, that I had no evil intention
against him, nor thought of promoting any Articles to his prejudice, as indeed
I had not, and was greatly troubled in my spirit, that such a fellow as I had
heard Trevers to be, should bring in Articles against a Learned Minister, as I
then took Mr. Bushnel to be.

Page 6.
And here (for an introduction to the honesty and discretion of the Doctor) I
shall observe this unto thee, that (as I have been told) he observed it, that
although there were several names subscribed, yet they were all written in the
same hand, from which it must needs follow, that by the Doctors confession, the
whole writing, both Articles and hands, might be all forged, as indeed they
were; so that me thinks, the Dr. has very much over-shot himself in point of
discretion, for he looks upon the Articles the more, because subscribed with
such and so many names, and yet he acknowledges all the names to be written
with one hand, which would have made any sober man the more to have suspected
it.

Answ.
And upon this ground I did the more suspect the paper, and openly declared my
dissatisfaction, as to the tender of these Articles by Trevers; And for my part
(I conceive) they were then looked upon by the Commissioners, as of no value,
and do still conceive, that they were not the Articles which were insisted on
by the Commissioners; But that another paper of Articles was afterward by
other hands exhibited against him, which were read unto him as his charge: What
cause therefore he had in this place to make such an outcry about my honesty
and discretion, Let others judge.

Page 6.
But yet the Doctor had an evasion for this, for at my appearing before them at
Calne, some of those whose names were subscribed, desired a sight of the paper,
that they might know who had thus abused them, which they could not obtain, yet
the Doctor (that we might not prove his friends guilty of forgery) endeavors
to preserve their Reputation with a Salvo to some such purpose, That their
names were written only by way of a Memorandum, that in case they were called
upon, they could depose to these Articles, that that might be done without
their knowledge (I think he added) that it was an usual course in the
proceedings of these Commissioners.

Answ.
This appears to be no strange Relation, being only of words spoken by me
to some such purpose, and depending only on Mr. Bushne^s, I think; And indeed
I cannot say what I then spoke, but I believe, if Mr. Bushnel do well recall
himself, whatever I spoke, it was spoken in a by-discourse to him, and those
with him; I am confident he can never prove, that I was unwilling that they
whose names were subscribed, should have had a fight of the paper, or willing
to give any countenance to that paper, or the hand which delivered it, or the
persons who contrived it, who are wholly unknown to me, and ever were.

Page 7.
But now I must tell thee, that many of them whose names were subscribed unto
those Articles did touching my self, first under their own hands, certify to
these Commissioners the quite contrary to these Articles, and afterward being
before them and sworn, were so far from testifying any thing to the sense of
the Articles, as that all they said was to my vindication, all which was
industriously declined by the Dr. and his Commissioners.

Answ.
Passing by your tart, groundless and frequent jear of my Commissioners, Try,
if you can prove this Syllable, that I did industriously decline your
vindication by your witnesses; prove that I was active, and stirring in that
way, either in your case, or any other case, which was ever before the
Commissioners, I am sure you will never prove it.

Page 69.
Reporting that one who was summoned for a witness, apprehended that two of the
witnesses sworn against him, spoke out of malice; Mr. Bushnel writes, which
(said he) the Commissioners having more understanding than we, must needs
perceive, and so they did some of them, and one of them a Minister If a
Minister, then no Commissioner.
too, (to the Doctors credit be it spoken) And yet, which is strange in this
man, although he discovered their leaven, and so must know them to act from
base principles, and with reference to a base end, yet he always vouchsafed
to these men whom he knew thus to act, his favorable countenance and
furtherance.

Answ.
That I may at once draw this, and all charges of the like nature in the
Narrative to a plain issue, that Mr. Bushnel may see what he is to apply his
proofs unto; I will here briefly relate, according to truth, how far I was
interessed in this business of Mr. Bushnel. At the first tendering the Articles
by Trevers, I was disquieted, and much unsatisfied, and expressed my
apprehension therein, as before appears: Afterward, when William Pinchin,
and Obadiah Cheltnam (altogether without any thought or knowledge of mine)
tendered Articles against Mr. Bushnel, which were read to him, I did then (if
he call himself to remembrance) go from the table to Mr. Bushnel, as owning
his acquaintance, and he and I exchanged some friendly words, he expressing a
great defiance of the Articles, and sense of the vileness of them (if they
could be proved) and then and there it was that I said to him, (he calling
for witnesses to prove the Articles) That the several parties should be
brought face to face, as he truly reports, page 4. At that time I looked on
Mr. Bushnel as a friend, from whom I should have expected, and who might have
expected from me, any common friendly courtesy, there having never been any
unfriendly passage between Mr. Bushnel and my self all our days. After this
William Pinchin, and Obadiah Cheltnam came to me, as being both known to me,
to speak with me about Mr. Bushnels business; They well know with what
earnestness I pressed them both, to take heed what they did, and to look
carefully to it, upon what grounds, and to what end they moved therein, telling
them, that if from private discontents, malice, covetousness, or any such
wretched grounds they did prosecute this Charge against the said Mr. Bushnel,
the Lord would surely require it of them; Whereupon they did with extraordinary
earnestness protest to me, that they had no enmity against Mr. Bushnel, nor
desire or thought of making advantage by his removal, but that they did mind
the good of their own (and others) souls in what they were doing, saying, that
he preached in such a Scholar-like way, that his Parishioners were little
profited by him, and that the scandalous miscarriages charged in the Articles
would be fully proved against him; Upon this (being prevailed upon by their
often and earnest protestations.) I left them to do what they thought fit,
only I did take knowledge of them when they appeared before the Commissioners,
as persons known to me, but never opened my mouth in their commendation, nor
to further them, or any witness which they brought to prove the Articles
against Mr. Bushnel: The Articles of scandal (as Mr. Bushnel often and truly
intimates) I had nothing to do with, being no Commissioner; Neither did I take
upon me to stickle about them one way or other; And as for Mr. Bushnels last
appearance at Lavington, when the Order was drawn up against him for his
ejectment, as he tells us, page 223. I was not then present, nor know I what
was passed against him.

And at Sarum, when the order of Ejection was published against Mr. Bushnel,
how very unwilling I was to have had any thing to do in the examination of him,
they who were present know, and with what fair respect I managed that part of
his examination which fell to my share, Mr. Bushnel may, and if he do not,
others do very well remember. Thus having made a true Relation how far I was
concerned in Mr. Bushnels business; That which rests upon him to prove in the
former Charge, is,

1 That I did know that Pinchin and Powel (the two witnesses) did act from base
principles, and to base ends, which I utterly deny.

2 That I afforded unto them furtherance in what they did, whereas Powel I knew
not, nor spoke I any thing (that I know) to the furtherance of Pinchins
testimony, but left it according to my place, to the Commissioners to consider
of it.

But now having related how able and ready he was to prove horrid and
barbarous crimes acted by Pinchin against his Father, Page 71.
and other his nearest Relations (to take off the force of his testimony) None,
says Mr. Bushnel, was more forward to withstand and oppose this, than Dr.
Chambers, who knew much of it to be true, but was not willing ('it is like) that
it should come to the knowledge of these Gentlemen, for fear that he should
thereby have What imaginable ground could I have of such fear, who was nothing
concerned in the business.
lost so precious a witness, or perhaps for fear Speak out Man, I fear not the
testimony of any person whatsoever.
that he should have heard something which would have merely reflected on
himself; This Dr. then acknowledging that there had been some small differences
between them, praying that no more words might be made of it; together with an
intimation that all differences were now composed, or to some such purpose.

Ans. The last words (or to some such purpose) evidence that Mr. Bushnel does
not well remember what I said, neither indeed do I; But this I am confident of,
that I did never speak those words, wherein the main weight of this Charge
lies, viz. That there had been some small differences between William Pinchin
and his Father: for though I never knew so much of the difference between them,
as Mr. Bushnel has here expressed, yet by what I had heard about William
Pinchins wicked and horrid carriage toward his Father, I did in my heart
greatly loathe it, and could never mince it under the name of small
differences, possibly I might (though I do not now remember it) upon William
Pinchins earnest protestation which he made to me, of his desire of becoming
a new man, say something of that business as a matter that was then past, but
that I did color it over with the name of small differences, or words to any
such purpose, I assuredly believe is not true, nor will ever be proved, and
shall gladly embrace Mr. Bushnels counsel laid down, page 73. In these words, I
could advise Mr. Chambers to admonish William Pinchin, that he would sadly
consider of it in this his day.

Page 89.
Upon the recital of Jane Hendyes deposition in his behalf Mr. Bushnel adds,
But now William Pinchin, at Lavington boldly interposes, and tells the
Commissioners, that his Mother (this Jone Pinchin) had told him that this Jane
Hendy had said so much to her, on which Mr. Chambers adds, that if Goodwife
Pinchin had said so, he was bound to believe her. And again at Marleborough,
May 8. When there were papers delivered in by William Pinchin, written by
himself, wherein it was affirmed under her mark, that Jane Hendy should say so,
the Doctor adds again, That if Goodwife Pinchin said so, he was in conscience
bound to believe her: Now by the Doctors leave, I conceive these words of his,
I am bound, and I am bound in conscience to believe her, were not spoken by
him, either with discretion or charity.

Answ.
I am yet to learn that I transgressed the Rules, either of discretion, or
charity, in saying of a woman, whom I had for many years often conversed with,
and taken to be a stayed Christian woman, that I was bound, and bound in
conscience to believe, what she said and attested under her hand; But Mr.
Bushnel adds.

Not with so much advisedness or discretion: For it is well known that William
Pinchin had that power over his Mother, that she dared not but to say, and to
do as her son would have her, I believe so well known, that the Doctor himself
could not be altogether ignorant of it.

Answ.
To believe that I would say that I was bound in conscience to believe a woman
of whom I knew that her son had power over her to make her say or do what he
pleased, I take it does savor of little charity in Mr. Bushnel, I hope I durst
not (whatever Mr. Bushnel believes of me) upon any terms have said, that I
was bound in conscience to believe Goodwife Pinchin, if I had known, or in the
least suspected her to have been so little a Christian, as to be under the
power of her son, to make her say and do what he please: I did fully believe
it was otherwise with her, when I showed my belief of what she spoke.

Page 91.
And why might not the Dr. be mistaken in her, (viz. Goodwife Pinchin) as well
as he has been in many others (Women I mean, for there his acquaintance did
especially lie, and these, many of them such, who had the hand over their
husbands) who have followed him as far, and as often as Jone Pinchin, and yet are
now fallen off both from his Doctrine and Acquaintance.

Answ.
I know nothing in any man which may exempt others from a possibility of being
deceived in him, whilst he has the deceitful heart of man in his bosom: No
doubt therefore I might be deceived in Goodwife Pinchin; but I was so far
persuaded of her Christianity at that time, when I spoke, that I had good
ground to believe, that she would not wilfully speak and swear against her own
knowledge; And I am still bound to believe as much of her, until I see the
contrary proved upon her, by some who afford her liberty to answer for her
self: That my acquaintance did especially lie with women, as Mr. Bushnel does
here confidently and jeeringly (in another Character, for fear it should not
be noted) affirm, is utterly untrue, as the whole country (where I then lived)
knows, wherein I had the happiness to be intimately acquainted with very many
men of best repute in all ranks, who afforded me a large share in their loving
respects. It is true, that my Ministry found acceptance with diverse Christian
women, whose acquaintance I have no cause to be ashamed of; if any of them,
(for no doubt Mr. Bushnel greatly outlasheth in the word many) had the hand
over their husbands, it was matter of grief to me, wheresoever I saw it; and
if many who used to hear me, be fallen often from my Doctrine and Acquaintance,
I hope their defection cannot be charged upon me, as my crime. The Lord show
them mercy, and return them into the way of truth.

And now for Dr. Chambers (a man of so much reverence and learning) to say
(when it had been good manners in him to hold his peace) that if Goodwife
Pinchin had said so, Page 94.
he was in conscience bound to believe her, was (upon the matter) to say to
this Jane Hendyes face, that she had twice foresworn her self.

Answ:
Here again Mr. Bushnel puts in his jeer of, a man of so much Reve^ence and
Learning, in other Characters, fearing belike that his Readers would be so
thick-sented, as not to smell the sweetness of his tart Sarcasm, without some
signal Indication, for which end, belike, he thought the mentioning of good
manners, immediately after, would not be sufficient: Whether this be dealing
suitable to a Minister of the Gospel let others judge: But as for what he
publishes as an evidence of want of chari^y in me toward Jane Hendy I am
confident all the Logic in Aristotle's Organon, will never join his Premises
and Conclusion together; For what Jane Hendy swear and Goodwife Pinchin said,
and confirmed by oath, may be all true, and no contradiction be found between
their two oaths; for Jane Hendy swore cautelously, that she did not remember
that she ever spoke of any such thing to Jone Pinchin, which Jone Pinchin
swear she did speak to her, and both oaths may be true, for it may (possibly)
be true, that Jane Hendy did speak something to Jone Pinchin, which she did
not at that present remember; so that I might say, that I was in conscience
bound to believe Goodwife Pinchin, and yet not say (upon the matter) that Jane
Hendy had twice for sworn her self; And therefore what I said, did not at all
amount to what Mr. Bushnel collects from my words, and makes a horrible outcry
upon, page 95. That I did pronounce one of them infallible, and the other
perjured: They did both swear according to truth, for ought I know, I am sure
they might do so, and my charity inclines me to think that they did so, for I
know no sufficient ground why Mr. Bushnel should peremptorily affirm, that the
testimony of these two women are contradictory, and that one or other of them
must needs be for sworn.

Page 96.
And now I shall add further, that I believe that this, and many other false
oaths had never been taken, had not the Doctor by those words, I am bound in
conscience, hinted unto them a kind of faculty, or dispensation of swearing,
and that now they might be bold.

Answ.
I refer it to the judgment of any rational Christian to determine whether my
saying of Goodwife Pinchin, that I was bound in conscience to believe what she
said, upon upon that persuasion which I had of her, that she was a
conscientious Christian, did hint a dispensation to her, and much more to any
other, whom I had no knowledge of, to swear falsely: I am confident Mr. Bushnel
will never be able to show any rational ground of his belief, that my saying
that I was bound to believe Goodwife Pinchin, did contain in it an
encouragement or dispensation for her, or any other, to swear falsely.

Page 96.
And one thing further, this oath being false (as I am confident it was) and
(as it is very probable) this oath being caused by such an invitation, I am
bound in conscience, if an incourager, or an abetter, or a perswader be an
Accessory, I cannot acquit some body (the Dr. may guess whom I mean) from being
guilty of this and many following perjuries.

Answ.
Here Mr. Bushnel is peremptorily confident, that Goodwife Pinchins oath was
false, and that the perjury lies with her, as before he expressed himself; had
I said so much of Jane Hendy, I should have heard of want of charity on both
ears: But I shall leave Mr. Bushnel to consider whether there be not some want
of charity in this his confidence: But that my saying, I am bound in conscience
to believe what Goodwife Pinchin said, being spoken in relation to what she had
said and testified under her hand, should be in any probability a cause and
invitation to induce her to swear what she did, is a most senseless and
irrational conjecture, because I spoke the words after she had fully declared
what she could and would swear; The relation of what she would swear, given
under her hand, caused me to say, as himself relates it, page 89. That I was
bound in conscience to believe what she testified: And therefore it is not
only improbable, but utterly impossible that my words should be a foregoing
cause, and invitation to her Oath. But that my saying of one whom I looked upon
as a Christian woman of great-fidelity, that if she would swear, I were bound
in conscience to believe her, should make me an Incourager, an Abetter, and
Accessory to her false Oath, in case she should swear falsely, and much more to
the perjuries of others (as Mr. Bushnel does here in a calumniating injurious
way charge me to be) I am confident will seem rational to no intelligent
person whatsoever; And therefore this high and groundless calumny, being built
upon such a false and sandy foundation, I do not fear, but it will fall of it
self, without any derogation from my good name.

Page 97.
Now I must tell the Reader, That not long before this, she, (viz. Goodwife
Pinchin) having some discourse with several persons, ever acquitted me,
saying, That she believed that I was wronged, or to that purpose; but now she
changes her note, and says. She cannot judge: Doubtless her own son William,
or the Doctor (for I have heard that he was at her house betwixt April 28. and
June 4.) had instructed her, and taught her to fall short, and why might he
not make the whole, as well as alter a part of it?

Answ.
By what Mr. Bushnel here relates of Goodwife Pinchin^ former words, it
appears, That there were some reports then going of what Goodwife Pinchin
testified, that Jane Hendy spoke about Mr. Bushnels carriage toward her, But
then Goodwife Pinchin (as he relates it) believed he was wronged in those
reports; I leave this wholly as not being concerned in it: Whereas Mr. Bushnel
lays it down as an undoubted truth, that either William Pinchin or I, and
leaves it doubtful, whether he or I, instructed Goodwife Pinchin, and taught
her upon her oath, to fall short of what she knew, and had formerly spoken; I
deny and defy this charge, as most untrue and injurious; if Mr. Bushnel can
make the least proof, or shadow of proof of it, I require him to do it, as he
tendereth the being free from the blot of a false and malicious Accuser: I
acknowledge that I called at Goodwife Pinchins house (the high way lying close
by her door) as I rode by, and spoke with her as an ancient Christian friend,
but that I instructed her, or taught her to swear against her knowledge, is a
spightful and most untrue insinuation, which must be answered for at the
appearance of the Lord Jesus.

Page 106.
Mr. Bushnel writes, that it was testified against one William Cottle, who was
a witness against him, amongst other things, that he should say, that your
Parsons were greedy, and that he would trust none of them all, no not Mr.
Chambers, who had left Claverton, and was gone to Pewsey: And when Cottle
(being still upon his Oath) denied these words to be spoken by him, after they
were testified and sworn to his face, he acknowledged that he had spoken
them, adding further, why? what if I did say so? The truth is, that the thing
being barely considered in and of it self, it mattered not, if he had said so,
for it was true as he said; Mr. Chambers had left Claverton (nor was this the
first time he had left it) and was gone to Pewsey, and this to his great
advantage too, for the report goes that he is three hundred pounds a year
gainer by this Remove.

Answ.
That I left Claverton before I came to Pewsey, and afterward came to Pewsey,
with a considerable advantage as to outward state, I do freely acknowledge; Nor
was I ever offended with any, who before they had heard what account I could
give of my Removal, had spoken of it, as importing some earthly-mindedness in
me; But not to trouble the world with tedious relations about personal
businesses, if Mr. Bushnel be pleased to afford me a private occasion, as
diverse Christian friends have done, to discover to him the grounds and reasons
of my removal from Claverton, and coming to Pewsey, I doubt not, but I shall so
far satisfy him, as to cause him to desist from making this a matter of
public reproach and defamation against me.

Page 109.
It were not amiss to tell thee that John Trevers, sitting by, during this
debate, and hearing and noting all the passages, observed it (and so did others
besides) and (as I have heard) has reported it elsewhere with some
complacency, that Mr. Chambers did hang down his head the while; Now we know,
that hanging down of the head does usually signify that there is shame and
sorrow in the heart.

-- pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.
And whereas shame does usually produce either an amendment in the person so
exposed; or else indignation, which the person so exposed conceives against him
whom he looks on as the cause of this exposal; I have some conjecture, that
this wrought after the latter and worser way with Dr. Chambers; and that he
did for this, store up a good turn for me against he had an opportunity; of
which the Readers shall have some account in due time and place.

Answ.
It is very strange that Mr. Bushnel, being present all the time of this
debate, and being a diligent observer of all my words and carriages (as appears
throughout his Narrative) did not himself take notice of my hanging down my
head, if it were so considerable as he would have the world believe it was,
from the testimony of Trevers, and other unn med witnesses; But to speak this
once for all to Cottles words concerning me, though Mr. Bushnel makes often
use of them for his purpose, I bless the Lord I have so much quiet in my own
heart, as concerning my Removal from Claverton, and coming to Pewsey, that I
was never ashamed to hear of it in any place, or to be called to show my
grounds for it; whether I held down my head, when Cottles words were proved
upon him by oath, I know not; This I am most assured of, that it was not out of
any shame which surprised me upon the hearing of Cottles words, in relation to
my self: I was so little affected with the words, that though upon Mr. Bushnels
Relation, I do believe that it was attested upon oath, that such words were
spoken by Cottle, yet this I can truly take my oath of, that I had utterly
forgotten it, and did not in the least remember any such passage; And as for
Mr. Bushnels uncharitable conjecture, that I did store up a good turn for him,
by reason of those words of Cottle, I call the great God to witness, who can
only testify in this Case, that I never had, nor have I, the least
indignation against Mr. Bushnel, in regard of Cottles words; if he knew my
heart, he would believe me.

Page 122.
Having called the witnesses which appeared against him, the Doctors, Mr. By
fields, and Mr. Blissets witnesses, Mr. Bushnel adds; Nor can these men have
any just cause to distaste me, that I call them their witnesses, when I have
given my reasons of it. I have told thee already, that I believe that many a
one which has appeared before them, and have been sworn against me, had never
so done, had it not been for their invitation and countenance, which as before,
so at this time appeared most visible.

Answ.
What has before been produced by Mr. Bushnel, to prove me an Inviter and
Countenancer of the witnesses against him, has been answered by me, and I
leave it to the censure of the judicious Reader. Now it seems by his words he
has met with a most visible Evidence in the Case, which is next to be
considered.

Having named the solicitors against him, Mr. Bushnel adds, And in their
addresses (neglecting the Gentlemen to whom alone of right this business did
belong.) Their Applications were to Mr. Chambers, and Mr. Byfield, John
Trevers, and William Pinchin, at the upper end of the Table standing at the
Elbow of the Dr. and Obadiah Cheltenham toward the lower end, waiting upon Mr.
Byfield: And this I conceive to be reason enough wherefore I call them their
witnesses.

Answ.
I dare not return Mr. Bushnel any jeers, but in good earnest, it is strange to
me, that Mr. Bushnel being (as I know him to be) a Scholar, and a Logician,
should think there is sufficient strength in this Reason why he should call
the solicitors, Mine, Mr. Byfields, and Mr. Blissets witnesses, because two of
them stood at my elbow, and one by Mr. Byfield: For if this be the reason why
he calls them our winesses, then by the same reason, they should not be
called Mr. Blissets witnesses, because never a one of them stood at his elbow,
or waited upon him: But if Trevers and Pinchin did stand by me, which is more
than I can tell: Did I entertain any friendly discourse with them? Did I take
any special notice of them? Did I speak a word in favor of them or their
business? Of this here is, Altum Silentium, which we may be sure proceeded
not from any willingness in Mr. Bushnel, to suppress any thing which he had
any hope might make against me.

Page 138
Upon the Relation of the Testimony of Henry Sheyler, upon oath, that he was
told by one Nowell (who with his wife had dep^sed something against Mr.
Bushnel) that Trevers and Pinchin made profers and promises of money to him, if
he would appear and swear against Mr. Bushnel, it follows: I must tell thee
further, that soon after this deposition of Sheyler was taken, Nowells wife
(being before at a window, and hearing what had passed) comes toward the Dr.
(for unto him were the most especial addresses made) and after a long and a low
courtesy, adds, yea, surely if Mr. Bushnel had not to pick a thank with Coll.
Air, told him of my Husbands Gun, and said, that therewith he used to kill
Hares and Pigeons, we would not have been here to day to have sworn against
him. And still continuing (...) was very (...) of her cou^tesies, who would
make so many, and so low courtesies when she was not taken (...) of.
courtesing to Mr. Chambers (who then turned his head about, and looked toward
her) she adds further, That he had known her of a long time.

Answ.
By this it appears, that Nowells wife claimed acquaintance with me (and
indeed her Father was my Clerk when I lived at Claverton) But did I take any
special notice of her? or show her any special favor? by this story it seems I
did not, who did not suddenly turn my head toward her, and when I did, though
she spoke to me, yet here is no intimation of any thing I said to her, which
would have been the Principal Verb in the Sentence, if any such thing could
have been alleged against me. And now Christian Reader, judge indifferently
what reason Mr. Bushnel had to write, page 139. that Nowell and his wife
conceiving themselves injured formerly by him, having this opportunity, and
countenance of the Dr. her ancient acquaintance (which is written in the
jeering character) they were resolved to be revenged on us both (I mean the
Collenel and my self.)

Page 147.
Having related four depositions taken against one Sanders, who was a witness
against him, to prove the said Sanders to be a very vicious person, Mr.
Bushnel adds; It must not be forgotten, that before these three last deposit
ons were taken at Marleborough, the Dr. (belike having before either instructed
William Pinchin what was to be done, or else having been informed by William
Pinchin what he had done) beckning to William Pinchin with his hands, and
twinkling of his eyes, it seems as doubting that William Pinchin had forgotten
himself. Whereupon William Pinchin approaches, and with a low congee, delivers
to the Dr. a piece of Paper, which the Dr. conveyes to Mr. Blisset, with some
such words; There is a Testimony of this man's (meaning Sanders) behavior;
which was by Mr. Blisset read accordingly. The business was but short, and my
thoughts so much upon this Doctor, that I little noted it; only I remember
there were the names of some whom I knew, set to it, and the names of others
which I have heard of.

Answ.
Because Mr. Bushnel makes much ado about this Sanders, as if I had been under
great guilt in relation to him, I will relate all that I know about the
business of Sanders: This Sanders is one whom I never knew, nor had heard a
word of him, till the time that he appeared as a witness before the
Commissioners: William Pinchin came to me in the Chamber before the sitting of
the Commissioners, and showed me a Certificate in the behalf of the said
Sanders, subscribed by the hands of some men of honesty and credit in
Chippenham, whose Reputation prevailed with me to think it to be of some
credit, and it is likely, as Mr. Bushnel relates it (though it be gone out of
my memory) that I might becken to William Pinchin to have the Certificate from
him, and give it to Mr. Blissett to be read, when Sanders name was in
question: not out of any purpose to bolster up Sanders in any wickedness, but
only that it might be weighed by the Commissioners, whether Sanders were a
man any way to be credited, yea, or no, wherein I was able to say nothing:
This is all I know about Sanders, which whether it amount to a guilt, let the
Reader judge.

Page 148.
I shall tell thee here, that William Sanders being questioned for the
Sacrilege (mentioned, but now) fled, and that he stands answerable for this
Sacrilege even to this hour. And was it not a handsome thing for the Dr. to
countenance this man (against the Minister) that had robbed the Church.

Answ.
I am beholding to Mr. Bushnel for an answer to this Charge, which else my
memory would not have helped me unto: He tells us, that before the three last
depositions were taken against Sanders, I handed the Certificate in his behlaf
from William Pinchin to Mr. Blissett; now one of those three last Depositions
concerns the Sacrilege here spoken of, and therefore if he will needs
interpret my delivering in the Certificate for a countenancing of this man
(which is more than it amounts unto) yet I am free from countenancing a
Church-robber against a Minister, seeing the Deposition concerning Sanders
Sacrilege was not given in, neither had I ever heard a word of it when I
handed the Certificate to Mr. Blissett. Page 156.


Having related the wicked and fraudulent course (supposing it to be as he
relates) which was taken for the obtaining the Certificate for Sanders from
the Chippenhammen, Mr. Bushnel adds: Now I do not wonder that William Pinchin,
Nicholas Spencer, William Sanders, and Obadiah Cheltenham should contrive and
practice such unworthy courses; My wonder is, that the Doctor should so
demurely put to his helping hand for the promoting of them; nay, that he
should be more forward than William Pinchin, and readier to call for it, than
William Pinchin was to deliver it. But doubtless the Caln -business did yet
stick in the Doctors stomach; there were a generation of men heretofore great
pretenders to godliness, that were touchy, and very implacable; and perchance
before I make an end of this discourse, I shall make some Such spiteful
observes are easily and frequently to be observed throughout his Narrative.
observes to the Dr. of the Agagite in the Old Testament, and the Scribes and
Pharisees in the New.

Answ.
I do from my soul abhor all such false and fraudulent ways* as Mr. Bushnel
makes mention of in the relation of the getting the Certificate for Sanders: If
I had had the least knowledge or jealousy the Certificate had been in such
wise obtained, I would never have taken it into my hand, unless it had been to
tear, or burn it: But the names subscribed to it, did keep me off wholly from
such a suspicion, and was the only cause why I delivered it. And as for Mr.
Bushnels saying, that doubtless the Caln-business stuck in my stomach,
doubtless he can make no proof of that, and the Lord knows it is utterly
false, and against the Rule by which I make conscience to walk, which is to
forgive others, as I desire to be forgiven of God: But as for Cottles words, I
can truly say, I never valued them more than a puff off wind.

Page 160.
I have told thee, that at such time, as (amongst other notorious Infamies) we
had proved Sanders to have fallen upon his own Father, to have thrown him down,
and beaten him, saying, He would make an end of the old Rogue, Mr. Chambers
calls for a Certificate, and promoteth it in this Sanders behalf: And this is
the second time that he showed himself very forward, either to countenance, or
defend such as by the Law of God had forfeited their lives.

Answ.
Mr. Bushnel may remember what he has told us, that I had delivered the
Certificate to Mr. Blisset before Sanders his cursed violence offered to his
Father was testified upon oath by one of the three last witnesses, and so
before I had the least thought of any such execrable carriage of his, and
therefore Mr. Bushnel does very injuriously charge me with countenancing or
defending such as by the Law of God were adjudged to death: I could willingly
give my voice for the reviving of that Law, and the Lord knows Mr. Bushnel does
me open wrong, when page 161. he writes that the Doctor did look upon a sons
couzening, cursing, frequent beating of his Parents, after a barbarous manner,
throwing them down, laying hands upon them, taking of them by the throat,
drawing his knife upon them, calling them old Rogue, and threatening to make an
end of them, as only some small differences, or matters, not much to be
noted, or easily to be excused: No, no, Mr. Bushnel, there is one that knows
this to be a very false and injurious accusation, before whom you and I shall
one day stand with open hearts, when not he that commends himself shall be
approved, but he whom God commends.

Page 168.
I had at this time, and before, several witnesses with me, which I desired
might be examined upon such Queries as should have been proposed unto them;
but a word of exception against them from William Pinchin (the Solicitor) and
Mr. Byfield (the Advocate) soon silenced, or put them all by; and thus they
served no less than four at this time, some whereof would have told pretty
stories of William Pinchin, John Trevers, Obadiah Chel^enham, William Cottle,
William Sanders, yea (perchance) of the Doctor too, if they might have been
heard.

Answ.
Mr. Bushnel does not here accuse me of stopping the Examination of his
Witnesses, and therefore to that I shall say nothing; But I desire Mr. Bushnel
not to Lie in the clouds, and raise blind suspicions of unknown crimes against
me: If he knows any that knew any secret actings of wickedness whereof I am
guilty, let them speak out, that I may know what to answer to. Though I know so
much of no man's sinfulness, as I do of mine, own, yet (I bless the Lord) I have
no cause to fear the Testimony either of friends, or foes against me, as to
such crimes as come under the worlds condemnation and censure.

Page 181.
Mr. Bushnel writing of Col. Air, says, All which, notwithstanding all these
men, by Colonel Air thus proceeded against for several Infamies, are by Mr.
Byfield, the Doctor, and their friends at Marleborough encouraged to testify
against him to his reproach, and yet he not permitted to say any thing in his
defense.

Answ.
This as to my self I avow to be a notorious untruth, and require a proof of
it: Col. Air has ever been my loving, and I believe my entire friend, and I
am sure I have, and do unfeignedly desire his welfare in all kinds, nor will it
ever be proved (I am sure) that I have transgressed the Rules of Love* so far
toward him, as to encourage any to testify any thing to his reproach; I am
sure it has occasioned trouble of heart unto me, when I have heard any
reports of that nature carried about of him.

Page 207, 208.
I was told that one near related to the persons and practices of the
Commissioners, should say to this purpose, seeing us come in to Town, That Mr.
Bushnel had brought such and such along with him, but that it was to no purpose
for he could not stay at Box, because that place was appointed for another
man, etc. As to mine own particular, I shall say only this; 1 That by their
own confession, my place was appointed for another man; which 2 I believe was
the man who has since my ejectment held it, viz. Mr. Stern, who lived
formerly in a Living sequestered of Mr. Walkers at Chilmark, and it may be was
there as a kind of a Curate to Mr. Sanger, Dr. Chambers Brother-in-law: But at
this time was destitute and therefore right or wrong, a place must be provided
for him elsewhere.

Answ.
This passage makes it evident, that any groundless and improbable probability
is sufficient for Mr. Bushnel to build vehement complaints upon, against me
and the Commissioners: For here is an uncertain tale taken up at a distance
from one, who told another, who told Mr. Bushnel, something to this purpose,
that Mr. Bushnel must not stay at Box, because that place was appointed for
another man; I cannot but think, that if this tale were brought back to the
first Author of it, he would disclaim it as spurious; But be it as it may
be, does this tale (if true) warrant Mr. Bushnel to note from it, 1 That by
their own confession his place was appointed for another man; where is any such
Confession of the Commissioners? who ever heard it? what if he that first
spoke the words (related) spoke without book, or upon some uncertain
conjecture, than which nothing is more frequent? does this prove a Confession
of the Commissioners themselves in the case? He is very willing to believe,
that takes such proofs; And as to Mr. Bushnels second note upon this uncertain
story, wherein he thinks (belike) he has paid me home, he may know that
Mr. Stern was never any kind of Curate to my brother Sanger, nor any way
related to me, nor had I any special cause in the world to look after his
settlement. And therefore Mr. Bushnel does me and himself open wrong, to
write, that because Mr. Stern (it may be) was a kind of Curate to my brother
Sanger; Therefore (being destitute of a place) right or wrong a place must be
provided for him, and so, which is the Conclusion driven at, I and the
Commissioners must needs be guilty of prejudging Mr. Bushnels case. Let any
rational man judge whether Mr. Bushnels passion did not here put him quite out
of his Argumentative faculty.

Page 213.
I was told likewise, that there were heavy exceptions taken against me, that
I came not amongst them, Mr. Chambers Mr Byfield etc. and that I did not make
one at their meetings, That I did not associate, but rather, that I not only
neglected but despised them, or to some such purpose.

Answ.
If any one spoke these words* or to some such purpose, to Mr. Bushnel,
certainly he abused Mr. Bushnels ears, by putting a most notorious falsehood
into them which can never be proved, And therefore I cannot but stand amazed
at what Mr. Bushnel adds.

And doubtless with the Dr. and Mr. Byfield, this was enough to make a man
scandalous in the highest degree.

Answ.
Doubtless this is a most notorious untruth, as may be proved by many
instances of diverse persons not associating, yet dearly loved, and highly
prized, both by Mr. Byfield and my self.

Page 214.
Showing some reasons why Mr. Bushnel did not associate with us, he says one
reason was, Because the persons who were the leading men amongst them were as
fierce and rigid in their way as are any (I believe) on this side or beyond
Tweed.

Answ.
If Mr. Bushnel does believe this, then I am sure, he believes as utter an
untruth as was ever told: The men he aims at, I know, are professed enemies to
fierceness and rigidness in their way, and desire nothing more than that
Brethern of several persuasions may walk in a way of Christian moderation:

Page 220.
Relating how Mr. Byfield insisted upon the Order, that none might be present
at the Examination but the Commissioners and their assistants, he writes, And
what if they had heard or known them? Were your questions such that you were
ashamed to have them known; or was it for fear the Country should (hearing your
questions and my answers) think better of me than you were willing?

Answ.
It is well known that I earnestly moved, that all that would might be present
at your examination, and had prevailed therein, had not the foregoing Order
obstructed it.

Page 223.
Speaking of the time when the order of ejection was published against him, Mr.
Bushnel writes; I observed that while my sentence was reading Mr. Chambers had
pulled down his hat somewhat low on his face, but the residue of his face which
might be seen looked very big, and possibly might say within himself, That now
he had taught me to bring a man of (...) it upon the stage, to make him the
discourse and laughter of the Country for leaving Claverton and going to Pewsy.

Answ.
I easily believe Mr. Bushnel that he did observe me, at this, as at all
times, most watchfully, if he might possibly espy any thing in me to be
complained of: But whereas he says, that he observed me, that whilst his
sentence was read, I pulled down my hat somewhat low upon my face, but for the
residue of my face which might be seen, I looked very big; any man without much
observation may see much irrational spite in this relation, which can hardly,
if possibly be made to consist with it self; For if I pulled down my hat
somewhat low upon my face, how could I then at the same time look bigg with a
little part of my face? I suppose that, in common understanding, big looks
are such, when men do not cover their faces somewhat low, as men ashamed, or
afraid, but do, if possible, make more of their faces, than they are, by high
looks, that they may outface such persons or things as are before them. I am
confident in true reason before unbiassed Judges) there is a more palpable
contradiction between the two parts of this Relation, than between the two
oaths of Jone Pinchin, and Jane Hendy, upon which Mr. Bushnel does, tanto
hiatu, tragediate, page 94, 95. And as for that spiteful, jeering, groundless,
and most uncharitable comment which he made upon my looks, and wherein he
seems to have a faculty of looking into my heart, which I could wish he had,
when he wrote, and possibly he might say within himself, That now he had
taught me to bring a man of his merit upon the stage, to make him the
discourse and laughter of the Country for leaving Claverton, and going to
Pewsey; I defy it, and such revengeful thoughts as it most injuriously fathers
upon me, whereas they were conceived and born in his own breast, and begotten
of his own revengeful imagination; and I further say, that the coining of such
cross comments upon the carriages of others, is a most unwarrantable practice,
unbecoming a Christian, and much more a Minister of the Gospel. I can never
sufficiently bless the Lord that it is beyond the reach of Mr. Bushnel, and his
witnesses, to make me (though a most unworthy servant of Jesus Christ) the
discourse and laughter of the Country, though possibly some profane persons,
and scoffers at godliness, Jer. 20. 10.
on an Ale-bench, may make themselves very merry with Mr. Bushnels jeering
relation concerning me.

Page 228.
Nay more, should I have chanced to have met your Dr. on the way, I should have
given him) not such reverence as he looks for, but) such respect as I thought
fitting: and upon some such weighty Account, I have been told that he was
distasted at me; and so was Haman the Agagite against Mordecay.

Answ.
Mr. Bushnel might do well to keep in his bitter revilings, till he have some
ground of truth, upon which to bring them forth: doubtless his nameless
reporter informed him of a wretched untruth, who told him that I was distasted
at him, for want of showing respect to me, and he himself wanted some grains
of Charity in mentioning great reverence, as that which I looked for from him or
any other under pain of Discontent: If I know my self, a very little Reverence
and Observation will content me, but if I be mistaken in my self, let all
that know me, speak, though I find Mr. Bushnel in his Narrative, often
rubbing (as he thinks) upon that sore of my loving to be reverenced.

Page 237.
Now Mr. Chambers hearing Henry Sheyler (for so was his name, that made this
pro^er) promising one hundred pounds, and having heedfully eyed him all the
time, asks, (belike, fearing that the Commissioners should have forgotten so
necessary a Question) Whether he were sufficient? ('it is like he meant) to pay
the rent, which he proffered: And here to see how these Doctors, Mr. Byfield,
and Mr. Chambers, concurred in questions (fundamentals) What is your Living
worth a year, quoth Mr. Byfield? Is he sufficient to pay the rent, quoth Mr.
Chambers? This business did in no wise concern Mr. Chambers, unless he mistook
the Examination of the sufficiency of the Tenant, for an Examination of the
sufficiency of the Minister.

Answ.
For Henry Sheyler, a man that I had never any thing to do with in my life, why
I should so heedfully eye him, as Mr. Bushnel reports, I cannot imagine, But
whether I did, or did not, possibly sitting by, and hearing the discourse about
renting the Living, such a speech might fall from me; Is he sufficient? you
may be confident I said no more, nor pressed it any further, if I had, Mr.
Bushnel doubtless would not have made little of much, who makes so much of so
little spoken by me; And whether it gives ground to such a loud (jeering)
outcry about Fundamentals, as Mr. Bushnel here makes, let the Christian Reader
judge.

Page 238.
The Dr. must give me leave to tell him, that I have read of such, who were of
this judgments. That right and propriety to a thing were founded in grace; and
that all men were Usurpers who were not of the godly. Now we know well to whom
this Epithet Godly has been by some men appropriated in these latter years,
and for what purposes: And therefore might the Dr. be so fierce against me,
as one (I being not of their mark) on whom even an Alms were cast away.

Answ.
That I was fierce against Mr. Bushnel, will never be proved by him, unless
he has an Art to prove an untruth. That propriety is founded in grace, is (I
know) an error that has met with entertainment in too many, which Mr. Bushnel
does very injuriously in a way of sly insinuation, charge on me. As for the
enclosing the name Godly, within the pale of particular parties, I have ever
abhorred it as a very unchristian practice: And as for Mr. Bushnel (for all his
words) I never did, nor will take upon me to judge him; to our own Master, he
and I must stand and fall, and the Lord give him and me grace impartially and
duly to judge our selves, that we be not judged of the Lord.

Page 246.
Writing most bitterly (after his manner) of Mr. Byfield, he says, I believe,
that were he living, he would confess that he did me as much mischief as
he could; and yet I believe that one of the same tribe did me more, although
he were more secret in it.

Answ.
For Mr. Byfield (of the integrity of whose heart in what he did, I have
ground to be much assured) I cannot hinder Mr. Bushnel from believing of him
what he pleases; But if I be the other of the same Tribe which he here
speaks of, in believing that I did him more mischief than he did, who (as
he says) did him as much mischief as he could, he believes that which the
day of manifestation will show to be an utter uncharitable, unjustifiable
untruth.

Christian Reader, I will now only offer to thy view, two or three of Mr.
Bushnels scurrilous passages (amongst many) wherein he makes me his But, and
whereby he thinks to cast shame upon me, and then leave it to thy judgment
to consider, whether it be credible that he had not in the Publication of his
Narrative any alm to asperse me (amongst the rest.)

Page 46.
Which is much worse than those worst of men, the hypocritical Pharisees and
Scribes, The Godly of those times Mr. Chambers.

Page 92.
Why may not the Doctor be mistaken in her, as many hundreds have been
mistaken in the Doctor?

Page 171.
William Pinchin, and John Trevers have their varieties of baits, and flies
suitable to the appetites of their fish. We know that Cataline had such
heretofore, yea, Mr. Chambers, the chief Priests and Elders made use of the
like, Mat. 26. 61. compared with Luke 23. 2.

By these amongst others his sly and cutting scoffs the Reader may judge,
whether Mr. Bushnel had not a design to asperse me in his Narrative.

After all these reproaches, and most slanderous irrational insinuations, I
find not in the whole Narrative the least intimation of any dram of charity
which Mr. Bushnel has for me; For although he pretends to have a little good
belief of Mr. Byfield, Page 208.
if he were living, yet all things therein and almost every line thereof,
speaks forth the highest despite and contempt of me; yet all the revenge that
I will take of him, is to pray for him as for my self, that the Lord would
forgive him all his trespasses, and renew his heart by his grace, and guide him
with such faithfulness and tenderness in relation to precious souls, to fulfill
the work of the Ministry, that he may give up his account with comfort to the
great Shepherd of souls in the day of his glorious appearing.

FINIS.
A Vindication of the Late Commissioners for the Ejecting of Scandalous
Ministers in the County of Wilts, (so far as it concerns Mr. Blisset, and other
the Commissioners of Marleborough) from the Aspersions of Walter Bushnel, Vicar
of Box.
When We consider how frequently (almost in every page) and how falsely Mr.
Bushnel does accuse and asperse so Eminent a person as Dr. Chambers, whose
integrity we thought had been beyond the reach of envy, we suppose we might
be silent, and leave the unprejudiced Reader to guess at the truth of his
several charges against us, by his impudency and rashness in attempting to
fasten such Notorious Calumnies on that Reverend Doctor; but fearing lest
herein he may gratify the Genius of such who delight in aspersing pamphlets,
and are too ready to believe the same, we thought fit to say something for the
vindication of our selves from the odious reproaches which Mr. Bushnel
endeavors to fasten on us.

In the first place we shall only take notice of one passage in his Epistle
dedicatory, where, in a Vaunting manner he ushers in his Narrative with plenty
of reviling language against the Commissioners, thus.

You shall find me charging them with such Crimes which are not only odious
in men as Christians, but with such which were looked upon as vild and odious
by the most civil sort of Heathens, and yet I have not charged them with a
syllable which I am not able by proofs to make good upon them.

Ans. It Is very obvious that Mr. Bushnels design herein is to prepossess those
honorable Persons to whom he dedicates his book, with prejudice against us,
and to beget in them a belief of what he says* but what little reason he has
to be so confident, will appear when we come to the trial of his proofs,
Parturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus.

In his Epistle to the Readers he says? Went hey meet with the word
Commissioners, they are not to understand me, as intending thereby all those
Gent. whose names were put into the Ordinance, as charging them with those
unworthy and unjust proceedings, many whereof (as to my business) never acted:
But the Commissioners which I here speak of, are those that made ejecting of
Ministers a kind of Trade, and unquestionably to themselves it was a beneficial
one, such who were constant, and frequent, and furious in the business, and
were these, Mr. Blisset, Mr. Thomas Baily, and Mr. Hunt of Marlborough.

Ans. It is to be noted again, how Mr. Bushnel does anticipate the Reader,
having not so much modesty or patience as to give him Liberty to judge upon the
whole matter as he finds it, but he will be (as our Accuser, so) our judge
in passing sentence: The charge which he brings against us is complicated, or
made up of these two parts.

1 That we made the ejecting of Ministers a Trade, and questionless a
beneficial one.

2 That we were constant, frequent, and furious in the business.

To the first of these we have five several things to say by way of answer for
our selves.

1 It Is sufficiently known that we of Marlborough have ever had an indignation
against that generation of men that have vilified the Ministers, as if they
made a Trade of Preaching (though hapily some have been too guilty hereof) But
the Vicar of Box is the first that has made a discovery to the world of a new
Trade of ejecting Ministers; But how unlikely it is that this should prove
beneficial to us (whose Commission was only to remove scandalous and
insufficient Persons from their livings, but had no power to settle any into
either Parsonage or Vicaridge) we leave to the indifferent Reader to judge.

2 Mr. Bushnel may conceit what he pleases to be unquestionable, we cannot
hinder that, nevertheless we challenge him or any other whatsoever to make
proof of the least Emolument which ever did redound to us, and this from the
hand of any person that either was brought before the Commissioners on a charge
exhibited, and not ejected, or upon a charge proved, was ejected, or any one
person that was presented and approved by the Committee of approbation in
London, to the living of such person as by us was removed; yea (as well knowing
our own innocence) we do conjure Mr. Bushnel to perform the promise which he
makes in his Epistle, that he would not charge us with a syllable which he
was not able by proof to make good, and let the impartial reader judge whether
Mr. Bushnel who would be taken for a faithful Minis^er of Christ) be not
bound in point of honor to himself, and his profession* yea and in point of
conscience to (if there be the sense of either of these upon him) to make good
by proof the foul charge which he lays upon us (through out his book) of being
mercinary persons, and such as have been bribed with monyes, Plate, Horse, and
hay: For to this effect h^e speaks in several places of his book, particularly
in Page 227* where also our wives cannot escape his venomous pen.

3 We were so far from making this work of ejection, a beneficial Trade (as
Mr. Bushnel terms it) that in carrying on the same, we all along, from first
to last, acted upon our own private charge to the expense of above twenty pound
apeece, to several of us, which monyes we can prove (if occasion require) was
spent in our several journies, and sittings, the which was never reimbursed by
any persons, nor yet out of the moneys raised for incident charges.

4 We appeal to the great God, the searcher of all hearts, to whom all our
actions and ways are fully known, that we are clear and guiltless of the
charge which Mr. Bushnel has laid upon us, as to the value of one penny in
Plate or money, or in any other kind whatsoever: yea further for our
vindication,

5 We do freely offer (if ever required thereunto) to take our oaths before
any Judge of Assise, or Justice of the peace; that we have not either directly
or indirectly taken any such Bribe, Gift, or reward, or ever knew that in the
work ejection we lay under such a temptation from any person whatsoever, and
therefore we do again require Mr. Bushnel to produce any person within our
County, or any other part of the Kingdom, that can testify the Giving, or our
receiving any such Bribe or Gift, to us, or by us, in relation to this ejection
work, and we are sensible (as who is not) that at this day men will not be
shy or backward to make out any such thing (if they could do it) as Mr. Bushnel
in his Narrative does accuse us of.

Now to the second part of Mr. Bushnels charge, That we were constant,
frequent, and furious in the business.

Answ. We shall make but a short reply to this, as being not so considerable
as to require many words; It is confessed that we were more constant and
frequent than some others of the County, because the sitting of the
Commissioners was usually in Marlboro^gh, the place of our habitation (for of
fifty four meetings there were above thirty in the said Town) and most of our
work was in the Northern part of the County, below us or near unto us (there
being little to be done in the Southern part, which was formerly purged of
scandalous Ministers by the Committee long since appointed by Order of the
house of Lords and Commons: Moreover, several of the Commissioners dwelt near
Marlborough, who did as frequently attend the meetings (for some of them) as
we our selves; and here we would have Mr. Bushnel know that as we can with
boldness appeal unto God as to our ends and aims, in our diligent attendance
upon that employment, that they were worthy and becoming the trust reposed in
us, so to this very day (notwithstanding all his aspersions) we do not in the
least repent of being instrumental in the removal of any scandalous person, nor
are we conscious to our selves of being furiously transported at any time in
the management of that work, against Mr. Bushnel or any other, but
conscienciously made it our business to proceed secundum allegata and probata.

In the same Epistle to the Reader he says, The Commissioners did often
violate that Ordinance by which they sat, and according to which they were to
act, and that in many particulars. As in admitting and countenancing such to
swear (if they appeared against me) which their Ordinance excepted against, in
excluding such witnesses, if appearing for me (yea after they had been sworn)
which by their Ordinance they were to admit of; and at last making a peremptory
Order, that such as would, might appear against me, but no more in my behalf;
and I charge them for discountenancing, interrupting, and thwarting with many
witnesses, etc.

Answ. Here is a long Chain of Calumnies that has not one link of truth in it,
and doubtless he did on purpose set his invention on work, how to asperse us,
and we must needs acknowledge his sigular dexterity herein; But let Mr.
Bushnel prove that we did ever knowingly admit or countenance any person (by
our Ordinance excepted against) to swear, or refuse witnesses produced by him,
then we are contented to undergo his censure; if he means, that, of our
admitting Pinchin and Sanders to swear, he cannot but remember they had given
in their Depositions against him before the Crimes he charges them with were
proved unto us, and as to the making that Peremptory Order, what rational man
will believe it? it is as false a suggestion, as those that follow, viz. our
discountenancing, interrupting and thwarting his witnesses.

It follows in the Epistle, And I charge them all, Commissioners, Ministers,
and Clerk, for countenancing and encouraging infamous persons, such who had
forsworn themselves, and touching some of themselves, in their hearing, such as
appeared out of malice, by their own confession, and were proved guilty of
suborning, and of being suborned, to their faces; yea, and such as we should
have proved guilty of forgery likewise, had not these Commissioners and
Ministers by a notorious peace of injustice prevented it.

Answ. Here Mr. Bushnel does exactly observe the Rule to Machiavel, he hopes
that by calumniating lustily, something will stick: To this horrid and unjust
Charge the Dr. has sufficiently (so far as it concerns himself especially)
replied, and showed the impertinency and invalidity of the several proofs,
whereby Mr. Bushnel has endeavored to fasten this accusation on him, and
'twill be evident to any one who has the patience to peruse his Book, that
he makes no conscience of what he says, for throughout his whole Narrative
there is not one Argument or Proof sufficient to ground this charge upon the
Commissioners. We do therefore once more desire Mr. Bushnel to be so ingenuous,
as to instance and declare which of the Commissioners did ever countenance such
kind of persons as here mentions, and to show wherein the Commissioners were so
unjust as to prevent the discovery of any who were guilty (as he says) of
Forgery: We do acknowledge that (amongst several substantial witnesses
produced against him) there were some few whose testimonies (after some crimes
alleged against them) were not so authentic as others, and doubtless Mr.
Bushnel means these: to conclude this, if the Articles offered by Trevers be
that which he intends for forgery, it is well known, and Mr. Bushnel cannot
but remember, that they were disowned and rejected, and he not prosecuted
thereupon, but upon others; and if this be not it which he strikes at, we
cannot guess at what he means.

Page 212. But since I have heard that some body has furnished one of the
Marlborough Commissioners with a horse, yea, and that some body has presented
him with a parcel of hay since that, so that it may be that the horse or the
hay made the speech and not the master.

Answ. To this blind story of some bodies giving these things to some body of
the Commissioners, we shall say no more, than that we know not of any persons
giving, or of any ones receiving the same, and do challenge Mr. Bushnel to
discover the persons (if he can) according to what he declares in his Epistle
dedicatory, who says that he has not charged us with a syllable which he is
not able by proof to make good upon us.

In page 249. Mr. Bushnel says (as Mr. Stern reported it) that the
Commissioners demanded fifteen pound of him for their incident charges in
thrusting me out.

Answ. How true this is that Mr. Stern reported it, we know not, nor do we
believe Mr. Stern will justify it, nay, we are sure, he cannot, for Mr. Stern
well knows that there was never more than ten pound demanded from him for
incident charges for the Vicaridge of Box, but upon what ground Mr. Bushnel
does impute this demand to be merely for thrusting him out, we cannot
imagine: Reader, see the Ordinance by which we acted, and thou will perceive
for what incident charges (at which Mr. Bushnel so often cavils) was demanded.

In page 252. I have not yet done with this fifteen pound charges incident (and
when I have done with that I have done with all) for let me now observe unto
thee, what a beneficial Trade these Marlborough men made of it, Let the wind
sit which way it would: I think in this particular out-doing the Jews
themselves, for they would so far improve their opportunities, that fall out
what could, they would turn it to their advantage.

Answ. What causeless Outcry does this man make? the relation it self being
false, as we have showed, and what was paid came from Mr. Stern, not Mr.
Bushnel; He tells us, having done with this, he has done with all, and if
this be all that he can bring by way of charge against the Marlborough
Commissioners, let the Reader judge, whether it amounts to any thing? No doubt
Mr. Bushnel making it his design (as it appears) to render the Commissioners
odious, consulted with the rest of his brethren that had been in the same
praedicament with him, to find out what other sums came to our hands. But he
could hear of none, therefore makes the ten pound incident charges received of
Mr. Stern (to which himself invents and adds five more) as it were his Text,
upon which he raises an Observation what a beneficial Trade the Marlborough
men made of it; this is as natural as some of those Reasons by which he proved
his doctrine at his examination before the Commissioners and Ministers.

Mr. Bushnel having not yet sufficiently disgorged himself, we find him again
at the fifteen pound, page 255. And (says he) fifteen pound they demanded for
thrusting me out; it is good being a hangman upon such terms; and questionless
this was enough to make me scandalous, because I would not daub, and they were
resolved to get by me, one way or other.

Answ. This as to the matter of Fact is before answered, we shall not (with
Mr. Bushnel.) reiterate, as to what follows, it is very unsavory and unbecoming
the mouth of a Minister; and truly the Commissioners need not be suspected of
injustice, in outing Mr. Bushnel for a scandalous person, when the very
language which comes from his Pen for the vindication of himself, speaks him
scandalous, and we doubt not but the Reader will judge him so, if he casts
his eye only upon thee 154 page of his Book, where he discovers the froth and
filth of his spirit, in comparing the Commissioners to Hang-men,
Sheep-stealers, etc.

In the same page Mr. Bushnel makes sport for his Reader, in relating a story
which he heard of a theevish Miller, to whom he compares the Commissioners,
his words are these; And now one would think that they had undone me, as much
as possible, and yet Mr. Stern has told me, that he is a greater loser than
myself, that I am four hundred pound the worse, but that he is five hundred
pound the worse: so that to me he seems to have met with some of such a
disposition* whereof I have heard a Miller to be, who stole five pecks out of
a bushel.

Answ. This shows that Mr. Bushnel in the want of truth has a mind to make
himself merry with his own lies, for he was removed from Box in September,
1656. and this Vicaridge reputed worth but ninety pound, per annum, and he
entering to it again before harvest 1660. So that he was deprived of the
profits of the same, not full four years, the which Mr. Stern took fully to
his own use (excepting only the tend pound incident charges) so that what Mr.
Bushnel lost, Mr. Stern had and Fifts to Mr. Bushnel only excepted.
received, how then does it follow that these two men can be losers of nine
hundred pounds between them? This is much like the Millers stealing five Pecks
out of a Bushel.

And now as to what concerns Mr. Blisset (one of the Commissioners) in
particular, the Reader is desired to observe what follows.

Page 208.
As to my self in particular, whereas in page 208. he boldly charge me
(though upon a bare report) with the receiving of xx. l. his words are, viz.
These men as Godly as they are, love dearly to be fingering money, Mr. Stern
has said that Mr. Blisset had xx. l. of him (I believe half the money would
have made him my friend) which in all probability he had an eye to of a long
time.

Answ.
Now let the Reader judge of the spirit of this man, who is not only void of
charity, but common Ingenuity; to make such a Conclusion from a bare reported
Premises, and to pass such a positive sentence upon such a report, as will
appear to be a very grand mistake between them, (I mean Mr. Bushnell and Mr.
Stern) and I refer him to Mr. Stern for the rectifying thereof, and then I
doubt not but he will quickly see his over-forwardness in censuring,
conjecturing and believing so much amiss of me, but more of this by and by*

Page 239.
Mr. Bushnell has another fling at me, in page 239. hopeing that some of his
dirt will stick. It seems (says he) that Mr. Blisset was well acquainted with
Mr. Sternes recei^^^, I doubt not but he and his son William has been well
acquainted with some of Mr. Sternes diflursements.

Answ.
It seems, and I doubt not, proves nothing, but is a farther manifestation of
his spleen, Laying the stress of all he says, upon conjectures, and his own
bare suppositions. Again, he harps upon the same string, lest it should be
forgotten, in page 249.

Page 249.
Besides the xx l. Mr. Blisset had from him, of which I have spoken already.

Answ.
And so have I also.

Page 253.
Again page 253. That he might be sure his Reader should not forget, yea that
he might the more certainly confirm him in the belief of that which before he
affirmed barely upon the report of another, the same is now become a truth upon
his own knowledge, for says he, And here I can speak upon my own knowledge, xx
l. Mr. Blissett had, I know not for what else, Answ.
but for putting Mr. Stern in.

Herein Mr. Bushnell does imitate those who by often telling incredible stories
come at length to believe them to be truths; And were it true, yet it must be
a lie in him, since here he affirms that to be true on his own knowledge, which
in several pages before he confesses he took up only on the bare Report of
Mr. Stern: But however Reader for thy satisfaction, I shall farther add, for
the clearing my self in this particular,

That I never saw one penny of Mr. Sternes money in all my life, nor did I (or
any other to my use) ever receive one penny, much less such a sum from him, or
from any other by his appointment; nor was I ever under that temptation from
him, nor did I know or was I made acquainted with what contracts Mr. Stern
made with any person in order to his coming into Box: Though (I believe) Mr.
Stern will acknowledge he received from me as many civilities as he could in
reason expect (being a stranger to me) which he has often acknowledged to many
persons, and fully expressed the same in a letter long since unto me. Therefore
knowing my own innocence as to this charge, I do appeal to Mr. Stern to
Justify the truth of this my Protestation, who is quoted by Mr. Bushnell to be
the Author of this scandalous Report.

Page 254.
Again in page 254. Mr. Bushnell adds, And if it be as Mr. Stern has reported
it, Mr. Blisset has not been wanting to himself in this business; for he has
not only made the Vicaridge of Box bring him in plentiful returns to his
Treasury for the present, but also he has so providently provided it, that it
shall yield him a crop after we are dead and gone, for as Mr. Stern told me,
he has got the next Presentation to the place, so that it is not to be
wondered, that he ruined me first, and (after he had received his largess from
him) cared not how soon Mr. Stern were gone from the place, in order
whereunto, it was endeavored that he should be made weary of it, because his
turn was next, and so upon Mr. Sternes avoidance, he might make use and benefit
of his presentation.

Answ.
This charge against me will soon be brought to a short issue, It consists of
two parts, The one (though expressed in other terms) I have already answered,
viz. Box Vicaridge bringing in plentiful returns to my Treasury ( I suppose
he means the twenty pound) I shall say* no more to this. The second is as
false a suggestion as the first; Let this be the issue between us: I appeal to
that honorable person Sir Hugh Speak, Knight and Baronet, who is the undoubted
Patron thereof; I say, I have nothing to do in the next Presentation, nor had I
in the last, more than in telling Sir Hugh Speak that I thought Mr. Stern to
be an able and honest man, and one that might deserve his favor* so that
these premises having no foundation, I doubt not but the impartial Reader will
adjudge his Conclusion, page 255. as rotten. I abhor that saying of his, that I
ruined him, he may very well remember my inclinations toward him were
otherwise I appeal to Edw. Carter Esquire; his Counsel.
. I require Mr. Bushnel to make good (if he can) that I endeavored to weary
Mr. Stern of Box, that I might make my advantage upon the next Presentation
Enquire of Mr. Stern.
. These, Mr. Bushnel, of all assertions in your Book* are the most diabolical:
I challenge you, or any person whatsoever, to make good these, or any other
passages of the like nature upon me throughout all the Actions of my whole
Life (having been in public employment near fourteen years last past.)

Reader, we thought fit to tell thee, that we have had no greater allowance
of time, than some forty eight hours, both for the reading of Mr. Bushnels
Book, and composing an Answer to those Passages that seem to reflect upon us;
for till within this two days we had no thoughts of entering upon this
ungrateful work, neither did we know of any Reply that the Doctor intended,
which might give us an opportunity to annex something thereunto for our
vindication, and if we mistake not, we do not find any thing in his
Narrative, save what the Dr. and our selves have fully answered to, that
carries any matter of Reflection with it. As for his oblique charges,
scurrilous expressions, and quibbles, and Mr. Blissets Circumstance so often
iterated and sported with, we are resolved not to take notice of them: But if
in this undertaking of his he had had so mnch modesty and ingenuity as to have
forborne his invective and satirical language both against Commissioners and
Ministers, and had fairly set before the Reader the whole proceedings in the
business of his Ejection, without such monstrous Comments and Inferences, and
not put the stress of the Truth of what he principally charge on us, upon
[As I conjecture] [as I think] [as I beleeve] [as I was told by some body] [as
it has been reported] [and in probability] [and it seems so] [and it is evident
enough to mee] and as I remember] [and the like.

Risum teneatis amici? we should have thought the judgment of his Ejection
(as to the Matters charged on him, and the proofs thereof made by such
witnesses (as he renders them) and the defense made by himself, and his
witnesses for him) would have lain with the more clearness before the Reader,
as to the Sentence of his Ejection, whether it was just or unjust.

FINIS.
A WORD from the CLERK -- TO THE VICAR of BOX.
Mr. Bushnel,
CAsting mine eye upon your Narrative, I find you squirting out many
scurrilous passages against my self, which I can bear well enough, but I am
troubled to see how you load others, and that you, who profess your self a
Minister of Christ, should so far adulterate your fancy with the spirit of
darkness, and at length bring forth into the world such a monster, whose
ugliness (I doubt not) will be offensive to any that shall behold it with a
Christian eye. And although the Charge you bring against me for entering
Depositions by halfs, confounding the Order in which they were taken, and for
leaving out material clauses, which might have been to your behalf, deserves no
other answer than a Mentiris Bushnelle, yet for mine own Vindication, the world
shall know that I had a peculiar respect and tenderness for you when you were
upon the Stage, desiring you might come off with honor and safety, and that my
management of your business (so far as concerned me) did argue as much, I dare
appeal to your own conscience, as well as to your own Counselor Edward Carter
Esquire; I must also mind you with a shrewd, and (I believe) wilful mistake of
yours, or rather a subtle equivocation about the name of Blisset, by which you
endeavor to cast a blot upon the untainted Reputation of my Father, as if he
had received twenty pounds for being an Instrument to help Mr. Stern into Box:
Sir, this money was given by him unto At this time I was married, lived of my
self, without any dependence upon my Father, being by profession an Attorney.
Mr. Blisset, the Clerk, and not Mr. Blisset the Commissioner, and this not to
me, as Clerk to the Commissioners, but as I undertook to be his Solicitor to
Sir Hugh Speak the Patron of Box, under whose displeasure You may inform your
self of the truth hereof from Sir H. S.
Mr. Stern was fallen, for addressing himself to Oliver Cromwell for the gift
of the same, and for entering on the Vicaridge upon that Title without the
consent of Sir H. S. M. Stern knowing the interest I had in that honorable
person This was done in the presence of William Pinchin and Obadiah Cheltenham.
applied himself to me to become his Advocate, and voluntarily offered me, by
way of reward, twenty pound: I did therefore after much pains and labor work
him into the favor of Sir. H. S. and got his Presentation for him. To
conclude, I do protest, that both the proffer, and receipt of this sum of money
from Mr. Stern, was altogether unknown to Mr. Blisset (my Father) until by
accident he had some hint of it at the least six months after; and as I wish
you may now repent the aspersing him by your clamorous report of falsehood; So I
advise you to an Index expurgatorius, if there be another Edition of your
unsavory Narrative.

William Blisset Jun.

FINIS.

