THE CARACTER OF A Leading Petitioner.
HE is an Insect produced by the Carrion of a Commonwealth, and naturally tends
to dissolve into his Principium, and primary constitution: though he be
preserved by the heat and moisture of serene Majesty, yet like contemptible
Vermin, He will with noisome pestilence infect that Air, to whose teaming
indulgence he owes his original, He Is unmannerly and mean, senceless and
impertinent, and though, being enjoined by duty, and qualyfi'd by education, to
show himself an industrious Terpawlin, when the billows of the troubled State
furiously heave, yet He Will saucily presume to give directions to his Pilate, and
regardless of his own respective Office, will boldly aim at the management of
the Healm. He in the repining Ghost of a dissolved Parliament, that uneasily
stalks about in obscurity and night, abusing popular credulity with the
deluding hopes of imaginary Treasure. He has the wit of a Dane, the truth of a
Frenchman, and the conscience of a London Grand-jury-man; And yet this vain
and troublesome tool would possess his obsequious rout, that the healing
results of a most wise Prince and untainted Council, are inferior to the long
Muster-Roll and Country Clubs of Richards and Robins, He is that unnatural
Greensickness of the Body- Politic, that would exchange the wholsomer
nourishment of a well-ordered Government, for the loathsome Trumpery of odious
Trash. Herodotus takes occasion to illustrate the rediculous vanity of a
Malcontent of this nature in his History about Cambyses, who perceiving some
discontent in one of his Officers, that could not without some pretense attempt
the traitorous design of unkinging his Master; The Prince did indulge his
Petitioner so far, as cautiously to comply with his unreasonable request; But
when the Supplicant perceived the very Grant of his requests. had ruind his
design, He condemned his importunities, and submissively sued to be restored to
his first condition. How greadily this Petitional Animal catches at the
seeming gilded bait of that imaginary Liberty that betrays him; He repines when
he is hungry, and murmurs when he is full, no sooner has a Moses redeliver'd him
from slavery, and pampered him with the Manna of peace and plenty, but the
High-fled Blockhead grows senseless of his happiness, and industriously
contrives for misery and want. He has the feathers of a Swan, but the stomach
of an Ostriche; He pretends innonsence and well-meaning zeal, but can digest a
harsher diet without any offense to his constitution. He is that troublesome
Vapor that breaks out of the earth to make a wind, and only sighs himself into
a Calm to recover breath and blow again. He is the crudor humors and Itch of a
Kingdom, and not only tickels himself into torment, but revengfully infects his
Neighbor, and if the wholesome Phebetomy of the Observator, had not fetched it
out of his veins by the timely discovery of his disease, the Infant Itch would
have spread into an incurable Scurf. He is the Epitome of all sorts of
villainies, and compriseth in his own peculiar Nut-shell the bold contrivances
and rediculous attempts of Jack Straw and his successless Gang. Rebellion is
his end, but the pretense of good service his means: There Is more Loyalty in
the very Title Page of one of the Intelligences, then in a thousand advising
Sheets of his Petitioning Scrowls. He pretends it is the fear of Popery that
alarms him, and to prevent that, He Will pull up the Wheat together with the
Tares, and (like the foolish Indian, that despises the Pearl because he found
it in a puddle) he will reject the truth of the Religion together with the Errors.
He refuses to come to Church, and comply with the Ceremonies because death
upon the Belfry is Popishly affected, and because the sand in his hourglass is
Jesuits Powder; He contemns the Church Bible because it is corrupted by the evil
Council of the Apocripha, and fancies that Tobith's dog was nothing else but
the Pope's Cerberus; Addresses he esteems as a sneaking peace of cowardice, and
reckons him to be the boldest Champion of Religion that will strenuously oppose
the Defender of it; His Bugbear jealousies are the creatures of his own head.
And (like the Artist that made a Devil which terrified him) he first creates
and then fears them; In a word, he is a desturber of the tranquillity of the
Nation, and an Enemy to all Loyal Subjects.

LONDON, Printed for W. Davis. 1681.


