CHAP. I. Of Magistracy.
I.
RELATION is nothing else but that State of Mutual Respect and Reference, which
one Thing or Person has to another.

II.
Such are the Relations of Father and Son, Husband and Wife, Master and
Servant, Magistrate and Subject.

III.
The Relations of a Father, Husband and Master, are really distinct and
different; that is, one of them is not the other; For he may be any one of
these who is none of the rest.

IV.
This distinction proceeds from the different Reasons, upon which these
Relations are Founded.

V.
The Reason or Foundation, from whence arises the Relation of a Father, is from
having Begotten his Son, who may as properly call every Old Man he meets his
Father, as any other Person whatsoever, excepting him only who Begat him.

VI.
The Relation of an Husband and Wife is founded in Wedlock, whereby they
mutually consent to become one Flesh.

VII.
The Relation of a Master is founded in that Right and Title which he has to
the Possession, or Service, of his Slave or Servant.

VIII.
In these Relations, the Name of Father, Husband, and Master, imply Sovereignty
and Superiority, which varies notwithstanding, and is more or less Absolute,
according to the Foundation of these several Relations.

IX.
The Superiority of a Father is founded in that Power, Priority, and Dignity of
Nature, which a Cause has over its Effect.

X.
The distance is not so great in Wedlock, but the Superiority of the Husband
over the Wife, is like that of the Right Hand over the Left in the same Body.

XI.
The Superiority of a Master, is an absolute Dominion over his Slave, a Limited
and Conditionate Command over his Servant.

XII.
The Titles of Pater Patriae, and Sponsus Regni, Father of the Country, and
Husband of the Realm, are Metaphors and Improper Speeches: For no Prince ever
Begat a whole Country of Subjects; nor can a Kingdom more properly be said to
be Married, than the City of Venice is to the Adriatique Gulf.

XIII.
And to show further, that Magistracy is not Paternal Authority, nor Monarchy
founded in Fatherhood; it is undeniably plain, that a Son may be the Natural
Sovereign Lord of his own Father, as Henry the second had been of Ieffrey
Plantagenet, if he had been an Englishman; which, they say, Henry the Seventh
did not Love to think of, when his Sons grew up to Years. And this Case alone
is an Eternal Confutation of the Patriarchate.

XIV.
Neither is Magistracy a Marital Power, for the Husband may be the Obedient
Subject of his own Wife, as Philip was of Queen Mary.

XV.
Nor is it that Dominion which a Master has over his Slave, for then a Prince
might Lawfully Sell all his Subjects, like so many Head of Cattle, and make
Money of his whole stock when ever he pleases, as a Patron of Algiers does.

XVI.
Neither is the Relation of Prince and Subject the same with that of a Master
and Hired Servant, for he does not Hire them, but, as St. Paul says, They pay
him Tribute, in consideration of his continual Attendance and Employment for
the Public Good.

XVII.
That public Office and Employment is the Foundation of the Relation of King
and Subject, as many other Relations are likewise Founded upon other Functions
and Administrations. Such as Guardian and Ward, etc.

XVIII.
The Office of a King is set down at large in the XVII. Chap. of the Laws of
King Edward the Confessor, to which the succeeding Kings have been sworn at
their Coronation: And it is affirmed in the Preambles of the Statutes of Prout
Regalis Officii exposcit utilitas
Marlbridge, and of the statute of Quo warranto, made at sicome le profit de
Office Demand.

The Kingly or Regal Office of this Realm jo. Mar. Sess. 3. Cap. 1.


Gloucester, That the Calling of Parliaments to make Laws for the better Estate
of the Realm, and the more full Administration of Justice, Belongs to the
Office of a King. But the fullest account of it in few words, is in Chancellor
Fortescue, Chap. XIII. which Passage is quoted in Calvin's Case, Coke VII. Rep.
Fol. 5 Ad Tutelam namque Legis Subditorum, ac eorum Corporum, and bonorum, Rex
hujusmodi erectus est, and ad hanc potestatem a populo effluxam ipse habet, quo
ei non licet potestate alia suo populo Dominari. For such a King ( That is of
every Political Kingdom, as this is) is made and ordained for the Defense or
Guardianship of the Law of his Subjects, and of their Bodies and Goods,
whereunto he receives power of his People, so that he cannot Govern his People
by any other power.

Corollary i. A Bargain's a Bargain.

2. A Popish Guardian of Protestant Laws is such an Incongruity, and he is as
Unfit for that Office, as Antichrist is to be Christ's Vicar.

CHAP. II. Of Prerogatives by Divine Right.
I.
GOvernment is not matter of Revelation; if it were, then those Nations that
wanted Scripture, must have been without Government; whereas Scripture it self
says, That Government is The Ordinance of Man, and of Humane Extraction. And
King Charles the First says, of this Government in particular, That it was
Molded by the Wisdom and Experience of the People. Answ. to XIX. Prop.

II.
All just Governments are highly Beneficial to Mankind, and are of God, the
Author of all Good; they are his Ordinances and Institutions, Romans 13. 1, 2.

III.
Plowing and Sowing, and the whole business of preparing Bread-Corn, is
absolutely necessary to the subsistence of Mankind; This also comes forth from
the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working, Isa.
28. from 23. to 29 Verse.

IV.
Wisdom says, Counsel is mine, and sound Wisdom; I am Understanding, I have
strength: By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me Princes Rule,
and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth, Prove. 8. 14.

V.
The Prophet, speaking of the Plowman, says, His God does instruct him to
discretion, and does teach him, Isa. 28. 26.

VI.
Scripture neither gives nor takes away Men's Civil Rights, but leaves them as
it found them, and (as our Savior said of himself) is no divider of
Inheritances.

VII.
Civil Authority is a Civil Right.

VIII.
The Law of England gives the King his Title to the Crown. For, where is it
said in Scripture, That such a Person or Family by Name shall enjoy it? And the
same Law of England which has made him King, has made him King according to the
English Laws, and not otherwise.

IX.
The King of England has no more Right to set up a French Government, than the
French King has to be King of England, which is none at all.

X.
Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; neither makes a Caesar, nor
tells who Caesar is, nor what belongs to him; but only requires Men to be just,
in giving him those supposed Rights, which the Laws have determined to be his.

XI.
The Scripture supposes Property, when it forbids Stealing; it supposes Men's
Lands to be already Butted and Bounded, when it forbids removing the ancient
Land marks: And as it is impossible for any Man to prove what Estate he has by
Scripture, or to find a Terrier of his Lands there; so it is a vain thing to
look for Statutes of Prerogative in Scripture.

XII.
If Mishpat Hammelech, the manner of the King, 1 Samuel 8. 11. be a statute of
Prerogative, and prove all those particulars to be the Right of the King, then
Mishpat Haccohanim the Priest's custom of sacrilegious Rapine, Chap. 2. 13.
proves that to be the Right of the Priests, the same word being used in both
places.

XIII.
It is the Resolution of all the Judges of England, that even the known and
undoubted Prerogatives of the Jewish Kings, do not belong to our Kings, and
that it is an absurd and impudent Thing to affirm they do. Coke 11 Rep. p. 63.
Mich. 5. Iac. Note, Give us a King to Judge us. 1 Samuel 8. 5. 6, 20.
upon Sunday the Tenth of November, in this same Term, the King, upon Complaint
made to him by Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning Prohibitions, was
informed, That when Question was made of what matters the Ecclesiastical Judges
have Cognizance, either upon the Exposition of the Statutes concerning Tithes,
or any other Thing Ecelesiastical, or upon the Statute 1 Eliz. concerning the
High Commission or in any other Case, in which there is not express Authority
by Law, the King himself may decide it in his Royal person; and that the Judges
are but the Delegates of the King, and that the King may take what Causes he
shall please to determine from the determination of the Judges, and may
determine them himself. And the Archbishop said, That this was clear in
Divinity, That such Authority belongs to the King, by the Word of God in
Scripture. To which it was answered by me, in the prefence, and with the clear
consent of all the Justices of England, and Barons of the Exchequer, That the
King in his own person cannot adjudge any Case, either Criminal, as Treason,
Felony, etc. but this ought to be determined and adjusted in some Court of
Justice, according to the Law and Custom of England. And always Judgments are
given, Ideo-consideratum est per Curiam, so that the Court gives the Judgment:
-- And it was greatly Marvelled, That the Archbishop durst inform the King,
that such absolute power and authority, as is aforesaid, belonged to the King,
by the Word of God.

CHAP. III. Of Obedience.
I.
NO Man has any more Civil Authority than what the Law of the Land has vested
in him; Nor is he one of St. Paul's higher powers any farther, or to any other
purposes than the Law has empowered him.

II.
An Usurped, Illegal and Arbitrary Power, is so far from being the Ordinance of
God, that it is not the Ordinance of Man.

III.
Whoever opposes an Usurped, Illegal, and Arbitrary Power, does not oppose the
Ordinance of God, but the Violation of that Ordinance.

IV.
The 13 of the Romans commands Subjection to our Temporal Governors, Verse 4.
because their Office and Employment is for the public welfare; For he is the
Minister of God to Thee for good.

V.
The 13 of the Hebrews commands Obedience to spiritual Rulers, Verse 17
because they watch for your souls.

VI.
But the 13 of the Hebrews did not oblige the Martyrs and Confessors in Queen
Mary's Time, to obey such blessed Bishops as Bonner and the Beast of Rome, who
were the perfect Reverse of St. Paul's spiritual Rulers, and whose practice was
murdering of Souls and Bodies, according to that true Character of Popery
which was given it by the Bishops who compiled the Thanksgiving for the Fifth
of November; but Archbishop Laud was wiser than they, and in his time blotted
it out.

The Prayer formerly run thus: To that end strengthen the Hands of our Gracious
King, the Nobles and Magistrates of the Land, to cut off these workers of
Iniquity (whose Religion is Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction, whose practice
is Murdering of Souls and Bodies) and to root them out of the Confines of this
Kingdom.

VII.
All the Judges of England are bound by their Oath, 18 Edw. 20 Edw Cap. 1.
and by the duty of their place^ to disobey all Writs, Letters, or Commands,
which are brought to them, either under the little Seal, or under the great
Seal, to hinder or delay common Right. Are the Judges all bound in an Oath, and
by their places, to break the 13 of the Romans?

VIII.
The Engagement of the Lords attending upon the King at York, June 13. 1642.
which was subscribed by the Lord Keeper, and Thirty Nine Peers, besides the
Lord Chief-Iustice Banks, and several others of the Privy Council, was in these
words:

We do engage our selves not to Obey any Orders or Commands whatsoever, not
warranted by the known Laws of the Land. Was this likewise an Association
against the 13 of the Romans?

IX.
A Constable represents the King's person, and in the Execution of his Office
is within the purview of the 13 of the Romans, as all Men grant; but in case he
so far pervert his Office, as to break the Peace, and commit Murder, Burglary,
or Robbery on the Highway, he may, and ought to be Resisted.

X.
The Law of the Land is the best Expositor of the 13 of the Romans, Here, and
in Poland, the Law of the Land There.

XI.
The 13 of the Romans is received for Scripture in Poland, and yet this is
expressed in the Coronation Oath in that Country; Quod si Sacramentum meum
violavero, Incolae Regni nullam nobis Obedientiam praestare tenebuntur. And if
I shall violate my Oa^h, the Inhabitants of the Realm shall not be bound to
yield me any Obedience.

XII.
The Law of the Land, according to Bracton, is the highest of all the Higher
Powers mentioned in this Text; for it is superior to the King, and made him
King, (Lib. iii. Cap. xxvi. Rex habet superiorem Deum, item Legem, per quam
factus est Rex, item Curiam suam, viz. Comites and Barons) and therefore by
this Text we ought to be subject to it in the first place. And, according to
Melancthon, It is the Ordinance of God, to which the Higher Powers themselves
ought to be subject. Vol. iii. in his Commentary on the Fifth Verse, (Wherefore
ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake.) He
has these words, Neque vero haec tantum pertinent ad Subditos, sed etiam ad
Magistratum, qui cum fiunt Tyranni, non minus dissipant Ordinationem Dei, quam
Seditiosi. Ideo and ipsorum Conscientia fit rea, quia non obediuut Ordinationi
Dei, id est, Legibus, quibus debent parere. Ideo Comminationes hic positae
etiam ad ipsos pertinent. Itaque hujus mandati severitas moveat omnes, ne
violationem Politici status putent esse leve peccatum. Neither does this place
concern Subjects only, but also the Magistrates themselves, who when they turn
Tyrants, do no less overthrow the Ordinance of God than the Seditious; and
therefore their Consciences too are guilty, for not obeying the Ordinance of
God, that is, the Laws which they ought to obey: So that the Threatenings in
this place do also belong to them; wherefore let the severity of this Command
deter all men from thinking the Violation of the Political Constitution to be a
light Sin.

Corollary. To destroy the Law and Legal Constitution, which is the Ordinance
of God, by false and arbitrary Expositions of this Text, is a greater Sin than
to destroy it by any other means; For it is Seething the Kid in his Mothers
milk.

CHAP. IV. Of Laws.
I.
THere is no Natural Obligation, whereby one Man is bound to yield Obedience to
another, but what is founded in paternal or patriarchal Authority.

II.
All the Subjects of a patriarchal Monarch are Princes of the Blood.

III.
All the people of England are not Princes of the Blood.

IV.
No Man who is Naturally Free can be Bound, but by his own Act and Deed.

V.
Public Laws are made by public consent, and they therefore bind every man,
because every Man's consent is involved in them.

VI.
Nothing but the same Authority and Consent which made the Laws, can Repeal,
Alter, or Explain them.

VII.
To judge and determine Causes against Law, without Law, or where the Law is
obscure and uncertain, is to assume Legislative power.

VIII.
Power assumed, without a Man's consent, cannot bind him as his own Act and
Deed.

IX.
The Law of the Land is all of a piece, and the same Authority which made one
Law, made all the rest, and intended to have them all Impartially Executed.

X.
Law on One Side, is the Back-Sword of Justice.

XI.
The Best Things, when Corrupted, are the Worst; and the wild Justice of a
State of Nature, is much more d^sirable than Law perverted, and overruled,
into Hemlock and Oppression.

LONDON, Printed for L. C. near Fleet-bridge. 1688.


