WITS Led by the Nose; OR, A POET'S REVENGE: A Tragi-Comedy, As it is Acted at
the Theater Royal.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar,
1678.

Licensed August 16. 1677. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

PROLOGUE, Intended to be spoke by Sir Simon Credulous, Written by F. W. Gent.
A Play Bill discovered upon the Door, Enter like a Country Gentleman. What Is
here? never Acted before, Hey-day!
This certainly is some insipid Play.
Wits lead by the Nose, I Gad I Would best retire,
They Will find me out to be some Country Squire;
And then for certain though I Am not a Wit,
They Will thrust me amongst my Brethren in the Pit;
Where with Debauches, Noise, and little Miss,
I shall be Martyred worse then Poet is,
And be obliged for Company to hiss.
To shun the Danger of the admiring Crew
B'w'y Miss, Boy, House, and Brethren all Adieu.
Offers to go, but returns. Gad should I stay, they would cheat me with pretense
Of a new Play called Country Innocence,
Or what was worst of all, the Devil take her,
A Debauched Chambermaid forsooth turned Quaker.
These little Tricks, so often put on Wits,
Made me forswear to come in either Pits.
Midnights Intreagues, and Conjerer de France,
Insipid fribling and unruly dance
So turned my stomach --
I talk, as if concerned at what they do,
I Gad Dear Brethren it is for none but you.
It grieves my heart to see you yawn in the Pit,
As if you came for sleep, and not for Wit.
Another Crew, with good diverting Play,
Passes the tedious hours of Show away,
Pumping for wit to manage him next day.
Gad what with that, ill nature, and worse, W --
The Actors are quite Acted out of Doors.
Disease, Impotence, and endless Rage,
Have been the ruin of this noble Stage.
I shunned the danger, Gad with much ado,
To be a Country Wit like some of you.
The Civil Wars betwixt the Blew, and Red,
Was but a spice of Pride stolen from the head:
In Imitation of such growing men,
They Have got the Knack to be undone again:
Ruin's Triumphant, and in Masquerade
Appears in every Corner to invade
The easy natured fools, and spoil the trade.
And will you hear how it is? The house is grown
So out of date to the ruling Fops of the Town,
That in a Month, I Gad, you scarcely come
TO applaud, but to debauch in the tyring Room;
Where having whispered your Harmonious Miss,
You creep into the Pit, and frame a Hiss.
You think new Plays, such as can please the Age,
Are not the work of this, but the other Stage:
Let us provide even the best we can,
Here they will scarce please a Country Gentleman;
Much less those Huffing Wits, who sans remorse,
Make down right railing here their common course,
And Jockie-like, damm the best running Horse.
In former Ages you came here for Wit,
Gleaned what best pleased, and then forsook the Pit:
You think us Barren, and to others steare,
And gape for Wit, but find no more then here.
God's Death, not to Plays but Puppet shows you run,
Sure you're in Love with dear Mrs. such a one,
And court her shadow ere the Play's begun.
When you're come here, as Gad it is very rare,
You serve us like the Monsters of the Fair;
Hiss without reason, damm without control,
As if you meant to Sacrifice the Soul.
This strange unkindness has our Stage undone,
And all that you thought Actors faith are gone:
The men to Misses, Places, or Estates,
The Women to their kind and welcome Fates;
Thus both at once retiring from the Stage,
Have left us here the Objects of your Rage.
To court your kindness were alas but vain,
You must be Damming though you Damm in pain.
Amongst the hard hearted, I good natures spy,
And kindness dancing in each Ladies eye;
They to commiserate, not hate, were born,
I know you are too kind and fair to scorn;
Your blushing Cheeks good Nature does betray,
It lies on you to save, or Damm the Play;
Our unlearned Author to your doom submits,
Desirous to be tried by Female Wits:
If you applaud him all his pains are crowned,
And he will defy the huffing Critics round.
Actors Names.
ANtellus, King of Sicilia Oroandes, General of his Army Zannazarro, a young
Lord in Rebellion Arratus, an old Courtier Vanlore, a Gentleman fallen to decay
Sir Simon Credulous Sir Jasper Sympleton Jack Drayner, Servant to Credulous
Dick Slywit, Servant to Sympleton A Shepherd A Servant, and a Messenger Mr.
Goodman. Mr. Lydell. Mr. Perrin. Mr. Watson. Mr. Power. Mr. Haynes. Mr. Styles.
Mr. Nathaniel Q. Mr. Coysh.
Women.
HEroina, Princses of Regium Glorianda, Princess of Cyprus Amasia, Sister to
Zannazarro Theocrine, Daughter to Arratus Julia, Theocrines Maid -- Mrs. Baker,
Jun. Mrs. Bowtell. Mrs. Baker. Mrs. F.
Attendants, Priests, Guards, Spirits, B. n letties, Shepherds and
Shepherdesses.

Scene SICILIA.

WITS Led by the Nose.
ACT I.
SCENE Arratus Lodgings.
Enter Arratus with a Letter in his hand, Sir Simon and Sly-wit as from
Traveling. Arr. SIR Simon, without this Letter your self had been most
welcome, and I am bound in honor to your Father (besides the great Engagement
of your presence) to do whatever he commands me.


Sym. Sir, I cannot but thank you, our English way admits of but few
Complements, and those are grown so tedious to me since I left the Clime, I
purpose to forget 'em.


Arr. Plain down right dealing's the Sicilian fashion, and that I count the
best too. But dear Sir Simon make me happy in the knowledge why you left your
Nation.


Sym. A toy -- a frollick -- a mere trick I Gad, a vain desire to see this
other World, and know what difference is between the Natures of such different
Kingdoms.


Arr. Your Curiosity ought Sir to be commended and encouraged; but sure some
other Reason urged you to Travel, Love, Love, I Will warrant you?


Sym. I Gad Love is the only thing I hate, it is more offensive to my
Constitution, then Arsnick to an Ague. I Gad we are cloyed with it in England;
and that which makes me hate it more* is, my last Amoret in the very height of
her Embraces not only pi^ke my Pocket, but dealt unkindly by me, and all that.
Love, oh out upon it, it is the greatest Monster Sir in Nature.


Arr. I Am sorry you are so averse to what we count a pleasure; and more since
the great hopes I had in such a noble Son, are blasted in their early spring.


Sym. I find by my hand, and all that; this old man intends to push a fortune
on me. -- aside.

It is my fate Sir, at first I loved like Plato, then like all the World, that
is every pretty yielding Beauty; at last by too many enjoyments --

Pox on 'em I may say -- aside.

I grew so dull, so wearied and so senceless, I Gad I resolved never to love
again.


Arr. It Is very strange.


Sym. Nor never will, unless Sir to oblige my best of friends, your noble self.


Arr. I rest engaged to you. I must confess Sir I have a Daughter, and one whom
Nature has rather been prodigal then backward in bestowing Graces. My mind ever
designed her (Sir) for you, and to complete what I so long had wished, even
from both your Infancies, I let your Father know my whole design, whose heart
with mine did willingly agree; there wanting nothing but your riper years,
which Heaven bestowing on you both, your Father according to his promise, and
my great desire, has sent in you the Center of my hopes.


Sym. I find my self betrayed, betrayed to love I Gad, and wheal'd already into
the bonds of Matrimony, and that is a dangerous task for a Gallant of the times
to undertake, especially for one who has bin caught by that religious cheat of
Wedlock at least fifteen times; but the best is, the Sicillian and our Laws
differ as much as their Constitutions, and for those facts committed there a
Gentleman in honor cannot suffer here. -- aside. Sir you honor me too much in
thus bestowing upon me so great a prize, as your lovely Daughter, who maybe as
ugly as the Devil for ought I know. aside.


Arr. Had not the great deserts Sir of your Father, besides equallity of birth,
and friendship, translated to my Soul your noble virtues, this first encounter
would have given me sufficient satisfaction of your merits.


Sym. My Lord, your praises rise to Ostentation; and to requite you for this
noble kindness, if recommencing love will ought oblige you, you may command
your Servant.


Arr. You make me happy; this grant of yours, pulls back some years from age;
my Daughter will be overjoyed at such a Husband, and meet you with the best
respects of Love.


Sym. Let her be swift in granting, for I Gad if she holds out long, my
affections will melt away, and turn into down right hatred, mere slight,
neglect, scorn, and so forth.


Arr. She Is half prepared already, there wants nothing but the grant, the word,
I Love, and then the deed is done.


Sym. I but that word I have known extended to such a length, that it was
impossible to find an end of the resolve. I since my fit of Love's returned,
hate all but yielding Females, and to those I fly with as much vigor, as a
Novice in the Art of Courtship to his new gained Mistress.

Let her be plyant, and my fit will last;
If not --
As it came swiftly on, it flies as fast.

Arr. Come Son, for so I Will call you now; after your tedious journey, rest is
needful, then you shall see the only joy I have,

And from her eyes receive so sweet a fate,
You Will bless that power, which first did Love create.
Exeunt
SCENE a City.
Enter Oroandes, two Captains and Soldiers. Oro. My Kings Commission gives me
not only orders to dethrone brave Zannazarro, but to demolish all, to burn his
factious Town, and in its Ruins bury the thoughts of Usurpation.


Omnes. Heaven crown the action with success.


Oroa. My gratitude divides it self amongst you all; the only way of
recompense, until some happy beam of opportunity shall light my wishes to a
requital of your early loves. -- Summon the Rebel. They sound a parl.


Enter as on the Walls Zannazarro and Attendants. Zan. What means this hasty
Summons? Is your anger so swift in motion, that it not admits due rites unto
the dead? and though our griefs sit heavy on our Souls, it is not of Kin to
fear, but we dare draw our Swords ere we have wiped our eyes, and in a peal of
Cannon, thunder his Funeral.


Oroa. It Is pity a resolve thus fortified, should unravel all its glory, in an
unlawful cause.


Zan. Oroandes, you may spare your labor, though we have lost the strongest
Citadel of all our hopes, in our dear Fathers death, yet we will sell our
Lives, at honors dearest rate, and not fall an humble Sacrifice to death.


Oroa. I am sorry Sir, that my advice, proceeding from the love I bear your
worth, has missed its wished for ends: Farewell, all happiness but that which
waits on victory attend you.


Exeunt below. Zan. The like to thee brave Soul, since part we must;
When next we meet, 'twill be in blood and dust.

Exeunt above. An alar'm and fighting within. Enter as in flight Zannazarro and
Soldiers, Enter aft ert em fighting the first Captain, and Soldiers, they
follow Zannazarro and Soldiers off, and then return, Enter to them Oroandes
and Soldiers. Oroa. Where Is Zannazarro?


1 Cap. Received into the Town, in spite of all our Force.


Oroa. God's Death, their Army beaten, and cannot he be Conquered? scale the Walls,
kill and burn all, till death be tired with Conquering.


Scene the Walls of the Town, Zannazarro and Soldiers appear upon 'em, Allarm,
Oroandes and Soldiers scale the Walls, beat off Zannazarro and Soldiers, and
enter the Town, Allarm still, a shout, and then the Scene changes to a Town
afire, a noise of shrieks and fighting for a while, and then the Scene changes
to a Temple, in which is discovered Amasia kneeling at the Altar with two or
three Ladies. Enter a Messenger all bloody. Mess. Fly dearest Lady, fly, the
day is lost, your noble Brother taken, Wars furious Goddess, fierce Enyo stands
over your battered Gates, a dropping pine about her Tresses lends with its
dismal light an entrance to the Messengers of Death, the Battlements sweat all
in flames, whilst loud confusion fills the enlightened air.


The Ladies weep. Ama. Weep not my dear companions, you have shared alike with
me in every change of fortune, if fate ordains this the Catastrophe of all
those Tragic Scenes; to us our Virgin innocence shall be protection, safer
then the united Swords of Earths most powerful Monarchs. Outcries within.


1 Lad. Oh they are entering, entering, lets fly dear Madam.


Ama. Whether? When slaughter runs through all, where can we find protection?


Enter Oroandes and Soldiers. Oroa. Ha! -- what place is this? -- with what an
awful Majesty it looks! -- sure it inshrines Deity -- what is she? -- spies
Amasia. with such a face Troy's tutelary Angel looked, when all her Crown of
Turrets dropped their flaming heads.


Amasia kneels to Oroandes. Ama. What ere thou art, that in this dreadful shape
come to profane this hallowed place with blood; if in your breast, there
dwell a human thought, telling you that a Woman was your Mother, for her sake
pity a distressed Virgin.


Oroandes stands amassed, lets fall his Sword. Oroa. A chilling frost unnerves
my joints, sure it is Divinity or Magic that has thus deposed my Reason, to
let rebel passion triumph in the injured Throne. -- Rise Lady, there is a
Religious ice about my heart, that chains up all my fury: -- I shall rather
slight the commands of a much injured Prince, then violate ought which the
dictates of my Soul proclaims for sacred.


Ama. Oh lead me then to some polluted place that is grown drunk with blood, and
there let mine increase the purple deluge; I shall not always be protected by
this place's sanctity, or if I were, find few of so much virtue, to be with a
Religious reverence awed.


Oroa. Do not dear Soul too much afflict your self, my Power secures you from
all future violence, each tear you shed drops from my heart in blood, I Am
conquered in this victory, and become a Captive to my prisoner: fear nothing
Madam, for your Guardian Angel roab'd in virginity is not whiter then those
thoughts which cloth my Soul, when they reflect on so much suffering virtue:
Oh give my passions leave to move within the Orb of your Celestial Beauty,
while no line -- tends to the Center of a thought unchaste.


Ama. Alas my Lord, this is no time to play with Love, when War and Death sit
by and hold the stakes.


Oroa. If all my service to my Prince has merited ought worth requital, he
must show it in mercy to you, or by a blacker doom shake my obedience off; but
only grant me thus much satisfaction, that when time redeems you from these
cruel frowns of fate, you would with pity then on my afflictions look.


Ama. I were ungrateful else, noble Sir; I so much prize your virtues, that if
ere my frowning stars smile on my fate again, their powerful influence shall
reflect on you, in so much thankful gratitude, you shall acknowledge it the
eldest Child of Love.


Oroa. My joys grow equal with my wishes;

Banish all fear since fate so kind does prove,
Thus to reward Wars mighty toyls with Love.
Exeunt.
SCENE Arratus Lodgings.
Enter at one door Arratus and Theocrine, at the other Sir Simon and Drayner,
Sir Simon dressed Gallantly. Arr. Son, you are most nobly welcome, my Daughter I
thank my Stars accepts the proffer, and no doubt but both parties will be
agreed.


Sym. I hope so too Sir, for as I said before I hate a tedious Courtship.


Arr. Daughter this is the Gentleman I spoke of, is he not in every thing
complete to my description?


Theo. Yes Sir, -- If gaudy Clothes, Powder and Paint can make a Lover, this
Monster wants no Graces. aside.


Sym. Madam, having the honor to be introduced into your noble company, I hope
I shall not appear rude in thus presuming to kiss your hand, and all that. [I
Gad, she is very handsome, and has conquered my heart at this first entervieu.
-- aside.] Lady I hope your Father has made you sensible of my Amors, and
withal the way and manner of my Courtship, for I Gad and all that, I love
damnably, and hate monstrously.


Theo. It Is strange Sir you can admit at once of love and hate.


Sym. In their degrees Lady, but sometimes they are inseparable, for I can at
once hate and love, love and hate, and all that, but the present cause which
may be easily avoided is a tedious Courtship.


Theo. I Am glad I know your mind Sir, and shall strive to please in expedition.


Sym. I vow to Gad and all that, you are the sweetest lovingest Lady, and so
forth, in all Europe.


Arr. I told you Son she would be all obedience, and to preserve your Loves
entire for ever, prepare against to morrow for the Wedding.


Theo. To morrow Sir?


Arr. Yes Daughter, so I Have said, a days loss begets an age of sorrow, to
morrow is the ultimate.


Theo. The warning Sir's too short, I cannot in one night consent, to the great
loss that fatal day will bring; defer it Sir a week.


Sym. By Heaven, I shall forget to love by that time, alas Madam my love comes
on by fits, and if you refuse me while it reigns upon me, I Gad and all that
you may go seek your Husband.


Arr. Dispute no more, to morrow is the day, till then I give you leave to
think upon it.

He must be taken in the height of love,
Or else the effects in pallid fear will move:
Delayed affection many ills produce,
And love may lose its power for want of use.
Exeunt.
As they are going off, Enter Sir Jasper and Slywit, Sir Jasper seeing them,
stands still. Jas. Ha! that is more then I expected, this is sure a Rival, and
one of the newest stamp, pox on this love I say, a man is never free from one
danger or other; now am I in a great Quandary, whether I had best go forward or
backward, if I go forward there is a Rival, if backward there goes a Coward, and
to stand still is worst of all.


Sly. Sir what do you mean? Did you come out with an intent to see your
Mistress, and stand disputing what you would best to do.


Jas. Do, why what you would have me do? Did you not see a Rival with my Lady,
and let me tell you there is danger in those Creatures, pox on 'em they are as
common as Cuccolds, but not half so loving.


Sly. That Is as they are used, if they discover the least spark of fear, they are
valliant then as Lions, but if you bear up Briskly, swear Neatly, and huff
Completely, they sneak away, just like insipid Asses.


Jas. Nay if swearing and huffing would overcome, I think none dare pretend to
have any courage but my self.


Sly. As for example, suppose you were my Rival, thus I come to you, Umh, Umh,
Umh, Dam me Sir, you are an Insipid, Excommunicated, Rascullian Son of a Whore,
and my Rival.


Gives Sir Jasper a slap on the face, retreats, and draws his Sword. Jas. Pox
on your Rival ship, if this be the fruits on it, you may keep your Lady and be
damned; was that Alamode to make fire fly out of both the eyes of a Gentleman?


Sly. I used you kindly in it, you should in answer to the affront, have drawn
your Sword, and --


Jas. Run away I Will warrant you.


Sly. No Sir, fought him Gentilely, and with a decent thrust pushed his Soul
into another World.


Jas. I marry Sir, that is a good way to be hanged, and all that


Sly. Phu, I am ashamed of you, and your conversation, a Gentleman and be
hanged, 'twas never heard of, I knew a Squire after he Cowardly had killed a
Score, had leave to mak't up Forty, and you being a Knight, I hope you may have
more power.


Jas. Say you so, nay if I may kill Cum privilegio, woe be to the next I meet,
my anger's up, and murder will ensue; but to our business, suppose you were my
Rival, thus I come up to you, Umh, Umh, Umh, Dam me Sir, you are an Insipid,
Excommunicated, Rascallian Son of a Whore, and my Rival.


Strikes Sly. Runs back to draw his Sword, and then returns. Sly. So this was
well done, and like a lover.


Jas. Nay let me alone for huffing. Enter an old Woman. here comes something,
now courage for me.


Sly. What mean you Sir?


Jas. Nothing, but to kill that Monster, I have sworn, and a Gentleman should
not break his word.


Sly. But that is a woman Sir, a very old woman.


Jas. If she were a very old Devil I would kill her, my angers up, and murder
will ensue. Goes to kill the old Woman.


Old W. Oh Lord Sir hold, put up your Sword Sir, I have not seen a naked thing
of that length this forty years, help, help, murder, murder. Runs up and down
the Stage, crying murder, at length falls down, and Jasper in running after
falls too, the old Woman gets up and runs away crying murder.


Jas. Pox of her old bones, could she not stand to be killed decently.


Sly. She thought 'twas better living Sir; but lets begone, her mumbling chaps
will raise the streets upon us.


Jas. Withal my heart.

Since want of Huff and Dinging, makes a Cully,
I Will Rant, Rore, Swear, and Curse to be a Bully.
Exeunt.
ACT II.
SCENE the City.
Enter Jasper Sympleton, Slywit, Musitioners and Dancers. Jas. FOllow your
Leader Rascals, this is the House, undermine it first with a noise of vocal
Music, and then blow it up with a whirlwind of Fidling.


SONG:
THus like a Spark and a Bully of the Town,
I Ramble in the Streets, and Roam up and down.
No Lover so decently ere made approach,
But first he debauched his dear self in a Coach;
The act being done, to his Miss with a noise
Of scraping dull Rascals, and rabble of boys,
In Nonsense he chatters the height of his joys.
2.
But your Knight Alamode, your man of pretense,
Who comes armed all over wtth nothing but sense;
With Gaudy rich Cloths, Perfume, Patch, and Paint;
Cannot such a Lover be less then a Saint?
For they dressed all Airie, and Purity prove,
No blessing so great, so great as your Love.
3.
Your Love, that chief bliss of our Mortal Estate,
Though oftentimes Clouded with envy and hate,
We Slaves must admire, and gladly pursue,
Yhough we lose both our senses, our pleasures, and you.
What man that is a Lover, and boldly dare move,
But durst for enjoyment, forsake all above,
Though that minute he is damned, and damned for his Love.
A Serenade, and then a Dance; all the while they Sing and Dance Theocrine and
Julia are seen in the Balconee. Enter Sir Simon Credulous and Drayner.
Theocrine and Julia, Exit above. Sly. Sir, there is your Rival.


Jas. Dam me Sir, you are an Insipid, Excommunicated, Rascallian Son of a
Whore, and my Rival.


Strikes Sir Simon, runs back and draws his Sword, Sir Simon does the same, and
coming toward one another they know each other. Sym. What my Quondam friend
and noble acquaintance Sir Jasper Sympleton.


Jas. My Right Worshipful, and Pomathematical Bully, Sir Simon Credulous. They
Embrace.


Sly. Cully Drayner.


Dra. Bully Slywit. They Embrace.


Sym. And how, and how is it? I Gad who thought to have seen you here? the last
time we saw each other, I pawned you at the Rose for a Guinny, that little
Debauch made a Divorce betwixt us, and have I met thee here? -- Embrace again.
but a Pox of your Ceremonious way of Greeting Bully, that slap was very severe
to a friend.


Jas. A slight way of Complement to a Rival, but dear Rogue let me kiss thee,
-- I Gad I joy to see you. --


Embrace again. Sym. This is a Rival by his fawning, for I believe a Sicilian
Rival, and an English Cuckold, are much of a Nature, both loving the man that
most injures them. -- aside. But Bully Sympleton what made you here so early,
bin upon the Ramble I Will warrant you, and so came and paid your devoires to the
Lady of your best affections.


Jas. Rot me, if I Am in love with any body but my Landress; these are only some
of my flashes of Gallantry, to let the City know my merits; but what made you
here Bully Credulous? To Court a Lady I dare swear.


Sym. By my honor no, an unlucky Horse of mine as I was riding to view the
Country, stood still with me seven miles together, which forced me to be
beholding to the Gentleman of this House for a nights Lodging; This will do or
nothing. -- aside. But if ever I ride a tired Horse again, post me for a Cully.


Jas. This may be, but I Gad it is very impossible.


Enter Theocrine and Julia. Sym. Zounds here comes my Lady, now dare I as well
be hanged as speak to her, for fear of having my threat cut. -- aside.


Jas. What a pox shall I do now? if I speak, I discover my affections, and
create a Rival; and if I say nothing, I lose my Mistress. Oh valor, oh valor,
what is become of you? -- aside.


Sly. Sir, why do you not speak to the Lady, she expects you. -- aside to
Jasper.


Jas. She may expect me if she pleases, but I think I shall not speak to her. --
to Slywit.


Dra. Sir, are you not ashamed to stand gaping as if you had lost your speech?
to Simon.


Sym. I Gad I had better lose my speech, then lose my life: for if I speak to
her, he will speak to me, and above all things I hate an angry Rival. to Drayner.


Sly. Good Sir recollect your self, your Rival is an arrand Coward, and dares
not own before your face his love to Theocrine, and should you refuse to Court
her now, she is lost for ever, -- aside to Jasper. forward Sir, forward, for
shame. -- Pushes Jasper forward.


Sym. I Gad I Will venture too, Drayner get your Sword ready, and if my Rival
offers to draw, dispatch him decently.


Speaks this aside to Drayner, and then goes toward Theocrine, Jasper does the
same. Jas. Honorable Madam.


Sym. Lovely Lady. Get your Sword ready Drayner.


Jas. Most Aromatic Beauty.


Sym. Divine, Celestial, and Odoriferous Venus.


Jas. The glory of your presence, makes me stoop thus low to kiss your hand. --
Kisses her hand.


Sym. The glory of your presence makes me bold to kiss your L -- and so forth.
-- Offers to kiss her.


Theo. What mean you Sir? --


Jas. Ay* what mean you Sir?


Sym. Nay, nay, no huffing Bully, no harm upon my honor Madam.


Theo. You Are bold Sir, and intrude too far upon the privilege my Father gave
you; but that you are a stranger and a Gentleman, I should chastise the
Insolence.


Jas. I would not lose the honor for a Kingdom, he is my Rival, and that is
sufficient, hum, hum. -- After a Huffing Proud manner. Bully Credulous you are
my friend, -- aside to him. Give me your hand, meet me within this minute --
Aloud, after the foregoing manner. at the Tavern. -- aside as before.


Sym. Agreed. -- aloud as before.


Jas. Madam your Servant, such saucy actions must and shall be punished,
farewell. aloud as before.


Exit. Sir Jasper and Slywit. Sym. Your Servant Madam; if I fall, say you lost
one who loved. -- After the same manner to Theocrine.


Exit. Sir Simon with Drayner. Theo. The Coxcombs will not fight sure?


Jul. You need not fear it Madam, their Spirits are too dull for such brave
Actions.


Theo. I do not much, yet something troubles me, and what it is I know not.


Jul. Love for Vanlore Madam; it is true, his virtues merit all your noble
thoughts, but his mean fortunes so inrage your Father, I fear you will never enjoy
him.


Theo. Fathers are Cruel when they think they are Kind, and more disturb our rest
by forcing Love, then when they rob us of the Author of it.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Madam, a Messenger from Ardenna desires to speak with
you.


Theo. Some news from Vanlore, now Heaven I hope is kind.


Exeunt. SCENE Chamber Royal.
Enter Antellus, Glorianda, Guards, two Sea Captains, and Attendants, Antellus
Reading a Letter. King. The Letter.
WHen first our full spread sails were Pregnant grown, and all our hopes grew
equal to our wishes, a spightful Storm stretched on the wings of all the
Clamorous Winds, scattered our Fleet, whose Ruind sails hang on the top of
Rocks, the darkened Sky proclaims a dissolution, and the angry Waves assault our
sinking Ships: Some hours this Tempest held, and on a sudden the face of the
Heaven was clear, the Seas grew Calm, and light appeared, just like a new born
day, that we might see the dreadful Ruin's of our scattered Fleet, and what
bred most distraction, the Prince's Ship was lost.



King. How full of fatal changes are our Lives, what is it to be a Monarch, and
yet live to be a trembling at every breath of passion? thus when all my
thoughts in the fair hopes were calmed of Heroina's safe Arrival, then, even
then to have 'em smothered in this Cloud of cursed Intelligence.


Glo. Your grief is yet but weak suspicions birth, and happily may prove
abortive Sir.


King. Oh Glorianda, thou fain would flatter me to comfort, but the malignity
of sorrow can admit no Cordials; there, there, Gives Glorianda the Letter, she
peruses it. unravel the black clew that led me into this dark Labyrinth of
grief; and tell me then, if I have ever left hopes to escape this growing storm
of Passion. Glorianda having perused the Letter, returns it.


Glo. Sir th'information is most sad, if true.


King. Oh, it is too true, too true my Glorianda, devouring Seas have cous'ned
our Embraces; but shall I lose her thus? Go gather all those Ships that owe
obedience to this life; and let their Squadrons scour the Seas until you find
her out, or else by all that is good, your lives, though an unworthy Sacrifice,
shall fall an offering to her Fathers loss. Exit. the Sea Captains.


Shouts within, Enter Oroandes, Zannazarro and Amasia Guarded. Oroandes kneels,
and presents the Prisoners. Oro. Thus only may your Enemies Encounter those
Beams of sacred Majesty, that shine through you from the Sicilian Diadem.


King. Rise Oroandes, high in our love as wonder; thus joy encounters grief,
but is too weak for such a foe.


Glo. I more then doubt poor Zannarro's safety.
Loves secret flames, teach me the way to fear,
And when he moves from life, my death draws near.

Weeps. King. Why so much woman Glorianda? Thou but mispendest thy pity on an
object, which if not removed, will soon Eclipse the brightness of our Stars. --

Go call the Priests of Mars and Pallas hither. Exit a Guard.


Oro. What might this Rage Portend?


Enter the Guards, and two Priests. King. Here take the Prisoners to your
charge, and let those Ceremonies be performed, by which the tainted blood of
Sacrifices, are made Incense for the Gods; see 'em prepared ere the next
Morning guilds the Earth.

-- Delay
Shall pluck no feathers from the wings of Day,
Ere vengeance meet the Rebels.
Exeunt Priests, and Prisoners.
Glo. Oh they are lost, for ever lost.


Oro. Is It Grief or Reverence that unnerves me thus? Oh my Soul -- thou art too
weak, too faintly weak, to move beneath the Chaos of these woes.


King. Now Oroandes I have time left to Embrace thee, and hug this Cabinet of
virtues yet, I have not in all thy absence let thy goodness slide out of my
thoughts, witness this Lady, in whose virgin breast, I Have strove to plant thy
worth.

Fight like a noble Soldier, and so move,
Till noble virtue Conquer Glorious Love.

Exit King and Attendants. Glo. Whither starts my degenerate Spirits? I was
born free as Sicily's King, and though he is my Brother, sure I may be allowed
the freedom of my Choice. -- Weeps.


Oro. She weeps.

There Is more in this then yet my thoughts can fathom, pardon Lady my
unbecoming rudeness, I have sorrows which like an evil Genius on my Soul sit
clothed in sables, and obscure the light of your bright Glories.


Glo. This is no time to flatter Sir, or move
In these disorders toward the Throne of Love:
A general sweetness should about us wait,
And not the surly frowns of angry fate.
To quench those flames so newly are begun,
I Will weep down floods, and drown the rising Sun.

Oro. To Court your tears, argues a fatal end,
And love thus planted, never can extend.
In Glorious paths of mutual happiness
We treat the fancy, and expect success;
But when before the heart is gone astray,
Our Monarchs gifts does but our lives betray;
And to refuse what he so kindly gave,
Were but to Ruin what we hoped to save.

Glo. Though our affections variously do move,
In different forms of Gratitude and Love;
Yet they are perhaps of kin, did you but know
From whence the Original of Grief does grow.
My Lord I blush not to relate, these eyes
Drop tears to mollify the Deities,
Those stubborn Gods which sway the reeling State
Of Zannazarro, and Amasia's Fate.
For him my cares, for her your fears are strong,
Yet they must suffer for their Fathers wrong.

Oro. Oraculously spoken, her great Charms,
Have bound me in the Circle of her Arms:
In height of Conquest they surprised my Soul,
Her Glories all my Laurels did control;
My growing fortune stopped at her bright eyes,
And she commanded all my victories:
To her great Charms my Conquest soon did bow,
And Lillies sat tryumphant on her brow.
The Warlike Eagle, and the Phaenix may
Fly to a Wilderness and shun the day:
While she invested in the Roabes of Love,
Darts fiercer Beams, as she to the East does move.

Glo. And can you then see so much goodness fall?
Rather turn Rebel, to save them lose all.

Oro. I have an Army yet, it is true, but when
I think on Treason they will shun me then.
My blood shrinks to its Center at a Rebels name,
Scattering a death-like Ague through each vein;
My Nerves shrink back at any thing that is ill:
We dam our selves when we a Monarch kill.
If all our prayers cannot satisfy
An angry King, we will both Loves Martyrs die.

Glo. I will do something too, something that may
Preserve my fame as glorious as the day.
Perhaps Sir, our united prayers may move
Heaven to Compassion, and the King to Love.

Oro. My prayers shall wait on yours, and if denied,
Dying for love with them shall be my pride. Exeunt.

SCENE a Tavern.
Sir Jasper Sympleton, Sir Simon Credulous, Drayner and Sly wit, are discovered
Drinking. Jas. Pox this is better then fighting: What should a man of honor
that has an Estate, and so forth, venture his life for? it is enough for poor
pitiful little inconsiderate Rascals, that have no other dependency, but
Murder and Hanging.


Sym. True Bully, Pox of fighting I say, there is no sport in it, whoring and
drinking I am for, but I hate fighting.


Jas. Come lets sit down then, Sirrah, some Wine, here is a health to my Lady,
Madam Theocrine.


Sym. Done, I Will pledge it, and begin another; here is a health to my Lady,
Madam Theocrine.


Jas. Is she your Lady then?


Sym. My Mistress Sir or so, if her Father may be believed, I thank him he has
confir'd that honor on me.


Jas. Why Bully, she is my Mistress too, her self I thank her, confir'd that
honor on me. --


Sym. Her self Sir?


Jas. Yes Sir, so I said, her self.


Sym. Nay Pox on it be not angry Bully, give me thy hand, let us drink away
sorrow, and a Pox of Quarrelling.


Jas. Quarreling Sir, I scorn quarrelling as much as any man, but I hate to be
abused.


Sym. Abused, and so do I, my Mistress is my Mistress, and so forth, and no
Rival shall get her from me, I will fight for her in Verse.


Jas. And so will I, and I think for Poetry no man can outdo me. They sit down
to write.


Dra. Was ever seen two such inconsiderable Asses, men that have no more sense
of honor then a Wood-cock; for my part though I as much abhor fighting as
either, yet the fault in them appears so odious, I hate my self for being such
a Coward.


Sly. In London I durst be a Bully, when incompas'd with an host of Hectors,
who have no more honor then courage, yet impudence enough to keep a man out of
the honorable path of fighting; grinning Honor is as loathsome to 'em as a
grinning Bailiff, and they had rather kill themselves with Nautious Physic,
then hazard the breathing of a vein in a just Quarrel.


Dra. It becomes neither you nor I to rail at Cowards, having so great a share
in Cowardice, but rather to be patient and bear our sufferings (I mean our
beatings) without noise, that the World may think us men of Wit and Prudence.


Sly. Since we came hither, Sir Jasper with his insufferable Impertinence, and
his unreclaimable Arrogance, has brought me into at least sixteen Quarrels, of
which the least had made us Mortal, had not I by my fawning and extreme art in
wheadling got clear, which makes me cry Pox of fighting, the very thought on it
proclaims me Mortus est.


Dra. I fear my life's at stake too, for my quarrelling Coward like a true
Bully, Tanndy, always sneaks away and leaves me to Capitulate with the Enemy,
or else Engage to fight, which neither of us have any stomach to.


Sly. For my part I commonly swear a Quarrel out, not fight it; or take a
beating, though with an Oaken Cudgel. This tilting is more dangerous then
Morbus Gallicus a dose of Mercury is; Heaven to the point of a Sword.


While Sly and Drayner discourse, Jasper and Credulous write, drink, walk, and
use all the Antic Postures of Poets; Drayner and Sly having done talking,
Jasper and Credulous rise, both being near drunk. Jas. By my Fathers Soul I Have
done, and without Ostentation, to as great a height, as -- When the Sons of the
Muses grew Numerous and loud, and so forth.


Sym. And by your favor I think I have done to a mighty height, and to a
greater height then a Lampoon; I have done to the height of Allebabbela su, and
so forth.


Jas. Thou have a notable Paw for Scribbling; but for Lampoon, Joak, Jest, Jear,
and so forth, I have the Brain.


Sym. And I have a Brain too, but let that pass; to the verses, to the verses,
come Bully lets hear the verses.


Jas. Divine -- Reads.


Sym. [Laughing,] -- He has made an Angel of her already. Divine, -- Oh horrid,
there is an Epithte for a Lady, pray when did you hear that a Divine was a Lady,
or of a divine Lady? ha, ha, ha.


Jas. Sir, it is a flight, and a great deal better then Diabollical.

Reads affectedly. Divine, Celestial, and Soul Charming fair,
Why were thou made so glorious and so rare,
Only to run us Mortals to despair?
How do like 'em Bully?


Sym. They are very rare, monstrous fair, and damnable despairing verses
indeed, but is here all?


Jas. Yes and enough too, a man that writes sense should not write above three
lines a day. Give me Premeditation, I say Premeditation, for that is the staff
of Poetry.


Sym. But by your favor I think my Song here without Premeditation, is as good
as your Divine Celestial and Soul Charming business. Bully, your Judgment.

SONG.
THE joys of Debauch in the Night are most sweet,
When Pashion and Guinnies with a Doxy we meet;
Though she plyes up and down
Like a Miss of the Town,
To oblige every Cully will give her a Crown,
Yet I Gad she will be kind to him she approves,
And deposite her dust to the man that she loves.
2.
Oh the pleasant Harang of a Citizens Wife,
Who loves to oblige a dear Spark with her life,
Her Husband poor Cully,
For fear of the Bully
Sits Mumping at home,
While abroad she does Roam.
At Night being Cloyed by Debauch and its Charms,
She Is asleep when the Cuecold should melt in her Arms.
I think if Wit, Sense and Judgment, be commendable in an Author without
Premeditation, I have it to excess.


Jas. But where is the business?


Sym. What business?


Jas. Why the Lady.


Sym. Pox of business and the Lady too, do I look like a man of business?


Jas. Then by my Fathers Soul you are a dull senseless Rascal, and have no more
Wit, then a Poetical Theif, for your Song is mere Nonsense.


Sym. I Gad who can help it? if it is Nonsense, it is Nonsense; but in my mind
it is admirable good sense, you shall hear it again.


Offers to Read it, Jasper snatches it out of his hand, and tears it. Jas. I Will
have no more Reading of Songs, dull witless Songs, that have no more sense in
'em then I have.


Sym. Now has he spoiled a Copy of the hopefullest Verses in Europe, and an
Original too.


Jas. Here, here, are the lines, these are the moving lines, and so forth.
Credulous snatches the Paper, tears it, and flings the pieces away.


Sym. Yes they are moving lines, see how they flutter.


Jas. Villain you have abused Poetry it self, and I will be revenged, I will
have a Session of Poets shall damm thee Ibraimattically, lead thee to School by
the Nose and Chastise thy Insolence.


Sym. And I will have -- your obliging and faithful Servant to command, and so
forth.


Dra. You are not going Sir, are you?


Sym. Yes to Challeng him, we Poets dare not fight, do you hear Bully, I hate
to be abused, and so forth, meet me to morrow.


Jas. Where?


Sym. Any where.


Jas. What hour?


Sym. Any hour.


Jas. The weapon?


Sym. What weapon you will.


Jas. I shall not fail.


Sym. Farewell. -- Exit Sym. and Drayner.


Jas. Is he gone?


Sly. Yes, and has left you to pay the Reckoning,


Jas. It Is no matter, it shall be the last I Will warrant you; to morrow is the
day,

Yill then rich Wine shall my dull brains inspire,
Cowards are Valliant when the head's all fire.
Exeunt.
SCENE the Temple.
Enter Oroandes with Amasia, his Sword drawn, and a Priests Roabes in his hand.
Oro. This fair Amasia was a happy hour.
To Rescue thee from such a Villains power.
Lust in these Roabs so dreadful did appear,
Beyond an Armies strength it made me fear.

Ama. The Impious Villain in such Crimes did move,
Striving to force what he at first called Love;
That I almost mistrusted Heaven, who gave
Such saucy Boldness to the injurious Slave,
Till you my chief Protector came with aid,
And the injurious Mass of sin displayed.

Oro. Under this Masque of Heaven, and Silver age,
The impious Rebel amongst his sins did rage.
The blooming beauty of a fragrant flower,
To crop, and kill, while it was in his power.
The Slaves confession may perhaps engage
Our King in Clemency to cease his rage.
Those Counterplots laid to prevent your fall,
Though seeming Ominous, may save us all.
These Roabs which he has so abused, shall prove
The Guardian Angel to preserve my love.

Ama. Run not such dangerous hazards for her sake,
Who knows no way to pay your favors back.
By the King, Vow and Laws, I Am doomed to die,
A minute cuts off my Mortality;
And then my Gratitude and Debts remain
Too Great and Vast, ere to pay back again.

Oro. All the return I ask for, or desire,
Is but your equal love, and equal fire:
Grant I in death may so much comfort meet,
To fall a Lover at Amasia's feet.

Ama. You had my word before, and if ere Fate
Changes my doom for a serener fate,
Before the Gods and you, I vow, that hour
Amasia* shall submit to your great power.
Your Chains I Will wear, and give up Victory,
The toils of War, for brave Captivity.
To be overcome by one, so truly brave,
Makes a most Glorious Captive of your Slave.

Oro. Those noble Chains I Will wear, and triumph more
Then ere I did in Conquering before.
To be your Slave is such a pleasing fate,
The mighty blessing does my fears rebate.
In Life, or Death, or smooth faced Victory,
No pleasures like this sweet Captivity.

Ama. We soon must part with all those joys and breath,
How e're I shall be happy in my death.
If Life with you be bliss, Death must be more,
Since real happiness is there in store
For all who do a true Loves fate deplore.

Oro. Think not of death, first see Oroandes fall,
And let a sigh attend his Funeral:
For whilst I live, no force shall reach thy heart.
When I am wounded in each mortal part,
And bleeding death about my Soul does wait,
Prepare Amasia to receive thy fate:
Till then my power and this disguise believe
Either of these may bring a safe repreive.

Ama. Thus to profane the holy Roabs, will be
A greater trouble then the loss of me.
Heaven will be angry at your strange pretense,

Oro. Heaven cannot frown to save such innocence;
They what we Sacrifice injustice call,
Else virtue would be banished from us all.
Virtue expatiates to blot out Vice,
Reaching her Glorious Arms to Paradise:
And if we root that Angel from the Earth,
Our weak humanity is out of breath:
For that conducted by the Powers above,
Teaches the way to Duty and to Love.
Come my fair Sacrifice, these Roabs can be
Never profaned, worn to deliver thee. Exeunt.

ACT III.
SCENE the Court.
Enter Antellus, Glorianda and Guards. King. URge me no more, the Gods have so
decreed,
Amasia and her Brother both must bleed.

Glo. Consider Sir the Nature of the Crime,
And for my sake withdraw your Rage this time;
Look on Amasia's Charms, and then declare,
If Zeal and Beauty are not both at War.
The Cruel Tyrant to secure his own,
Usurps this beauty to enrich his Throne.

King. You sue in vain for what must be denied,
The Gods prescribed this way to scourge their pride.

Glo. Call not that Pride which was Revenge alone,
Nor is it Justice Sir to Kill the Son.
Your vengeance scourged the Rebels as they flew,
And every factious man your Valor slew:
You strong Rebellion hunted out of breath,
Which Sir expired in brave Zoranzo's death.

King. The fathers fall did but foment him more,
Proving a greater Rebel then before;
Still he grew on and in Rebellion moved,

Glo. Your self Sir by a Son would be beloved:
His Fathers Death new vengeance did implore,
Could he do less for one had sought before:
Rebellious Nature did the faction head,
And he fought only to revenge the Dead:
His Army weak, wounded on every part,
Fought not to Conquer, but Revenge their smart.

King. Why for the bold Usurper do you move,
I shall grow angry, and believe you love.

Glo. You gave me leave, and made a worthy choice,
Brave Oroandes had my Brothers voice;
But he, as well as I, preserves a flame
For dead Zoranzo's Issue.

King. -- Dare you name
An Act so base, to love your Countries foe,
He dies, and never shall your pashions know.
The Gods expect their Sacrifice with care,
And 'cause you shall not languish in despair,
Against to morrow for their Deaths prepare.

Glo. What have I said that should your anger move?
If you will save his Life, I will not love;
Let him but live, and I Will forget the wrong,
Though love is grown too powerful and too strong
With ease to be removed; in youth when first
Kind conversation in each eye had nursed
A gentle Cupid, and our hearts though poor,
Wanting the effects of love could love no more;
Down with content we by each other sat,
Weeping to think upon our Childish fate,
Till he, forced by a Fathers pride did fly
From me, and honor to your Enemy:
Though then he lost obedience to the Crown,
A mutual love did our Souls Current drown
Within one Silver stream; and shall I now
Cause his dejected state to fate does bow
Kill him with pride, whose noble growth would be
A joyful Harvest of felicity?
No, let his Titles Sacrifices fall
To his first Guilt, his Virtue merits all.

King. Call Treason Virtue, and the Traitor just:
Rebellion's a desire to Rule, and Lust
Of Empire makes 'em break their trust.
ill Acts committed, by success made good,
And Nations staggering for want of blood
Drawn out by Civil strifes and unjust fears,
Are only debts to Nature in Arrears:
You know my Vow which I will never evade.

Glo. Heaven blushes when that bloody Vow is paid:
If he must fall, the worthiest of men,
Heaven will be pleased with Sacrifices then;
My blood and his shall mount up to the Skys,
And feed the Nostrils of our Deities,
Till they in Rage to see such goodness fall,
Rain down our blood on vengeance on ye all:
Amasia's Charms shall with such swiftness move
The Gods out of mere pity from above
Shall plague you all, when it is too late, with Love.

Exit Glorianda. King. Amasia 's Charms shall with such swiftness move
The Gods out of mere pity from above
Shall plague you all, when it is too late, with Love.
What can she mean? 'Twas spoke as she did spy
The little Tyrant dancing in my eye.
Something unruly does about me wait,
Like hidden Charms my anger to rebate;
The surly motion tells me I do ill,
Can I pretend to be a King and kill?
Amasia was no Rebel to the State,
Why therefore should she share a Brothers Fate?
It Is true, her life did from that spring take head,
And she may own those factions which they bred;
How ere --
If she can love she lives, if not she dies,
Bring then a Rebel fit for Sacrifice,
Call in Amasia, -- though her Charms appear
Exit some Guards. So uncontrolled, they must submit to fear,
Fearful to try what joy or bliss would be
Found while they are strangers in Eternity. Enter Amasia.
Having considered Madam your Estate,
And how each Title now submits to Fate,
I could not choose but rob the Gods of one,
One only fit for Siracusia's Throne.

Ama. To say I Have no desire to live, would prove
A Barren Gratitude for Royal Love;
Death though a debt, which is to Nature due,
We all would fain prolong, and so would you:
But how I am thus blessed, being so nigh
The welcome brink of Immortality,
Staggers my Faith and strikes my Reason blind.

King. You Will make all perfect by your being kind.


Ama. I know so well you love that Conqueror,
Who made us Captive to your mighty Power;
You Would not deny, might it with safety be
My Brothers Life, my Love and Liberty.

King. Your Liberty without dispute I grant,
Yet all those Graces must your Brother want;
His Life must be to Heaven a Sacrifice,
Your own is Ransomed by your Charming eyes.

Ama. What have I heard, shall Zannazarro find
His Sister proved so weak to stay behind?
Must he alone stoop to the Cruelty?
I was a Rebel Sir as well as he.

King. In acts of Love you but a Rebel prove,
Conquering the Conqueror, yet scorn to Love:
He --
Wading through blood to Massacre did run,
Outdid the Father, to undo the Son.

Ama. My Fathers Crimes he never did partake,
Kill me, and spare him then for Honors sake:
Nature can never consent to stay behind,
He is my Brother, and in that I find
Some secret motion, though my love be strong,
Which tells me that I needs must go along:
Thus Love and Nature struggle in desires,

King. Consider Madam who it is admires,
And the vast gift I give to quench my fires.

Ama. You give me life which I would gladly take,
(Might he live too) for brave Or'andes sake:
Affections 'twixt the Victor and the Slave
So strong are knit, they both will share one Grave;
Then if he die, Or'andes too must fall,
And Heaven will blush to see the Funeral:
The Gods made drunk with such a vast expense
Of Royal blood, will pardon us from thence.

King. You love Or'andes then, and for his sake,
This tedious Pilgrimage of Death will take;
Charmed by your Charms, I gave Reprieve for life,
In hopes you would consent to be my Wife;
But since to him your faith's already given,
This day you keep your Nuptial feast in Heaven;
You by the Law must fall a Sacrifice;
He only out of duty to your eyes,
May if he please translate himself from hence,
Death will confirm what now is but pretense.
Guards bring this Prisoner to the Temple straight,
My Love shall end when she receives her Fate.

Exit King and attendants. Enter Glorianda. Glo. Go Cruel Brother, who at once
withstood
His Friend, his Sister, and his Countries good,
And all to satisfy the Gods with blood.
You weep Amasia, and those pearly tears
Confirm my Brothers rage, and my own fears;
His Cruel heart will no impression take
From bended Knees, kind Words, or Natures sake.

Ama. Yes he is kind, too kind alas for me,
He gen'rously gave me Liberty,
Urging, my Crime so little did appear,
Heaven could not see it, and he would forget it here;
But then the recompense I was to give,
Proved so severe, my Justice could not live.
Brave Oroandes I must dispossess,
And make him rich in my unhappiness,
Which once denied, he then my Death decreed.

Glo. The Chaste Amasia not alone shall bleed,
For Zannazarro I, Oroandes You,
Dying together will proclaim us true;
He in our fall shall so much virtue see,
When we are extracted from humanity,
As Heaven shall turn to smooth felicity.

Ama. My Cares are many for your noble life,
Since you ought not to suffer in the strife,
Earth will be Robbed when so much goodness dies,
And Heaven be too much stored with Sacrifice.
Live and be happy in a second choice,
Or'andes once has had your Brothers voice;
Let him possess in Zannazarro's stead,
All the enjoyments of a Nuptial Bed;
I can resign that blessing up to you,
And I am sure you are satisfied he is true.

Glo. In Life and Death so generous you prove,
In Heaven you will be rewarded for your Love.
Know fair Amasia, though you did resign
Your interest, I can never remove mine;
Death's but a toy, a moments fear, and then
We Launch into a World of Bliss again.

Ama. I for that World must instantly prepare,
And how to know you there shall be my care.
Shrouded in Clouds of glorious innocence,
And Angels waiting on each petty sense,
Shall draw our Souls through Clouds of bliss from hence.

SCENE a Wood.
Enter Sir Simon Credulous Armed Cap a Pe, with him Slywit. Sly. Believe me
Sir, it is true.


Sym. I fear him not, I am intolerable, this case of Steel makes me as free
from wound, as if enchanted.


Sly. Yet Sir there is a greater danger near, the Wood is lined with men in
Arms, whom he has hired, if you should be the Victor, to cut your throat; if
he survive, to drag your Body to the Sea, and there intomb it, that your name
and actions may be lost to future ages.


Sym. How! is he so great a Villain?


Sly. He Killed his Father, Ravished his Sister, Poys'ned the Great Turk, and
has committed outrages innumerable.


Sym. Then I think it fit to forbear the honorable employment of fighting for
this time, and go home, rather then stay to meet with these unavoidable dangers.


Sly. Sir I love you, and I cannot see so much virtue perish, fight him in
spite of all, and at convenient time fall down; Sir Jasper imagining you are
dead, will fly; behind the Castle waits your Father with Officers to seize him,
and hurry him to Prison, to give you the more privilege and uncontrolled
freeness to Marry his Daughter.


Sym. Can this be true?


Sly. Upon my honor Sir, my love to you forced me to be a Traitor to my
Master, and relate this secret.


Sym. It shall not go unrewarded.


Sly. You will not walk long before my Mistress meet you, farewell.


Exeunt severally. Enter Sir Jasper Armed Cap a pe, with him Drayner. Dra. Nay
he has vowed to kill you; your Armor were it more impregnable, the Mambrosia's
Helmet, his Sword will find a passage through.


Jas. Tell Sir Simon I am Armed all over: if Wine, Steel, and Impudence, are
not enough to oppose one single Hector, Rot me for a Wigeon; I am come with a
fighting Resolution, and will not be appeased, tell this thy Master.


Dra. I Am sorry Sir you will not take my Counsel. Farewell.


Exit Drayner. Jas. Counsel when a man is come to fight for honor! here is the
only counsel a Knight Errand ought to take -- Pulls out a Bottle. A resolution
thus fortified need not fear the opposition of a single Arm. Drinks.


Enter Sir Simon and Sly. Sym. How in Armor, Zounds this is hard, he is walled
in as well as I am, and the Devil cannot kill him, drinking too, nay then Valor
assist me. Offers to fall on.


Jas. Hold Sir, hold, a fair Capitulation before fighting is as good as Tent
and Eggs before Matrimony. Are you disposed to fight?


Sym. Yes.


Jas. Then Sir begin.


Sym. You Will take the Law then, for most Cowards when they think they cannot
overcome, either take that for Sanctuary, or pretend your Enemy is not Gentele
enough to fight with a man of honor, and thus you Cowardly shun the danger of
a fight.


Jas. Sir your affront's unsufferable, prepare.


Here they fight at a distance, moving by degrees till they meet; after a short
dispute, Simon falls, as soon as he is down Sly runs off crying Murder. Jas. Ha
dead, nay then it is time to prepare for safety.


A noise within of follow follow, Enter Sly. Sly. Fly Sir, fly, the Officers
and Guards of the City, like Bloodhounds bend their Course this way, therefore
begone or else expect to meet a shameful Death.


Jas. If this be honor, the Devil take fighting for me, grinning honor I defy
thee. -- Within follow follow. Let me but escape this time, and if ever you
find me in the Bed of honor, the Field of danger again, hang me for a Woodcock.


Exit Jasper. Sly. So, thou art safe, now for the other. Stands aside.


Simon raises himself, and looks about him. Sym. I am not dead yet, thanks to
my Case of Steel; how like an Ass Sympleton will look when he shall hear I have
Married Madam Theocrine, ha, ha, ha, -- Laughs within, follow follow. ha,
follow, follow, what means this?


Enter Sly Running. Sly. Fly, fly Sir Simon, my Masters men are eager to find
your Body, search up and down the Wood, under pretense of following the Murder,
that they without the least suspicion may convey it to the Sea.


Sym. Zounds I Am not dead yet, what is to be done in this case.


Sly. Fly to the City Sir with expedition, there for a time shelter your self,
till the noise of this fight be over, and Sir Jasper imprisoned; then break out
like the Sun slipping from behind a Cloud, and Comfort your Dear Lady.


Sym. Was ever Conquest easier gained, or Conqueror thus treated? Exit Sir
Simon.


Sly. Now both shift for your selves, this noise has raised the Town, and
'twill be hard to 'scape the Inquisition. Exit Sly.


SCENE a Tavern.
Four or Five Citizens are discovered drinking. Enter Sir Jasper Sympleton in
his Armor as affrighted, a noise of follow, follow, still. Jasp. Follow,
follow, follow, now the Devil follow you, cannot a man Conquer decently, but he
must have those blood Hounds after him. Where am I? Spies the Company. Ha, in a
Tavern, and amongst these grave Citizens, nay then without a great deal of
impudence, I am lost for ever; that virtue now assist me, Stalks up to the
Table, and snatches a Bottle of Wine, the Company seeing him, start up and run
away, as frighted, crying a Devil, a Devil, a Devil. So this is well, I Am taken
for a Devil, and I hope I shall be, till I get home to my Lodging: Ha what is
here? -- Spies the figure in the Scene. the figure of a man in Armor, then I Will
make another, perhaps that way I may escape the search: by your leave Monster I
must imitate you. Stands upon a Pedestal, and imitates the posture of the
figure.


Enter Sir Simon in his Armor running, within follow. Sym. Confusion take you
all for me, can a man of no honor be safe? this it is to pretend to fighting; I
see there is more safety in being a Cowardly Gentleman, then to be an honorable
Commander, A noise within as of a Rabble. Ha! they are there, at the door, the
very door by Heaven, and I shall be in salve Custodius presently, what is here,
Spying the figure, and Sir Jasper. two in Armor, I Gad I Will make a third, that
way or none I may escape the Inquisition. Stands upon the other Pedestal
imitating Sir Jasper.


Enter a Drawer. Draw. What Is the matter here I wonder, these Citizens are
afraid of their own shadows, one runs this way crying a Devil, a Devil, a
Devil, a second this, a third, a fourth, and a fifth this way, all running and
roaring as if they were possessed with a Devil indeed, a company of Cowardly
Rascals, had they no more money then valor I might properly say, they were
Beggarly Cowards; ha there is a brace of Devils indeed, -- in the name of -- the
Devil, the Devil, the Devil. -- Exit running.


Enter Constable and Watchmen, Sly dressed like a Constable. Con. Search the
House, here they went in for certain, leave not one Room unlooked in, while my
Brother and I solace our selves with a Bottle of Wine, -- Exit Watchmen. Come
Brother, you and I, as we have participated in several Nocturnal Dangers, and
also shared the Profits, will steal so much time to share a Bottle, or so. They
sit down, and lean their staves against the Arms of Jasper and Simon which are
extended.


Sly. Withal my heart, and see how fortune blesses us, here is plenty of the
thing we ask for: Brother a health to our happy success in finding out the
Murderer.


Con. Agreed. They drink and fling the remainder in Sir Jaspers and Sir Symon's
faces.


Sly. Another health to the Gold which perhaps they will give us to blind our
eyes.


Con. Agreed. They drink, and fling the remainder as before. And now here is
another health to -- As they are going to drink, Simon and Jasper break the
Glasses. by my Staff of Office, what saucy Rogue was that? he deserves
punishment from the hands of Justice, but it is no matter, we will drink each a
Bottle, and that shall be to Majesty it self.


While they are drinking, Jasper and Simon with their feet fling down the
Table, the Constables start up. Sly. Ha what means this, we are Enchaunted sure.


Jasper and Simon jump down from the Pedestals, and dance up to the Constables,
who run off, crying, begone, stand off, we are the Kings Officers, etc. Jasper
and Simon still dance up and down, both performing the same Antic postures,
till meeting face to face, they stand gazing upon each other. Sym. What, Bully
Sympleton?


Jas. What Bully Credulous? are you alive still?


Sym. Yes, as sure as we are both Cowards; I see it is more dangerous for
Gentlemen to fight, then for Churchwardens to rob the poor; we may be hanged
yet if we are taken.


Jas. For that trick, to avoid trouble, I Will go home, it is dark enough to keep
suspicion off.


Sym. And so will I,

From hence forth, honor I Will no more pursue
Then she does Cowards, that is both I and you.

Jas. Had we been valiant we had bin no more,
Death saved our lives, that we might save a score. Exeunt.

SCENE the Temple.
Antellus, Glorianda, Arratus, Theocrine and Guards are discovered. King. Thou
look too sadly Glorianda; though Funerals do attend the day, we are not to
wear the sables on our Souls.


Glo. My sadness Sir only proceeds from fear, how my frail temper may endure a
sight so full of horror.


Loud Music, Enter at one door the Priests of Mars leading Zannazarro bound,
followed by Priests in white, with Censors and Sacrificing Instruments; at the
other, Oroandes dressed like a Priest of Pallas, leading Amasia bound, Virgins in
white following with Censors and Sacrificing Instruments. King. My Rage begins
to melt, I could even wish they might survive the rigor of their doom.


Glo. Must I see this and live? No Zannazarro, here is my Convoy to thee. Draws
a Dagger.


The Priests lead 'em to the Altar, where unbinding their Arms, they give 'em
liberty to embrace each other. Zan^ So now Amasia, we have ended all our
employments on the Earth: the wheels of Time worn on the road of Age, will lose
their motions, ere we shall again meet in the Robes of flesh: Farewell,

Though in a Moment here our Bodies die,
Our Souls shall meet in vast Eternity;
Inseperably in the Clouds we both shall move,
Treading on Air teaching the Gods to love;
There walking hand in hand such tales we will tell,
As shall Immortalize our joys -- Farewell.

Ama. Farewell dear Brother; if thy Soul do move,
And take thy flight ere mine to dwell above,
Stay for me in the thin unmoulded Air,
For fear your loss should kill me with despair.

Zannazarro and Amasia are led to the Altar, where whilst they kneel this Song
is sung. SONG:
SEE each wind leaves Civil Wars,
And Heaven approves the Sacrifice;
Whilst to behold it all the Stars
Glitter to light the Deities.
Cho. Peace reigns through every Element,
Whilst this blessed pair to Heaven are sent.
2.
Sparta's fair Ephigenia di'd
A spotted Sacrifice to this,
Bright Nymph compared, whose Virgin pride
Says Nature naught has done amiss.
Cho. Yet she must live where Time shall be
Confounded in Eternity.
3.
Prepare, prepare, the fatal stroke
Which Life and Soul must separate,
Goodness may pity not revoke
The firm Decrees of certain fate.
Cho. They come, they come, their ways prepare,
And lead 'em through the pathless Air,
Lead 'em to live where Time shall be
Confounded in Eternity.
The Priests offer to strike, but are hindered by Oroandes; a clap of Thunder,
Groans and Shrieks throughout the Temple, the Priests Robes are spotted with
blood, the Images of the Gods drop down. King. What horrid Prodigies are these?
The Gods are sure grown angry with our Prayers.


Oro. I have bin long attendant on these Powers, yet never saw the Gods thus
moved before.


King. They Are sure displeased with Offerings so Pure, or else some hidden
Charms unknown to us has wrought this Miracle.


Oro. Here, here lies the guilt of our impieties; it is I deserve the utmost of
your rage. Oroandes discovers himself.


King. Ha! Oroandes what damm'd Imposture's this?


Soft Music from above, the Images are raised again. Oro. The argument of
Mercy from the Gods emboldens me to seek the like from you. My violent passions
forced my love into strange labyrinths of attempts; but what I first trembling
with guilt did undertake, these Miracles have proved Legitimate. When Amasia
into the inmost Room was of the Temple brought, resolved to bear her from the
Rigor of her doom, I had thither in private first conveyed my self, attending
on the hour when the Priest with his sad charge should enter, which arrived, I
that came there to offer Sacriledg saw my self ordained the Instrument of
Heaven, to free her from the hands of a fowl Ravisher.


King. This dreadful story strikes trembling Earthquakes throughout all my
Limbs.


Oro. That this is true, witness those Powers which owned that cause, which I
(though rashly) undertook.


King. Pardon me ye Diviner Powers, -- I have been too neglective of the charge
you gave me, but will redeem it in my future Zeal: that Villains blood forced
out by Tortures, shall begin the Purple Deluge. To Zannazarro and Amasia who
kneel. I must forget those Crimes, Heaven has been pleased freely to forgive;
rise higher in our favor then was that exalted Story from whence your Father
fell. They rise.


Oro. Mountains of grief fall from my burdened Soul in their delivery; but
your Soverain Mercy must either with one Cordial more relieve my sickly hopes,
or I am lost for ever.


King. Thy actions speak thy wishes -- Here Oroandes take from my hand this
gift from Heaven, she is thine by their decree.


Gives him Amasia, Zannazarro kneels. Zan. Ere your extended Mercy shall
contract it is liberal hand, let me be happy in the full fruition of my joys; my
love to Glorianda, though long smothered in my fates security, must now break
out.


King. Thy thoughts arrive clothed in the Robes of joy: Rise Zannazarro --
Embrace in her thy happiness. Zannazarro rises, the King gives him Glorianda.
Now all your Seas are calmed, only my Barque still stands in opposition against
the wave,

And it shall struggle with the Storm to show
To show how much we to this days deliv'ry owe. Exeunt.

ACT IV.
SCENE the Sicilian Plains.
Enter Vanlore like a Shepherd leading in Heroina wet as from a wreck,
Shepherds and Shepherdesses. Van. COme Lady, you must now inhabit here
In silent shades and solitary Groves,
Where Rustic sweetness makes us void of fear,
And harmless Nature teaches harmless Loves.
The Morning Dew drawn up by Sols strong Charms,
Is not more safe when locked within his Arms,
Then you protected by our Innocence.

Her. Sir, if these words prove not a bare pretense,
I shall have cause to thank your care, and be
Happy amongst you, though clothed in misery.

Van. Time will wear out the thoughts of dangers past,
And you may be released from griefs at last;
Though in the Storm you left Estates behind,
Your life secures the safety of your mind:
A troubled fancy Robs the Soul of rest;
That man may be secured, but never blessed,
For they who do within such Wars maintain,
Distract their Reason to secure their Pain.

Her. But pains like mine do seize on every part,
Ensnares the Soul to Captivate the Heart;
My many troubles like a Clouded Sky,
Declare some sudden Storm of dangers nigh.

Van. You but suspect those ills you need not fear,
And danger Madam's unacquainted here.

Her. Wealth I have none to lose, or to bestow,
My Gratitude is all, and that I Will owe;
Which may in time to such a greatness rise,
I shall return those thanks you will not despise.

Van. I wish the Curtain of your Fate may be
Drawn from the face of smooth felicity:
Wounds are not cured by Grief, nor Fate made less
Or more by hopes of harms or happiness:
Let Madam all our Vows disperce your fears,
Time lost cannot be pulled back by sighs or tears.

Her. Yet silent Griefs a troubled heart may ease,
And Passion vented mittigates disease. Exeunt.

SCENE Arratus Lodgings.
Enter Slywit, Theocrine in man's clothes, and a Shepherd. Sly. Sir, to your
charge I do commit the Fare:
Be her safe conduct, she will reward your care.

Shep. For Valore's sake my duty I Will express,
Nor Madam for your own could I do less.

Theo. I can but thank you, yet in time I may
Find out a means your services to pay;
My Gratitude till then you shall employ,
Take that, and lead me to a World of joy.
Exeunt. manet Sly.
Sly. So thus far I Am right, and all my plots thrive equal with my wishes; I
have persuaded Sir Simon, Sir Jasper's in Prison, and that I have got
Theocrines consent to Celebrate the Marriage this Morning; a Bride I have
provided, and such a one as (Heaven knows) are too common in this Age, a
debauched Chambermaid, one as fit for Sir Jasper's humor, as a Tailor for a
Cowcumber; he promised to meet me here, but has not kept his word, I hope he
has not found the cheat, but here he comes. Enter Sir Jasper. Have have to the
Temple Sir, you will lose your Mistress else; within a Room behind the Altar waits
a Priest, and all things are in readiness.


Jas. But --


Sly. But me no Buts, but get you gone I say; delay a minute and you are undone
for ever. Pushes him off. So he is gone* and I within this hour shall be
revenged at full: how sweet those actions are, when we project for Guinnies. By
this time Drayner's ready with his Mask to entertain'em; and if that and Sir
Jasper's Wife make not Matrimony odious, I Will never plot again.

Wives just like Fools, are only kept to please,
Delight dull Appetites, and bring us ease;
Their various ways to Pleasure we adore,
Which once seen over, we admire no more.
Things often repeated, though they pleasant prove;
Nautiate and dull the stomach like fond Love.
Things in extremes are ills to every sense,
And though a while they please us with pretense,
Both once enjoyed the prudent banish hence.
Exit.
SCENE the Temple.
Enter a Priest of Hymen, then Arratus, and then Sir Simon leading Julia dressed
like Theocrine. Arra. This is the day, Son, makes us happy, you in the hopes of
such a virtuous Wife, and I to see both Married. And Daughter (since your duty
speaks you so) I hope this joyful day will Crown your Loves, and add Eternal
Comforts to your Lives. Lead to the Altar. As they go up to the Altar the
supposed Ghost of Vanlore appears, Julia and the Priest shriek and run off
severally, Arratus falls down, Sir Simon offers to run out, but is stopped at
every entrance by a Spirit.


SONG. By the Spirits.
1 Spi. MAke have, make have,
The time does wast
And flies too fast.
Cho. Therefore Remove
These sinners from their bliss Above,
For they must share
With us in Everlasting Care.
2.
2 Spi. Remember old man, and ye sprightly young Blade,
The Lover, the Lover, to death was betrayed;
At Ardenna by you he was strangely removed,
Because he too fondly pursued what he loved.
3 Spi. For which you shall be
Tormented by me,
For ever, for ever, by him, and by me.
Cho. For which, etc.
3.
1 Spi. Come let us remove.
2 Spi. Come let us remove.
4 Spi. This lump of Diseases and scandal of Love,
Let Us bear'em from hence to their Torments below,
Where Lavishing Souls are wrapped up in woe;
There to Tortures they shall for their mischiefs be sent,
Yet never, Oh never, Oh never Repent.
Cho. There to, etc. The Song being ended, the four Spirits drive Sir Simon
into the middle of the Stage, and Dance; the Dance being ended, they hurry him
away. Arratus raises himself and looks about him.
Arra. Are they gone? Rises. Was ever Marriage so crossed, they are all gone, and
have left me nothing to keep me Company, but a guilty Conscience; Oh the horror
of it strikes me dead; Murder is the sin Committed, and I the only Actor! Oh
Vanlore, could I recall thy Soul, I willingly would give my Daughter to you to
satisfy the injuries I did you, but it is in vain, the Bloody deed is done, I
shall grow mad, my Son and Daughter and my Wits are lost, lost past Redemption,

However I Will spin my Life out, though my Grief
Burden my Soul till it is past Relief.
Exit.
SCENE a Plane.
Enter Oroandes Reading a Letter. Oro. Meet me at Nine behind the Hermits Rock.
I have not mist in either Circumstance, unless my have Anticipated Time --
Looks on his Watch. It yet is not full Nine. Enter Antellus.


King. Oroandes you are now a Loyal Subject.


Oro. All my Ambitions never flew higher, Sir, then in that Region of your
thoughts to thrive.


King. There it was grown to full Maturity: But I must like wanton Nero either
Ruin all the Glorious Structure of thy hopes, or live Impris'ned in thy
Loyalty: thy Life (till now my strongest fortress) is become the fatal Engine
of my Ruin.


Oro. Heaven! what have I done to merit this?


King. Nothing but bin too Virtuous, and by that centered affections which I
must remove, or shake thee into Chaos.


Oro. This Language blasts me, sure I have no sin ponderous enough to buoy your
Vengeance up. Did I but think one Viper Lodged in my remotest part, I Would tear
each Fiber of my heart, to find the Monster out, and in my blood Imbalm'd throw
it as far as Life's short span can reach. But Heaven my witness is no flame of
Zeal, but has bin yours in the second Magnitude; my Vows of Kin to those I
paid the Gods, my Prayers but Love and Duty fired into a holy Calenture.


King. Thy Virtue fathoms not my debt of Guilt; such a prevention of my Anger,
would only change the active passion for sorrow as insupportable: those
Characters which must uphold the sables of my Soul, are in dark Hieroglyphics
hid, through which thy strength of Judgment cannot pierce.


Oro. You speak in misty wonders Sir, such as lead my apprehension into wild
Meanders.


King. This will unriddle all our doubts, -- draw. King draws.


Oro. Against my Sovereign! an Act so wicked would retort the guilty steel into
my breast: fear never yet Marbled a Cowards heart more then Obedience mine.


King. Will you deny when I Command?


Oro. Pardon me Royal Sir, I would bestride a Cloud with Lightning Charged in's
full Carreer, affront a Thunderbolt, leap into the Clefts of Earthquakes, or
attempt to prop the Ruins of a falling Rock,

Yet count all this my happiness, so I
Met Death in the white Robes of Loyalty.

King. Are my attempts prized at so weak a rate? wears not my Sword a danger on
its point as well as thine? -- Draw -- or I shall conclude it is fear, not
Loyalty, that Charms thy hand, which speaks thy Soul a Traitor.


Oro. This stirs my blood, were you a private man that only had his better
Genius to defend him, and though Allied to me by all the ties of Nature, and of
Friendship, yet being thus far urged, our Swords long since had shown whose
Stars had brightest Influence.


King. I have unfettered all those legal bonds. Draw -- for thy denying now but
slights my power.


Oro. Then since there is no Evasion, -- Oroandes draws.
Witness ye Gods my Innocence is wronged.
But Gracious Sir, -- Oroandes kneels.
Before I fall, or stand less fortunate, to see you overthrew, Oh let me know
what Fate, what Cruel Fate has Robbed me of the Treasure of your Love.


King. And must such goodness die? Know noble Youth, I am so far from calling
it desert in thee, that has unsheathed my Sword, that in this midnight storm
of fancy I can shed some drops of Pity too. I come not rashly to attempt thy
life, but long have struggled with my hot desires, stood fiery Trials of
temptations. I am diseased, and know no way to health but through a deluge of
thy blood, -- there is a cause.


Oro. Dear Sir reveal it, that e're I fall, my penitential tears may cleanse my
Soul from such a Leprous Crime.


King. Alas brave Youth, thy thought's white as the Robes of Angels are, I know
thy Love to fair Amasia inseparable, as goodness from a Deity, yet I must
deprive thee of this Darling of thy Soul.


Oro. With pardon Royal Sir, I cannot think the Cyprian Princess is so soon
forgot, with whom Amasia Sir compared is nothing.


King. Dare thou affect her, yet dispraise a Beauty that in its Orb contracts
Divinity? This Profanation what had else bin sin will render Meritorious, --
Guard thy Life.


They fight, the King is wounded. Oro. What have I done?


King. The Business that we met for, now we are friends again, friends until
Death. The King staggers and falls.


Oro. Oh do not faint, call up your spirits Sir, there is hopes of Life.


King. My Vital Powers fail, my Eyes are bowing to Eternal night.


Oro. And I grow wild with Horror, -- milder then a Flame provoked by angry
Winds; what shall I do, or whither shall I fly, to leave behind me this
pursuing Guilt? A noise within.


King. Oh, Oh, -- be gone, be gone my Oroandes, some Company draws near. May
thou live long and happily in the Embraces of her whom I unjustly strove to
have: my dying wishes wait upon your joys.


Oro. Angels attend your latest hour, I go
From hence to meet my Everlasting woe. Exit.

Enter Heroina, Vanlore, Shepherds, and Shepherdesses. Hero. I thought I heard
the unruly noise of Swords,
And Clashing Murmurs of unfriendly words,
Besides the Echo of a hollow Groan.

Van I heard the dismal noise, and fear the event,
These wild Bandetties live by spoils alone,
Run on in sin, and fear no punishment.

King. Oh, Oh, Oh.


Hero. -- What noise is that?


Van. -- Some newly Slain
By these untamed Bandetties of the Plain.

Hero. And here lies one breathing his latest breath,
His face is cold, and all appears like Death;
Let Us Bear him off
Within for his Recovery all means I Will try,
For something prompts me, that he must not die.

They take him up, and Exeunt. Enter Theocrine and the Shepherd, the Shepherd
brings back Vanlore. Van. My dearest Theocrine, in all, you prove
Your Honor great, as is your Real Love.

The. My Vanlore, sure I may believe my eyes,
Or does the sudden Joy my sense surprise;
The Cruel pleasures steal so sweetly on,
Makes me mistrust the Bliss I run upon.

Van. Your Bliss is Real, and my Joy's Complete,
Heaven could not give a happiness more great.

The. Through doubts and fears I have attained my will,
But 'twas unkind to let me Languish still.

Van. That only cast a Cloud on the design,
That with more ease you might to Love incline.
And I to live alone retired with pain,
Expecting still this happiness to gain;
Which thus possessed, more perfect Bliss I find,
Then in the various pleasures of the mind.

The. Love like the wind often shifts and seems to cease,
As if each minute lulled it into peace;
Sweetly it breaths upon the flowery Plain,
And yet a moment pulls it back again.
From Calms to Storms the unruly Gust does rise,
And scatters all the Clouds about the Skies;
So we neglectful, now our Bliss is near,
By staying, threaten dangers we should fear:
My Lovers Anger, and my Fathers Age,
With Thunder will pursue us in his Rage.

Van. Thou art the Loadstone, and my Soul shall be
Directed only by thy Charms and thee.
Amongst harmless Sheep, and solitary Bowers,
We Will wast the tedious Time in pleasant Hours*
There Love and Pleasure we will at once possess;
Who wades through Crosses meets true Happiness. Exeunt.

SCENE the Court.
Enter Zannazarro, Glorianda, and Amasia. Zan. How sad a change is this! This
morning was appointed for more joyful Enterviews.


Glo. When last nights slumber robbed our wakeful hopes of the delicious births
of fancy, 'twas with fairer promises: Amasia, I fain would comfort thee, but my
own griefs make me a stranger to that balmy Language.


Ama. Dear Sister, thy Passions are too violent; the Messengers are not yet all
returned, nor have we seen Arratus. Enter Arratus.


Glo. And here he comes.


Zan. My Lord, you either come to share in Grief with us, or ease ours by some
blessed discovery.


Arr. My Lord, my Son, my Daughter, and my --


Zan. Peace, no more, mix not theirs with a Sov'raigns loss, whose least drop
of Blood is worth a Thousand Lives, speak thy intelligence.


Arr. My Largest lies within the City walls, and there he has not yet bin heard
of; is none with him?


Zan. Yes, Oroandes, Enter a Messenger. here comes our last hopes, speak thy
success.


Mess. Not good my Lord, we have travest all the Fields that Circles lofty Erix,
and yet see no beam of blessed Intelligence; all we found worthy to fix an
Observation on, was a place beneath the Hermits Rock all stained with store of
Blood, and near the foot this token of our Grief. Gives a bloody Handkercher
which was the Kings.


Zan. Oh my Prophetic fears!


Ama. Our sorrows are confirmed!


Glor. They are in Bloody Characters!


Arr. I Will go and secure the Citadel, and cry Treason.


Exit. Arratus. Zan. Sorrow out-grows all my Resolves, this is an Act so full
of Horror it is terrible to name it; but if the Force of Syracuse can scourge
the Traitors,

-- We Will have
Their Heads to build a Temple over his Grave.
Exeunt
ACT V.
SCENE the Plains.
Enter the King lead by two Shepherds and Heroina. King. I HAVE now got strength
enough to render to you the fair preserver of my Life; my Spirits stir, as if
they would shake off the sluggish weight of weakness.


Hero. How much in every twinkling of the eye does he resemble my Heroic Love.
Aside.


King. You Are sad sweet Lady.


Hero. I have a Cause, and such a one, that did you know, your Goodness would
Commiserate my wretched Fortune.


King. Reveal it Lady, I perhaps may be enabled then to dissipate your Griefs.


Hero. I was resolved to weep away my Time in private sorrow; but discovery
cannot aggravate my woe; besides I may venture to lodge a secret, where I have
found such temperate virtues. I Will only with this Question Usher in my own
discovery; is Sicily your place of Birth, or not?


King. It is, and Breeding both.


Hero. I will not ask what were the Parentage, where I find Virtues plant
Nobility, yet would be loath to a Plebeian breast to trust what I must now
divulge.


King. You may be confident I am a Gentleman, as well by Birth as Education,
Lady.


Hero. I do presume it Sir, and therefore wish of all I now remain amongst to
be known unto you alone. You never had Relation to the Court?


King. There was my Breeding Lady.


Hero. Near the Person of the King?


King. One of his Bedchamber, and it is no boast to say, as well beloved by him
as any, there being in the opinion of the Court, a near Resemblance of our
looks.


Hero. Then sure my name is not a stranger to you, have you not heard Sir of
the Cyprian Princess.


King. The Beauteous Heroina.


Hero. The wretched Heroina, such I Am sure is my condition in my present State.


King. Pardon the Child of Ignorance, my wild, and unbecoming Rudeness. Kneels.


Hero. Rise Sir, we are Companions yet; and hope we shall be till your Royal
Master possess what was long since intended his. By what Disaster, I was cast
upon this dreadful Precipice of Danger, as we are walking I Will Relate. Enter
two Bandetties.


I Ban. A prize, a prize, a noble prize, seize you upon that pretty
Shepherdess, while I dispatch the Guardian. Draws.


King. It Is not so quickly done, and though as yet unable to defend, hither
I Will fly for Rescue. Snatches the Bandetties Sword, who is going to seize
Heroina. Now I Am prepared to scourge your saucy Insolence.


Fights with the first Bandetty and wounds him, the second leaves Heroina, and
offers to seize the King; Enter Vanlore and Theocrine, Vanlore Draws, and
drives the second Bandetty off; the first that was wounded by the King stays.
Hero. This was a timely Rescue, and has by the fair Redemption of my Honor
bound me to give you thanks.


King. I merit none; my Duty urged me to preserve that Life which they strove
thus to Ravish. The brightest Stars that Ruled my Fate, did light me to this
blessed Employment; but had all set, e're their Influence had attained its end,
had not this Gentleman's assistance lent new Vigor to their fading Beams.


Hero. I must confess a debt of thanks to him, which if Irregular Humanity
prove no Rebel to my safety, shall be suddenly discharged: Let this Villain
attend us to the Court, there you will find a Prince to be entreated, when your
Advocate bears Heroina's name. I can forgive, and so I hope can you, although
his Crimes merit a lasting punishment.


1 Ban. Pardon me best of Women, and impute Kneels. my Rudeness to my
Ignorance. If any Service can Extenuate Crimes of such Monstrous Growth, my
Blood shall pay the forfeit of my disobedience.


Hero. Your hopes of safety prompts me to believe you: Come Sir, you and that
Gentleman shall attend me to the Court.


Van. We are your Vassals Madam, proud to have such a Command to Usher our
desires.


Hero. And you Sir.

There I Will complete that cure so well begun,
And raise your fading hopes for what you have done.
Exeunt.
SCENE a Tavern. A Table, Pen Ink and Paper in it.
Enter Led by the Nose, Sir Jasper Sympleton by Drayner, and Sir Simon
Credulous by Slywit, disguised. Dra. Come, come along Sir, is it not enough to
kill an honorable Gentleman, but you must Lampoon him when you have done, and
wound his fame in Verse.


Jas. Dam-me if ever I writ a Verse in my Life, or any thing like it, alas I
have no more wit then a Goose, and writing's as disagreeable to my Nature, as
Hanging: I must confess I have often had an Itching mind to Poetry, but could
never obtain it.


Sly. And what makes your name Sir, crowded on the Title Page of several Plays
in splendid Characters, as if that Ostentation did proclaim thee a man of wit
and merit?


Sym. I see you are Ignorant of the English Customs; their men of Wit and
Sense inclined to Poetry, have such a little share in the Worlds Treasure,
their works and them alike go both a begging, and scarce a morning but we
Easie-men (who rather then our lives would be accounted the Zanies of the Age)
are troubled with their Visits, where for a Guinny we purchase the Labor of
three Months, and then by our Authority, with the Acting Females (who do at
upon us Gallants of the Times) the Play in our name's Acted, and by
Consequence, 'cause all the World should be acquainted with our Folly (which we
think Wit) some Greedy Bookseller pays dear for the Copy, and by his means it is
Ushered into the World; those Dedications writ by us (small Critics) never are
honored by a Noble Patroness, tending to down right railing at the Age, or
finding fault perhaps with the best Poets.


Sly. This makes you Guilty of the last Lampoon, in which you have not only
abused him who never was a Poet, but all the Poets of the Age; and therefore if
you give us not (in the behalf of our dead Friend) sufficient satisfaction, you
die immediately.


Sym. This it is to pretend to Poetry in a strange Country: I Gad in London, a
man of Nonsense is as safe (amongst the Crew of Critics) as in a Hollands
Leaguer, for they are more given to the Spirit of Contradiction, then that of
Fighting. Aside.


Dra. Come Sir, dispatch, we are in have.


Jas. So am I to be gone. Aside.


Sly. Swear Sir.


Sym. Swear what?


Sly. Either you did, or did not write the Verses.


Sym. I vow to Gad, and all that, I am Innocent.


Sly. That Is but a weak Oath, and shows too must of Cowardice to gain belief,
swear me a full mouthed Oath like a true Englishman.


Sym. Then on the Virtue of a Gentleman, and Honor of Sir Simon Credulous, I
am not Guilty.


Sly. Honor and Virtue are two mighty strangers to an Ignoble breast; I cannot
in the least Imagine they are lodged in yours. Come Gentlemen, here is Pen Ink
and Paper, write every Letter that we shall command you, or die in disobeying.


Sym. Was ever poor Pretended led by the Nose before? Honor begone, to save my
Life I Will do it; we are ready Sir.


Sir Jasper and Sir Simon go to the Table, and prepare to write. Sly. Write
this then, -- I am a Coward.


Sym. All the World knows that already, it needs no publication.


Sly. Write I Command you.


Both. I am a Coward. -- Write.


Sly. An Arrand stinking Coward.


Both. An Arrand stinking Coward. -- Write.


Dra. A Poetical Thief.


Jas. Not I by Heaven.


Dra. Write I say.


Both. A -- Write.


Sly. And a damm'd Son of a Whore, if ever I writ these Verses.


Both. And a -- Write.


Jas. All this I Gad is true Gentlemen, have you done?


Dra. Not yet Sir, one word more, and I do here promise to receive into my
Arms, the Lady yesterday Married, to have and to hold, for better for worse,
and so forth, with a promise to make her a Jointure of Three Hundred a Year; to
keep (and never to part with) her, as being a Match only fit for me -- Jasper
Sympleton.


Jas. Withal my heart. Jasper writes.
Now Sir Simon I think I am even with you. Aside.
Here Sir I deliver this to you as my Act and Deed.

Gives Drayner the Paper. Dra. So this is well. And now Gentlemen, 'cause you
shall be eased of all your fears and miseries, all disputations 'twixt you two
must cease; the Lady, the Beauteous Lady Theocrine by Nuptial tie is yours, and
as your Wife receive her.


Enter Julia. Jas. Withal my heart, now you have played the part of honest men,
welcome into my Arms.


Dra. Pray Heaven you find us so, do you know me Sir?


Discovers himself. Jas. What Drayner, Servant to my Rival Sir Simon Credulous,
nay then I fear the worst.


Dra. I am the honest man you talk of Sir, and 'cause you shall not dwell in
Ignorance too long, behold whom you have Married.


Discovers Julia. Jas. Cheated, Gul'd, abused by Heaven; have I Married this
Chambermaid?


Jul. This Chamber-woman you have Sir, I was a Maid until you made me
otherwise; and afterward you would persuade me to have bin as false as
Dunkirk, and in one hour have received English, Dutch, French, and abused them
all; but you see the Fates decreed it otherwise, I am now your Wife.


Jas. The Devil shall be mine as soon; go home to your old Office, keep the
Door, and let in every paultry Knight or Squire, that gives a Guinny and a Kiss
for Entrance, who being slighted by your Peevish Lady, falls foul on you, as
being loath to lose the Imagination of Enjoyment, though with her meanest
Servants.


Sym. Good Bully Sympleton, how like an Ass you look now, I must confess you
have such a smart way of Courtship, such taking Charms, such sweet Devices, no
Woman can hold out. Wish you much Joy Sir. Gad Drayner let us serenade him with
the second part to the same Tune.

Sings Ridiculously. I had a Miss, a Dainty, Dainty Miss,
Who could at once, Dissemble, Cog, and Kiss;
This Miss I Gad grew weary of the Life,
Jilted Sir Jasper, and became a Wife.
How do you like it Bully, Ha?


Dra. Come, come Sir, be patient, you are now a Knight Alamode, a Courtier of
the Fashion, for scarce one of them but Marry some Debauched Lady or other, and
count it happiness if but three Nations have enjoyed her; and this Pasty is of
your own Cutting up, and no doubt will prove a Virtuous Wife.


Jas. A Virtuous Devil she may: Pox of the Sex in general, and in particular
thee: farewell Wife, farewell Bully; may thou Love on, till thou Reelst like a
Drunken Dutchman, and in that Humor Commit Adultery with some Gotish Citizen,
till the hot Pestilence of Pleasure sink thee into another World.


Offers to go, but is hindered by Drayner. Dra. Stay Sir, stay, I have your hand
here to confirm a Contract, which I give up to Julia, and here I vow by all
those Plagues you heaped upon her head, to kill you instantly, unless you take
her to your Arms.


Jas. Why this to your friend Drayner? Pox you'^ a man of Wit, and Merit, and I
know have more discretion, then to Bubble your Obliging Friend and Servant.


Dra. I am resolved nothing shall stop my fury; take her, or --


Jas. Pox on ye, come, had I Courage enough to die, I would be hanged before
I Would have a Chambermaid.


Sym. A Chambermaid, Ha, Ha, Ha; give me thy hand Sympleton, give you much
joy, a Chambermaid, Ha.


Jas. Well, well Sir, let nothing trouble you, my Chambermaid may be a Lady as
soon as your Lordship.


Sym. Give you much joy, I say no more Bully, but now I hope I may Court my
Mistress without the trouble of Poetising, Drinking, or Whoring, Ha, Bully
Sympleton.


Sly. You may Sir, but she is Married.


Sym. The Devil she is, to whom?


Sly. A Shepherd Sir, one poor but honest, and such a one as Nature only made
equal in Graces to compare with her, won by her prayers and tears; I stole her
hence, and gave her to a faithful Shepherd, who was her Conduct to him.


Sym. God's Death am I gold by Shepherds? the base Slaves shall die: who was the
Principal?


Sly. One though unfortunate, may boast himself a Soldier and a Gentleman, one
whom she thought was Dead, the worthy Vinbore.


Sym. A very honest fellow I Gad, and one I love extremely, though I never saw
him; he shall enjoy her, my blessing wait upon him, that is, continual Love,
and want of Women Kind, light on him.


Enter a Constable* and Watchmen. Con. There, there are the Murderers, seize on
'em all; if they refuse, knock'em down, we have the Law on our sides.


They offer to seize 'em. Sly. Draw Gentlemen, they b^^e the sight of a Sword.


Sym. Not I by Heaven.


Jas. Not I by Jove; what Draw against a Constable?


Sly. What Brother Constable, are you here?


Con. Keep off Sir, how came you to be my Brother?


Sly. When you were hot upon the search for my Master, this Gentleman's
Murderer, I to secure his Person which might casually fall into your hands, and
to create a Jest, disguised my self into the shape of an Officer, and coming
into your Company, I carried you to the Tavern, where both the Murderer and
Murdered stood like Images, and to maintain the Jest, I appeared as fearful as
your Worship, giving the first start at what I knew so well, Sir Simon
Credulous in Armor. Discovers himself.


Jas. What Sly, my subtle serving-man?


Sly. The same Sir, born to bring you out of these dangerous troubles.


Con. Was there no Ghost in the Tavern then?


Sly. None I assure you, unless these Gentlemen are Devils.


Con. Oh dishonor to our Office, and stain to this staff of Dignity, seize
upon 'em all, I Will teach you to abuse Authority, you are as wicked as Players,
who make no more of a Constable, then of a Cobbler.


Sly. The Cause you seize us for's so means we scorn to stand against it, --
here we all yield our selves, do what you can, or dare. All deliver their
Swords.


Con. Nay now you are Civil Gentlemen, and were not that I have another
Warrant, which is too great to disobey, I Would give you all your Liberties; the
King is lost, and it is to be supposed Murdered, upon which I have Order to
secure every suspicious Person*


Dra. How the King lost?


Sly. And Murdered!


Jas. Oh Horror!


Sym. Nay now we may be hanged indeed, but sure the King had more wit then to
die of his own accord, it is mear Treason by Jove.


Con. It cannot be les^, therefore Gentlemen till news comes of our Sovereign,
this Tavern shall be your Goal, to no worse place I Will carry you.


Sym. I Gad thou art the merriest Constable in Europe; come along Brother
Traitors, Madam Sympleton you are a Conspirator too, come along Boys:

When sparkish Bacchanalians Traitors ^urn,
We Will swim through Fire, and in Canary burn.

Exeunt. Mane^ Sly and Drayner. Sly. So now we are Revenged, and Profits grow
More great, then e're this Fop^ has to b^stow,
When Profit and Revenge together meet;
Each hour successes Crowned fall at our feet:
How bright each Motion to that Bliss does prove!
Revenge once Compassed, tastes more sweet then Love. Exeunt.

SCENE the Court.
Enter the King and Vanlore, leading Heroina, attended by Theocrine Shepherds,
and Shepherdesses, at one door; at the other, Zannazarro, Glorianda, and
Amasia, all in Mourning, attended by the Kings Guard, Zannazarro kneels, and
having kissed Heroina's hand, Roses. Zan. The best of welcomes this sad place
affords wait on your Grace's Entertainment.


Her. I thank you Sir, but must first Employ your service in declaring, what
these silent Emblems of a sorrow means?


Zan. Wilt please you Madam, lend your attention to the saddest Story that e're
did yet Seicilia's Annals Blot; The Scene draws, and discovers the Picture of
the King. Behold great Princess, all but the memory of the living fame of
Syracusias Monarch. Heroina swoons.


Glo. Help, help the Princess.


Ama. Madam, dear Madam.


Her. Oh, Oh, Oh.


Arr. Bear her forth, and give her more Air.


Her. Hold, I am better here; if any thing revive my Spirits, 'twill be this
that puts me in mind of my deceased Lord. Why stand you thus amazed? Enter
Oroandes, Zannazarro, and the rest seem amazed.


Zan. Pardon us Madam; had the united dust of some dead friend, whose memories
never forgot, visited Earth in his own shape again, our wonder could not have
arrived unto a higher Pitch. Let me Embrace thee friend.


Oro. Stand off, yet farther off, -- you know not what you touch; you safer far
may grapple with a flame; or in his midnight walks, affront a friend armed with
full Vials of destructive wrath: the Graves Inhabitants, when folded in
Corruption, are not more defiled then I.


Zan. What tends this Language to?


Oro. Destruction, Zannazarro.


Ama. How have thou lost thy Temper Oroandes, prithee look on me friend, am I
grown a stranger to thy knowledge?


Oro. Leave me Amasia, thou art of kin unto those hollowed Angels that did once
attend my Actions, and must now with them a stranger to thy Oroandes grow.


Hero. You are to me a stranger Sir, yet in your looks something I read, that
may concern your absent Prince.


Oro. I do, and would Relate it, but that it has a sound so full of horror, I
tremble to Relate it; yet I must, no other way can lead my Soul out of this
wilderness of flesh; he is Murdered.


Zan. How?


Glo. By whom?


Oro. By me, do ve start? 'twas I, 'twas I, that when your blooming hope
cheered with the Sun of Majesty, were grown big with expected favors, did
Eclipse the Glorious Light in a Black Cloud of Death; I cut the heart strings
of the Land, and fed the Groaning Land with Blood, whose Purple had bin by an
Ancient Stock of Ancestors died into Royalty.


Van. Ungrateful Slave, why are our Swords so slow to Execute the Villain?
Offers to Draw.


Ama. Oh hold, believe him not, he Raves.


Oro. Thou have but injured me Amasia, in staying their just fury.


Glo. Oh Brother if this be true, thou have undone us all.


Oro. True, do not think this any Natural Distemper, that spreads this
Malignant Vapor through my Veins, which naught but the Poison of my Guilt
Corrupts; yes I have done it Brother, and you are all bound, as you love your
Prince, to see it Revenged with Torments; here is a Note will when I Am dead,
direct you where to find him. Flings Zannazarro a Note. And now I Have done my
Business on the Earth, I Will give the first stroke to Revenge, and here open a
passage for your Swords to Enter. Draws his Sword, and offers to kill himself;
is stayed by the King. What bold hand is that?


King. One that here may claim a privilege. Discovers himself, all kneel by
Heroina. Rise thou true Mirror of all Royalty, never higher in our favor.


Zan. Our Gracious Sovereign!


Omnes. Welcome, Oh welcome Royal Sir.


King. You are all my much loved Subjects, such in whom never was King more
Blessed; Madam your presence Crowns our Joys, now I stand Exalted in the Zenith
of my Fate; who would not pass a Stormy Night, to be thus Courted by a Glorious
Day? You all are sharers in my heart, but thou my Love To Heroina. the chief
Commandress of that Royal Fort.


Hero. My Joys are now Completed, and I find a Sea of Pleasure Crowns my
Dangers past; what those were, at your leisure I Will Relate.

Now Joy and Thanks alike my Breast possess,
Which leads me to a World of Happiness.

King. Hymen shall light us to that World of Joy,
Which once possessed, shall all our Cares destroy.

Arratus. I should chide you, but it is no time to wear an angry brow, although
the Crime was monstrous,, to hier two wicked Slaves to Murder Vanlore, who then
lay Leaguer at Ardenna, but by Miracle preserved, to save mine and Heroina's
Life, for which all he desires, is your free Consent to Marry Theocrine.


Vanlore and Theocrine kneels. Arr. My Lord he has it and I Joy to hear his
Life was saved to Act (...) brave a ^^eed, Rise and receive my Blessing, you
are a worthy So^.


King. To add a Title to that Honor, I here Create him (...) you Oroandes to a
Place of greater worth, and nearer to our (...), thy Loyal (...) merrits it.


Omnes. Long live Ante^^^^ and Heroina, King and Queen of Scicily.


King. My Debts are great to all, but must remain in full Arrears until my
Offerings pa^'d to ^air Heroina give me liberty:

Then lulled in Peace* and by this ^rize se^ down,
We Will find new ways past Victories to Crown.
The mighty Bliss about my Soul does move
In different forms, like unknown Joys Above,
B'ing Crowned at once with Loyalty and Love.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
WHAT strange unkindness does amongst you Reign,
Sure you will never leave off this Damming strein;
You Sans remorse, like Cruel Victors kill;
Both Friend and Foe must suffer by your will,
And all you do is good, though never so ill;
Your Native sweetness sure is from you fled,
And all kind Nature is Extinct and Dead;
Like Miss Enjoyed, you lead us to the Door,
Quite Cloyed, you thrust us out, and Love no more,
Leave us like her to all Ensuing harms,
And Curse the ill, because you hate her Charms:
By Instigation, or by Precept led,
You that are Wits the Guiddy faction head;
And taught by them, ill Nature and their spite,
Y' Explode what they call wrong, though never so right.
Like Massanello's our kind Judges sit,
Cry down the Play, because they hate the Wit;
Damm me says one, why so Satyrick here,
What means the Fop to Ramble from his sphere,
And Carp at things, the gravest Poets fear?
Troth 'twas Invention, though he mist the way,
He writ, and hoped to please as well as they,
But he misto^k, and Jaded his poor Muse,
And what he though Jocose, proved mere abuse.
The Drudging Scribler quakes within, for fear
You should turn Hectors and dissect him here;
His little frailty sure you can forgive,
And Impudence you know deserves to live;
You may be merciful, though you are Foes,
Since to your Rage at once he did Expose
All he held dear, to Lead you by the Nose.

