A COLLECTION OF SOME PAPERS WRIT UPON SEVERAL OCCASIONS, CONCERNING Clipped and
Counterfeit Money, and Trade, so far as it relates to the Exportation of
Bullion.

By Dr. Hugh Chamberlain.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took, at the Middle Temple-gate in Fleetstreet.
1696.

A COLLECTION of some Papers Writ upon several Occasions, etc.
Some few Considerations supposed useful, concerning the Vote of the House of
Commons, Friday the 24th of February, upon the Bill for the hindering the
Exportation of Gold and Silver, and the melting down the Coin of the Realm;
humbly proposed by Dr. Hugh Chamberlain, to the Wisdom of the Honorable House
of Commons.

GOLD and Silver, as all other Commodities, whether Foreign or Domestic, must
be considered with respect to their real natural Value and Market-price, which
are both very variable, and not to be governed by Laws.

The real natural Value of all Commodities, is the expense of Labor, Charge,
and Hazard, in raising and bringing the same to a Market, and this varies it
accordingly; for Gold does not cost so much in Peru or Guiny, as it does in
London, Paris, or Amsterdam. The Marketprice varies according to the Multitude
or Paucity of Chapmen, and the plenty or scarcity of the Commodities.

First, The multitude or paucity of Chapmen happens according to their several
necessities and pleasures in the use of Commodities: Thus we see (where Gold is
not the measure of Trade, as in some parts of the East and West Indies, and in
Africa) Iron is much more valuable, because they have much occasion for the
one, and little or no use for the other, neither for Vessels, Ornaments, nor
Money. So likewise (tho Gold should cost you 3 l. per Ounce, if you can find
but few Chapmen, and your necessities compel you to sell) you must take 2 l. if
you can get no more. And (if it should cost you but 2 l. per Ounce, if there
are many Merchants) you may fell it for 3 l. 10 s. more or less; for it is not
what Charge it stands you in, but the greater or lesser number that has
occasion for it, which alters and raises the price.

Secondly, The plenty and scarcity of Commodity also varies the price, tho much
above or below the natural Value. Thus a piece of Bread of a Penny natural
value, is often sold in a Siege for 5 s. And on the contrary, a Diamond formerly
sold for 10 l. when scarce, has by clogging the Market yielded but 5 l. tho
possibly less than the Charge expended, which is the natural Value.

Thirdly, Nothing can possibly bring Gold or Silver, being of Foreign growth,
into England, but the Exportation of Commodities of our own Growth or
Manufacture; or what our Natives can return from Foreign Service for their
Labor; or what Foreign Travelers spend here to see the Country, etc.

Fourthly, Nothing can possibly carry our Gold and Silver out of England, but
the consuming more Foreign Commodities at prime cost, than we get in value for
the sale of our exported Merchandise; or what Foreign Merchants and Mechanics
by their Labor and Thrift can save here to return to their own Country; or
what our Nobility and Gentry spend abroad in their Travels; or what our
Ambassadors* Foreign Ministers, or our Armies in Foreign Countries, or
Mercinary Allies draw out of the Nation.

So that it is neither changing the Denomination of our Coin higher or lower,
above or under the natural Value and Market-price of the material (which
Quantity and Use will regulate) can either gain, keep, or drive away our Gold
and Silver, but only the abovmentioned balance of Trade, over or under, which,
like necessity, will overruled all Laws.

Fifthly, That which makes the variety of Value here at home betwixt Gold,
Silver, and Bullion, is the disproportion among themselves, according as they
exceed the Proportion settled by the Standard, in Use or Quantity. For Example,
When there is more use for Gold, or less quantity in Proportion than for
Silver, Gold shall be dear, and exceed the Standard in the Market-price, tho
the natural Value continues the same. And when there is more use for Silver, or
less quantity in Proportion than for Gold, Silver shall be dear, and exceed the
Standard in the Market-price, tho the natural Value were the same. And when
there is more use for Plate than for Money, Plate shall be dearest* and exceed
the Standard in value; and Coining shall not only stand still, but very often the
Coin shall be melted down. For if the quantity of Gold exceeds (in Proportion)
the Silver, Gold shall be cheap. If Silver exceeds Gold, Silver shall be cheap:
If Money exceeds Plate, Money shall be cheap: If Plate exceeds Money, Plate
shall be cheap. And tho Money still retains the same Denomination, it does not
always the same Value, being also overruled by the plenty or scarcity of other
Commodities; for a Crown is not of the same Value when it will purchase but
half a Bushel of Wheat, as when it can a whole one; there being then either
less Corn, or more need of it, or more Chapmen that come with more Money; but
this variety is no prejudice to the Nation, in respect of the quantity of Gold
and Silver; for when we have more Money, we have so much the less Plate; and if
more in Plate, we have the less in Money. But notwithstanding it is a very
great damage to Trade, because Money is living Riches, Plate but dead; that
being capable of turning and improving Trade, when this is not.

The Nobilities hoarding and carrying of Gold in their Pockets, and the great
Gaming with Gold, will raise the price above Silver, tho the Proportion remains
the same.

From the Premises may be concluded, That raising the Value of our Money cannot
keep it, tho it may give our Merchants some trouble to adjust the Par in their
Exchange and Trade abroad. Nor lowering it cannot drive it away, without
bringing as much or more in the room; but if we take no care to exceed in
Exportations, all we can do will never keep our Money; and if we do exceed in
Exportations, all Foreigners can do, can never draw it away. Exportations
should be sufficient to answer the Charges that Foreign payments of Allies,
Armies, Ambassadors, English Travelers, and returning strange Dealers
requires, as well as importing Foreign Commodities, or we must still decline.
Which Regulation of Trade it is humbly conceived, may well deserve the serious
Care of this Honorable House. This Duty I thought I owed my Country, and hope
'twill give no offense. If I have been mistaken, I Will thank any that will
rectify me.

London: Printed in the Year 1693. And Reprinted December 1695.
Some Considerations upon the Necessity of Calling in the Clipped and Counterfeit
Money. Written some time since.
THE Clipped and Counterfeit Money now current in the Nation, is a loss must
certainly fall somewhere; and the longer deferred, the greater it will prove;
whence will naturally arise three Considerations.

First, How to prevent the increase of it for the future? Secondly, Where to
place this Loss with most Justice and Convenience? Thirdly, What new Measures
can be prudently taken to repair this Loss to the Nation?
Upon the first Enquiry, It cannot be much amiss to premise, that Money
counterfeited and clipped in England is, per se, no Loss to the Nation, tho it is
to Particulars; nay, it may by chance be a Gain to the Nation. But all that is
clipped and counterfeited beyond the Sea, and imported, is not only a damage to
Particulars, but a dead Loss to the Nation, which Importation can
notwithstanding be no ways prevented as long as clipped and counterfeit Money is
suffered to be current, which therefore becomes, per accidens, a Mischief.

The only Remedy therefore is, to cry down on the same day throughout the
Nation, all the clipped and counterfeit Money which shall not be brought in
within twenty four hours after such public Notice, that so there may be no
time for either further Clipping or Counterfeiting, at least, not beyond Sea,
which is by much the greater Mischief. Let such Money be paid into the Chamber
of the Adjacent Corporations, and into the County Courts, where each Person
must have an Authentic Receipt of the Moneys so paid in by Tale, and not by
Weight or Goodness.

The second enquiry is, where to place the Loss?

Even upon the whole Nation; for (since it is impossible to make the Foreign
and Domestic Offenders refund) it seems unjust to charge it upon other
innocent particular Persons, as well as unreasonable to undo a few with a
Burden which the whole Nation can hardly feel: unless the Government should
think fit to charge some small matter, as five per Cent* or thereabouts upon
Particulars, because few will suffer much thereby, except the great moneyed
Men, who can best bear it.

In the putting this into practice, great care must be taken, that there be no
encouragement given to clip the Money remaining whole, and pouring in a great
quantity of false Money. And secondly, That the People may not, tho for never
so small a time, be unfurnished with Market-money for present indispensable
Occasions.

To prevent the first, The calling it all in in one and the same day throughout
England, seems the likeliest means And for the second, That either all the
Silver Plate some Weeks before the Prohibition be called in to be Coined,
weight for weight, and sent down to the several County Treasuries, to be
changed for indispensable Necessaries, together with Pence, Farthings, and
Half* pence in Copper, coined on purpose without ^raud or Deceit, according to
the Value allowed, upon a high Penalty. And to compel Persons to bring in their
Silver Plate to be coined, 6 d. per Ounce may be laid upon all Plate uncoined.
Or else that five Shilling Tickets of Credit be dispersed payable in three or
six Months, instead of Coining the Plate, and to be in the mean time current by
Act of Parliament.

In answer to the last Inquiry, How the Nation may find some amends? It may be
considered, whether it is not fit that no Tax whatever, except Parish Rates, be
paid for one whole Year next ensuing: or but half Taxes for two Years: or
quarter Taxes for four Years, for the Government may be as effectually supplied
by voluntary Methods another way.

Every County and Corporation may choose Trustees for this purpose after the
very same manner, as Parliament Men are chosen.

The high price of Guineas at the present seems to be, what it really is, a
great Grievance; but yet it is no more capable of being reduced or fixed by
Law, than a Cuckoo to be hedged in; for necessity, and the natural Value will
always overruled, which follows the plenty or scarcity of Silver in proportion
to other Commodities, or to its several Uses and Demands.

The best Remedy is to make Gold and Silver more plentiful, and keep both to
their due Standard, which will bring down their price without a Law, tho the
Denomination ought by no means to admit of an Alteration: Or else to make them
both less useful, and less necessary; for whatever is scarce, or so in
proportion to its uses, must ever be dear, nothing but a prudent Balance of
Trade can possibly increase our Gold or Silver: And nothing can render its uses
less necessary, than a well-established Land-Credit.

Money-Credit cannot do it, and Reputation-Credit cannot only less do it, but
is more dangerous.

The hinderance of the Importation of Bullion, or the imprudent Permission of
its Exportation, are to be more lamented than the loss of ten times the value
of other Commodities. For,

First, It Is the measure of all the rest. Secondly, It Is equally courted by all
civilized Nations, and can yield but such a limited increase, when as all other
Commodities may be increased according to the Debet or Demands. Thirdly, All
other Commodities end with the Consumer, but Money still lives, and the more
hands it runs through, the better; so that in a sense the use does not destroy
it, as it does other Commodities, but leaves it as it were immortal.
A Method to prevent the Exportation of Bullion.
First, LET the Trade at home be regulated.

Secondly, Let all or the greatest part of our Foreign Expenses of Money
(especially for the Army, if still there remains a necessity of keeping any
abroad beyond our stipulated Quota) be changed into a supply of all Necessaries
for them from hence.

Thirdly, Let our Trade at Sea be protected.

To perform the first.
Let an exact Balance betwixt our Importations and Exportations be strictly
maintained, that the first may by no means exceed the last; and therefore let a
high Custom, almost equal to a Prohibition, be laid on all Foreign Manufactures
not absolutely necessary, as Wines, Fruit, Lace, wrought Silks, very fine
Linen, Dutch Ware, etc. and in the room introduce the Fashion of wearing
Clothes of English Manufactures, tho they may without public Damage be adorned
richly (if you please) with Jewels. And also of using only English Household
Stuff, tho much Plate may be admitted: And of living upon English Food, tho
improved to the height for Goodness, Cleanliness, and Health.

Let no Foreign Manufactures be suffered to be worn here, but rather invite and
encourage Foreign Artists to come and inhabit here. One Foreigner employed by
us beyond Sea, does the Nation more hurt than five hundred inhabiting here.

To perform the second.
Tho the Home-charge should hereby be never so much increased; all Necessaries
for our Army, upon which they spend their Money, must (if possible) be provided
here, and sent over to them, as Clothes, Victuals, Beer, Bread, Cheese, Butter,
etc.

Likewise all Materials for our Train may be transported hence, which may be
easily done if we send Stores, and provide Magazines there.

Let Frugality abroad be encouraged in the Officers and Army, tho left to their
liberty here at home, not excepting the King's Equipage, which His Majesty may
be petitioned to defray with his Foreign Revenue, and his home Expense with the
English; and if we must also pay the Allies, let it be in Woollen Manufacture,
Lead, Tin, etc. tho it should arise to double the value, for that will keep our
Money, and employ our Poor at home.

To perform the Third.
Let a joint Stock of Merchants, or of the General Office of Land-Credit
provide a Fleet, and defray all the Expense thereof, for which the State may be
pleased to grant only 20 per Cent. for nine Years, without paying the principal
Sum disbursed on that occasion. And let only the third of the Complement of the
said Fleet be able Seamen; Soldiers, Land-men, Boys, and disabled Seamen, will
serve for the rest.

Let the Prizes, paying one tenth part to the King* be disposed of by the
Undertakers, etc. of which every Seaman in the Action shall have his just Share.

Let all that serve in the Fleet be exempted from being impressed, and have
their standing Posts in the Royal-Navy according to their Seniority, and the
Benefit of Hospitals, Pensions, etc. as others, these being in the Nations
Service, as much as those Seamen employed by the Government.

The Undertakers and Managers of the Joynt-Stock, with some Merchants, may
serve as an Admiralty for this Fleet.

Let the Officers be chosen by the Undertakers, and recieve their Commissions
from the Admiralty.

When our Trade shall be regulated and protected, we shall have larger
Exportations, and consequently import more Bullion than now.

It is humbly offered to serious Consideration.
THAT all clipped Money should pass at the former Value, provided the present
Weight be stamped upon it at the Mint.

That all false Money shall pass, having a Stamp upon it hard and chargeable to
be Counterfeited, till called in and made good by Authority.

That bad Money thus made current, and hindered from increasing, will make a
quick Trade, and equal a small Sum by frequent Circulation to a great Sum which
moves slow.

If by this means, Money can be prevented from being clipped, and counterfeit
Money from being made, it is the speediest and easiest Redress without danger.

That there can be no better reason pretended for exporting Bullion, but the
Norway and East India Trade, which ought to be regulated, if not thought fit to
be prevented: But if there must necessarily be Exportation, it is better to
export it Coined, and to have the Nation bear the Coinage charge, by which
Manufacture some will be here employed; the Credit of our Coin abroad will be
some Honor, and nothing but the Coinage lost, which is among our selves, and
it is likelier to return when coined than uncoined. And if the Merchant has the
same weight and fineness out of the Tower as he brought in, every one will
bring it thither, let it be at what price it will abroad. And when more can be
got by our English Commodities than by Money, none will export Money, and, that
none may be, we ought to lessen the Consumption, if not totally forbid the use
of Foreign Commodities, and save or lessen our Foreign Expense.

Many Treatises have been writ on this Subject, some give us the History of
Coin not altogether unuseful; some are dressed Mathematically, that their
Assertions may seem the more cogent, but many of them are besides the mark:
Which is only to provide, That our Native and Manufactured Commodities exoprted
may exceed the Value of all Foreign consumable Commodities imported, as much
as, or more than our Foreign Expense of Armies, etc. amounts to, and then Gold
and Silver must of necessity be brought back to balance the Overplus, and this
no Law nor Cunning can hinder, and without this care no Law nor Cunning can
preserve us.

For suppose we should call two Crowns but five Shillings, no Home nor Foreign
Trader could come by this five Shillings, but for ten Shillings worth of Goods
or Labor, and then it is the same thing. And suppose we should call one Crown
ten Shilling, no Home or Foreign Trader will let us have but five Shillings
worth of Goods or Labor for the same; so that it is not calling Money by a
higher or lower Denomination alters the Value, but what it can purchase.

Have the Bank-Dollers in Holland been altered in their Name or Weight by the
rise of Bullion there, which some report to be risen, tho others deny it? Nor
is there more or better reason here to alter our Standard.

So that nothing can keep or export our Money but a Balance, and that will and
must against all Law and Trick whatsover.

To the Honorable the House of Commons, A Proposal for making good the light
and clipped Money; bumbly tendered by Dr. Hugh Chamberlain.
THE said Doctor for some Years last past made several Advantageous Proposals
to this House, for passing current Credit upon valuable Pledges. One of which
was in February (93), reported by a Committee of the House of Commons,
practicable, and tending to the benefit of the Nation.

That diverse Persons have this Session made to this Honorable House Proposals
evidently built upon the Doctor's Foundation, as can easily be made appear,
when commanded.

The Doctor relying upon the Justice of this House for a preference, in case
his Proposal be but equal to those; and depending upon their Wisdom (in case
the same be more advantageous) therefore humbly submits to this Honorable
House what follows.

First, That for all clipped and light Money brought into the Exchequer, Bills of
Current-Credit shall be by Order of the Lords of the Treasury, issued out of
the Office of Land-Credit, payable according to the Direction of this
Honorable House, at three Months certain from the date of such Orders.

Secondly, That all the new Money, so fast as Minted, may be paid into the said
Office of Land-Credit, to answer the said Bills, issued by such Orders of the
Lords of the Treasury.

Thirdly, That since this House has thought fit to Vote but Twelve hundred
thousand Pounds to make good the Clipped Money, the said Office of Land-Credit
humbly offers to perform the same for Sixty thousand Pounds per Annum, for
Thirty Years; or an Hundred and twenty thousand Pounds per Annum, for Fifteen
Years; which is either Five per Cent. per Annum, for Thirty Years; or Ten per
Cent. per Annum, for Fifteen Years, without Payment of the Principal Sum. And
this Proposal comprehends all the Advantages offered by Mr. Briscoe, at two
fifths cheaper to the Nation: But if that Gentleman (as some report) shall fall
from his first Proposal of One hundred thousand Pounds, to Seventy five
thousand per Ann. for forty years, which will then be after the Rate of Four
Pounds thirteen shillings and eight pence, per Cent. per Ann. or Five per Cent.
per Ann. wanting one sixteenth part for the forty years, yet will this Proposal
still be one fifth in the whole cheaper to the Nation than his, and this may be
redeemed at any time whenever the Parliament shall please.

Fourthly, It Is humbly hoped, that this, being no small service at this time to
the Nation, shall not want, at least, an equal Encouragement from the
Government with the Bank of England; it being on far better terms than Mr.
Briscoe's, and as much superior to his, as his to the Bank of England.

Fifthly, That if the House shall think fit to enlarge their Allowance for
Clipped and Light Money, and to grant their Charitable Relief to such poor
persons as through Mistake and Ignorance receive Counterfeit Money, the said
Office will undertake at the same rate of Five per Cent. for thirty years, or
Ten per Cent. for fifteen years, to perform the same: Which great Charity of
this Honorable House may preserve abundance of poor Families from extreme
Misery, otherwise inevitable to them; their All often consisting in such
Counterfeit Money.

That the Doctor, in the Infancy of this Increase of Counterfeit Money, did
humbly insinuate to diverse Members of the late Parliament, the dangerous and
chargeable Consequences, that, unless timely prevented, were likely then to
ensue, and have since but too truly been verified; he now presumes to offer to
the Consideration of this Honorable House, with all dutiful Deference to their
great Wisdom, That if some effectual Provision be not immediately made, for the
Employing and Maintaining the Poor, the Mischievous Consequences that may ensue
the Neglect of it, may possibly prove fatal. To avoid which Danger, Proposals
may be humbly offered, whenever this Honorable House will please to Command.

FINIS.
THE Reader is desired not to be offended, if he meets with frequent
Repetitions in these Papers, but to consider they were written at several
times, as occasion required.


