MASTER BAKEWELLS SEA OF ABSURDITIES, CONCERNING SPRINKLING CALMELY Driven back
by Peter Chamberlen. 12. April, 1650.

London, Printed by J. C. And are to be sold by Giles Calvert, at the
Black-spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's, 1650.

Mr. Bakewells Sea of Absurdities concerning SPRINKLING; calmely driven back by
Peter Chamberlen, 12 April 1650.
MR. Bakewell, There was a Letter, with your name subscribed, brought to Ely
house the 24. of March, last (as I heard) and the same was afterward delivered
unto me; whereupon I sent 4 times to your house, to have returned you an
Answer, and either you were not at home (as the Messenger told me) or else you
would not be at home: so that on the last Lords day, (7. April present) which
you call the Sabbath or Palm Sunday, (which was the first time I was at Ely
house since the Letter) I gave a public Answer in the place where it was sent.
Therefore you wrong your Friends, in possessing them, that you had defied
Israel, and none durst answer you, as your Preamble imports. Nor do you well to
charge me with a promise I never made. For you neither could tell whether I
made any promise, (you, nor your Messenger, not having spoken with me,) nor
could you so much as know whether I had received your Letter, it neither being
delivered unto me, nor to any in my presence, nor yet left at my house. Nor
truly, were you so civil as to send me a Copy of what you printed, and I had
not known thereof, if another had not given me one.

You say further, that you were requested by some Friends to publish your
Letter. I partly believe you are but the Catts Paw, by your dabling in Greek
(p. 6. and last line) which probably you understood not; and by my Reverend
Friend Mr. Downan's vouchsafing you an Imprimatur, and your own confession here
of your Friends Request, yet I cannot but a little wonder at it. What? That
your Ministers should allow a Layman to take upon him their Function! and to
answer what they durst not! They knew (perhaps) none so bold. --

Well Mr. Bakewell, I shall not be so proud, as because you may be censured by
your own party, out of your Element, (under which notion (perhaps) taking me,
they permit you to do what you do:) therefore not to grant you an humble and
loving Answer; however you are pleased to judge me proud of heart, and taking
upon me the Title of Tyrus, etc. Truly I am sorry I cannot so behave my self as
to have prevented you from any such rash censure, and do but you teach me
greater humility, wherein the truth of Christ may not suffer, and I shall be
glad to learn of you that meekness and humility, wherein you follow Christ
before me. Which nevertheless in this you seem not to do, in presuming to
answer for Dr. Gouge, as supposing your self the abler man, or abler then any
of your sprinkling Ministers.

I must pass by many impertinencies, and touch upon the most material passages
of the Letter, that I may avoid the words of railing, and only return an
Answer in love.

You except against my asking a question of Dr. Gouge, because he is ancient,
Of whom should men enquire but of the ancient should not days speak, and
multitude of years teach wisdom, Job 32.7. Of whom should we enquire, but of
those that take upon them the Office? should not the Priests lips preserve
knowledge? Malach: 2.7. Why man, I sent not to fight with Dr. Gouge, and so
long the older the better: nor did I confine the question to him, but that
others were also lovingly entreated to his assistance. Yet having sufficiently
censured and chid me; you will not give me leave to state mine own Question;
but pretend to know my meaning better then my self. My Question was, WHETHER
THE SPRINKLING OF INFANTS BE OF GOD OR OF MAN? It is the same question which
Christ propounded to the Pharisees concerning the Baptism of John, Mat. 21.25.
You have made a Question of your own, WHETHER SPRINKLING THE BAPTIZED BE OF GOD
OR MAN, BE THEY INFANTS OR OF FULLAGE? do you mean by Baptized, Sprinkled? as
in your 6 page and last line you intimate. Then you Tautologize and will sound
thus in plain English, Whether sprinkling the Sprinkled be of God or Man? or
would you have those that are baptized already, to be sprinkled also? I pray
consult with your Teachers a little before you either state my Question, or
state it in that manner. In the mean time I will suppose you speak sense, and
that (at all adventures) you affirm that THE SPRINKLING OF INFANTS IS OF GOD
AND NOT OF MAN'S INVENTION, which is quite contrary to what Dr. Gouge affirmed
to some. For I have been informed by Mr. Edw. Barber, and have it under his
hand since you printed your Letter, that at 2 several times, both upon his
being sent unto him by the Bishops, and one Mark Whitlock, to be satisfied for
taking the Oath ex officio: Dr. Gouge did acknowledge (not only Sprinkling)
but that baptizing of Infants was a tradition of the Church, and used it as one
Argument to take that Oath: But to your Arguments.

1. Arg. You would prove that Sprinkling of Infants is of God, because the Lord
foretold that in the times of the Gospel his people should be sprinkled with
clean water. Ezekiel. 36.25. Mr. Bakewell, it had been well if you had desired
your Teachers to help you to make a Syllogism of it, whereof they that will
undertake to dispute, ought not to be ignorant; but because you may chance not
know what belongs to it, ask them whether by SPRINKLING here be meant
BAPTISM? Or whether by CLEAN WATER, be meant ELEMENTARY WATER? Or whether by
the words (UPON YOU, which you interpret his people) be meant LITTLE INFANTS?
Or whether by THEN be meant the TIME OF THE GOSPEL with THE GENTILES, as you
likewise render it? Or whether this SPRINKLING allude not rather to the
SPRINKLING UNDER THE LAW, ( Levit. 14.7. Numb, 8.7.) which they understood
distinct from those many Baptismes mentioned in Heb. 9.10. which were amongst
them, and did not understand John's or Christ's Baptism, which as yet was not?
And whether the PURE WATER be not rather the HOLY GHOST in the Language of our
Savior ( John 7.39?) And whether the time THEN and the People You, be not
rather the glorious times of the CALLING OF THE JEWS?

I believe these mistakes will rather put them upon a more strict way of
keeping the staff in their own hands, and not suffer Lay-ignorance though
never so zealous, Talketive, or Devout, to betray their Cause. For when you or
any else have said all you can upon this place, IT IS A PROMISE OF WHAT GOD
WILL DO, IT IS NOT A COMMAND OF WHAT MAN MUST DO.

Then you say (Mr. Bakewell) that the water in BAPTISM is A SIGN OF THE BLOOD
OF CHRIST: but where does the Scripture say so? They had under the Law, the
SPRINKLING OF WATER. Levit. 14.17. Numb. 8.7. distinct from the SPRINKLING OF
BLOOD, Exodus 12.22. and 29.21. and both distinct from their BATHES AND
WASHINGS, Levit. 15.5.6.7.8.10.11.13.18.21.22.27. And 16.26.28. and 17.15.16.
and Numb. 19.7.8.19. and Exodus 19.10. and 29.4. and 30.18.19. and 40.12.31.
Levit. 6.27.28. Deuteronomy. 21, 6. and diverse other places. And we have under the
Gospel BAPTISM distinct from the SUPPER OF THE LORD. And the Holy Ghost is
punctual, ( John 19.34.) that there came out of the side of Jesus both Water
and Blood. Now should they have confounded the sprinkling of water with that of
blood, or either with their washings, or one with the other under the Law, they
could not but have neglected a great part of those Rights and Ceremonies
wherein they were to be so exact: And if we also should confound those few
Commands which our Savior lest us under the Gospel, we should soon arrive to
that spiritual Babel which is so rife in these days amongst many who suppose
themselves spiritual. Forbear therefore so boldly to affirm or infer that
the water in Baptism is called in Heb. 12.24. The blood of sprinkling. But if
you will needs find Baptism in that Text, find it in our coming to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant, from the which the Blood of sprinkling is
distinguished by a conjunction Copulative (AND). That also of the 10. of Heb.
22. must be kept from confusion, and then it comprehends the 2 complete parts
of Baptism.

1. The work and promise of God in these words. Our hearts sprinkled from an
evil Conscience, and the work and obedience of men in these words. Our Bodies
washed with pure water. For IT IS NOT THE WORK OF MAN TO SPRINKLE THE HEART,
NOR IS IT THE WORK OF GOD TO WASH THE BODY. 2. GODS SPRINKLING IS EQUIVALENT TO
MAN'S WASHING, In which sense the phrase is used of GODS FINGER, Exodus
8.19.31.18. And these two parts are distinctly held forth in many places, Mat.
3. Mar. 1. Luke 3. I baptize with water, but he shall baptize with the Holy
Ghost. And Act 1.5. John baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the
Holy Ghost: So Act 2.38. Repent and be baptized, and ye shall receive the Holy
Ghost. If either of these be wanting, Baptism is not complete. For Christ
himself, who had not the spirit by measure, must be baptized to fulfill all
righteousness ( Mat: 3.) Peter by Cornelius his Companies receiving the HOLY
GHOST, judges them thereby fit to be baptized with water: Act 10. Who can
forbid water that these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy
Ghost as well as we? And he commvnded them to be baptized. And on the other
side without fruits worthy of Repentance, the Pharisees shall not be admitted
to the BAPTISM OF WATER. ( Mat. 3.7.8.) Nor probably the Eunuch, unless he
had BELIEVED WITH ALL HIS HEART. Act 8.37. For it is not the outward washing
away the filth of the flesh, but the inward answer of a good Conscience toward
God through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21.

2. Your second Argument or Article with the latter end of the first, lays
down a Rule of Similitude between the sign (or Sacrament, in your phrase) and
the thing signified. Consider your own Rule, with SPRINKLING OF A CHILDS FACE,
(which is a Ceremony but lately allowed, by the late Directory, and was not
allowed (though practiced) by the Book of Common Prayer. Consider I pray you,
whether by your Rule you do not make a Face-Christian, yea a specled
face-Christian, your SPRINKLING being only on the FACE, and that but here and
there in DROPS; but if you allow BAPTISM to signify the WASHING AWAY OF SIN,
as all Catechismes imply, would you only wash away the FACE and OUTWARD
APPEARANCES OF SIN, to make an Outside-Pharisee-Christian? or would you have
ALL SIN, even the whole body of Sin washed away? Therefore the washing of the
whole Body, as was appointed by the Book of Common Prayer, and was the COMMAND
and PRACTICE of CHRIST and his APOSTIES, and of those learned men whom they
commonly call FATHERS, is the right way of administering the Sacrament, and not
a new-invented way of SPRINKLING, which (though practiced) was NEVER COMMANDED
TILL OF LATE.

Compare it also with those other REPRESENTATIONS IN BAPTISM, would you have
the Baptism of the HOLY GHOST to be but in DROPS, and that but in APPEARANCE,
on the FACE, or but one PART? Or would you be FILLED so as to have Rivers of
living water flow out of your Belly? John 7.39. Would you have your FACE only
BURIED WITH CHRIST IN BAPTISM, or have your FACE only BAPTIZED INTO HIS
DEATH, and have only your FACE to RISE WITH HIM, or have only an Outside-shew
of Death to Sin, and Resurrection to life in Christ? ( Col. 2.12. Romans 6.34.
etc.) Or would you make CHRIST only a VISARD FOR YOUR FACE, to PUT HIM only ON
UPON YOUR FACE? ( Gal. 3.27.) Lay your hand upon your heart, and consider
seriously these things.

Then you insist upon the VISIBILITY OF THE SIGN OF THE BAPTIZED, etc. First,
consider your own Practice. Do INFANTS SEE THE WATER wherewith they are
sprinkled? Are their EYES commonly OPEN or SHUT? Do any pluck them open? yea,
if they were open, would not nature teach them to shut them when they felt the
drops of water upon them? Or if they open their eyes, know they what water is,
or what it means? Secondly, Whether is a Basin of Water, or a River most
visible? Is not this like the old Woman that could see the needle, but not the
Barn? Thirdly, whereas you say that he who is plunged does not see the Sign,
if you mean WATER, He does not only see it but feel it, and if you mean the
Washing and Clensing of his Body, surely they are more likely to see their
Bodies cleansed that go into a RIVER, and afterward dry themselves and wipe
away the filth, then they that only have their Face Sprinkled, which they
cannot see without a Looking-glass, (a thing of no use to Newborn Infants.)
And whereas you say that they cannot hear what is said, no more do Infants,
nor do they understand if they hear the words; but the baptized according to
the Scriptures do both hear the words and know them before they are plunged,
although pronouncing the WORDS, do not the work, but the Obedience of being
Baptized into the Name of the Lord.

3. Your third Article says, that many were Baptized in their houses, and you
instance in Paul, Cornelius, and the Jailer, for whom you quote Act 9.17.18.
and 16.25.48. You do ill (Mr. Bakewell) to father so many untruths in print
upon the Scriptures. The Scriptures say NOT that PAUL was BAPTIZED in the
HOUSE: but that Ananias entered into the House, and afterward when the scales
were fallen from his eyes, he arose and was Baptized without saying he was
Baptized either in a Tub or Pond, (according to your roving language,) or in a
River: or that he was Baptized without Water as the Drie-washing Book of the
Doctrine of Baptismes will infer. You may likewise read it again in Act
22.16. Paul was not to sit still to be sprinkled; but, now up, why tarriest
thou? arise and be Baptized, and wash away thy sins, etc. So Act 10. Peter
after having reasoned the business about Cornelius and those with him, who can
forbid water, etc? he commands them to be Baptized, but it is not said where,
nor by whom. And if you allow any water to be used (as is expressed) you must
either suppose it carried up and down with the Apostles in Aqua-vitae-Bottles,
or Rose-water-Bottles, to dash them in the face as soon as they had been but
taken confessing of Christ, or that wheresoever they came, they either found or
called for a Basin of water in the first place (which we do not read they did)
or else the same time that would serve to fetch water and bring it back, might
serve them to go to the water. And in the 16. of the Acts, I perceive you do
not so much as read the 30. verse, else you would never have put in print that
the Jailer and all his were baptized in the Prison, quite contrary to the Text,
which says, that the Jailer came trembling, and fell down before Paul and
Silas, and brought them out, at least out of the inner Prison, before it is
said that he asked what must I do to be saved? and in the 33. verse, he took
them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes and was Baptized, he
and all his straightway, before it is said that he brought them into his house,
etc. Nor is it probable that they were Baptized with water, and the blood of
the Stripes of Paul and Silas. Absurdities muct not be put upon the Scriptures,
but the main being expressed, the rest ought to be understood, especially being
fully expressed in other places. All the following Questions therefore denote
your extreme ignorance both in the Scriptures and in that Ordinance. And your
great partiality appears in that you asked not the same absurd questions about
the washing of Paul and Silas, and the Baptism of the Jailer and his household.
As what Vessel? Who should fetch it? How often emptyed? Did Paul stand in a
Vessel? How many times went he in? or went he in at all? Wherefore all these
Absurdities cannot but stick fast in your weak Imagination, till they be all
dissolved in a RIVER, or SUFFICIENT QUANTITY OF WATFR.

4. In the 4. place, you say the SACRAMENT must be administered WHERE THE WORD
IS PREACHED, because that Mat. 28.19. You say it is, Preach and Baptize. Here
you also play the false Prophet in your false Interpretation and Repetition.
For the word is not (...), Preach but (...), Discipline or make Disciples, nor
is it (...), and baptize but (...), baptizing much less does the Text either
say or infer that they must baptize in the same place where they preach: John
Baptist, and Christ, and his Disciples went up and down preaching the Gospel in
the WILDERNESS, Mat. 3.1. and about all Galilee, Mat. 4.24. and up in a
MOUNTAIN. Mat. 5.1. and 10.7. and 27. and 11.1. and in a CHARIOT. Act 8.4.31.
and 35. etc. But they BAPTIZED in JORDAN. Mark 1.5. John 3.22. in AENON. Jo.
3.23. etc.

5. Upon the same score of ignorance you have the like troubled fancy as in the
3. Article, about a Rivers banck, or half way in the River, or 2 Persons at
least to administer the Ordinance, from all which absurdities you sprinkle your
self with Holy water, and rest in a contented ignorance.

6. Against supposed NAKEDNESS you allege MODESTY, and against ClOTHING you
would not have them sit DUNG-WET at meat, and against a Partial Clothing you
allege Aarons Briches, with many other weak things, even answered in the very
readding. For by this you allow not Jesus, nor the Eunuch, nor all the rest to
be nor Naked, nor Clothed, nor half Naked and half Clothed. And were your
modest suppositions true, what think you of CIRCUMCISION? Perhaps when you duly
weigh these things, and deny your self-conceits and strange Imaginations, to
submit them to the Truths of Scripture, your zeal may be converted into
knowledge, which truly is my Prayer for you. For I verily believe you write not
in malice to me, though in hard censure.

7. Seventhly, Mr. Bakewell, you affirm another untruth of the Scriptures for
want of knowledge of the Tongues, owning the error of the Translator. Mark
3.11. where John is made to say I baptize with Water, and not in water, and say
you, the Scripture always says with water. Now if you your self were such a
Grecian, as to be Author sufficient for the Greek word (...), as you undertake
in the last line of the 6. page, you might also be credited here, having the
translation on your side, which there you have not: but because I believe you
are not, but speak by roat as you are taught, I pray ask your Teachers (who
know the Tongues,) and they will tell you, that (...) signifies in water, and
not with water. And Ephesians. 5.26. (...): with the washing of water in the word.
And Heb. 10.22. has neither in nor with, only the Dative Case, which our
language will not render with any propriety. And truly it were well, if those
errors which are caused for want of a more exact Translation, were taken away
by a new Translation. And till you are able to be an Interpreter, it is good to
be sober in making your own Conclusion upon matter of Interpretation; but yield
the place to those that are better able, and better gifted: till when, I must
leave you in the midst of all your absurdities which you have framed and
affirmed, and not I, nor any one as I know but your self.

8. Eighthly, you began with a hard word Anabaptist, and you should do well to
know what that word means, and how to use it, and to whom it belongs, before
you undertake to condemn any under that notion. And when you understand the
true signification of Baptism, you will not exact Brick, and allow no straw,
you will not bid one cut meat without a knife, you will not expect that men
should be baptized, and not suffer them to come into the water. And for your
Hocus Pocus of saying that Infants are under water for being lower then that
handful of water held by your Ministers in sprinkling, it is too ridiculous,
as diverse other passages, to be either answered at all, or at all seriously
answered: nor would your Ministers have pleaded that for an Argument.

9. Lastly, you promise to show that Sprinkling one part of the Body is
sufficient: but you pull in your Arguments with Ropes of Sand.

1. One DROP of water is as truly water as the whole Ocean; what follows?
Therefere one DROP of water is as SUFFICIENT as the whole OCEAN! For what? To
feed Whales? To bear great Ships? To water the Earth? to vvash and bath? no
nor to sprinkle neither. Or what would you have to follow? That as one drop
of water is water as well as the whole Ocean, so is one part of the body a
Body, as well as the whole Body? This concludes nothing to your purpose. Or
that as one drop of water is vvaetr as well as the whole Ocean; so if one
part of the body be sprinkled all the body is sprinkled. The similitude vvil
not hold nor follow: but try the practice of it when your face is foul,
vvash your feet, and see whether your face will be any whit the cleaner.

2. You say there is no measure of water prescribed, only it must be water.
No more there is for your Bread, yet one drop will not suffize to make Dowe:
nor will one drop serve to vvash your hands or feet, when you go to knead it:
and it were ridiculous for the Apostle to mention that John was baptizing in
Aenon, BECAUSE THERE WAS MUCH WATER THERE, if one drop would have served the
turn; but so there be enough it is no matter whether it be in Jordan or
Aenon, or the Wilderness. Act 8. or the River without the City of Philippi.
Act. 16.13.

3. You say (to as little purpose) that the baptized may be under one drop as
well as under a Tun; so he may be under a Tun as well as one drop, and
we are daily under more in the Clouds: but what would you infer thereon?
That a man may be buried and plunged, or drowned with one drop, or by being
under one drop, as well as by being under a Tun? He may indeed be as dry
under a Tun as under one drop, so the Vessel leake not: in the sense you
mentioned last of the Child's being under the Ministers handful of water, but
not so soon buried or plunged with one drop as with a Tun of water; and
if the Sextone afforded but one grain of earth upon each body that were to be
buried, I believe each Nostril would soon complain there were not sufficient.

But 4. you as desperately attempt to clear this by the Conference of Jesus
Christ with Peter about the washing of his Feet. Jo. 13.8. Read on to the 10.
verse. He that is Washed (says he) or he that is already Baptized, needs not
save to cleanse or wash his feet, etc: This shows (say you, from the 8. verse
instancing, in me for with me, as almost in all the Scriptures you quote, you
mistake somewhat) this shows that washing was sacramental. If you mean it is
a Sacrament, why do you not so practice it? If it be the Sacrament of Baptism,
why do not your Ministers wash the feet of Infants as Christ did his Disciples,
rather then sprinkle the face only, which Christ never did?

When you have spoken your last, you come with 3. OBJECTIONS for plunging, from
Act 8.38. Mat. 3.6. and Romans 6.4. To the first you answer, that every Pit or
River in those hot Countries were not always brim-full of water. Be it so
Therefore every Pit (which you make a Synonyma to a River) was not chosen: but
the chief River Jordan, and Aenon, because there was much water. You say they
might go into the Pit, and not go into the water. The Lord deliver us from the
Pit where there is no water ( Jer. 39.6. Zach. 9.11.) but the Text answers your
Cavel, (if you would at all heed what the word says) that in the Baptism of
Jesus and the Eunuch, where the manner of Baptizing is particularly mentioned,
they went both down into the water, and they came up out of the water, not into
the Pit, and out of the Pit. Mark 1.9.10. Act 8.39.

To the 2. you affirm, that the Greek word (which I suppose you can neither
write nor read, which is (...) or (...) in the Infinitive) does signify as
well to SPRINKLE as to PLUNGE, whereas all the Scholars in Europe cannot find
it so used in any Greek Author, nor others; but of late some Latin Authors
(from the practice) have rashly printed what you here affirm. Which if it
should be granted, and your Testament so interpreted, hear a little your own
Absurdities. Mat. 3.1. In those days came John the SPRINKLER, preaching in the
Wilderness of Jordan. Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the
Region round about Jordan, and were SPRINKLED of him in Jordan the River. Mark
1.5. John 3.22. After these things came Jesus and his Disciples into the Land
of Judea, and there he tarried with them, and SPRINKLED, verse 23. And John
also was SPRINKLING in Aenon, BECAUSE there was MUCH WATER there, and they came
and were SPRINKLED.

Mark 1.19. And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth
of Galilee, and was SPRINKLED of John ((...)) into Jordan, verse 10. And
straightway coming up ut of the water, etc. Act 8.30. And they went down both
into the water; both Philip and the Eunuch, and he SPRINKLED him. verse 39. And
when they came out of the Water, the Spirit caught away Philip. So Gal. 3.27.
As many as have been SPRINKLED into Christ have put on Christ, and Col. 2.12.
BURIED with him in SPRINKLING; wherein also ye are risen with him; But I
confess, this sort of bettering the Transiation, I shall not like in my Bible.

Yet not content with all these Absurdities, you say you might add more of
plunging in water, and danger of lives, and you condemn men of murder for
having plunged in winter, yet name none that were murdered, nor executed for
that murder, nor is there any proof save you own Authentic Imagination.

To avoid the hardship of Winter, the Common Prayer Book will tell you in the
preamble, that Easter and Whitsuntide were therefore appointed by the Ancients
for fit times of Baptism. And the Winter-Baptizing of Children in Wales, will
sufficiently testify that you foist in your own untruths, by the strength of
your own distracted Imagination.

In answer to the 3 Objection from Romans 6.4. you would take a great advantage,
because there is no mention of water, and will make it a dry Baptism. When
you bid your man wash your Cup, or Glass, unles you bid him do it with water,
does it signify nothing? But let him that is diligent read the Texts, Romans
6.4. Col. 2.12. 1 Cor. 1.8. and satisfy themselves.

To as little purpose do you bring in all the other places of Scripture, and
therefore I shall trouble my self no futrher in the particulars of them. Nor do
I intend further to be at Charges of printing a satisfaction to every one that
Scribles, after having spent and lost so much for the public, and repayed with
so much injustice and ingratitude. Nor will I meddle at present with the
lawfullnesle or unlawfulness of your Ministry, which you bring in by head and
shoulders.

Therefore you may well perceive by my patience in answering your weak
Arguments, and by my waving all your words of provocation and censure, as of
Pride, like Tyrus, Questions of strife, Janglings, that I know nothing (P. 2.)
Popish Pilgrimage, (P. 4.) to abide in the Ass or with the Ass. (P. 8.) and
his invention who was a murderer. (P. 7.) Anabaptists. (P. 6.) mad and drunk.
(P. 3.) Dippers plunged in a Sea of Absurdities (in the Title.) Renouncing of
Baptism, denying of God, Devils, Heaven, Hell, Grace, Glory, and the like;
that I am not al ogether so proud as you censured me, but that I desire in
meekness and lowliness of Spirit to win you and all of your opinion (not to
mine, but) to the truths of God, which the Lord grant through Jesus Christ,
Amen.

FINIS.
The late coming forth of this Impression is to be amongst the Errata of the
Printer: He that desires to be satisfied of the point, may read the Scriptures,
and the Disputes between Mr. Den and Mr. Tombs, Dr. Featly and Mr. Marshall.
And Mr. Blackwells storming of Antichrist. And Mr. Laurence his Treatise of
Baptize. Or the Book entitled the Vanity of Childrens Baptismes, etc. But they
that are like Gallie ( Act 14.15.16.17.18.) may let all alone.


