A VINDICATION Of Public Artificial Baths and Bath-stoves FROM The Objections
and Scandalls obtruded on them, by those that do not, or will not know their
Great Benefit to the PUBLIC.

By way of Answer to some Fellows of Our College of Physicians in LONDON and
others.

By Peter Chamberlen Docter in Physic* and Fellow of the said College.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1648.

A Vindication of Public Artificial Bathes and Bath-stoves*
IF Salus Populi be Suprema Lex, These should not beg a Law that bring You
Health attended like a Queen with cleanelines, Nimblenes, Pleasure, Strength
and Stature.

The great Doctor-makers of the World Hippocrates Galen, Avicen, Paracelsus,
and the rest, speaking of them as of Diett, Hipp. de vict. ratione in More:
acut: Gal: lib. de Sal. Diet. Com. Epid. de Off. lib. 3. de Tuend. San.
commend the often use of them, but more in Summer then in Winter: approve
several of them for Digestion, to make one Fatt or Lean, to be a Preparative
for Purgation, to be the Perfect Finisher of Cures, to be Abstersive,
Aperitive, Resolving, Provoking Urine,Cooling, Heating, Drieing, Moistening,
Easing Pains, Inclining to Sleep, Good against Pains of the Head, the Gout,
Convulsions, Mischances, Dropsies, Palsies, Pains of the side, Inflammations
of the Longs, inward Ulcers,Consumptions, Fevers, yea Most Diseases.

Who then can expect that Docters in Physic, who only pretend to be so for
having read these Authors, and for having understood them, and practiced by
their Rules, and maintain and justify their practice by their Precept will
seem so ignorant as to disallow so great and generous a Remedy.

Nevertheless, there is no doubt but, some way seek to oppose even their own
good; For Good and Evil are contrary, and Wicked men will grow worse and
worse, Tim. 13. 13. Of such men it is an Honor to hear ill, To which Honor
(I thank God) I have twice arrived unto; Once for compassionating the general
Miseries and Sufferings of Women and Children, by the ignorance and disorder
of some Midwifes and Nurses: And now for endeavoring the Public Health of the
Kingdom. But Regium est male audire and been facere. Seeca says, Sit tibi tam
triste laudari a turpibus, quam si lauderis ob Turpia. And a geater then Seneca
tells, us The world shall hate us; Let us hear then what Slander, or Malice
will say and such as thereby are ignorantly seduced.

This Country is too cold. 1. Obj.


Germany, 1 Ans.
Poland, Denmark, and Moscovia are colder, they use them Winter and Summer.

Italy and Greece are colder in Winter then we are in Summer, 2* Ans.
let us have them in Summer.

They are a Remedy against the Cold, 3* Ans.
If we complain of Cold let us have this Remedy.

If Experience approve them not, 4. Ans.
none will frequent them, the Loss will be the Adventurers.

There are Private Hot Houses, 2. Obj.
And Dr. Grent's Bath.

Dr. Grent has (indeed) attempted somewhat, 1. Ans.
but so, as the Common Wealth is not sensible of the Benifit, and He Himself
has quitted the Inconvenience, Charge, and Trouble of them, And when He
pleases may adventure a second Loss, or more safely be an Adventurer as
(others) in mine.

Let every man enjoy what he has* 2. Ans.
but not hinder what he has not:

Other Doctors have them as well as I: 3. Obj.


Why have they not been as zealous to serve the Commonwealth with them as I?
1. Ans.
They cannot deny them to be good, that were to contradict their Masters. They
will not confess they fear a Diminution of their own gain. That were to
obtrude a strange Maxim to the State; That sickness must be provided for
Physicians, not Physicians for sickness; so sinners for Preachers, and
Malefactors for Judges.

If they mean only Bathing-Tubbs, 2. Ans.
wherewith they say they canmake shift, I contend not with them, to debarr
their venient Privilege, or compel them to this better accommodation; Yet I
prescribed the use of them by Mr. Phillips and Mr. Kellet Apothecaries in
little less than desperate Diseases, before any (but seven) that are now
Fellows of our College were Doctors, And have appointed not a few in
consultations with them since I came over; And they have been more appointed by
others since my Proposal of these public ones, then in seven years before.

They say they know them (meaning mine) Why then would they take no Cognizance
of them till the other day, 3. Ans.
notwithstanding the Kings Grant of them, by Order to Sr. Hen, Vain about 10
years since, my Octroy in Holland 4 years since, My Petition in Print, and mine
own mention to some of them, (particularly to Dr. Bates) two years since, and
the Diurnall divulging them half a year since, and lastly 2 several Letters
from the Honorable Committee.

Who is so deaf as they that will not hear?

But how long have they known them? If long they have been so long uncharitable
in concealing them; 4. Ans.
if of late then have they been ignorant of them until now, probably
enlightened or provoked to a further information by my Model or Propositions.
And does it therefore follow, because they know them, the public must want
them? It were far better they were ever ignorant.

Lastly, If the only heart-burning be against me, (though Treasure would not
be refused from a Turk, 5. Ans.
and my long study, experience, and expenses in them might answer their
Comparison) I had rather lay down all my Merit at the feet of the Parliament,
and resign them all my interest (so they would manifest they could do them, and
be oblidged no longer to delay them) than that the Kingdom should be longer
destitute of so great a good; But if they only plead for the Dog in the
Manger, I dare not so neglect my Native Country and mine own Family, as to let
him sleep there.

This will be a Monopoly. 4. Obj.


Can there be a Monopoly of what is not? 1. Ans.


Or where every man is left free to the use of what he has or to refuse what
he has not? 2. Ans.


Or where no sweat of any brow is exacted without hire, 3. Ans.
nor poor man's face ground, nor his Bread engrossed, but rather new
employment, and provisions for their?

Public Works are distinct from Monopolies, 4. Ans*
and are not capable of that Odium.

They are no new Invention. 5. Obj.


In Solomon's time there was nothing new under the Sun, 1. Ans.
Yet what we have not had we yet call new. No question but Trees floated one
the water before Noah built his Arc; Nor was there ought created new for the
Art of Gunns or Printing, and the Loadstone (without doubt) was from the
beginning, though the use but of yesterday,. The water running from Ware in
another Channel is deservedly called the New River, and is so allowed by
Parliament. The very greivance is, that, Bathes having aunciently been of that
admirable use and efficacy for the Good of Mankind, they are yet in England to
be new sought out and Studied.

If they be not new where are there any? 2. Ans.


Public Artificial Bathes and Bath-Houses, 3. Ans.
with their Architecture, Order, Use, Efficacy, Safety; with some of their
Ingredients, and Manner of Decocting them, with their Cisternes, Waterworks,
Hamaccoes etc. are so very new that they are not understood by many when
mentioned, nor the Truth of them believed when affirmed.

They may be occasions of Sin. 6. Obj.


We may with the same reason, 1. Ans.
pluck down Churches, or anathematize all Public Meetings, where Men and
Women appear in the best Clothes and choicest D^esse that can possibly tempt
the Eye, although some are neither handsome nor cleanly all the week after.
Who can answer for the Bathes in Summer setshire, for Innes, for Feastings, for
Tavernes, Victualling-Houses, Alehouses, All Houses?

These will be Public, 2 Ans.
and Public places are not so fit for Wantonness as Private.

Men and Women shall have Places, 3. Ans.
or Times and Attendants of each Sex a part.

Abuse ought not to disanull the use of Good things. 4. Ans.


They are Remedies for the Pex. 7. Obj.


Though Bathes were good for nothing else, 1. Ans.
would the Opposers have the whole World infected for want of them, (for that
is the fear that Rudius mentions) And the chasted bed is not always exempt by
accidental conversations, or bad Deliveries or Childbed. Would they then be
content to have the Pex without Remedy, that will allow no Remedy for it?

Though they were fit Cures for that Disease, 2. Ans.
ought they therefore to be prohibited in all other Diseases? Why do they that
will make these Objections use Purging-baggs and Diet Drinks, Spring or Fall,
whose chief Ingredients are Sarsa Guaja^^m, China. etc, the only known Remedies
(of Vegetables) against that Infection.

Physicians cannot allow the Water-Bathes as fit Indications of cure. 3. Ans.


Good Remedies they are to prevent but not to cure it, 4 Ans.
The reason (perhap^) why the Disease was so unknown to the Ancient, or so
little known to the Turks, and Muscovites, notwithstanding their Luxuries.

The Keepers of the Baths will not so disparage the House, 5. Ans.
displease their Customers, or hazard their own Profit.

The Patients themselves will not seek for Remedy in such Public Places, 6.
Ans.
if they may possibly have it elsewhere. These therefore are only Arguments
against Privat-house or Bawdy House Bathes, or against the use of Tubbs and
Sweating Cradles.

To conclude, the Design of Bathes is Honorable, Useful Necessary.

Honorable in being the Praise and Subject of 30 Le^rned Physicians, and 50
other Famous Authors. Secondly, In being the Work and Glory of many Great and
Mighty Princes and Emperors. The Grand Segnor and Great Duke of Muscovia, not
being ashamed to this day, to own the Patronage and Revenue of them. They
having been (aunciently) had in Divine Reverence, and now are next in esteem
unto their Mosques.

And lastly in making those Places Honorable that have them, and those People
Honorable in Beauty, Stature, and Activity that frequent them.

Useful they are in Health and Sickness. Peace and War, Summer and Winter, so
proved by Authority, Experience and Arguments, when required.

Necessary they are in All Great intentions of Cure, where other Remedies are
nothing beneficial or sufficient, as Pains of the Gowte, Stone, Childbed:
Cure of Many obscure and difficult Diseases in Weomen; Besides Consumptions,
Fevers, Melancholy, Leprosy, Plague, Madness* etc.

To the Candid this is sufficient.

Oh that the Worthies of Parliament (whilst others boast with the Tyrant (Ps.
52.) That ^hey can do evil) would find out ^way to do Great things w^^^
Expedition, and Difficult things with ease, that th^^^^nnes of England might be
cherished, and not make other Nations happy with our Decay.

FINIS.

