THE EARL OF BEDFORDS Passage to the Highest Court of PARLIAMENT, May the
ninth, 1641. about ten a clock in the morning.

Observed by his Lordships Physician Doctor CADEMAN.

LONDON, Printed for Hugh Perry, 1641.

THE EARL OF BEDFORDS PASsage to the highest Court of Parliament.
UPON the sad news of the death of Master Francis Russell at Paris, his father
my most honored Lord of Bedford, told me, that four fair Oaks of his, were
lately blown down as it were altogether; of which subject my Lord made so
moving a discourse, as it seemed to me their extirpation took deep root in
his thoughts. Shortly after my Lord sent for me again, and then complained
that he found his own health somewhat shaken: wherefore to lessen the
maintenance of a future sickness, he desired to resume a vomit, which the last
year had gently cured him of a churlish sickness in the Country: but in
this, both my Lord and my self were willing to ask the counsel and consent
of D. Craige, as well a true friend as a faithful Physician to his Lordship.
He finding him the next day in a feverish disposition, inclined to the letting
of his Lordship blood first, which as it was learnedly proposed, so it was
presently executed Afterward, seeing my Lord continue sick by an oppression
of choler in his stomach, consented to give him his vomit. When that had done
working, as it often happens, nature being discharged of one burden, her self
shakes off another, like Gallens Ass, that was too weak to winch off two
sackes, would never bear one; there flourished in diverse parts of his skin
some red spots, which my Noble Lady Brook, my Lords daughter, and Misteris
Roberts his diligent servant first observed, whereupon my Lord, who ever
considered others safety before his own content, with extraordinary
earnestness forced his dear Lady and Children much against their will to
leave him.

This year has been fertile of wonders, many strange eruptions have been
made in the skin that have desembled the small pox when it proved otherwise,
even to the deceiving of the best Physicians, no dishonor to the profession.

The cleerest knowledge of mankind is clouded with errors in all employments.
An medicina ars non putanda est quam tamen multa fallunt.

My Lord being thus parted from his dearest Lady and children, as a tree
without a bark and branches;

Out of the great zeal the influence of my Lords favors to me, had kindled in
my heart, put me into passion, which if it makes us blind and unable to see
things present, much more it does obscure things far off, and to come. All
that I could do for that time to comfort my Lord and my self, was to say, I
believed it was but a simple boiling of blood, which he had often formerly had,
and had neither the infection nor the peril of the small pox. I endeavored
to be very cheerful with him; having ever found that the speeches of the
Physician, as good and bad aspects to govern and reign much in the hearts and
thoughts of the Patients, and much more with their passions, highten, or lessen
the power of their sickness

Some recover of the Plague, because they never knew they had it, others dye of
a fit of an Ague, because they thought it the Plague: always the small pox
comes soonest out, when it is not thought of within, to the great security of
them that have it, for amongst all good signs in that disease, that is the
best, that they break forth together and quickly; howsoever all exanthemata
and eruptions to the skin require the same cure and (...), except some are
pursued and chafed out with less sev^^^y.

(...) are plants thrive best in the (...); my Lords body was so subtle as he
could scarce endure to be covered up a whole night in his bed.

We can rake up coals in their embers, but flames never.

A faithful servant of his told me, he was so weary of his bed, as he seared
it would be his grave, by these words, I fool away my life to observe the
Physicians; and in my hearing, when he was (...) to rise, he sighed out this
profession of obedience; well then I will die to observe the Physicians.

If I were now upon my death bed, and to declare what my Lord died on, I should
say he died of too much of his bed, and not of the small pox: till
Saterday-night I am sure he had no sign of danger, as I am sure that then
there was no hope of life; nature having given over the field to devotion,
which came in so armed and so invincible as I never yet saw the like, though I
have waited upon many who had no other business of life then to die well, his
breath was spent before his eyes and hands ceased to be lifted up to heaven, as
if his soul would have carried his body along with it.

Thus though he commanded his body to be buried with decency, but not pomp,
yet I could not but publish the glorious manner of his death.

Those that knew the obligations I had to this great and good Lord, will I
presume pardon,

His Lordships constant honourer T. C.

FINIS.

