REVENGE FOR HONOR. A TRAGEDY, BY GEORGE CHAPMAN.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1654.

The Persons Acting.
Almanzor Caliph of Arabia. Abilqualit his eldest Son. Abrahen his Son by a
second Wife, Brother to Abilqualit. Tarifa an old General, Conqueror of Spain,
Tutor to Abilqualit. Mura a rough Lord, a Soldier, Kinsman by his Mother, to
Abrahen. Simanthes a Court-Lord, allied to Abrahen. Selinthus an honest, merry
Court Lord. Mesithes a Court Eunuch, Attendant on Abilqualit. Osman a Captain
to Tarifa. Gaselles another Captain. Caropia Wife to Mura, first beloved of
Abrahen, then of Abilqualit. Perilinda her Woman. Soldiers, Guard. Muts,
Attendants.
PROLOGUE.
O^^ Author thinks it is not in the power of Wit,
Invention, Art, nor Industry, to fit
The several fantasies which in this age
With a predominant humor rule the Stage.
Some men cry out for Satyr, others choose
Merely to story to confine each Muse;
Most like no Play, but such as gives large birth
To that which they judiciously term mirth.
Nor will the best works with their liking crown,
Except 't be graced with part of fool or clown.
Hard and severe the task is then to write,
So as may please each various appetite.
Our Author hopes well though, that in this Play,
He has endeavored so, he justly may
Gain liking from you all, unless those few
Who will dislike, be it never so good, so new;
The rather Gentlemen, he hopes, cause I
Am a main Actor in this Tragedy:
You Have graced me sometimes in another Sphere,
And I do hope you will not dislike me here.
REVENGE FOR HONOR.
ACTUS PRIMUS.
Scena I.
Enter Selinthus, Gaselles, and Osman. Sell. NO murmurings, Noble Captains.


Gas. Murmurings, Cosen? this Peace is worse to men of war and action then
fasting in the face of the fo, or lodging on the cold earth. Give me the Camp,
say I, where in the Sutlers palace on pay-day we may the precious liquor quaff,
and kiss his buxome wife; who though she be not clad in Persian Silks, or
costly Tyrian Purples, has a clean skin, soft thighs, and wholesome corpse, fit
for the trayler of the puissant Pike, to sollace in delight with.


Os. Here in your lewd City, the Harlots do avoid us sons of the Sword, worse
then a severe Officer. Besides, here men of the Shop can gorge their mustie maws
with the delicious Capon, and fat limbs of Mutton large enough to be held
shoulders of the Ram anco^ge the 1^ Signs, while for pure want your soldier
often dines at the charge of the dead, among tombs in the great Mo^que.


Sell. It Is believed Coz, and by the wisest few too, that in the Camp you do not
feed on pleasant: po^lts; a ^allad, and without oil or vinegar, appeases
sometimes your guts, although they keep more noise then a large pool full of
ingendring frogs. Then for accoutrements, you wear the Buff, as you believed it
heresy to change for linen: Surely most of yours is spent in lint, to make
long tents for your green wounds after an onslaught.


Gas Coz. these are sad truths, incident to frail mortals!


Sell. You yet cry out with more eagerness still for new wars, then women for
new fashions.


Os. It Is confessed, Peace is more opposite to my nature, then the running ach
in the rich Usurers feet, when he roars out, as if he were in hell before his
time. Why, I love mischief, Coz, when one may do it securely; to cut throats
with a licencious pleasure; when good men and true o'th Jurie, with their
frostie beards shall not have power to give the noble wesand, which has the
steel defied, to the hanging mercy of the ungracious cord.


Sell. Gentlemen both, and Cozens mine, I do believe 't much pity, to strive to
reconvert you from the faith you have been bred in: though your large discourse
and praise, wherein you magnify your Mistress, War, shall scarce drive me
from my quiet sheets, to sleep upon a turfe. But pray say, Cozens. How do you
like your General, Prince, is he a right Mars?


Gas. As if his Nurse had lapt him in swaddling clouts of steel; a very Hector
and Alcibiades.


Sell. It seems he does not relish these boasted sweets of war: for all his
triumphs, he is reported melancholy.


Os. Want of exercise renders all men of actions, dull as dormise; your Soldier
only can dance to the Drum, and sing a Hymn of joy to the sweet Trumpet:
there is no music like it.


Enter Abrahen, Mura, and Simanthes. Ab. I Will know the cause, he shall deny me
hardly else.


Mu. His melancholy, known whence it rises once, 't may much conduce to help
our purpose.


Gas. Pray Coz. what Lords are these? they seem as full of plot, as General^ are
in Siege, they are very serious.


Sell. That young Stripling is our great Emperors son, by his last wife: that in
the rich Imbroidery's, the Court Hermes; one that has hatched more projects,
then the ovens in Egypt chickens; the other, though they call friends, his mere
opposite Planet Mars, one that does put on a reserved gravitie, which some call
wisdom, the rough Soldier Mura* Governor ^'th' Moroccos.


Os. Him we have heard of before: but Cozen, shall that man of trust, thy tailor,
furnish us with new accoutrements? have thou taken order for them?


Sell. Yes, yes, you shall flourish in fresh habiliments; but you must promise me
not to engage your corporal oaths you will see it satisfied at the next press,
out of the profits that arise from ransom of those rich yeomans heites, that
dare not look the fierce foe in the face.


Gas. Doubt not our truths, though we be given much to contradictions, we will
not pawn oaths of that nature.


Sell. Well then, this note does fetch the garments: meet me Cozens anon at
Supper.


Ex^unt Gas. Os. Os. Honorable Coz* we will come give our thanks.


Enter Abilqualis. Ab. My gracious brother, make us not such a stranger to your
thoughts, to consume all your honors in close retirements; perhaps since you
from Spain returned a victor, with (the worlds conqueror) Alexander, you greive
Nature ordained no other earths to vanquish; if it be so, Princely brother,
we will bear part in your heroique melancholy.


Abil. Gentle youth. press me no farther, I still hold my temper free and
unshaken, only some fond thoughts of trivial moment, call my faculties to
private meditations.


Sim. Howsoever your Highness does please to term them, it is mere melancholy,
which next to sin, is the greatest malady that can oppress man's soul.


Sell. They say right: and that your Grace may see what a mere madness, a very
mid-summer frenzy, it is to be melancholy, for any man that wants no money, I
(with your pardon) will discuss unto you all sorts, all sizes, persons and
conditions, that are infected with it; and the reasons why it in each arises.


Ab. Learned Selinthus, Let Us taste of thy Philosophy


Mu. Pish, It Is unwelcome to any of judgment, this fond prate* I marvel that
our Emperor dos permit fools to abound in the Court!


Sell. What makes your grave Lordship in it, I do beseech you? But Sir, mark me,
the kernel of the text enucleated, I shall confute, refute, repel, refel,
explode, exterminate, expunge, extinguish like a rush candle, this same
heresy, that is shot up like a pernicious Mushroom, to poison true humanity.


Ab. You shall stay and hear a lecture read on your disease; you shall, as I
love virtue.


Sell. First the cause then from whence this flatus Hypocondriacus, this
glimmering of the gizard (for in wild fowl, it is termed so by Hyp^crates)
arises, is as Averroes and Avicen, with Abenbucar, Baruch and Aboflii, and all
the Arabic writers have affirmed, a mere defect, that is as we interpret* a
want of --


Abil. Of what, Selinthus?


Sell. Of wit, and please your Highness, That is the cause in general, for
particular and special causes, they are all derived from several wants; yet
they must be considerd, pondred, perpended, or premeditated.


Sim. My Lord, y'ad best be brief, your Patient will be weary else.


Sell. I cannot play the fool rightly, I mean* the Physician without I have
license to expalcat on the disease. But (my good Lord) more briefly, I shall
declare to you like a man of wisdom and no Physician, who deal all in simples,
why men are melancholy. First, for your Courties,


Sim. It concerns us all to be attentive, Sir.


Sell. Your sage and serious Courtier, who does walk with a State face, as he
had dressed himself in the Emperors glass, and had his beard turned up by the'
irons Roial, he will be as pensive as Stallion after Catum, when he wants
suits, begging suits, I mean* Me thinks, (my Lord) you are grown something
solemn on the sudden; since your Monopolies and Patents, which made your purse
swell like a wet sponge, have been reduced to the last gasp. Troth, it is far
better to confess here, then in a worser place. Is it not so indeed?


Abil. What ere he does by mine, I Am sure h'as hit the cause from whence your
grief springs, Lord Simanthes.


Sell. No Egyptian Soothsayer has truer inspirations, then your small Courtiers
from causes and wants manifold; as when the Emperors countenance with
propitious noise does not cry chink in pocket, no repute is with Mercer, nor
with Tailor; nay sometimes too the humor's pregnant in him, when repulse is
given him by a Beauty: I can speak this though from no Memphian Priest, or
sage Caldean, from the best Mistress (Gentlemen) an Experience. Last night I had
a mind t'a comely Semstress, who did refuse me, and behold, ere since how like
an Ass I look.


Enter Tarifa. Tar. What, at your Counsels, Lords? the great Almanzor requires
your presence, Mura; has decreed the War for Persia. You (my gracious Lord)
Prince Abilqualet, are appointed Chief: And you, brave spirited Abrahen, an
Assistant to your victorious Brother: You, Lord Mura, destined Lieutenant
General.


Abil. And must I march against the foe, without thy company? I relish not the
employment.


Tar. Alas, my Lord, Tarifa's head's grown white beneath his helmet; and your
good Father thought it charity to spare mine age from travel: though this ^ase
will be more irksome to me then the toil of war in a sharp winter.


Abr. It arrives just to our wish. My gracious brother, I anon shall wait on
you: mean time, valiant Mura, let us attend my Father.


Exeunt Ab. Mura, Sim. Abil. Good Selinthus, vouchsafe a while your absence, I
shall have employment shortly for your trust.


Sell. Your Grace shall have as much power to command Selinthus, as his best
fancied Mistress. I am your creature.

Exit.
Tar. Now, my Lord, I hope you are clothed with all those resolutions that usher
glorious minds to brave a^chievements. The happy genius on your youth attendant
declares it built for Victories and Triumphs; and the proud Persian Monarchy,
the sole emulous opposer of the Arabique Greatness, eourts (like a fair Bride)
your Imperial Arms, waiting to invest You Sovereign of her beauties. Why are
you dull (my Lord?) Your cheerful looks should with a prosperous augury presage
a certain Victory: when you droop already, as if the foe had ravished from your
Crest the noble Palm. For shame (Sir) be more sprightly; your sad appearance,
should they thus behold you, would half unsoul your Army,


Abil. It Is no matter, Such looks best suit my fortune. Know ( Tarifa) I Am
undispos'd to manage this great Voyage, and must not undertake it.


Tar. Must not, Sir! Is It possible a lovesick youth, whose hopes are fixed on
marriage, on his bridal night should in soft slumbers languish? that your Arms
should rust in ease, now when you hear the charge, and see before you the
triumphant Prize destined to adorn your Valor? You should rather be furnished
with a power above these passions; and being invoked by the mighty charm of
Honor, fly to atchieve this war, not undertake it. I Would rather you had said,
Tarifa ly'd, then uttered such a sound, harsh and unwelcome.


Abil. I know thou love me truly, and durst I to any born of woman, speak my
intentions, the fatal cause which does withdraw my courage from this
employment, which like health I covet, thou should enjoy it fully. But (
Tarifa) the said discov'ry of it is not fit for me to utter, much less for thy
virtue to be acquainted with.


Tar. Why (my Lord?) my loyalty can merit no suspicion from you of falsehood:
whatsoere the cause be or good, or wicked, 't meets a trusty silence, and my
best care and honest counsel shall endeavor to reclaim, or to assist you if it
be good, if ill, from your bad purpose.


Abil. Why, that I know ( Tarifa.) It Is the love thou bear to honor,
renders thee unapt to be partaker of those resolutions that by compulsion keep
me from this Voyage: For they with such inevitable sweetness invade my sense,
that though in their performance my Fame and Virtue even to death do languish,
I must attempt, and bring them unto act, or perish in the pursuance.


Tar. Heaven avert a mischief so prodigious. Though I would not with
over-sawcie boldness press your counsels; yet pardon (Sir) my Loialtie, which
^imorous of your loved welfare, must entreat, beseech you with ardent love and
reverence, to disclose the hidden cause that can estrange your courage from its
own Mars, withold you from this Action so much allied to honor: Pray reveal
it: By all your hopes of what you hold most precious, I do implore it; for my
faith in breeding your youth in wars great rudiments, relieve Tarifa's fears,
that wander into strange unwelcome doubts, left some ambitious frenzy against
your imperial fathers dignity has late seduced your goodness.


Abr. No, Tarifa, I never durst aim at that unholy height in viperous
wickedness; a sinlesse, harmless (ift can be truly termed one) it is my soul
labors even to despair with: t'faine would out, did not my blushes interdict
my language: it is unchaste love, Tarifa; nay, take it all, and when thou have it,
pity my misfortunes, to fair Caropia, the chaste, virtuous wife to surly Mura.


Tar. What a fool Desire is! with Giant strengths it makes us court the
knowledge of hidden mysteries, which once revealed, far more inconstant then the
air, it fleets into new wishes, that the coveted secret had slept still in
oblivion.


Abil. I was certain 'twould fright thy innocence, and look to be besieged
with strong disswasions from my purpose: but be assured, that I have tired my
thoughts with all the rules that ^each men moral goodness, so to reclaim them
from this lovesick looseness; but they (like wholesome medicines misaplied)
faced their best operation, fond and fruitless. Though I as well may hope to
kiss the Sunbeams 'cause they shine on me, as from her to gain one g^ance of
comfort; yet my mind, that pities it self with constant tenderness, must needs
revolve the cause of its calamity, and melt in the pleasure of so sweet a
sadness.


Tar. Then you are undone for ever; Sir, undon beyond the help of council or
repentance. It Is most ignoble, that a mind unshaken by fear, should by a vain
desire be broken; or that those powers no labor e're could vanquish, should be
overcome and thral'd by sordid pleasure. Pray (Sir) consider, that in glorious
war, which makes Ambition (by base men termed ^in) a big and gallant Virtue,
you have been nursed, lulled (as it were) into your infant sleeps by the surly
noise of the trumpet, which n^w summons you to victorious use of your
indowments: and shall a Mistrisse stay you! such a one too, as to attempt, then
war it self's more dangerous!


Abil. All these persuasions are to as much purpose, as you should strive to
reinvest with peace, and all the joys of health and life, a soul condemned to
perpe^uity of torments. No (my Tarifa) though through all disgraces, loss of
my honor, fame, nay hope for Empire, I should be forced to wade to obtain her
love; those seas of mischief would be pleasing streams, which I would have to
bath in, and pass through them with that delight thou would to victory, or
slaves long chained to'th' oar, to sudden freedom^.


Tar. Were you not Abilqualit, from this time then our friendships (like two
rivers from one head rising) should wander a dissever'd course, and never meet
again, unless to quarrel. Nay, old and stiff, now as my iron garments, were
you my son, my sword should teach your wildness a swift way to repentance.
You Are my Prince, on whom all hopes depend; think on your Father, that lively
Image of majestic goodness, who never yet wronged Matron in his lust, or man
in his displeasure. Pray conjecture your Father, Country, Army, by my mouth
beseech your piety to an early pity of your yet unslain Innocence. No
attention! Farwell: my prayers shall wait you, though my Counsels be thus
despised. Farwell Prince!

Exit.
Abil. Alas good man, he weeps. Such tears I Have seen fall from his manly eyes
once when ye lost a battle. Why should I put off my Reason, Valor, Honor,
Virtue, in hopes to gain a Beauty, whose possession renders me more incapable
of peace, then I am now I want it? Like a sweet, much coveted banquet, it is no
sooner tasted, but it is delicious luxury's forgotten. Besides, it is unlawful.
Idle fool, there is no law, but what is prescribed by Love, Natures first moving
Organ; nor can ought what Nature dictates to us be held vicious. On then, my
soul, and destitute of fears, like an adventrous Mariner, that knows storms
must attend him, yet dares court his peril, strive to obtain this happy Port.
Mesith^s (Loves cunning Advocate) does for me besiege (with gifts and vows) her
Chastity. She is compassed with flesh, that is not invulnerable, and may by
Love's sharp darts be pierced. They stand firm, whom no art can bring to Love's
command.


Enter Abrahen, Abr. My gracious brother!


Abil. Dearest Abrahen, welcome. It Is certainly decreed by our dread Father, we
must both march against the insulting foe. How does thy youth, yet uninur'd to
travel, relish the Imploiment?


Abr. War is sweet to those that never have experienced it. My youth cannot
desire in that big Art a nobler Tutor then you (my Brother^) Like an Eglet
following her dam, I shall your honored steps trace through all dangers, and
be proud to borrow a branch, when your head's coverd ore with Laurel, to deck
my humbler temples.


Abil. I do know thee of valiant active soul; and though a youth, thy forward
spirit merits the Command of Chief, rather then Second in an Army. Would
heaven our Roial Father had bestowed on thee the Charge of General.


Abr. On me, Sir! Alas, it is fit I first should know those Arts that do
distinguish Valor from wild rashness. A General (Brother) must have abler
nerves of Judgment, then in my youth can be hoped for. Your self already like a
flourishing Spring teeming with early Victories, the Soldier expects should
lead them to new Triumphs, as if you had vanquished fortune.


Abil. I am not so ambitious ( Abrahen) of particular glories, but I would have
those whom I love partake them. This Persian war, the last of the whole East
left to be managed, if I can persuade the great Almanzor, shall be the trophee
of thy yet maiden Valor. I have done enough already to inform Succession, that
Abilqualit durst on fiercest foes run to fetch Conquest home, and would have
thy name as great as mine in Arms, that History might register, our Family
abounded with Heroes, born for Victory.


Abr. It Is an honor, which, though it be above my powers, committed to my
direction, I would seek to manage with care above my years, and courage equal
to his, that dares the horrid'st face of danger: But it is your noble courtesy
would thrust this mas^'line honor (far above his merits) on your regardless
Brother; for my Father, he has no thought tending to your intentions; nor
though your goodness should desire, would hardly be won to yield consent to
them.


Abil. Why, my Abrahen, we are both his sons, and should be both alike dear to's
affections; and though birth has given me the larger hopes and Titles, 'twere
unnatural, should he not strive to indow thee with a portion apted to the
magnificence of his Offspring. But thou perhaps art timorous, lest thy first
essays of valor should meet fate disastrous. The bold are Fortunes darlings.
If thou have courage to venture on this great imploiment, doubt not, I shall
prevail upon our Father to ordain thee Chief in this brave hopeful Voyage.


Abr. You imagine me beyond all thought of gratitude; and doubt not that I Will
deceive your trust. The glorious Ensigns waving in the air once, like so many
Comets, shall speak the Persians funerals, on whose ruins we will build to Fame
and Victory new temples, which shall like Pyramids preserve our memories, when
we are changed to ashes.


Abil. Be sure, continue in this brave mind; I Will instantly solicit our
Father to confirm thee in the Charge of General, I Will about it.

Exit.
Abr. Farewell gracious Brother. This haps above my hopes. Alas, good dull fool,
I see through thy intents, clear, as thy soul were as transparent as thin air
or Cristal. He would have me removed, march with the Army, that he mean time
might make a sure defeat on our aged fathers life and Empire: 't must be
certain as the light. Why should not this with equal heat, be like my
thoughts, ambitious? Be they as harmless as the prai'rs of Virgins, I Will work
his ruin out of his intentions. He like a thick cloud stands 'twixt me and
Greatness: Greatness, the wise man's true felicity, Honor's direct
inheritance. My youth will quit suspicion of my subtle practice: then have I
surly Mura and Simanthes, my allies by my dead Mothers blood, my assistants,
his Eunuch too Mesithes at my service. Simanthes shall inform the King, the
people desire Prince Abilqualit's stay; and Mura whose blunt demeanor renders
him oraculous, make a shrewd inference out of it. He is my half Brother, the
other's my Father; names, mere airie titles! Soveraigntie's only sacred,
Greatness goodness, true self-affection Justice, every thing righteous that is
helpful to create a King.


Enter Mura, Simanthes. Abr. My trusty friends, you are welcome: our fate's
above our wishes; Abilqualit by whatso'ere power moved to his own ruin, would
fain enforce his charge of General on me, and stay at home.


Sim. Why, how can this conduce to advance our purpose?


Abr. It Is the mainest engine could ever move to ruin him. Simanthes, you shall
inform our Father, it is the people out of their tender love desires his stay.
You ( Mura) shall infer my Brothers greatness with people; out of it, how nice
it is and dangerous. The air is open here; come, we will discourse with more
secure privacie our purpose. No^hing's unjust, unsacred, tends to advance us to
a Kingdom; that is the height of chance.


ACTUS SECUNDUS.
Scena I.
Enter Almanzor, Mura, and Simanthes. Al. HOw? not go, Simanthes?


Sim. My dread Sovereign, I speak but what the well affected people out of
their loyal care and pious duty enjoined me utter: they do look upon him as on
your eldest Son, and next Successor, and would be loath the Persian War should
rob their eyes of light, their souls of joy and comfort, this flourishing
Empire leave as it were widowed of its loved Spouse: They humbly do beseech
your Majesty would therefore destine some more fitting General, whose loss (as
heaven avert such a misfortune) should it happen, might less concern the State.


Al. It Is not the least among the blessings Heaven has showered upon us, that we
are happy in such loving Subjects, to govern whom, when we in peace are ashes,
we leave them a Successor whom they truly reverence: A loving people and a
loving Sovereign makes Kingdoms truly fortunate and flourishing. But I believe
( Simanthes) their intents, though we confirm them, will scarce take effect: My
Abilqualit (like a Princely Lion, in view of's prey) will scarcely be orecom to
leave the honor of the Persian War, in's hopes already vanquished by his
valor* and rest in lazy quiet, while that Triumph is ravished by another.


Sim. With the pardon of your most sacred Majesty, it is fit then your great
commands forbid the Princes Voyage: boldness inforces youth to hard
achievements before their time, makes them run forth like Lapwing^ from their
warm nest, part of the shel yet sticking unto their downie heads. Sir, good
success is often more fatal far then bad; one winning ^^st from a flattering Di^
tempting a Gameste^ to hazard his whole fortunes.


Mur. This is dull, fruitless Philosophy, he that falls nobly winns as much
honor by his loss, as conquest.


Sim. This rule may hold well among common men, but not among Princes. Such a
prince as ours is, who knows as well to conquer men's affections as he does
enemies, should not be exposed to every new cause, honorable danger. Prince
Abilqualit's fair and winning carriage has stolen possession of the peoples
hearts, they doat on him since his l^te Spanish conquest, as new made brides
on their much coveted husbands; and they would pine like melancholy turtles,
should they so soon lose the unvalued object both of their love and reverence:
Howsoever, what ere your awful will (Sir) shall determine, as heaven, is by
their strict obedience held sacred and religious.


Al. Good Simanthes, let them receive our thanks for their true care of our
dear Abilqualit. We Will consider of their request, say.


Sim. Your highness humblest creature.

Exit.
Mu. I do not like this.


Al. Like what? Valiant Mura, we know thy counsels so supremely wise, and thy
true heart so excellently faithful, that whatsoere displeases thy sage
Judgment, Almanzor's wisdom must account distastful. What is it dislikes thee?


Mu. Your Majesty knows me a downright Soldier, I affect not words; but to be
brief, I relish not your son should (as if you were in your tomb already)
ingross so much the giddie peoples favors. It Is neither fit for him, nor safe
for you to suffer it.


Al. Why, how can they, Mura, Give a more serious testimony of reverence to me,
then by conferring their affections, their pious wishes, zealous contemplations
on him that sits the nearest to my heart, my Abilqualit, in whose hopeful
virtues my age more glorious then in all my conquests?


Mu. May you prove fortunate in your pio^s care of the Prince Abilqualit. But
(my Lord) Mura is not so prone to idle language (the Parasits best ornament) to
utter o^ght, but what (if you will please to give him audience he will show you a
blunt reason for.


Al. Come, I see into thy thoughts, good Mura; too much car^ of us, informs thy
loyal soul with fears the Princes too much popularity may breed our danger:
banish those suspicions; neither dare they who under my long reign have been
triumphant in so many blessings, have the least thought may tend to
disobedience: or if they had, my Abilqualit's goodness would never consent
with them to become impious.


Mu. It Is too secure a confidence betrays minds valiant to irreparable dangers.
Not that I dare invade with a foul thought the noble Princes loyalty; but (my
Lord) when this same many headed beast (the people) violent, and so not
constant in affections, subject to love of novelty, the sickness proper ^'all
humane specially light natures, do magnify with too immoderate praises the
Princes actions, doat upon his presence, nay chain their souls to th'shadow
of his footsteps, as all excesses ought to be held dangerous, especially when
they do aim at Scepters, their too much dotage speaks, you in their wishes are
dead already, that their darling hope the Prince might have the Throne once.


Al. It Is confessed, all this a serious truth.


Mu. Their mad applauses oth'noble Prince, though he be truly virtuous, may
force ambition into him, a mischief Seasing the soul with too much craft and
sweetness, as pride or lust does minds unstay'd and wanton: 'tmakes men like
poisoned rats, which when they'ave swallowed the pleasing bane, rest not until
they drink, and can rest then much less, until they burst with it.


Al. Thy words are still oraculous.


Mu. Pray then think with what an easy toil the haughty Prince, a demi God by
the popular acclamations, nay, the world's Sovereign in the vulgar wishes, had
he a resolution to be wicked, might snatch this diadem from your aged temples?
What law so holy, tie of blood so mighty, which for a Crown, minds sanctified
and religious have not presumed to violate? How much more then may the soul
dazzling glories of a Scepter work in his youth, whose constitution's fiery, as
overheated air, and has to fan it into a flame, the breath of love and praises
blown by strong thought of his own worth and actions.


Al. No more of this, good Mura.


Mu. They dare already limit your intentions, demand (as 'twere) with cunning
zeal (which rightly interpreted, is insolence) the Princes abode at home. I will
not say it is, but I guess, 'tmay be their subtle purpose while we abroad fight
for new kingdoms purchase deprived by that means of our faithful succors, they
may deprive you of this crown, enforce upon the prince this Diadem; which
however he may be loath to accept, being once possessed often and tasted the
delights of supreme greatness, he will be more loath to part with. To prevent
this, not that I think it will, but that may happen, it is fit the Prince march.
I'ave observed in him too of late a sullen Melancholy, whence rising i will not
conjecture; only I should grieve, Sir, beyond a moderate sorrow, traitorous
practice should take that from you which with loyal blood ours and your own
victorious arms have purchased. and now I have discharged my honest conscience
censure on it as you please; henceforth I Am silent.


Al. Would thou had been so now, thy loyal fears have made me see how
miserable a King is, whose rule depends on the vain people suffrage. Black now
and horrid as the face of storms appears al Abilqualits lovely virtues, because
to me they only make him dangerous, and with great terror shall behold those
actions which with delight before we viewed, and dotage; like Mariners that
bless the peaceful seas, which when suspected to grow up tempest^ous, they
tremble at. Though he may still be virtuous, it is wisdom in us, to him no
injustice, to keep a vigilant eye over his proceedings and the wild peoples
purposes.


Enter Abil. Al. Abilqualit! come to take your leave, I do conjecture.


Abil. Rather, Sir, to beg your gracious license, I may still at home attend
your dread commands, and that you would please to nominate my hopeful brother
Abrahen (in lieu of me) chief of your now raised Forces for the Persian
expedition.


Al. Dare you (Sir) presume to make this suit to us?


Abil. Why? (my roial Lord) I hope this cannot pull your anger on your most
obedient Son: a true affection to the young Prince my brother, did beget this
my request; I willingly would have his youth adorned with glory of this
conquest. No tree bears fruit in Autumn, 'less it blossom first in the Spring;
it is fit he were acquainted in these soft years with military action, that when
grown perfect man, he may grow up too perfect in warlike discipline.


Al. Hereafter we shall by your appointment guide our Counsels. Why do you not
entreat me to resign my Crown, that you the peoples much loved minion may
with it impale your glorious brow? Sir, henceforth or know your duty better, or
your pride shall meet our just waked anger. To your Charge, and march with
speed, or you shall know what it is to disobey our pleasure. When you are King,
learn to command your Subjects; I will mine (Sir.) You know your Charge,
perform it.


Exit Alm. and Mura. Abil. I have done. Our hopes (I see) resemble much the
Sun, that rising and declining cast large shadows; but when his beams are
dressed in's midday brightness, yields none at all: when they are farthest
from success, their guilt reflection does display the largest shows of events
fair and prosperous. With what a settled confidence did I promise my self, my
stay here, Mura's wished departure? when stead of these, I find my fathers
wrath destroying mine intentions. Such a fool is self-compassion, soothing us
to faith of what we wish should hap* while vain desire of things we have not,
makes us quite forget those we are possessed of.


Enter Abrahen. Abr. Alone the engine works beyond or hope or credit. How I hug
with vast delight, beyond that of stolen pleasures forbidden Lovers taste, my
darling Mistress, my active Brain! If I can be thus subtle while a young
Serpent, when grown up a Dragon how glorious shall I be in cunning practice? My
gracious brother!


Abil. Gentle Abrahen. I am grieved my power cannot comply my promise: my
Father's so averse from granting my request concerning thee, that with angry
frowns he did express rather a passionate rage, then a refusal civil, or
accustomed to his indulgent disposition.


Abr. He Is our Father, and so the tyrant Custom does enforce us to yield him
that which fools call natural, when wise men know it is more then servile duty,
a slavish, blind obedience to his pleasure, be it nor just, nor honorable.


Abil. O my Abrahen, these sounds are unharmonious, as unlookt for from thy
unblemished innocence: though he could put off paternal piety, 't gives no
privilege for us to wander from our filial duty: though harsh, and to our
natures much unwelcom be his decrees, like those of Heaven, we must not presume
to question them.


Abr. Not, if they concern our lives and fortunes? It Is not for my self I urge
these doubts; but it is for you, who are my Brother, and I hope, must be my
Sovereign, my fears grow on me almost to distraction: Our Father's age
betrays him to a dotage, which may be dangerous to your future safety; he
does suspect your loyalty.


Abil. How, Abrahen?


Ab. I knew 'twould start your innocence; but it is truth, a sad and serious
truth; nay his suspicion almost arrived unto a settled faith that you are
ambitious.


Abil. It Is impossible.


Ab. The glorious shine of your illustrious virtues are grown too bright and
dazzling for his eyes to look on as he ought, with admiration; and he with fear
beholds them, as it were, through a perspective, where each brave action of
yours surveyed though at remotest distance, appears far greater then it is. In
brief, that love which you have purchased from the people that sing glad Hymns
to your victorious fortunes, betraies you to his hate; and in this Voyage which
he inforces you to undertake, he has set spies upon you.


Abil. It Is so: afflictions do fall like hailstones, one no sooner drops, but a
whole Shower does follow. I observed indeeed, my Abrahen, that his looks and
language was dressed in unaccustomed clouds, but did not imagine they would
presaged so fierce a tempest. Ye gods, why do you give us gifts and graces,
share your own attributes with men, your virtues, when they betray them to
worse hate then vices? But Abrahen, prithee reconfirm my fears by testimonial
how this can be truth; for yet my innocence with too credulous trust sooths up
my soul, our father should not thus put that off which does make him so, his
sweetness, to feed the irregular flames of false suspicions and soul
tormenting jealousies.


Ab. Why, to me, to me (my Lord) he did with strong Injunctions give a
solicitous charge to overlook your actions. My Abrahen (quoth he) I Am not so
unhappie, that like thy brother thou should be ambitious, who does affect,
before thy aged Fathers ashes, with greedy lust my Empire. Have a strict and
cautious diligence to observe his carriage, 'twil be a pious care. Moved with
the base indignity, that he on 'me should force the office of a spy; your spy,
my noble and much loved brother: my best manhood scarce could keep my angry
tears in; I resolved I was in duty bound to give you early intelligence of his
unjust intentions, that you in wisdom might prevent all dangers might fall
upon you from them, like swift lightning, killing 'cause they invade with
sudden fierceness


Abil. In afflicting me, misery is grown witty.


Ab. Nay besides (Sir) the sullen Mura has the self same charge too consigned
and settled on him; which his blind duty will execute. O brother, your soft
passive nature, does like jet on fire when oils cast on it, extinguish:
otherwise, this base suspicion would inflame your sufferance, nay make the
purest loyalty rebellious. However, though your too religious piety forces you
'ndure this foul disgrace with patience, look to your safety, brother, that
dear safety which is not only yours, but your whole Empires: for my part, if a
faithful brothers service may ought avail you, tho against our father, since
he can be so unnaturally suspicious, as your own thoughts, command it.


Enter Selinthus and Mesithes. Sell. Come, I know, although thou have lost some
implements of manhood may make thee gracious in the sight of woman, yet thou have
a little engine, called a tongue, by which thou can overcome the nicest female,
in the behalf of friend. Insooth, you Eunuchs may well be styled Pimps-royal,
for the skill you have in quaint procurement.


Mes. Your Lordship's merry, and would enforce on me what has been your office
far oftener than the cunningst Squire belonging to the smock transitory. May't
please your Highness.


Abil. Ha! Mesithes.


Ab. His countenance varies strangely, some affair the Eunnch gives him notice
of, 't should seem, begets much pleasure in him.


Abil. Is this truth? Mes. Else let me taste your anger.


Abil. My dear Abrahen, we will march to night, prithee give speedy Notice to
our Lieutenant Mura, to collect the forces from their several quarters, and
draw them into Battalia on the plain behind the City, lay a strict command he
stir not from the Ensigns til our self arrive in person there. Be speedy,
brother, a little hasty business craves our presence. We will anon be with you,
my Methises.


Exeunt Abil. and Mes. Sell. Can your grace imagine whether his highness goes
now?


Ab. No, Selinthus; can thou conjecture at the Eunuchs business? what ere it
was, his countenance seemed much altered: Il'd give a talent to have certain
knowledge what was Mesithes message.


Sell. I Will inform you at a far easier rate. Mesithes business certes concerned
a limber pett^coate, and the smock soft and slipperie; on my honor, has been
providing for the Prince, some female that he takes his leave of Ladies flesh
ere his departure.


Ab. Not improbable, it may be so.


Sell. Nay, certain (Sir) it is so: and I believe, your little body earnes
after the same sport. You were once reported a wag would have had business of
ingendring with surly Mura's Lady: and men may conjectute you are no chaster then
a vot'rie: yet though she would not solace your desire^, there are as handsome
Ladies will be proud to have your Grace inoculate their stock^ with your
graft-royal.


Ab. Thou art Selinthus still, and wilt not change thy humor. I must go and find
out Mura; so farwell Selinthus, thou art not for these wars, I know.

Exit.
Sell. No truly, nor yet for any other, 'less't be on a naked yiedling enemy;
though there may be as hot service upon such a foe as on those clad in steel:
the little squadron, we civil men assault body to body, often carry wildfire*
about them privately, that ^indges us in the service from the crown even to the
sole, nay sometimes hair and all off. But these are transitory perils. Enter
Gasilles, Osman. Couzens, I thought you had been dancing to the drum. Your
General has given order for a march this night, I can assure you.


Gas. It is Cousen, something of the soonest; but we are prepared at all times
for the journey.


Sell. To morrow morning may serve the turn though. Hark you, Couzens mine; if
in this Persian War you chance to take a handsome she Captive, pray you be not
unmindfull of us your friends at home; I will disburse her ransom, Couzens,
for I Have a months mind to try if strange flesh, or that of our own Country has
the compleater relish.


Os. We will accomplish thy pleasure, noble Cousen.


Sell. But pray do not take the first say of her your selves. I do not love to
walk after any of my kindred in the path of copulation.


Gas. The first fruits shall be thy own, dear Couz. But shall we part (never
perhaps to meet again) with dry lips, my right honored Coz?


Sell. By no means, though by the Alcharon wine be forbidden, you Soldiers in
that case make it not your faith. Dr^nk water in the Camp, when you can purchase
^o other liquor; here you shall have plenty ^f wine, old and delic^ous. I Will be
your leader, and bring you on, let who will bring you off. To the encounter,
come let us march, Couzens.


Exeunt Omnes. Song. Scena Secunda.
Enter Abilqualit, Caropia, and Mesithes, Perilinda. Car. No more, my gracious
Lord, where real love is needless are all expressions ceremonious: the amorous
Turtles, that at first acquaintance strive to express in murmuring notes their
loves, do when agreed on their affections change their chirps to billing*


Abil. And in feathered arms incompasse mutually their gaudy necks.


Mes: How do you like these love tricks, Perilinda?


Per. Very well; but one may sooner hope from a dead man to receive kindness,
than from thee, an Eunuch.^ You are the coldest creatures in the bodies, no
snow-balls like you.


Mes. We must needs, who have not that which like fire should warm our
constitutions, the instruments of copulation, girl, our toys to please the
Ladies.


Abil. Caropia, in your well becoming pity of my extreme afflictions and stern
sufferings, you have shown that excellent mercy as must render what ever action
you can fix on, virtuous. But Lady, I till now have been your tempter, one that
desired hearing, the brave resistance you made my brother, when he wooed your
love, only to boast the glory of a conquest which seemed impossible, now I have
gained it by being vanquisher, I my self am vanquished your everlasting Captive.


Car. Then the thraldom will be as prosperous as the pleasing bondage of
palms, that flourish most when bowd down fastest; Constraint makes sweet and
easy things laborious, when love makes greatest miseries seem pleasures. Yet
'twas ambition (Sir) joined with affection that gave me up a spoil to your
temptations. I was resolved, if ever I did make a breach on matrimonial faith,
't should be with him that was the darling of kind fortune as well as liberal
nature; who possessed the height of greatness to adorn his beauty; which since
they both conspire to make you happy, I thought 't would be a greater sin to
suffer your hopeful person, born to sway this Empire, in loves hot flames to
languish, by refusal to a consuming fever* then t'infringe a vow which never
proceeded from my heart when I unwillingly made it.


Abil. And may break it with confidence, secure from the least guilt, as if 't
had only in an idle dream been by your fancy plighted. Madam, there can be no
greater misery in love, than separation from the object which we affect; and
such is our misfortune we must ith'infancy of our desires breath at unwelcome
distance; ith'mean time, lets make good use of the most precious minutes we have
to spend together.


Car. Else we were unworthy to be titled lovers; but I fear loathed Mura may
with swift approach disturb our happiness.


Abil. By my command he is mustring up our forces. Yet Mesithes, go you to
Abrahen, and with intimations from us, strengthen our charge. Come my Caropia,
love's wars are harmless, for who ere does yield, gains as much honor as who
wins the field.


ACTUS TERTIUS
SCENA I.
Enter Abilqualit and Caropia, as rising from bed, Abrahen without, Perili^^a.
ABr. Open the door, I must and ^ill have entrance unto the Prince my brother,
as y^^ love your life and safety and that Ladies ^^nor, whom you are lodged in
amorous twi^^s* with, do not deny me entrance to you, I am Abra^^n, your loyal
brother Abrahen.


Abil. It Is his voice, and there can be no danger in it, Caropia, be not
dismayed, though we are to him discovered. your fame shall taste no blemish by it.
Now brother, it is something rude in you, thus violently to press upon our
privacies.


Abr. My affection shall be my Advocate, and plead my care of your loved
welfare, as you love your honor, haste from this place, or you will betray the
Lady to ruin most inevitable. Her husband has notice of your being here, and's
coming on wings of jealousy and desperate rage to intercept you in your close
delights. In brief, I over heard a trusty Servant of his ith'Camp come and
declare your highness was private with Caropia: at which tidings the sea with
greater haste when vexed with tempests, so sudden and boystrous, flies not
toward the shore, then he intended homewards. He by this needs must have
gained the City; for with all my power I hasted hitherward, that by your
absence you might prevent his veiw of you.


Abil. Why? the slave dare not invade my person, had he found me in fair
Caropias arms: 'twould be ignoble, now I have caused her danger, should I not
defend her from his violence. I Will stay though he come armed with thunder.


Abr. That will be a certain means to ruin her: To me count that cure, I Will
stand between the Lady, and Mura's fury, when your very sight, giving fresh
fire to th'injury, will incense him against her beyond all patience.


Car. Nay, besides his violent wrath breaking through his allegiance, may riot
on your person. Dear my Lord withdraw your self, there may be some excuse when
you are absent thought on, to take off Mura's suspicion: by our loves, depart I
do beseech you. Hapless I was born to be most miserable.


Abil. You shall overruled me* Better it is for him with unhallowed hands to
act a sacriledg on our Prophets tom then to profane this purity with the le^^^
offer of injury; be careful Abrahen, to thee I leave my heart. Farwell Car^^ia,
your tears enforce my absence.

Exit. Abil.
Abr. Pray have my Lord lest you should meet the enraged Mur. now Madam where
are the boasted glories of that v^^tue, which like a faithful Fort withstood m^
bat^^ries? demolished now, and ruined they app^^r; like a fair building toter'd
from its b^^^ by an unruly whirlewind, and are no instead of love the objects
of my pity


Car. I Am bound to thank you Sir ^et credit me; my sin's so pleasing't 'cannot
meet re^^^ntance. Were Mura here, and armed with al^ the horrors ^age could
invest his powers with; not forgiven Hermits with greater peace shall have t^
death, then I to be the Martyr of this cause, which I so love and reverence.


Abr. It Is a noble and well becoming constancy, and merits a lover of those
Supreme eminent graces, that do like full winds swel the glorious Sails of
Abilqualit's dignity and beauty! yet Madam, let me tell you, though I could
not envy my brothers happiness, if he could have enjoyed your priceless love
with safety, free from discovery, I am afflicted beyond a moderate sorrow,
that my youth which with as true a zeal, courted your love, should appear so
contemptible to receive a killing scorn from you: yet I forgive you, and do so
much respect your peace, I wish you had not sinned so carelessly to be betrayed
in the first fruitions of your wishes to your suspicious husband.


Car. It Is a fate Sir, which I must stand, though it come dressed in flames,
killing as circular fire, and as prodigious as death presaging Comets: there is
that strength in love, can change the pitchie face of dangers to pleasing
forms, make ghastly fears seem beauteous; and I Am resolved, since the sweet
Prince is free from Mura's anger, which might have been fatal if he should here
have found him, unresistless I dare his utmost fury.


Abr. 'Twil bring death with it sure as stifling dampe; and 'twere much pity so
sweet a beauty should unpitied fall, betrayed to endless infamy; your
husband knows only that my brother in your chamber was entertained; the
servant that betrayed you, curse on his diligence, could not affirm he saw you
twined together: yet it is death by the law, you know, for any Lady at such an
hour, and in her husbands absence* to entertain a stranger.


Car. It Is considered Sir, and since I cannot live to enjoy his love, I Will meet
my death as willingly as I met Abilqualit's dear embraces.


Abr. That were too severe a cruelty. Live Caropia, til the kind destinies
take the loathed Mura to their eternal Mansions, til he fall either in war a
sacrifice to fortune, or else by stratagem take his destruction from angry
Abilqualit, whose fair Empress you were created for: there is a mean yet to
save the opinion of your honor spotless, as that of Virgin innocence, nay to
preserve, (though he does know (as certainly he must do) my Brother have
enjoyed thee) thee still precio^s in his deluding fancy.


Car. Let me adore you if you can give effect to your good purpose. But it is
impossible.


Abr. With as secure an ease 't shall be accomplished as the blessed desires of
uncross'd lovers: you shall with one breath dissolve these mists that with
contagious darkness threaten the lights both of your life and honor. Affirm
my brother ravished you.


Car. How my Lord?


Abr. Obtained by violence entry into your chamber where his big lust seconded
by force, despite of yours and your Maids weak resistance surprised your
honor: when 't shall come to question, my brother cannot so put off the truth,
he owes his own affection and your whiteness, but ^o acknowledge it a rape.


Car. And so by saving mine, betray his fame and safety, to the laws danger,
and your fathers justice, which with impartial doom will most severely
sentence the Prince, although his son.


Abr. Your fears and too affectionate tenderness will ruin all that my care
has builded. Sure, Mesithes has (as my charge enjoined him) made relation Enter
Mura. to him of Abilqualit's action. See your Husband, resolve on it, or y' are
miserable.


Mu. Furies, where is this lustful Prince, and this lascivious Strumpet? ha
Abrahen, here?


Abr. Good^ Cozen Mura, be not so passionate, it is your Prince has wrought
your injury; resolve to bear your crosses like a man: the great'st afflictions
should have the greatest fortitude in their sufferings from minds resolved and
noble. Alas poor Lady, 'twas not her fault; his too unruly lust it is, has
destroi'd her purity.


Mu. Ha, in tears! Are these the liverie of your fears and penitence, or of
your sorrows (minion) for being robbed so soon of your Adulterer?


Abr. Fie, your passion is too unmannerly; you look upon her with eyes of rage,
when you with grief and pity ought to surveigh her innocence. My Brother,
degenerate as he is from worth, and merely the beast of lust, (what ^fiends
would fear to violate) has with rude insolence destroyed her honor, ^y him
inhumane ravished,


Tar. Good Sir be so merciful as to set free a wretch from loathed mortality,
whose life's so great and hateful burden now she has lost her honor: 'Twil be a
friendly charity to deliver her from the torment of it.


Mu. That I could contract the soul of universal rage into this swelling heart,
that it might be as full of poisonous anger as a dragons when in a toil
ensnared. Caropia ravished! Me thinks the horror of the sound should fright to
everlasting ruin, the whole world, start natures Genius.


Abr. Gentle Madam, pray withdraw your self, your sight, til I have wrought a
cure upon his temper, will but add to his affliction.


Car. You're as my good Angel, I Will follow your directions.

Exit.
Abr. Cozen Mura, I thought a person of your masculine temper, in dangers
fostred, where perpetual terrors have been your play-fellowes, would not have
resented with such effeminate passion a disgrace, though never so huge and
hideous.


Mu. I am tame, collected now in all my faculties, which are so much oppressed
with injuries, they have lost the anguish of them: can you think, Sir, when all
the winds fight, the enraged billows that use to imprint on the black lips of
clouds a thousand brinie kisses, can lie still, as in a lethargy? that when
baths of oil are pou^'d upon the wild irregular flames in populous Cities, that
they will then extinguish? Your mitigations add but seas to seas, give matter to
my fires to increase their burning, and I ere long enlightened by my anger shall
be my own pile, and consume to ashes.


Abr. Why, then I see indeed your injuries have ravished hence your reason and
discourse, and left you the mere prostitute of passion. Can you repair the
ruins you lament so with these exclaimes? was ever dead man called to life
again by fruitful sighs? or can your rage reedifie Caropias honor, slain and
betrayed by his foul lust? Your manhood, that heretofore has thrown you on all
dangers, me thinks should prompt you to a noble vengance, which you may safely
prosecute with Justice, to which this crime, although he be a Prince, Renders
him liable.


Mu. Yes, I Will have justice or I Will awake the sleepy Deities, or like the
ambitious Giants wage new wars with heaven it self, my wrongs shall steel my
courage, and on this vicious Prince like a fierce Sea-breach my just waked rage
shall riot till it sink in the remorcelesse eddie, sink where time shall never
find his name but with disgrace to taint his hateful memory.


Abr. This wildness neither befit your wisdom nor your courage, which should
with settled and collected thoughts walk on to noble vengeance. He before was by
our plots proscribed to death and ruin to advance me to the Empire; now with
ease we may accomplish our designs


Mu. Would heaven I nere had given consent, overcome by love to you to have
made a forfeit on my allegiance, it is a just punishment, I by him am wronged,
whom for your sake I fearlesse sought to ruin.


Abr. Are you repentant grown, Mura? this softnese? ill suits a person of your
great resolves, on whom my fortunes have such firm dependence. Come, let
Caropia's fate in^^ke thy vengeance to gain full mastry over all other
passions, leave not a corner in the spacious heart unfurnished of a noble rage,
which now will be an attribute of glorious justice: the law you know with loss
of sight does punish all rapes, though on mean persons; and our father is so
severe a Justicer, not blood can make a breach upon his faith to justice.
Besides, we have already made him dangerous in great Almanzors thoughts, and
being delinquent he needs must suffer what the meanest offender merits for such
a trespass.


Mu. I Am awake now, the lethargy of horror and amaze that did obscure my
reason, like those dull and lazy vapors that o'reshade the Sun, vanish, and it
resumes its native brightness. And now I would not but this devil Prince had
done this act upon Caropia's whiteness, ^^nce't yields you free access unto the
Empire, The deprivall of's sight does render him incapable of future
sovereignty.


Abr. You Are in the right, and have put on manly considerations: Caropia
(since she is in her will untainted) has not forgon her honor: he dispatc'd
once, as we will have him shortly,'t shall go hard else* a tenant to his
marble, thou agen^ wedded in peace may be to her pure virtues, and live their
happy owner.


Mu. I Will repair to great Almanzor instantly, and if his partial piety do
descend to pity, I will awake the Executioner of justice, death, although in
sleep more heavy than he can borrow from his natural coldness; on this good
sword I Will wear my causes justice till he do fall its sacrifice.


Abr. But be sure you do it with cunning secrecy, perhaps, should he have
notice of your just intentions, he would repair to the Army, from which
safeguard our best force could not pluck him without danger to the whole Empire.


Mu. Doubt not but I Will manage with a discreet severity my vengeance, invoke
Almanzors equity with sudden and private haste.


Abr. Mean time I will go put a new design in practice that may be much
conducing to our purpose. Like clocks, one wheel another on must drive,
affairs by diligent labor only thrive.


Exeu^t. Scena Secunda.
Enter Selinthus, Gaselles, Osman, and Soldiers. Sell No quarrelling good
Couzens, le^ft it be with the glass, 'cause it is not of size sufficient to gi^e
you a magnificent draught. You will have ^^ighting work enough^ when you're
in the wars, do not fall out among your selves.


Os. Not pledge my peerlesse Mistress health? Soldier, thou'^t mortal, if
thou refuse it.


Gas. Come, come, he shall pledge it, and 'twere a Tun. Why, we are all as dull
as dormise in our liquor: Here Is a health to the Prince Abilqualit.


Soul. Let go round: I Would drink't, were it an Ocean of warm blood flowing from
the enemy. Pray, good my Lord what news is stirring?


Sell. It should seem, Soldier, thou can not read; otherwise the learned
Pamphlets that fly about the streets, would satisfy thy curiosity with news;
they are true ones, full of discreet intelligence.


Os. Cosens, shal's have a Song? here is a Soldier in's time has sung a dirge
unto the foe often in the field.


Soul. Captain, I have a new one, the Soldiers Joy it is called.


Sell. That is an harlot. Preethee be musical, and let us taste the sweetness
of thy voice.


A Song. Gas. Whist, give attention.


Soul. How does your Lordship like it?


Sell. Very well. And so here is to thee. There Is no drum beats yet, and it is
clear day; some hour hence 'twill be Enter Abr. Mes. time to break up the
Watch. Ha! young Lord Abrahen, and trim Mesithes with him! what the devil does
he make up so early? He has been a bat-fowling all night after those Birds,
those Ladie-birds termed wag^ails; what strange business can he have here, tro?


Abr. 'Twas well done, Mesithes! and trust me, I shall find an apt reward, both
for thy care and cunning. Prithee have to Lord Simanthes, and deliver this note
to him with best diligence, my dear Eunuch; you are half the soul of Abrahen:


Mes. I was borne to be entitled your most humble vassal; I Will have to the
Lord Simanthes.

Exit.
Sell. How he cringes! These youths that want the instruments of Manhood, are
very supple in the hams.


Abr. Good Morrow to noble Lord Selinthus: what companions have you got here
thus early?


Sell. Blades of metal, tall men of war, and't please your Grace, of my own
blood and family, men who gathered a ^allad on the enemies ground, and eaten it
in bold defiance of him; and not a Soldier here but's an Achylles, valiant as
stoutest Mirmidon.


Abr. And they never had juster cause to show their valor; the Prince my
dearest brother, their Lord General's became a forfeit to the stern laws
rigor; and it is imagined, our impartial father, will sentence him to lose his
eyes.


Gas. Marry heaven defend, for what, and 't like your Grace!


Abr. For a fact which the severe law punishes with loss of natures precious
lights; my tears will scarce permit me utter 't: for a rape committed on the
fair wife of Mura.


Os. Was it for nothing else, and please your Grace? ere he shall lose an eye
for such a trifle, or have a hair diminished, we will lofe our heads; what,
hoodwink men like sullen hawks for doing deeds of nature! I Am ashamed the law
is such an Ass.


Sell. Some Eunuch Judge, that could not be acquainted with the sweets due to
concupiscencial parts, invented this law, I Will be hanged else. 's Life, a
Prince, and such a hopeful one, to lose his eyes, for satisfying the hunger of
the stomach beneath the wast, is cruelty prodigious, not to be suffered in a
commonwealth of ought but geldings.


Abr. It Is vain to sooth our hopes with these delusions, he will suffer less he
be reskued. I would have you therefore if you ow any service to the Prince, my
much lamented brother, to attend without least tumult 'bout the Court, and if
there be necessity of your aid, I Will give you notice when to employ it.


Sell. Sweet Prince, we will swim in blood to do thee or thy brother service. Each
man provide their weapons.


Abr. You will win my brothers love for ever, nay my father, though he will seem
angry to behold his justice deluded, afterward when his rage is past, will
thank you for your loyalties: Pray be there with all speed possible, by this my
brothers commanded before my father, I Will go learn the truth, and give you
notice: pray be secret and firm to your resolves.

Exit.
Sell. For him that flinches in such a cause, I Will have no more mercy on him.
Here Is Tarifa Enter Tarifa and Mura^ the Princes sometimes Tutor, Mura with him
a walking toward the Court, let us take no notice of them, lest they discover
our intentions by our grim looks. March fair and softly Couzens, we will be at
Court before them.


Tar. You will not do this, Mura!


Mu. How Tarifa? will you defend him in an act so impious? Is It fit the drum
should cease his surly language, when the bold Soldiers marches, or that I
should pass over this affront in quiet silence, which Gods and men invoke to
speedy vengeance? which I will have, or manhood shall be tame as Cowardice.


Tar. It was a deed so barbarous, that tr^th it self blushes as well as justice
to hear it mentioned: but consider Mura, he is our Prince, the Empires hope,
and pillar of great Almanzors age How far a public regard should be preferred
before your private desire of vengeance! which if you do purchase from our
impartial Emperors equity, his loss of sight, and so of the succession, will
not restore Caropia to the honor he ravished from her. But so foul the cause
is, I rather should lament the Princes folly than plead in his behalf.


Mur. It Is but vain, there is your warrant, as you are high Marshal, to summon
him to make his speedy appearance before the Tribunal of Almanzor; so pray you
execute your office.

Exit.
Tar. How one vice can like a small cloud when it breaks forth in showers, black
the whole heaven of virtues! O my Lord, Enter Abilqualit, Muts, whispring, seem
to make protestations. Exeunt. that face of yours which once with Angel
brightness cheered my faint sight, like a grim apparition frights it with
ghastly terror: you have done a deed that startles virtue till it shakes as it
got a palsy. I Am commanded to summon you before your father, and hope you will
obey his mandate.


Abil. Willingly, what is my offense, Tarifa?


Tar. Would you knew not, I did presage your too unruly passions would hurry
you to some disast'rons act, but never imagined you would have been so lost to
masculine honor, to commit a rape on that unhappy object of your love, whom now
you have made the spoil of your foul lust, the much wronged wife of Mura.


Abil. Why, does Mura charge me with his Caropia's rape?


Tar. This warrant sent by your angry father, testifies he means to appeach you
of it.


Abil. It Is my fortune, all natural motions when they approach their end, have
to draw to it with accustomed swiftness. Rivers with greedier speed run near
their out-falls, than at their springs. But I Am resolved, let what happen that
will, I Will stand it, and defend Carpoia's honor, though mine own I ruin; Who
dares not dye to justify his love, deserves not to enjoy her. Come, Tarifa,
what e're befall, I Am resolute. He dies glorious, that falls loves innocent
sacrifice.


Exeunt. ACTUS QUARTUS.
Scena I.
Enter Almanzor, Abilqualit, Tarifa and Mura. Al. NO more Tarifa, you will provoke
our anger, if you appear in this cause so solicitous, the act is too apparent:
nor shall you need (injured Mura) to implore our justice, which with impartial
doom shall fall on him more rigorously, then on a strange offender. O
Abilqualit, (for the name of Son, when thou forsookst thy native virtue, left
thee;) Were all thy blood, thy youth and fortunes glories of no more value,
then to be exposed to ruin for one vice; at whose name only the furies start,
and bashful fronted justice hides her amazed head? But it is now bootless to
show a fathers pity, in my grief for thy amiss. As l'me to be thy Judge, be
resolute, I Will take as little notice, thou art my offspring, as the wandering
clouds do of the showers, which when they have bred to ripeness, they straight
disperse through the vast earth forgotten.


Abil. I Am sorry Sir, that my unhappie chance should draw your anger on me;
my long silence declares I have on that excelling sweetness, that unexampled
pattern of chaste goodness; Caropia acted violence. I confess, I loved the
Lady, and when no persuasions served to prevail on her, too stubborn,
incenss'd, by force I sought my purpose and obtained it; nor do I yet (so much
I prize the sweetness of that unvalued purchase) find repentance in any abject
thought; what ere falls on me from your stern rigor in a cause so precious, will
be a pleasing punishment.


Al. Yon are grown a glorious malefactor, that dare brave thus the awful rod of
justice! Lost young man, for you are no child of mine; do not con^^der to
what a state of desperate destruction thy wild lust has betrayed thee! What
rich blessings (that I may make thee sensible of thy sins by showing thee thy
suffering) have thou lost by thy irregular folly! First my love, which never
more must meet thee, scarce in pity; the glory flowing from thy former
actions stopped up for ever; and those lustful eyes, by whose deprival (you are
deprived of being capable of this Empire) to the law, which will exact them,
forfeited. Call in there a Surgeon, and our Mutts to execute this act Enter
Surg. Muts. of justice on the unworthie traitor, upon whom my just waked wrath
shall have no more compassion, then the incensed flames have on perishing
wretches that wilfully leap into them.


Tar. O my Lord, that which on others would be fitting justice, on him your
hopeful though offending son, will be exemplar cruelty; his youth Sir, that
has abounded with so many virtues* is an excuse sufficient for one vice: he is
not yours only. he is your Empires, destined by nature and successions
privilege, when you in peace are shrouded in your marble, to weild this Scepter
after you. O do not, by putting out his eyes, deprive your Subjects of light,
and leave them to dull mournful darkness.


Al. It Is but in vain, I am inexorable. If those on which his eyes hang, were
my heart strings, I Would cut them out rather then wound my Justic^; nor dos't
befit thy virtue intercede for him in this cause horrid and prodigious; the
crime against me was acted; 'twas a rape upon my honor, more then on her
whiteness; his was from mine derivative, as each stream is from its spring; so
that he has polluted by his soul fact, my fame, my truth, my goodness,
stricken through my dignity by his violence: nay, started in their peaceful
urnes, the ashe^ of all my glorious Ancestors; defiled the memory of their
still descendent virtues; nay with a killing frost, nipt the fair blossoms,
that did presage such goodly fruit arising from his own hopeful youth.


Mur. I ask but justice; those eyes that led him to unlawful objects, it is fit
should suffer fo^'t a lasting blindness; the Sun himself, when he darts rays
lascivious, such as engender by too piercing fervence intemperate and
infectious heats, straight wears obscurity from the clouds his own beams
raises. I have been your Soldier Sir, and fought your battails; for all my
services, I beg but justice, which is the Subjects best prerogative, the
Princes greatest attribute; and for a fact, then which, none can be held more
black and hideous, which has betrayed to an eclipse the brightest star in the
heaven of virtues: the just law does for 't ordain a punishment, which I hope
you the laws righteous guider, will according to equity see executed.


Tar. Why! that law was only made for common malefactors, but has no force to
extend unto the Prince, to whom the law it self must become subject. This
hopeful Prince, look on him, great Almanzor; and in his eyes, those volumes of
all graces, which you like erring Meteors would extinguish* read your own
lively figure, the best story of your youths noblest vigor; let not wrath
(Sir) overcome your piety, nay your humane pity. It Is in your breast, my Lord,
yet to show mercy; that precious attribute of heavens true goodness, even to
your self, you^ son! me thinks that name should have a power to interdict your
Justice in its too rigorous progress.


Abil. Dear Tarifa, I Am more afflicted at the intercessions, then at the view
of my approaching torments, which I will meet with fortitude and boldness, too
base to shake now at one personal danger, when I Have incountred thousand perils
fearless; Nor do I blame my gracious fathers Justice, though it precede his
nature. I Would not have him (for my sake) forfeit that for which he is famous,
his uncorrupted equity, nor repine I at my destiny; my eyes have had delights
sufficient in Caropia's beauties, to serve my thought^ for after
contemplations; nor can I ever covet a new object, since they can never hope to
encounter any of equal worth and sweetness. Yet hark Tarifa, to thy secrecy I
will impart my dearest, inmost counsels; if I should perish, as it is probable I
may, under the hands of these tormentors; thou may unto succession show my
innocence; Caropia yielded without least constraint, and I enjoyed her freely.


Tar. How my Lord?


Abil. No words on it, as you respect my honor! I Would not lose the glory I
shall gain by these my sufferings; come grim fures, and execute your office. I
will stand you, unmoved as hills at whirlewinds, and amidst the torments you
inflict, retain my courage.


Al. Be speedy villains.


Tar. O stay your cruel hands, you dumb ministers of injured Justice, and let
me speak his innocence ere you further afflict his precious eyesight.


Al. What does this mean, Tarifa!


Tar. O my Lord, the too much braverie of the Princes spirit it is has undone
his fame, and pulled upon him this fatal punishment; 'twas but to save the
Ladies honor, that he has assumed her rape upon him, when with her consent the
deed of shame was acted.


Mur. It Is his fears makes him traduce her innocence: he who did not stick to
commit a riot on her person, can make no conscience to destroy her fame by his
untrue suggestions.


Al. It Is a baseness beyond thy other villainy (had she yielded,) thus to
betraie for transitory torture, her honor, which thou were engaged to
safeguard even with thy life. A son of mine could never show this ignoble
cowardice: Proceed to execution, I Will not hear him speak, he is made up of
treacheries and falsehoods.


Tar. Will you then be to the Prince so tyrannous? Why, to me just now he did
confess his only motive to undergo this torment, was to save Caropia's honor
blameless.


Abil. I am more troubled* Sir, with his untimely frenzy, then with my
punishment; his too much love to me, has spoild his temperate reason. I confess
Caropia yielded! Not the light is half so innocent as her spotless virtue. 'T
was not well done, Tarifa, to betray the secret of your friend thus: though She
yielded, the terror of ten thousand deaths shall never force me to confess it.


Tar. Again, my Lord, even now he does confess, she yielded, and protest^ that
death shall never make him ^ay shee'^ guilti^: the breath scarce passed his
lips yet.


Abil. Hapless man, to run in^o this lunacie! Fie Tarifa, so treacherous to
your Friend!


Tar. Again, again. Will no man give me credit?


Enter Abrahen. Abr. Where is our roial fathe?: where our brother? As you
respect your life and Empires safety, dismiss these tyrannous instruments of
death and cruelty unexemplified. O Brother, that I should ever live to enjoy
my eie-sight, and see one half of your dear lights endangered. My Lord, you have
done an act, which my just fears tells me, will shake your Scepter! O for heavens
sake, look to your future safety; the rough Soldier hearing their much loved
General, My good Brother was by the law betrayed to some sad danger, have in
their piety beset the palace; think on some means to appease them, ere their
fury grow to its full unbridled height; they threaten your life, great Sir:
pray send my brother to them, his sight can only pacify them.


Al. Have you your Champions! We will prevent their insolence, you shall not
boast, you have got the Empire by our ruin. Muts, Strangle him immediately.


Abr. Avert such a prodigious mischief, heaven. Hark, hark Enter, Enter.
they are entered into the Court; desist you monsters, my life shall stand betwixt
his and this violence, or I with him will perish. Faithful Soldiers, have to
defend your Prince, curse on your slowness. He Is dead; my fathers turn is
next. O horror, would I might sink into forgetfulness* What has your fury
urged you to?


Al. To that which whosoever murmurs at, is a faithless traitor Enter Simanthe^.
to our tranquillity. Now Sir, your b^siness?


Sim. My Lord, the City is up in arms, in rescue of the Prince; the whole
Court throngs with Soldiers.


Al. 'T was high time to cut this viper off, that would have eat his passage
through our very ^owels to our Empire. Nay, we will stand their furies, and with
terror of Majesty strike dead these insurrections. Enter Soldiers. Traitors,
what means this violence?


Abr. O dear Soldiers, your honest love's in vain; my Brother's dead,
strangled by great Almanzor's dire command, ere your arrival. I do hope they will
kill him in their hot zeal.


Al. Why do you stare so, traitors? 'twas I your Emp'ror that have done this
act, which who repines at, treads the self same steps of death that he has
done. Withdraw and leave us, wee'ld be alone. No motion* Are you statues? Stay
you, Tarifa here. For your part, Mura, you cannot now complain but you have
justice; so quit our presence.


Os. Faces about, Gentlemen.


Exeunt. Abr. It has happened above our wishes, we shall have no need now to
employ your handkercher. Yet give it me. You Are sure it is right, Simanthes.


Al. Tarifa, I know the love thou bearst Prince Abilqualit makes thy big heart
swell as 't had drunk the foam of angry Dragons. Speak thy free intentions,
Deserved he not this fate?


Tar. No: You're a Tyrant, one that delights to feed on your* own bowels, and
were not worthy of a Son so virtuous. Now you have ^ane his, add to your
injustice, and take Tarifa's life, who in his death, should it come flying on
the wings of torments, would speak it out as an apparent truth* the Prince to
me d^cla^'d his innocence, and that Caropia yielded.


Al. Rise Tarifa; we do command thee, rise: a sudden chillness, such as the
hand of winter casts on brooks, thrils our aged heart. I^ll not have thee
ingross sorrow alone for Abilqualii's death: I loved the boy well, and though
his ambition and popularitie did make him dangerous, I do repent my fury, and
will vie with thee in sorrow. How he makes death lovely! Shall we fix here, and
weep till we be statues?


Tar. Til we grow stiff as the cold Al^bl^sters must be erected over us* Your
rashness has robbed the Empire of the greatest hope it ere shall boast again.
Would I were ashes.


Al. He breathes (me thinks:) the over-hastie soul was too discourteous to
forsake so fair a lodging, without taking solemn leave first of the owner. Ha,
his handkercher! You Are liberal to thy Father even in death, leave him a
legacy to dry his tears, which are too slow; they should create a deluge. O
my dear Abilqualit!


Tar. You exceed now as much in grief as you did then in rage, One drop of this
pious paternal softness had ransomed him from ruin. Dear Sir, rise: my
grief's divided, and I know not whether I should lament you living, or him
dead. Good Sir, erect your looks. Not stir! His sorrow makes him insensible.
Ha, there is no motion left in his vital spirits: The excess of grief has
stifled up his powers, and ^rack'd (I fear) his aged hearts cordage. Help, the
Emperor, he Emperor's dead; Help, help.


Abrahen, Simanthes, Mesithes, Muts Abr. What dismal outcrie's this? our royal
father dead! The handkercher has wrought I see.


Tar. Yes; his big heart vanquished with sorrow, that in's violent rage, he
doomed his much loved son to timeless death, could not endure longer on its
weak strings, but cracked with weight of sorrow. Their two spirits, by this,
are met in their delightful passage to the blessed shades; we in our tears are
bound to call you our dread Sovereign.


Omnes. Long live Abrahen Great Caliph of Arabia.


Abr. It Is a title we cannot covet, Lords, it comes attended with so great
cares and troubles, that our youth start at the thought of them, even in our
sorrows which are so mighty on us; ou^ weak spirits are ready to relinquish
the possession they have of mortality, and take swift flight after our roial
friends. Simanthes, be it your charge to see all fitting preparation provided
^or the funerals.


Enter Selinthus. Sell. Where Is great Almanzor?


Abr. O Selinthus, this day is the hour of funerals grief; for his cruelty to
my brother, has translated him to immortality.


Sell. He Will have attendants to wait on him to our great prophets paradise, ere
he be ready for his grave. The Soldiers all mad with rage for the Princes
slaughter, have vowed by all oaths Soldiers can inve^t, (and that is no small
store) with death and destruction, to pursue sullen Mura.


Abr. Tarifa, use your authority to keep their violence in due obedience.
We Are so fraught with grief, we have no room for any other passion in our
distracted bosom. Take these roial bodies and place them on that couch; here
where they fell, they shall be imbalm'd. Yet put them out of our sight, their
veiw^ draw fresh drops from our heart. Anon we will show our selves to cheer the
afflicted Subject.


a Sho^t. Omnes Long live Abrahen, great Caliph of Arabia.


Exeunt Abr. And who can say now, Abrahen is a villain? I am saluted King with
acclamations that dea^ the Heavens to hear, with as much joy as if I had
achieved this Scepter by means fair and ver^uous. 'Twas this handkercher that
did to death Almanzor; so infected, its least insensible vapor has full power;
applied to the eye, or any other Organ, can drink its poison in to vanquish
Nature, though nere so strong and youthful. 'Twas Simanthes devised it for my
brother, and my cunning transferred it to Almanzor; it is no matter, my worst
impiety is held now religious. 'Twixt Kings and their inferiors there is this
ods, These are mere men, we men, ye^ earthly gods. Exit.


Abil. 'Twas well the Muts proved fai^hful, otherwise I Would lost my breath with
as much speed and silence as those who do expire in dreams, their health
seeming no whit abated. But 'twas wisely considered of me, to prepare those
sure instruments of destruction: The suspicion I had by Abrahen of my fathers
fears of my unthought ambition, did instruct me by making them mine, to secure
my safety. Would the inhumane Surgeon had taken these blessed lights from me;
that I had lived for ever doomed to perpetual darkness, rather then Tarifa's
fears had so appeach'd her honor. Well, villain Brother, I have found, that by
my seeming death, which by my lives best arts I never should have had knowledge
of. Dear Father, though thou to me were pitilesse, my heart weeps tears of
blood, to see thy age thus like a lofty pine fall, eaten through by the gin
from its own Stock descending: He has agents in his ungracious wickedness:
Simanthes he has discovered: Were they multitudes as numerous as collected
sands, and mighty in force as mischief, they should from my Justice meet their
due punishment. Abrah^n by this is proclaimed Caliph, yet my undoubted right*
when 't shall appear I Am living, will reduce the people to my part; the armie's
mine, whither I must withdraw unseen: the night will best secure me. What a
strange Chimera of thought possesses my dull brain! Caropia, thou have a share
in them: Fate, to thy mercy I do commit my self; who scapes the snare once,
has a certain caution to beware. Exit.


Scen. 2.
Enter Caropia and Perilinda. Car. Your Lord is not returned yet!


Per. No, good Madam: pray do not thus torment your self, the Prince (I warrant
you) will have no injury by saving of your honor; do you think his father will
be so extreme outrageous for such a trifle, as to force a woman with her good
liking?


Car. My ill boding soul beats with presages ominous. Would heaven I Would stood
the hazard of my incensed Lords fury, rather then he had run this imminent
danger. Could you never learn, which of the slaves it was betrayed our close
loves to loathed Mura's notice?


Per. No indeed could I not; but here is my Lord, pray Madam do not grieve so!


Enter Mura. Mu. My Caropia, dress up thy looks in their accustomed beauties,
call back the constant spring into thy cheeks, that droope like lovely Violets,
over charged with too much mornings dew; shoot from thy eie^ a thousand flames
of joy. The lustful Prince, that like a foul thief, robbed thee of thy honor by
his ungracious violence* has met his roial fathers Justice.


Car. Now my fears carry too sure an augury! you would fain sooth me, my Lord,
out of my flood of sorrows* what reparation can that make my honor, though he
have tasted punishment?


Mu. His life is fallen the offspring of thy chastity, which his hot lust
polluted: nay, Caropia, to save himself, when he but felt the torment applied
to his lascivious eyes; although at first he did with impudence acknowledge thy
rape, he did invade thy spotless virtue, protested, only 'twas to save thy
honor, he took on him thy rape, when with consent and not constrained, thou
yeildedst to the looseness of his wild vicious flames.


Car. Could he be so unjust, my Lord?


Mu. He was, and he has paid for it; the malicious Soldier, while he was a
losing his eyes, made violent head to bring him reskue, which pulled his ruin
on him. But no more of such a prodigy; may his black memory perish even with
his ashes. My Caropia, the flourishing trees widowed by winters violence of
their fair ornaments, when it is expired once, put forth again with new and
virgin freshness, their bushie beauties; it should be thy emblem. Display again
those chaste immaculate glories* which the harsh winter of his lust had
withered; and I Will again be wedded to thy virtues, with as much joy, as when
thou first enriched me with their pure maiden beauties. Thou art dull, and do
not gratulate with happy welcome* the triumphs of thy vengeance.


Car. Are you sure, my Lord, the Prince is dead?


Mu. Pish, I beheld him breathless. Take comfort best Caropia, thy disgrace
did with his loathed breath vanish.


Car. I could wish though, that he had fallen by your particular vengance,
rather then by the laws rigor; you're a Soldier of glory, great in war for
brave performance: me thinks 't had been far nobler, had you called him to
personal satisfaction: had I been your husband, you my wife, and ravished by
him; my resolution would have armed my courage to have stroke him thus: The dead
Prince sends you that.


Stab him* Mu. O, I am slain!


Car. Would it were possible to kill even thy eternity. Sweet Prince, how shall
I satisfy thy unhappie ruins! Ha,^ not yet breathless! To increase thy
ang^ish even to despair, know, Abilqualit was more dear to me, then thy foul
self was odious, and did enjoy me freely.


Mu. That I had but breath enough to blast thee.


Car. 'Twas his brother (curse on his art) seduced me to accuse him of my rape.
Do you groan, prodigy! take this as my last bounty.


Stab again. Enter Perilinda. Per. O Madam, Madam, what shall we do? the house
is round beset with Soldiers; Madam, they do swear they will tear my Lord, for
the sweet Princes death, in pieces.


Car. This hand has saved their fury that just labor: yet I Will make use of
their malice, help to convey him into 's Chamber.


Enter Osman, Gasselles, Soldiers. Gas. Where is this villain, this traitor
Mura?


Car. Heaven knows what violence their fury may assault me with; be it death,
't shall be as welcome, as sound healthful sleeps to men oppressed with
sickness. What Is the matter? what means this outrage?


Os. Marry, Lady gay, We Are come to cut your little throat; pox on you, and
all your sex; you have caused the noble Princes death, wildfire take you fort,
weel talk with you at better leisure: you must needs be ravished! and could not
like an honest woman, take the courtesy in friendly sort!


Gas. We trifle: her husband may escape us. Say, where is he? or you shall die,
ere you can pray


Sold* Here, here I have found the vallain! what, do you sleep so soundly?
never wake more, this for the Prince, you rogue: let us tear him piecemeale. Do
you take your death in silence, dog!


Car. You appear endowed with some humanity, you have ^ane his life; let not
your hate last after death; let me embalm his body with my tear^, or kill me
with him.


Os. Now you 've said the word, we care not if we do.


Enter Tarifa. Tar. Slaves, unhand the Lady, who dares offer her least
violence, from this hand meets his punishment. Gaselles, Osman, I thought you
had been better tempered, then thus to raise up mutinies. In the name of
Abrahen our now Caliph, I command you, desist from these rebellious practices,
and quietly retire into the Camp, and there expect his pleasure.


Gas. Abrahen Caliph! There is some hopes then, we shall gain our pardons:
Long live great Abrahen. Soldiers, slink away, our vow is consummate.


Car. O my dear Lord!


Tar. Be gone.


Os. Yes, as quietly as if we were in flight before the foe; the general pardon
at the coronation, will bring us off* IN me sure.


Tar. Alas, good Madam! I Am sorry that these miseries have fallen with so much
rigor on you; pray take comfort* your husband prosecuted with too much violence
Prince Abilqualit's ruin.


Car. It appeared so! what worlds of woes have hapless I given life to, and yet
survive them!


Tar. Do not with such fury torment your innocent self. I Am su^e the Emperor
Abrahen, will number 't amongst his greatest sorrows, that he has lost your
husband. I must give him notice of these proceedings. Best peace keep you, and
settle your distractions.


Car. not until I Am settled in my peaceful urne. This is yet some comfort to
me, 'midst the floods of woes, that do overwhelm me for the Princes death, that
I revenged it safely; though I prize my life at no more value then a foolish
ignorant Indian does a Diamond, which for a bead of Jet or glass, he changes:
Nor would I keep it, were it not with fuller, more noble braverie, to take
revenge ^or my Lord Abilqualit's timelesse slaughter. I must use craft and
mystery. Dissembling is held the natural quality of our Sex, nor will it be
hard to practice. This same Abrahen, that by his brothers ruin weilds the
Scepter, whether out of his innocence or malice, 'twas that persuaded me to
accuse him of my rape. The die is cast, I am resolved to thee my Abilqualit ^
will come. A death for love, 's no death but Martyrdom.

Exit
ACTUS QUINTUS.
Scena 1.
Enter Abilqualit, Selinthus, Gasselles, Osman, Soldiers, and Muts* Abil. NO
more, good faithful Soldiers; thank the powers divine, has brought me back to
you in safety; the traitorous practices against our life, and our dear
fathers, poisoned by our b^other; we have discoverd, and shall take just
vengan^e on the unnatural paricide: Retire into your tents, and peacefully
expect the event of things, you Osman and Gasselles shall into the City with
me.


Os. We will march through the world with thee, dear Sovereign, great Abilqualit.


Abil. Selinthus, give you our dear Tarif^ speedy notice we are again among
the living: pray ^im to let our loyal Subjects in the City, have sure
intelligence of our escape; and dearest friends and fellows, let not your too
loud expressions of your joy, for our unlooked for welfare, subject to
discovery our unexpected safety.


Sell. Never fear: they are trusty M^rmidons, and will stick close to you their
dear Achilles; but my Lord, the wisest may imagine it were safer for you to
rest here among your armed legions, then to entrust your person in the City,
whereas it seems by the passed story, you will not know friends from enemies.


Abil. Selinthus, Thy honest care declares the zealous duty thou ow'st thy
Sovereign: but what danger can assault us there, where there is none suspects
we are alive? we will go surveigh the state of things, in the morning we will seize
the Palace, and then proclaim our Right. Come, valiant Captains, you shall be
our companions.


Gas. And w^'l guard you safe, as you were encompassed with an Army.


Sell. You guard your own fools heads: Is 't fit his safety, on which our lives
and fortunes have dependence, should be exposed unto your single valor? Pray
once let your friends rule you, that you may rule them hereafter. Your good
brother Abrahen has a strong faction, it should seem in the Court: and those
these Bloodhounds followed the sent ho^ly till they had worried Mura He has
other allies of no mean consequence; your E^nuch Mesithes his chief Favorite,
and Simanthes.


Abil. It was that Villain that betrayed my Love to him and ^laught'red Mura.


Sell. Very likely. An arranter, falser Parasite, never was cut like a Colt.
Pray Sir, be wife this once, at my entreaties; and for ever after use your
discretion as you please: these night works I do not like; yet e're the morning
I will bring Tarifa to you.


Abil. You shall over rule us. Poor Caropi^, these thoughts are thy vot'ries;
love thy active fire, ^^ames out when present, absent in desire.


Exeunt. Scen. 2.
Enter Abrahen, Simanthes and Mesithes. Abr. What State and Dignitie's like
that of Scepters? With what an awful Majesty resembles it the Powers above? the
inhabitants of that Superior world are not more subject to them, then these to
us; they can but tremble when they do speak in thunder; at our frowns these
shake like Lambs at light 'ning. Can it be impie^y by any means to purchase
this earthly Deity* Sovereignty* I did sleep this night with as secure and
calm a peace, as in my former innocence. Conscience, thou'^t but a terror,
first devised by the fears of Cowardice, a sad and fond remembrance, which men
should shun, as Elephants clear springs, lest they behold their own
deformities, Enter Mesithes. and start at their grim shadows. Ha, Mesithes!


Mes. My Royal Lord!


Abr. Call me thy Friend, Mesithes, thou equally do share our heart, best
Eunuch; there is not in the stock of earthly blessings another I could wish to
make my state completely fortunate, but one; and to atcheive possession of that
bliss, thy diligence must be the fortunate Instrument.


Mes. Be it dangerous as the affrights Sea men do fain in Tempests, I Will
undertake it for my gracious Sovereign, and perish, but effect it,


Abr. No, there is not the least show of peril in it; it is the want of fair
Caropia's long coveted beauties that does afflict thy Abrahen. Love, Mesithes,
is a most stubborn Malady in a Lady, not cured with that ^elicity, that are
other passions, and creeps upon us by those ambushes, that we perceive our
selves sooner in love, then we can think upon the way of loving. The old flames
break more brightly from th'ashes where they have long layn hid, like the young
Phoenix that from her spi^le pile revives more glorious. Nor can I now
extinguish't; it has passed the limits of my reason, and intend my will, where
like a fixed Star 't settles, never to be removed thence.


Mes. Cease your fears; I that could win her for your brother, who could not
boast half your masculine Perfections, for you will vanquish her.


Enter Simanthes. Sim. My Lord, the widow of slaughtered Mura, fair Caropia
does humbly entreat access to your dread presence; Shall we permit her entrance?


Abr. With all freedom and best regard. Mesithes, this arrives beyond our wish.
I Will try my eloquence in my own cause; and if I fail, thou then shall be my
Advocate.


Mes. Your humblest vassal.


Abr. Withdraw and leave us, and give strict order none approach our presence
till we do call. It is not fit her sorrows Enter Car. should be surveyed by
common eye. Caropia, welcome; and would we could as easily give thee comfort as
we allow thee more then moderate pity. In tears those eyes cast forth a
greater luster, then sparkling rocks of Diamonds enclosed in swelling seas of
Pearl.


Car. Your Majesty is pleased to wanton with my miseries, which truly you, if
you have nature in you, ought to bear equal part in your deer brothers
untimely loss, occasioned by my falsehood, and your improvident counsel: It Is
that calls these hearty sorrows up, I am his Murdresse.


Abr. 'Twas his own destiny, not our bad intentions took him away from earth;
he was too heavenly, fit only for the society of Angels, amongst whom he sings
glad hymns to thy perfections, celebrating with such eloquence thy beauties,
that those immortal essences forget to love each other by intelligence, and
dote on the Idea of thy Sweetness.


Car. These gentle blandishments* and his innocent carriage had I as much of
malice as a Tigresse robbed of her young, would melt me into meekness. But I Will
not be a woman.


Abr. Sing out, Angel, and charm the world (were it at mortal difference) to
peace with thine enchantments. What soft murmurs are those that steal through
those pure rosy organs, like aromatic west-winds, when they fly through
fruitful mists of fragrant mornings dew, to get the Spring with child of
flowers and spices? Disperse these clouds, that like the vail of night, with
unbecoming darkness shade thy beauties, and strike a new day from those orient
eyes, to gild the world with brightness.


Car. Sir, these flatteries neitheir befit the ears of my true sorrows, nor yet
the utt'rance of that real sadness should dwell in you. Are these the funeral
rites you pay the memory of your royal Father, and much lamented Brother?


Abr. They were mortal, and to lament them, were to show I envied the immortal
joys of that true happiness their glorious souls (disfranchis'd from their
flesh) possess to perpetuity and fullness. Besides, (Caropia) I have other
griefs more near my heart, that circle 't with a sickness will shortly number
me among their fellowship* if speedier remedy be not applied to my most
desperate malady.


Car. I shall (if my hand fail not my determined courage) send you to their
society far sooner then you expect or covet. Why, great Sir, what grief,
unless your sorrow for their loss, is it can afflict you, that command all
blessings men witty in ambition of excess can wish, to please their fancies?


Abr. The want only of that which I Have so long desird; thy love thy love,
Caropia, without which my Empire, and all the pleasures flowing from its
greatness, will be but burdens, soul-tormenting troubles. There Is not a beam
shot from those grief drowned Comets but (like the Sun's, when they break forth
of showers) dart flames more hot and piercing. Had I never doated before on thy
divine perfections, viewing thy beauty thus adorned by sadness, my heart,
though marble, actuated to softness, would burn like sacred incense, it self
being the Altar, Priest, and Sacrifice.


Car. This is as unexpected, as unwelcome, Sir. Howere you're pleased to mock
me and my griefs with these impertinent, unmeant discourses, I cannot have so
prodigal a faith, to give them the least credit; and it is unkindly done; thus
to deride my sorrows. the virgin Tur^les hate to join their pureness with
widowed mates; my Lord, you are a Prince, and such as much detest to utter
falsehoods, as Saints do perjuries: why should you strive then to lay a bait to
captivate my affections, when your greatness conjoined with your youths
masculine beauties, are to a woman's f^ailtie, strong temptations? You know the
story too of my misfortunes, that your dead brother, did with vicious
looseness, corrupt the chaste streams of my spotless virtues, and left me
soiled like a long plucked rose, whose leaves dissever'd, have forgon their
sweetness


Abr. Thou have not (my Caropia;) thou to me art for thy sent still fragrant,
and as precious as the prime virgins of the Spring, the violets, when they do
first display their early beauties, til all the winds in love, do grow
contentio^s, which from their lips should ravish the first kisses. Caropia,
think thou I should fear the Nuptials of this great Empire, 'cause it was my
brothers? As I succeeded him in all his glories, it is fit I do succeed him in
h^s love. It Is true, I know thy fame fell by his practice, which had he lived,
he would have restored by marriage, by it repaired thy injured honors ruins. I Am
bound to do it in religious conscience; It is a debt his incensed ghost would
quarrel me living for, should I not pay't with fullness.


Car. Of what frail temper is a woman's weakness! words writ in waters, have
more lasting Essence, then our determinations.


Abr. Come, I know, thou must be gentle, I perceive a combat in thy soft heart,
by the intervening blushes that strive to adorn thy cheek with purple beauties,
and drive the lovely liverie of thy sorrows, the Ivorie paleness, out of them.
Think, Caropia, with what a settled unrevolting truth I have affected thee; with
what heat, what pureness; and when upon mature considerations, I found I was
unworthie to enjoy a tre^sure of such excellent grace and goodness, I did
desist, smothering my love in anguish; anguish! to which the soul of humane
torments, compared, were pains not easy, but delicious; yet still the secret
flames of my affections, like hidden virtues in some bashful man, grew great
and ferventer by those suppression^. Thou were created only for an Empress;
despise not then thy destiny, now greatness, love, Empire, and what ere may
be held glorio^s, courts thy acceptance like obedient Vassals.


Car. I have considered, and my serious thought^ tell me, it is folly to refuse
these profers: to put off my mortality, the pleasures of life, which like full
streams, do flow from greatness, to wander in the unpeopled air, to keep
society with ghastly apparitions, where is neither voice of friends, n^r
visiting suitors breaths to delight our ears, and a^l this for the fame of a
fell murdress. I have blood enough already on my soul, more then my tears can
e're wash off. My roial Lord, if you can be so merciful and gracious, to take a
woman laden with afflictions, big with true sorrow, and religious penitence for
her amiss, her life and after actions, shall study to deserve your love. But
surely this is not serious.


Abr. Not the vows which votries make to the powers above, can be more fraught
with binding sanctity. This holy kiss confirms our mutual vows: never til now
was I true Caliph of Arabia.


Enter, Enter, Enter, Abr. Ha, what tumult's that! Be you all furies, and thou
the great'st of devils, Abrahen will stand you all, unmoved as mountains. This
good sword if you be air, shall disinchant you from your borrowed figures.


Abil. No, ill-natured monster, we are all corporeal, and survive to take
revenge on thy inhumane acts, at name of which, the bashful elements do shake
as if they teemed with prodigies. Do not tremble a^ thy inhumane villains?
Dear Caropia, quit the infectious viper, lest his touch poison thee past
recoverie.


Abr. No, she shall not; nor you, until this body be one wound. Lay a rude hand
upon me! Abilqualit, how ere thou scapst my practices with life, I am not now
to question; we were both sons to one father, whom, for love of Empire, when I
believed thee strangled by those Muts, I sent to his eternal rest; nor do I
repent the fact yet, I have been titled Caliph a day, which is to my ambitious
thoughts, honor enough to eternize my big name to all posterity. I know thou
art of valiant noble soul; let not thy brother fall by ignoble hands, oppressed
by number; draw thy bright weapon; as thou art in Empire, thou art my rival in
this Ladies love, whom I esteem above all joys of life: for her and for this
Monarchy, let us try our strengths and fates^: the impartial fates to him, who
has the better cause, in justice must needs design the victory.


Abil. In this offer, though it proceed from desperateness, not valor; thou
showst a masculine courage, and we will not render our cause so abject as to
doubt, but our just arm has strength to punish thy most unheard of treacheries


Tar. But you shall not be so unjust to us and to your right, to try your
causes most undoubted Justice, against the dispairing ruffian; Soldiers, pull
the Lady from him, and disarm him.


Abil. Stay! though he does merit multitudes of death, we would not murder his
eternity by sudden execution; yield your self, and we will allow you liberty of
life, til by repentance you have purged your sin; and so if possible, redeem
your soul from future punishment.


Abr. Pish, tell fools of souls, and those effeminate cowards that do dream of
those fantastic other worlds: there is not such a thing in nature; all thesoul
of man is resolution, which expires never from valiant men, till their last
breath, and then with it like to a flame extinguisht'd for want of matter, 't
dos not die, but rather ceases to live. Enjoy in peace your Empire, and as a
legacy of Abrahens love, take this fair Lady to your Bride.


stab her. Abil. Inhumane Butcher! has slain the Lady. Look up, best Caropia,
run for our surgeons: I Will give half my Empire to save her precious life.


Abr. She has enough, or mine aim failed me, to procure her passage to the
eternal dwellings: nor is this cruelty in me; I alone was worthy to have
enjoyed her beauties. Make good haste Caropia, or my soul, if I have any, will
hover for thee in the clouds. This was the fatal engine which betrayed our
father to his untimely death, made by Simanthes for your use, Abilqualit: and
who has this about him and would be a slave to your base mercy, deserved death
more than by daily tortures; and thus I kissed my last breath. Blast you all.


dies. Tar. Damned desperate villain.


Abil. O my dear Caropia, my Empire now will be unpleasing to me since I must
lose thy company. This surgeon, where is this surgeon?


Sell. Drunk perhaps.


Car. It Is but needless, no humane help can save me: yet me thinks I feel a
kind of pleasing ease in your embraces. I should utter something, and I have
strength enough, I hope, lest yet to effect my purpose. In revenge ^or your
supposed death, my loved Lord, I slew my husband,


Abil. I Am sorry thou have that sin to charge thy soul with, 'twas rumored by
the soldiers.


Sell. Couzens mine, your necks are safe again now.


Car. And came hither with an intent to have for your sake slain your brother
Abrahen, had not his courtesy and winning carriage altered my resolution, with
this poniard I Would struck him here about the heart.


Stabs Abil. Abil. O ^ am slain, Caropia, and by thy hand. Heavens, you are
just, this is revenge for thy dear honor which I murdered, though thou were
consenting to it.


Car. True, I was so, and not repent it yet, my sole ambition was to have liv^d
an Empress, which since fate would not allow, I was resolved no woman after my
self should ere ^njoy that glory, you dear Abilqualit: which since my weak
strength has served me to perform, I dye willingly as an infant. O now I
faint, life's death to those that keep it by constraint.


dye. Tar. My dear Lord, is there no hopes of life? must we be wretched?


Abil. Happier, my Tarifa, by my death: but yesterday I played the part in jest
which I now act in earnest My Tarifa, the Empire's thine, I Am sure thou wilt
rul't with justice, and make the subject happy. Thou have a Son of hopeful
growing virtues to succeed thee, commend me to him, and from me entreat him to
shun the temptings of lascivious glances.


Sell. Alas good Prince! heel die indeed. I fear, he is so full of serious
thoughts and Counsels.


Abil. For this slaughtred body, let it have decent burial with slain Muras,
but let not Abrahens corpse have so much honor to come in the royal monument: lay
mine by my dear fathers: for that treacherous Eunuch, and Lord Simanthes, use
them as thy justice tells thee they have merited; for Lord Selinthus, advance
him (my Tarif^) ^^^'s of faithful and well deserving virtues.


S^l: So I am, I thought it would come to me anon: poor ^^ince, I e'ne could die
with him.


Ab^l. And for those soldiers, and those our most faithful Muts, that my life
once saved, let them be well rewarded; death and I are almost now at unity.
Farewell.


dies. Tar. Sure I shall not survive these sorrows long. Muts, take those
Traitors to prison; we will shortly pass their sentence, which shall be death
inevitable. Take up that fatal instrument of poisonous mischief, and see it
burned, Gaselles. Gentlemen, Fate has made us your King against our wishes.


Sell. Long live Tarifa, Caliph of Arabia.


Tar. We have no time now for your acclamations* these are black sorrows
Festival. Bear off in state that royal Body; for the other, since it was his
will, let them have burial, but in obscurity. By this it may, as by an ev'dent
rule be understood, they are only truly great, wh' are truly good.


Recorders Flourish. Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
I AM much displeased the Poet has made me
The Epilogue to his sad Tragedy.
Would I had died honestly amongst the rest,
Rather then live to the last, now to be pressed
To death by your hard Censures. Pray you say,
What is it you dislike so in this Play,
That none applauds? Believe it, I should faint,
Did not some smile, and keep me by constraint
From the sad qualm. What power is in your breath,
That you can save alive, and doom to death,
Even whom you please? thus are your judgme^ts free,
Most of the rest are slain, you may save me.
But if death be the word, I pray bestow it
Where it best fits. Hang up the Poet.

