Englands Choice, etc. To all ARCHBISHOPS, and BISHOPS, who are not a Shame
(to) or ashamed (of) the NAME of CHRIST before MEN, Grace, Wisdom and Truth,
from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, AMEN.
My Lords,
I Thought to have Written in LATIN, that the Subject (being CATHOLIC) it
might not be confined within our Cinque Ports; and because the LITTLE-HORN
(having sprung up in Latin) it might be so rooted out as it sprang up. But, as
I would not have my Integrity favor of the Vanity of Languages (1. Cor.
14.1.-10.) so I would not run the Gauntlet of my Country-mens Tongues (in the
Apostles Language) to censure me of Barbarism (1. Cor. 4.11.) nor yet to hazard
the Censure of our Savior, as if I shunned the LIGHT of common People ( John
3.19, 20.) I therefore dip my Pen in the IDIOM of our Mother Tongue; And (in
the first place) I most humbly Salute those of mine own Country; that (as it
becomes us first) to cast the Beam out of our own eye (Mat. 7.3, 4, 5. Luke
6.41, 42.) to avoid HYPOCRISY, according to the Counsel of our Savior; So
this Honor of -- Physician heal thyself (Luke 4.23, 24.) may first be ascribed
to your Wisdom To which Purpose, not knowing how to Address my Papers to your
several PALACES, I have been at the Charge of Printing, and Distributing them
to Booksellers, that they may be conveyed into your hands; to wash them in
Innocence from the little Horn-Change of Times and Laws.

Many HEADS have passed their Sentence on the VISIONS of DANIEL, of whom (the
Learned Doctor Moor) has given an impartial Account, and laid the CHANGE of
Times and Laws at the Doors of ROME. But the particulars of WHAT Times and Laws
are changed? And -- WHAT Times and Laws are come in their place? And -- WHEN?
And -- by WHOM? is left as a Province for your Glory to bring to LIGHT; which
may (again) set ROME on Fire, either of Zeal, to amend what is amiss; Or burn
to Ashes of perpetual Silence and Oblivion, all their Lies and Changes.

I shall patiently wait one Month, to observe the Operation of this my Service;
which (if it prove ineffectual) I shall not forget that I am a Member of the
Church of Christ, (1 Cor. 12.26.) and of the Body Politic, Much less shall
deny my self to be First, and Eldest PHYSICIAN to his Majesty's Person in
Ordinary, and my DOCTORSHIP above 62 years standing: Having been Physician in
three Kings and Queens Courts of ENGLAND, besides many others. I must not
(therefore) Palliate the CURE, but search it to the Bottom; and accordingly
having discovered the CAUSE, prescribe the taking it away, that I may not be
unworthy of Subscribing my self,

London, May 29. 1682 My Lords, Your Graces and your Lordships most
Christian-Servant, PETER CHAMBERLEN.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord High CHANCELLOR of ENGLAND; and the Lord
Privy Seal; and the Lord MAYOR of LONDON: As also to both the Lord Chief
Justices, with the Lord Chief Baron; and all the rest of his Majesty's Judges,
Magistrates, and Justices throughout England. Truth, and Wisdom of God, is
wished through our Lord Jesus Christ. AMEN.
My Lords and Gentlemen.
VAlue not this Message, by the Meanness of the Messenger, but by the
IMPORTANCE of the Message. For --

1. If the words of Christ be true ( Mat. 12.25.) this KINGDOM is not far from
Desolation.

2. The Tripple-Crowned-Little-Horn-Change of TIMES and LAWS, which God thought
good to reveal ( Dan. 7.1, 25.) to his greatly beloved Prophet ( Dan. 9.23.)
And sent his Angel to interpret ( Dan. 7.15 16.) ought not to be undervalued by
Men of Wisdom and Honor.

3. Be you pleased to restore those TIMES and LAWS there spoken of, and you
will not find it a work so Contemptible, as some may imagine.

I have written to the most Reverend ARCHBISHOPS, and BISHOPS about it: They
being for the WORD as you for the SWORD. If then you be joined together in the
Work of the Lord, You will bring it to Light, and make it manifest that your
Work is wrought in God, (Joh. 3.20.21.)

If any Particulars lie hid, be pleased to command the LAMP of,

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your Lordships and Worships, Most
Loyal-English-Servant, Peter Chamberlen.
June 12. 1682.
To the Two LIGHTS of ENGLAND; the Two UNIVERSITIES of this Kingdom: And to all
their most worthy HEADS and MEMBERS. Truth, Wisdom and Honor from God our
Father, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
Ye celebrated Men of Wisdom and Learning.
THe TRIPLE-CROWNED-LITTLE-HORN, has so worried the Saints of the Most High,
out of the World with his blasphemous Endeavors of changing TIMES and LAWS,
that Men know not how to keep Time for their Laws, nor have any Law for their
Time.

But the Learned Dr. MORE (and several others) in their COMMENTARIES on DANIEL,
have laid the CHANGE of TIMES and LAWS at the Doors of ROME. Yet because (Dolus
versatur in universalibus) they seem not to be concerned.

There wants a NATHAN to say, Thou art the Man. (2 Samuel 12 7.) There wants some
to say, what Times, and what Laws, the Angel spoke of to Daniel? Dan. 7.25.

To which purpose I did write to the Most Reverend ARCHBISHOPS and BISHOPS, on
the Kings Birthday; and the most Honorable JUDGES in Term time, in the very
beginning. And now to your Selves (against your Days of Solemnity) that many
Hands may make light Work, Plus vident Oculi, quam Oculus.

If then you are pleased to make a Discovery of those TIMES and LAWS, you do
well; but if you can restore them, you do better: For (so extravagant is yet
the LITTLE-HORN in England) that if any Single Pen should draw the Curtain, and
discover the Nakedness of ANTICHRIST in those Times and Laws, they would
immediately bestow upon him the Curse of CHAM, or adjudge him to Fire and Faggot.

And the SCENT of the HORN is yet so Rank, that it is not in the Power of KING
and PARLIAMENT, to make a perfect Restoration.

Yet do not you refuse your helping hand --

Est aliquid prodire tenus, si non detur ultra. How strange would it appear, if
after all your Silence, my Goos-Quill should make a Noise, and awaken the
CAPITOL of ENGLAND to prevent a (total) Desolation prophesied by the Lord Jesus
Christ, ( Mat. 12.25.)

Let not this Service be unseasonable from

June 19. 1682. Your most humble Christian Servant, Peter Chamberlen.

ENGLANDS CHOICE, in believing Truth, or Falsehood, to Salvation, or Damnation.
CAN there be a greater Importance than SALVATION, or DAMNATION, of Kings, and
KINGDOMS? Can there be more unquestionable Credit than the WORD of Almighty
God? Of so great Consequence is believing the Truth, or a Lie. For, God shall
send them strong delusions (to bilieve a Lie) that they all may be damned who
receive not the truth in the love of it, but have pleasure in unrighteousness.
(2 These. 2.11, 12.) And Jesus Christ shall be revealed from Heaven with his
mighty Angels; in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. (2 These. 1.7, 8.) But to be
glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe. (Verse. 10.) Yet,
who has believed our report? and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed?
(Isa. 53.1.) For the Triple-crowned-little-HORN has opened his mouth, speaking
great things against the most High, and has worn out the Saints of the Most
High; has thought to change Times and Laws; and they have been given into his
hands, for a time, and times, and the dividing of times. (Dan. 7.25.) The Angel
says not to Daniel, that the little HORN did change Times and Laws; For (Genesis
8.22.) Till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or one tittle, in no wise shall
pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. (Mat. 5.18.) The HORN thought to
change Times and Laws, but the Saints believe, and swear they are changed; such
tough-little-Horn men Saints are grown. The little Horn makes the Lie, and
Saints believe the Lie. Are they not both joined together? ( Rev. 22.15.) I did
write to BISHOPS (on the Kings Birthday) that I must not palliate the Cure. To
STATESMEN (in the beginning of Midsummer Term) to offer my Lamp. And to the
UNIVERSITIES (about the solemn time of their Acts and Commencements) to make my
Goose-quill make a noise, and awaken the CAPITOL of ENGLAND. Promising also (if
they did not) I would answer the Question. But having heard no Answer, as if
what God had vouchsafed to reveal in a Vision to his greatly beloved Prophet, (
Dan, 9.23.) And his Angel to interpret it ( Dan. 7.16.) were all but a TRIFLE.
I shall boldly affirm, that the Times and Laws (there thought to be changed)
are the TIMES and LAWS of GOD; even the Commandments of God, and the Faith of
Jesus, (Rev. 14.12.)

To pass through the dark Meanders of the little Horn (that I might not
palliate the Cure) I shall light my Lamp, and fill my Quill; making a noise
over the Capitol to save the Nation; in rescuing the Laws of God from the
usurping THOUGHTS of the little Horn.

I shall lay before them, whether they would have but one Lawgiver, who is only
able to save? ( Jam. 4.12. Isa. 33.22.) Or many Lawgivers, who are only able to
destroy? Whether they will have God, or Mammon? (Mat. 6.24.) Christ, or Belial?
(2 Cor. 6.16.) For his servants we are to whom we obey. (Romans 6.16.) Whether
they will have the LAW of GOD, which is holy, just, good and spiritual? (Romans
7.12, 14.) Which also endures for even? (1 Pet. 1.25.) And which shall judge
us in the last day? (John 12.48.) Or the Changling-Times, and Laws of the
little HORN, which blaspheme God, and wear out the Saints; lasting no longer
than the next swearing Mark of the Beast? ( Rev. 13.16, 17.) Both which being
brought to the light ( Jo. 3.20, 21.) will be made manifest. ( Ephesians. 5.13.)
Behold now the Commandments in order.

Exo. 20.3. Deu. 5.7. But the Little-Horn has Gods many, and Lords many, (1
Cor* 8.5.) It Is also written, Faith is the gift of God, (Ephesians. 2.8.) But the
Little-Horn has Godfathers and Godmothers; to keep the Faith of the Children
in Pawn, till they come to Age.

Exo. 20.4, 5. Deu. 5.8, 9. But as the Heathen worshipped Juno, and Idolatrous
Israel the Cake-Queen of Heaven (Jer 7.18. chapter 44.18, 19.) to whom they poured
out drink offerings; as if they sold Ale and Cakes in Heaven: So the
Little-Horn worship the VIRGIN-QUEEN of Heaven, a Mother of Five Sons, and of
all their Sisters, ( Mat. 12.47. chapter 13.55, 56.) But this is not all the
worship which the little Horn has thought to change, for he has multiplied
WATER-GODS by Millions: Besides, all Saints, and all Souls are worshipped,
contrary to this Commandment. To this Commandment, Gods Statutes and Judgments
appoint Death (without mercy) unto Idolaters, Exo. 32.27. Number. 25.4-9. Chapter
31.1-13. Deu. 13.1-11. But the little Horn makes all IDOLATERS hail fellow well
met: As good as any Christians; calling themselves the Kings best Friends; and
their Witness as authentic as the Kings Evidence.

Exo. 20.7. Deu. 5.11. Men (formerly) did swear in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness, (Jer. 4.2.) But Christ says, Swear not at all, (Mat. 5.34) And
his Servant James says, Above all things (my brethren) swear not, (Jam. 5.12.)
But the little Horn allows, imposes, and maintains Swearing, Forswearing,
and Fals-swaring, as things meritorious for the MOTHER CHURCH; though for these
things the Land mourns, ( Jer. 23.10. Hos. 4.2, 3.)

Exo. 20.8, 9, 10, 11. Deu. 5.12, 13, 14, 15. But the little Horn has changed
that time, giving the Lie to the Seventh day; and says (in plain terms) that
the First day is the Sabbath of the Lord: So that here the time is changed
every Week. Then, from Even to Even was the Sabbath, ( Lev. 23.32.) Now, from
Morning to Evening is the Sabbath. Then, they might not speak their own words,
nor do their own works, nor take their own pleasure, ( Isa. 58.13.) Now, they
have all liberty of works, or sports, or words.

Exo. 20.12. Deu. 5.16. A stubborn and rebellio^^ Son, must be brought by his
Father and Mother to the Elders of the City, to be stoned to death. (Deu.
21.18-22.) But the little Horn has thought to change this Law, so as to make
it MURDER.

Exo. 20.13. Deu. 5.17. It Is written, Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed, (Genesis 9.6.) But the little Horn grants a Pardon.

Exo. 20.14. Deu. 25.18. This was punished with Death: ( Lev. 20.10.) But the
little Horn thinks to change it into Penance of a White Sheet.

Exo. 20.15. Deu. 5.19. The Thief (formerly) was to restore four fold, or be
sold. ( Exo. 22.1.3.) But the little Horn hangs up men for Thirteen-pence
halfpenny, and confiscateth all his Goods.

Exo. 20.16. Deu. 5.20. The false Witness (formerly) was to have it done to
him, as he thought to have done to another: Life for Life, Eye for Eye; Tooth
for Tooth; Hand for Hand; Foot for Foot, (Deu. 19.18, 19. Exo. 21.23, 24, 25.)
But the little Horn thinks to change it into a Pillory, or Pardon.

Exo. 20.17. Deu. 5.21. Covetousness was punished in Achans whole Family, (
Josh. 7.21-27.) But the little Horn passes all Scot-free; punishing none,
unless a Cheat, or Fraud, be found, and proved. Thus the Laws of these Commands
are thought to be changed.

Behold the little Horn now in the Faith of Jesus.

1. As to BAPTISM. Jesus says, except one be born from above, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God. (John 3.3.) He also says, Except one be born of Water, and
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. (John 3.5.) The little
Horn is so charitable as to crowd in all Infants, and take the Kingdom of God
by force of Circumcision; least he should lose so many Fees and Members of his
Church.

It Is true; Circumcision was under the LAW; but the little Horn has Placed
RANTISM in the room of it, and called it Baptism.

1. Then Males only were circumcised. But the little Horn rantiseth both Sexes.

2. Then the eighth day was precisely appointed. (Genesis 17.12. Chapter 21.4. Exodus
5.25, 26.) But now (at any time) Infants are rantised, when the
little-Horn-Gossips can agree about it.

3. Then Circumcision was in the Foreskin. Now Rantism is in the Face, with a
Cross in the Forehead.

4. Then they went down into the Water; were baptized, and buried under water;
( Romans 6.4.) rising again out of the Rivers, and many Waters. As Jesus ( Mat.
3.16 17.) John in Enon (Jo. 3.23.) Philip and the Enuch ( Acts 8.38.) But now a
BASIN, or Sucking-Bottle will serve turn.

5. To Baptism is required Faith. ( Mark 16.16. Acts 8.37.) Now they only
require it in Parents, who are misbelievers.

6. Then Jesus took a journey from Galilee to Jordan, to be Baptized of John. (
Mat. 3.13.) But the little- Horn saves all that Labor, by bringing Rantism
into a Chamber. Thus the little Horn has thought to change the Times and Laws
of Baptism under the Gospel.

2. As to the LORDS SUPPER. This was instituted about Midnight, in the end of
eating the Passover. (Exodus 12.29.31.42. Mat. 26, 26, 27. Mark 14.22, 23. Luke
22.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. Mat. 25.6. Acts 20.7, 8.11.) in breaking of
Bread, and drinking of Wine, But the little Horn (by virtue of Tapers and
Lamps) do enlighten their dark mysteries in all times of Night, or Day,
throughout the year; transubstantiating the visible WATER, into the invisible
Flesh and Blood of Christ: making them swallow it whole, Bones and all, as
often as they please, to the very last Moment of their Breath; That they may be
as well provided of Victuals (for so great a Journey as Heaven) like the
provision of ELIAS, who at one meal was sufficiently fed for a Journey of 40
Days, and 40 Nights, to Horeb, the Mount of God. (1 Kings 19.8.)

But some are so favorable, as to avoid the Evil report of NIGHT-MEETINGS, to
have Bread and Wine at Noonday; with two unlighted Tapers, to show it should
be Midnight. Thus has the little Horn mangled and changed hoth times, things,
and meaning of the very words.

I appeal, therefore to all Bishops, Statesmen, Magistrates, and Universities,
whether these Changes of Times and Laws, are not of the Times and Laws of God?
And of unthroning Christ, the LAWGIVER? Likewise, whether King and Kingdom,
had better continue in the Little-Horn-Changes (which they are sworn to) or be
forsworn to keep the COMMANDMENTS of God and the FAITH of Jesus.

LONDON: Printed for H. Jones, 1682.


