THE USE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE Gravely and Methodically DISCOURSED: By WILLIAM
CHAPEL Bishop of Cork, sometimes Fellow of Christ's College In CAMBRIDGE. A
Work of singular benefit to Divines, and all men, to establish themselves, and
others in the Perfection, Perspicuity, and Efficacy of Gods Word, against
Atheists, Heathens, Romanists, Enthusiasts, and all other Unbelievers and
Misbeleevers, etc. TO WHICH Is prefixed a Preface, by a friend to the Author,
as an Introduction to the TREATISE.

London, Printed by E.C. for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in Paul's
Churchyard, 1653.

The Preface.
THE following Treatise thus undressed, was put into mine hands near Twenty
years since (by the very Reverend, Learned, and grave Author) to be privately
used by me, as by some other of his friends, of whom he was not ashamed to be
seen thus: and to whose capacity he yielded so to lisp.

So exemplarily modest, and yet so discreetly exact he was, that he liked not
to be much in sight of a censorious world, though he merited as little ill from
any, as he meant, which is no other than love and all Christian offices.

If notwithstanding he pleased to be public, he would come forth (never in
fantastical affectation, but) in substantial comeliness.

And thus should these bones of his have appeared, if he had pleased to
fulfill them; and happily more, or fewer.

Yet as they are, they may be known to whom they once belonged: And very many
will call him gladly to mind, though I name him not.

Shortly, though the excellent Author intended it (perhaps) never to see the
wide world, the Atheistical wicked world, the world that scorns the Theme of
his Notes, the H. Scripture, and by scattering words [that men do, or may make
it an Idol] exposes it, and God withal, to the vulgar, hate, contempt, and
worse: Yet it were, I suppofe, some injustice to the dead, great injury to the
living, and a spice of Sacrilege (besides ungratefulness) in me, to steal, in
a sort, by concealing to my self this thing, but thus much devoted to the
Church, or bestowed upon Churchmen.

I have therefore (with Gods approbation, and motion, I hope) endeavored to do
the Author and posterity this right, after my small ability, as not to deprive
them of the great fruit they may, with me, and some others, reap from this
labor; nor Him of the public improvement of this his Talent, as it is.

And I have the rather been so rude with my once very reverend friend, lest
some other should (for I hear that his papers are enquired for abroad, to
benefit the public, as they are) put this scorn upon me, that any man should
be readyer than my self, to bear blame for so deserving a friend.

One thing only seemed to remain of the Text, the ground of the Discourse,
though nothing of the Work designed by the Author; who in declaring the every
good use of holy Scripture according to Art and Method, in useful Notes,
obtained the hither-end of that, whereof the further end is, Gods glory (whose
Word he so commends) joined with our neighbour-mans salvation.

That of the Text which seemed to me presupposed by the Author, and not
discussed, I thought was left for some other, and (since none other will) it
seems for me.

The H. Apostle in the former part of the Chapter 2 Timothy 3. describes the
impiety of the last times, propounding himself, his doctrine, manners, and
sufferings to Timothy, and all that would live godly in Christ's Jesus, for an
example; in the 14 v. exhorts Timothy to continue in the things which he had
learned, and was assured of; and that from his knowledge both of the person
from whom he learned them, viz. the Apostle, a man inspired by God, and of the
holy Scriptures which are commended v. 15. from their ability or power of
making a man wise unto salvation through faith in Christ. Which his knowledge
of the Scriptures, is illustrated from its duration in party to Timothy's age.
From a child (says the Apostle) thou have known the holy Scriptures.

In these two last verses 16, and 17. he ascends from the hypothesis, or
special, to the thesis, or general, commending the H. Scrip. From their
Author God, who gave them by inspiration: and from their profit or usefulness
in the rest of the text, the 16 v. (which is the matter of the following
Treatise, as is the former of this Preface) which profit is illustrated from a
certain end thereof, 17. v. that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished to all good works.

But ere I proceed it is requisite that it be showed what is their cohaerence
and use in the Body of Divinity, the Truth, 1 Timothy 6 3 Tit. 1.1.
or Doctrine, according to godliness.

And thus it seems to me to stand.

That God our Lord decreed from all aeternity to exert and communicate his
goodness abroad, and in the fullness of time according thereunto he performed
his determination. Quaecunque voluit fecit, Psa. 135.6.
Whatsoever the LORD would, he did, in the Heavens, in the Earth, in the Sea,
and in all deep places, says the Psalmist. That most single, pure,
incorporeall act the LORD resolved to make a Creature like (not equal) to
himself. Therefore the first Creature he is believed to have made, was after
his own image, spiritual, to wit, the Angels; and so last, the soul of man;
which at first he breathed into our Grandfather Adam, and still goes on,
working hitherto, by a con-naturall act, to increate, or congenerate into
bodies, receptacles prepared for it. God and man propagate mankind, who are
one part the Image of God, that is, in the soul, the other part the body, in
the Image of Man.

To give to Adam and to us his race only being without activity or power of
working, had been to small purpose; therefore he made us active creatures, and
that with an higher extent of activity then the Horse and Mule who have no
understanding, even Reason and Will: though man being in honor understood not
(as he might,) but became (through his fault) like the beast that perishes.

Now this Reason and Will had been in vain, if it had no end to aim at, neither
God, his Creatours glory, nor its own happiness. Power of choice had been
rather a burden, yea, a curse, than an ease or blessing, had there been no
rule, no good means leading to this end, which means men ought to choose,
refusing the contrary: Therefore God prescribed a Religion, or manner of
Service, whereby he would be believed and worshipped. This Service or
Religion had been in vain, unless it had been either written, and imprinted in
our hearts, as it was in Adams, or else written and printed in visible, and
legible characters to be read of every man, as (the Lord be blessed) it is in
our Bibles, propagated and continued by good hands, through the power and
goodness of God, from Father to Son, from Predecessors to Posterity, to our
time, and we trust will be to the worlds end.

More fully and distinctly, take it, if you please, thus.

We have received from God a reasonable soul, after his image, and capable of
him. An understanding fit to reflect upon our Creator, and, in our measure,
behold his glorious Nature, a natural and inbred desire of enjoying God, and
restless (if not some way besotted till it come unto him.

Now if God (as Heathen Philosophers could observe) have, even in inferior
Creatures put no power, ability, or natural desire in vain; how then shall we
imagine that in man, the abridgment or brief module of the world, the lively
Image of God, for whose Creation there was, as it were, a Council called in
Heaven, Come let us make Man; Genesis 1.
God should in vain place a nature not perfectible without Him? But all this
have we received in vain, if God shall not reveal himself, and the things of
God unto us.

For it is impossible God should be known or enjoyed by any, but to whom he
shall manifest himself, (who, as he is the beatificall object, so is he the
sole Author of the acts of seeing and enjoying himself, and all other in order
thereunto) or any thing be effectually believed concerning him, whereof
himself, who only knows himself, has not testified.

And howsoever by the Creation of the World, God has somewhat manifested
himself; yet could that never have satisfied man's soul in innocence, much less
now after the Fall; since when, unless God had graciously given Revelation,
we were prone to abuse that of him, which shines in his works, as may appear
by the Heathens foolish conceits of God, and more in the Treatise following.

Moreover, alas! we could never have thought of Redemption by Christ, nor of
Grace to be had, and obedience to be yielded here, nor of Glory to be
inherited hereafter, no not by the help of all the Angels, had not God himself,
who only knows his own will, revealed them. Of which you will find solid
discourse in the Book following.

And indeed it did not bseem the nature of God, nor befit our condition, that
we should be the devisers of worship for God: His wisdom knows best what
worship may beseem us to do unto him, and how to devise and prescribe the
same. It beseems his Justice to be the Rule of that Worship, and his Will the
enjoyner of it: seeing the very formality, or being of worship consists in
conformity or sutablenesse to the Justice and Will of the party worshipped, and
his goodness alone is to be the rewarder of it. Good reason he should reveal
this, who is to punish omission, and reward obedience.

And though we were bound by the act of Creation, much more of Redemption, to
worship him; yet did it not benefit us to pay this debt, till he should
prescribe wherein. No though we could have devised fit worship: Much less
since the Fall, whereby we are so infatuated, and besotted, and the worship now
required challenging such an height of knowledge, as Men and Angels never could
have aspired unto.

Finally, a man could never have peace of conscience in any duty he performed,
except his Maker and Redeemers good pleasure had been revealed unto him, and
unless all the H. Scripture had been given by inspiration from God; the Author
giving it the Authority it justly challenges.

The Holy Gods words penned by his inspired Apostle, or Man of God, here, are

[(...)] (...), Scripture] I am resolved not to dispute, whether only the sense
of Gods Word were inspired, or the words also. I never yet met with those
arguments of the former assertion, which I conceive, a man of not so strong and
excellent parts as the Learned Defenders thereof, might not reasonably solve,
and yet acknowledge the diverse readings consonantly enough.

My sense is (with reverence to greater judgment, and readiness to submit to
better reasons than yet I see, if it shall be thought wholesome and seasonable
to produce them) that the word [Scripture] in this place is wrapped in two
Tropes or Figurative expressions: First, by a Synecdoche, of the general for
the more special, Scripture is put for holy Scripture,

I see not cause enough to doubt of this,

That both Holy writ it self, that is, the holy things written in the Canonical
Scripture of the Bible; as also the scription, penning, or writing of those
holy Books at first, are both of them given by inspiration of God.

(...), All] But of one kind, all (as I shall touch ere we part) all that
Scripture, the holy Scripture in the verse next foregoing mentioned. (...), The
whole Scripture of this kind, Ephesians. 2 21. 1 John 2.2.
of the Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, and the like to them, is Canonical,
not passively, as if it could not be a Rule or Canon, unless men would
authorize it for one, but actively, because it gives, or is a Rule to man, of
right, even to him that indeed will not be ruled by it. And it seems, there is
some (...) excellency in the singular number (...) employed, as if it excelled
Plato, Aristotle, and all men's writings. The Scripture of scriptures is the
holy Scripture, and that because (...), given by inspiration of God]

Breathed or inspired by God] this is the word.

But what is the thing?

The Divine Writer to the Hebrews affirms, That God spoke unto our Fathers by
the Prophets (...), Heb. 1.1.
at sundry times, and in diverse manners, whereof this was one.

Speaking is taken largely sometimes for all manner of ways of Revelation.

Sometimes he spoke to their outward senses, as to their sight and hearing in
particular. To their Hearing, either by a voice created for that purpose, This
is my beloved Son, Mat. 3.17.
in whom I am well-pleased: Or by a voice framed by the ministry of an Angel
in an assumed body. Genesis 19.1.15. etc.
Thus the Angels spoke to Lot to remove out of Sodom. Or lastly, properly by a
voice uttered by the mouth of his Son, (...), and of holy men of God who spoke
as they were carried or acted by the holy Ghost.

He spoke (in a borrowed large sense) likewise to their eyes, either by
apparitions, or especially by the written Word of God: and this manifestation
was partly called Vision, and perhaps from hence the Prophets of old, were
called Videntes Seers.

God has also revealed himself to men by speaking to them inwardly, sometimes
to their fancy by dreams, 33 Job 14.5, Numb. 12.6, 8.
6. verses.

Lastly, after a manner unspeakable, God has manifested himself to the minds
of men, by dictating his Mind, and Will, and Word, to men chosen by him for
that end. And this way of Revelation is called Inspiration.

Thus all holy Scripture is given by inspiration of God, as we believe.

And that upon such arguments as are incomparably beyond all, brought in for
evidence to beget belief of any other Religion; and such as to which nothing
can be opposed to make them not to be very credible. Which alone, if true, is
a sufficient act on the proposers part to beget (not knowledge which requires
scientificall, and the more artificial arguments, but) such a Faith as the
Motives or arguments thereof, are fit to persuade, those arguments coming in
their several proper powers.

This is a work which diverse have had in hand, and brought to good pass, and
it had succeeded better toward its high end but that the envious man will not
endure any thing shall pass for an argument here, but one, the testimony of
man, and that of none of the best friends of holy Scripture. Had not some of
our own Divines decryed the Works of those other learned men of ours, which
they cannot assent to, because their Interest says they shall not, and herein
assisted the adversary brought on his knees in the conflict, Gods word had
found a freer passage, and more belief upon the same, and better grounds.

The arguments made use of in this matter, are not all of one nature, some of
them more directly tending to win belief, that these are the writings derived
to us by hands of very great note from the holy pen men thereof, and the purest
times: Others to gain and beget, with the holy Spirits efficacy in and with
them such a Faith, as (Interests, self-love, Gal. 5.6. Heb. 11.33 Romans 13.8.
etc. Gal. 5.14. Acts 15.9.26.18.
and such other prejudices laid aside) will work by love, will, in acceptable
measure, work righteousness, keep the Commandments.

Lastly, purifying, and sanctifying the heart (as holy Scripture speaks) and
overcoming the world is accompanied with Justification and Salvation, 1 John
5.4. Romans 5.1. Mar. 16.16. Heb. 11.1, 33.
so obtaining the promises. Between which two considerations there is wide
distance, which, well considered, will solve the Grand Difficulties in these
Cases objected.

An argument that will pass among many Christians, is the holy Scriptures
Testimony concerning it self, or properly Gods Testimony in holy Scripture
concerning it. L. 3. de Gubernat Dei.
All sayings besides (says Salvian) need arguments and witnesses to confirm
them, Dei autem sermo ipse sibi testis est, quia necesse est, quicquid
incorrupta veritas loquitur, incorruptum sit testimonium. Men may, 1 John 5.9.
God cannot lie. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is
greater. Our Savior speaking perhaps by concession, according to the vulgar
opinion, perhaps otherwise, says, If I bear witness of my self, John 5.31.
(happily, [and have no other witness] is understood) my witness is not true, it
will not pass, or let it not. But speaking according to their Law, and
directly, he says, Yet if I judge, my judgment is true; for I am not alone,
but I and the Father that sent me. It is also written in your Law, that the
testimony of two men is true, ( i.e. must pass) I am one that bears witness
of my self, and the Father that sent me bears witness of me.

That God the Father, and J. Christ the Son, and holy Ghost, all bear record to
holy Scripture, has been substantially proved by others; and the same in
effect lately, Dr. Ham. Reason. of Christ. Rel.
by a very pious, diligent, and learned Writer of our own, who does all things
like himself.

This proof, me thinks, cannot reasonably be refused by the Church of Rome. For
why should not the Scripture be believed testifying it self to be Gods Word, at
least as well as they who (the greatest part of the world denying it) affirm
themselves the only true Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ, and only
people of God?

I desire the Reader to peruse these Texts and compare them, and I shall add
no more to this head.

Romans 9. v. 17. Exodus 9. v. 16. Genesis 12. v. 3. Gal. 3. v. 8. Romans 11. v. 32.
Gal. 3. v. 22. Exodus 17. v. 5. Jer. 1. v. 2, 4, 7, 9, 11. etc. Acts 28. v. 25.
etc. Mat. 11. v. 4. 2 Cor. 13. v. 3. Ephesians. 2. v. 17. 2 Pet. 1. v. 20, 21. and 3.
v. 15, 16. Heb. 1. v. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 3. v. 15. etc. 4. v. 6, 7.

But if the Atheist will (as his irreligion ingages him) not accept this for a
proof, since he cannot without manifest contradiction to himselse, both deny
that God is, and affirm that he speaks: Yet are we not destitute of such
proofs, as some apart, but more all together, will either convince him, or
prove him a fool.

These tend either to beget humane or divine belief, according as they are.

The former sort spring from the witness of man, which though it cannot beget
divine belief, because nor Faith, nor any other effect can rise higher than the
cause whence it proceeds, and in which it is founded; yet may it by Gods Order
and Dispensation prepare a man to divine belief.

And without doubt the Testimony of the Church was so evident authority to S.
Austin, no fool, that he must upon the credit of so many honest, knowing,
welmeaning men, believe this (or be fit to be hissed for an incredulous fool)
that those Scriptures on which they preached, and which they professed, were
the Originals, or else Copies of the holy Scripture, or Writings of Inspired
men, most of them bearing their proper Authors name in their Front. Of which
their Testimony they were able and ready to give exact account out of their
Archives and Registers: so their predecessors upward till the Apostles.

There are some witnesses to part, (as Jews and Turks our professed enemies,
and therefore willingly testifying nothing for us) and to all of it many
thousands Saints and Martyrs, no atrabiliary malcontents, but advisedly
resolved, sober Christians, who have sealed to the divine Truth in hand, and
the consequents thereof otherwise, or with their dearest blood: and some of
them so uninteressed in the world, and wholly devoted to Gods glory and the
peoples good; Exodus 32.32. Romans 9.3.
that they could therefore have been content to have lost their lives at least,
yea and their souls.

This argument indeed from humane Testimony, can but prove that Jesus our
Savior, the holy Apostles, etc. spoke or wrote these words; as some of them
knew, the rest believed.

The other prove the Divinity thereof, and are together fit and sufficient to
beget divine belief, and they are such as with divine authority have influence
into the Heart of Man, and do build our Faith more immediately on Gods Truth,
into which only, the best Faith must be analyzed; no principle, to him that
confesses this to be truly affirmed of God (that he is a Spirit infinite in
all perfection, and therefore in truth) being in it self more evident than this
conclusion is, (it is therefore surely true, because God says it.)

Now Divine arguments are of two sorts: Such as have power public of
convincing all men; or such an one as has strength to convince and assure
privately, and that savingly, such as resist it not.

Those of the former sort, are either such outward actions of God about the
holy Scriptures, as do strongly argue that they came from him, as his signs,
miracles and apparitions wonderful, either significative of his presence, or
representative of his person. The strange light, the thick darkness, a private
and public, loud and still voice, in a humane shape by his Angels, if not by
his own Son as a Praeludium to his humanity, which after he took in the truth
of Incarnation. These strange things either were wrought by God (and then holy
Scripture is his Word, who is so just and holy, that he would never have used
them to confirm a doctrine false, or none of his) or else not wrought by him,
and then it is the greatest miracle of all, that the world without miracles
should believe a Doctrine so contrary to self-love and worldly interest, that
the wisest Heathens, as they were short in the degree of teaching and urging
virtue, so they could in no kind once think of the proper Tenants and
Institutes of Christianity.

Or moreover, God has done other deeds to prove the H. Scriptures to be given
of himself. These are either concerning it, or by it.

Concerning it: He has kept it in all necessary particulars, both sense and
words unaltered, unmixt; so as his Justice, Wisdom, and Power, so as his just
Titles of Lawgiver, King, Lord, Father, Just, merciful Judge, require of him,
besides our necessity. And to doubt hereof, were so far forth to doubt whether
we should love and serve him, or indeed believe that he is God, that is,
infinite in all perfections. He has kept it against so many great inroads and
invasions of the Devil and his instruments, a wicked persecuting world, and
false Brethren, Traditores Traitors against it, in such alteration of times,
and vicissitude of affairs; though it crossed the corrupt reason and affection
of people soaked in Idolatry and sinful lusts, living at ease; whereas this
Book, and Doctrine thereof was attended with the Cross, and persecution.

By it God has done strange deeds; overthrown the kingdom of Satan so long
and strongly founded in the world, standing on the two main pillars of Devils
Oracles, and Demons Idolatry; and established his own in the hearts of many
millions, so deeply, as that they dare die for it; in so short a time, that
though Gods Word, without the efficacy of the holy Ghost, be a cross to the
mind, and flesh, or sensual appetite of man; and the Ministers few, inferior,
infirm, (yet of undaunted courage) opposed by Adversaries subtle, powerful,
in authority, of contrary practice and profession; and withal exasperated with
calamities which they imputed to Christians and to the change of Religion: yet
the work of their Conversion, and the fall of Satan was as quick as lightning.

Now those arguments proving the holy Scriptures divinity which God set or
implanted therein, are considered either Simply, or Comparatively one part with
another.

In the former are to be considered the kind of the Doctrine, and the phrase of
H. Writ.

The Doctrine is propounded to man in Precepts, wherein not only the matter and
substance of duties, in themselves holy, are enjoined (which argues the
holiness of that God who commands them for our good) and are confidently
prescribed to be done by man, though cross to his flesh and blood, (which
argues Gods omnipotence) but also the manner of their performance is required
to be out of conscience, and love to God and our neighbors, without hypocrisy
or impurity of the heart, which is known to God alone. Hence appears in the
scripture (as the former attributes of holiness and omnipotence, so)
omniscience also.

It comes to man moreover in promises and threats, which are so many Motives to
man to observe the precepts to do them, and can be fulfilled or executed only
by God, and available to move no man but the conscience of such as acknowledge
the precepts to come from God. The authority of man's bare commandment depends
upon the proveableness of its justice and equity: but the authority of Gods
commands depends upon their power from God.

Neither is it only propounded to man, but also otherwise exercises it self
about him, as in declaring and tendering severity to the wicked, mercy to the
Just, and the fit temperature of them both in Christ; so that although God
dearly love his Creature, yet he will not be reconciled without a Mediator,
and him besprinkled with his own life-bloud, though he be his Son: whom
indeed, having suffered, he will raise up, place at his right hand, make a King
and Savior to the sons of men, Author of Salvation to all that obey him.

Yea though God would have all men to be saved; yet he applies powerfully the
efficacy of his obedience and sufferings to Believers and poenitent Sinners
only, and to such as by their obedience and sufferings are, or are ready to be
conformed to the Image of his Son: And unto them he imparts a greater measure
of glory than ever Adam in his best integrity was capable of, viz. to sit on
Christ's own Throne with him, as Members with the Head.

By the phrase of Scripture, I mean not the concinnitic, and elegancie, and
bravery of the flourish of the style, (though there want not some who dare with
the Song of Moses, the Psalm of David, Deuteronomy. 33. Psalm. 104.
and the beginning of the Prophet Isaiah, challenge the loftiest wing of Homer
to soar a pitch, and the Prince of Latin Poets to sing a strain) But the
attributes of perfection given it, which God its Author claims to himself, as
to be the searcher of the heart, and trier of the reins, Almighty in a sort,
etc. which it acts in a strange manner, whether you consider the persons to
whom Kings as well as Peasants, nay the Prince of darkness, and the whole world
without exemption of any; or the manner of denouncing and commanding in
expressions of Majesty (which in any but God, were insufferable, being to all
men) I am the LORD thy God, no other Preface. I the LORD have spoken it, this
is the Conclusion. Thou shall, thou shall not, upon pain of evils here and in
hell, or in hope of the promises of the life that now is, and (in heaven) that
is to come. Here Is the style.

The Harmony of one part with another, is found by comparing the Doctrines
uttered and penned in such distance of times and places by so many Writers: Of
whom in the old Testament Isaiah was sawen to pieces by Manassch, Jeremy, Zech.
1.1. Mat. 23.35
Ezekiel, Amos, slain, and Zechariah the son of Berachiah between the Temple
and the Altar; and diverse writers of the New Testament, and all this for the
only profession of that truth which they spoke and wrote, and would not recant.

Moreover, by comparing the Figures with their Antitype, the shadow with its
body. How fit a body was our Jesus to their Isaac, Heb. 11.19.
whom Abraham received from the dead in a figure; to Sampson, to the Prophet
Jonah, and his other shadows!

Add hereto predictions or prophesies with their conform or answerable event,
even in things most contingent, and often to man's reason, next impossible, and
that long before. Is. 41.21, 22, 23.44.7.
Here is the finger of God without doubt. Which of the Heathen Gods ever yet
answered the Prophet Isaiah's challenge? Compare only Genesis 15. v. 13, 14. with
Exodus 12. v. 40, 41. and wonder.

The antiquity of H. Scripture above the writings of the Heathen is not
nothing; But I pass it, and end this Disquisition with that argument, which
serves not so to convince other men, as savingly to ascertaine some few, such
namely as resist not, but receive it. This is the Testimony of the holy Ghost
witnessing this truth [that holy Scripture is given by inspiration of God]
which he does by inlightning the mind to conceive it; by inlivening and
strengthening the heart with abilities to perform the commands therein
contained, in expectation of the precious promises, which the same holy Spirit
convinces the mind to be faithful and true, and converts the will to count
them good, worthy of all acceptance, and by his most powerful grace (God only
knows how) makes us (all worldly selflove laid aside) rely upon the Lord Jesus
only for righteousness and life; in the promises whereof the said holy Spirit
confirms and establishes us, Ephesians. 4.36.1.13, 14.
sealing us to the day of Redemption, with the holy Spirit of promise, the
earnest of our ininheritance (...), till Godfetch out, by complete Redemption,
his sealed; and they enjoy the purchased possession, unto the praise of his
glory.

Note here, that we speak of the Spirit of Christ (no other Spirit) that takes
of Christ's Gospel, Ioh. 16.14. Gal. 1.8.9 Ioh. 14 26,
(no other Gospel) and thus causes the praise of his glory, or glorifies him.
Brings Christ's sayings to their remembrance, and not the Devils or Man's
Enthusiasms, or conceits of Infallibility.

This holy Spirit of God, we may, must follow, not fearing any giddyness in a
round objected to this part. For neither is it all one (as I have said) to
believe such a Chapter and verse to be Canonical; and to believe it when it
appears to be so: Nor do we offer to prove to them by this argument, that holy
Scripture is Gods Word; only we say, Gods Spirit proves it unto us.

Of this infinite favor, giving holy Scripture by inspiration, Gods goodness
to weak forgetful man, and his Justice, that he might judge the world
righteously, and his wisdom, who knew what was best for us; were the proper
sources or Originals; 2 Pet. 1.19.
That we might have a more sure word of Prophecy, (because written) then that
which came by unwritten Tradition, ready to be forgotten, even that word of God
to become Scripture, or that holy Doctrine, written by holy men of God in the
Church, which was before the Church was, by, and to which the Church and every
live Member thereof was called from the beginning. Psalm. 93.5.
That these sure testimonies which were written afore-time might be for our
Learning, even a Lamp to our Feet, Psalm. 119.105. Romans 15.4. 2 Pet. 1.19.
and a Light to our Paths, a light shining in a dark place (making obscurities
plain) that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope:
For our example, 1 Cor. 10.6, 11.
for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come. That it might be
the rule of that worship required of us by God. It is written, Mat. 4.10.
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. That we
may learn, 1 Cor. 4.6. 1 Pet. 4.11.
not to think above that which is written, and if we speak, to speak as the
Oracles of God. Ioh. 5.39. 1 Ioh. 4.1. Acts 17.11. Acts 5.29. Ioh. 10.4, 8, 16.
Mat. 7.15.
That we may try the Spirits whether they bt of God or no, and that by
searching the Scriptures (as the noble Bereans did.) That we may learn to
hear and obey Christ's voice, not the voice of a stranger, to obey God more
then men, to know the true Shepherd from such as come in Sheeps clothing, and
are ravenous Wolves.

In a word, 2 Timothy 3.15.
for all those ends and uses in the verse before the text, That a man may be
wise to salvation through faith in Christ, answerable to that of Saint John,
Ioh. 20.31.
These things are witten that ye might believe, and believing, might have life
through his name. In the verse following the Text, 2 Timothy 3.17.
that the Man of God may be perfect thoroughly furnished unto all good works: V.
16.
and in the Text, All H. Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, (or confutation) for correction, and for
instruction in righteousness; which ends comprehensive of all other, are the
Subject of the Discourse following.

Now what cause have we poor men (justly deprived of original righteousness
living as without God in the world, not having him in all our thoughts) to
bless Gods Holy Name, who gave us this New Light, the last Revelation of his
whole Counsel, his entire last Will and Testament, Rev. 22.18, 19.
to which nothing is to be added, from which nothing to be diminished, under
the highest plagues and forfeitures, expressed in most terrible words by the
dreadful God who gave them by inspiration, even the holy Scripture!

Which therefore is (...). A word faithful in it self, worthily believed,
worthy of all acceptance. So truth it self, that it only is fit to be standard
and rule of all saving truth, a perfect Canon, a never failing Touchstone to
try all spirits.

And can receive no authority or strength from man, as if the Churches
definition made it a (...) or Rule, who found it as it is (for we hope they
added or subtracted nothing) But from God it has to be a rule to man in order
to his happiness, from whom it has to be.

Let the 20. Article of our English Confession, to which we formerly
subscribed, speak its mind.

The Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and authority in
Controversies of Faith; And yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing that is contrary to Gods word written; neither may it so expound one
place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore although the
Church be a witness and keeper of holy Writ, yet (as it ought not to decree
any thing against the same, so) besides the same ought it not to enforce any
thing to be believed for necessity of salvation.

The 21. Article says thus,

General Councels mvy err, and sometimes have erred, even in things
pertaining unto God. Wherefore things ordained by them, as necessary to
salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that
they be taken out of holy Scripture.

To these we heartily subscribed as to points about the chief foundation of
Reformation in Religion: The contrary assertion being the strongest Hold and
Castle of the errors we forsook.

Who, after all this, dare dispense with any standing and fundamental Canon in
H. Writ? Who dare say, I man am above Gods word? when none but the Author can
give authority of this sort, as is somewhat too clear to need proving.

And for my part, I dare not ascribe such (...), authentickness and
infallibility to the judgment of any men, be he preacher or private person
(though never so wise or honest) as to give away the H. Scriptures prerogative,
which it could receive from none but Gods Inspiration.

If I should believe any thing in Religion to be true or false (whoever spoke
it) upon a man's bare word, without express Scripture, or good consequence
rightly deducible therefrom; I should have cause to think, I had exchanged my
Nature of Man for that of Beasts, who follow the Herd, not always qua eundum,
which way they should, but qua itur, after the gang: or else good Religion for
bad, to believe in man in stead of God: or else my reason with a Fool, to trust
another man's eyes, rather than mine own, in things I can well see.

Never was there mere man always free from error, God and his Word only are so
true, as infallible. But all men are liers (so far as that possibly they may
err, and do) says the man inspired by God; and that very sentence was given
by inspiration.

It remains that I humbly desire my countrymen to do themselves a favor or
two.

One is, to be as willing every word of Scripture should be true and good, as
men are, that the stories thereof (which little concern them) be true; and the
promises thereof (which please them well) should be good. Or I make it mine
hearty request, that they be wel-pleased to believe the same of the precepts
and threatenings of Divine Inspiration in holy Scripture, that they do of the
promises. i.e. That the thing in every of them propounded is good, therefore to
be consented to and embraced, as well as the proposition that carries it, is
true, and to be firmly assented unto. This were a complete believing.

And all cause in the world, why I should prevail. For God is (...), The only
wise (says the Apostle) whose understanding is infinite. Therefore knows
perfectly what he says. Psa. 147.5. Is. 49.7. Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.18.
He is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel (...) who cannot lie, not possibly.

Besides that we highly honor God the Author in believing his Word, thereby
giving him the glory of his veracitie, the contrary whereof makes, i.e. counts
him a liar, or behaves it self, as if it did. We shall reap the sweet comfort
thereof in the evil day, amidst all assaults, and sing, I know whom I trusted,
God in his Word; God that cannot lie, who is faithful and righteous in all his
ways and Chasiadh good, kind, holy in all his works, and in none more than
this work, his holy Word.

And for my part, if I were certain any implicit Faith would serve my turn in
all points, I durst not venture on the Colliers round Faith, Quid credis? Fidem
Ecclesiae. Quid Ecclesia? Meam Fidem. But would dare to trust my soul upon the
H. Scripture, and believe most firmly that to be highly true and good, which
God the Author had inspired as the sense of it, whatever that sense should fall
out to be.

To this H. Scripture we must submit our selves as to the high Law of the King
of Kings, and Lord of all, even Lords. In so doing, God will reap the honor,
we the benefit.

There is one only request to make to Scholars, Divines, who have their senses
exercised in the Scriptures.

It is, that some one or more would gather up the fragments, the jods and
tittles of this inspired Word, that nothing be lost, and compile them in a Work
together.

Plainly, Very many have taken great good pains in Commentaries, Glosses,
Annotations. And of this last sort (disparaging none) Erasmus, Beza, and
Grotius, men of vast parts, all. These, here and there, have gathered up the
Adverbs, Conjunctions and Prepositions, etc. and happily oftentimes rendered
them to their proper sense. But have laid their gatherings so far off, in such
distant repositories, that it is far more labor to put them thence into a
basket, then from H. Scripture where they are, and whereof they are part.

That I may give an instance of my meaning, I put these few Quaeries, and they
are no more, neither would I be mistaken, as if I at all intended to dogmatise.

I. Quaere, about the particles (...), quia, etc. ideo, etc. Nam, sed, etc.
because, therefore, etc. for, etc.
Quaere, Whether the word [because] in 1 Samuel 2.25. [They ( Elies sons)
hearkened not to the voice of their Father because the LORD would slay them]
might not as Grammatically, and Theologically, be rendered (in stead of that
causall) by this illative conjunction [therefore?] As Theologically, because as
well (at least) clearing God from all aspersion of causing or authorizing man's
sin, and the destruction thereby intentionally caused; that the blame of their
destruction may be laid upon themselves, where it ought. Hos. 13.9.
O Israel thou have destroyed thy self. I know the ordinary reading may have
good sense, but is it so good?

And as Grammatically, since the Hebrew Conjunction (...) there used, is so
rendered by the same our Translatours, I believed, therefore have I spoken:
Psalm. 116.10.
and so ought to be, as is evident from Saint Paul, who citing these words,
following the Lxx, renders them by (...), 2 Cor. 4.13.
which (...) is translated ideo in the Text, and propter quod by Arias Montanus
in the Margin of his Interlinear Translation of the place in the Greek. By
Castellio and his adversary Beza, ideo: By Tremelius in his Latin out of the
Syriac, and before him, by Erasmus, propter quod, and so before them all by the
vulgar Latin, and by Erasmus in his Annotations on the place, quapropter, and
propterea quod.

And if it be better read in that place of Sam. [therefore] than [because] may
it not also be so in that place, Jer. 4. v. 18. This is thy wickedness because
it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine heart, which bears a hard
construction; when by reading therefore, therefore, all is clear, and runs
currently after the immediately foregoing words in the same verse, Thy way and
thy doings have procured these things unto thee; This is thy wickedness,
therefore, etc. And indeed Buxt. Lex voce. (...)
in both these texts translates the Conjunction igitur, ideo, idcirco.

But especially, does not this give much light and clearness to that difficult
passage in the Parable, dangerously, by some misinterpreted? Her sins which
are many, are forgiven [for] she loved much.

Seeing (...) is by the LXX rendered (...), Luke 7.47.
which our last English renders [that] the Latin quod, Number. 24.1.
and the same (...) Grammarians and Translators yield by quia, quoniam etc. And
since the Greek in that famous place of Saint Luke, named, has ((...)) which
answers no more to (...) than (...) does; why should we rather translate it
quoniam, with the vulgar and others, or quia, or nam, etc. with others, than
ideo, idcirco, igitur, therefore, as I have showed the particle (...) to
bedivers times used, and perhaps as often illatively as causally? Then all is
clear in the Parable. To whom most is forgiven he will love most (as St. Peter
answered with our B. Saviors approbation, ver. 42, 43.) Our Saviors
application or assumption follows, and it must be answerable to the sense of
the proposition he approved, v. 47. Her sins which are many are forgiven, then
he concludes, therefore she loved much.

Perhaps therefore this word were better exchanged in the Translation.

The learned Grotius on the 12. c. of St. John v. 39. (where our Translatours
read [because] though v. 49. [for] in stead of (...)) notes thus, Malim hoc
(...) per [nam] vertere, quam per [quia,] so Trem. renders it, v. 49.

Now consider, Why should not that [for] so rendered, 1 These. 2.16.
be rather read [therefore] at least, so interpreted? For the first abovenamed
reason, To clear God from suspicion, that any effect of his wrath (in this
life) should cause them to fill up their sins always. When the sense would be
presently clear if the words were read thus. They (the Jews) are forbidding us
to speak to the Gentiles, (to the end) that they might be saved, to fill (or
hereby filling) up their sins always, therefore the wrath is come upon them to
the uttermost.

Though the word rendered as it is, may bear a good sense elsewhere, but I know
not whether there or no.

The word here rendered [for] by which I would understand [therefore] is
[(...), autem, sed, vero, but] yet by the vulgar it is there translated [enim]
so by Beza.

Now that (...) signifies also the same with enim, viz. Nam, Buxtorf. in the
word will tell you and no more. Thus (...) is used Psalm. 1. v. 4. rendered by
Arias Montanus, quinimo; by Iunius and Tremelius, sed; the proper signification
of (...) in the Text to the Thessalonians now before us.

That (...) in other places signifies [therefore] is plain; that it is
translated [ sed and but] is as plain. May it not then, at least signify (if
it be not to be translated) [therefore] in this place?

All this while I am not afraid of [ because] but like it very well where it
should be, and know that it is a rational conjunction, and a ratio or argument
may be from other Topics beside the cause, yea, from the effects; even then
when we may handsomely say [because] yea even from such as are inartificiall,
and utterly extraneous to the thing testified.

I will but add on this head, what St. Chrysostom on John 12.37, 38, 39.
says of this [(...)] (...) [(...)] (here again (...)) (...), is not causal, he
says, (...), but eventuall, or illative. (...), etc. For not because Isaias
said, did they therefore not believe; but (...), Because it would be that they
believed not, therefore Isaias said so. He adds a reason, which is to show
(...), that holy Scripture cannot lie, and that things are not one way spoken,
and come to pass another; etc. They would come to pass, so that the Prophet
foresaw them, (...), because, or being the men were incurable, (...) [(...)]
[they could not] stands for (...) [(...)] (...) [they would not.] Soon after,
(...). Where is more to this purpose. This the father calls (...), the
Scriptures Idiom. By which he says, is understood no more, but that the
Prophet of God herein could not lie, etc. If they should have believed, the
Prophet would have truly said so.

II. Quaere, about the signs shall, will, let, etc. do, do ye, ye do, (...)
that, lest, etc.
Quaere, whether in that famous place Psalm. 95. v. 7, 8. repeated in the
Epistle to the Hebrews c. 3. v. 7, 8. and c. 4. it should be read, See 2 Timothy
3.12. Iam. 4.4.
To day if ye will, or rather, ye shall hear his voice, harden not your hearts?
Since it is not (...) by [(...)] in the Indicative Mood, the first future; but
(...) by [n] in the first Aorist of the Subjunctive; si [audieritis] not
[audietis.] May not the Aorist (...) as well refer to time past as to the
future, as audiveritis is in both Tenses, If ye have, or if ye shall? that the
sense may be, If at any time or whenever, or if To day, by Gods providence,
ye have heard, or shall hear, Gods voice: then it is your part to beware of
hardening your hearts, that which is chiefly intended being not-hardening, and
not the hearing: whereas if we read [wil] it will hardly be, or Divinity, or
sense, perhaps. May we harden our hearts, if we will not hear? Consider it.

Note moreover, that [audio] if taken for [obedio] as 1 Samuel 15.22, govern a
Dative case, as dicto audiens; but here the Latin has it vocem audieritis in
the places named. See Vulg. Jun. and Trem. Beza, Arias Montanus, etc. not to
name that (...) here governs (as a verb of sense) the Genitive (...).

Now then, why should not, by like reason, [shall] be translated [will,] and
contrariwise [wil] be exchanged for [shal] or [let] and others notes of
commanding for [shall] as [shall,] or [shalt] for a word of command? yea and
for [will] sometimes? and so their conjugates? Especially if, for want of such
interchanging, several places of holy Scriptures be in danger to be
misinterpreted to the favoring of some great error, at least by obvious
consequence.

And quaere, whether it be not likely that such mistakes, are sometimes, and in
some, not so much in voluntary, as wilful and upon design, to force and writhe
holy Scripture to patronise some prejudice of a beloved opinion?

In the 13. c. of S. Mat. v. 14. consider, Mat. 13.14.
whether it were not as well translated, By hearing ye will as ye shall hear, and
will not (having will to evil) rather then shall not understand; and seeing ye
will or shall see, and rather will not, then shall not perceive. Especially
because in the next verse this is said to happen to them by their evil
self-will: Ver. 15.
For, etc. and their eyes they have closed, lest they should (that will be the
success thereof that they cannot, perhaps, loving their lust they will not)
see, hear, understand, be converted and healed.

Quaere also, If it be not an Hebraism reciprocum pro passivo, noting no more,
but indefinitely, their eyes are closed.

This place is taken out of Isa. 6.9, 10. where that, which is in S. Matthew
expressed in the future tense, as prediction of sin, punishment, or both, by
[shall] or [will] is Imperative and Minatorie. Hear ye indeed, but understand
not, see ye indeed but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, make
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see, hear, understand, convert
and be healed.

The reason of which seems to be clear from the manner of the Hebrews using the
first Future Tense, with its signs shall or will for the Imperative Mood, with
its signs, [let it] do, be, etc. for a good reason; Because the thing
commanded is future, or to be done. Which is likewise confirmed from a very
real argument, even by all the Imperative forms in the Decalogue expressed in
the Future, Thou shall, Thou shall; Thou shall not, Thou shall not, etc. i. do,
do, do not, do not, do not, etc.

This way will make short work concerning those cursing forms, Judge. 5.23.
Curse ye Meroz, if it signify no more than Meroz will or shall be cursed: and
Psalm. 109. from the 6. to the 21. v. inclusively; which perhaps may be
wondered they should be curses from the mouth of that holy Man of God who (as
often elsewhere, so) just before in the 4. and 5. v. said he loved them, prayed
for them, did them good, and again loved them. This will hamstring that kind of
unchristian Oratorie of rash cursing, if either that reason that has been now
used, or St. Aug. be heard, De Sermon. Domini in Monte.
saying, Propheta per imprecationem, quid esset futurum cecinit, non optantis
voto, sed spiritu providentis: These things the Prophet spoke in cursing forms,
not that he wished they should be so, but foresaw by the Spirit of Prophecy
that they would be so. Where you may read much more to this purpose. Let, let,
let, etc. by this way being nothing else then shall or will, shall, shall, etc.

To the same sense the Author of Quest. and Answers, Resp. ad Quaest. 125
under the name of Justin the Martyr, where he says, S. Paul (in saying to the
High Priest, God shall smite thee, etc. and to Alexander the Coppersmith, 2 Timothy 4.14.
who had done him much evil, The Lord reward him according to his works) did
neither curse them, nor revile them, his words were neither (...) nor (...) but
predictions foretelling what would and should befall them, beseeming the man,
the Apostle, who revenged not himself, but gave place to wrath.

The like may be said of some praying forms.

To name only that of the Apostle for Onesiphorus supposed to be then dead:
(for he salntes his family not him, contrary to his use in such cases) which
is urged by some, 2 Timothy 1.18.
of no mean note, for the lawfullness of praying for the dead: The Lord grant
to him (in the Imperative sense) that he may find mercy of the Lord in that
day! Why may not it (upon the former grounds) be rendered, at least expounded,
The Lord will grant him to find mercy then?

One thing more, It would be observed that some words, as (...), etc. used in
Holy Scripture, may indifferently (if nothing else hinder) be rendered
Indicatively, or Imperatively, Ephesians 5 5.
Do ye, or ye do, For this ye know, v. 8. (...), Walk ye, or ye walk.
or know ye, either seitis or scitote, v. 8. (...), Walk ye, or ye walk. v. 15.
Marc. 4.12. Luc 8.10. Ioh. 12.39, 40. Romans 11.8
if ye knew it not before know it now. And see ye, or ye see how ye walk
circumspectly, videtis or videtote, both. By this little, those places parallel
(to that first named in this Quaere out of S. Matthew) may be understood
perhaps. In the three first of which places [(...), ut] is used to signify (as
some think) not the intendment, but success or event, Mat. 13.14, 15. Acts
28.26, 27. Ioh. 5.34, 40.
as they say appears by that place aforenamed, and by another parallel to that,
and to all those last named. Though in S. John c. 5. v. 34. (...) seem to
signify, contrariwise, the intendment, without (or not the) success, as they
say, seems to be apparent, from v. 40. But ye will not come, etc.

III. Quaere, about (...), and, etiam, and, even, etc.
Quaere, Whether in the Prophet, Zech 99.
of those words, [ Thy King comes, etc. riding upon an Ass, [and] upon a colt
the foal of an Asse] (cited verbatim in the Gospel) it be not plainly
determined by S. Mat. 21.5. Ioh. 12.15.
John, That he rode but on one, viz. an Asses colt, not on an Ass besides?

Also whether it be well read, Gal. 1.4. Col. 1.3. 1 These. 2.3.
God and our Father, Thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. God
and our Father again; and in other places.

Or whether [even] were not better placed there, 2 Cor. 1.3.
in stead of [and] as our Translatours have sometimes done, God even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Seeing (...) notes indifferently and and etiam, and
and even; and since if it be read and, it must be interpreted [even] lest we
commit absurdity in placing our Savior (supposing his riding to be but once)
on two beasts together: and err dangerously in Divinity (as some have done)
by imagining God to be another from (and not the same with the) Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and our Father there spoken of.

I will add but one place, where (...) by us rendered [both] seems rather to
be, of right, translated [and].

(...), Romans 11.33.
etc. O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom, and, etc. where Theodoret
first gave me advice to read [and] in stead of [both;] and quaere, whether it
be not the Apostles intent, as may seem to appear from the two next verses,
which are an (...), a particular rehearsal in words interpretative of the
former. For who has known the mind of the Lord? O the depth of his knowledge!
Or who has been his Counselor? O the depth of his wisdom! Or who has
first given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? O the depth of
his riches!

Of this mind are Origin and S Chrysostom, that I know, of the Ancient,
Illyricus. Bucer. Aretius. Corn. a Lap.
and many learned Neoteries of our own and the Roman Confession.

IV. Quaere, about the Praeposition [For] signified by (...), etc. Ad, ob,
propter, pro, in. To, the sign of the Dative case. To, the sign of the
Infinitive Mood, in the active and passive sense, etc.
Quaere, 2 Timothy 3.16.
Whether the particle (...) (four times used in the text) the Theme or this
Work, and always translated by us [For] do not express the Latin
Translations which constantly use [ad] in the place. And if so, whether these
particles [ to and for] (...) and (...) had not need to be diligently expressed
in the several Texts where they are found: seeing it is manifest that in many
places they are not used to signify the same?

In what sense does the Psalmist, twice in one verse, use the word [For] does
it not in effect signify the same that [against] by reason of its noting the
Dative case, and the Infinitive signification? The place is [For] that is a
conjunction signifying [because] Without cause (says David) have they hid for
me their net in a pit, Psalm. 35.7.
which without cause they have dug for my soul. As men dig pits, and lay
snares there, for beasts falling into those pits [for] to take them, [for to]
etc. for their flesh, for their skins; out of their coveting appetite to have
them, out of their angry appetite to rid the Country of them; So Saul etc.
behaved themselves toward David, as if it were [for my hurt.]

And in a sense agreeing to (though differing also from) this, the Preposition
(...) signifies pro and contra, (though pro be [for] or [in stead of] there) in
the word Antichrist, as some Divines contend.

And sometimes [for] ones good, is [against] his harm. It would be well
inquired how the shepherd is [for] the sheep and they for him. The greater
[for] the less, and back again. What (...) answers to in the notion when
applied to praying for Peter, for others, etc.

The truth is, this one word [For] this little preposition, if not soundly
stated, will (as it has in the Socinian Controversy) so far trouble our
Divinity, as a great deal of sense, and multitude of reasons, besides good
words will not appease, if it be not timely undertaken (by some able pen) to be
prosecuted where very able ones of our own have left it, being prevented by
death or otherwise. Men skilful in this knowledge, know well what I say, and I
doubt not, prove it too true.

It were well worth good labor to find out the true importance of the
particle (...) twice repeated (in two several clauses, and to several
purposes) in one Text, and twice translated [for.]

Who was delivered [for] our offenses, and was raised [for] our justification.
Rom 4.25


May not [(...), for] in the former clause signify the impulsive cause, in the
latter the final? Yes (says Crellius, granting that here to Grotius readily,
Crell. contra Grotale satisfactione Resp. ad cap. 1. partic. 117.
which elsewhere he is more difficult in yiedling.) In priori loci membro
causam impulsiva^, in posteriori finalem significare vocem propter; quod quo
minus fiat nos non pugnamus. Ill agreeing to his Master Socin. who affirms that
instead of pro, propter, Socin. praelect. cap. 20
reponi potuisse, and presently, dictio autem pro significare causam tantum
modo finalem.

Much more he has to that purpose; of which the very learned Vossius (in his
smart defense of the no less learned Grotius against Ravenspergerus, J. Ger.
Vos. Resp. ad judicium Raveal pergori cap. 16. Leg^ eundem cap. 17.18.
of whom Grotius had deserved better then to be so traduced by him) takes a
particular account.

It is wonderful to observe what a coil is kept by Crellius (as by Socinus
before him) about (...), and the rest of the prepositions controverted, how
loath they are to find, Crell. ubi sup. R^lp. ad cap. 9. partio. 2.
in (...) commutation, or surrogation of one in another stead, and yet will
not deny but it may be so.

Here is good work for Critics that have leiture to exercise their senses and
their pens.

How (...) signifies the instrumental cause or manner of doing, Mr. Medes
Apost. of the latter times, part. 2.
see our learned Country man Mc. Mede and others; how near the sense of it is
to (...) with a genitive case. Consider also whether (...) applied to our
Savior in the Genitive case may not be rendered propter, as well as per. And how
(...) is the same with (...) in sundry Scriptures.

Large is the field, great will be the crop, of much profit, though seeming
little, if this work by some able and diligent hand be undertaken and performed.

There are besides these, sundry little particles, as (...), and many more, the
interpretation whereof has strangely exercised great men in other
Controversies of very weighty Divinity; I could heartily wish the proper
importance of them, and such other, were impartially stated in their several
places where they are found, such vast weight being laid by men on these little
props.

Reader, I have thus far detained you. Pardon my boldness, I have done so
perhaps for thee in like cases. The good Lord teach us all what we should do;
and enable us to do what he teaches, making us thoroughly furnished, by his
holy Word, to every good work, and wise unto salvation is the hearty prayer of

Thy servant in the Lord PHILO-BIBLIUS.

OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRE: OR SERMON-NOTES ON II TIMOTHY III. 16.

Being the Theological Ground of another Treatise of the Author extant under
the title of METHODUS CONCIONANDI, Containing a learned and brief
exemplification of the same Method.

Translated (a great part) out of his Latin Copy.

OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURE.
2 Timothy III. 16. (...).

All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness.


AXIOM. I.
(...).

Holy Scripture is profitable for doctrine.

Explic. [(...)] is in holy Scripture used two ways: For The DOCTRINE
wherewith the mind is informed. Marc. 7.7. teaching for doctrines (by way of
object) the commandments of men The INFORMATION of the mind with doctrine. Or
it notes the Action of the Agent, or Reception in the patient.
1 Timothy 4.13. Give attendance to exhortation, to doctrine.


It is taken here for the act, properly; because,

1. Scripture is said to be profitable to it. Now it is not profitable for it
self, it self being the Doctrine (by way of object) but profitable for
information of the mind.

2. The other words here used are taken actively.

Yet Synecdochically it is here taken for information of the mind with holy
doctrine.

[Profitable] a thing is said to be Either from the Manner, and that
Immediately and ultimately or lastly, so the chief good. Mediately in order to
the chief nearer, or, further off.

or Degree, either Absolutely necessary, or So as without it, all may be well
with us.
Absolutely necessary is The chief good, And All that, without which the chief
cannot be attained, necessary by necessity of the end.



Necessary by this necessity of the end, or without which the end cannot be
at all atttained, may be conceived thus, either That Although without it the
chief good cannot be had, yet the said chief good may be missed, though it be
there: of this sort is knowledge of God. With it, the chief good cannot but be
attained, or cannot be missed.


And this latter admits of a twofold consideration, Of Adaequate, or even
commensuration to the chief good: or, Such a commensuration or fitness, as
whereby, by concomitance with other, it brings in the chief. Such is Faith.


Now as a subordinate in respect of the chief, behaves it self For

Manner Mediately, or Immediately.
Degree Absolutely, so as either The subordinate being denied or absent, so is
the chief; but not being present, so is the chief. The subordinate being
present, so is the chief
or, Not either Adaequately, or, By concommitance.

So may one subordinate be distinguished in respect of another subordinate. The
result is this. The Scripture is profitable to inform the mind by way of an
adaequate object in order to salvation, and that, for the manner, immediately;
hence it is said to be engraffed, to dwell in etc. For the degree, it is
absolutely necessary, as containing those divine senses concerning God,
concerning Christ, of whom it says, There is none other name whereby we can be
saved, and of all those things which God in Christ does either

Gratify us with, or Require of us.

Yet not in that degree, that it being present so is the saving information of
our mind, unless the illumination of the holy Ghost be added, not so as that
he inspires new senses not comprehended in the Scriptures (as Familists dream)
but so as he imprints the senses of holy Scripture, and persuades them to the
mind to beget true faith.

(...).
This truth may be seen a hundred times in the 119. (...).
Psalm. From the H. Scriptures Sufficiency, or perfection. Perspicuitie,
plainness, together with its efficacy by the Holy Spirit flowing with it into
the Soul.


The sufficiency or perfection, is argued

1 From the Efficient thereof God
The Father 1. Anointed his Son, Ps. 45.7. Thy God has anointed thee. 2. Said
by voice from Heaven; This is my beloved Son, Mat. 3.17.17.5. Hear ye him. 3.
Wrought by him miracles, by which he confirmed the words he spoke, Joh. 8.18.
The Father that sent me, bears witness of me.
The Son who is in the bosom of the Father, Joh. 1.18. witnesses that he has
heard and seen, Joh. 3.32. All that I have heard of my Father, have I made
known to you (as friends) Joh. 15.15. The Holy Ghost, The Spirit who searches
all things, even the deep things of God, has revealed to us the things which
God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.10. He shall teach you all
things which I have spoke to you, Joh. 14.26. Shall lead you into all truth,
Joh. 16.13. Truth wherewith the Church is to be sanctified to the end, Joh.
17.17.20.

2. The Isntrumental Causes, the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists. These
Are made Ministers of the Spirit 2 Cor. 3.6. Of righteousness, verse. 9. Of
the word of Salvation, Act. 13.26. The power of God to Salvation to every
believer, Romans 1.16. Of the immortal seed whereof we are born again, 1 Pet.
1.23. Reveiled all by Preaching, I have not shunned to declare unto you all the
the counsel of God, Act. 20.27. Writing, Luke 1.3.20. Joh. 3.31. These things
are written, etc.

3. The End.
I write unto you, that ye may know, ye have eternal life, and that ye may
believe in the name of the Son of God, 1 John 5.13. These things write we
unto you, that your joy may be full. 1 John 1.4. That thou may know the
certainty Luke 1.4.

4. The Effect.
Making wise unto salvation, in the verse before the Text. Keeping from the
place of torment, Luke 16.29. Send Lazarus, (says the rich man) to my Fathers
house, For I have five brethren, that he may testify to them, lest they also
come into this place of torment. They have Moses and the Prophets (says
Ahraham) Let them hear them ( viz. to keep themselves out of the place of
torment). And if they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded, though one rise from the dead.

5. The Object.
The Holy Scriptures contain that truth which is according to godliness, Tit.
1.1. The doctrine of Faith, Hope, and Charity, 1 John 5.13. 1 Co. 13.
Which contain our whole duty, and have for their object, Gods bounty.

6. The Adjunct.
A prohibition of adding to, or diminishing, Deuteronomy. 4.4. Ye shall not add to the
Word, which I command you, nor shall you diminish ought from it. Not to think
above that which is written, 1 Cor. 4.6.

7. The Simile.
It is styled, The Scripture of the Old and New Testament. Now to a Testament
as nothing may be added, so (if it be the Testament of a wise man, much more,
if Gods) it contains the whole Will of the Testator, according whereunto, it
is his pleasure or will, his Goods should be dispensed: Heirs should live.


Perspicuity of Holy Scriptures follows.
The Testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple, Psalm. 19.7. Pure,
enlightening the eyes, verse. 8. Thy word is alanthorn to my feet, and a light
unto my path, Psalm. 119.105. The entrance of thy Word gives light, it gives
wisdom to the simple, v. 130.

For God knows perfectly to utter the senses of his mind plainly: Our
necessity requires he should, seeing without the knowledge of those senses of
holy Scripture we cannot be saved. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures.

Now for the Efficacy thereof by the Holy Ghost.
The Scripture by the Holy Ghost is made powerful. 1 These. 1.5. Hence it is
called, The power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. The Ministry of the Spirit,
(...), 2 Cor. 3.8. His Ministers, Ministers of the Spirit, the 6. verse. The
wisdom which God ordained before the world, praefinierat, God has revealed
to us by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.7. and 10. Hereupon the Sons of the Church are
called (...), taught of God, 1 These. 4.9. The Holy Spirit writes Gods Law in
our hearts. Heb. 8.10. By enabling the principle of action. The same Holy
Spirit confirms and seals. He who stablisheth us, and has anointed us, he
seals us, 2 Cor. 1.22.
and gives us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.

The result is.
That which contains all things necessary to Salvation, and that plainly, and
has the Holy Ghost impowering it, enlightening the mind to perceive or
understand it, enabling the heart to perform it, sealing to ascertain it; that,
surely, is profitable, (...), for doctrine.

But Holy Scripture is such. Therefore, etc.

The Use of this is for
Instructions. 1. Whatsoever cannot be manifestly proved out of the Holy
Scriptures, is not necessary to salvation.

2. Doctrine or Information is a thing most excellent, as being that unto which
Holy Scripture was ordained, or is in order: Even the Scripture inspired by the
Holy Ghost, preached by the Son of God, confirmed by so many signs and
miracles, preserved by so many acts of providence, by which also it was
defended and propagated; adorned of God with so many titles of attributes
proper to himself, fraught with so many inbred arguments breathing the divinity
thereof, accompanied, and actuated by the holy Ghost.

3 What thanks owe we to God for his giving us the holy Scriptures.

4 That the neglect of holy Scripture is the cause of that vast ignorance (of
matters divine, and which concern salvation) which every where abounds, in so
much that (though it be a shame it should bespoken) we may bespeak many among
us very justly in the words of the H. Apostle, Heb. 5.12. For when, for the
time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, which be
the first principles of the Oracles of God.

5 That all persons enjoying, (and capable of understanding) holy Scripture,
thus profitable for Information, are left utterly without excuse and pretext of
their ignorance.

Refutation 1. Of Papists, who pretend some Axioms not contained in H. Script.
to be necessary to salvation, as etc. 2. Familists, who pretend other senses
(besides those of the Scripture) to be inspired into them by the H. Ghost.


Reprehension of Papists Who hide in an unknown tongue H. Scripture thus
profitable for Information; and Thrust upon us (in their room) doctrines of
Men, rotten Legends etc.
All who neglect H. Scripture profitable for Information Whose sin is
aggravated from The H. Scriptures Excellence, with which it is considered in It
self and its own Nature Proper work.
Its influence on other Arts Works.

The Persons Condition Private Public In disposition. Actually Magistrates.
Deu. 17 Prove. 8. Ministers.


Act, as Simple omission, or worse Preferring other doctrines, chiefly if
wicked ones. Contempt of H. Scripture.







Exhortation 1.
To Ministers, that their care be to instruct the people out of holy Scriptures.

Motives.
1 God requires it of them, and will exact it. Hereupon S. Paul adjures
Timothy: I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and the dead, at his appearing, and his kingdom; Preach the Word.

2 The cooperation of the Holy Ghost will prosper this work in their hands.
Take heed to thy self and to the doctrine, continue in them: For in doing this
thou shall both save thy self and them that heart thee.

Means are Indirect. Remove self-seeking in Other businesses, hindrances to
this work; This, studying to please others, Gal. 1. boast thy self.

Direct. Concerning Thy self Inform thy self that thou may be able to inform
others. Inflame thy self in love toward them, that thou may be willing to do
it to others.
Holy Scripture; Explain it, in Words, which thou may interpret out of
Phraseologies, and the idiom or peculiar manner of expression in the language
and those words Several and single; or, Conjoined.
Sense. Find out that intended by the holy Ghost whether it be Literal; or,
Mystical.
Where especial care must be had that it agree to the form of sound words. Be
fitted to the scope of the place, which is done by Comparing places like unlike.
Diligent viewing the context, in which the Occasion End.
the Circumstances; as Persons or Time Place

Connection of before and after.




Apply



Exhortation II.
Let the people be persuaded to receive hence (from H. Scripture) their
information.

Motive hereunto, Is the excellency thereof, as that therein is contained all
man's Office or Duty, Benefit or Reward.


Means, 1. Remove Prejudice, which, as a colored glass, presents every thing
like it self. Impuritie or foulness of heart, which makes the mind averse from
H. Scriptures which are so opposite to that impuritie.
2. Bring Ingenuous, or welbred docilitie (teachablenesse) and the fear of God,
Psalm. 25.14. Practice of those things thou have learned from H. Scripture, and
a resolved (firm) purpose to do what thou have learned thence.
3. Implore or beg help of The Holy Ghost, who may teach and lead thee into all
truth. Them who have their senses exercised in H. Scripture.



AXIOM. II. (...), ad refutationem.
Holy Scripture (inspired of God) is profitable for Confutation.

Explication of the Word: (...) is taken, Largely, for argus, manifesto, etc.
to argue or clear somewhat: or Specifiedly, or as it receives its kind from the
object Good. Hence Heb. 11.1. Faith is called (...), the evidence of things not
seen. Evil of Error: 1 Tit. 9. (...), to convince, the gainsayers. Vice or
sin; Herod, Luc. 3.19. (...) being reproved by him.


Here confutation seems to be signified, because it is specified from the
object understood; Information goes before, to which confutation of Error
being added, perfects the mind. Correction follows, which seems to be the
same with Reprehension.
Thing. For understanding whereof, we must know 1 What erroneous is, or what is
erroneous. 2 How H. Scripture is said to confute it.



1 That erroneous may be known We must know truth, which either is Necessary
to salvation, or, Not necessary; Convenient, of which as being revealed in
Holy Scripture, a holy use may be made in order to salvation. Indifferent, in
respect of salvation, as are all truths no way comprised in H. Scripture, which
are found in other sciences Liberal Mechanic


Hence that is to be esteemed erroneous which (that we mention not truth
indifferent) is so called Simply, when it crosses truth Necessary to
salvation, or, Convenient, as being by God revealed.
Modificately, or after a sort (whether it be erroneous Simply or, Not:) As
when that is said Necessary to salvation which is not, Not necessary thereto,
which is as, The Pope is head etc. S. Peter was at Rome. and Other of contrary
nature.







2 The H. Scripture is said to confute Directly and Postively Whatsoever it
denies. Whatsoever is contrary to that which it affirms. And both these it does
by Discourse or Reasoning: Bare Affirmation Denial.


Obliquely and Negatively; for either It is not found in Scripture, and yet is
boasted to be necessary to salvation; If it be found in the Scripture, yet not
in the rank of Necessaries.



The sense of this Axiom is, That the H. Scripture is so profitable, as that it
is also so far necessary, that without it deadly errors cannot be confuted:
but by it (accompanied with the illumination of the H. Ghost) all errors that
war against our salvation may be confuted abundantly.

Tit 1.9. (...)
A Bishop must hold fast (...) fidelem illum Sermonem, qui ad doctrinam facit,
(we read the faithful Word, as he has been taught) that he may be able, by
sound doctrine, both to exhort and convince the gainsayers.

So our Savior Christ convinced the Sadduces.

It is said of Apollos, that he mightily convinced ((...)) the Jews, showing by
the Scripture that Jesus was the Christ. Acts 18.28.


This might be proved by Induction of Errors Contemplative Practical.


If any shall, Contemplative.
with many Contra-Remonstrants, Manichees, or Stoics, say, That God is the
Author of sin, That all things are chained with unalterable destiny, (or bound
by fatal necessity) and that they flow from Gods unchangeable Decree: The holy
Scripture confutes them. Tues Deus non volens iniquitatem, Jam. 1.13. Ps. 5.4.
Joh. 8.44. 1 John 3.8.
Thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil
dwell with thee. He that commits sin is of the Devil.

If any shall with the Pelagians, say, That we can by our natural strength
fulfill Gods Law: Holy Scripture confutes him by saying, Without me ye can do
nothing, Joh. 15.5. Phil. 2.13.
God gives both to will and to do.

If any with the Familists deny that there shall be a resurrection of the body:
The Scripture confutes him * 1 Cor. 15 2 Timothy 2.17; 18.
.

If any think he may safely do as the most do; Practical.
the Scripture confutes him: Wide is the gate, Mat. 7.13. Exodus 2 2. Prove.
11.21.
and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many go in thereat. Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil. Though hand join in hand, the wicked
shall not go unpunished.

If any think he may go on in ungodliness, unjustice, intemperance, because
the mercy of God is so magnified, and grace has abounded under the Gospel;
The Scripture confutes it, saying: Tit. 2.11.
The grace of God has appeared, teaching us to deny ungodliness, etc. Luc.
1.69.74, 75.
He has raised up a born of salvation, etc. that we might serve him in
holiness, etc.

If any think, he may spend his youth in pleasure, and safely put off
repentance till age; The Scripture confutes it, Eccl. 12.1. Luc. 12.20 Psalm. 95
Heb. 3.15.4.7.
saying, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Thou fool, this
night may thy foul be taken from thee. To day if ye will hear his voice, Prove.
1.
etc. I will laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes. Because
I purged thee, Ezck. 24.13.
and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy sin any more, till
my fury rest upon thee.

The reason of this is founded in the former, (...)
the profitablenesse of Gods Word for Information. For if the Scripture be
absolutely, and adaequately necessary for information of the mind with saving
knowledge; then is it likewise for confutation of all errors that are opposite
to saving knowledge; seeing that Verum est index sui and obliqui, and verum
salutare index sui, and oppositi saluti: truth or right shows (or is the
declarer of) it self, and that which is wrong or crooked; and saving truth of
it self, and of that which is opposite to salvation. Having therefore
demonstrated formerly the Scriptures profitablenesse for saving information,
from the sufficiency and perspicuitie thereof: I may thence argue, that it is
in the same manner and degree profitable (...) for confutation.

The Heathen Philosophers, Socrates and others, could confute the (...), (or
opinion of many Gods) of the people, and some other deadly errors, without the
help of Scriptures, and therefore they may seem not to be profitable,
adequately, for confutation.

1 As one may be opposite to another, index obliqui, may be said not properly
to confute the error, in the opposite whereof themselves erred.

2 So much of the truth as they had, they may be said not to have it so firmly
and clearly as might suffice for the saving confutation of the opposite error.

3 So far forth as they had any divine truth upon firm ground, they had it from
the rays of that essential truth which shined out unto them in the more general
acts of his providence, who leaves not himself without witness among them.
And this truth being no other then that which is (and that far more clearly) in
the Scriptures, they did by that divine sense which is in the Scriptures,
confute those errors; And therefore the propriety of confutation remains firm
to the divine sense contained in the Scriptures primely and eminently; and so,
though not by the letter (which they knew not) yet by the sense (which is the
soul of the Scriptures) though otherwise revealed to them, they were able to
confute some errors.

1 inspiration have this end among others, to confute errors; we may learn,
That errors in Divinity are dangerous, and of great consequence to be freed
from them.

2 That opinion which cannot be confuted by the Scripture, either is not
erroneous, or if it be, yet it is no dangerous error; nor the truth opposite
thereto, necessary to salvation.

3 Here we may see the reason why so many errors swarm every where, even among
Christians; it is because they do not in humility, and self-denial, and
laying away prejudice attend unto the holy Scripture. For this is profitable
for confutation.

4 Here we may see the unexcusablenesse of those who live in error, and yet
have the Scripture among them, which is profitable for confutation of error.
What will they pretend, when an answer fuller then that of our Savior to the
rich man shall be given them? They have Moses and the Prophets, yea, and the
holy Evangelists, and the holy Epistles, etc.

This divine truth which tells us, profitable for confutation, may exercise its
power against the Papists who hold, that the Scripture should not be made known
to the people, because it tends to breed errors in them; directly contrary to
the Apostle, who here says, It is profitable to confute errors.

1 Those that confute errors, Paul before his conversion. If the party be
skillful in both, who refutes the one by the other: either he does this for the
humane authority on the one part; and then he sets the Creature in Gods Throne
whose Word it is that is profitable to confute: or for the resplendencie of
Gods Word in that opinion; then does he ill in concealing God, whom in his mind
he acknowledges; and magnifying man, on whom he depends not. But if this be
done by a man for an ill end, as for victories sake to beat down that by voices
of men which Gods Word confutes not, or because it is more cross to corrupt
nature, or leaves fewer pretenses and shifts for a licentious life to palliate
it withal; Then as Solomon says of the sacrifice of the wicked, Prove. 21.27.
It is abomination to God, and how much more when he brings it with an ill
mind? So I may of such doing, It is ill, but how much more when it is done for
these ends?

2 Those that bring errors to confute Gods word, though not eo nomine,
(professing so much) yet in effect. Thus did the Pharisees when they said:
Which of the Priests and Rulers believe in him? He in whom, etc. So say too
many, That which most do, That which brings profit, pleasure, credit among men,
that must be done though the Scripture say contrary. I say no more to such, but
that I wish them not to contend with Gods Word, which is profitable to confute
all their errors.

Comfort to him that is accused (...) of being of another then the received
opinion, yet not confuted out of H. Consolation.
Scripture.

That we would apply to our judgments, or minds, Exhortation.
the Word of God to confute our errors therewith.

Motives from the Nature of Error Hard to be dealt with. Evil.
Excellency of the holy Scripture to confute it.


AXIOM. III. (...). Holy Scripture is profitable for correction, or rectifying
and restoring.
I Find not this word used in all the New Testament excepting this place, nor
yet in the Verb in this composition, whence it is derived; nor yet either of
them by the LXX. in their Translation of the Old Testament. In the Apocrypha I
find the one of them twice, the other four times, but scarce once in
Theological sense in order to the soul. The word properly signifies a
rectifying, or setting straight again, or repairing that which is decayed:
(...), It is as much work to rectify a policy or government, as to make a new
one.

Here the word is used in Theological sense, and therefore to be determined by
the object, as being an act of Gods Word in the hand of the man of God, for the
rectifying of men in order to God and salvation.

That we may the better find out the meaning of this Axiom, and likewise give
some light to that which follows, we must take our rise the higher, and enquire
in the object hereof, and the formalis ratio (formal nature) thereof. The
object of Gods Word to be wrought upon by it, is the mind and heart of man. The
mind as the Counselor to the heart is to be both Informed, that it may inform
or present the heart with right objects; and Freed from error, that it may not
inform erroncously.


And hither tended the two former (...) (...)


The heart also is the object of Gods word, and that principally, which, as it
is terminus actionum ad intra (the bound of those actions that look inward) the
senses reporting to the mind, and it counselling the heart; so it is fons
actionum ad extra, (the wellspring of those actions that look outward to the
life. Prove 4 23. Mat. 15.19. 1 Samuel 16.7. Prove. 23.26. Prove. 4.4.21.
With all diligence keep thy heart, for there-out are the issues of life. Out
of the heart proceed murders, adulteries, etc. says our Savior. And
according to the heart God esteems of man. Hence he says, My son, give me thy
heart. Elsewhere, Let thy heart keep my precepts. Let thy heart receive
(retain) my words. Keep them in the midst of thy heart.

The formalis ratio of the heart of man, as it is the object of these acts of
holy Scripture, is the capablenesse of it thereby to be raised up to
supernatural action, and fruition of God. But we may more distinctly conceive
the heart of man as it is the object of Scripture in regard of the present, as
under some present evil, or in regard of the future, as in order to some
future good, or liable to some future evil; and this distinction notes the
whole formalis ratio thereof: but being various, draws us to prosecute it, till
we have settled the several acts.

The heart in regard of the present, as under some present ill, calls for this
act of the Scripture which the Apostle here mentions, (...). Needs rectifying
or restoring, an act peculiar to a distemper or decay; and here, of the heart,
the object of that act. Yet must we go one step further before we can settle.

This formalis ratio, or present ill upon the heart, is twofold.

1 When the ill of sin is indeed upon the heart, and it not at all, or not
aright affected therewith.

2 When the ill whether of sin or pain, is not indeed upon it, but in conceit,
and yet the heart affected as though it were indeed; or if it be upon it, yet
not in so great degree, or such manner as it is conceived, and as the heart is
affected. Which two respects in the object are so different as must needs
distract this act into two, seeing the same act cannot both rectify that which
requires beating down, and that which requires raising up. The former being by
reproof, the latter by comfort.

Whereby appears that this word (...), contains in it two acts answering two
distempers of the soul to be rectified or restored, Reprehension and
Consolation: the difference of which is so great, that I cannot handle them at
once, but must divide this Axiom into two.

I. Branch
or former, The Scripture is profitable for Reprehension. II. The Scripture is
profitable for Consolation.
For the first of these;

The Scripture is profitable for Reprehension.

1. What and how manifold Reprehension is. Explication.


2. How the Scripture is profitable for it.

For the first we must know:

1 What it is for which one is reprehensible, or the formal object of
Reprehension. And that is sin unrepented of. Thine own wickedness shall
correct thee, Jer. 2.19.
and thy backsliding shall reprove thee. Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11.
Tit. 1.12, 13.
but reprove them rather. The Cretians are ever liars, evil beasts,
slow-bellies, therefore reprove them sharply.

Quest. 1. Whether a man may be reprehended for nothing but sin.

Answ. He may for some effect or ill of punishment which by his sin he has
brought upon himself, but so as it is resolved into sin as the proper cause of
it.

Quest. 2. Whether one may be reprehended for sin, after he has heartily
repented of it.

Answ. If sin be completely repented of, and absolutely pardoned by God, I see
not how it can be a ground of reprehension to the party: Yet in some cases I
think it may be reprehensible, after it is truly repented of.

1 If it be of that nature as requires an explicate repentance upon occasion
all a man's life. Thus God did more then reprehend David after his repentance,
when he killed the child, and made the sword not to depart from his house. But
thus reprehension may be said to look at those future acts of repentance, by
which the sin past is not yet repented of.

2 If the act have been very scandalous, and satisfaction not yet given, it may
be reprehended to give satisfaction, that attendant being not yet added to the
repentance; and so in some sense it may be said not to be so repented of, as
that satisfaction is given. Thus our Savior may seem to have given Peter a
secret reprehension for his thrice denying him, by urging him (till he was
grieved, says the Text) to a threefold profession of his love to him. Joh. 21.
Other cases may, perhaps, be thought of, and yet stand with that, That sin
unrepented of, is the formalis ratio of the object of reprehension.

2. We must know what act, or affection in the heart Reprehension tends to
excite and work upon.

There be four passions in the soul of man, which be called by the School the
Cardinales passiones, because thewhole frame of man's heart moves upon them; the
two first looking at the present; the two latter at the future; and these are
grief, joy, hope, and fear: the two first in the conceupiscible; the two latter
in the irascible. Upon the two former of these does the Apostles (...) here
act, for the rectifying of the distempered soul: and in this act of
Reprehension, upon the affection of grief, to excite that to exercise it self
about the thing for which it reprehends. This is manifest, where S. Paul.
reprehends the Corinthians, and then adds, Ye are puffed up, 1 Cor. 5.
and have not rather mourned. And speaking of the same matter, 2 Cor. 7.
Ye were made sorry by my Epistle after a godly manner, and godly sorrow
leads unto repentance not to be repented of.

Now the formalis ratio of the object of Reprehension being sin unrepented of;
Gods word by stirring up this affection of grief, or working godly sorrow for
it, makes it to be no longer sin unrepented of, and repentance causes the
sinner to forsake his sin (as Solomon says, He that confesses and forsakes
his sin shall find mercy:) and God, in mercy, takes away the sin (as Nathan
said to David) God has taken away thy sin. And thus the formalis ratio of the
object of Reprehension being gone, the soul is rectified, or restored from the
distemper arising from the presence of sin unrepented of, by exciting godly
sorrow for sin in the heart.

3 How Reprehension excites sorrow for sin unrepented of. This may be
understood from the nature of grief, whose object being malum praesens, it is
excited (as all affections are by their proper object in its propriety
presented) by setting before it the evilnesse of sin, and presence thereof to
the heart. So that Reprehension works by these two acts. 1 Of laying sin to the
guilty heart in the evilnesse of it. 2 Showing that it is present to it, or
lies upon it, as committed, and not removed.

First, the laying of sin to the heart in the illness of it is done two ways.
1 By showing the inhonestum (dishonesty or dishonor) of the sin, in the
crosseness of it to Gods holy will and rule, with the several heads of
aggravations (well worthy the study of a Divine, and the practical
consideration of all.) 2 The inutile (unprofitablenesse and mischief) of it, in
crosseness to man's true good: where comes in to Reprehension the act of
Commination, if need be, either in regard of the sin, or radication of it in
the party.

The latter, to wit, the presentnesse of this evil, if need be, is to be
manifested by such Notes as argue the presence of it. As Samuel reprehending
Saul, showed him the illness of his sin; 1 Samuel 15.23.
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and
idolatry. So when Saul would not take notice of the presence of his
disobedience upon him, he gives him a note of it, What means this bleating of
sheep, v. 14.
and lowing of Oxen which I hear?

Quest. How then can a man be reprehended for sins past, seeing they cannot now
be malum praesens to the heart, to stir up grief, in that long since they
issued thence?

Answ. Though the transient act external passed away, yet all the sins that
ever a man did, and has not truly repented of, are still present unto him in
the stain, in the disposition of the soul to further sins, as likewise in
regard of God, in the guilt and curse that lies from God upon the head of the
impenitent sinner, whereby he stands as liable to punishment every moment, and
especially at the great day of Account, as if they were all at that instant
committed.

From these three things explained, ye may gather a description of Reprehension
here spoken of.

It is an (...) or rectifying of the heart distempered through sin unrepented
of, by laynig to it the evilnesse and presence of such sin upon it, for the
exciting of godly sorrow, whereby the sin is repented of, and forsaken on man's
part, and graciously pardoned, and taken away on Gods part.

How manifold is it? I find Reprehension in Scripture diversely distinguished.

1 In regard of the efficient, by One in authority. Tit. 2.15.
A neighbor, Lev. 19.17
or in collateralitie.


2 In regard of the degree, Vehement. Tit. 1.13. Reprove than (...), praecise,
or sharply. Mild. The Apostle otherwhere commends the spirit of meeknes.


3 In regard of the manner of laying open the sin, Plainly, Covertly, in
Action; as Example to the contrary, or Otherwise fignificative action.
Covert speech, as parabolically.



4 In regard of the parties occupate therein, the parties reproved alone,
private, Mat. 18.15, 16. etc. reproving some with them, public: Mat. 18.15,
16. etc.


Some other perhaps may be found, etc.

II. How the Scripture is profitable for Reprehension?

I answer, as before, for Information and Confutation, it is necessary in such
degree and manner, as no saving reprehension can be without it, but by it, with
the work of Gods Spirit, may the soul be rectified.

The example of our Savior reprehending by the Scripture, Ye Hypocrites, (...)
Mat. 15.7.
well did Isaiah prophecy of you, saying, This people draws nigh unto me
with their lips, etc.

I might likewise prove this by induction of several vices, and show how the
Scripture reprehends them. Solomon reprehending an idle person, lays his sin
to him, Thou sluggard; aggravates it from the example of the Ant, far inferior
to him in ability and obligation, but far above him in performance, having no
guide, ruler, or overseer, provides her meat in the Summer, gathers her food in
the harvest. Then from the adjunct duration of it, How long? When will thou
arise? Yet a little sleep! Then lays a threatening in the neck of it; So shall
thy poverty come as one that travaileth, that is, unexpectedly; and as an armed
man, i.e. unresistibly.

This truth, (...).
as the last, is founded in the demonstration of that concerning the Scriptures
profitablenesse for Information.

If the Scriptures contain all things necessary to salvation both fully and
plainly, as was there demonstrated, then does it also, as in the last Axiom,
confute all errors, so here detect all vices opposite to salvation. Sin being
that which Reprehension is founded on, and sin being nothing else but (...) so
called from dissenting with Gods Law or Rule, and this Rule being nothing else
but the Scripture, it must needs be that the Scripture is profitable for the
reprehension of sin, which is an omission of that which the Scripture injoins,
or a commission of that which the Scripture forbids, of which it contains the
aggravations, and against which it contains fearful threatenings.

A man is reprehensible for disobedience to humane Laws,

Disobedience to the lawful Laws of men, Every soul to be subject to the
Superior Powers, and that for conscience sake to God, and his word which
commands obedience to their commands in him.

The Scripture is profitable for Reprehension.
1 That there always have been, are, Instruct.
and will be some whom a man may reprehend. Which follows not from hence by
necessity of the consequent, as if therefore there should (would) be some, who
are to be reprehended, because the Scripture is for reprehension, but of the
consequence. For God in the infinity of his Being, and understanding foreseeing
this, furnished his Word with this act.

The truth of this matter past ages have given too sufficient proof of. In the
same day whereon our first parent was created, and that about dinner time (as
Divines, not improbably, judge) he made himself reprehensible by eating the
forbidden fruit.

We read of the second ADAM delivered for the sins of the first, and of his
posterity, somewhat in the Evangelist answering (agreeable) thereto. Joh.
19.14.
It was about the sixth hour (of the sixth day) (noon to us) when Pilate
delivered Christ to be crucified. Luc. 23.44
And from the 6. hour to the 9. there was a darkness over all the carth. So
early was a foundation of reprehensiblenesse laid, whereupon his firstborn
Cain built fratricide, and posterity raised an huge pile reaching up to heaven
that called down most severe reprehensions.

He that sees not the reprehensiblenesse of the present age, must needs be
blind exceedingly: Both the miseries of the Church, and the eminent evils
speak it too plainly. Yea those happier times which men expect (if Laodicea be
the shadow of them) will not want their reprehension.

If Scripture be etc. Then Reprehension, sure, is of great worth, as that to
which Scripture, the pure and holy image of God, so like himself, is in order:
that David might well sing, Psalm. 141.
Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness: let him reprove me, it
shall be an excellent oil which shall not break mine head.

3 Wretched are those men who have so far broke out into wickedness, that God
will not reprehend them; considering that only Scripture is the power of God to
salvation, and in this act to rectify the heart infected with the evil of
sin. Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee (says Solomon.) Cast not your
pearls before Swine (says our Savior) lest they trample them, and rend you.
These men are in the case of one deadly sick, and deprived of the only remedy
that should cure him.

4 They who live in known sins are inexcusable, in as much as they enjoy the
Scripture profitable for Reprehension. Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there not
a Physician here? Yes sure there is: The Scripture is profitable to restore the
heart defiled with him. Why then are they not healed? They will have no
pretense at that day, but either with him in the Gospel, they will be
speechless: or with the young man in desperation, cry out: How have I hated
instruction, Prove. 5.12, 13.
and my heart despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers,
nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me?

Let this part of Gods word which affirms the Scripture to be profitable for
Reprehension, Reprehension.
accomplish its work therein, in the reprehension of diverse sorts;

1 Either such as are simply hereby reprehensible 2 Or reprehensible as
touching the use of Reprehension.
1 It reproves those who having need of Reprehension (as who has not?) do not
desire nor seek for reprehension from Gods Word. This is a fault almost as
general as the object of Reprehension. For where is the man that desires to be
reproved when he deserves? That lays Gods Word impartially to his heart for
the rectifying of it, and entreats this as a special benefit at his friends
hand to tell him plainly, and lay Gods Word home unto him, when he sees any
thing amiss with him? There is not the poorest in the company, but will be at
cost to buy a Looking-glass to see a spot in his face, that he may wipe it
off; and none so careless of his outward man, but will thank his friend that
tells him of that which would make him be derided of men when he should come
among them. God offers a glass for our soul to detect the spots thereof, which
make men odious to him, his holy Angels, and Saints; yet can we sustain to come
into his presence with spotted souls, yea even such spots as rest not in the
heart only, but come sub signo, (some manifestation thereof) to be viewed by
Angels and Devils, to the joy of Satan, and grief of our Guardians the holy
Angels, (if those can joy, or these grieve:) yea, such as eat through the veil
of our body (as I may see) and appear to the eyes of men. Yet is a spot in the
soul so much worse, by how much the soul is better then the body. Et pretium
pars haee corpore majus habet. And it is of greater price (could the Heathen
man say) and so much more care to be had for the wiping it off, by how much the
censure of God, and his holy Angels is more to be feared, then of all the men
in the world.

2 Those who when reprehension comes home to them from God in his Word, will
not receive it home, and let it have its whole work upon them for their
reformation, will not totum telum in corpus recipere (as the accusation was of
Scaevola); They will do somewhat with Saul, reform some things with Herod at
John's preaching, but if it tends to rectify their darling corruptions, stop it
there.

The nature of a remedy or medicine is aut prodesse, aut obesse, (either to do
good or harm) but if a man takes but part of the dosis which a skillful
Physician prescribes, the essence of the medicine consisting in that
indivisible he prescribes, and the operation following the essence; what can be
expected but that it should only irritate the humor, and not being able to
expel it, leave nature weaker and the disease stronger. Thus will their case be
who deal thus with that precious remedy of the soul, which God the most wise
Physician of the soul prescribes in his word for the cure thereof.

3 Yet more, those that pretend to receive Gods word in this act of
reprehension, but let it not enter into their heart. Like as some of our
Church-papists deal with the Communion, make show of eating the bread, but with
their handkerchief conveigh it: or of drinking, but kiss the cup with closed
lips, or spit out what they receive.

Thus to receive a reprehension is so far from rectifying the soul, that it
provokes Gods anger the more against it, etc.

4 Those that hate reprehension and Gods Messenger that brings it. 1 King. 22.
I hate him (says Abab) for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but
evil, i. e. he reproved. He should have hated himself to whom no good could be
prophesied. This was Ahab who had sold himself to work wickedness. What such
entertainers of this act of Gods word may expect, you may see; God sent a
Prophet to Amaziah, and it came to pass as he talked with him, that the King
said unto him, 2 Chronicles. 25.16.
Art thou made of the Kings Council? forbear, why should thou be smitten?
Then the Prophet forbear, and said, I know God has determined to destroy thee,
because thou have done this, and have not hearkened unto my counsel.

5 Those that contemn or despise reproof. I was thinking whether to reserve
this, or the other of hating reproof, for the last and highest degree of those
who are here to be reprehended; considering, 1 That the object of contempt is a
little evil, which we account not so great as to draw our hatred or fear upon
it: and 2 Those that hate reproof, do labor more to hinder the sincere
preaching of Gods Word, and to vex the Ministers thereof, then those who only
contemn it, and with Gallio, care for none of these things.

But I find that an evil may be counted little two ways:

1 In its nature and crosseness to our affection.

2 In the power that goes with it to prevail against us: and so the contemner
may inly hate the ill as much, but conceiving it to have no power to enter upon
him, contemns it.

Thus Goliath could not but conceive that David desired to kill him, as well as
if a Giant had come out against him; but in his pride he saw not how he could
hurt him, and so (says the Text) despised him.

So that to despise reproof from Gods word, may involve hatred in it, as it
lies cross to a man's lusts, and superadde atheism, as if Gods reproof were
not able, either to deprive him of his lusts, or condemn him for them. And thus
is contempt of reproof, in the nature of it, a higher sin against God, and
where reproof comes with power to cross it, will appear in the greatest
hatred.

Those that despise reproof I send to the Wise man, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26.
Because ye set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also
will laugh at your calamity, etc.

Against this 5. degree, That scorners are not to be reproved.

1 One or a few acts of despising reproof,

2 To reprove in thesi differs from the personal application of reproof.

3 For the personal reproving of a scorner, we may consider. The Agent Word,
that will reprove and condemn him. Person reproving Wanting power, and so
liable to have his person hurt, jewels trodden etc. and of such our Savior and
Solomon may seem to speak: God tendering his servants safety, and ability of
doing good otherwhere, more then a scorners salvation by his means, and with
his danger. Having power to quell the scorners insolency, and if not thereby
to amend him, yet to terrify others from his courses, Prove. 22.10. Cast out
the Scorner, and 19.25. Smite a scorner, and the Simple will beware.

Scorner. Though he testified his scorn upon one, or two, or three sundry
ways of reproof, and that fearfully, and so as we have no hope those ways:
yet perhaps some other way, reproof may settle on him, or by some other, or
after some passages of providence have befallen him which had not then. While
God rich in mercy lets a man live, and it appear not to us that he sins
against the H. Ghost, we may not absolutely despair, or wholly give him over
for lost.


A second sort to be reprehended by this doctrine are such as have to do with
this act, and

1 Do not reprehend where the Scripture does. Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them: as if one could not escape
fellowship with them, unless he reproved them. This is to detain Gods truth in
unrighteousness, and to diminish from Gods word, as if it did not reprove such
a sin.

2 If Gods word etc. then are they to be reproved who reprove those whom the
Scripture does not. This is to add to Gods Word, and make the way to heaven
straighter then our Lord has made it.

3 Those that reprove where the Scripture commends. This is as Judas dealt with
the Woman that brought the box of ointment to our Savior: which is aggravable
from the Excellency of Scripture, which is the testimony of the infinitely
wise, just, and good God. Man, who behaves himself so as to be commended by it.
Indignity of the Act, which puts upon that which the Scripture commends, the
ratio (notion) of sin unrepented of. Agent, sinful dust who dare censure that
which God commends.



4 That reprove those who reprove according to Scripture. Such an one was
Amaziah the Priest of Bethel: Amos 7.10.
and by reproving him who reproved according to Scripture, he turned the edge
of the reproof upon himself in a fearful threatening. v. 17.


This comforts those who are reproved by men where the Scripture reproves them
not, Consolation.
whether for Evils, whereof they are not guilty Per se, (considering them in
themselves) Per accidens, (by accident) either In aiming at by ends Failing in
the manner.

Good.


In both they invade Gods chair, and the prerogative of his word, and in both
play the Devil: in the Former, by slandering the righteous person. Later, the
righteousness of the person.


1 That seeing Gods word is profitable for Reprehension to rectify the soul
thereby,

The matter is of as great concernment (moment) as our souls, and everlasting
happiness to be begun here, and consummate hereafter. No unclean thing can
enter there. And we have all sin, and contracted upon us by nature; sin the
only evil opposite to Gods justice, to Christ's merit and intercession for us,
and example to us; to the work and motions of his holy Spirit, and to our own
happiness. Unless this be repented of and amended, there is no hope left us
in that great salvation; and no repentance or amendment but by this act of Gods
word upon our souls. Jer. 17.
Our hearts are deceitful above all things: There is no trusting to our own
phansies and dictates of nature. We seek to our selves plurima ratiocinia, many
inventions wherewith to deceive our souls with distinctions and evasions, even
against Gods word it self, unless it be laid home unto us impartially. Satan
lies at all advantages to deceive us; the world and the flesh flatter til they
have destroyed us: We can trust no friend safely in this point. Many a soul now
in torment might have escaped, if he had not trusted others, and neglected to
lay Gods word home unto his heart. Only the Scripture is no respecter of
persons, as is not the Author of it. This will lay open, this will cure the
distemper of our soul.

This is (...), profitable for reprehension.

Means.
1 Utterly deny our selves, bring no conclusions with us to seek Premises out
of Gods word, no desire that any thing should be otherwise then Gods word will
have it. The cause of all deadly misunderstanding of Scripture.

2 Come to it with prayer, with humility, with resolution to pluck out eyes,
cut off right hand, deny what ever it is against, do whatsoever it injoyns.

When any reprehension comes unto us in the Ministry of the Word, moving to
amendment agreeing to Gods Word; lay it home, and let it have its full work: So
shall we honor God therein, encourage and cheer his instrument, get a precious
balm to our souls.

3 To use Gods Word in this act of it upon others: Exhortation III.
This the Magistrate may do uncontrollably, yea though there be no hope of
amending the party, yet the smiting of a scorner will make others beware. Prove.
19.25.
The Minister so far, as his pearls be not trampled, and he rent by swine, for
whom he has the keys to shut them out, or the dust of his feet to shake off
against them, and so leave them; or patience to bear for Christ's sake what in
his cause shall befall him. A private man may likewise exercise this. Lev. 19.17
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke
him, and not suffer sin upon him. For him that is to be reproved, if a
slow-belly, there is a sharp reprehension; if otherwise, Tit. 1.12, 23.
a spirit of meekness: if once, there is a private; if iterated etc. public:
direct, where it agrees, where not, oblique. By practicing the contrary,
retiring, silence, gesture, all may reprehend all.

BRANCH II. The Scripture is profitable (...), for Consolation.
There is a two-sold distemper of the heart to be rectified by Gods word,
Explication.
(as I showed before,) The former rectified by reprehension; of that before:
The other by Consolation; Of this now.

The word not used otherwhere in Scripture, yet in the Maccab. 2 Maccab. 15, 17.
goes not far from this sense (...), animi juvenum confortati (says S.
Hierome) The young men's minds were comforted.

For the meaning of this we must enquire,

1 What is meant by comfort.

Comfort taken Improperly for the Cause. Effect.
Properly.

2 How the Scripture is profitable thereto.

1. For the former we must find out

1 The object of comfort. 2 The affection which it works upon to excite it. 3
How it does that.
1 The object of this act is a Mourner, or man under the rest of mourning, or
dejection of mind. Isa. 61.3. 2 Thessalonians. 5.13. 2 Cor. 7.12.
To bind up the broken hearted, to comfort the mourners, the mourners in Sion.
Comfort the feeble-minded.

Mourning is for present evil, evil present being the object of Grief. But if
we will find out the object of comfort more particularly, we must distinguish
of the several terms, [Man] [Mourning] [Evill] [the presence of it.]

Man may be considered as Believer. Unbeleever Impious. In disposition to
conversion.



Grief or mourning may be distinguished from the Root, and so it may be
considered Morally; as Good out of love of God: ourselves. under both which
comes Love of our Neighbor; Under the former, as we look at that of God in
him. Under the later, as we look at that somewhat of our selves in him.

Ill, when it proceeds from love of our corruptions.
Naturally.
Quantity Even object. Odd Greater Less.




Evil may be considered 1 As Apparent, which whether it be, or be not in rerum
natura, is not in its nature evil. Real, which whether it be actu or potentia,
(in act or not) is in its nature evil.
2 As the Evil of Sin Pain which is In its nature ill, but overpowered by God,
and made good, and an object of joy to the party to whom it is sent, Trial,
Martyrdom.
Both ill in its nature, and to the party the object of grief Punishment,
Chastisement.





Now Chastisement is either of the Wicked, tending to conversion, Godly to the
Renewing of repentance, as a testimony of Gods displeasure, yet with
difference. Taking better heed for the time to come.



Present Both in deed, and in apprehension, Only in the one respect, as In deed
only, and not apprehended. In apprehension only, and not in deed.



Believer Unbeleever evil apparent real of sin pain present In deed, In
apprehension only,



be not grieved for, there properly is no object of comfort, as being no grief,
which in general is the object of comfort. Yet is there great difference under
this. I Will name the two most opposite particulars in their greatest generality.

If, whether in believer or unbeleever, the evil of sin, apparent or real,
present indeed or apprehended only, be not grieved for; there is work for
Reprehension.

If the real evil of pain, but of that sort which, though in its nature ill,
is by an over-powering of God made good, as of probatio, or (...), be not
entertained with grief; there is thereupon no ground of Reprehension. Jam. 1.2.
Mat. 5.12.
Count it all joy, my brethren, when ye fall into diverse trialls. When men
revile and persecute you, and speak all ill of you falsely for my sake, (...),
Rejoice, and skip for joy. Yea though such need not comfort in actu secundo
(actually) in that for which they rejoice; yet the Word of God goes along with
them in fitness to comfort them, if they should at any time be dejected, and
in the mean while, speaks all good to their souls.

If an apparent ill, whether of sin, Gal. 5.
which is a work of the flesh; cannot be revenged on him whom he hates; may not
vie drinking in the College hall, or the like: here, though there be grief, is
no object of comfort. Thus sinned those in the Prophet, who grieved the
Sabbaths were so long. Amos 8.5.
When will they be over? said they. Thus Ahab, that he could not tell how to get
Naboths vineyard.

Yea, here may be a sin of the highest degree. I know not whether the Devil
has a greater sin then this, that he so grieves, he can do God no greater
dishonor.

Yet if a believer out of weakness of judgment, and tenderness of conscience
should grieve for some act which was not ill; here would be place for true
comfort: yea, if one yet an unbeleever, but in fieri, and under the hand of
Gods Spirit preparing him for his conversion should grieve for somewhat, as a
sin which was none, he might so far receive comfort, as to take away his grief
in regard of that object. So if out of the love of himself subordinated to the
love of God, he should grieve for some apparent ill of pain, whether present
indeed, or apprehended only; here is a subject of comfort.

If the evil of sin real be present indeed, Augendus est iste dolor, The man
must grieve more, says Hemmingius.

2 If more in either, there is work for comfort, yet with difference. The
believer doing so with that ingenuous grief that looks at God as his father by
him offended; Christ as his Redeemer, and the Holy Spirit, who has formerly
spoken peace to his conscience: there Gods Word gives present comfort. But the
unbeleever, and by this work disposed to conversion, however he may overgrieve
in regard of the punishment, or with some ingenuous grief according to such
apprehension as he may have of God, and so far may be comforted, as that the
sin is pardonable, and he in the way to obtain pardon, yet must he be brought
to the sight of plenteous redemption which is with Christ, and his grief made
thereby more ingenuous, that upon his says in him who takes away the sins of
the World, he may receive the great comforts of heaven, which the Word affords
to them who come weary and heavy-laden unto Christ.

3 If equal, here is matter of joy. Poenitens semper doleat (says S. Austin)
and de isthoe dolor gaudeat; The penitent must always grieve, and rejoice for
that grief. And no sinful distemper of the soul of fallen man in via (while he
lives here) but an unagreeablenesse to the commands of the Gospel. Yet because
sin is the antecedent to all grief, and had it not been, man should not have
grieved; and the soul under godly sorrow is not where it would be; here is an
object of comfort.

If real evil of pain (except that ill of absolute punishment which has no
intention of good from God with it to the party) be indeed present, Lam. 3 33.
afflicts not the sons of men (...) from his heart, (or willingly) has a word
of comfort for them that are in distress, so far forth for all, that the cause
being removed, he will take away, or overbalance with good the ill of pain:
yet with this difference, that his special comforts are for the believer, whom
he pities as a father his son that fears him, and most especially those, who
undergo sometriall, or suffer for righteousness sake, with whom his love is
most present, and their reward great in the kingdom of heaven.

If the evil of sin be present in apprehension only,

From all these particulars we may gather thus much in general, That though
the object of comfort, properly, be one that mourns, yet some mourners are
excepted herefrom.

1 Those that mourn because they cannot satisfy their corrupt desires.

2 Those that mourn under pain which is absolute punishment, without any
intention of saving good to them from God. Such is the mourning of the damned
in hell, for whom there is no comfort. And such would be the mourning of one
that had sinned against the holy Ghost, if he were under some ill of pain,
Otherwise, I think, there is no punishment to a man in this life under which he
can mourn, but carries some intention of good with it from God.

3 Those that mourn for sin in some sort, but are not thoroughly humbled.

The first and last of these are capable of comfort in sensu diviso, (when they
and their ill ends, or wants are divided) the second of none.

So much for the object of comfort, the variety and perplexednesse whereof as
it has been troublesome to me, so, I fear, it has been tedious to you.


2 What affection Comfort aims to excite and set a working: that is Joy, as
oppositely Reprehension aimed at Grief.

I will comfort them, Jer. 31.13. Isa. 61.2, 3
and make them rejoice for their sorrows. To comfort all that mourn, to give
them the oil of joy for mourning.

3 This it does by presenting the heart with some good, wherewith it being not
before affected, or not in that measure, was dejected.

The object of Joy being Good present, and no affection stirred but by that
which brings the formalis ratio of its object with it, Nihil lenit dolorem nisi
aliqua boni ratio in eo conspiciatur, (says Melancthon) There is no asswaging
of grief without some spice of good appear in the remedy.

The ratio (nature) of good may be conceived in that Good.
which is a positive good. has the respect of a less ill.


The former is plain.

Of the later our Savior speaks, Mat. 26.24
It were good for that man he had never been.

And I doubt not but it would carry a great respect of good, and much comfort
to a soul in hell, to be assured that after ten thousand thousand years it
should be annihilated. Not to be, has no entitie, therefore no good, yet
carries respect of good in comparison of greater ill. Whence, removing ill de
tanto or toto, (in part or whole) has the rationem (or respect) of good.

Good may be said to be present in diverse degrees, in possibility,
probability, in actual union, in immediate for the fullness, and unseparable
for the perpetuity of the union.

According to the differences of the Good, and degrees of the presence which
the comfort brings, so is the joy more or less. To a soul despairing, and sunk
down under the impossible (conceit of impossibility) of deliverance, the
possibility is comfort, and perhaps sufficient for the present. The highest
degree of comfort in this life, 1 Pet. 1.8.
is the communion a believer has through faith with Christ: Wherein he
rejoiceth with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Salvation apprehended in the
certainty of Faith to the praise of Mercy; which is then consummated, when
according to the Word of God, by the act of Omnipotency, the object
beatificall shall be immediately and unseparably enjoyed.

Hence may appear how comfort acts upon the dejected heart, viz. by affecting
it with some joy upon the good present, either in the removal of the ill
partly or wholly, under which it lies: or else by bringing in positive good,
which may either sustain the heart against the ill, if it remain, or possess
the heart with liquid joy, if it be removed.

Hence we may thus describe comfort. What is Comfort?
It is an (...) or rectifying of the heart, (by grief arising from some
morally, or naturally good principle) dejected under some ill, present in
apprehension only, or in deed; by affecting it with some present good,
comparative or positive, whereby the ill is removed in part, or wholly: or the
heart by Good sustained against the Ill, or possessed upon the removal of the
Ill.

Hitherto of this first part of Explication.

2 The Scripture (...) profitable for Comfort, as for the former acts of
Instruction, Refutation, Reprehension.

It is necessary in such degree and manner, as no saving Comfort can be
without it, but by it, by the work of Gods Spirit may the dejected soul be
rectified.

Whatsoever things were written in old time, were writ for our learning, (...).
that we through patience and comfort of the Scripture might have hope. Romans
15.4 Ps. 119.50
This is my comfort in my affliction, thy Word quickneth me.

I might for the further proof hereof bring an induction of several griefs,
and how the word is profitable for comfort against them, but I will name only
two, which Hemmingius counts the chief. Gravissimus animi cruciatus, etc. The
most grievous torment of the mind is desperation, with which, whosoever
labors, feels the sorrows of hell. And this arises from either An
imagination of particularity, The consideration of ones unworthiness by reason
of often falling.


1 If the tentation arises from a Stoicall imagination, The testimony of the
Lord is true (says he) and it says thus: 1 Timothy 2.4 2 Pet. 3.9.
God would have all men to be saved and none to perish. Let this Word be
opposed to all Stoicall imaginations.

2 The universal promise of Grace, Come unto me all ye that labor, Mat. 11.28
Joh. 3.16. Mat. 28.
etc. So God loved the World, etc. Go teach, etc. He that believes, shall be
saved, etc.

3 There is no respect of persons with God.

According to this unmovable (sure) Rule, He receives all penitents, rejects
all impenitents.

II Against the thought of our own unworthiness, are 1 The glorious and large
promises. 2 The excellency of the Sacrifice, The Lamb of God, yea the Lamb
God, etc. 3 Grace abounds above sin. 4 The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us
from all sin. 5 The examples of them who have sinned grievously, and yet have
obtained mercy.


Founded in the former. (...).
If the Scripture contain all things fully and plainly that are necessary to
salvation, then likewise for comfort, whereby the dejected soul is raised up,
and carried on against all that might press it down, or discourage it in the
way to salvation. The former was proved in the act of Information.

1 The Heathen have places of comfort in their Treatises,

Against the ill of sin, cold comfort, who knew not him that takes away the
sins of the world. Against Gods anger no saving comfort, seeing in his Son
alone he is well-pleased, and loves none to salvation but as considered in him.
He has made us acceptable to himself in his beloved. Ephesians. 1.6. 2 Cor. 5.19.
In him he is reconciling the world to himself.

Against affliction their comfort but weak. Sin the sting of affliction they
knew not how to pluck out, or how savingly to pacify Gods anger. The
righteousness of the cause (which was their greatest comfort) is nothing where
there is not the righteousness of the person, the person reconciled to God,
and enabled with grace to bear it.

Non meriti paenam pateris, sed numinis iram;
Est aliquid magnis crimen abesse malis.
Thou suffer not the punishment of thy fault, but only the anger of a
deity: And this is something. Thus Ovid comforts his friend. But what he gives
with one hand, he takes away with the other, for if the deities anger be there,
his something is nothing.

In a word, We may answer here as before in Confutation; If there be any
comfort in their Philosophy it is derived from the fountain of comfort, who
leaves not himself without witness, is eminently in the Scripture, not saving
comfort, unless perfected by the Scripture, wherein the mystery of Salvation
is alone contained.

1 God is said to be the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort,

The subordinate is not taken away by the principal; God comforts,

2 Angels and Men are said to comfort.

By and according to the Scripture, which assures us, that he has made his
Angels ministering Spirits for the good of the Elect; and given them charge over
us to keep us in our ways.

The same may be said of men who comfort us, Using this word; Doing what it
contains to be done to us.


III We were comforted by your faith, says the Apostle.

1 That faith was the work of Gods Word in them.

2 This word told the Apostle what a good thing it was to see them believe to
whom he had preached: how acceptable a work to God, a crown to him, which might
overbalance the afflictions attending his Ministry.

1 Here we see what is the condition viatoris (of one on his journey traveling
to heaven,

2 The admirable goodness of God, who has afforded us his Word, the Word of
comfort.

3 The reason why any dye in despair is not because there is no comfort for
them, but because either it is not applied unto them, or regarded by them: for
it is profitable for comfort.

4 See the miserable condition of those who want Gods Word.

5 The unjust pretense of some, who say, they would betake themselves to a
godly course of life, but that they see no comfort in it. Sure they place
comfort in the pleasures of sin: Otherwise the Rule of a godly man's life, is
the Word profitable for comfort.

1 Those that fly to the best Philosophers for Comfort, Reprehension.
leaving Gods Word.

It is true they have some excellent sayings, materials of comfort. The chief
Tullie names, Conscientia recte facti, The Conscience of a good deed:
Conscientia officiorum meorum, The Conscience of my duties: Conscientia rectae
voluntatis, The Conscience of a good purpose or intention, Est maxima
consolatio rerum incommodarum, Is the most sovereign comfort I find in my
troubles.

S. Paul speaks to the same effect, 2 Cor. 1.12.
This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world. Gods Word gives comfort enough
to such an one as by the Apostle is here described. But alas the Philosophers
conscience had not the Synteresis informed out of Gods Word, (...) having their
dianoetic or discoursing, Ephesians. 4.18.
(reasoning) faculty darkened. Heb. 9.14.
They had not the blood of Christ to cleanse their consciences from dead Works
to serve the living God.

2 Those that fly to Stoic destiny for comfort against sin or pain; Fatalis
quaedam calamitas incidit (say they) my misery is fatal. What is that but to
lay their sins to God, or (as the Phrase is in Job) to impute folly to God?
The sin by this means remaining unpardoned, yea infinitely augmented by making
the H. God who is Deus non volens iniquitatem, Psalm. 5.4.
God that has no pleasure in wickedness, to be the author of it. How shall
not the pain recoil with far more strength to their utter confusion?

3 Those that run to Epicurisme for comfort against grief. Sigravis, brevis,
(say they) si longus, levis: If heavy, it will be short; if long, light. But
this is one of their speculative comforts. When the grief comes and proves
heavy, but not short, long and not light, what is then to be done? Gods Prophet
denounced his judgments against them, and they said, Let us eat and drink,
Isa. 22.14.
to morrow we shall dye. A sin which the Lord said he would never pardon. This
is their father Epicure said to have done, -- Qui Stygias ebrius hausit aquas:
who went down drunk to drink of the Stygian Lake.

I suppose one draught of that Lake would waken his drunkenness, and then it
would be too late to call for a drop of that liquor to cool his tongue,
wherewith he had so often enflamed and intoxicated his brain. Such are those that
drown their griefs and stings of conscience in their cups, till they have
brought an habitual stupiditie upon themselves: which though it may be void of
grief for the present, yet is as far from true comfort which Gods Word affords,
as darkness from light, Hell from Heaven.

4 Those who seek to the Devil for comfort by Witches and Magical Arts. What
comfort Saul found in this the Scripture tells us. And if any find more, let
them know that the Devil that Murderer would do them no benefit, but upon
biting interest; And God who removes his hand for the present in displeasure,
does it but to raise it the higher, to give them a greater blow.

To those who cleave to Gods Word, Consolation.
and build themselves thereon, and have it dwelling plentisully in them. It is
a word profitable for Comfort. His Word who is the Father of Mercies, and God
of all Comfort. His Word who is the Consolation of Israel. His Word who is the
Comforter. That Word which contains in it all the good which the universal God
has in store for the sons of men. That Word which is accompanied with the Holy
Spirit, who searches the depth of God, most wise and able to apply it, and
seal it to the heart of man, for the dispelling of all those terrors and
griefs; which otherwise when they shall indeed be let loose upon a man, and by
Satan, and conscience aggravated, would make him by untimely death to fly from
them to hell, as less grievous, till felt, then those actually lying upon him.
That Word which is accompanied with the immutable will and omnipotency of God
to accomplish the recompense of reward upon all those to whom it speaks saving
comfort.

If Grief for sin lie heavy upon thee; this will say, Behold the Lamb of God
which takes away the sin of the World. Joh. 1.29.
He that confesses his sin, and forsakes it, shall find mercy.

If reproach and disparagement, by Satan's Ministers or Messengers, be cast upon
thee in thy calling; This is indeed (...) a dart or cross to flesh and blood,
and able to bring S. Paul upon his knees. But this Word will tell thee, That
the Grace of God is sufficient for thee, yea that thou may rejoice in that
against which thou prayedst. If thou should lie upon thy bed of sickness,
this Word will tell thee, Thy Saviors left hand was under thy head, and his
right hand did embrace thee. If death was now seifing upon thee, and the grave
opening her mouth for thy body, This would make thee say of death, Oh death
where is thy sting! Oh grave where is thy victory! This would say unto thy
soul, Come you blessed of the Father, inherit the kingdom.

1 To those that are betrusted with this Word, Exhortation I.
that they would comfort others therewith.

It is the Gospel of Peace, Ephesians. 6.17.1.13.
the Gospel of our salvation. He gives it and gifts with it for this end. Isa.
50.4.
God has given me, etc. He calls for this, Isa. 40.1.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people. Complains for want of it, The diseased have
ye not healed, Ezekiel. 34.4.
nor strengthened that which was sick, nor bound up that which was broken.

2 To all, Exhortation II.
to fly to Gods Word for Comfort in all our distresses. To desire comfort I
need not exhort: And that it is no where else, has been proved.

1 Lay away impiety. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God.

2 Look our grief come not from the love of our lusts.

3 If for sin, look it be cordial, and the wound searched to the bottom,
before this precious medicine be applied. They have healed the hurt of the
daughter of my people slightly, Jer. 6.14.
saying, Peace, peace, when etc.

To keep a thankful remembrance of those whom God has stirred up to be means
of bringing us to the knowledge of this Word, Exhortation III.
etc.

AXIOM IV.
(...). Ad disciplinam quae est in justitia.
Holy Scripture is profitable for Instruction in righteousness.

FOr the Explication of this part of Scripture, Explication.
we must first show what act of Scripture is contained in these words: And then
explain that.

That the word implies a practical act looking at good and ill, Suidas
affirms, saying, (...): I take right (...) or instruction to be, not a trim
ryming or gingling of words and tongue or language; but (...), true senses, or
opinions, or doctrines, concerning good and bad, honest and filthy.

1 (...)properly notes that act wherein men are conversant about children,
informing their mind and manners, for the prosecuting of good and avoiding of
ill. Wherein the first distinct act seems to be Exhortation and Dehortation: in
that after some confused act of knowledge of the thing, the will is to be
excited to prosecute, or refuse it, and that will command both the mind to
learn and the hand to practice.

Hence it seems to be brought in as the first act of a child capable of
institution. Isa. 7.16.
Before the child shall know to refuse the ill and choose the good: which is
done by exhortation and dehortation.

I was my fathers son, Prove. 4.4.
tender, he taught me, and said --. What was this teaching but a manifold
exhortation which there follows, and chiefly to learn instruction?

Hence Socrates was wont to say, that he had done half his work, when he had
obtained that his scholars were willing to learn. Which he got by Exhortation
and Dehortation.

So that this act is a mean to bring on that of instruction in the
distinctnesse thereof.

2 After institution, and exhortation and dehortation, the word signifies
chastisement, as needful in special for that age. My son despise not (...)
the chastnings of the Lord: Heb. 12.5.
For whom the Lord loves (...) he chastises.

From this prime signification of the word in reference to children, it is
raised up Synecdochically, in all these significations, to note at large,
Institution, Exhortation, Dehortation, or Castigation of all sorts,
indifferently, old or young. And thus in this place, where the Apostle speaks
of an act of Gods Word belonging to all. But in which of these senses, remains
to be inquired; and that will appear to be Exhortation and Dehortation.

That the word is so used may appear in Rev. 3.19. In the 15, 16, and 17. (...).
verses our Savior severally reprehends the Laodiceans, not without threatening
added thereto: in the 18. verse he exhorts, using a Motive from the End; then
recollecting what he had said in the 19. ver. he says, Ego quoscunque amo,
(...), whomsoever I love, I rebuke or reprehend, and chasten; or rather,
exhort; Reprehend, as v. 15, 16, 17. Exhort, as v. 18.

The grace of God has appeared (...), Tit. 2.12.
that is, dehorting us from ungodliness and worldly lusts, and exhorting to
live soberly, righteously, and godlily (or religiously) in this present world.

For this place the Context requires this sense.

That the Apostle here intended to set down all the acts of Gods Word, whereby
it is effectual, appears from the end, in the next verse, That the man of God
may be perfect, (...) thoroughly furnished (made absolute) to every good work.

Instruction we had in the word (...), Correction (so far forth as an act of
Gods Word) in the word (...): so that there remains only that sense of this
word which contains Exhortation to good, and Dehortation from ill.

This may further appear by the words here added, (...), which seem to be added
for distinction, or specification of the (...) here named, which our
Translation does not so fully express: But Beza thus renders it ad disciplinam
quae est in justitia: and Tremelius out of the Syriac, ad eruditionem quae est
in justitia, to the discipline, to the good nurturing (or making unrude) which
is in righteousness. In the Syriac is the Pronoun (...) which answers in that
tongue to (...) in the Hebrew.

It seems to add a double distinction to the word (...). 1 To difference the
word from the two other senses of Instruction and Castigation: and therefore he
says not (...), nor (...), which is in knowledge, which is in affliction; not
that which is in knowledge by instruction, or in affliction by castigation: but
(...), which is in Exhortation and Dehortation. 2 To difference (...) from that
wicked Exhortation and Dehortation which Satan and his instruments use, not
(...) that which is in wickedness, which the holy Scriptures abhor, but (...).

Righteousness is the conformity of man unto Gods rule or commands, (...)
which being twofold, Bidding, Forbidding,
there are two parts of righteousness; doing good, which answers to the
affirmative command, and eschewing ill, which answers to the negative. Psalm.
34.14
David comprehends both in one verse, Eschew evil and do good: and then adds
in the next verse by way of motive, The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous; intimating that that is righteousness to eschew evil and do good.
We are brought to do good by Exhortation, which tends to excite us unto good;
and therefore (...) contains Exhortation. We are brought to eschew ill by
Dehortation, and therefore that is also contained in (...) which is (...).

So that as the word (...) employed the acts of Reprehension and Consolation,
there being a twofold rectification needful; so (...) implies two acts of
Gods word, the one for the prosecution of good, the other to deter from ill.

We have then two Axioms in these words.

I. The Scripture is profitable for Exhortation to good.

II. For Dehortation from ill.

For the former.
I. The Scripture is profitable for Exhortation.

1 What is meant by Exhortation. 2 How Gods word is profitable for it.
1 For the former. We will consider it, 1 In it self. 2 In its difference from
a Precept.

1 In it self. 1 What respect it looks at in the object. 2 What affection it
tends to excite. 3 How it does that.


1 Exhortation looks at man indifferently considered, and not under any
determined qualification of present good or ill, as the former acts of (...)
did. To the unconverted it says, Turn ye, Ezekiel. 18.
turnye, why will ye die? To the converted, Exhort one another daily. (...) 3.3.
Only it looks at man in reference to some future good to be done.

2 The affection which Exhortation aims at, is Hope, or efficax desiderium;
whence is in man, the prosecution of good. Love looks at good abstractly in the
connaturality or conveniencie which it has unto the man, and is indeed, as it
were, the life and soul of all the affections, whereby they act. Hate, the
prime affection wherein are founded all the rest that are conversant about ill,
is it self not collateral, but subordinate to love, and founded therein.
Therefore do I hate a thing, because opposite to somewhat which I love. If the
good loved be future, Love takes the wings of Desire to move unto it: If
possible to be had, Love stirs up the soul to use the means, whereby it may be
had; and to conquer the difficulties, and so animates this cardinal passion of
Hope, whereby we prosecute good whether officii or beneficii, of duty, or
benefit, honest, or profitable. Both which God has so united, that we cannot
follow that which is honest, but true profit will attend it; we cannot follow
aright that which is truly profitable, but honesty is the way wherein, and the
last end whereto that prosecution tends. Gods Rule being the way, his Honor
the last end.

3 That you may see how Exhortation excites this affection of hope, ye must
know,

1 What the formalis ratio of the object of this affection is,

2 And then how exhortation brings an object thus clothed.

1 The formalis ratio of the object of hope, is bonum, absens, arduum,
possibile. Bonum is lovely, bonum absens desirable, bonum absens possbile,
superaddes the proper respect of Hopes object, and arduum may seem to be, by
accident, of the object of Hope; in that, God has so ordered, that in this
life (...) are (...): but the more difficulty, the less Hope, and the less
difficulty, the more hope. Yet hence it is placed in the iraseible, which
rises up against the arduum.

2 An Exhortation in the compleatnesse of it, brings in this whole formalis
ratio.

In the Motives the Bonum, honestum or utile, or both, of the thing exhorted
to; and so much the stronger by how much the good is greater, and more
necessarily subordinate to the chief good. To which may also be added the
threatening of ill to them who prosecute not the good, the escaping of it having
also the reason or nature of good.

By the Notes which Exhortation adds, absent, necessarily argue the absence
of that whereto they are inseparably agreeing: As likewise Notes may be taken
from the incompatible dissentanie, which if present, argue the bonum to be
absent.

The arduum of it will be made appear by showing the hinderers of us: The
averseness of our corrupt nature from it. Satan and his instruments laboring
to Entice us anotherway, Deter us from it; and without difference.



The possible is manifested by the means of obtaining it, Remove what might
hinder us. Bring on the good directly.


These four make an exhortation complete, for the exciting of hope, or stirring
up the heart for the prosecution of Good.

If ye exhort to any thing, the first question the heart makes, will be this,
Is it good? Hereto the Motives answer.

Secondly, it will say (as we are prone to flatter our selves) It is with me
already. This the Notes will discover.

Thirdly, it will say, There is no haste, I can have it with no ado when I
list. Hereto the expounding of the arduum will answer.

Nothing more can the heart say, why it should not follow it, but that

Fourthly, It is impossible, at least secundum quid, or in regard of us. To
this the Means will answer, which show how it may be gotten.

And hence we may gather what divine Exhortation is, viz. (...) wherein by
presenting the heart with some great good, the want of it, and the possibility
of obtaining it, hope is excited, and the heart set on work, for the
prosecution of that good.

2 For the explication of Exhortation in difference from a Precept; How a
Precept and Exhoreation differ.

A precept is an authoritative expression of the Commanders serious will to
have somewhat done or omitted.

Implies three things.

1 Jus, right to command.

2 Seriam volitionem, a willing in good earnest.

3 Manifestationem volitionis, an expression of that willing.

Precept is Bidding. Forbidding.


Forbidding and Exhortation do much differ, the one having for its object
evil, the other good.

Bidding and Exhortation not so much. Yet these may be considered 1 Abstractly
in their natures, or 2 In the use of Scripture.


1 Considered at large in their natures they differ really. The former
peremptorily injoining the duty by virtue of authority over the party in order
to that.

The latter persuading and exciting the heart, out of respect to the goodness
of the thing.

He may command that does not exhort, he may exhort that does not, yea cannot
command.

2 In Scripture-use, precept and exhortation do not really differ. God might,
by his authority over us, resulting from creation of us, and much more from
Redemption, have peremptorily commanded; but the gracious God would not use his
authority in commanding, before he made a Covenant with us, and therein
propounded his command by way of stipulation or exhortation to that he would
have us do, to move us to free and ingenuous obedience. God so commands, as he
persuades to the thing from the goodness of it to us: he so exhorts or
persuades, as not forgoing his authority to punish the neglect of his
persuasions. His command, as tending to our good, and attended with his promise
upon obedience, is an Exhortation; as coming in his name and authority, and
attended with a threatening upon disobedience, retains the nature of a Command.

2 How Gods word is profitable to Exhortation.

As to the former acts in the same degree and manner.

A Bishop must not be given to wine, (...).
nor filthy lucre; but sober, just, holy, temperate; holding fast the faithful
word, Tit. 1.9.
that he may be able, by sound doctrine to exhort. These things speak and
exhort (says the Apostle) having formerly laid down the sum of the Gospel)
Hence is preaching called The word of Exhortation, c. 2. v. 15.
Acts 13.15.
eminently.

If the Scripture contain all things perfectly, (...)
and perspicuously, which are necessary to duty and salvation, then is it
adaequately, and necessarily profitable for Exhortation. But the Scripture
contains, etc. Therefore etc.

Here the proper adjunct, profitablenesse for Exhortation, is demonstrated of
the proper subject, the Scripture, by the proper cause, the sufficiency and
perspicuitie of the Scripture, to duty and salvation.

The Minor has been proved at large in the profitablenesse of it for
instruction.

The Major may appear in that, Exhortation, in all the parts of it, is founded
in that which conduces to duty attended with salvation.

The thing exhorted to, or the keeping of the precept, is life, Prove. 4.4.
(...)

The Motives urge it in that name.

If ab honesto, that is to Gods honor, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and those that honor him he will honor.

If ab utili, that is truly profitable which is in order to salvation. What
shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul?

The trial whether we have the good or no, looks at duty attended with
salvation. Examine your selves, prove your selves, 1 Cor. 13.5.
know ye not your selves, that Christ Jesus is in you except ye be reprobates?

The difficulty of the thing exhorted to, is considered in order to life. Enter
in at the straight gate, narrow is the way to life.

So like wise the Means in order to salvation. If by any means I might attain
to the Resurrection of the dead.

That therefore which contains all things whereto man need be exhorted, all
Motives whereby, all Notes of Trial, expressions of difficulty, Means of
prevailing; must needs be profitable for Exhortation.

Such is the Scripture, as containing all things fully and plainly necessary
for salvation, which all divine exhortation more nighly or remotely looks at.
Therefore, etc.

1 Instruct.
Exhortation not that in righteousness. And I would to God it were not so
frequent, especially here (in the Universitie.) The Prophet Laiah affords us an
excellent example of such (...) in the Clergy of his days. Isa. 56 10, 11.12.
The Watchmen are blind, yet they are greedy; they all look to their own way,
every one for his gain from his quarter. Come ye (say they) I will fetch wine,
and we will fill our selves with sirong drink, and to morrow shall be as this
day, and much more abundant. And I would to God men destinated in special for
that (...) which is in righteousness, could not exemplify the contrary, not
only in the scandalous practice, but also in persuasions to luxury and
impiety! But this, God and his holy Word do abominate. The Scripture indeed is
profitable (...), but (...).

2 Here we may see, That while we here live, we have need of exhortation, so
averse or back ward are we from good: Which certainly, had not our good and
provident God seen, he had never put into his Word, the Rule of our life, this
act of Exhortation.

3 That we are not carried to good by necessity, or an Enthusiasm not to be
withstood, for then no place would remain for Exhortations, which operate on
our heart by Motives and persuasions; as has already appeared from the nature
of them.

4 See the goodness of God, who not content to send his son to puchase or
obtain our Redemption, to instruct us concerning it now obtained, to confute
errors opposite thereto, to reprehend straglers from Gods ways, to comfort
the dejected; is pleased also to superadde Exhortation which might strive with
us, and draw us with the bands of a man, and the cords of love, most sweetly,
to the prosecution of good.

5 Happy is their condition who enjoy the Word of God profitable for
Exhortation. If they were happy who heard Solomon discourse of natural and
politic wisdom; how much happier are they who hear God exhorting to
supernatural and beatifying or blissful good?

6 The condition of those is miserable who are destitute of Gods word. Who
shall exhort them to good?

7 They are inexcusable who having Gods Word, follow not that which is good.
Where will they (poor men!) lay the fault? Upon the want of Exhortation to
good? They cannot, for Gods word is profitable for Exhortation.

Reprehension of them that neglect Exhortation To take it out of Gods word. I
will aggravate this but with this one consideration. If they were such as were
imperswasible, and would not at all be exhorted (though the case were
desperate) it was a less sin: but to be easily persuaded by Satan, and not to
yield to God, makes it exceeding sinful. By Satan exhorting to uncleanness,
and not by God to holiness. By Satan to that which is hurtful to others, not
by God to that which is good for them. By Satan to that is damnable, not by God
to that is salvation. To give it. Take the like aggravation here. Have Gods
word, and detain that in unrighteousness, yet bring out rotten principles.


It is a comfort to us against the evil of our averseness from good,
Consolation.
that we have Gods word profitable for exhortation.

1 That since the word of God is profitable for exhortation, Exhortation.
we would attend to the exhortations of it.

Motives from the good of Exhortation in its Cause Bringing it out, The Son out
of the bosom of the Father. Assisting, The Holy Ghost.
Nature Holy. Profitable.

Attention to it.


The Father conceived it. The Son brought it forth. The H. Ghost assists and
actuates it.

(...) The mighty God, Psalm. 50 1.
even the LORD has spoken.

I. The good of Exhortation appears in that,

1 The every way perfection of God, together with his glory, render him to us
worthy to be attended to, in his Exhortations: He being of infinite wisdom,
justice, goodness, power, etc. So that it may well beseem, and be no prejudice
to us to hear him.

2 His Actions and relations thence resulting have deserved our attention. The
actions of Creation, Providence; First Covenanting with us: of Redemption,
Second Covenant, in which there is the preparation of Grace. Glory.


Creation gave him dominion over us, The Father.
Providence continues it; The first Covenanting with us augmented it,
Redomption infinitely enlarged it; The second covenanting perfects it; The rest
of his actions have made him an absolute Lord: Foederation or Covenanting with
us, makes him a King and Father. He might, as an absolute Lord, peremptorily
command, without proposing any promise, and punish with eternal torments the
least neglect of his command; yet he exhorts as a King and Father. And to an
Exhorter so excellent, so deserving of us, shall we not attend?

Divine exhortations are from the Son of God, The Son.
that logos essentialis who is Prophet and King of his Church, who brought
these exhortations out of the bosom of his Father, and in the days of his
flesh, urged them with all vehemence and lovingnesse of expression, spending
whole nights in prayer for success: with tears bewailing the want thereof. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often? O that thou had known this thy day! When we
lay under the curse and never sued to him, he undertook our Redemption: when he
had revealed so much by his Spirit before his Incarnation, and wrought in us a
sense of our want, we did but entreat, O that thou would rend the heavens and
come down to us! He came at our request, emptied himself of glory, and took the
shame due to us upon him, endured such contradiction of sinners, poured out his
hearts blood and soul in a most cursed and cruel death, under the weight of
all our sins for an atonement; and now at the right hand of his Father,
entreats for us, and listens to all our entreaties; yea perfumes them with his
own precious merit to make them acceptable: and shall we not attend to him in
his exhortations to us?

The holy Spirit assists and acts divine exhortation. The Holy Spirit.


1 He inlightens the understanding by the Word of God and persuades the truth
thereto; he heals the Will by an action immediate unto, and into it, that it may
will good supernatural: and by this illumination of the Mind, and infusion of
strength into the will, does he in some sort also correct the affections, whose
objects the understanding enlightened by the Spirit shows; whose actions the
will healed by the Spirit commands. By grace he prevents or comes before the
act, by inabling to it, he excites by inviting, and by, as it were, striving
patiently, he operates in a man that puts not a bar against him.

2 By Grace subsequent to, or following the former, he helps the will in the
act, concurs effectually with it, and cooperates to consummate the act brought
forth by him. And shall we not attend to the exhortations of Gods word so
powerfully, so patiently, so lovingly applied by the Holy Ghost?

For the object rei or thing whereto they exhort, They are perfect, sure,
right, Psalm. 19.
pure, clean, enduring for ever, true, and righteous altogether.

For the benefit of them, They are converting the soul, making wise the simple,
rejoicing the heart, enlightening the eyes; more to be desired are they then
gold, yea then much fine gold, sweeter also then honey and the honeycomb. By
them is Gods servant warned, and in keeping of them there is great reward.

In a word, Godliness is the thing they contain, wherein stands the glory of
man, and his conformity with God. 1 Timothy 4.8.
And Godliness is profitable for all things, has the promises of this life,
and that life to come.

And shall we not listen to such exhortations as contain the things we should
sue for, though we were not exhorted to things that contain our perfection and
beatitude both viae and patriae, here and hereafter?

2 By listening to them we honor God who sends them, our Savior who brought
them, and his Holy Spirit our Comforter and Sanctifier, who strives with us,
and works our good by them. Hereby we receive the benefit of his preventing
grace, the help and cooperation of his subsequent grace. Hereby we are made
perfect, firm, right, pure, clean, enduring for ever, true, and righteous,
transformed into their nature, and thereby made partakers of the divine nature.
Hereby we obtain conversion, wisdom, joy, illumination, the treasures of
heaven, the great reward, the promises of this life, and that to come.

If we neglect these we dishonor God, despise Christ, resist the Holy Ghost,
frustrating his preventing grace, never obtaining his cooperating grace.

If we neglect these, we listen to Satan's exhortations and are transformed into
their nature and his image, becoming corrupt, deceitful, crooked, impure,
unclean, false and unrighteous.

All the benefit hereof will be perversion of our souls, sottishness, horror
of Conscience, darkness, the loss of the great Reward, and curses of this
life, and that to come.

Yea by how much the Exhortations of the Scripture come with greater authority,
love, and power, perfection, and profit, by so much the more heavy and fearful
shall be the condemnation of those who will not listen unto them. Prove. 1.22.
Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no
man regarded, I will laugh at your calamity, etc.

Many other Motives might be added, if I listed to go out of my text for them.

Notes.
I. From the effect. If any one shall say, That he does attend to divine
exhortation, I will give him this note of Trial,

Which is, 1 To practice that whereto the Scripture exhorts.

2 All that. And

3 Because the Scripture, or God therein, exhorts thereto.

1 For the first branch, our Savior tells us. Mat. 7.24.
Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a
wise man that built his house upon the rock: v. 26.
But every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be
likened to a foolish man that built his house upon the sand.

For the second, S. James tells us, That if a man should keep the whole law, and
yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. For he that says, Do not commit
adultery, says also, Do not kill.

3 For the third, It is hence that the Scripture says so often, The things
that I command you. Whatsoever ye do, do to the glory of God. Zech. 7.5.
Did ye at all fast to me, even to me?

First, if he attend not that does not practice according, in vain do they
pretend attention to the exhortations of Scripture, who think it snfficient to
hear Gods word read or preached, though they make no conscience to practice
what they hear. Such our Savior likens to a fool, Prove. 1.7.
and a fool is said to despise wisdom and instruction.

The second, Of obeying all, discovers those to be no attenders, who reserve to
themselves some sin pleasing to corrupt nature, and think because they listen
to the Scripture-exhortations in many other things, all is well, God must be
merciful to them in that: but such a Saint was Herod, who is said to have
listened to John in many things.

Thirdly, to obey eo nomine, because, etc. shows them not to attend indeed, who
in that they do for the material of the action according to divine
exhortation, aim at their own ends, and make not God the ground and end of
their doing what he exhorts to.

II. From the dissentany. To listen to Satan and his Instruments. No man can
serve two Masters (says our Savior) so can no man attend to Gods word, and
theirs who persuade the contrary. Whence Solomon makes it one end of divine
Exhortation, to keep us from listening to the Exhortation of Satan's
instruments, Prove. 7.5.
That they may keep thee from the strange woman; whose persuasions ye have
there at large.

This shows those to be no listeners to divine exhortation, who are led away
with ill company to sinful practices.

By these two Notes (to add no more) I fear many will have just cause to
think, that though they hear, yet they do not indeed attend to
Scripture-exhortations.

If any one shall say, that he can attend when he will, and his time is before
him: Let me tell him, That God opened the heart of Lydia, and man has not Gods
power in his hand when pleases him. To day if ye will hear his voice, Psalm. 95.
harden not your hearts, says David. The heart grows hard, the habits of sin
strong, the interest that the Devil and ill company have got in a man, potent;
and the decree may every moment come forth, which ye have in Ezekiel. Ezekiel.
24.13.
Because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be
purged from thy filthiness any more. And what more vain and uncertain then
man's life? Psalm. 39.5.
Verily every man at his best estate is altogether vanity, or, All Adam is all
Abel settled.

Means.
1 Remove self-conceit,

2 Mortify our desires of the pleasures, profits, and honors of this world.
Here lies the strength of Satan's Motives. If this be highly prized by us, we
shall never resist his persuasions, and consequently never attend unto the
Scripture, or choke (we shall) what we receive.

The cares of this world choked the seed. Mat. 13. Gal. 6.14.
But if we be crucified to the world and the world to us, (as the Apostle
speaks) then are we fit to attend to the Scripture-exhortations.

3 Avoid ill company, and the occasions of sin. This Solomon appoints as a
Mean, Take fast hold of Instruction, Prove. 4.14, 15.
she is thy life. Means hereto, Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go
not in the way of evil men; avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass
away.

1 Serious desire of salvation.

2 Serious desire to honor God, which is the thing exhorted to, or the matter
of divine exhortation.

3 Resolution to practice what he exhorts to, and bring forth the fruits
thereof, which is the good ground.

4 Prayer to God for his holy Spirit to lay home his Exhortations effectually
to us.

5 Cherishing the motions of his holy Spirit, which by divine exhortations he
stirs up in our hearts.

2 To those to whom God has in special committed his word,

(...). Holy Scripture is profitable for Dehortation.

Explication What is the nature of Dehortation considered in It self, where
consider What Respect is in the object Person. Affection it stirs up, and how.
Its difference from a Precept.
How the Scripture is profitable for it.


1 The Nature of Dehortation.

1 Dehortation (as Exhortation) looks not at its object as determined by any
present qualification of good or ill, (as Preprehension and Consolation did)
but indifferently.

To the regenerate it says, Heb. 3.18.
Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you, an evil heart of unbelief,
in departing from the living God.

To the unregenerate, Sirs, Acts. 14.15.
why do ye these things? We are also men and preach unto you, that you turn from
these vanities.

Only it looks at the object in relation to the future, (as Exhortation does)
but with this difference; That exhortation respects the Object as capable of
some future good, that it may excite thereto: Dehortation as liable to some
future ill, that it may deter from it.

May we not then dehort him,

If the evil be of pain, future.

2 The affection which Dehortation intends to stir up, is fear, opposed
affirmatively unto hope. For seeing Dehortation is from evil that we may fly
it, and fear is the flight from ill, or the affection whereby we eschew evil;
necessary it is, that Dehortation stir up the act of fear.

3 How does Dehortation stir up this affection.

For this we must understand what is the object of Fear, and how Dehortation
presents to the affection its object clothed with that formalis ratio.

The object of Fear, is malum magnum, imminens, vitabile: A great ill,
imminent, possibly to be avoided.

If the evil be not great in it self, Jer. 49.15.
we despise it.

Imminent, imports absens, propinquum, arduum, a thing absent, yet near, and
difficult.

If it be present, we grieve. Job 14.22.


If we apprehend it under a conceit of distance, it affects us little or not at
all. They that put far away the evil day, Amos 6.3, 5, 6.
chant to the Vial, and drink wine in bowls.

If it be near, and not difficult, it makes us not very solicitous. The Rulers
of the people in Jerusalem said, Isa. 28.15.
When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us,
for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves.

Hence in the former verse he calls them scornful men. They scorned the
threatenings of the Prophet, because they thought they could shift well enough,
and easily avoid the ill when it came, though they lived in the sin that caused
it.

If Dehortation for the most part be from sin, arduum, hard, difficult, shall be
shut out from the object of Fear. That Dehortation is most from sin, appears
throughout the whole Scripture. That sin cannot properly be feared in the
decision of Aquinas. 1a. 2x. 43. Qu.
Therefore either shut out difficult, or seek a new affection.

That Dehortation is often from sin,

That sin cannot properly be feared is the Schoolmans saying, and therefore we
will examine it.

In the body of the Article ye have this decision, with the reason of it, and a
prolepsis or anticipation of somewhat that might seem to cross the former.

The decision, Sin cannot be feared.

Peccatum subjacet voluntati, and potestati nostrae, Sin's in our will and
power. Therefore, etc.

That al sin is voluntary, Austins saying. Understand it of actual sin, and I
think it may go for current. For that which God affords, or is ready to afford
no power to avoid, I think he will not condemn a man.

But to answer to his reason.

Sin is in our power, or rather impotencie, and will, to commit it, (as woeful
experience teaches) but suvingly to avoid it, is not in our power or will,
further then we have power from Gods free Grace, and our will be acted thereby:
and if we oppose contumacie to his preventing grace, we shall never obtain his
cooperating and subsequent grace, which he affords not but to those who yield
up themselves to the former, causing them alone savingly to avoid sin, who
pray, and watch, and mortify their lusts, and avoid occasions of sinnings. So
that from this one thing, That God gives both to will and to do, the Apostle
argues, That we should work out our salvation with fear and trembling. Phil.
2.13, 14.


The Schoolmans Prolepsis stands thus, Voluntas, etc. The will may by an outward
cause be inclined to sin: If that inclinant have great power to incline a man,
in this regard there may be fear of sin, in as much as it is from an outward
cause: as for the purpose, when a man's afraid to stay in wicked men's company,
lest by them he be drawn into sin.

Whereto he answers in these words, Sed proprie loquendo, etc. But to speak
properly, a man in this condition, fears seduction more then the sin in its
proper nature, or ratio. Where, by the way you may see, the Contemplator in his
Cell could see (which few well take notice of) that ill company has great
power to incline to sin.

But for his answer, It may thus be retorted against himself; If seduction may
be feared, seeing it is feared only in regard of sin, as it tends to bring on
sin; it must needs follow, That sin it self may be feared, which makes
seduction to be feared.

If any be of his mind, let him show it in not sinning, seeing so easily
avoided.

Let us hear what the Scripture says to this point. Rom 6.23. Joh. 15.5. Ephesians
4.22. Heb. 12.1. 2 Pet. 2.20 1 Pet. 5.8. Prove 1.10.
The wages of sin is death. Without me ye can do nothing. The heart is
deceitful, Jer. 17. Lust is deceitful. Sin easily besets us. The world (which
we must needs be conversant in) tends to pollute us. Satan goes about to devour
us, (viz. by making us to sin) III company to entice us. Whence and from many
the like places we may reason thus a priori.

That which unavoided is deadly, cannot be savingly avoided but by Gods grace,
has a lustful and deceitful heart from within to incline to it, the World,
Satan and his Instruments from without; that is justly to be feared.

Such is sin: Therefore, etc.

Again, our Savior commands, Mat. 26.41
Watch and pray that ye enter not into tentation.

Take heed, Brethren, Heb. 3.12, 13.
lest there be in any of you an evil heart to depart from the living God.

Keep back (prays David) thy servant also from presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.
let them not have dominion over me.

I made a Covenant with mine eyes etc. Job. 31 1. 1 Cor. 9.27.


I keep under my body and bring it into subjection. I might add yet many
examples.

The whore alone, she has cast down many wounded, yea, many strong men have
been slain by her.

David, Solomon, Peter, were overthrown by sin.

Whence we may reason thus, a posteriori.

That which God commands us to watch and pray against, bids us take heed of,
and exhort one another daily that we be not hardened by it; That which the
strongest of Gods servants pray they may avoid; keep under their body, make a
covenant for avoiding occasions of; That which overthrows so many thousands,
and has conquered Gods worthies; that sure is justly to be feared.

Such is sin: Therefore, etc.

I have stood the longer in clearing this doubt about the arduum, in the object
of Dehortation, which is principally sin, because, if it were not to be feared,
we need not be dehorted from it, and so this act of Gods word should be in vain.

The last thing in the object of Fear, is possibile vitatu. When there is no
hope of avoiding the ill, there it is apprehended as present, Rhet. 2 5.
and so causes grief rather then fear. (...) (says Aristotle) There must be
something of Hope under Fear. He gives a reason, (...), For fear makes men take
counsel or advise, and no man takes counsel concerning things hopeless or
impossible.

The Dehortation propounds the object under this formalitie. It expounds the
evil in Motives, which evil because it is best judged by the opposite good,
is either dishonest or unseemly, or unprofitable and unpleasant. And according
to the degrees of good, so are those of evil, in deordination from good, and
subordination to the highest evil that can be given.

Hence the fundamentals of Dehortation are to be fetched.

The Arduum or imminens is declared, either from Our inward corruption. Outward
Incliners. Deficients.



The Vitabile is explained in the Means, by way of Removing what would bring it
on. Bringing in what would keep it out.


II. How Dehortation differs from a Precept.

It differs much from an affirmative or Bidding one: That having for its object
Good, this Ill; from a negative, or Forbidding, little. However they agree in
the object, only a Precept in the authority of the commander forbids Ill:
Dehortation disswades from it, from the nature of the thing.

They are used promiscuously in Scriptures, where God forbids nothing which
either has not the ratio of sin in its own nature, and therefore is forbidden;
or from the precept backed with the threatening, by which it is made ill to us
though in its own nature indifferent.

III. How is the Scripture profitable for Dehortation? In the same manner and
degree, as in the other acts thereof, so that without it no saving Dehortation
can be made, but thereby through the grace of the H. Ghost, our heart may be
savingly restrained from evil.

By an induction of those dehortations which are every where in Scripture. (...)


To instance in one.

Dehortation from drunkenness, Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk, etc.

Motives.
1 A sin of a high nature, Ab inhonesto.
so that he is a son of Belial that commits it; and Belial in the New Testament
is put for the Devil, as in the Old always in very ill sense. Count not thine
handmaid a daughter of Belial, said Hanna, when Eli accused her of
drunkenness. A sin that cannot stand with the state of grace. Gal. 5.21.
Envying, Murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; of the which I
tell you before, and I have told you in times past, that they which do such
things have no inheritance, or shall not inherit the kingdom of God. He that
cannot inherit the kingdom of God, cannot be the Son of God; Romans 8.
For if Sons, then Heirs.

2 It disposes to It self. Prove. 23.35. Other sins, Negatively, by taking away
what would prevent them. 1 Wisdom. Prove. 20.1.
Whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. 2 The Heart. Hos. 4.11.
Wheredome, and wine, and new wine take away thine heart. 3 Discerning between
good and ill. Lev. 10.9, 10.
4 Consideration of Gods works. Isa. 5.12.
They regard not the works of the Lord, nor consider the operation of his hands
5 Judgment for managing of their calling. Isa. 28.7.
They are out of the way through strong drink, they err in vision, stumble in
judgment. 6 Common sense, so as they become sots. Prove. 23.35.
They have struck me shall thou say, and I was not sick, they have beaten me
and I felt it not. Psalm. 69.12.
The drunkards have made songs of me. They pursue drink till it pursues them,
They swallow down it, till it swallow them up. Isa. 28.7.
They are swallowed up of wine.
Positisely, it disposes to other sins; Whoredom. Prove. 23.33.
Thine eyes shall behold strange women. Wicked speaking. Ibid.
Thine heart shall speak perverse things. Mocking and railing. Prove. 20.1
Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging. Contention and babbling. Prove. 23.29.
Who has contentions? Who has hablings? They that tarry long at the wine.
Injustice. Prove. 31.4, 5.
Lest they drink and forget the Law, and pervert judgment.




Yea there is no sin that drunkenness disposes not to, unless it requires
more wit (and command abstemiousnesse) then drunkenness leaves a man.

It makes a man a slave to a senseless creature. (...), Indecorum Tit. 2.3.
and so takes away the Image of God, wherein man was made Lord of the Creatures.

All tables are full of vomit, and filthiness, Isa. 28 8.
so that there is no place clean.

In one word, but often applied, Inutile. Isa. 2.1.
the Scripture says, Woe to them, Woe to the Drunkards of Ephraim!

And lest a man with a side paunch, and melancholy dull temper, who could stand
when others fell, might think himself exempted from the Woe: Isa. 5.22.
Woe unto them (says the Lord) that are mighty to drink wine, and men of
strength to mingle strong drink.

The particular evils to the body, Prove. 21.17.
estate temporal, spiritual, would be long to recite.

Take that for all, which S. Paul tells the Galatians, and had told them in
times past; Gal. 5.21.
That a Drunkard cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.

Bites like a serpent, and stings like an Adder. Injucundum.
Pro. 23.29.

Thus we see how the Scripture furnishes with motives to Dehortation from the
great evil of this sin.

The Scripture likewise lays down the arduwn both Arduum.
from Within. I will seek it yet again, Prove 23.35. Without. Come ye (say they)
I will fetch wine, etc. Isa. 56.12.


Means. Per modum removendi illativa. Prove. 23.31 v. 20. Luc. 21 34 Per modum
inferendi prohibitiva.

Look not upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his color in the cup.

Be not among wine-bibers.

Take heed that at no time your heart be made heavy with drunkenness.

Watch and pray.

Be filled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves with Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, making melody in your hearts to the Lord.

This will keep out drunken catches, and braying out the hot fumes (that wine
has bred within) in brutish roarings.

As in the former Branch, (...).
where the proper adjunct was demonstrated of the proper subject, by the proper
cause.

1

2 So propense we are to evil that we stand in need to be dehorted from it.

3 The goodness of God that gives it us in his Word.

4 That we are not fatally kept back from evil, but by Dehortation or
disswasion.

5 Happy is their estate who enjoy Gods word thus Dehortatorie from evil.

6 Wretched is theirs who want it.

7 The unexcusablenesse of those that eschew not evil, when Gods own word
dehorts them.

Reprehension of 1 Those that submit not themselves to the dehortations fetched
from Gods word. The aggravation of their sin, is, For that they will submit to
other dehortations. 2 Those that dehort not others from evil. Their sin is
aggravated by this, That they will dehort, or dissuade from other things,
especially from Good.


Consolation against evils is, We have the Scripture fit to dissuade us from
evil.

To submit our selves to the dehortations of the Scripture. Exhortation.
Thou have laid up thy word in mine heart, that I should not sin against thee.

THE END.

