A CHARGE CONSISTING Of Several HEADS: WHEREUPON The Earl of Lincoln, Earl
of Suffolk, and Earl of Middlesex:

THE Lord Hunsdon, Lord Willoughby of Parham, Lord Bartlet, and Lord Maynard
are Impeached of HIGH TREASON

Printed in the Year, 1647.

royal blazon or coat of arms
A CHARGE Consisting Of Several HEADS: Whereupon The Earl of Lincoln, Earl
of Suffolk. Earl of Middlesex, etc. are Impeached of High Treason.
I. THat the Earl of Lincoln, Earl of Suffolk, Earl of Middlesex: Lord
Hunsdone, Lord Willoughby of Parham, Lord Bartlet, and Lord Maynard, did join
in the Traitorous design of levying War to force the Kings Majesty to come
to London, to countenance a most dangerous design. II. That the said Earl of
Lincoln, Earl of Suffolk, Earl of Middlesex: Lord Hunsdon, Lord Willoughby
of Parham, Lord Bartlet, and Lord Maynard, did join in countenancing, and
employing diverse Reformadoes, and others, who forced the Speakers, and other
Members from the Houses, because they could not there sit in a free Parliament.
III. That the said Earl of Lincoln, Earl of Suffolk, Earl of Middlesex:
Lord Hunsdon, Lord Willoughby of Parham, Lord Bartlet, and Lord Maynard, did
join in levying Forces against the Army, with those who employed such evil
affected persons, to oppose them and sought to destroy them. IIII. The said
Lords have countenanced such persons who were promoters of the mutinons,
Petition presented by the London Apprentices with Captain Musgrave and diverse
others, who forced the Houses to Vote what they pleased. V. That they have
countenanced the Cities Declaration against the Army; which was published, and
read in diverse Churches about the City of London, tending to the raising a new
war. VI. That they often were at the pretended Committee of the Militia of
London, and the Committee of Safety, who levied forces and joined in
countenancing those that levied forces against the King, Parliament and
Kingdom. VII. That they subscribed several warrants for the raising of
forces, to join in the aforesaid Treasonable Design against the King,
Parliament and Kingdom. VIII. That several of them, at several times signed
diverse warrants, for the disposing of Ammunition, and Armies in this wicked
Design of putting the Kingdom into a new War. IX. That they joined in
removing diverse persons of Trust out of their places, in the Tower and else
where, and placing of such in their rooms, as joined with the late Riotous
people. X. That the Earl of Middlesex and others of them have advised with,
and given advice to the Reformados when forces were levying against the King,
Parliament, and Kingdom.
The House of Commons have sent a message to the Lords, to desire their
Lordships to appoint a time for the bringing in of the particulars of the
Impeachment against the Earl of Lincoln, Eatle of Suffolk, Earl of Middlesex:
Lord Hunsdone, Lord Willoughby of Parham, Lord Bartlet and Lord Maynard who are
Impeached of high Treason, in the name of all the Commons of England for
levying War against the King, Parliament and Kingdom.

The Lords have appointed all their Members to be summoned for a full House,
And then an Answer will be returned to the Commons by a message to bring up the
particulars of the Impeachment.

Sir John Evelin a Member of the House of Commons at the Lords Bar Impeached
the Earl of Lincoln, Earl of Suffolk, Earl of Middlesex: Lord Hunsdone,
Lord Willioughby of Parham, Lord Bartlet and Lord Maynard of high Treason, in
the name of all the Commons of England, for levying War against the King,
Parliament. and Kingdom: And declared that they would make good the Charge of
high Treason against them.

At the trial of these seven Lords The Peers are to sit in their Parliament
Robes.

FINIS.

