THE CHARACTER Of a True ENGLISH Protestant Soldier; With That of a
Doublet-Pinking Bully-Hec, OR, A Cowardly-Spirited ANIMAL, Who dares not
Venture his LIFE in the Service of his COUNTRY.
A Soldier, however Born, is a Gentleman by his Profession; and that which
undeniably proves him so, is, that he values his Honor above his Life. He is
too Jealous of slippery Fame, to trust her so long on the ticklish Precipice of
a doubtful Succession; and therefore with his own merit, he either supports the
Credit of an Ancient Family, or lays the Foundation of a new one: he thinks it
not sufficient to say his Forefathers were Valiant, unless himself be so too;
and would suspect his own Mothers Fidelity, did he not find himself in
possession of his Fathers Courage.

The Politician calls the Soldier, The Bulwark of a Nation; and whilst I
behold ours in their ruddy Apparel, methinks every one looks like a
contributing Brick, to those Impregnable Walls; for they are Cemented with
Loyalty instead of Lime; and whilst they stand in defense of their King and
Country, we need not doubt but they will easily undergo the fiercest shock of
the most Potent Enemy. The Sea and These, look like a Tautologie, where
Illiterate Nature might have spared the first, since she has been so liberal in
the latter. They were certainly such Stones as these, which (like Epicurean's
wanton Atoms) Danced to the Jigg at Thebes, and by an accidental hit, settled
there into a Wall, as the other into a World. However I am confident ours
will prove so Flinty a one, that they who storm it, must strike that Fire which
will revert to their own Destruction.

But not to digress: --

A Soldier is one, who (as Heaven has given him a Soul, so he) knows how to
use it: He is sensible of the difference between Honor and Infamy, so that the
horrid apprehensions of a base Life, drives him from the Fire to the Field;
where carried on by an undaunted resolution, he many times obtains at once, the
Soldiers three grand Utinams, Fame, Preferment, and Victory: whilst others by
the silent Rhetoric of an insipid Life, seem to make good Charroon's
indifferency about Sense and Reason --

If any man may be compared to the Soldier, it is (excepting himself) the best
of Men, the Philosopher; for they both carry their chiefest Treasures about
them, Courage and Learning, the One current in the Town, the Other in the
Field. The Soldier thinks not himself in want when his Money fails, but when
his Spirit fails him; and then he knows he cannot suffer long, for his death
must immediately follow. Sterling-Valour is the only Coin that passes in
Glory's Forum, and he who has that shall be sure either to purchase Dominions,
or at least the favor of him that rules them.

As Summer calls the Husbandman, so War beckons the Soldier into the Field;
that alone's his time of Harvest, his Sword is his Sickle, and out of men cut
close down and well thrash'd, he maintains both himself and his Family; nor is
he so prodigal of his dear-bought Reputation, as to exhaust it all in his
lifetime, but as one never weary of doing good, by a continuance of generous
Actions, still keeps up the old Stock; which ere his Death being put into the
safe Repository of some Chronicle or History, he afterward dying, bequeaths it
as a Legacy to his emulating Successors.

Of all sights in the World, the Backside of a Coward is most hateful to him:
he had rather charge the Devil in the Teeth, than him in the Posteriors. A
Flying Foe he looks on, as the worst quest he can follow, because generally the
Game's not worth the hanging, when it is caught. His Courage and Reason have
made a Marriage, whereof a Succession of Noble Actions are the commendable
Issue; these like Epaminondas his two Victories, he may worthily call his
Daughters; and need not fear the harsh attacks of Time, so long as they shall
assuredly live, and rescue him from the assaults of Oblivion.

If his Birth be obscure, yet it is his comfort to think, that all Families
have had a time for their rise; and that no Ages have been fruitful in such
Productions, as those of War, wherein the meanest Soldier has sometimes
out-stript his General; and by a swift Progression in the Race of Honor, has
at length come to command even his Commander.

No man is so liable to Advancement, as himself: He has the whole World for his
Scene; and 'till all its Inhabitants fall asleep together, he need not fear
want of Employment. The first day he ^ists himself, he bids fair for
Preferment, and runs as great a hazard of Knighthood, as of Death in every
attempt. Let him look which way he will, he finds no room for Fear; for if his
time be come, he thinks no place so fit to expire in, as the Field, which is
the Bed of Honor; but if the Thread of his Life be not yet wound up, he knows
it lies not in the reach of any Accident to shorten it. In the Time of War, he
looks on the World as reduced to a Lottery, where he that has the greatest
Courage, is sure to draw the richest Prize. This it is, that makes him strut in
Rags, and rate himself not according to his Habit, but his Heart; as long as
that is good, his Fortune cannot be otherwise, so that how low soever he is at
present, he looks on himself as a Commander in Futuro.

A Soldier is certainly the best Logician; for as he seldom or never disputes,
but in a good Cause, so he generally carries the Conclusion in his Scabboard.
Like the choicest Physics, his worth may be undervalued, during the wanton
Interval of a Kingdoms Health; but if her Politic Body, like our Natural Ones,
through an excess of Ease and Luxury, reel in Sickness, it is he alone is the
known Antidote against the Pestilence of Dissension: Like Fire, he cures by
Sympathy, driving out one Sword with another; and by the extraordinary heat of
his own Courage draws out That of his Enemies. He holds it next to his Creed,
That no Coward can be an Honest Man. He knows the hazard of Battles, not the
Pomp of Ceremony, are the Soldiers best Theater; and looks not on himself
indebted to the multitude, but to his own Actions, for his Glory.

In short, He is One who is deaf to Dangers, in whose Ears the Calls of Honor
out-roar a Cannon, and the Invitations to Glory drown a Demiculverin. Next to
his KING, he is his Countries Guardian; and She owes her welfare to his Courage
and Conduct. Lastly, When the Fertility of his Actions have folded him up in
Peace, he leans his Silver-Head toward the Golden Scepter, and dies happily
inveloped in his Princes Arms.

The Character of a Coward, or Bully-Hec.
BUT a Coward is certainly the shame of his Species. He is Human Nature
Travestied, or the mock man, who (Munkey-like) would undervalue the real one,
by resembling him. His Heart, like a Pigeons Gall, lies in his Guts; and
nothing under a Gallon of Usque-Baugh, or Kilderkin of Ale, can chase it up to
his Stomach. He is never Quarrelsom till he is Drunk; for then he knows his
weakness, like a woman's, is his sure Protection. When he is come home, he
shows his manhood in Swearing at, or perhaps fighting with his Wife, Maid, or
Children; and when he wakes next morning, runs the hazard of a Consumption in
contemplating ^he danger he went, by his last Nights Valor.

Though he is naturally an Epicure; yet he often curses the Custom of Eating,
because there are generally Knives used in it; and fore-swears drinking out of
a Quart-pot, because the Mouth of it looks so like the muzzel of a Musket.

Like silly Children, he thinks the whole Firmament is composed of Smoke, and
concludes he can live no where, but under that part of it which was composed by
his own Chimney: Like a Fish, he breaths his destruction out of his own
Element, and nothing under a Sub-poena can drag him out of his Native Country.
His greatest pique against England is, that it is an Island, and thinks there
is danger enough in a Battle beyond Sea, without an unnecessary hazarding of
ones Life to go to it. He had rather be covered with Newgate at home, than with
a Coat of Male abroad; because the Stone is the more sure Defense, and is
situate in less danger.

To conclude, he is at best but the skin of a man stufft with Cowardice; like a
Cinnamon Tree, his Bark is more valuable than his Bulk; so hollow-hearted, that
if he strikes but his hand on his breast, it sounds like a Drum, and his shirt
runs the hazard of a Contamination, at the mere apprehension of a War. He looks
like one of Prometheus his Images unfir'd; like one of Natures Cast-by's, whom
fearing he should take up another room, she huddl'd up in a hurry, and
produced with such dispatch, that the hasty Midwife was forced to pluck out
his body with such speed, that she left his soul in his Mothers Womb.

FINIS.
With Allowance,

LONDON, Printed by E. W. for J. Gibbs. 1689.


