THE CHARGE VOTED AGAINST BISHOP WREN On Monday, 5. of July, 1641. in the
Afternoon, which consists of these several Particulars following.

ASPICIS VT VIVNNT PELLICANI SANGVINE PVLLI ^ SIC CHRISTO EFFVSO SANGVINE VIVIS
HOMO* printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the year, of our Praelates fear, 1641.

Monday, 5 July, 1641.
This Afternoon the Charge was voted against Bishop Wren, which consists of
these several Articles folllowing.
FIrst, Excommunicating, Depriving, or Banishing in the space of 2 years 50
godly, painful, learned Ministers.

Secondly, Practicing superstition in his own person.

Thirdly, Causing the Communion Table to be placed Altar-wise, and to be railed
in, and kneeling and consecrating the Bread and Wine at the West side of the
Communion Table with his back toward the people, and bowing to or before the
same.

Fourthly, Elevating the Bread and Wine over his head that the people might see
it.

Fifthly, Causing all his Pewes or Seats, to be so contrived, that the people
must of necessity kneel with their faces toward the East.

Sixthly, Employed his power to restrain powerful preaching, forbidding all
Sermons on Sundays Afternoons, or in the week days, without his lycense, and
lest expounding the Catechism, and Common Prayer book, should be as bad as
Preaching; as he and some of his Officers said, therefore he inhibits any
manner of exposition, and injoines* only the bare Question and Answers in the
Common Prayer book.

Seventhly, And to the end, the people shall not know where there is any
Sermons, commands all ringing of Bells to be alike, that so the people may not
distinguish where there is a Sermon, or where there is but prayer.

Eighthly, He permitted no Prayer to be read before Sermon, but that which is
directed in the 39. Canon, which has no warrant of Law, and after Sermon
suffers no Prayer at all, but only Gloria Patri, etc.

Ninthly, He did publish a book of Articles, to which the Churchwardens were
to be sworn, and these 39. Articles contain at least 897. Questions. One
whereof was this, does any man discourse profainly at Mealetime, touching
Religion or the holy Scripture?

Another, Does the Minister expound the holy Scripture, according to the sense
of the ancient Fathers?

This, I must believe, will pussell the best learned Churchwardens in England
to answer.

Thursday next, is appointed to consider what penalty the Bishops have incurred,
by making these Canons which tend to Sedition.

The Result and Conclusion which was drawn from the forementioned Premises,
was that, it was resolved upon the Question, that it is the opinion of this
House, that Matthew Wren Bishop of Ely, is unworthy and unfit to hold or
exrecise any Office of Dignity in the Church or Commonwealth.

Resolved that there be a Message sent to the Lords to desire them to join
with the Commons to petition his Majesty to remove Bishop Wren both from his
person and service.

FINIS.

