A CHARGE AND IMPEACHMENT OF HIGH TREASON AGAINST Sir John Geyer, Lord Major of
London, Alderman Adams, Alderman Langham, Alderman Buns, Alderman Cullam.
Prisoners in the Tower of London.

Together with the Votes of the House of Commons; and the Impeachment, against
Colonel Lawrence Bromfield, Colonel John Hooker, and Captain Jones, Citizens
of London; now Prisoners to the Sergeant at Arms.

London, Printed for Len. Norton. 1647.

THE CHARGE and IMPEACHMENT OF HIGH TREASON AGAINST Sir John Geyer, (Lord Mayor
of London) Alderman Adams, Alderman Langham, Alderman Buns, and Alderman Cullam.
Upon the Report made to the House of Commons (upon Friday last) by Mr. Miles
Corbet, concerning the late Force, and attempt offered to both Houses of
Parliament; as also their endeavoring to raise a new War, and after some
time in debate thereof, the House sell upon the said business, and proceeded
on in finding out the chief Actours in the late horrid Engagement, and at last
came to this Result;

Resolved upon the Question,

That there appears matter sufficient to accuse Sir John Geyer (Lord Mayor of
London) Thomas Adams, James Buns, John Langham, and (...) Cullum, (Aldermen of
the City of London) of High Treason, and other Crimes and Misdemeanors, etc.
Whereupon it was ordered, That the said Sir John Geyer, Alderman Adams,
Alderman Buns, Alderman Langham, and Alderman Cullum, be committed to the Tower
of London, upon a Charge and Impeachment of High Treason, for their late
Actions and great forwardness, touching the late Engagement against the Army,
etc.

This Charge will be speedily drawn up at large, together with the Articles of
their Impeachment for their said such Crimes, and Misdemeanors; which Charge
(as is said) consists of these particulars; viz.

I. That the said Sir John Geyer (Lord Mayor of London) Thomas Adams, James
Buns, John Langham, and (...) Cullum, Aldermen of the said City, did join in
the traitorous design of leavying Wa^r to force the Kings Majesty to come to
London, to countenance a most dangerous design. II. That the said Sir John
Geyer (Lord Mayor of London) Thomas Adams, James Buns, John Langham, and (...)
Cullum, Aldermen of the said City, did join in countenancing, and employing
diverse Reformadoes, and others, who fotced the Speakers, and other Members from
the Houses, because they could not there sit in a free Parliament. III. That
the said Sir John Geyer (Lord Mayor of London) Thomas Adams, James Buns, John
Langham, and (...) Cullum, Aldetmen of the said City, did join in leavying
Forces against the Army, with those who employed such evil affected persons,
to oppose them and sought to destroy them. IV. That they have countenanced the
Cities Declaration against the Army; which was published, and read in diverse
Churches about the City of London, tending to the raising a new War.
Diverse other Articles (as is said) are drawing up, (to be presented to both
Houses of Parliament) against the said Sir John Geyer (Lord Mayor of London) by
diverse well-affected Citizens, and others, who have suffered very much, by the
faid Lord Mayor, (especially the Company of Weavers) to the utter undoing of
many honest men of that trade, both in person and estate.

The said Lord Mayor, were sent prisoner to the Tower of London upon Saturday
last, (25. instant) being conducted thither, by two Captains belonging to his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax; and when his Lordship came to Tower Hill, he
resigned up his Sword, to the City, and according to Order, took his place in
the Tower of London.

But upon Friday night (having leave to stay at his own house) about two of the
clock in the morning, he sent a messenger to Alderman Bide, living at
Shorditch; what the Message contained I cannot give you full satisfaction
therein; only this, That his Lordship acquainted the said Alderman, the
pleasure of both Houses, conceruing his Lordship, that it was ordered, he and
some others, should be committed prisoners to the Tower of London upon the
Saturday morning, which was accordingly performed.

It is further declared, against the said Sir John Geyer (Lord Mayor of London)
that he, and diverse other of his Adherents, have been great Obstructers to the
Peace of the Kingdom, and also have been very backward in raising of the
sum demanded by both Houses, for payment of the Army; although formerly (as
does evidently appear) the said Lord Mayor, and diverse other Aldermen,
proffered great sums of money for maintaming of a second War against the
King, Parliament, and Kingdom.

Upon Saturday September 25. the Commons took it into consideration, the Report
made by Mr. Corbet, concerning some other Citizens, viz. Colonel Laurence
Bromfield, Colonel John Hooker, and Captain Jones, and upon Debate.

Resolved,

That there appears matter sufficient to accuse Colonel Laurence Bromfield of
high Crimes and misdemeanors; and it was ordered that Colonel Laurence
Bromfield be committed to the custody of the Sergeant at Arms, for high Crimes
and misdemeanors.

Resolved,

That there appears matter sufficient to accuse Colonel John Hooker of High
Crimes and misdemeanors.

And it was ordered, that the said Colonel John Hooker be committed to the
custody of the Sergeant at Arms, for his said misdemeanors.

Resolved,

That there appears matter sufficient to accuse Captain John Jones of high
Crimes and misdemeanors;

And it was ordered, that the said Captain Jones be committed to the custody of
the Sergeant at Arms, for his misdemeanors.

Resolved,

That there appeates matter sufficient to accuse Captain Musgrave of diverse
high Crimes and misdemeanors;

And it was ordered, that he continue a prisoner in Newgate, and that he be
indicted of High Treason at the King's Bench Bar.

And there is also power given to Mr. Corbet, Mr. Seldom, and diverse others, to
see the said Indictment put in full force, and to be brought to a speedy trial.

This Coptain Musgrave was a great Actour in the late desperate Engagement, and
the chief promoter of the mutinous Petition, being the chiefest of those, who
forced the Houses to Vote what they pleased.

He also countenanced the Cities Declaration against the Army, which was
published, and read in diverse Churches about the City of London, tending to the
raising a new War.

And that he was also after at the pretended Committee of the Militia of
London, and the Committee of Sasety, who levied Forces against the King,
Parliament, and Kingdom.

And that he further countenanced diverse Warrants, for the raising of Forces,
to join in the aforesaid Treasonable Design, against the King, Parliament, and
Kingdom.

And that he joined with others in removing diverse Persons of Trust out of
their places, in the Tower and else where, and placing of such in their rooms,
as joined with the late Riotous people.

It is supposed, that there are more Cards still to play, and that there will
be a further Discovery of diverse other Citizens.


