THE CHARACTER OF AN UNJUST JUDGE OR AN UNJUST JUDGE PAINTED TO THE LIFE.
HE is a Certain kind of Animal very Difficult to be Charracterized in all his
Tropes and Figures, however that you may know him, take this following
Description. He is a Person whose Brains are too heavy for his Conscience, and
yet one is as Addle as a stinking-Egg, and the other as rotten at Coare as a
Pear. He is a meer-state Hocus Pocus, who can Play fast and loose at Pleasure.
He will not allow it Lawful to Accept of Bail for Petty crimes, though never
so sufficient, yet he can prove it Lawful for Impeachment of High Treason when
the Case lies at his own Door, If you are minded to put him in a Fustian-Fume,
only talk (...) liument, and it makes him Stark- Raving-Mad. You had as good
look a Needle in a Bottle of Hay as desire Justice at has Hands; but if you
have a bad Cause on Foot, one Draught of (...) Potabile renders him your Humble
Servant, he is a mere Cormorant, for it is thought he has Devoured ten Thousand
Guinies at a Break fast, though a Parliament Purgation will cause him either to
Evacuate them or Pay his Head for a Reckoning. He is a Person will read in
Polliticks, but cannot be ^erswaded but the best Policy in the World, is, To
E^a^her his own Nest First, let the World run how it will Staffords Head is the
best Emblem of Mortality he ever Consulted, for he seldom thinks of that, but
it puts him in mind to Secure his own. He is a Person very Defective in his
Optics, for he cannot disceen a Fair Cause from a Foul Cheat, except through
a Gold Prospective Glass: and then he is as Clear Sighted as a Ly^x in Favou of
the Person, presents him with it. His Coach Wheels move as heavy as his
Justice, except well Greased with Pocket Dust, and th^n Jeheu's Chariot is an
Ass for Expedition. A Fat Pigg well stuffed with Jacobusses for Sauce, will
make him a good Meal, and a hundred of Pippins with a Guiney in each Pippin,
will serve for a good Concoction. He is a great Abhoror of Petitioning, yet
thinks it no scorn to Petition for his own Life. In a Word, He is lately much
troubled with the Palsy, for his very Head shakes and Totters on his
Shoulders. He is so far from being a Romanist, that he Mortally hates The
Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome, and has Endeavored as much as in him lay
to Suppress it, until his Superiors gave him a Dose to take that Qualm off his
Stomach. If you find a Person described by these Marks, bring him before his
Superiors, and Possibly the Case may be so far Altered that he may Exchange a
Velvet Cushion on the Bench for a more convenient Place at the Bar. However I
reflect upon no Person but An Unjust Judge, and he which is so let him take it
to himself.

FINIS.
London printed for T. VV. 1681.


