THE CHARACTER OF A True Protestant.
HE is one that professes the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England, as it is Established by the Laws of the Kingdom, and professes
against the Contrary. He sticks to the Protestation of Ausburge. from whence he
had his Name: He loves the Unity of the Church so, that he endeavors next her
Verity in Faith, her Unity and Conformity in Discipline with that Church, not
daring to broach any new Opinion, nor preach them to disturb the Peace of his
Aged Mother! Private Interpretations of Scripture he approves not; but submits
his own, and maintains none against the received and approved Doctrine of the
Church, whereof he is a Member. He thinks that Evangelical Counsel is to be
observed, and that all things must be done in Order and Decency: He owns the
King to be the Head of the Church, as it is Personal, and has Sworn him Gods
Deputy in Government, and Trusted with the Sword, which he must not bear in
vain: He dares not question his Authority, who is only answerable to God; but
in his Heart, honor him, as Gods Vicegerent; and knows, that to resist his
Power, is to resist him that gave it; and though the Penalty be Damnation, yet
he fears not for that so much as the Offense given, to God who gave that Power:
He Confesses an Obligation to Gods Moral Laws, and Man's Judicial; and that
there must be Obedience Active, as well as Passive, to the One, and the Other:
He knows Christ's Spiritual Kingdom opposes not the Temporal C^^im and Power
of Kings; but Caesar must have his Tribute (^he Badge of Conquest) as God must
have his in the Acknowledgment of his Protection; and dare call his Sovereign,
the Anointed of God, since God called Cyrus an Heathen so; not for the Holiness
of External Unction, but the Internal Character of Suprem Power. So he can make
a difference between Types and Metaphors; the One being in Persons, the Other
in Words. He conceives Passive Obedience always due to the King, where Active
cannot be performed with a Good Conscience. He believes Faith alone cannot
justify, without Works; but both together; the First before God, the Second
before Man. He believes God rewards above Merit; yet that there is difference
in Glory, and Reward, though all have Fullness: Traditions and Ceremonies he
reverences, as they are Antiquites, and stream from the Spring of Original
Purity, not to the necessity of Doctrine, but Discipline. He detesteth Parity
in Church or Commonwealth, as tending to Anarchy. He dares not Swear against
his Conscience, nor vow Implicit Obedience to occasional Ordinances. He thinks
no Authority but the same, or greater than that to whom he has made a Judicial
Vow, can disannul it: He is Loyal, for Conscience sake, to his Sovereign;
Charitable, for Gods sake, to his Neighbor; and dares not do that unto
another, he cannot be contened should be done unto himself; muchless rob his
Sovereign of his Birthright, or deface Gods Character. He thinks Dixi vos
dijestis, belongs Supreamly to his Sovereign, Ministerially to his Subjects: He
dares not distinguish betwixt the King, and his Person; but thinks those that
dare be so bold, derive their Logic with the Jesuits, from Hell. His Heart
thinks no Disloyal thought, muchless dares he speak a Word to lessen the
Reverence due to Majesty; not for fear of Punishment, but the Sin. In a word,
he is One that dare in his Princes Just quarrel, meet Death with cheerfulness,
as David met Goliath, or as Daniel went into the Lions Den; and can serve his
God, his King, and Country, without Fear of Enemies; and with chearfulnness,
can sing his Nunc Dimitte, as Simeon did with his Christ in his Arms. And this
alone is your True Protestant.

LONDON, Printed for T. S. in the Year 1682.


