A CHARACTER OF MR. BLAWS BOOK ENTITLED SUADELA VICTRIX.
In a LETTER to a COMRADE.
SIR
YOU desired me to be at the Pains, to read over Mr. Blaw's School-Orations, to
see if they might be profitable to Others, or worth the while. It Is true I am
unwilling to refuse your Requests, which are all Commands to me; but, I
protest, before I had read them half over, I began to suspect, That you had
imposed the Task, as a Test of Friendship, or as a Penance to expiate some
heinous Offense: For I Am sure, hardly any thing but the Author's Ferula, could
oblige one to read them to the end.

It is true had I never heard of the Author, or seen other of his Works before,
the swelling Title would have raised my expectation: but instead of that, it
raised my Stomach only. Suadela victrix, quoth he, Hor: Quid dignum tanto feret
hic promissor hiatu?
After such a daring Brag,
What wit so brisk as not to Fag?


But it is not the first time he has amused his Readers with the like bombast.
To entitule a ridiculous Vocabulary Fraus Elusa, or Tenebrae depulsae, is
beyond a Superlative, but indeed it might rightly be called Fraus Elusa: For
whereas before he cheated the Liedges without being so much known, he then
avowedly Printed himself a Fool. Now after the ridicule, he met with for that
Title, one would have expected, he would have learned more Modesty; but now
seeing he has not, the Poet privilegeth us to ridicule him.

Hor. Ridetur, Chorda qui semper oberrat eadem.
That Fiddler as a Fool we mock,
Who still goes wrong in the same stroke.
But you will say, he is a silly Gardener that lightlies his own Leeks; it is true
indeed, but yet Good Wine needs no Bush. The same Poet has taught us, what
Judgment to make.

-- Ubi before aequo
Laudat venaleis qui vult extrudere merces.
When Pedlers praise their Trump'ries, more than's meet,
The Prudent Merchant should suspect a Cheat.
It Is one of the Author's Predominants, to cause his Reader gape wide, and then
only to Blow in his Mouth: So in his Prologue to this Suadela Victrix, giving
his Readers an Account and Character of the following Orations, he ascends
gradually, and as if he were at an Auction with them, the farrer he goes he
raises the Rate the higher. He promises on the first Orator's Head, Quod
Luculenter ostendet quam vitando sit ignavia; but as if this Luculenter were
but mean (although Buchanan thought it sufficient for Knox's Sermons, and
Salust for Cicero's Oration) he advances some higher with the next. And
therefore to Complement one of his honorable Patrons, the Deacon of the
Websters, to whom he Dedicates this Piece; he assures him, That the second
Orator, Laudem artium Mechanicarum validis argumentis astruet, and magnis
tuebitur auctoribus; and when we look into the Oration it self, among his Magni
Auctores is reckoned Musculus, who (says he) left the Webster Trade, and
applied himself to Divinity, as if this Example did not prove the contrair of
what he intended. if it prove any thing: But he needed not have gone beyond Sea
for Examples, his own is beyond exception.

Juv. Quem Pater ardentis massae fuligine lippus
A carbone, and forcipibus, gladiosque parante
Incusde, and luteo Vulcano ad Rhetora misit.
Whom's Father black with smoke in the Smithy,
Sent from the Anvil and the Stithy,
Where he good Culross Girdles made,
To learn the Rhetorician Trade.
Here the Poet in the Original has drawn him as much to the Lisa as if he had
been sitting to his Picture, if he had not mistaken Swords for Girdles, but the
Translation corrects the Error. Nay so well skilled is he in sowing Point,
and in all sorts of Cookery (as he relates of Achilles) yea even to Pottage
making, that his own Wife was never troubled, or entrusted with it.

But the third Orator mounts yet a step above his Fellows, and tells his
Hearers, that he Majore Cothurno personabit refulgentes doctrinae lauds, and
so his Cothurnus makes us fear a tragical Catastrophe, and so indeed it proves;
for the tender Mothers pay severely in the next Oration for their Indulgence.
Well, it may be, he will wish to have meddled with others, when he meddled with the
Wives of Edinburgh, who are his only Support. This touring Climax of his, puts
me in mind of the Trick of the old Wife, who to put off her Daughters, that lay
long on hand, pretended the best was ay behind.

But to proceed, this Suadela victrix contains some Select Orations, but what
the Author means by Select is not yet agreed on by Commentators; perhaps
they are so called for their Dignity, because they are choice and special ones;
if this be the reason, the Epithet indeed is well chosen; for I dare say they
can hardly be matched, but perhaps they are so called, because they are chosen
out from among many others if so, then I Am in a deadly fear we shall be plauged
with the rest of them;

Juv. -- Nam quis.
Peccandi finem fecit sibi, quando recepit
Ejectum semel attrita de front pudorem?
For who to sin yet more does fear
When shame's once past the shade o's Hair.
Old Horace was not mistaken in his Judgment of that Cattle, when he said.

Quem semel arripuit tenet, occiditque legendo,
Nec missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo.
Who once has got a trick of Scribbling.
His stone-sick pen will never leave dribling,
Till he his wretched Reader kill,
And like a Leech has sucked his fill.
Yet I have heard some say, that as ill as these Orations are, they are not his
own. Well! it is not the first Child has been wrong Fathered, and of the various
sorts of Cuckolds that are in the World, Mr. Blaw is of the happiest sort: For
he is a contented one, and doteth wonderfully upon other Men's Children. I know
indeed certainly, that the Oration to be said at the Cock-fighting is Mr.
Cuninghame's, but Mr. Cuninghame knew how to keep decorum better, than to do
any thing for him so well, but that by it is Imperfections, it might resemble
the supposed Author: But for the most part of these Orations, I dare say, that
they slander him, who allege they are not his own. They carry his Mark as
indelibly as his Wife, when branded by him with the hot Tongs. And yet as bad
as they are, so fond is he of them, that, when he was reproved for some Errors
by Mr. -- with a Huff he answered, What! a pack of Zoilus 's and Momus 's carp
at other Men's Works, because they cannot do the like themselves. Indeed I hope
Mr. -- shall never be guilty of so much as a Motus primo-primus to that Sin. If
this make an Author, Dii been fecerunt, inopis me, quodque pusilli
Finxerunt Animi --
I bless my Stars, my Wit's but weak,
Such as will never an Author make.
And to another Gentleman, asking him how his School prospered, What! (says he,
with an Air peculiar to himself) no fear of my School, I think my Works have
made me Famous. Now of all the Inventions that ever were, these of Gunning and
Printing have been most pernicious to Mankind. O! how much precious Paper has
been misspent in Printing; which Selkirk or Thomson could have most usefully
employed about their Tobacco.

He makes use of a Prologue to his Orations, to give his Hearers an Account of
what they are to expect: And the reason why he does so is thus, Ut qui lautum
instruunt convivium, varia fercula, eorumque seriem animo priusquam stomacho
digerunt, simile quidpiam nos facere decrevimns. Is not this Allusion pretty
and argumentative? yea it exactly infers the contrary: For it is not the
fashion for these that make a Feast, to tell those whom they have invited, what
Messes they are to receive, or in what order: Only the Master of the Feast
contrives them in his own Mind. So the Animus cannot be Convivarum but
Convivatoris, otherwise what he says is a Lie: So by this Allusion neither
ought he to tell his Hearers, what Orations they were to hear, and so the rest
of the Prologue would be impertinent and contradictory: But if ever he had made
a Feast I would allege, It had been his own Custom to tell his Guests before
hand what they were to expect: For that of the Poet seldom fails, Claud. --
Similes agnoscit pagina mores.
-- Lo here,
The Author's Manners by his Works appear.


But being Jealous of the Auditor's ridicule, as he had good Reason, in the end
of the Prologue, he endeavors to prevent it, by quoting a line of Horace.
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici.


How luckily will even a Fool at a time, blunder on that which is most
apposite! Now had he racked his Brains a thousand Years, he could not have hit
more happily, how true is the old Saying, Saepe etiam est olitor verba
opportuna locutus,
A Fool sometimes may speak what is fit
As a blind Man a Dog may hit.


The whole work is even as like the Piece, that Horace draws before that line,
as one Egg is like another, so Monstrous, Unnatural, and Disorderly are all the
parts of it; and therefore nothing could be more fitly subjoyned; yet he has
the forehead to commend them before Ovids Ajax for varying the Gesture of the
Body, or tuning the Voice; whereas every one knows, that that Piece of Ovid for
Humor and Passion, is the most exquisite Piece of Rhetoric that can be found;
and therefore incomparably and infinitely fitter for that purpose, than these
Orations of his, the like of which for ill Latin, impertinent Authorities and
wrong Verse, I dare say never appeared in Print.

But the most unpardonable of all his Transgressions is, That he Murders the
Verses of good Poets: So in his Authorities to his Oration on Diligence.

Tendimus in latium seeds ubi fata quietas
Ostendunt, atque ut omnia vincet amor.
In this last verse he manifestly violats the quantity, and there are few of so
good a reach as to Fathom the depth of the nonsense. In his Oration in Laudem
linguae Latinae, he has set down in an Italian Character, and in a line by it
self, that we may be sure that it is a Verse.

Dum idem limes orbis and urbis erat,
Let any one measure it, and see if it be right. A little after in the same
Oration, he has Marguillied another verse of Virgil's at the same rate. Haec
tantum alias intercaput extulit --
With the defect at the end, but none at the beginning, without which supposed,
it cannot be measured. In his Title he promises to give Authorities at the end
of every Oration, out of good Authors for confirming the several points, and a
Chorus relative to each subject, behold then; at the end of that, in
Indulgentiam matrum one of his verses out of good Authors. Bonos corrumpunt
perversa consortia mores, What Poet ever made such a verse, is beyond my
reading to know. Si puer hoc sciret, quantum doctrina valeret
Raro dormiret, noctesque diesque studeret.


These look as if they were out of some good Author, in his Chorus upon the
Mechanic Arts, he begins with Asclepiadiack Verses, but try these that follow.
Ignarum solum his obloquitur pecus
Manent, his etenim commode vivitur.
Gens, and hasce colens divitiis cluas.
You see what Verses they are, and for the Latin, consult the Book where they
are entirely set down, in the other Chorus's there is at least an aim at Rhyme,
but here is neither Rhyme nor Reason. In the Chorus to that Oration in
Indulgentiam matrum, Qui puero dat arbitrium is made to fignifie to give a
Child his Will, is not this brave Latin? But considet how pertinent the Chorus
is, the Oration is in Indulgentiam matrum, but the Chorus is in Indulgentiam
Patrum. It is Qui and not Quae puero dat arbitrium. Is not, Vina fere dulces
oluerunt mane Camenae, a very good Authority against the Indulgence of Mothers?
is not. Ingressus iter parat haec quae postulat usus,
a good Verse for the quantity? And yet this Author has perfected the Prosody
(as he says) by his Index Poeticus. Now in two Pages full of Authorities upon
the last Oration, there are not four to the purpose. These adjoined to that in
in laudem Linguae Latinae, are altogether impertinent, not one of them on the
Latin Tongue. These adjoined to that in Laudem Doctrinae, are all, except two,
in praise of moral Virtue, not a word of Learning, Nay and three parts of four
of all these Authorities, are not either out of a Classick Author, or yet any
later Author of any Fame. And then for his Chorus of Saphick Verse of his own
making, patcht out of Horace, it may be kept for a Standard of Nonsense. Whom
says the Chorus to, Docte sermones utriusque linguae?
It must be to the Master or no Body, and he indeed may be called docte
sermones, etc. in the same sense that the Boys understand doctus grammaticam:
For one who has forgot what he has learned, in opposition to doctus
grammaticae: We have seen some of his Latin already, and for his Greek his
Derivation of Alector, quod a lecto excitet in the Cock-oration, evidently
shows his Skill: And yet as senseless as these Chorus's are, the Boys must get
Ballads, the worst and profanest possible, to learn to sing the Chorus
according to the Tune of them. Lillie-bur-lero he confesses to be hellish
Lines. The last time I came through the Moor, I left my Lass behind me, is
indeed a very modest one. As she has guided me, is indeed a very godly Ballad,
when the next Lines are, The De'il put on her Winding Sheet the Night before
she die.

But now I Am tired with relating his impertinencies, I protest I could show 200
more gross errors, for which any discreet Schoolmaster would Whip a Boy. He
further threatens the public with his practical decisions against Tyranny,
whereby (says he) any good Subject may defend the present Government. Now God
have Mercy on Mankind if Blaw turn Statesman, a Fellow of so concocted a Malice,
that he is able to possess the Devil, and of so refined a Hypocrisy, that he
would outjugle a Jesuit. A thing so uncivilized and unpolitick that he was
never yet in a Society, out of which he was not thrust as insociable with a
note of Infamy, Witness the West-Kirk and High-School of Edinburgh. One who
could never yet agree with his own Wife, much less with others, but Sabina
knows better things than to be so treated. But how comes he now to be a man of
this Government, certainly it was not so in the days of old: We know whom he
threatened to delate to the late Government for Nonconformity, and his
practices about the Abbay in the Eighty Eight are too notour to be denied. But
the Answer is easy, Sequitur fortunam ut semper, and odit damnatos, he is as
good Presbyterian, as the Test can make him. It is true he pretends to have
vomit it up, but an easy tentation would make the Dog return to his vomit.

But to leave him, Fumi-vendulus the ordinar Anagram of his Name, is a full
description of the Man and his Works.

Sir Your humble Servant.

I have not taxed any Errors of the Press, although they be in equal number to
the lines almost, though he himself was the Corrector.

If Mr. Blaw allege, that the Verses that are taxed, were not designed for
Verses, the structure and order of the words show the contrary, for never any
wrote so in Prose.

When his promised works are Published, I shall in another Letter give their
Character, unless they be in better order, then I know them to be in his Papers.


