THE CHARGE OF THE SCOTTISH COMMISSIONERS Against CANTERBURY and the
Lieutenant of IRELAND. Together with their Demand concerning the Sixth Article
of the Treaty Whereunto is added the Parliaments Resolution about the
Proportion of the Scottish charges, and the Scottish Commissioners thankful
acceptance thereof.

The Lord is known by the Judgment which he executes. The wicked is snared
in the works of his own hands. London, Printed for Nath. Butter. 1641

The Charge of the Scottish Commissioners against the Prelate of CANTERBURY.
NOvations in Religion, which are universally acknowledged to be the main
cause of commotions in Kingdoms and States, and are known to be the true
cause of our present troubles, were many and great, beside the books of
Ordination, and Homilies, 1. Some particular alterations in matters of
Religion, pressed upon us without order, and against Law, contrary to the form
established in our Kirk. 2. A new book of Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical. 3. A Liturgy or book of Common Prayer, which did also carry
with them many dangerous errors in matters of doctrine. Of all which we
challenge the Prelate of Canterbury, as the prime cause on earth.

And first, that this Prelate was the author and urger of some particular
changes, which made great disturbance amongst us, we make manifest: 1. By
fourteen letters subcribed, W. Cant. in the space of two years, to one of our
pretended Bishops, Bannatine, wherein he often enjoyneth him, and other
pretended Bishops, to appear in the Chapel in their whites, contrary to the
custom of our Kirk, and to his promise made to the pretended Bishop of
Edinburgh, at the coronatio^, that none of them after that time, should be
pressed to wear these garments, thereby moving him against his will to put
them on for that time, wherein he directs him to give order for saying the
English Service in the Chapel twice a day, for his neglect showing him that
he was disappointed of the Bishopric of Edinburgh, promising him upon his
greater care of these novations, advancement to a better Bishopric, taxing him
for his boldness in preaching the sound doctrine of the reformed Kirkes,
against Master Mitchell, who had taught the errors of Arminius, in the point of
the extent of the merit of Christ, bidding him send up a list of the names of
Councillors and Senators of the College of Justice, who did not communicate
in the Chapel in a form which was not received in our Kirk, commending him
when he found him obsequious to these his commands, telling him that he had
moved the King the second time for the punishment of such as had not received
in the chapel: and wherein he upbraideth him bitterly, that in his first
Synod at Aberdein, he had only disputed against our custom of Scotland, of
fasting sometimes on the Lords day, and presumptuously censuring our Kirk, that
in this we were opposite to Christianity it self; and that amongst us there
were no Canons at all: More of this stuff may be seen in the letters
themselves.

Secondly, by two papers of memoirs and instructions from the pretended Bishop
of Saint Androis, to the pretended Bishop of Rosse, coming to this Prelate for
ordering the affairs of the Kirk, and Kingdom of Scotland, as not only to
obtain warrants, to order the Exchequer, the Privy Counsel, the great
Commission of Surrenders, the matter of Balmerino's process, as might please
our Prelates, but warrants also for sitting of the High Commission Court once a
week in Edinburgh, and to gain from the Noblemen, for the benefit of Prelates,
and their adherents, the Abbacies of Kelso, Arbroith, S. Androis, and Lindors:
and in the smallest matters to receive his comands, as for taking down
Galleries, and stone-walls, in the Kirks of Edinburgh, and Saint Androis, for
no other end but to make way for Altars, and adoration toward the East, which
besides other evils, made no small noise, and disturbance amongst the people,
deprived hereby, of their ordinary accommodation for public worship.

The second Novation which troubled our peace, was a book of Canons, and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, obtruded upon our Kirk, found by our general
assembly to be devised for establishing a tyrannical power, in the persons of
our Prelates, over the worship of God, over the consciences, liberties, and
goods of the people; and for abolishing the whole discipline, and government
of our Kirk, by general and provincial assemblies, Presbyteries, and Kirk
sessions, which was settled by law, and in continual practice since the time of
reformation; that Canterbury was Master of this work, is manifest.

By a book of Canons sent to him, written upon the one side only, with the
other side blanke, for corrections, additions, and putting all in better order,
at his pleasure; which accordingly was done as may appear by interlinings,
marginalls, and filling up of the blanke page with directions sent to our
Prelates; and that it was done by no other then Canterbury, is evident by his
Magisteriall way of prescribing, and by a new copy of these Canons, all written
with Saint Androis own hand, precisely to a letter, according to the former
castigations, sent back for procuring the Kings warrant unto it, which
accordingly was obtained; but with an addition of some other Canons, and a
paper of some other corrections: According to which the book of Canons thus
composed, was published in print, the inspection of the books, instructions,
and his letters of joy, for the success of the work, and of others letters of
the Prelate of London, and the Lord Sterling, to the same purpose; all which we
are ready to exhibit, will put the matter out of all debate.

Beside this general, there be some things more special worthy to be adverted
unto, for discovering his spirit. 1. The 4. Canon of Cap. 8. for as much as no
reformation in Doctrine, or Discipline can be made perfect at once in any
Church; therefore it shall, and may be lawful for the Church of Scotland, at
any time to make remonstrance to his M. or his successors, etc. Because this
Canon holds the door open to more innovations, he writes to the Prelate of
Rosse his privy Agent, in all this work, of his great gladness, that this
Canon did stand behind the Curtain, and his great desire that this Canon may
be printed fully as one that was to be most useful. Secondly, the title
prefixed to these Canons by our Prelates. Canons agreed upon to be proponed to
the several Synods of the Kirk of Scotland, is thus changed by Canterbury;
Canons and constitutions Ecclesiastical, etc. Ordained to be observed by the
Clergy. He will not have Canons to come from the authority of Synods, but from
the power of Prelates, or from the Kings prerogative. Thirdly, the formidable
Canon, Cap. 1.3. threatening no less then excommunication against all such
persons whosoever shall open their mouths against any of these books,
proceeded not from our Prelates, nor is to be found in the copy sent from them,
but is a thunderbolt forged in Canterburies own sire. 4. Our Prelates in diverse
places witness their dislike of Papists. A Minister sal be deposed if if he
be found negligent to convert Papists. Chap. 18. 15. The adoration of the
Bread is a superstition to be condemned, Cap. 6. 6. They call the absolute
necessity of Baptism an error of Popery, Chap. 6.2. But in Canterburies
edition, the name of Papists and Popery is not so much as mentioned. 5. Our
Prelates have not the boldness to trouble us in their Canons, with Altars,
Fonts, Chancels, reading of a long Leiturgie before Sermon, etc. But Canterbury
is punctual, and peremptory in all these. 6. Although the words of the tenth
Canon Chap. 3. be fair, yet the wicked intentions of Canterbury and Ross, may
be seen in the point of justification of a sinner before God, by comparing the
Canon as it came from our Prelates, and as it was returned from Canterbury, and
printed, our Prelates say thus: It is manifest that the superstition of former
ages, has turned into a great profaneness, and that people are grown cold,
for the most part, in doing any good thinking there is no place to good works,
because they are excluded from justification, Therefore shall all Ministers, as
their text gives occasion, urge the necessity of good works, as they would be
saved, and remember that they are via regni, the way to the kingdom of heaven,
though not causa regnandi, howbeit they be not the cause of salvation. Here
Ross gives his judgment, That he would have this Canon simply commanding
good works to be preached, and no mention made what place they have or have
not in justification. Upon this motion, so agreeable to Canterburies mind, the
Canon is set down as it stands without the distinction of via regni, or causa
regna^^^, or any word sounding that way, urging only the necessity of good
works. 7. By comparing Can. 9. chap. 18. as it was sent in writing from our
Prelates, and as it is printed at Canterburies command, may be also manifest,
that he went about to establish auricular confession, and Popish absolution.
8. Our Prelates were not acquainted with Canons for inflicting of arbitrary
penalties: But in Canterburies book, wheresoever there is no penalty expressly
set down, it is provided that it shall be arbitrary, as the Ordinary shall think
fittest. By these and many other the like, it is apparent, what tyrannical
power he went about to establish in the hands of our Prelates, over the worship,
and the souls and goods of men, over-turning from the foundation, the whole
order of our Kirk, what seeds of Popery he did sow in our Kirk, and how large
an entry he did make for the grossest novations afterward, which has been a
maine cause of all their combustion.

The third and great Novation was the book of Common Prayer, administration of
the Sacraments, and other parts of divine Service, brought in without warrant
from our Kirk to be universally received, as the only form of divine Service,
under all highest pains both civil and Ecclesiastical; which is found by our
national assembly, beside the Popish frame, and forms in divine worship, to
contain many Popish errors, and ceremonies, and the seeds of manifold and
gross superstitions, and idolatries and to be repugnant to the Doctrine,
Discipline, and order of our reformation, to the confession of faith,
constitutions of general assemblies, and Acts of Parliament, establishing the
true Religion: that this also was Canterburies work, We make manifest.

By the memoirs, and instructions sent unto him from our Prelates; wherein they
gave a special account of the diligence they had used, to do all which herein
they were enjoined, by the approbation of the Service Book sent to them; and
of all the marginall corrections, wherein it varieth from the English book,
showing their desire to have some few things changed in it, which
notwithstanding was not granted: This we find written by Saint Androis own
hand, and subscribed by him, and nine other of our Prelates.

By Canterburies own letters, witnesses of his joy, when the book was ready
for the press, of his prayers that God would speed the work, of his hope to
see that service set up in Scotland, of his diligence to send for the Printer,
and directing him to prepare a black letter, and to send it to his servants at
Edinburgh, for printing this book. Of his approbation of the proofs sent from
the press. Of his fear of delay, in bringing the work speedily to an end,
for the great good, (not of that Church, but) of the Church. Of his encouraging
Rosse who was entrusted with the press, to go on in this piece of Service
without fear of enemies. All which may be seen in the Autographs and by
letters sent from the Prelate of London to Rosse, wherein as he rejoices at
the sight of the Scottish Canons; which although they should make some noise at
the beginning, yet they would be more for the good of the Kirk, then the Canons
of Edinburgh, for the good of the Kingdom. So concerning the Leiturgy he
shows, that Rosse had sent to him, to have an explanation from Canterbury of
some passage of the Service Book, and that the press behoved to stand till
the explanation come to Edinburgh, which therefore he had in haste obtained
from his Grace, and sent the dispatch away by Canterburies own convaiance.

But the book it self as it stands interlined, margined and patcht up, is
much more then all that is expressed in his letters, and the changes and
supplements themselves, taken from the Mass book, and other Romish Ritualls,
by which he makes it to vary from the book of England, are more pregnant
testimonies of his Popish spirit, and wicked intentions, which he would have
put in execution upon us, then can be denied. The large declaration
professes, that all the variation of our book, from the book of England, that
ever the King understood, was in such things as the Scottish humor would
better comply with, then with that which stood in the English service. These
Popish innovations therefore have been surreptitiously inserted, by him
without the Kings knowledge, and against his purpose. Our Scottish Prelates do
petition that something may be abated of the English ceremonies, as the cross
in baptism, the ring in marriage, and some other things. But Canterbury will
not only have these kept, but a great many more, and worse superadded, which
was nothing else, but the adding of fuel to the fire. To express and
discover all, would require a whole book, we sall only touch some few in the
matter of the Communion.

This book inverteth the ordour of the Communion, in the book of England, as
may be seen by the numbers, setting down the orders of this new Communion, 1.
5. 2. 6.7.3.4.8.9. 10. 15. Of the diverse secret reasons of this change, we
mention one only, In joining the spiritual praise and thanksgiving, which is
in the book of England, pertinently after the communion, with the prayer of
consecration before the communion, and that under the name of Memorial or
Oblation, for no other end, but that the memorial and sacrifice of praise,
mentioned in it, may be understood according to the Popish meaning. Bellar. de
Missa, lib. 2. cap. 21. Not of the spiritual sacrifice, but of the oblation of
the body of the Lord.

It seems to be no great matter, that without warrant of the book of
England, the Presbyter going from the north end of the Table, shall stand
during the time of consecration, at such a pairt of the table, where he may
with the more ease and decency use both hands; yet being tried, it imports
much, as, that he must stand with his hinder pairts to the people, representing
(says Durand) that which the Lord said of Moses, Thou shall see my hinder
pairts. He must have the use of both his hands, not for any thing he has to
do about the bread and wine, for that may be done at the North end of the
Table, and be better seen of the people; but (as we are taught by the
Rationalists) that he may by stretching forth his arms to represent the
extension of Christ on the Cross, and that he may the more conveniently lift
up the bread and wine above his head to be seen and adored of the people, who
in the Rubric of the general Confession, a little before, are directed to
kneel humbly on their knees, that the Priests elevation so magnified in the
Mass, and the peoples adoration may go together, That in this posture,
speaking with a low voice, and muttering (for sometimes he is commanded to
speak with a loud voice, and distinctly) he be not heard by the people,
which is no less a mocking of God, and his people, then if the words were
spoken in an unknown language. As there is no word of all this in the English
Service; so does the book in King Ed. time, give to every Presbyter his liberty
of gesture, which yet gave such offense to Bucer, (the censurer of the book:
and even in Cassanders own judgment, a man of great moderation in matters of
this kind) that he calls them, Nunquam satis execrandos Missa gestus, and
would have them to be abhorred, because they confirm to the simple and
superstitious ter impiam and exitialem Missae fiduciam.

The corporal presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, is also to be found
here: for the words of the Masse-book serving to this purpose, which are
sharply censured by Bucer in King Ed. Leiturgie, and are not to be found in the
book of England, are taken in here; Almighty God is incalled, that of his
Almighty goodness he may vouchsafe so to bless and sanctify with his Word
and Spirit, these gifts of bread and wine, that they may be unto us the body
and blood of Christ.

The change here is made a work of Gods omnipotency: the words of the Mass,
ut fiant nobis, are translated in King Edwards book, That they may be unto us,
which are again turned into Latin by Alesius, Vt fiant nobis. On the other
pairt, the expressions of the book of England at the delivery of the Elements
of feeding on Christ by faith, and of eating and drinking in remembrance that
Christ died for thee, are utterly deleated. Many evidences there be in this
pairt of the Communion, of the bodily presence of Christ, very agreeable to the
doctrines taught by his Secretaries, which this paper cannot contain. They
teach us that Christ is received in the Sacrament, Corporaliter, both objective
and subjective. Corpus Christi est objectum quod recipitur, and corpus nostrum
subjectum quo recipitur.

The book of England abolisheth all that may import the oblation of any
unbloody Sacrifice, but here we have besides the Preparatorie oblation of the
Elements, which is neither to be found in the book of England now, nor in King
Edwards book of old, the oblation of the body and blood of Christ, which
Bellarmine calls, Sacrificium Laudis, quia Deus per illud magnopere laudatur.
This also agrees well with their late doctrine. We are ready when it shall be
judged convenient, and we shall be desired, to discover much more matters of
this kind, as grounds laid for missasicca, or the half Mess, The private
Mess without the people, Of communicating in one kind, Of the Consumption by
the Priest, and Consummation of the Sacrifice, Of receiving the Sacrament in
the mouth, and not in the hand, etc.

Our Supplications were many against these Books, but Canterbury procured them
to be answered with terrible Proclamations. We were constrained to use the
remedy of Protestation; but for our Protestations, and other lawful means,
which we used for our deliverance, Canterbury procured us to be declared Rebels
and Traitors in all the Parish Kirks of England: when we were seeking to
possess our Religion in Peace, against these Devices and Novations, Canterbury
kindles war against us. In all these it is known that he was although not
the sole, yet the Principal Agent and Adviser.

When by the Pacification at Berwick, both Kingdoms looked for Peace and
Quietness, he spared not openly in the hearing of many, often before the King,
and privately at the Counsell-table, and the privy Iointo to speak of us as
Rebels and Traitors, and to speak against the Pacification as dishonorable,
and meet to be broken. Neither did his malignancie and bitterness ever suffer
him to rest, till a new war was entered upon, and all things prepared for our
destruction.

By him was it that our Covenant, approven by National Assemblies, subscribed
by his M. Commissioner, and by the Lords of his M. Counsel, and by them
commanded to be subscribed by all the Subjects of the Kingdom, as a Testimony
of our duty to God, and the King, by him was it still called Ungodly, Damnable,
Treasonable; by him were Oaths invented, and pressed upon diverse of our poor
Contrymen, upon the pain of imprisonment, and many miseries, which were
unwarrantable by Law, and contrary their National Oath.

When our Commissioners did appear to render the reasons of our demands, he
spared not in the presence of the king, and Committee, to rail against our
National Assembly, as not daring to appear before the World, and Kirkes
abroad, where himself and his Actions were able to endure trial, and against
our just and necessary defense, as the most malicious and Treasonable Contempt
of Monarchical Government that any bygone age had heard of: His hand also was
at the Warrant for the restraint and imprisonment of our Commissioners, sent
from the Parliament, warranted by the King, and seeking the peace of the
Kingdoms.

When we had by our Declarations, Remonstrances, and Representations,
manifested the truth of our intentions, and lawfulness of our Actions, to all
the good Subjects of the Kingdom of England, when the late Parliament could
not be moved to assist, or enter in war against us, maintaining our Religion,
and Liberties, Canterbury did not only advise the breaking up of that high and
honorable Court, to the great grief and hazard of the Kingdom, but, (which
is without example) did sit still in the Convocation, and make Canons and
constitutions against us, and our just and necessary defense, ordaining under
al highest pains, that hereafter the Clergy shall preach 4. times in the
year, such doctrine as is contrary, not only to our proceedings, but to the
doctrine and proceedings of other reformed Kirks, to the judgment of all sound
Divines, and Politiques, and tending to the utter slavery and ruining of all
Estates and Kingdoms, and to the dishonor of Kings and Monarchs. And as if
this had not been sufficient, he procured six Subsidies to be lifted of the
Clergy, under pain of Deprivation to all that should refuse. And which is yet
worse, and above which Malice it self cannot ascend, by his means a Prayer is
framed, printed, and sent through all the Paroches of England, to be said in
all Churches in time of Divine Service, next after the prayer for the Queen
and Royal Progeny, against our Nation by name of traiterous Subjects, having
cast off all obedience to our anointed Sovereign, and coming in a rebellious
manner to invade England, that shame may cover our faces, as Enemies to God and
the King.

Whosoever shall impartially examine what has proceeded from himself, in
these two books of Canons and Common Prayer, what Doctrine has been published
and printed these years by past in England, by his Disciples and Emissaries,
what gross Popery in the most material points we have found, and are ready to
show in the posthume writings, of the Prelate of Edinburgh, and Dumblane, his
own creatures, his nearest familiars, and most willing instruments to advance
his counsels, and projects, fall perceive that his intentions were deep and
large against all the reformed Kirks, and reformation of Religion, which in his
Majesty's dominions was panting and by this time had rendered up the Ghost, if
God had not in a wonderful way of mercy prevented us: And that if the Pope
himself had been in his place, he could not have been more Popish, nor could
he more zealously have negotiated for Rome, against the reformed Kirks, to
reduce them to the Heresies in Doctrine, the Superstitions and Idolatry in
worship, and the Tyranny in Government, which are in that See, and for which
the Reformed Kirks did separate from it, and come forth of Babell. From him
certainly has issued all this deluge which almost has overturned all. We are
therefore confident that your Lordships will by your means deal effectually
with the Parliament, that this great firebrand be presently removed from his
Majesty's presence, and that he may be put to trial, and put to his deserved
censure according to the Laws of the Kingdom, which sall be good service to
God, honor to the King and Parliament; terror to the wicked, and comfort to
all good men, and to us in special, who by his means principally have been
put to so many and grievous afflictions, wherein we had perished, if God had
not been with us.

We do indeed confess that the Prelates of England have been of very
different humors, some of them of a more hot, and others of them, men of a
more moderate temper, some of them more, and some of them less inclinable to
Popery, yet what known truth, and constant experience, has made undeniable,
we must at this opportunity profess, that from the first time of Reformation
of the Kirk of Scotland, not only after the coming of King James of happy
memory into England, but before, the Prelates of England, have been by all
means uncessantly working the overthrow of our discipline, and government.
And it has come to pass of late, that the Prelates of England having
prevailed, and brought us to subjection in the point of Government, and
finding their long waited for opportunity, and a rare congruity of many
spirits, and powers, ready to cooperate for their ends, have made a strong
assault upon the whole external worship, and doctrine of our Kirk. By which
their doing they did not aim to make us conform to England, but to make
Scotland first (whose weakness in resisting, they had before experienced, in
the Novations of Government, and of some points of Worship) and thereafter
England conform to Rome, even in these matters, wherein England had separated
from Rome, ever since the time of Reformation. An evil therefore which has
issued, not so much from the person all disposition of the Prelates themselves,
as from the innate quality and nature of their office, and Prelaticall
Hierarchy, which did bring forth the Pope in ancient times, and never cease
till it bring forth Popish doctrine and worship, where it is once rooted, and
the principles thereof fomented and constantly followed. And from that
antipathy and inconsistency of the two forms of Ecclesiastical government,
which they conceived, and not without cause, that one Island united also under
one head, and Monarch, was not able to bear: the one being the same in all the
parts and powers, which it was in the times of Popery, and now is in the Roman
Church: The other being the form of Government, received, maintained, and
practiced, by all the reformed Kirks, wherein by their own testimonies, and
confessions, the Kirk of Scotland had amongst them no small eminency. This also
we represent to your Lordships, most serious consideration, that not only the
firebrands may be removed, but that the fire may be provided against, that
there be no more combustion after this.

FINIS.
THE CHARGE OF THE SCOTTISH Commissioners against the Lieutenant of IRELAND.
IN our Declarations we have joined with Canterbury, the Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, whose malice has set all his wits and power on work, to devise and
do mischief against our Kirk and Country.

No other cause of his malice can we conceive, but first his pride and
supercilious disdain of the Kirk of Scotland, which in his opinion declared by
his speeches, has not in it almost anything of a Kirk, although the Reformed
Kirks, and many other Divines of England, have given ample testimony to the
Reformation of the Kirk of Scotland.

Secondly, our open opposition against the dangerous innovation of Religion
intended, and very far promoved in all his Majesty's dominions; of which he
has showed himself, in his own way no less zealous then Canterbury
himself, as may appear by his advancing of his Chaplain, D. Bramble not only
to the Bishopric of Derry, but also to be Vicar general of Ireland, a man
prompted for exalting of Canterburian Popery, and Arminianisme, that thus
himself might have the power of both swords, against all that should maintain
the Reformation; by his bringing of D. Chapel, a man of the same spirit, to
the University of Dublin, for poisoning the Fountains, and corrupting the
Seminaries of the Kirk.

And thirdly, when the Primate of Ireland did press a new ratification of the
Articles of that Kirk, in Parliament for barring such novations in Religion,
he boldly menaced him with the burning, by the hand of the Hangman, of that
Confession, although confirmed in former Parliaments.

When he found that the Reformation begun in Scotland, did stand in his way,
he left no means unessaied to rub disgrace upon us, and our cause. The pieces
printed at Dublin, Examen conjurationis Scoticanae, the ungirding of the
Scottish Armor: the Pamphlet bearing the counterfeit name of Lysimachus
Nichanor; all three so full of calumnies, slanders, and scurrilities against
our Country, and Reformation, that the Jesuits in their greatest spite, could
not have said more; yet not only the Authors were countenanced and rewarded by
him, but the books must bear his name, as the great Patron both of the work
and workman.

When the National Oath and Covenant warranted by our general Assemblies, was
approved by Parliament in the Articles, subscribed in the Kings name, by his
Majesty's high Commissioner, and by the Lords of privy Counsel, and commanded
to be sworn by his Majesty's subjects of all ranks: and particular and
plenary information was given unto the Lieutenant, by men of such quality, as
he ought to have believed, of the loyalty of our hearts to the King, of the
lawfulness of our proceedings, and innocence of our Covenant, and whole
course, that he could have no excuse: yet his desperate malice made him to bend
his craft and cruelty, his fraud and forces against us. For first, he did
craftily call up to Dublin some of our Countrymen, both of the Nobility and
Gentry, living in Ireland, showing them, that the King would conceive and
account them as conspirers with the Scots, in their rebellious courses, except
some remedy were provided: and for remedy, suggesting his own wicked invention,
to present unto him and his Council, a petition, which he caused to be framed
by the Bishop of Raphoe, and was seen and corrected by himself, wherein they
petitioned to have an oath given them, containing a formal renunciation of the
Scottish Covenant, and a deep assurance never so much as to protest against any
of his Majesty's commandments whatsoever.

No sooner was this Oath thus craftily contrived, but with all haste it is sent
to such places of the Kingdom where our Contrymen had residence: and men,
women, and all other persons, above the years of sixteen, constrained either
presently to take the Oath, and thereby renounce their National Covenant as
seditious and traiterous, or with violence and cruelty to be haled to the
jayle, fined above the value of their estates, and to be kept close prisoners,
and so far as we know, some are yet kept in prison, both men and women of good
quality, for not renouncing that Oath, which they had taken forty years since,
in obedience to the King who then lived. A cruelty ensued which may parallel
the persecutions of the most unchristian times: For weak women dragged to the
Bench to take the Oath, died in the place, both mother and child: hundreds
driven to hide themselves, till in the darkness of the night they might escape
by Sea to Scotland, whither thousands of them did fly, being forced to leave
Corn, cattle, Houses, and all they possessed, to be a prey to their
persecuting enemies, the Lieutenants Officers. And some indicted and declared
guilty of High Treason, for no other guiltiness but for subscribing our
National Oath, which was not only impiety and injustice in it self, and an
utter undoing of his Majesty's subjects, but was a weakening of the Scots
Plantation, to the prejudice of that Kingdom, and his Majesty's service, and
was a high scandal against the Kings honor, and intolerable abuse of his
Majesty's trust and authority: his Majesty's Commission, which was procured by
the Lieutenant, bearing no other penalty then a certification of noting the
names of the refusers of the Oath.

But this his restless rage and insatiable cruelty, against our Religion and
Country, can not be kept within the bounds of Ireland.

By his means a Parliament is called, And although by the six subsidies
granted in Parliament not long before, and by the base means which himself
and his Officers did use, as is contained in a late Remonstrance, that Land was
extremely impoverished, yet by his speeches, full of Oaths and Asseverations,
that we were Traitors and Rebels, casting off all Monarchiall government, etc.
he extorted from them four new Subsidies, and indicta causa before we were
heard, procured that a War was undertaken, and forces should be leavied
against us as a Rebellious Nation, which was also intended to be an example and
Precedent to the Parliament of England for granting subsidies, and sending a
joint Army for our utter ruin.

According to his appointment in Parliament, the army was gathered, and brought
down to the Coast, threatening a daily invasion of our Country, intending to
make us a conquered Province, and to destroy our Religion, Liberties, and
Laws, and thereby laying upon us a necessity of vast charges, to keep forces
on foot on the West Coast to wait upon his coming.

And as the War was denounced, and forces leavied before we were heard. So
before the denouncing of the War, our ships, and goods on the Irish Coast
were taken, and the owners cast in Prison, and some of them in Irons. Frigates
were sent forth to scour our Coasts, which did take some, and burn others of
our Barks.

Having thus incited the Kingdom of Ireland, and put his forces in order there
against us, with all haste he comes to England.

In his parting, at the giving up of the Sword, he openly avowed our utter
ruin and desolation, in these or the like words. If I return to that
honorable Sword I shall leave of the Scots neither root nor branch.

How soon he comes to Court, as before he had done very evil offices
against our Commissioners, clearing our proceedings before the point; So now he
uses all means to stir up the King and Parliament against us, and to move
them to a present war, according to the Precedent, and example of his own
making in the Parliament of Ireland. And finding that his hopes failed him, and
his designs succeeded not that way, in his nimblenesse he takes another
course, that the Parliament of England may be broken up, and despising their
wisdom and authority, not only with great gladness accepts, but uses all
means that the conduct of the Army, in the expedition against Scotland, may be
put upon him; which accordingly he obtains as general Captain, with power
to Invade; kill, slay, and save at his discretion, and to make any one, or more
Deputies in his stead, to do, and execute all the power and authorities
committed to him.

According to the largeness of his Commission, and Letters patents of his
devising, so were his deportments afterward; for when the Scots, according to
their Declarations sent before them, were coming in a peaceable way, far
from any intention to invade any of his Majesty's Subjects, and still to
supplicate his Majesty for a settled peace, he gave order to his officers to
fight with them on the way, that the two Nations once entered in blood,
whatsoever should be the success, he might escape trial and censure, and his
bloody designs might be put in execution against his Majesty's subjects of
both Kingdoms.

When the Kings Majesty was again inclined to hearken to our petitions, and to
compose our differences in a peaceable way, and the Peers of England conveened
at York, had, as before in their great wisdom and faithfulness given unto
his Majesty's Counsels of peace, yet this firebrand still smoaketh: and in that
honorable Assembly, takes upon him to breath out threatenings against us as
Traitors, and enemies to Monarchical government, That we be sent home again
in our blood, and he will whip us out of England.

And as these were his Speeches in the time of the treaty, appointed by his
Majesty at Rippon, that if it had been possible, it might have been broken
up. So when a Cessation of Arms, was happily agreed upon there, yet he cease
not, but still his practices were for war, His under Officers can tell who it
was that gave them Commission to draw near in Arms beyond the Teese, in the
time of the treaty at Rippon.

The Governor of Barwicke and Carlisle can show, from whom they had their
warrants for their acts of Hostility, after the Cessation was concluded. It may
be tried how it comes to pass, that the Ports of Ireland are yet closed, our
Countrymen for the Oath still kept in prison, Traffic interrupted, and no
other face of affairs, then if no cessation had been agreed upon.

We therefore desire that your Lordships will represent to the Parliament, that
this great Incendiarie upon these, and the like offenses, not against
particular persons, but against Kingdoms, and Nations, may be put to a trial,
and from their known, and renowned justice, may have his deserved punishment.

16 December. 1640.

THE SCOTTISH Commissioners Demand concerning their sixth ARTICLE.
COncerning our Sixth demand, although it has often come to pass, that these
who have been joined by the bonds of Religion, and Nature, have suffered
themselves to be divided about the things of this World; And although our
Adversaries, who no less labor the division of the two Kingdoms, then we do
all seek Peace, and follow after it, as our common Happiness, do presume
that this will be the Partition wall, to divide us, and to make us lose all our
labors taken about the former Demand, Wherein by the help of God, by his
Majesty's Princely goodness, and Justice, and your Lordships noble, and equal
dealing, We have so fully accorded, and to keep us from providing for a firm
and weell grounded Peace, by the wisdom, and justice of the Parliament of
England, which is our greatest desire expressed in our last Demand. We are
still Confident, that as we shall concerning this Article represent nothing but
what is true, Just, and Honorable to both Kingdoms; So will your Lordships
hearken to us, and will not suffer your selves, by any slanders, or
suggestions, to be drawn out of that straight and safe way wherein ye have
walked since the beginning.

IT is now We suppose known to all England, especially to both the Honorable
Houses of Parliament, And by the occasion of this Treaty, more particularly to
your Lordships, That our distresses in our Religion, and Liberties, were of
late more pressing then We were able to bear, That our Complaints and
Supplications for redress, were answered at last with the terrors of an Army;
That after a Pacification greater Preparations were made for war, whereby
many Acts of Hostility were done against us, both by Sea and Land; The
Kingdom wanted administration of Justice, and We constrained to take Arms
for our defense; That we were brought to this extreme, and intolerable
necessity, either to maintain diverse Armies upon our borders against Invasion
from England, or Ireland, still to be deprived of the benefit of all the Courts
of Justice, and not only to maintain so many thousands as were spoiled of
their ships, and goods, but to want all Commerce by Sea, to the undoing of
Merchants, of Saylors, and many others who lived by Fishing, and whose callings
are vpholden from hand to mouth by Sea trade: Any one of which evils is able in
a short time to bring the most potent Kingdom to Confusion, Ruin and
Desolation, how much more all the three at one time combined to bring the
Kingdom of Scotland to be no more a Kingdom: Yet all these behoved We either
to endure, and under no other hope, then of the perfect slavery of our selves,
and our posterity in our Souls, lives, and Means; Or to resolve to come into
England, not to make Invasion, nor with any purpose to fight, except we were
forced, God is our Judge, our actions are our witnesses, and England does now
acknowledge the truth, against all suspicions to the contrary, and against the
impudent lies of our Enemies, But for our relief, defense, and preservation
which we could find by no other means, when we had essayed all means, and had
at large expressed our pungent, and pressing necessities, to the Kingdom, and
Parliament of England. Since therefore the war on our part (which is no other but
our coming into England with a guard) is defensive, and all men do
acknowledge, that in common equity, the defendant should not be suffered to
perish in his just and necessary defense, but that the pursuer, whether by way
of Legal Process in the time of Peace, or by way of violence, and unjust
invasion in the time of war, ought to bear the charges of the defendant. We
trust that your Lordships will think that it is not against reason for us to
demand some reparation of this kind, and that the Parliament of England by
whose Wisdom and Justice we have expected the redress of our wrongs, will
take such course, as both may in reason give us satisfaction and may in the
notable demo^stration of their Justice serve most for their own honor.

Our earnestness in following this our Demand, does not so far wrong our
sight, and make us so undiscerning, as not to make a difference between the
Kingdom, and Parliament of England, which did neither decerne nor set forward
a War against us, And that Prevalent faction of Prelates and Papists who have
moved every stone against us, and used all sorts of means not only their
counsels, Subsidies and forces, but their Kirk Canons, and prayers for our
utter Ruin, which makes them obnoxious to our just accusations, and guilty of
all the losses, and wrongs, which this time past we have sustained: Yet this
we desire your Lordships to consider, That the Estates of the Kingdom of
Scotland being assembled, did endeavor by their Declarations, Informations,
and Remonstrances, and by the proceedings of their Commissioners, to make
known unto the Counsel, Kingdom, and Parliament of England, and to forewarne
them of the mischief intended against both Kingdoms, in their Religion, and
Liberties, by the Prelates, and Papists, to the end, that our Invasion from
England might have been prevented, if by the Prevalencie of the faction it had
been possible. And therefore we may now with the greater reason, and
confidence press our Demand, That your Lordships, the Parliament, the
Kingdom, and the King himself may see us repared in our losses at the cost of
that faction by whose means we have sustained so much damage, And which,
except they repent, will find sorrow recompensed for our grief, Torments for
our toil, and an infinite greater loss for the Temporal losses, they have
brought upon a whole Kingdom, which was dwelling by them in Peace.

All the devices and doings of our common enemies were to bear down the Truth
of Religion, and the just liberties of the Subjects in both Kingdoms. They
were confident to bring this about one of two ways: Either by blocking us up
by Sea and Land to constrain us to admit their will for a Law both in Kirk,
and policy, and thus to make us a Precedent for the like misery in England, or
by their Invasion of our Kingdom to compel us furiously, and without order,
to break into England, that the two Nations once entered into a bloody War,
they might fish in our troubled Waters, and catch their desired Prey. But as
we declared before our coming. We trusted that God would turn their
Wisdom into foolishness, and bring their devices upon their own Pates, by
our Intentions, and Resolutions to come into England as among our Brethren, in
the most peaceable way that could stand with our safety, in respect of our
common Enemies, to present our Petitions for settling our Peace, by a Parliament
in England, wherein the Intentions and Actions, both of our Adversaries, and
ours might be brought to light, The Kings Majesty, and the Kingdom rightly
informed, The Authors, and Instruments of our divisions, and troubles punished,
All the mischiefs of a National, and doubtful War prevented, and Religion,
and Liberty with greater Peace, and Amity then ever before established, against
all the Craft and violence of our enemies. This was our Declaration before we
set our foot into England, from which our deportments since have not varied.
And it has bin the Lords wonderful doing, by the wise Counsels, and just
proceedings of the Parliament, to bring in a great part to pass, and to give
us lively hopes of a happy Conclusion: And therefore we will never doubt, but
that the Parliament in their Wisdom and Justice, will provide that a
proportionable part of the Cost, and charges of a work so great and so
comfortable to both Nations be borne by the Delinquents there, that with the
better Conscience the good People of England may sit under their own Vines,
and Figtrees, Refreshing themselves, although upon our greater Pains and
Hazard, yet not altogether upon our cost and charges, which we are not able to
bear.

The Kingdom of England does know and confess, that the Innovation of
Religion and Liberties in Scotland, were not the principal design of our
common Enemies, but that both in the intention of the Workers, whose zeal was
hottest for settling their devices at home: And in the Condition of the Work,
making us whom they conceived to be the weaker for opposition, to be nothing
else but a leading case for England. And that although by the power of GOD,
which is made perfect in weakness, they have found amongst us greater
resistance, then they did fear, or either they or our selves could have
apprehended; Yet, as it has been the will of God that we should endure the
heat of the day; So in the Evening the precious wages of the vindication of
Religion, Liberties, and Laws are to be received by both Kingdoms, and will
enrich we hope to our unspeakable Joy, the present Age, and the Posterity
with Blessings that cannot be vallued, and which the good People of England
esteem more then Treasures of Gold, and willingly would have purchased with
many thousands. We do not plead that Conscience and Piety have moved some men
to serve GOD upon their own cost, and that Justice and Equity have directed
others, where the Harvest has been common to consider the pains of laboring,
and the charges of the Sowing, yet this much may we say, that had a foreign
Enemy, intending to reduce the whole Island into Popery, made the first assault
upon our weakness, We nothing doubt, but the Kingdom of England, from their
desire to preserve their Religion, and Liberties, would have found the way to
bear with us the expense of our resistance, and lawful defense, how much more
being Invaded, although not by England, yet from England, by common enemies,
seeking the same ends, we expect to be helped and relieved.

We will never conceive that it is either the will, or the well and honor of
England, that we should go from so blessed a work after so many grievous
sufferings, bearing on our backs the insupportable burdens of worldly
necessities, and distresses, return to our country empty, and exhausted, in
which the people of all Ranks, Sexes, and conditions, have spent themselves.
The possessions of every man, who devoted himself heartily to this cause, are
burdened, not only with his own Personal, and particular expense, but with
the public, and common charges; Of which if there be no relief, neither can
our Kingdom have peace at home, nor any more credit for Gommerce abroad: Nor
will it be possible for us, either to aid, and assist our friends, or to
resist and oppose the restless, and working wickedness of our Enenemies: The
best sort will lose much of the sweetness of the enjoying of their Religion,
and Liberties, and others will run such ways, and undirect courses; as their
desperate necessities will drive them into. We shall be but a burden to our
selves, a vexation unto others, of whose strength we desire to be a
considerable part, and a fit subject for our Enemies to work upon for
obtaining, their now disappointed, but never dying desires.

We will not allege the example of other Kingdoms, where the losses of
necessary and just defense had been repaired by the other party, Nor will we
remember what help we have made according to our abilities to other reformed
Kirks, And what the Kingdom of England of old, and of late has done to
Germany, France, and Holland, Nor do we use so many words, that England may be
burdened, and we eased, or that this should be a matter of our Covetousness,
and not of their Justice, and kindness; Justice, in respect of our
Adversaries) who are the causes of the great misery and necessity, to which we
have been brought: kindness, in the supply of our wants, who have been tender
of the welfare of England as of our own, that by this equality and mutual
respect, both Nations may be supported in such strength, and sufficiency, that
we may be the more serviceable to his Majesty, and abound in every good work,
both toward one another, and for the comfort and relief of the reformed
Kirks, beyond the Seas, that we may all bless God, and that the blessing of
God may be upon us all.

The English Peers demand concerning the Preceding Articles.
Whether this be a positive demand, or only an Intimation of the charge,
thereby to induce the Kingdom of England, to take your distressed estate into
consideration, and to afford you some friendly assistance.

The Scottish Commissioners answer to this Demand.
We would be no less willing to bear our losses if we had ability, then we
have been ready to undergo the hazard; But because the burden of the whole
does far exceed our strength, We have (as is more fully conceived in onr
Papers) represented to your Lordships, our charges, and losses, not intending
to demand a total Reparation, but of such a proportionable part, as tha. we
may in some measure bear the remanent, which we conceive your Lordships
(having considered our reasons) will judge to be a matter, not of our
Govetousnesse, but of the said Justice, and kindness of the Kingdom of
England.

Proposition of the Peers to proceed to the other Demands during the debate of
the Scottish losses.
That in the Interim whilst the houses of Parliament take into consideration,
you demand of losses, and damages, you proceed to settle the other Articles of
the peace, and Incourse betwixt the two Kingdoms.

Answer to the Peers Demand.
We have represented our losses, and thereby our distressed Condition
ingenuously, and in the singleness of our hearts, with very great moderation,
passing over many things which to us are great Burdens, That there might be no
difficulty, nor cause of delay on our part, hoping that the Honorable Houses
of Parliament, would thereby be moved at their first Conveniencie to take the
matter to their consideration.

We do not demand a total Reparation, Nor do we speak of the payment, till
we consult about the settling of a solid peace, at which time the ways of
lifting and paying the money, may be considered; We do only desire to know
what proportion may be expected. That this being once determined, and all
impediments, arising from our bypast troubles, removed, We may with the
greater confidence, and more hearty consent on both sides proceed to the
establishing of a firm and durable peace for time to come.

It is not unknown to your Lordships, what desperate desires, and miserable
hopes our Adversaries have conceived of a a breach upon this Article; And we
do foresee what snares to us, and difficulties to your Lordships may arise
upon the postponing and laying aside of this Article to the last place.

And therefore that our Adversaries may be out of hope, and we out of fear,
and that the settling of peace may be the more easy: We are the more earnest,
that as the former Articles have bin, so this may be upon greater reasons
considered in its own place, and order.

Your Lordships upon the occasion of some motions made heretofore of the
transposing of our Demands, do know, that not only the substance, but the
order of the propounding of them, is contained in our Instructions. And as we
can alter nothing without warrant, the craving whereof will take more time then
the Houses of Parliament will bestow upon the consideration of this Article, So
are we acquainted with the reasons yet standing in force, which moved the
ordering of this Demand. And therefore let us still be earnest with your
Lordships, that there be no halting here, where the Adversaries did most, and
we did least of all, by reason of the Justice, and kindness of the houses of
Parliament expect it.

Answer of the Parliament to the preceding Demand. Resolved upon the Question.
THat this House think fit, that a friendly assistance and relief shall be
given toward supply of the losses, and necessities of the Scots, and that in
due time this House will take into consideration the measure and manner of it.

The Scottish Commissioners Answer.
AS we do with all thankfulness receive the friendly, and kind resolution of
the Parliament concerning our sixth Demand, And do therein acknowledge your
Lordships noble dealing, for which we may assure that the whole Kingdom of
Scotland will at all occasions express themselves in all respect, and
kindness, So do we entreat your Lordships to represent to the Parliament our
earnest desire, that they may be pleased, how soon their conveniencie may
serve, to consider of the proportion, wishing still, that as we expect from
our friends the Testimonies of their kindness and friendly assistance, So the
justice of the Parliament may be declared, in making the burden more sensible
to the Prelates, and Papists (our enemies, and Authors of all our evils) then
to others, who never have wronged us; Which will not only give unto us, and the
whole Kingdom of Scotland, the greater satisfaction, But will also (as we do
conceive) conduce much to the honor of the Kings Majesty and Parliament. We
do also expect that your Lordships will be pleased to report unto us the
Answer of the Parliament, that we may in this, as in our former Articles, give
account to those who sent us.

The Peers Demand upon the above written Answer.
WE desire to understand, since (as we conceive) the particulars are like to
require much time, whether we may not from you let the Parliament know, That
(whilst they are debating of the Proportion, and the ways how their kind
assistance may be raised) you will proceed to the agreeing of the Articles of
a firm and durable peace, that thereby both Time may be saved, and both sides
proceed mutually with the greater cheerfulness and alacrity.

The Scottish Commissioners Answer to the preceding Demand.
AS we desire a firm peace, so it is our desire that this peace may be with
all mutual alacrity speedily concluded. Therefore let us entreat your
Lordships to show the Parliament from us, that how soon they shall be pleased
to make the proportion known to us, that we may satisfy the expectation of
those who have entrusted us, (which we conceive may be done in a short time,
since they are already acquainted with all the particulars of our Demand) we
shall stay no longer upon the manner and ways of raising the assistance, which
may require a longer time: And yet we trust will be with such conveniencie
determined, as may serve for our timous relief, But remitting the manner and
ways to the oportunities of the Parliament, shall most willingly proceed to
the Consideration of the following Articles, Especially to that which we most
of all desire, a firm and blessed peace.

Ianuar. 16.
Resolved on the Question?
THAT this House does conceive, that the sum of three hundredth thousand
pounds is a fit proportion for that friendly assistance and relief, formerly
thought fit to be given, toward the supply of the losses and necessities of
our Brethren of Scotland. And that this House will, in due time, take into
consideration the manner how, and the time when, the same shall be raised.

Answer of the Scots Commissioners.
WE entreat your Lordships, whose endeavors God has blessed in this great
work, to make known to the Parliament, that We do no less desire to show our
thankfulness for their friendly assistance and relief, then We have been
earnest in demanding the same. But the thankfulness which We conceive to be
due, does not consist in our affections or words at this time; but in the
mutual kindness, and real demonstrations to be expected from the whole
kingdom of Scotland in all time coming: and that not only for the measure
and proportion, which the Parliament has conceived to be fit; and which (to
begin our thankfulness now) We do in name of the whole Kingdom cheerfully
accept of, but also for the kind and Christian manner of granting it unto us,
as to their Brethren, which adds a weight above many thousands, and cannot
be compensed but by paying their reciprocal love and duty of Brethren. And
for the resolution to consider in due time of the raising of the same for our
relief, which also makes the benefit to be double. This makes us confident
that God (whose working at this time has been wonderful) has decreed the
peace and amity of the two Kingdoms, and will remove all ^ubbes out of the
way, that our enemies will at last despair to divide us, when they see that
God has joined us in such a fraternity. And that divine Providence will
plentifully recompense unto the Kingdom of England, this their justice and
kindness, and unto Scotland all their losses, which shall not by these and
other means amongst our selves be repaired, but by the rich and sweet blessings
of the purity and power of the Gospel, attended with the benefits of an happy
and durable peace under his Majesty's long and prosperous reign, and of his
royal posterity to all generations.

FINIS.

