THE CHARACTER Of a true and false SHEPHERD* WITH A general admonition to
MINISTERS, being very seasonable for the present times.

Printed in the Year 1670*

The Character of a true and false Shepherd, with a general Admonition to
Ministers, being very seasonable for the present times.
VErily, John 10 chapter 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. ver.
verily, I say unto you, He that enters not by the Door into the Sheepfold
but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber: But he that
enters in by the Door is the Shepherd of the Sheep, to him the Porter opens,
and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name, and leads
them out. And when he puts forth his own sheep he goes before them, and the
sheep follow him, for they know his voice; and a stranger will they not follow,
for they know not the voice of strangers.

It is worthy of examination whether the shepherd of this place entered in at
the door, viz. Whether he did undermine and thrust out a worthy learned Divine,
able to instruct his flock both in English and Welsh; and climbed into his
place through the window against the good will and liking of his Parishioners.

What good he has wrought amongst them since his intrusion, John, He is a
Thief and a Robber.

1. He robbed his elder Brother of his right.

2. He robbed his Parishioners of that Spiritual food and comfort which they
received from his wholesome Doctrine.

3. He robbed God of his Honor and Glory.

4. He robbed the poor of that relief which the Charity of his Predecessor
afforded unto them; this uncharitable man keeping a fierce Dog to terrify the
poor from coming to his Door, which is open only unto such as are able, 1.
either to feast him again: or, 2. To support him in his pride and usurpation.

This Intruder cannot lead his Sheep in the paths of Righteousness and
Holiness;

1. He cannot preach or instruct his flock in their own native Language; so
that they do not understand him nor the meaning of his Discourse.

2. He will not maintain another in his stead that can or might teach and
instruct his flock.

3. He may be properly termed a stranger, because he came into the place very
strangely, by supplanting his Predecessor who was worthy of the place, and his
Sheep did love and honor him, and he was able to go in and out before them, and
to lead them, and his sheep did willingly follow him.

4. It is a strange voice, and not the voice of a true Shepherd, for the true
shepherd does feed his sheep with spiritual food, and like the true Samaritan,
does pour wine and oil into their wounds. But this stranger does make wounds
and sores where there were none before; much like the Indian flies that infect
and make sores on every place where they light upon.

5. He comes not in to save, but to destroy his sheep: 1. by his oppression and
vexatious suits: 2. By his railing invectives and strange Doctrines; denouncing
his sheep Reprobates, because they will not patiently suffer him to fleece and
flay them*

6. This shepherd is not only barbarous in his dealings with his Parishioners,
but also according to the words of St. Paul to the Corinthians may be properly
called a Barbarian, Cor. 14. ^hap.
by whom his sheep can receive no profit or benefit.

Follow after Charity and desire spiritual Gifts, but rather that ye ^ay
prophecy; for he that speaks in an unknown Tongue, speaks not unto men,
for no man understands him; howbeit in the Spirit he speaks Mysteries.

He that speaks in an unknown tongue edifieth himself; but he that
prophesies edifieth the Church. Now Brethren, if I come unto you speaking with
Tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you either by
revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by Doctrine.

And even things without life giving sound, whether Pipe or Harp, except they
give a distinction in the sound, how shall it be known what is piped or harped;
for if the Trumpet give an uncertain sound who shall prepare himself to the
Battle.

So likewise you, unless you utter by the tongue words easy to be understood,
how shall it be known what is spoken, for ye shall speak into the air.

Those that come to Church to hear him cannot understand him, and those that
come not are excommunicated; and if they go to hear those that can instruct
them in their own native Language, this Wolf does prosecute and persecute them
for Schismatics; a hard Dilemma. If a Welsh man should presume to preach Welsh
in England, he would be quickly hooted out of the Pulpit by his Auditors: with
what Conscience can thou sue thy Parishioners for Tithes and can not
discharge the place. Therefore we may conclude that this is the stranger meant
by St. John that entered not at the door, but came in another indirect way,
whose voice the sheep do not understand, for they know not the voice of this
stranger who feeds himself and starves his flock, which leads us to the 34
Chapter of Ezechiel, where it is thus written:

And the word of the Lord came unto me, ^^^chiel (...)
saying, Son of man, prophecy against the shepherds of Israel, prophecy and
say unto them, Thus says the Lord God unto the shepherds, Woe be to the
shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves, should not the shepherds feed the
flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the wool: ye kill them that are
fed, but ye feed not the flock.

The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have you healed that which was
sick, neither have you bound up that which was broken, neither have you brought
again* that which was driven away, neither have you sought that which was lost,
but with sorce and with cruelty have you ruled them.

My sheep wandered through all the mountains and upon every high hill; yea, my
flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek
after them.

Therefore ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord. As I live, says the Lord,
Surely because my flock became a prey, and my flock became meat for every beast
of the field, because there was no shepherd, neither did my shepherds search
for my flock. But the shepherds feed themselves, and feed not my flock.

Therefore O ye shepherds, hear the words of the Lord, Thus says the Lord God,
Behold, I am against the shepherds, and I will require my flock at their hand,
and cause them to cease from feeding the flock, neither shall the shepherds
feed themselves any more, for I will deliver my flock from their mouth that
they may not be meat for them.

For thus says the Lord God, even I will both search my sheep, and seek them
out: As a shepherd seeks out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep
that are scattered, so will I seek out my sheep, and I will deliver them out of
all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day, and I
will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the Countries, and I
will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel,
etc.

We are hereby to observe God's Commandments to his shepherds;

2. How the shepherds in those days as well as at this time and in this place,
feed themselves and not the sheep.

3. The woe that is pronounced against those shepherds that neglect their duty.

4. The Lord will in his due time take us into his fold, and under his own
immediate care, and feed his own flock, he will deliver us from the mouth of
those shepherds that fed upon them, that they may not be meat for them anymore.

All which does administer matter of great comfort and consolation to us all,
especially those that fear the Lord, who in his own time, which is the best
time, will relieve the oppressed and feed us with the bread of life, we ought
therefore patiently to wait the Lords time.

Come and buy milk and wine without money and without price.

The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, Isaiah 55. Rev. 22. chapter 17. v.
and let him that hears come, and let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever
will, let him take of the water of life freely.

Art thou contented to preach the Gospel freely for Conscience sake, hearken to
the words of St. Paul.

For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of: For necessity is
laid upon me, 1 Cor. 9. ch
yea, woe is to me if I preach not the Gospel; for if I do this willingly, I
have a reward; but if against my will, a dispensation of the Gospel is
committed unto me. What is my reward then, verily that when I preach the Gospel
of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel. For though I
be free from all men, yet have I made my self a servant unto all that I may
gain the more: and this I do for the Gospel sake, that I may be partaker of the
Gospel with you.

Our Savior Commands his Disciples to heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise
the dead, cast out devils, Mat. 10. chapter 8. v.
freely you have received, freely give.

Our Savior in this Chapter has laid three several commands on Simon Peter to
feed not only his sheep, but also his Lambs. John 21. ch


1. The shepherd of this place does feed neither the sheep nor Lambs committed
to his care and charge.

2. The youth of this Parish which are like to the young Lambs are left to go
astray, being not Catechized nor instructed, either in their duty toward God
or man: but left to be nourished in ignorance and profaneness.

Luther did not scorn to profess himself Discipulum Catechismi: A Scholar of
the Catechism; by this Catechism, the Gospel first go^ grounds of Popery: and
let not our Religion now grown rich be ashamed of that which first gave it
credit and set it up, lest the Jesuits and Seminaries beat us at our own
weapons, as they have already done, through the want of this Catechizing, many
which are well skilled in some dark out-corners, have lost themselves in the
beaten road thereof. And it is observed, that since this bad man has
undertaken the charge of the Souls of this great Parish, that great numbers of
his flock are gone astray for want of a faithful worthy Pastor to instruct and
guide them in their own native Language.

Our Savior uses these words, John 10. ch v. 11.
I am the good shepherd, the good shepherd gives his life for his sheep: But
he that is an Hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not,
sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep and flees, and the wolf catches
them and scatters the sheep, the hireling flees, because he is an hireling
and cares not for the sheep.

1. This Text is a clear and plain definition of a true shepherd and an
hireling.

2. It does sufficiently prove the shepherd of this place to be no true
shepherd but an hireling, and that the sheep are not his own.

3. For as long as he did quietly feed upon them, and receive the tenth part of
their labor and substance, he continued amongst them.

4. But when the dark and cloudy day came, wherein he was to give a testimony
of his faith and calling, when his usurped living was once in danger to be
sequestered, he fled away like a coward to the place from whence he came and
left his sheep to the mercy of the Wolves, and his flock have ever since been
scattered abroad upon the mounta^ns, and will not be brought to Christ's
sheepfold, the true Church, until it shall please Almighty God to send us
another shepherd that will love and feed his flock, and gather into the Church
again the lost sheep that are gone astray.

5. This hireling would not endure one hours imprisonment, nor so much as one
combat for the Religion he professed, or the Religious care he should have had
of his flock; but like a false Prophet deserted those by whom he was maintained.

Much like Peter de Armiens the Hermit, a great Incendiary of the Holy War
against the Turks, and pretended he was sent by command of our Savior, yet at
the siege of Antioch most cowardly ran away, and was afterward most shamefully
brought back again for a fugitive.

Our Shepherd in deserting his Parishioners in the time of danger did not
follow the Example of St. Paul.

I am more, 1 Cor. 11. chapter oeginning at 23. ver.
in labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in death often, of the Jews
five times received I forty stripes save one, I was twice beaten with rods, I
was once stoned, I suffered thrice shipwreck, night and day have I been in the
deep Sea. In Journeying I was often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers,
in perils of my own Nation, in perils amongst the Gentiles, in perils in the
City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils amongst
false Brethren. In weariness and painfulness, in watching often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and in nakedness.

We shall leave it to the Conscience of the shepherd of this place impartially
to judge,

1. For the cause of Religion.

2. For the maintenance and honor of his holy Function.

3. For the edification and preservation of his flock; what good has he done
for God, his King or the Clergy, unless it be some prating pragmatical words
and discourses, and telling of News, or drinking a health in some corner, where
he was secure from tale-bearers like himself.

Then was the day of Trial, then was the time for him to seal his Ministerial
Function, with some remarkable act to testify his faith and adherence to the
Church, as St. Paul says:

For the seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord. 1 Cor. 9.


As soon as his tithe was in danger to be lost, his mouth was sealed up; No
penny, no Pater noster, he did not as much as give a farewell Sermon to his
Parishioners, nor once appear amongst them in the cloudy days to administer any
comfort unto them, or to endeavor to keep them from going astray, or from
renouncing their allegiance to their King, or obedience to the Church; but left
them naked without a guide or Guardian to lead or defend them.

O thou unworthy shepherd that take so much upon thee, and do so often take
the Name of God and the King in vain in thy defiled mouth; answer for thy self
and say, what have thou done either for God, King, Church or Parishioners in
thirty years for all the Tithes thou have received. Take shame upon thee, and
hide thy face, and give place and honor to those that have suffered for the
cause of Religion and Church of England, and were instruments for the
restoration of such an ungrateful person as thou art, when thou durst not show
thy face, nor appear to own thy profession.

Can thou say; thou have done as much as good old Eli did, and yet there are
various opinions amongst Learned men whether he was a good man indeed, however
we will judge charitably of him, as many pious and Learned persons have done
before us.

Old Eli being 99 years old, and not able to go to the Battle, 1 Sa^. 4. chapter 3.
he got upon a Seat by the ways-side near the Battle where it was sought, and
there he sits watching what will become of the Ark, for his heart trembled for
fear of the Ark of God; that is to say, for fear the Ark of God should be taken
prisoner and carried away, as afterward it happened for the sins of the
Priests.

The non-payment of a Tyth-pigg or a Goose, Hophni and Phineas, nor will there
be any hopes of Reformation in this Parish, whilst such an unsanctified Soul
does continue their shepherd.

What did thou for God and the Church when the Ark of God was in danger, and
the Candlestick of the Gospel like to be removed, and thou amongst others
thrown out as unsavory salt: Peruse the Black book of Ejection, and thou shall
find thou were cast out for scandal, not for thy Loyalty; examine thine own
Conscience, whether thou have been a better Christian since thy restitution?
Have thou expressed any gratitude either to God or man for it? Surely no, but
art ten times worse than before, just like a wolf returned to his prey.

And most ungratefully do rail and defame such that Matthew. 12 chapter 43, 44, ^^.
v.
as our Savior said of the man into whom the seven devils did re-enter, That
his last state is worse than his first.

Who art thou that take so much upon thee, Prove. 15. 8. 21 and 27.
and wherein can thou glory thy self, Ecclus. 34. 21. v.
and why do thou take the Name of the Lord in vain in thy mouth, Mit. 21. 31.
do thou preach the Gospel to others, Dan. 6. 24. 13. 62. 14. 31, 42.
and yet thou thy self art a cast a way.

The sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination unto the Lord.

To add more Texts to this purpose.

A Bishop, or Minister of the Gospel must be blameless, the husband of one
wife, 1 Timothy 3.
vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach, not
given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; not a brawler, not
covetous, one that rules well his own house, and having his children in
subjection with all gravity, moreover he must have a good report of them which
are without, lest he fall into reproach, and the snare of the devil.

1. Blameless.

Whether the shepherd of this place be blameless, let all men judge.

1. He has broken his sacred vow and promise made to God, and his Canonical
Oath.

2. He has broken many vows and promises made unto men, and acted quite
contrary to his covenant and engagement under his own hand and seal by another
instrument under his hand and Seal: Verbum Sacerdotis was anciently as solemn a
tie as a bond; nay, as sacred as some men's Oaths; but the word of a Turk is far
more obliging and valuable than this man's hand and seal.

3. He has violated the bonds of amity, and ungratefully betrayed his friend,
and discovered his secrets to his Opponent.

4. Whether is it fit for a Minister in the time of morning prayer on the Lords
day, to go to his Neighbors ground to number their Tithe-Lambs. Ecclus. 27,
chapter 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.


Whosoever discovers secrets loses his credit, and finds no friend after
his will.

Love thy friend, and be faithful unto him: but if thou betrayest his secrets,
thou shall not get him again.

For as a man destroys his Enemy, so do thou destroy the friendship of thy
Neighbor.

Follow after him no more, for he is too far off, he is as a roe, escaped out
of the snare, for his soul is wounded.

As for wounds they may be bound up again, and an evil word may be reconciled:
But who so betrayeth the secret of his friend has lost all his credit.

A man's foe shall be they of his own household. Matthew. 10. chapter 36. v. Psil. 56.
v. 12, 13, 14* 15.


Surely mine enemy did not defame me, for I could have born it, neither did
mine adversary exalt himself against me, for I would have hid me from him.

But it was thou, O man, even my companion, my guide and my familiar which
delighted in consulting together, and went into the house of God as Companions.

Let death cease upon him, let him go down quick into the grave, for wickedness
is in his dwelling, even in the midst thereof.

He has rewarded me evil for good, Psalm. 109. v. 5. 16, 17. 7.
and hatred for my friendship. Because he remembered not to show mercy, but
prosecuted the afflicted and poor man, and the sorrowful hearted to slay him.

As he loved cursing so shall it come unto him; as he loved not blessing so
shall it be far from him.

When he shall be judged, let him be condemned, and let his prayer be turned
into sin.

He that vexes his neighbors with causless suits,

The Devil is a murderer and a liar from the beginning, John 8. 44,
and the father of lies and liars, Job 41. 25.
and the King of pride. We read in Judges that God sent an evil Spirit between
the Inhabitants of Sechem and Abimelech to the end they might destroy one
another. Judges 9. chapter 23, 24. v
Art not thou such another evil instrument in thy neighborhood.

The husband of one wife.

This shepherd has more than one wife, viz. he has two Benefices besides a
Prebend in all worth 200 per annum, yet all too little to satisfy his proud
and covetous mind, nevertheless he does not give due benevolence to any of his
wives, for all complain of his insufficiency, imbecility, want of true love
and affection, neglect of Christian and family duties. Insomuch that he starves
his wives, and will not suffer them to be fed or satisfied by more sufficient
persons; but like the dog in the manger will neither eat himself, nor suffer
others to eat.

Vigilant.

1. He is very watchful to entrap and ensnare his Neighbors.

2. He is vigilant to gather and exact the tenth of their labor and substance.

3. But he is careless of his flock, and does neither watch nor pray for them,
but preys upon them.

Sober and of good behavior.

1. He has a form of Godliness, but denies the power thereof.

2. He has a grave Habit and a Cathedral Hat, but most proud and uncivil
toward his neighbors, (stinking Puppy) and thou fool, are the civil
Language, he does court his Neighbors withal when he is the least displeased,
a sign he has not been bred either in the Spiritual or Temporal Courts: Sure
this is contra bonos mores.

An affected gravity and formality of his Habit is such as if he would belie
the Register-Book, and ante-date his Age: his ambitious thoughts raising him
above the degree of an Archdeacon, as if nothing less than a Bishopric, if
not an Archbishopric will satisfy his Lordly thoughts.

Given to Hospitality.

1. His doors are open to men in power, but keeps his barking Mastiffs to
terrify the poor from coming to his door, as has been said already.

2. He is very unwilling to allow them any maintenance abroad, or to bear his
share of those taxations that are imposed on him for relief of the poor.

Apt to teach.

He neither will nor can (as he ought) teach his flock, Hogs-Norton, where the
pigs play upon the Organs: and were you there, you might mistake the Church for
Newgate-Market, for he scolds with his Parishioners for small Tithes worse than
any Butter-woman; he will pry for gain through a small chinck, whereby you may
note him to be a notable Hen-House-wife.

Not given to wine.

1. He deserves not to be sevreely accused for his drinking Exodus 16. chapter 3. v.
or for open incontinencie: Si non cast tamen caute, but he is often drunk
with rage and passion, which does too much rule and reign over him.

2. And though he does not deserve the name of Bacchus, yet he may go in the
crowd for an Epicurus; and if he were deprived of his tithes, and destitute of
belly-chear, I doubt he would (like the Children of Israel) wish that he might
die.

No striker, not a brawler.

1. He is afraid to strike lest he be beaten again, yet he brags much of his
courage, and is often ready to strike when he meets with his inferiors.

2. But he is a notorious Brawler and Scold far exceeding any Oyster-scold in
Billings-gate, and cannot forbear it even in the Pulpit and Churchyard. 1 Timothy
6. 10. Mark. 7 ch, 21, 22, 23 v. Matthew. 6. 20. Mat. 26 14, 15.


Not covetous.

This is one of the Cardinal sins that reigns within him, Covetousness is
called in Scripture, the root of all evil.

There is one alone, and there is not a second, which has neither son nor
brother, yet is there none end of his travail, neither Ecclus. 4. chapter 8. v.
can his eye be satisfied with riches, neither does he think for whom do I
travail and defraud my soul of pleasure, this also is vanity, and this is an
evil travail.

This sin is so rooted in him that it will not leave him without God Almighties
special Grace and Mercy, until death put an end to his avaritious desires.

He is such a petty Tyrant,

And the Almighty has been graciously pleased, both to himself and neighbors,
that he has none of Jehu's race to succeed him. We shall not put him in mind
of his youthful labors, lest we do dravv others into Question; but we will
bury that in oblivion, since he has a gracious pardon for it from earth, God
grant he may have a pardon from Heaven, not only for the sins of his youth and
middle age, but for all his sins and infirmities.

Good Report.

Good report he has from very few of his neighbors

He deserves not to be called one of the sons of Levi but the son of Eli, 1 Samuel 2. c.
or the son of Servia; we may not honor him with the name of Anastatius contra
mundum and mundum contra Anastatius.

But this is the son of Ishmael, his hand is against every one of his
Parishioners, Genesis 16. chapter 12. v.
and all or most of them have put their hands against him. Anastatius contended
for the Faith; this man contends for Pigs and Geese, and filthy lucre, and yet
cannot afford his Parishioners a good word or civil discourse.

Demosthenes never made any Oration suddenly, nor expressed any thing
unadvisedly, Plutarch in the life of Demost.
and was wont to say, That he showed how much he honored and reverenced the
people of Athens, because he was always careful what he spoke to them.

And should not a Minister be much more careful what he speaks to his Auditors
in the Pulpit, in presence of the Almighty, and to have a care he brings no
false Message, nor pronounces any rash, severe, or false Sentence against his
Auditors.

1. To condemn his Parishioners to Hell is very harsh and uncharitable,

2. If ye give an Animal or a Dog but a crust of bread, he will was his tail,
and express some thankfulness; but this ungrateful Vitasius, though he is fed
with good wheat, fat lambs and pigs, his fiery tongue shall wag apace to abase
and defame his Parishioners for it.

Surely Tobies Dog was better bred, and would have expressed more gratitude for
benefits received.

The most savage Beasts recompense good turns, and forgetting their nature
remember a benefit though small.

One of the Ancients said, that to live ungrateful was one of the most infamous
lives that might be imagined. St. Augustine says, That not only the vicious
pursue this vice, but that which is most deplorable, the Religious, or rather
those that are pretenders to Religion, who ought to have the fillet of
shamefacedness fastened upon their brows, and a trembling awefulness within them
that they should not run hastily to commit this most ugly sin of ingratitude.

Si dixeris ingratum omnia dixeris.

God has placed the Ministers of the Gospel many steps higher than their
Auditors, and planted them with his hands as Stars in the goodly firmament of a
Heavenly life, upon whose life and influences very much depends the whole
course of the inferior world their Auditors: The people are like the Polypus,
who changes color according to the diversity of objects; ought not you then
to be an object and example of piety, meekness, humility, charity, brotherly
love, and gratitude both to God and man, and to shake off this earthly leprous
sin of Covetousness.

Alas poor wretched worldly man, he loved money so dear,

And it is notoriously known, although he has a Prebend of good value freely
bestowed on him by the Reverend Bishop of the Diocese, yet out of mere
covetousness and contumacie, he forgot his Canonical obedience, and would not
pay the small rent reserved on his Prebendary, although it was appointed
toward the preaching of Gods word, until he was compelled thereunto by Legal
proceedings.

By all which it may appear that this is the man that is an open enemy and
opponent to the Magistracy and Ministry, which shows he had very little zeal
or affection to Religion, and the advancement of the Gospel. And he that durst
oppose his Lord and Master, his Benefactor and best friend; it is no marvail
that he does trample upon, and despise his Parishioners.

Patient.

As for patience, it is a virtue that he never learnt, for he is ever impatient
until he does pour down some malignity or revenge on his innocent neighbors,
against whom he retains any displeasure; they are sure either of a suit or an
invective, and if no place convenient will serve him to vent his spleen and
madness, he will make use of the Pulpit, hoping that place will save him from a
Bastinado: he has more disturbances in his head than the winding Euripus has
waves; yet let him not provoke his Parishioners too much: Patientia saepe laesa
vertitur in furorem, and to return him his own.

Video meliora, proboque deteriora sequar.

Application and friendly Admonition.
HE has not learnt of David a King and Prophet, who said, 1 King. 36.
My God, if thou suffer this persecution against me, at the least I beg the
sacrifice of my patience may ascend to thy Altar in the odor of sweetness.

But it is otherwise with this man, where anger does violently move in the
three principal Regions, and the passions thereof do often attach and endanger
his own Soul, which has made him foam like a boar, hiss like a Serpent, and
cast out fire out of his angry mouth like Medeas B^lls.

And because his Parishioners made addresses to his Superior, in order to a
better supp^y of the Church for Gods glory and the health of their Souls, you
would marvail what furious threats and menaces proceeded from this Orlando
furioso, even to the calling of his Auditors, Reprobates and Rebels: a sign he
had little love or charity toward his Parishioners. For, Love will hide a
multitude of faults.

He has either forgotten or omitted to read the first of St. James. My
Brethren, James 2. 3.
count it exceeding joy when ye fall into diverse temptations, knowing that the
trying of your faith brings forth patience.

We are commanded to lay aside all malitiousness, 1 Pet. 2. chapter
and all guile and dissimulation, and envy, and all evil speaking.

It is not sparkling flames, but invisible heats which melt Metals, and
sweetest influences are those which cause the greatest effects in total nature.

It was not the way that our Savior or his Disciples used, to condemn all for
Reprobates, that opposed the very Doctrine of the Gospel, but to convince and
gain them by love, not by rigor. Our Savior is called the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world; not a Lion to destroy: Blessed are those
that save.

It is the Devils part to destroy, and to preach Reprobation, to bring men into
despair; it is not lawful for a Minister to defile the Character of Divinity
with rigours insupportable, and to draw such damnable conclusions from the
malice of his own breast, virulencie and bitterness of Spirit becomes not a
Gospel-Minister, who should not come with a destroying sword into the Pulpit,
but with the Balm of Gilead, to heal and cure the sores of the afflicted.

But he whetteth his tongue like a sword, and shot for his arrows bitter words.
Psalm 52. 64. 3. v.


His tongue imagines mischief, and like a sharp razor that cutteth
deceitfully; thou do love evil more than good, and lies more than to speak
the truth, thou love all words that may destroy, O thou deceitful tongue.

A revengeful spirit spares nothing to please it self and vent its passion, and
oftentimes opens precipices to fill them with death and ruin. So this roaring
Bull breaths nothing but destruction against his innocent Neighbors, and
because in their religious concerns they have crossed his evil disposition, he
would open the doors of Hell and violently throw them down headlong into
everlasting damnation; had you been present you might have seen sparkles,
flames and coals to proceed from the passionate mouth of this furious man, as
if he would have burned them all at once with Hell fire.

What, no mercy nor compassion in Parson Fret, will nothing satisfy him but to
deliver his sheep to the black spirit of the Abyss to be for ever tormented.

Ministers should be lights to lead the blind, not Come^s to pour down
malignity on their Parishioners.

A good man never slandereth, never envieth, never despises any man, neither
does he malign his neighbors, he courteth not the rich and powerful for
Dinners or suppers, or other self-advantages, nor ungratefully persecuteth his
neighbors to enlarge his estate or interest, nor shall fury make him witless,
nor revenge choleric. Seneca has well said, that choler was not a sign of a
courageous, but a swollen spirit; and haughty colors, signify only an imperious
spirit, but humility bespeaks a man to be a servant of the Lord. Those that are
arrogant and given to contemn and flour others, draw fire and poison on their
own heads, when they assail heroic natures, who cannot feed themselves with
affronts and injuries, words of provocation fly like fire, which raises those
flames which are not easily quenched; and it is an old Proverb, and a true one,
He that stirs the coals, (as this man has done) the sparks will fly in his
face.

Our Savior in the 7 of St. Matt. uses these word's:

Judge not that ye be not judged, Matthew. 7.
for with what Judgment you judge you shall be judged, and with what measure you
meet, it shall be measured to you again. And why see thou the mote that is in
thy Brothers eye, and perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye, thou
Hypocrite, cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and thou shall see clearly
to cast out the mote out of thy Brothers eye.

God sent not his Son into the world that he should condemn the world, John 3.
chapter
but that the world through him should be saved; the Law judges no man before
it hear him, and knows what it has done.

Speak not evil one of another, Brethren: He that speaks evil of his Brother,
James 4.
or he that condemns his brother, speaks evil of the Law and condemns the
Law, and if thou condemnest the Law, thou art not an observer of the Law, but a
Judge; there is one Lawgiver which is able to save and destroy, who art thou
that judge another man?

When our Savior Christ was mocked, reviled and beaten, he answered not again,
neither did he invent a railing invective against them.

This Sentence of Reprobation given by this wild Pastor does, represent him to
be a proud man, and not an humble Minister of the Gospel; Ecclus. 35. 17.
The prayer of him that humbles himself, pierces the clouds, but God
resists the proud, and gives Grace to the humble and meek.

Whosoever will be greatest in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and before God,
must humble himself as a little Child, and abase himself under all men, and
become a servant to all men.

He that humbles himself shall be exalted. Mat. 23. 12 Lam. 3.


God Almighty does not immediately condemn or declare a sinner a reprobate, but
does punish man to humble him, not to destroy him.

He does not afflict willingly, Mic 7. 18.
nor grieve the children of men. But he shows mercy willingly, because he
delights in it.

The Church of God is compared to a Dove, which teareth no man with her Talons,
but is pleased sweetly to strike with her wings. The true gravity of a Minister
consists in manners, not in countenance; it ought to be a seal of a Diamond
firmly to preserve the Characters of virtue, and sign others by Example.

It is more honorable for a Minister to conquer the Kingdom of his passions
than to vanquish the Persian or Indians. It is a great shame to intrude
wickedly into a Benefice, and to undermine and thrust out your Brother to make
room for your own profit and advantage. Saints were wont to gain honor and
profit by flying from them; Ecclus. 9. 8. v.
but you run over the head of your Brother to overtake them; your white linen
should put you in mind of the purity of your Angelical Life, and innocent
conversation, whereunto you say you are called.

The Prophet Esaiah says, they should have their vessels very clean, Isaiah.
5. 2.
who are chosen to bear the vessels of God.

A Minister abiding within the limits of his purity would appear amongst men,
as if he came from a Quire of Angels: As soon as he falls off into a
disordinate life and forsakes the dignity of his calling, he goes out from
the throne of Majesty, as the unfortunate Babylonian King to feed on Hay
amongst Beasts, and immediately draws upon himself scorn and contempt from his
Parishioners.

A Minister ought to be a bright Star to run over and inlighten the little
world, or Parish committed to his Pari^h charge; for God expects he shall give
a good and faithful account of the Souls of his Parishioners; and he ought to
carry the torch of Example in his own life and conversation, and to be a lively
pattern of virtue and holiness of life.

You know the old saying, Like Priest like people.

You have ill spent your time and talent amongst your Parishioners, if in the
end you shall deliver them up to Satan as Reprobates. You are chosen to be the
Ark of the Testament, will you instead thereof become a black Angel of
darkness; Angels hover over your head, and men are on every side to observe
your actions, and have the eyes of a Line to epsy your deformity and looseness
of conversation; And will soon perceive and judge you are in the Church an
unprofitable burden, when your evil life and ineffectual preaching has
brought your Parishioners into the state of Reprobation; for which you may melt
into a cloud of darkness at noonday, to cover your face from the shame and
ignominy that you have thereby subjected your self unto. And you your self
cannot but say it is high time to throw you out of the Garden of Eden, since in
30 years spent amongst your Parishioners, you render your self so useless and
unprofitable un^o them.

Let this shepherd cast-up his rage and fury, and demand of them, where he has
been for so many years; and wha^ good he has done amongst his Parishioners;
Let him enter into a secret and close examination with his own Soul, and look
back and review his life and labors for thirty years last past, and give
impartial judgment against himself, and give one instance of any one Soul he
has saved or converted; one good act he has done; one difference he has
composed amongst his neighbors; one body he has clothed with his charity, or
any good Christian office he has performed in his Parish worthy of a
Tithe-pig; and we doubt, he will give sentence against himself, he has not
deserved a pennyworth of Eggs for his thirty years Tithes he most
unconscionab^y exacted from his Parishioners, and yet cannot return them any
grateful words for the same. Gratitude is the Key of the Land flowing with milk
and honey; ingratitude is a channel from whence all the plagues of Heaven pour
down upon rebellious and contumacious heads, who defile the glory and honor of
their holy profession with envy, ambition, fiery passions, and a brutish life,
wherewith this unworthy shepherd has clothed himself.

And knowing his own guilt would fain draw down his Parishioners with him to
bear him company with infernals below, a place provided for such ungrateful
miscreants.

But let him go, and stay there if he will; surely his Parishioners who never
loved his company here, will never travel so far a journey to enjoy such evil
Society.

Possibly some that are not afraid of Infernals may be persuaded to travel with
him to the waters-side, and deliver him to Charon in hopes to be quite rid of
him. Mat. 16. 18.
For they that are Members of the Church of Christ, the gates of Hell shall not
overcome them.

But hold, shall we leave him there as bad as we found him; surely no: We have
learnt more charity from others, and are better principled, than to leave him
at the worst, or to take ill example by him, in delivering him up to Satan,
we'll pull him back by the Coat, if we can, or at lestwise shall pray to God
for his conversion, and reformation of life and manners. That since for thirty
years last past he has so unprofitably spent his time in the Lords vineyard,
and could not by his Life or Doctrine be an instrument to save others, that God
will be merciful to his own Soul, and that the Lord will also be graciously
pleased to have mercy upon the Souls of his Parishioners, in sending a more
glorious Angel of light to lead and guide them to Heaven according to his
gracious promise and tender mercies expressed in the 34 of Ezekiel.

Behold, Ezechiel 34. chapter
I am against the Shepherds, and will require my sheep at their hands, and
cause them to cease from feeding my sheep, neither shall the shepherds feed
themselves any more; for I will deliver my sheep from their mouths, and they
shall no more devour them, I will feed them in a good pasture, I will set up a
shepherd over them, and he shall feed them.

We shall now conclude with the 13th. of St. Paul to the Corinthians, and the
6th. of St. Luke.

Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, 1 Cor. 13. Chap.
and have no charity, I am become as a sounding brass, or tinkling cymbal. And
though I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all knowledge; and though I
have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, I am
nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor; and though I give
my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits me nothing; charity
suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth not, charity vaunteth not it self,
is not puffed up, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no
evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth; bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things.

But love ye your enemies, and do good, Luke 6. 35.
and lend, hoping for nothing again, and your reward shall be great, and ye
shall be the children of the Highest, for he is kind to the unthankful and the
evil.

FINIS.

