OBSERVATIONS UPON CAESAR'S COMENTARIES.

By CLEMENT EDMUNDES, Remembrancer of the city of LONDON



THE COMMENTARIES OF C. JULIUS CAESAR, Of his Wars in GALLIA, and the Civil
Wars betwixt him and POMPEY, Translated into English: With Many excellent and
judicious OBSERVATIONS Thereupon: As also The Art of our Modern Training, or,
Tactick Practice; By CLEMENT EDMONDS Esquire, Remembrancer of the City of
LONDON.

Whereunto is adjoined The EIGHTH COMMENTARY of the Wars in GALLIA; With some
short Observations upon it.

Together with The LIFE of CAESAR, and an Account of his MEDALLS. Revised,
Corrected, and Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed by R. DANIEL, and are to be sold by Henry Tvvyford in
Vine-Court Middle Temple, Nathaniel Ekins at the Gunne in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and John Place at Furnivalls Inn Gate in Holburn. 1655.

TO THE PRINCE.
SIR:
HAving ended this task of Observations, and according to your gracious
pleasure and command, supplied such parts as were wanting to make up the Total
of these Commentaries: it does return again, by the lowest steps of
humbleness, to implore the high patronage of your Princely favor; emboldened
specially because it carries Caesar and his Fortunes, as they come related
from the same Author: (...).
which, in the deep Judgment of his most excellent Majesty, is preferred above
all other profane histories; and so commended, by his sacred Authority, to your
reading, as a chief pattern and Masterpiece of the Art of war. And herein your
admired wisdom may happily the rather deem it capable of freer passage, in
that it is not altogether unproper for these happy days; as knowing, that War
is never so well handled, as when it is made an Argument of discourse in times
of sweet and plenteous peace. The blessings whereof may ever crown your years;
as the sovereign good of this temporary life, and the chiefest Ornaments of
Princely condition.

The humblest of your Highness servants, CLEMENT EDMONDS.

In CLEMENTIS EDMONDI De re militari ad JUL. CAESARIS Commentarios
Observationes.
CUr creperos motus, and aperto praelia Mart
Edmondus nobis pace vigente refert?
Cur sensus mentesque Ducum rimatur, and effert*
Diserteque Anglos bellica multa docet?
Scilicet, ut media meditetur praelia pace
Anglia belli potens, nec moriatur honos.
Providus haec certe patriae depromit in usus;
Ut patriae pacem qui cupit, arma parat.
Guil. Camdenus, Cl.

To my friend, Master CLEMENT EDMONDS.
WHo thus extracts, with more then Chymick Art,
The spirit of Books, shows the true way to find
The Elixer that our leaden Parts convert
Into the golden Metal of the Mind.
Who thus observes in such material kind
The certain Motions of his Practices,
Knows on what Center the Actions of Mankind
Turn in their course, and sees their fatalness.
And he that can make these observances,
Must be above his Book, more then his Pen.
For, we may be assured, he men can guess,
That thus does CAESAR know, the Man of men.
Whose Work, improved here to our greater gain,
Makes CAESAR more then CAESAR to contain.
Sam. Daniel.

To his worthy friend, Master CLEMENT EDMONDS.
OBserving well what Thou have well Observed
In CAESAR'S Works, his Wars, and Discipline;
Whether His Pen has earned more Praise, or Thine,
My shallow Censure doubtfully has swerved.
If strange it were, if wonder it deserved,
That what He wrought so fair, He wrote so fine;
Me thinks, it is stranger, that Thy learned Line
Should our best Leaders lead, not having served.
But hereby (Clement) have Thou made thee known
Able to counsel, aptest to record
The Conquests of a CAESAR of our own;
HENRY, thy Patron, and my Princely Lord.
Whom (O!) Heaven prosper, and protect from harms,
In glorious Peace, and in victorious Arms.
JOSUAH SILVESTER.

TO MY FRIEND, MASTER CLEMENT EDMONDS. Epigramme.
NOt Caesar's deeds, nor all his honors won
In these West-parts; nor, when that war was done,
The name of Pompey for an Enemy;
Cato to boot; Rome, and her liberty;
All yielding to his fortune: nor, the while,
To have ingrav'd these Acts with his own style;
And that so strong, and deep, as might be thought
He wrote with the same spirit that he fought;
Nor that his Work lived, in the hands of foes,
Un-argu'd then; and (yet) has fame from those:
Not all these, Edmonds, or what else put to,
Can so speak Caesar, as thy Labors do.
For, where his person lived scarce one just age,
And that 'midst envy' and Parts; then, fell by rage;
His deeds too dying, save in books: (whose good
How few have read! how fewer understood!)
Thy learned hand, and true Promethean Art,
As by a new creation, part by part,
In every counsel, stratageme, design,
Action, or Engine, worth a note of thine,
TO all future time not only does restore
His Life, but makes that he can dye no more.
Ben. Johnson.

Another, of the same.
WHo, Edmonds, reads thy book, and does not see
What the antique Soldiers were, the modern be?
Wherein thou show, how much the later are
Beholden to this Master of the War:
And that in Action there is nothing new,
More then to vary what our Elders knew.
Which all but ignorant Captains will confess:
Not to give Caesar this, makes ours the less.
Yet thou, perhaps, shall meet some tongues will grutch
That to the world thou should reveal so much;
And thence deprave thee, and thy Work. To those
Caesar stands up, as from his urne late rose
By thy great Art; and does proclaim by me,
They murder him again, that envy thee.
Ben. Johnson.

CAIUS JULIUS CAESAR DICTATOR PERPETUUS AETATIS SUAE LVI.



CAESARIS ELOGIVM. C. JULIUS CAESAR.
Lucii Caesaris F. Lux Caesarum and Pater,
Romanus Alexander, Terrae Mars:
Omnibus tam metuendus, quam mitis;
Pretium fecit servituti.
Victo orb Vrbem victricem orbis vicit.
Defuere illi hosts, hostem habuit Patriam,
Ne deesset unquam quod vinceret.
Ingratam Patriam patriis armis puniit.
Eam vicit invitus, qua vixit invita.
Qui Romae propugnator non regnavit, regnavit expugnator:
Pro Roma triumpharat, de Roma triumphavit:
Amavit tamen inimicam, nolenti profuit.
Saepe a fulmine lauro servatus regia,
Quem inermem timuerunt arma, armata necavit toga.
Cessit Civibus Caesar Caesus:
Sero cognitum luxit Patria;
Viventem hostem, mortuum vocavit Patrem,
Parricidium confessa cum patrem dixit.
Disce lector:
Melius saepe quae non habes vides, quam quae habes.
THE LIFE OF C. JULIUS CAESAR; with certain Historical Observations upon his
Medalls.
THe excessive Luster of a million of gallant achievements successefully
performed by Caesar (the most illustrious and celebrated Favorite of Fortune)
has through all ages so dazzled the greatest part of Mankind, especially
those, both ancient and modern, who made it their business to describe the
great transactions either of their own, or former ages; that they have not
only paralleled him with the greatest Heroes of the first ages, but have
balanced him with Alexander, the most generous and the most grlorious of all
Monarchs. Nay in their account Caesar far outweighs him, since that all that
may be called great or illustrious, either as to Virtue, Valor, true
Magnanimity, or Clemency, is more conspicuous in him then in all the Roman
Emperors, who after him sat at the helm of that Monarchy. Those who made
difficulty to assign him the first place among the Roman Emperors, considered
not certainly that the designation of a building is the Masterpiece of the
Architect, and that superstruction may require no eminency of perfection. For
having consummated those innumerable Trophies he had erected among the Galls by
those about Pharsalia, he laid the foundation of that eternal fame the world
has deservedly honored him with since: nay, to that height of adoration had
he raised the minds of Posterity, that his very Successors thought it their
greatest glory to wear the livery of his Name, and after him to be called
Caesar's.

To offer at a perfect anatomy of this great man's actions, were to quote most
Authors and writers that have been, and consequently a work of too long a
breath. It shall therefore suffice to trace him out in those great designs
whereby he laid the foundations of the Roman greatness.

The first thing worthy, not only notice, but admiration, is the strange
judgment of Sylla of him: who reflecting on the great perfections of Caesar
when yet a youth, and the strange vivacity and conduct of his first actions,
made that inhumane proposition that he might be killed, as he had caused diverse
of the Kindred and party of Marius, who had married Iulia an Aunt of Caesar's by
the mother side. Nor does Envy want pretenses, since as he conjectured, one
Caesar contained many Marius's, and should, if suffered to live; prove the
Viper of the Commonwealth. But this may be easily passed by, since that they
are indeed the greatest actions that must expect Censure. But it must in the
mean time denote a strange transcendency of courage and confidence, to think to
conquer that people who had conquered the Universe, it must be the effect of an
ambition more then humane, for this is commonly fettered to probabilities. The
Emperor Julian, though he has made it his business to satyrize against his
predecessors, yet having to do with Caesar, he by a strange fiction discovers
the greatness of his designations. Caesar, says he, a person of a gallant and
graceful presence, being entered the place, where Romulus was to entertain the
Gods, and Roman Emperors at the Saturnalian feasts, came in with such an
insolent deportment, that the Gods were of opinion, he was not come thither
unless it were to manage some ambitious plots against the Majesty of Heaven,
whereof Jupiter being very jealous, he was thrust by, till at last Mars and
Venus made him place. The ingenuity of this Satyrist amounts only to thus
much, to paint ever that great Virtue, that great indulgence of Nature, and
Fortune in the colors of an insatiable ambition, which had not this Censor
been excessively guilty of, might have proved somewhat.

But the endowments of Nature, the constant presence of Fortune, and the
surprising Glory consequentiall to his Actions, were the Genius's that raised
him to such high adventures, as the sudden change of the Democraticall State of
Rome into a Monarchical, to pretend a title to the great acquests of a
valorous people for 700. years, and to assume to himself an Empire far greater
then the Assyrian, Persian, or Macedonian, both in extent of time greatness
and power. For not to descend to the acquisitions of the later Emperors, we
shall only take a view of the Roman Empire as it stood, before Caesar seized
the raines of Government. In Europe they were Masters of all Italy and Gallia
Cisalphina, or Lombardy, Austria, and Illiricum now called Slavonia, reaching
as far as Danubius; They had reduced all Greece, the States of Athens,
Lacedemonia, Thebes, Corinth, and all Peloponesus now called Morea; Macedon,
and Epire now called Albania, and Thrace. They had the Islands of Sicily,
Sardynia, Creeta, Candia, Cypres, Rhodes, and Negrepont, and diverse others in
the Mediterranean Sea. They had taken in all Spain, and (which was Caesar's own
work) all France that part of Germany lying on the Rhine, called Gallia
Belgica, and great Britain. They were Masters of all Africa, (the third part of
the world then) even to pull down the pride of Carthage. The best Provinces of
Asia were Tributaries, as Syria, Phoenicia, Palestina, Iudaea, Phrygia, Caria
Cilicia and Bithynia. Egypt and Cappadocia were confederates. In Armenia and
Colchos they had forces. Albania Iberia and some other Countries paid
Contributions and did homage. In fine they were so great that they were
unconquerable unless by their own strength, that so they might have this
satisfaction and glory in their conquest, that they triumphed over themselves.

It is easy to attribute to ambition and discord what is the design of Fate.
Greatness must expect a period, and to be successful presumes a happy
conjuncture of men and affairs. Some differences there were between Caesar and
Pompey (the most eminent and the most powerful in Rome) raked up in the embers
of the civil war between Sylla and Marius, wherein the later being slain,
the other made himself Dictator, and seized Rome, but quitted both before his
death. Pompey had sided with Sylla, Caesar with Marius, as being his Kinsman.
But to ascend a little higher in these Broiles, we are to note that Sylla
having dispower'd himself, Pompey and Crassus came into repute. The later was
the more recommended by his wisdom, eloquence, Nobility and excessive riches;
the other had gained the popular esteem by his Victories and great actions in
war, even in Sylla's time. While the differences of these two increased with
their greatness, Caesar returns to Rome from his Praetorship in Spain,
bringing that reputation with him, that swelled the greatness and ambition of
his thoughts. He had gone through most charges Civil and Military; he had been
Quaestor, Tribune of the Soldiers, Aedile, High Priest and Praetor. All which,
with other accomplishments he was furnished with, which we shall mention
elsewhere, though they brought him into much esteem, yet was he not yet arrived
to near the Authority and reputation of either Crassus or Pompey.

Caesar, though he were come to Rome, yet stifled all thoughts of aspiring for
a while: so that both Crassus and Pompey applied themselves to him, hoping by
his accession to ruin one the other. But Caesar declined both, and carried
himself with circumspection, that he endeavored to reconcile them, so hoping
by his new trality to undermine them both, which was, as Plutarch says,
observed only by Cato. At length he so ordered things, that he made an
agreement between them, and so obliged both; which caused that, retaining some
jealousies of each other, they equally courted Caesar's friendship, by which
means he became equal to either: so that the power which before was between
two, became now tripartite. Things being thus appeased, Caesar demands the
Consulship: which obtained, he carried himself in it with that reputation, that
his Co-Consul Bibulus left all to his managery. To maintain the authority he
had got, he himself took to wife Calpurnia the daughter of Lucius Piso, who was
to succeed him in the Consulate, and bestows his own Daughter Iulia on Pompey;
and so taking in Crassus, they make a League, and being equally ambitious
conspire to invade the Commonwealth. Caesar chooses for his Province the Galls,
or France; Crassus, Asia; Pompey, Spain; whither they went with three puissant
Armies, as if the world had been to be trichotomiz'd among these three. What
Caesar did in his Province, what Battles he fought, what people he subdued,
what valor, policy, success followed him every where, may be seen in his own
Commentaries of that war, approved by his very enemies as modest and
impartial, and attested by Cicero, Plutarch, Suetonius, Appianus Alexandrinus,
Lucan, Paulus Orosius, Florus, Eutropius; too great a testimony against one
censorious Asinius Pollio. By this war Caesar got the reputation of the
greatest Captain that ever was, subduing all France from the Pyrenean hills to
the Alps, and so to the Rhene. But to forbear particular instances, as that he
conquered the Suissers and Tigurins (who were according to Plutarch 300000.
men, whereof 19000. were well disciplined) this is most worth our remark, that
during these so great wars, he omitted not, both by intelligence and
presents, to endear his friends both at Rome and elsewhere, doing many things
without the Senate's leave, upon the score of the League with Pompey and
Crassus. Nay, his courting of all sorts of people, both Soldier and Citizen,
was none of his least masterpieces, by which means he had supplanted Pompey in
matter of esteem, before he perceived it. To this purpose has Pliny observed,
Lib. 33. cap. 3. that in the time of his Aedility, that is to say his
Shrievedome, he was so prodigal, that all the Vtensills and arms that he made
use of at public sports and combats, were all of silver, which yet afterward
were bestowed among the people; and that he was the first that ever brought
forth the beasts in chariots and cages of silver. This it was made some suspect
him guilty of rapine, and that he plundered Temples and Cities saepius ob
praedam quam ob delictum.

But this reputation of Caesar begat jealousy in Pompey, which (the tie of
their correspondence being loosed by the death of Iulia) was easily seen to
break forth into a flame, especially now that Crassus, the third man, was
together with diverse stout Roman Legions buried with infamy in Parthia. Thus
the foundations of Friendship and Alliance in great ones being once taken away,
the superstructures fall down immediately. Nothing could decide the emulation
of two so great persons, as Pompey and Caesar, (the one defying superiority,
the other equality) but as great a war. It could not but be universal, when
Senate, Armies, Kingdoms, Cities, Allies, all were some way or other embarked
in the quarrel. There was on one side 11. Legions, on the other 18. The seat
of the war was Italy, France, Epirus, Thessaly, Egypt, Asia and Africa;
through all which after it had ravaged 5. years, the controversy was decided
in Spain. That Ambition (the imperfection only of the greatest minds) might
have been the occasion of so inveterate a war, has been the opinion of
diverse others, who charge not Pompey with so great discoveries of it as Caesar,
to whom they assign a greater then the Empire; as if their mutual distrust and
jealousy of one another, should be able to cause so many tragedies through so
many Countries. Besides Caesar had his Enemies at Rome, and among others Cato,
who threatened to impeach him when he was once out of command. What bandying
there was against him, we find somewhat in the later end of the eighth
Commentary, to this purpose. Lentulus and Marcellus, both of Pompey's Faction,
being Consuls, it is moved in the Senate, that Caesar might be called home, and
another sent to supply his command of the Army then in Gallia; since that he,
having written for the Consulship, should according to Law have been personally
in Rome. Caesar demands to be continued in Commission and Government, and that
he might demand the Consulship absent. This Pompey opposes, though he himself
as much contrary to Law, had had the Consulship and other dignities before he
was at full Age.

This denied, Caesar proposes, that he would come to Rome as a private man, and
give over his command, so that Pompey quitted his employment in Spain. About
this the Senate was much divided. Cicero proposes a mediation: but Pompey's
party prevailing, it was decreed that Caesar should by a certain time quit his
command, and should not pass his Army over the River Rubicon, which bounded
his Province; declaring him an enemy to the Roman State in case of refusal. C.
Curio and M. Antonius the Tribunes of the people, out of their affection to
Caesar, endeavoring to oppose this decree, were thrust disgracefully out of
the Senate, which occasioned them to repair to Caesar; whereby they endeared
the affections of the Soldiery to him, the office of the Tribunes being ever
held sacred and unviolable.

Caesar understanding how things stood at Rome, marches with 5000. foot and
300. Horse to Ravenna, having commanded the Legions to follow. Coming to the
fatal passage of Rubicon, he entered into a deep deliberation, considering the
importance, and miseries that might ensue that passage. At last in the midst of
his anxiety, he was animated to a prosecution of his designs, by the
apparition of a man of an extraordinary stature and shape, sitting near unto
his army, piping upon a reed. The Soldiers went down to the River side to
hear him, and approached so near, that he caught one of their trumpets, and
leaping into the River, began with a mighty blast to sound, and so went to the
bank of the other side. This resolves Caesar, who cried out, Let us go whither
the Gods, and the injurious dealings of our enemies call us. With which he set
spurs to his horse, and past the River, the army following. Who would be more
particularly informed, may be satisfied out of Appianus Alexandrinus,
Suetonius, Plutarch, in the lives of Caesar, Cato, and Cicero, St. Augustine l.
3. de c. d. Caesar himself in his Commentaries, Florus, Livy, Paulus Orosius,
Eutropius, Lucan, Pliny de viris illustribus, Valerius Maximus, etc.

Having passed the River, and drawn the Army together, the Tribunes came to him
in those dishonorable garments wherein they had fled from Rome. Whereupon he
made an excellent oration to the Soldiery, opening to them his cause: which
was answered with general acclamations, and promises of duty and obedience to
all commands.

This done he seizes Ariminum, and diverse other Towns and Castles as he past,
till he came to Corfinium: where Domitius, who was to succeed him in his
command, was garrisoned with 30. Cohorts.

Caesar's advance and intentions astonished Rome, Senate and people; nay, so
surpised Pompey, that he could not believe Caesar would thrust himself into so
much danger, or that his forces were so considerable. But though Pompey was
empowered by the Senate to levy forces, recall the Legions, and provide for the
defense of Italy, yet all could make nothing against Caesar. The rumor of his
advance spreading, Pompey and the Senate leave Rome, and repair to Capua, from
thence to Brundusium; from whence the Consuls were dispatched to Dyrrachium, to
unite what forces they could, since they despaired of resisting Caesar in
Italy: who hearing the Consuls and Pompey were at Brundusium, marched thither,
and having invested the Town, Pompey in the night time embarques for
Dyrrhachium, where the Consul expected him: so that Caesar became absolute
Master of Italy. Having not shipping to pursue him, he resolved for Spain,
which held for Pompey, where his best Legions were, and two Captains, Petreius
and Afranius.

Returning from Brundusium, he in 60. days mastered all Italy without any
bloodshed, and coming to Rome, the memory of the devastations of Sylla's days
frightened the people extremely. But Caesar's clemency, and his attributing the
cause of all the distractions to Pompey, quieted all things. He so far
justified his own Cause, that he moved that Ambassadors might be sent to Pompey
for peace, and causing himself to be chosen Consul, he opened the Roman
Treasury, and made a divided of it among the Soldiery. This done, he provides
for Spain, having taken care for the civil as well as military government.
Brundusium, Otranto, and other maritime places he fortifies against Pompey's
entering into Italy, in case he should attempt it. Hortensius and Dolabella were
to provide shipping for him at Brundusium against his return. Quintus Valerius
he sends with a Legion into Sardinia against Marcus Cotta, who held it for
Pompey. To Sicily he sends Curious against Marcus Cato: which when he had taken
in, he was to march into Africa. He leaves Lepidus to govern at Rome, and
Antonius for all Italy. Thus intending to leave Licinius Crassus in France he
with his wonted celerity went on his journey, meeting with no resistance, but
at Marseilles; which leaving D. Brutus, and C. Trebonius with sufficient forces
to besiege, he went forward toward Spain, where he was expected by Petreius
and Afranius: with whom, though he met with the inconveniences of the Winter
and high Rivers, he had diverse skirmishes; yet at length he carried his
business so, that the enemies were forced by hunger to a composition, the
Legions and Captains, such as would not remain with Caesar, having leave to
depart whither they pleased.

The spring now coming on, (to leave nothing unsubdu'd) he marches into
Baetica, now called Andaluzia, where quartered Marcus Varro, with one Legion of
Soldiers, as Pompey's Lieutenant; who, conceiving himself unable to make
opposition, resigned both the Country and Legion to Caesar, whereby all was
quieted.

Thence he marched to Cordova, where assembling the estates of the Provinces,
he acknowledged their affection and devoirs, and so went to Cales; where he
took such ships and Galleys as Marcus Varro had there, with what others he
could get, and embarked. Having left Q. Cassius which four Legions in that
Province he marches to Narbona and so to Marseilles, which having suffered
great miseries during the siege, at length, surrendered, yet he protected it
from any violence, preferring the consideration of the antiquity of the place,
before the affronts he had received from it, and so having sufficiently
garrisoned it, he marches into Italy and so to Rome, all things succeeding
Prosperously to him, though not so to his Captains. For Antonius (who was joint
General at sea with Dolabella) was over thrown and taken Prisoner by Octavius,
Pompey's Lieutenant, in the gulf Venice and that by a strange stratagem.
Antonius being forced for want of ships to put his men into long boats, the
Pompeians tied ropes under the water, by which means one of them which carried
a thousand Opitergins, stout young men, was surpised and assaulted by the
whole Army, yet making resistance from morning till night, they at last seeing
all their forts ineffectuall did by the instigation of their Commander
Vulteius, kill one another. Dolabella was also overcome, as also Curious, who
was ordered to go into Africa, was overthrown by Pompey's friend Iuba, King of
Mauritania.

While Caesar was at Rome busy in causing himself to be made Dictator, and then
putting off that Consul, that so he might send Praetors into the Provinces, as
Marcus Lepidus into Spain, A. Albinus into Sicily, Sextus Peduceius into
Sardinia, and Decius Brutus into France, and taking such further order as he
thought fit; Pompey was as busy in Macedonia, raising of men and money and
providing ships in order to his return into Italy. What his forces might amount
unto, may be judged from the almost infinite assistances came in to him from
diverse Kingdoms and Provinces of Asia and Greece, from Syria, Pontus,
Bithynia, Cilicia, Phoenicia, Cappadocia, Pamphilia, Armenia the less, Egypt,
Greece, Thessaly, Boeotia, Achaia, Epire, Athens, Lacedaemonia, the Isles of
Creta and Rhodes and diverse other places, there coming to his assistance in
person the Kings Deiotarus and Ariobarzanes. These certainly, with those he had
brought with him out of Italy, must needs make up a vast Army by land, nor
could the number of ships and Gallyes but be proportionable. However Caesar
knowing all this, leaves Rome in December, and so marches to Brundusium, whence
he was to embarque for Macedonia, out of this consideration, that his Victory
consisted in expedition, though Pompey in the mean time upon intelligence of
Caesar's being at Rome, had scattered his people into Macedonia and Thessaly,
conceiving the inconveniences of the winter would have deferred him from
crossing the Seas. But Caesar being come to Brundusium, (now called Brindez,)
he embarques seven Legions of his choicest men in the beginning of January,
leaving order to those that were coming to make have and join with those which
remained behind, all whom he would speedily send for.

Three days after he arrives upon the coast of Macedonia, before Pompey had so
much as heard of his embarquing, and lands in Spite of Pompeys Captains, and
presently commands the ships to return for the remainder of his Army, which
done he takes it by storm Apollonia, (now called Bellona) and Oricum, two
Cities kept by L. Torquatus and L. Straberius, for Pompey; who alarmed by this,
sends for such troops as were nearest, and marches to Dyrrachium, where all his
Ammunition and Provision lay, to secure it from being surpised by Caesar:
which indeed he had attempted, but, by reason of the natural strength of the
place, to no purpose.

Pompey being come, both Armies lodged not many furlongs from one another,
only they were divided by a River. Which post as it gave occasion of diverse
skirmishes, so it begat many overtures of Peace from Caesar; which Pompey,
presuming upon his strength, would not hear of. This proposition of Caesar's,
though it proceeded from his meekness, which was not the least of his virtues;
yet argued some conscience of his own weakness at this time. For he was
extremely perplexed, that the other part of his Army was not come, in so much
that he embarked in a Brigandine disguized to fetch them. Having passed down
the River, the sea was so tempestuous, that the master of the vessel would not
adventure out: whereupon, as it is said, Caesar discovered himself, and said to
him, Friend, thou carriest Caesar and his fortune. Whereat the master being
encouraged, ventured out into the sea, but the Tempest was so violent, that it
brought Caesar back again. This action of his was like to have raised a mutiny
in his Army, as a thing which though it spoke courage, yet was a stranger to
discretion: which it may be is the reason that Caesar has made no mention of
it in his Commentaries.

But some few days after Antonius arrives with four Legions of the remaining
part of the Army, and sends back the ships for the rest. These joining with
Caesar, there past diverse skirmishes and pickeerings (being so nearly lodged)
between both Armies: but that which was most remarkable was near the City of
Dyrrachium, wherein Caesar's Troops were so routed, that no threats or
entreaties could stay them from running to their Camp; which though fortified,
yet was abandoned by some. Pompey in the mean time, either out of fear that the
slight might be feigned, and in order to some ambush, or that he thought Caesar
sufficiently conquered, does not prosecute the victory. Which weakness in him
Caesar dissembled not, when afterward he said to his men, that that day had
ended the war, if the enemy had had a Captain that knew how to overcome. But
Caesar, as no Prosperity disordered him, so in Adversity he had a courage and
such a confidence of Fortune that he was nothing cast down. He lost in that
engagement, besides the Common-Souldiery, 400 Roman Knights, 10 Tribunes, and
32 Centurions, with as many Colors. This success obtained, Pompey sends the
news of it into all parts of the world, so advantageously to himself, as if
Caesar were utterly routed; who though he did not decline fighting, yet thought
it not policy to engage his men lately worsted (though indeed exasperated with
shame and indignation at their loss) with those that were animated and fleshed
with a victory. He therefore disposes his maimed men into Apollonia, and in the
night takes his way toward Thessaly: both to hearten and refresh his Army, as
also to draw the enemy further from the Seacoast, where his main force and all
his provisions lay; or at least to meet with Scipio, who, he had intelligence,
was to join with Pompey.

This unexpected departure of Caesar's brought Pompey almost to a Resolution to
return into Italy, to recover that, with France and Spain, and afterward to
meet with Caesar. But the Roman Lords that were about him (a sort of proud,
insolent, indisciplinable people, who indeed proved his ruin) dissuaded him,
and caused him to alter his design: and so he fell upon the hot pursuit of
Caesar, who, making a stay in the fields of Pharsalia till that his men had
reassumed their courage and resolution, was now willing and eager to fight. But
Pompey perceiving this readiness of Caesar to proceed from want of Provision,
and a fear his Army should diminish, purposely avoided fighting, and would have
prolonged the war, and so have defeated his enemy without hazzarding his own
Army. But the murmurings, mutinyes, and importunity of those that were about
him had such a prevailing influence over him (as Plutarch, Lucan, and Caesar
himself acknowledges) that they forced him contrary to his intentions and
policy, to give Battle; which was such, that all the flower and force of Rome
was engaged in it. Caesar's Army (according to the computation of most writers)
amounted to half Pompey's: but in compensation, his men were more active, and
versed in war, and knew their advantages; whereas the other's was a
tumultuary sort of people raked together, (besides what Romans he had.) The
exact number of both these Armies is not agreed on by Authors: some raise them
to 300000. of which opinion was Florus; others bring them down to 70000. But if
we agree with Appianus, we must conceive, that so many countries and nations
having sent in their assistances on either side, there must needs be vast
Armies on both sides: and therefore those who pitched upon the lesser number,
meant only the number of Romans, who were the maine force and hope of both
Generals. But here we may make a strange remark upon the uncertain events of
war. We have two of the greatest Captains that ever were, the stoutest Armies
that ever met, such as experience, force, and valor was equally divided
between, and, to be short, the most exasperated parties that could be, and yet
it proved but a very short sight: so weak is the confidence and assurance that
is only placed in number. We may further note the strange influence of
Religion upon Mankind in general, in that it enforces man in the greatest
exigencies to consultation: for Pompey met with diverse things that might
somewhat have informed him of the success of that famous Battle; The running
away of the beasts destined for Sacrifice, the swarming of bees, the sky
darkened, and his own fatal dream of being in mourning in the Theater, seconded
by his appearance in the head of his main Battle the next day in a black robe,
which might signify he mourned for the liberty of Rome beforehand.

Being both resolved to give Battle, they put their Armies in such order as
they thought fit, and harangued their Soldiers according to their several
pretenses. In the beginning, Pompey's horse, consisting most of the Roman
Gentry and Nobility, prevailed over Caesar's, and made them give ground: which
he perceiving, causes a Battalion, set apart for that purpose, to charge them;
with order to aim altogether at the face: which Pompey's horse not able, or
not willing to endure, began to retreat, and so made way for the total
overthrow; by which means the foot being discouraged, and seeing Caesar's horse
falling on, the Victory was soon decided on Caesar's side, Pompey flying to his
camp, and leaving the field to his adversary. Here was the greatest misfortune
of Pompey, to outlive the Liberty of his Country (which he pretended so much
to fight for) and his own glory in this Battle, being forced to a
dishonorable flight, and to deliberate whither he should retire, whether into
Parthia, Africa, or Egypt.

Caesar being thus Master of the field, and meeting with no opposition, falls
upon Pompey's camp, which, without any great difficulty, he entered. Whereupon
Pompey disguizing himself, takes up the first horse he met, and with four more
(his own Son Sextus Pompeius, the two Lentuli, and Favonius) makes his escape,
and stays not till he came to Larissa: where meeting with some of his own
horse, who were in the same condition of running away, he continued his flight
till he came to the shore of the Aegaean Sea; where meeting accidentally with a
certain Merchants ship of Rome, he embarques himself in her, and sails to
Mitylene, where his wife and family were. Having taken them with him, and got
together what men and ships a shattered fortune could furnish him with, he
departed thence in very great doubt and perplexity, not able to resolve whither
to dispose of himself. He was advised by some to march into Africa, and shelter
himself with Iuba, whose friendship and affection toward him he had received
testimony of but very lately; others were of opinion, his best course was to
retire among the Parthians: but at last, by his own wilfulness, it was voted
he should go into Egypt; which he was the more inclined to, out of a
consideration of the friendship and correspondence which he had had with King
Ptolemey, father to him who then reigned: and so touching at Cyprus, he sails
toward Egypt, and arrives at Alexandria.

Thus was the controversy for no less then the known world decided in one day,
Caesar being Master of the field and Victory. Of Pompey's side there were slain
fifteen thousand, if you will take it upon Caesar's credit, and of his own not
two thousand. Caesar having intelligence of Pompey's flight, pursues him
without any stay with the swiftest and lightest of his Army, so to give him as
little breath as he could afford, that he might not meet with any means or
opportunity to recover or repair himself. Reducing all Cities as he passed, he
comes to the Sea side, and taking up all the ships and galleys he could meet
with, and such as Cassius (who was received into his favor) could furnish him
with, he embarques such troops as he could, and passed into Asia the less:
where understanding that Pompey had been at Cyprus, he easily presumed that he
was gone for Egypt. He thereupon resolves to take the same course, and taking
with him only two Legions of his old Soldiers, he safely arrives at
Alexandria: where he soon understood that Pompey was arrived, upon a confidence
(as was said before) there might have remained some sense and memory in young
Ptolemey, of the entertainment and favors he had done his Father. But he was
as much mistaken in this, as he had been eluded by Fotune in the war: for he
finds that the friendship of great men and Princes seldom outlives their
prosperity, and that adversity makes them the greatest strangers that may be.
Being by this King Ptolemey invited into Protection, and upon that confidence
coming toward the shore in a small Boat, he was, ere he could reach the land,
murdered, by the same Kings commandment, by Septimius and Achillas, who thought
by that means to purchase Caesar's favor. This was done by the contrivance of
Photinus an Eunuch, whose authority both with King and Court was very great.
Caesar receives also news, that Cornelia, Pompey's wife, and his Son Sextus
Pompeius, were fled from that port in the same vessel wherein they came. Being
landed and received into the City, he was soon presented with the head of the
great Pompey; which out of a consideration of the horridness of the fact, he
would not by any means see. His Ring also and his Seal, with his Coat of Arms
upon it, were presented to him: which causing him to reflect on the great
successes, adventures and prosperities of that great and glorious man (besides
that he was to look on him as his Son in Law) it drew tears from him, to
compare them with his unfortunate end. Thus is he who had three times
triumphed, been so many times Consul, been the most eminent and the most
concerned person that Rome had for so many years together, one who had been
acquainted with all the dignities so great a Commonwealth could confer upon
a deserving Citizen, most inhumanely and perfidiously assassinated, to the
greatest regret of him who was looked on as most desirous of it. This in the
mean time concludes that opinion erroneous, that Caesar was so extremely
overjoyed at the news of Pompey's death, that he caused upon that very place
where he had ordered his head to be interred, a Temple to be built to the
Goddess Nemesis; which some interpret a most unnatural revengefulnesse, a
horrid insultation over a clamitous virtue, and a profanation of divine
worship, to abuse the name of a Goddess for to immortalize the memory of his
vengeance, and to authorize the injustice of it. But it is as easy to give the
title of barbarism and cruelty to magnanimity and height of courage, as to say
the contrary: and therefore Caesar certainly could not be guilty of so great an
Hypocrisy, as to shed tears over his enemy's head, when he was inwardly
surpised with joy.

Caesar upon his arrival into Egypt finds it embroiled in civil wars,
arising from some differences between young Ptolemey and his sister Cleopatra,
about the division and inheritance of the Kingdom, wherein Caesar (as Consul
of Rome) thought sit to be a mediator. Photinus and Achillas, the plotters and
practicers of Pompey's death, fearing from Caesar a reward of vengeance
proportioned to so horrid a crime, and perceiving his inclination to favor
Cleopatra, take such order, by their great influence over King and Court, that
they brought what Army the King had near the City, which consisted of about
20000. able men: and this they did out of a design to entrap Caesar, and act
the same perfidious butchery upon him, as they had done upon Pompey. By this
means there began between what forces Caesar had brought with him, and those of
the Egyptians within and about the City, as also between the ships and galleys
in harbor, the hotest disputes and sharpest encounters he ever met with: which
we shall not particularize here, because it is the proper work of a complete
history. One thing our observation cannot balk in these hot and occasional
engagements, that Caesar himself was personally engaged in most disputes, both
within the City, and among the ships, and that to the great hazard of his
person; as may appear by that one adventure, when he was forced to leap out of
the Boat wherein he was, into the Sea, and by swimming to recover one of his
galleys: and being in this great extremity (if you will believe Suetonius,) he
carried his Commentaries in one hand above the water, and his robe in his
teeth, that it might not fall into the enemies hands. In these conflicts were
there nine months spent: at which time Caesar receiving his forces out of Asia,
made an end of the controversy, with the same attendance of Fortune and Victory
which had waited on him every where else. Had Caesar been acquainted with no
war but this, he might justly challenge the title of the greatest Captain in
the world, so much personal valor, wisdom, conduct, circumspection and
policy did he express in all passages thereof, though encompassed with all the
inconveniences and disadvantages imaginable.

Egypt being thus quieted, the murderers of Pompey punished, and Cleopatra
(by whom Caesar had a Son called Caesario) established Queen, Caesar takes his
march toward Asia through Syria, having received intelligence, that, while he
was engaged in the wars of Egypt, King Pharnaces, the Son of the mighty
Mithridates, taking his advantage of the dissensions among the Romans,
entertained some hopes of recovering what his Father had lost; having in order
thereto overthrown Domitius, whom Caesar had left Governor in those parts, and
taken in by force the Provinces of Bithynia and Cappadocia, expelling thence
Ariobarzanes, a friend and subject to Rome. The like he intended to have done
with Armenia the less, which King Dejotarus had made subject to the Romans.
But Caesar coming upon Pharnaces before he expected him, they in a few days
came to a Battle, which in a few hours was dispatched, to the overthrow of the
King, and the infinite slaughter of his people, which he himself escaped by
flight. This Victory gave Caesar more satisfaction then any of his former,
because of the great desire he had to return to Rome, where, he was informed,
many scandalls were spread, and insolences committed by the encouragement of
his absence. He had also understood that Pompey's eldest Son had seized a great
part of Spain, and, out of those that M. Varro had left there, and some
gleanings of his Father's troops, had gotten together some considerable force.
He also knew that most of the principal Romans who had escaped the Battle at
Pharsalia, were gathered together in Africa, and headed by M. Cato, (surnamed
Vticensis, for having killed himself at Vtica) and Scipio Pompey's
Father-in-Law; that they had a great part of Pompey's navy; that with the
assistance of Iuba King of Mauritania, they had subdued all that Country, and
had a great Army in readiness against Caesar, having chosen Scipio for their
General, because that name had been fortunate in Africa. Caesar, upon
intelligence of all these transactions, with his wonted celerity and diligence
recovers all that Pharnaces had usurped, and chasing him from Pontus regained
all those Countries, which he recommended to the government of Caelius
Minucius, with two Legions; where having reconciled differences, decided all
controversies, and settled all things, by rewarding and gratifying those Kings
and Tetrarchs who had continued firm to the Commonwealth and interest of Rome,
he made no longer abode in Asia, but passing with all expedition into Italy, he
came to Rome within a little more then a year after he had departed thence:
wherewith if we compare his great expeditions and adventures, it would prove
matter of faith and astonishment, to consider how such vast Armies should pass
through so many countries in so short a time.

Some few days after his coming to Rome he is created the third time Consul,
and, as far as time and the exigencies of his affairs permitted, studied the
reformation of what disorders there then were. For that his Enemies
beforementioned should be Masters of Africa, was a thing he could not easily
digest. Therefore with his ordinary expedition he marches thitherward, and
commands his forces to follow. He took shipping in Sicily, and so passed into
Africa, having no great force with him: however, such was his confidence of his
Fortune, that he staid not the arrival of either his Army or navy. Being
landed with his small forces near unto the City of Adrumetum, he marches unto
another called Leptis; where he was received, and where he took occasion by
some conflicts, to keep the enemy in action, so to divert them from augmenting
their forces. In fine, his Legions being arrived, he very earnestly set himself
to the prosecution of the war: in which, though it lasted but four Months,
(from the beginning of January to the end of April) there happened many
encounters and Battles. For having dispatched what work Petreius and Labienus
found him, he came to deal with Scipio and King Iuba, who had brought an
assistance of 8000. men, whereof one half were Cavalry, Africa at that time
being very abundant in horse, as may appear partly in that Caesar's enemies
had, among them, raised in that Country, besides eight Legions of foot, 20000.
horse. Hirtius, Plutarch, Lucan, and Florus have written at large of this
war, and tell you that Caesar was many times in very great danger as to his
own person, yet at last, by the assistance of his forces and the compliance of
his great Fortune, he put a period to that war by one signal Battle, wherein
there being slain of the Enemies side 10000. they were utterly defeated; Caesar
remained Master of the field, and shortly after of all the Country. The
principal Captains of the adverse party, though they escaped death at the
fight, died most of them miserably and unfortunately. King Iuba himself being
for want of refuge brought to that despair, that fighting with Afranius, and
killing him, he commanded one of his own slaves to dispatch himself. Marcus
Cato, being in Vtica, hearing of Caesar's approach, though confident not only
of his pardon, but his particular favor, yet either out of an indignation to
be obliged by his enemy, or an extravagant zeal to Liberty, laid violent hands
on himself. Cicero wrote a book in commendation of Cato, to justify that
action, which Caesar answered with another, which he called Anti-Cato, both
which are lost. The Ceremony of his death was very remarkable; for upon hearing
of the miscarriage of most of his partners, he embraces his Son and Friends,
and bids them good night, pretending to go to bed. Resting upon his bed, he
took into his hand Plato's book of the immortality of the Soul: wherein having
satisfied himself, he, about the relieving of the watch, with a Roman
resolution drew his sword, and ran himself into the Body. Being not quite
dispatched, Physicians came in and applied something to the wound, which he
suffered while they staid with him, but as soon as they were departed, he pulled
all off, and thrust his dying hand into the wound. Scipio, the General in this
war, having escaped, and shipped himself in certain Galleys, was met by
Caesar's navy; but to avoid being taken by them, he gave himself some wounds,
and leapt overboard, and so was drowned.

Caesar being by this means absolute Victor, spends some time in ordering the
Provinces of Africa: which done, and reducing Iuba's Kingdom into a Province,
he comes to Vtica, whence he embarked the third of June for Sardinia; where
having staid some few days, he arrives at Rome July 25. whither as soon as he
was come, there were granted unto him four Triumphs. The first was for his
conquest and Victories in France, wherein were set forth the Rivers of Rhodanus
and the Rhene wrought in gold. In the second, which was for Egypt and King
Ptolemey, were represented the River Nile, and the Pharos of Alexandria
burning. The third was for his Victory over King Pharnaces, wherein a certain
writing represented the celerity he used in the prosecution of that Victory,
which only contained three words, Veni, Vidi, Vici; I came, I saw, I overcame.
The fourth was for his reduction of Africa; wherein was placed Iuba's Son as a
captive. As for the Battle against Pompey, Caesar would not triumph for it,
because it was against Roman Citizens.

These triumphs ended, and great rewards scattered among the Soldiery, who had
been assistant in so great Transactions, the People being also entertained with
feasts, sports, and presents, Caesar is chosen the fourth time Consul. But
there yet remained some sword-work to do, for Gneius Pompeius, Great Pompey's
Son, had got together most of the remainder of the African Army, and was gone
into Spain to join with his Brother Sextus, who (as was hinted before) was
there, and had possessed himself of a great part of Spain, with the Cities of
Sevill and Cordova, the Spaniards being ready enough to come in to their
assistance. Caesar takes with him his most experienced veterane Soldiers, and
with extraordinary speed arrives in Spain within a few days, being accompanied
with his Nephew Octavius, who was about sixteen years of Age.

Being come into Baetica (now Andaluzia) where the two Pompeys were with such
Legions as they had got together, he soon began a hot and bloody war; whereof
to be short the issue was this. Caesar and Gneius (Sextus being in Cordova)
near Munda, join battle, which proves the sharpest and most obstinate that
ever was. It lasted almost a whole day, and that with such indifference as to
point of Victory, that it was adjudg'd sometimes to one side sometimes to
another. Suetonius and Eutropius tell us that Caesar one time, upon his men's
giving ground, was in such a plunge, that he was almost resolved to have killed
himself, so to have avoided the shame and dishonor of being conquered; and
that in that heat of indignation and despair he snatched a Target from one of
his Soldiers, saying with a loud voice (as Plutarch relates) If you are not
ashamed, leave me, or deliver me into the hands of these Boys, for this shall
be the last day of my life, and your honor. With which words the Soldiers
being animated and heightened by his example, regain their lost ground, turn,
by degrees, the scales of the Battle; and, toward the evening, the enemy
fainting and flying, become apparent Victors. The Enemy lost in this field
30000. men: Caesar, beside the common Soldiery, 1000. all persons of quality.
This did Caesar account the most glorious of all his Victories, (the
commemoration of hazzards and suffering being to some the greatest satisfaction
conceiveable,) for he would often say afterward, that at other times he fought
for Fame and Victory, but that that day he fought for his Life, which he had
never fought for before. Pompey, who had performed all that a wise and stout
captain could, persecuted by a malicious fortune, and seeing there was no other
remedy, escaped by flight: but being hopeless and refugelesse, he was at last
surpised by some of Caesar's friends, killed, and his head brought to him;
which was also the fate of Labienus. Sextus upon this quits Cordova, and
shortly after Spain, leaving all to Caesar, who in a short time reduced and
settled the whole Country. Which done, he returns to Rome, and triumphs for the
wars of Spain; which was his fifth and last triumph.

Having thus conquered the greatest part of the world, and by consequence
gained the reputation of the most famous and most powerful man in it, it was
at least a pardonable ambition, if he thought no title, name, or dignity too
great for him. It requires some faith to believe that such vast bodies as Roman
Armies, consisting of many Legions, could at an ordinary rate, march through so
many Countries, and cross so many Seas, had they had no enemy to engage: but
to conquer them transcends it, and must be attributed to Miracle; for within
less then five years, through infinite conquests and Victories, he
consummated the Roman Monarchy, making himself perpetual Dictator, Sovereign
Lord or Emperor. Which later title though it had not that height of
signification which his Successors have raised it to, yet was it the greatest
attribution of honor which that, or after-Ages have acknowledged.

But if his thoughts were so high, and his ambition so exorbitant as to deserve
a severe Censure, certainly it may prove so much the more excuseable, by how
much it was enflamed by the general acclamations and acknowledgments. For both
the Senate and peole of Rome, some out of fear, some out of affection, some
out of dissimulation, were forward enough to invent those appellations of
honor and preeminence, and afterward to elevate them to the height of his
ambitious mind. Hence was he called Emperor, Father, Restorer, and Preserver
of his Country; hence created perpetual Dictator, and Consul for ten years,
and perpetual Censor of their Customs; his Statue erected among the Kings of
Rome: hence he had his thrones and chaires of state in the Theater and Temples,
which, as also all public places, were filled with his pictures and images.
Nay, their adoration ascended to that point, that from these humane honors
they attributed to him divine; finding marble little enough for Temples and
Statues for him, (which were dedicated to him with the same veneration as to
their Gods) and metal little enough to represent his high and almost
incredible adventures.

But all the power and command of so many nations as he had conquered, was
inconsiderable as to the extent of his mind: whereby we may see what small
acquaintance there is between Ambition and Acquiescence. It was not sufficient
to have been personally engaged in fifty signal Battles, and to have laid
with their Bellies to the Sun a million ninety and odd thousand men, (abating
all those that fell in the Civil wars) but there yet remains something to do
greater then all this. The fierce Parthians break his sleep, they are yet
unconquered, which once done, it were easy, like lightning, to pass through
Hyrcania and other Countries to the Caspian Sea, and so scour the Provinces of
Scythia Asiatica, and so passing over the River Tanais, to come into Europe,
and bring in Germany and the bordering Provinces under the wings of the Roman
Eagle. In order to this expedition had he in sundry places raised 10000. horse
and 16. Legions of choice foot: but another greater power thought fit he should
leave some work for his successors.

Nay some things he aimed at beyond Man's attempt, correcting even nature it
self. As that design of making Peloponnesus an Island, by cutting of that neck
of Land which is between the Aegeaan and Ionian Seas. He thought to have
altered the courses of the Rivers Tiber and A^ien, and made them navigable for
ships of the greatest burden. He had begun to level diverse hills and
mountains in Italy, and to dry up Lakes and Fenns. He re-edified and re-peopled
the once famous Carthage and Corinth. These and many other things he had done
without doubt, had not an unexpected and barbarous death surpised him in the
midst of his designations. Which because it is the tragical part of this
Relation, we shall refer to the last place, while in the mean time we shall
divert our thoughts, with a short entertainment of his personal excellencyes
and endowments, his extraction, birth, Deification, and names; as we have
already satisfied our selves with the consideration of his Actions: and so
pass to that part of our undertaking, wherein we presume to promise the
curious and critical reader no less content then he has found in what he
has already reflected on, that is to say, the description and dilucidation of
what MEDALLS have been snatched out of the jaws of hungry Time, that have had
any relation to the great name of CAESAR.

CAesar was of a full and handsome composure of body, of a graceful carriage
and deportment, of a whitish complexion, his eyes were somewhat big, black,
quick and piercing, his nose straight and large enough, but his mouth was more
then ordinary wide, his cheeks lean. In his later days he became bald toward
the forepart of his head, and, through his continual hazzards and hardships,
much wrinkled in the forehead. These last imperfections are easily discernable
in his Medalls, as also in some graven stones and Marbles: and this made him
seem somewhat older then he was, his baldness, wrinkles, and wide mouth taking
away much of the gracefulness of his countenance, and causing him to have a
rustic Physiognomy. This gave occasion to Silenus the oldest among the Satyrs,
very pleasantly (in the CAESAR'S of the Emperor Julian) to boast that, besides
other similitudes between them, he had a head like Julius Caesar's. But as to
the baldness, it is no more to be objected to him as indecent, then to diverse
other great personages of Antiquity, as may be frequently seen in Medalls and
Marbles, Hercules himself being one of the Tribe. They are the highest and
sublimest things, nay the more divine, as approaching the sky, that are freed
from all superfluities. The highest mountains are bald on their tops, though in
other parts they are perruqu'd with woods, and have fertile descents. Caesar
was much troubled at the loss of his hair, insomuch as, having effected his
designs, he always wore a Crown of Laurel, the better to cover the
nakedness, thrusting up the hair he had toward the hinder part of his head
as much as he could, as may be remarked out of his effigies in the Medalls. He
had a strong and vigorous body, able to endure any thing of labor or hardship;
an active and lively mind, capable of any undertaking; his judgment and common
sense most exquisite. He was furnished with a strange foresight and vigilance,
a dexterity and presence of mind above ordinary, and an incredible resolution
and courage in all exigences and emergencies. In the wars of Asia, under the
Praetor Marcus Termo he obtained a Civicall Crown. He was admirable for his
Eloquence and incomparable Memory. He was well versed in Astrology, and by the
assistance thereof foreknew many things. It was by that that he was jealous of
the Ides of the months, as being fatal to him. Nay, he writ books of the
motion of the stars, regulated the year, and reduced it to the course of the
Sun; which science he learned from the Egyptians. From his skill in that
science he raised himself to attempt that great change and alteration which he
brought about, from the strange prodigies which had happened not long before,
as you have them elegantly described by Petronius and Lucan; the heavens,
earth, sea, nay the very mountains and rivers intimating that great
vicissitude.

But in the whole constellation of his virtues and perfections, none shines
brighter then his Clemency and Generosity. His propensity to pardon his
enemies, when conquered, whether Barbarians or Citizens, was exemplary: and it
is much to be questioned whether his Lenity raised him more friends or enemies.
When he had passed the Rubicon, he takes the City Corfinium, and in it
Domitius, whom the Senate had designed to succeed him in his Command in France:
yet though all were at his mercy, he dismissed Domitius, with what part of the
Legions would go with him, to repair to Pompey. Nor was his Clemency and
Liberality less remarkable at the Battle of Pharsalia, where he not only
pardoned his enemies, but received some of the most inveterate into favor and
familiarity, and engaged them into the government of Provinces and Countries:
not to mention the confidence in him of Cato Vticensis, and his severe
punishing of the Murderers of Pompey. Much more might be said of him, but
since it is not our business to write any Panegyricks on him, we come to his
extraction.

As for his extraction, we find that those of the Julian family boasted that
they were originally descended from Iulus, the Son of Aeneas, the Son of
Anchises and Venus, which was a common and yet no criminal ambition in those
times. The Poets, above all other, those that lived in the times of Caesar and
Augustus, strove who should most celebrate this Genealogy, and that by very
remarkable casts of their inherent flattery. To omit what may be gathered out
of Lucan, Petronius, and others, we shall content our selves with what we have
from Manilius, Astron. lib. 1. -- Venerisque ab origin proles
Iulia descendit coelo, coelumque replevit.
and Propertius, lib. 4. Eleg. 1. Tunc animi venere Decii, Brutique secures,
Vexit and ipsa sui Caesaris arma Venus,
Arma resurgentis portans victricia Trojae:
Felix terra tuos cepit, Iule, deos.
But that which Caesar suffers in this business, is, that it was objected to
him as a great vanity, to derive himself from this Goddess, as being so far
guilty of it, that he recommended to her the success and conduct of his most
signal enterprises, trusting her with all his good fortune. We mention not his
dalliances with Cleopatra, because the temptation on her side was more then
ordinary; not only that of her beauty, but her strange prostitution of her
self, even to that point, that before she had seen Caesar, she caused her self
to be put up into a Basket, and, as if it had been some present, to be brought
to him, fearing, if she had come without this surprise, she might not have
access. But if it be a vanity, it is easily discovered in his Coins, being
furnished with several shapes of this Venus Genitrix, this Goddess of
Generation, sometimes sitting on the prow of a ship, sometimes standing,
bearing a Victory in her right hand, to represent a Venus Victrix, such as
whereof Hypermnestra dedicated a figure in the City of Argos, calling it (...)
bearing a Victory, which was the word Caesar gave at the Battle of Pharsalia,
wherein he was afterward imitated by Augustus at the fight of Actium. The same
reason may be given for his placing a Venus Victrix upon the other side of his
own effigies in his Medalls, with a globe, as conceiving she ought him the
conquest of the Universe. Besides at the battle of Pharsalia, he made a vow to
build her a Temple (as Appianus records l. 2.) and afterward caused his statue
to be placed next to that of this Goddess of Generation. To which Monuments
seem to relate those antique Inscriptions which Gruterus mentions, forasmuch as
concerns the worship of this Venus, observed by the Romans out of their
Veneration of her and the Julian family. DIVO JULIO LIB. JULIA EBORA OB ILLIUS
IMMUN. ET MUN. LIBERALITATEM QUOIUS DEDICATIONE VENERI GENETRICI CESTUM
MATRONAE DOMUM TULERUNT. VENERI GENETRICI D..... JULI IN MEMORIAM GENT. JULIAE
STATUAM CUM... JUNIUS VIRBIUS ATTICUS FLAM. DIVI JULI D. S. P. D. But we shall
have more to say of this Goddess when we come to the Medalls, we therefore
proceed to his Nativity.

Caesar was born under Sagittary, that is to say, upon the twelfth day of July,
which denoted to him great Victories, and many famous triumphs in his own
Country, according to Manilius, lib. 4. in these verses. Nec non arcitenens
prima cum vest resurgit,
Pectora clara dabit bello, magnisque triumphis
Conspicuum patrias Victorem ducet in arces;
Sed nimium indulgens rebus Fortuna secundis
Invidet in facie, saevitque asperrima fronti, etc.
but the end should be dismal and unfortunate: as indeed it happened. But
Apollinaris Sidonius in his Panegyric of Anthemius, verse. 120. makes another
observation, wherein of all Authors he is singular, saying that Caesar was
born at the same time when a crown of Laurel was burning. Julius in lucem
venit dum Laurea flagrat. What presage could arise hence to signify his
innumerable Victories, we have only this Author to inform us. But indeed
there is one other discovers this mystery, but another way: for when they would
presage the fertility or sterility of the ensuing year, they were wont to cast
a crown of Laurel into the fire, and according to the crackling of the leaves
they gave their judgment. This is Tibullus. l. 2. Eleg. 5. Vt succensa sacris
crepitet been laurea flammis,
Omine quo felix and sacer annus eat.
At Laurus bona signa dedit, gaudete coloni,
Distendet spicis aurea plena Ceres.
Therefore at Caesar's birth it may be thought some one out of superstition
bethought him of this ceremony, or it happened by chance. But in fine, those
that were assistant at the birth, were by that accident raised to a certain
confidence that the child then born should prove a most fortunate man, and
should arrive to great fame and wealth.

As concerning his Deification, there is not much to be said. In the first
place, we suppose it a thing not so miraculous, that the Romans should believe
that one who had done such great and transcendent actions, as Caesar did, might
be thought somewhat more then a man, and had in him something divine; besides
that he was one acknowledged to have descended from Venus Genetrix, the mother
of the Universe. Other nations had that custom of adoring and invoking their
Kings, as Gods, after their death; as the Egyptians, Persians, and the Moors,
who in Caesar's time put Iuba into the number of the Gods. In the second place,
we meet with two censorious remarks upon this Deification. First, how that
Genius of Virtue and generosity which was wont to animate the Roman people, was
so metamorphosed into that of flattery and vanity, as to deify one who, by the
greatest, if not the most, was looked on as the greatest oppressor of the
Roman Liberty, and only the most fortunate Malefactor that ever was, when
they had not vouchsafed that honor to Numa Pompilius, who had been the Moses,
the Lawgiver, the most just and the most pious among the Roman Princes.
Secondly, whether, if he had miscarried at the battle of Pharsalia, he had not
been the most infamous person among the Romans that ever was, and more
abominable then Catiline; and on the contrary, whether rocks, mountains, seas,
and the cabinets of conquered Kings and Citizens had furnished marble,
porphyry, jasper and precious stones enough to erect pillars, statues, and
Temples to celebrate the glory of the great Pompey, who was so zealous for the
Liberty of Rome. But Divine Providence was pleased to use Caesar as an
Instrument to change that Commonwealth into a Monarchy, that the Prince of
Peace and Savior of the world should be born under the peaceable reign of one
sole Monarch.

As for the name of Julius; since, as is before noted, the Julian Gens derived
it self from Iulus the Son of Aeneas, the Son of Anchises, by a prodigious
coition with Venus, it must be granted Iulus was the Author of this Family.
Julius a magno deductum nomen Iulo. as Virgil says. This Julius was also
called Ilus, and more frequently Ascanius, from a place in Phrygia called
Ascanium, or from a River named Ascanius. That of Ilus was in memory of Ilus
the most renowned King of the Trojans, from whom Troy was called Ilium. But to
be yet more critical, the name Julius or Iulus was given him, because of his
hairinesse about the cheeks sooner then his age required, according to the same
Virgil, At puer Ascanius, cui nunc cognomen Iulo
Additur, Ilus erat dum res stetit Ilia regno.
Upon which place Servius tells us, that that name was given after the battle
that Ascanius gained against Mezentius, ob barbae lanuginem (quam (...) Graeci
dicunt) quae ei tempore victoriae nascebatur. So that (...) signifies (...),
the soft hair which first appears upon the cheeks.

The name Caesar seems to have some relation to the other, for that (...), in
Hesychius, signifies (...), that is to say, a certain thick and clotted
hairinesse, such as women's, when they plait and twist their hair about their
heads; and he that either naturally or artificially had such a one, had first
the honor of that name, which likely was some one of the posterity of Iulus,
the Son of Aeneas; unless we would rather trust Spartianus, who would have the
first of this family to be so called, Quod cum magnis crinibus sit utero
parentis effusus, because he was born with abundance of hair. In fine, however
it came, it was so venerable during the long reign of Augustus, that of
Tiberius, and three more of the family, that it alone designed the Emperor,
and became a name of invocation upon any accident of have, surprise, or
admiration.

We might here bring in what Suetonius delivers in the life of Augustus, that
the first Letter of the name Caesar, which is C. being dashed out by a
thunderbolt, it was predicted that he should die within a hundred days, because
that Letter stands for that number: and that after his decease he should be
received into the number of the Gods, because AESAR signified in the Hetruscan
tongue GOD. This gave occasion to all that have commented on that Author, to
criticize and puzzle themselves about the signification of the word CAESAR: but
all being trivial, and imaginary, we forbear further disquisition, and pass
to our observations upon his MEDALLS.

Observations upon CAESAR'S MEDALLS.
Upon the first Medall.
THe effigies of Venus Genitrix with a globe or world before her, without any
inscription; though Occo and Vrsinus mention one inscribed with L. BUCA, the
other side has Venus giving Anchises a meeting near Mount Ida: this it should
seem Caesar caused to be done out of flattery to himself, in that it served,
both to make his original more illustrious, and as a monument of that
happiness and good fortune which this Goddess had procured him in all his
enterprises. For it was his ambition, to have descended in a right line from
Anchises and Venus, by whose indulgence he had conquered the Universe, as being
his directrix in all his designs, as is represented by the globe, or world;
whereof this Goddess was thought to be in some sort the Protectresse, as being
esteemed the Sovereign Genius of Generation according to Solinus, -- Tu
foetibus auges
Cuncta suis, totus pariter tibi parturit orbis.
And her worship was questionless very ancient: For it was the head of Venus
Genitrix that the Saracens and Ishmaelites worshipped, alleging that Abraham
had by the means of it enjoyed Hagar, from whom proceeded a great generation,
as Enthymius Zigabenus, in his table of the opinions of that Nation, and the
anonymous Greek Author of the Saracen History, have observed. So have we here
the same Goddess accosting that great Heroes to have issue by him. The Genius
destined to further the establishment of the Roman greatness, has a Scepter
in his hand, to signify the future Majesty of that Monarchy.

The second Medall.
L. SEPULIUS MACER. Venus standing with a Victory in her right hand, and a pike
in the other, being the otherside of that which bore the effigies of Caesar and
the star of this Goddess. Servius quoting an observation of Varro, says
upon the first of the Aeneids, that when this Heroes lest Troy, looking up into
the sky he presently perceives Venus in the daytime, she shining then
purposely to direct him to Laurentum, the place for which the Destinies had
designed him. The Egyptians represented this star by the figure of a most
beautiful woman, it being thought the brightest in the firmament, whence it
was called (...) pulcherrima, being named in the morning Phosphorus or Lucifer,
in the evening Vesper. This star therefore, that was Aeneas's conductresse,
was no other then that midwife of the Light Venus, being the same which the
Saracens call Cubar or Kabar, which word signifies, great; being also otherwise
called Astarte, Urania or Coelestis: by all which names is meant no other but
this Genetrix, under which epithet the Lacedaemonians adored and invoked her as
an advancer of Generation. The Romans in the Circensian games brought forth the
statue of Caesar in pomp, having the Planet Venus on his head. Now this Urania
(because of her procreative influence) was held in particular devotion by the
women, as diverse Medalls of the Empresses discover, being commonly inscribed
Veneri coelesti, and having that Star. Gualterus furnishes us with an
inscription of a certain priestesse of hers, out of the ancient monuments of
Sicily. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Diodotus Titieli filius Appeiraeus sororem suam Minyram Artemonis filiam
Sacerdotem Veneris Coelestis. She was also inscribed Venus Coelestis Augusta,
(possibly in favor of some Empress) as also, Invicta Coelestis.

The third Medall.
CAESAR DICT. PERP. Caesar perpetual Dictator. A Venus Victrix naked, holding
an Helmet and a Buckler. There is before her a Pillar, upon which is placed an
Eagle, and behind a military Ensign. The meaning is this. We have Venus here
naked with a Helmet in her hand, to signify her victorious over Mars by her
charming attractions, as if that God had quite lost all courage, delivering up
his Arms, and rendering himself her Prisoner. Thus Menelaus casts away his
pike, sword and buckler, having had but a glimpse of the delicate breast of the
fair Hellen. But in this Medall Venus denotes, that she had so fortunately
assisted Caesar (the minion of all her progeny) in all his warlike enterprises,
that he had obtained absolute Victory over all his enemies; whereof the Helmet,
Buckler and military Ensign being the marks, Caesar had consecrated them to her
in acknowledgement of her favors. The Eagle pitched upon a pillar, signifies,
that his Victories have assured him the Roman Empire, which should be his
eternally. The Eagle denotes Empire and Royalty, and presages and signifies
absolute Victory. It signifies also that the Empire shall be assured to him,
maugre all the force and opposition of the Galls and Germans, or any other
whatsoever, whom he should despise, as this bird does thunder; for that of all
creatures it can ascend above the clouds, where it can suffer no injury.

The fourth Medall.
GERMAN. INDUTI. III. A River lying by a mountain side pours out his water,
having a boat or bark near him. This Medall seems to have been stamped purposely
to exercise our divinations. We conceive it should be read GERMANA INDUTIA, and
that the number three stands for nothing else but the year, taking the word
INDUTIA to signify a Colony of Germans disposed into that place by Caesar's
order. This name indeed is not found among the Geographers, only Pliny
mentions a Town called INDUSTRIA, situated along the Apennine, upon the famous
River of Po. Now there is a great conformity between the situation of this Town
and this Medall, and possibly it may be an erratum in Pliny, and that it should
be read INDUTIA instead of INDUSTRIA, which is not so likely to be the name of
a City. For the three points III. they may signify the year of the
establishment of that Colony, or of the foundation of the City. There is
another Medall has four IIII. denoting the fourth year; but it has withal
the devise of an Ox with his head stooping, and his knee bent, which posture
implies the establishment and foundation of a City. In this posture does Nonnus
describe the Ox of Cadmus. Upon both these Medalls there is a Venus Victrix on
one side, and what is before recited on the other: whence it is inferred, that
the planting of this Colony happened after Caesar's most remarkable Victories
against the Germans.

The fifth and sixth Medalls.
WE have these two Medalls from Goltzius: whereof one in Greek, has a Tripod
and two stars, the inscription of the head and the other side is (...).
Caesar Imperator, Pontifex maximus, Augur. This Tripod of Apollo has something
in it more particular. Apollo, Augur, or (...), who is here designed by one of
the stars which accompanies that of Venus Genetrix or Coelestis, shows that
Caesar was assisted in his charge of Augur, and his study of Astrology, and
presaging (whereof the Lituus and the Tripod were the marks) by these two
divinities. For Phoebus or (...) has two significations, which relate much to
his star and Tripod, that is to say, splendid and luminous, so that he is
both foreteller and Augur. But to return to the star of Venus, or Phosphorus,
or (as Philo Iudaeus calls it) Eosphorus, and to this Sun or star of Phoebus
Apollo. It may be conjectured they are placed above this Tripod, to give us to
understand, that these Gods should promise the Roman Augur Caesar, by a
continual success in all his enterprises, the absolute conquest of both East
and West.

The seventh Medall.
CAESAR. An Elephant with a Serpent betwixt his legs. On the other side, the
utensils and instruments that belonged to sacrificing, with the head-ornament
of the High Priest. Diverse Antiquaries have so commented upon this Medall, as
to make the word Caesar signify an Elephant. But in my opinion, this devise
signifies altogether as much as if it had this inscription about it, IMP.
CAESAR, or CAESAR DICTATOR PERP. on one side, and PONTIF. MAX. on the other.
For as the one shows forth the Royal quality, the other supposes the
Pontifical to have been in those times joined with it in the person of Caesar.
An Elephant in Italy (according to Artemidorus) signifies a Royal, imperial
or supreme Power. But Achmet in his Oneirocriticks chapter 271. tells us that this
creature had the same signification in the Indies and Egypt; therefore
Artemidorus has not done well to restrain it to Italy. But it may be the
Moors, imitating other nations herein, took an Elephant to signify a Monarch;
and, because Caesar was the most famous man that ever was, one that commanded
Kings and Monarchs, would make his name stand for an Elephant, for this word is
little less then African. The same Artemidorus says, that a Dragon seen in a
dream signifies a King and a supreme Magistrate; which agreeing with what he
says of the Elephant, and both these creatures being on the other side, I
conceive my interpretation the more receiveable.

The eighth Medall.
CAESAR DICTATOR. Caesar with the augurall stick. In the reverse there is L.
LIVINEIUS REGULUS. a Bull furiously running with his head stouping. It is
conceived this was stamped by Regulus, in Caesar's favor, when Caesar was
created Dictator, or shortly after. This Bull is brought in as an emblem of
Principality, as Dion Chrysostom says, who has made an excellent parallel
between this creature, and a King and his Kingdom. But before him St. Denis in
the 15. chapter of his Hierarchy, said that the strength of a Bull represents the
force necessary for a Prince, and that his horns signify Servatricem atque
invictam vim. Stephanus observes upon the word (...), that the Ancients called
(...) all things that were excessive for greatness or strength. The intention
therefore of Regulus was to let Caesar understand, that, having overthrown
Pompey, and become perpetual Dictator, he was in effect the most powerful and
most redoubted Monarch that ever was, and was in a condition to pursue and
accomplish the utter ruin of his enemies, and protect his friends.

There is a reverse among the Medalls of Augustus, where there is also a Bull
in a different figure and posture from this, bending his knee, to represent (as
is conceived) the Taurus Coelestis, which is under the dominion of Venus, which
signified the invincibility of Augustus. It may be also considered, that this
Bull may signify Italy subdued and subject to the Laws of Augustus, as being,
now the civil wars were over, ready to receive the yoke. For that Province
took its name from a Bull, which the Tyrrhenians called (...); so that Italy
submitted its neck to receive the yoke of the new government, as the Bull --
Summittit aratris Colla, jugumque suis poscit cervicibus ipse.

The ninth Medall.
DIVO JULIO. the effigies of Caesar deifi'd, the Star of Venus before him, or
if you will, Caesar's own. On the other side Mars upon an Altar, or rather
Caesar representing Mars, before whom sits a figure, which has a Cornucopia,
or horn of abundance under the left arm, in the right, holds a Victory, which
presents a Crown to him. This Medall seems to have been made shortly after
Caesar's death, to keep his memory in veneration, and nourish that belief of
the people, that he was, while living, a God transformed into a man. It was
indeed an excellent artifice of Augustus and his party, to make the
superstitious vulgar believe, that Julius Caesar was become a fellow-Commoner
among the Gods, to make his succession the more plausible. For being already
persuaded that no other then a demy-God, could have arrived to that glory which
Caesar had, having baffled the Universe; it was not very hard to persuade them
that the Comet which appeared in the North after his death, was his deifi'd
soul. But the cheat was, that this soul must appear there to render Augustus
more illustrious; who to retribute the glory, and make the business more
authentic, must erect Caesar's statue in the Capitol, representing upon the
head of it that Star in Gold, and giving it this bold inscription; (...), to
Caesar the Demi-god. To make any long discourse upon Comets from hence, were
superfluous, since all that can be said is, that they signify changes and
revolutions of States and Empires, and sometimes favorably. This signified, in
all likelihood, the war then kindling against Augustus: after which, a
general peace ensueing, the Prince of Peace should be born; the Comet at whose
birth denoted the universal change of Religion that afterward happened. To be
short, all that the Poets, those fine Cooks of fictions and inventions, could
dress that would be any way digestible with the credulous vulgar, was served
up at this time to raise the memory of Julius Caesar to the greatest reputation
that might be: but it will be to no purpose to repeat their adulations in this
place.

On the reverse of this Medall, we find Mars, who receives the Crown which
Victory presents him with, represented with a dart. The Victory is Venus
Victrix, or the Victorious City of Rome, and the Mars, Julius Caesar himself,
in the posture of that God. The statue is conceived to be the same with that of
Mars erected by the Romans in the Temple of Quirinus, with this magnificent
title, (...), Deo invicto. This supposition is confirmed by the dart, for Mars
was ordinarily represented with a spear, as diverse Medalls discover. But in
this statue he has a dart, which is that piece of Arms which is capable of
furthest casting, and that indeed which the Romans most used, and at the sight
of Pharsalia was one main cause of the Victory, Caesar having given his men
order that they should aim at the faces of the raw Roman Nobility they had to
deal with, as diverse Historians have delivered. Yet this argues not but that
Caesar sometimes made use of a Iavelin or Pike as well as Mars; but it is to be
conceived this was more for the convenience of his traveling, which was afoot,
(and that many times in the winter happily over the Alps) according to the
custom of most of the great Captains and Generals of Rome, as Livy and
Plutarch abundantly attest.

The tenth Medall.
(...). Cai Iulii Caesaris Imperatoris Dictatoris. The effigies of Caesar
crowned with a thick crown of Laurel, which closed before, the better to cover
his baldness, the hair being thrust forward to help it. The reverse has (...)
Iliensium bis Neocororum; Aeneas carrying his Father and the Palladium at their
quitting of Troy, the little Iulus going before with his hat in his hand. That
which in this falls under question, is, First, to know the situation of this
Ilium; wherein Strabo has spent more sweat then all the Geographers; affirming
it was not the Ilium of his time, a town well known, nor any thing built upon
the ruins of the old one so ill-entreated by the Greeks, as being distant from
this thirty stadia; that in that place there was only a small village bearing
up the name; that it was built up by Alexander, from a small town that it was
before, having a little Temple of Minerva much ruined, and received from him
diverse privileges and immunities, with a promise after his Victory over
Darius, of a magnificent Temple, and the toleration and setting up of Games and
exercises. This was partly executed after his death by Lysimachus, who enlarged
the City by a wall of forty stadia, disposing thither many out of the
neighboring Cities that were ruined. After which it was ruined and restored
diverse times; but lastly it received great favors from Sylla, which is
conceived to be the reason that it declared against Caesar in the Civil
wars: whence it may be inferred, that those of that City knew not at that
time that Caesar pretended to be of the race of Venus and Anchises, which was
only found out after his Victory. But at length Caesar receives them into
favor, restores and confirms their ancient privileges and immunities, and
imitating Alexander, did them many courtesies.

In the second place, the understanding of these words (...), or (...)
Iliensium Neocororum. The word (...) is translated commonly Aedituorum; which
we cannot render properly in English, but by Overseers, Supervisors, and those
that are entrusted with the charge of the Temples, and dispose of all things
sacred, or in some sort, they were such as we call Churchwardens in our
Churches. But they are not those Neocori of the Temples that this Medall and
diverse others represent unto us, but the word was analogically applied to whole
Nations, as also to Cities and Bodies corporate, to whom the Kings, and
afterward the Emperors gave Commissions, to make Panegyricks and Encomiastick
Orations upon their Statues, Pomps, religious worships, public recreations and
exercises, to the honor of their Gods and Princes; which was done out of the
public stock, or by the contribution of the Corporations. As therefore the
Neocori that belonged to the Temples, were disposers and guardians of the
things sacred, that were in their Sanctuaries, nay happily entertained the people
or strangers, with the rarities and antiquities of their worships and
mysteries; so these National Neocori had the superintendency over the Pomps
and Solemnities, panegyricall celebrations, exercises, sacrifices, and
ceremonies which were to be observed upon the more festival days, whereof
they had the absolute disposal. This I build upon the conjecture of the Great
and Learned SELDOM, who was the first cut this Gordian knot, upon a passage of
the Acts of the Apostles chap. 19. There we have Demetrius and those of his
profession raising a Tumult, and accusing St. Paul and others for preaching
that the Statues made with the hands of men were not Gods. The Town-Clark, or
the Churchwarden having appeased the Tumult, tells them that it was wellknown
that the City of Ephesus was then Neocore (in the English Translation
worshipper) of the great Goddess Diana, and of the Image fallen from Jupiter,
and that therefore there being no contradiction in that, they ought not to do
any thing rashly. For these men, faith he, are neither sacrilegious, nor
blasphemous persons, and therefore have done nothing against the Majesty of
Diana. But if they had any matter against any man, the Law was open: but in
case it were something else relating to their Goddess, whether by Blasphemy,
impiety, or sacrilege, (the cognizance whereof did of right belong to the
Ephesians in body, as being then Neocori) they should have satisfaction in a
full assembly convocated for things of that nature. Now those silver shrines
which Demetrius is said to make, are conceived to have been Modells of that
magnificent Temple, which the Ephesians being Neocori, caused out of magnifice
to be made of that rich Metal. Had this controversy between the Apostles and
the Goldsmiths come to a decision, they had proceeded thus; They would have had
some to make public panegyricks of their Goddess in the first place; then, if
Paul and his companions should not rest satisfied, this Neocorean people would
have punished them according to their manner. Now that the Neocori of the
Temples were used to commend to all comers (especially Travelers) the
greatness and power of their Gods, and that the Neocori of Cities imitated
them, but did it with great Pomp, employing persons eminent for Learning and
Eloquence, as Poets and Orators, for the honor of their Gods, as also their
Kings, Monarchs, Emperors, Founders, and that upon days in stituted and
ordained for that purpose, may be learned from Horace, who lib. 2. Ep. 1.
writing to Augustus, call's those Poets Aidituos, who should immortalize the
Virtue of that Emperor, or rather those who were charged to chose such as
should do it, in these verses: Sed tamen est operae pretium cognoscere quale is
Aedituos habeat, belli spectata domique
Virtus, indigno non committenda Poetae.
But besides Seldom has well observed, that there were none of these Medalls
in the time of the Commonwealth, for that the Cities of Greece were not yet
arrived to that esteem of the Roman greatness by the fabric of their moneys
and other signs of veneration, which they have come to since it became a
Monarchy. This is the opinion of that great judicious man, which yet is not
absolutely true; for there were found the marks of this magnificence, under the
title of Neocori, abundantly among the Medalls of Alexander the Great, whereof
Goltzius reckons above 20. with this inscription^ KOINON MAKE-(...) (...).
Whence may be observed, that the people of Mac^donia being generally Neocori,
had caused these Coins to be stamped in the honor of Alexander, having upon
the reverse, the figures of statues, chariots, temples, columns, etc. Nay, the
Maroneans in Philip's time, though but the people of a particular City, were
honored with the charge of Neocori, there being a Medall, which has on the
one side, the effigies of Bacchus, crowned with Vine-branches, inscribed,
(...); on the reverse, that of Philip, thus, (...). In fine, the inhabitants of
Ilium obtained leave of Caesar, to make some magnificence, under the title of
Neocori, to honor him and the Julian Family, having erected, in memory of his
extraction from Anchises, Aeneas and Iulus, some Colossus representing the
posture of Aeneas when he left Troy, doing a signal act of Piety both toward
the Gods and men, having the Palladium in his hand, and carrying the old man
his Father in his right arm, as women carry children, the little Iulus
marching before, having his hat in one hand, and asking his father the way with
the other. The word (...), signifies that this was the second time they had
been honored with the quality and commission of being Neocori, and that they
had celebrated the solemn days with Panegyricks, Pomps, exercises, and other
magnificences befitting the grandeur of Caesar.

The Wives of Caesar.
HIs first wife was COSSUTIA, whom he married in his youth, but divorced her at
the seventeenth year of his Age, before he had lived with her, though she was
rich, and descended of a family of the Roman Knights.

The second was CORNELIA, the daughter of Cornelius Cinna, one who had been
four times Consul; by whom he had only one daughter, named Iulia, afterward
first wife to Pompey. He took her death very heavily, and publicly commended
her, in a most elegant funeral Oration.

The third was POMPEIA, the daughter of Q. Pompeius, who had gotten that evil
report, as if Publius Claudius had been somewhat too familiar with her, which
was the reason that Caesar divorced her.

The fourth and last was CALPHURNIA, who outlived him, and was the daughter of
Lucius Piso: a woman of a generous spirit and well spoken, and had that honor
and affection for Caesar, that after his death she her self made a most elegant
funeral Oration to his honor, and afterward retired to Mark Antony.

The Medall of the TRIUMVIRI.
THis Medall is of Copper, small, of the Greek fashion; It represents the three
effigies of Caesar, Antonius, and Lepidus, done sidewayes, one upon another on
the same side, without Inscription. On the reverse it represents an Hermathena;
before which image there is an altar, out of which issues a serpent that lifts
it self above it; behind there is a Legionary eagle: time has worn out the
inscription to this half word APXIEP. This figure represents Mercury and
Minerva joined in one statue; that is to say, the upper part is of that
Goddess, armed with a Helmet, Buckler and Iaveline; the Lower part is a
Terminus or Hermes. For the interpretation of this devise; This Hermathena,
comprehending in it the God Terminus, with Minerva and Mercury, denotes an
excellent union, as to affection, interest and good understanding, among the
Triumviri, as well for the management and conduct of civil affairs, as
military. Which being so, the invention must needs be ingenious, denoting that,
though their employments were several, yet there was such a concurrence
between their Counsels and intentions, as that they jumped into the same
resolution for to carry on the interest of the Commonwealth. As for the Altar
and Serpent, they signify certain sacrifices performed by that people, for the
welfare, union and concord of those three powers; as also either to obtain some
Victory, or to give thanks to the Gods for one received. For a Serpent issuing
from under a table was taken by Sylla to presage Victory, as the Historian
Sisenna observes upon Cicero, lib. 1. de Divinatione. See also. Val. Maximus,
lib. 1. chapter 6. and Plutarch in his Life. It Is therefore the Symbol of Health,
Victory and Felicity. Of which opinion is also Theophrastus, who giving the
marks of a Superstitious man, says, that if he surprise a Serpent in any
place, he presently raises a chapel or an altar in that place, as it were to
thank the Gods for so good an adventure. There may this further reason be given
of this juncture in the Hermathena, that as Minerva has a dominion over
wrestling, as well as Mercury, so were they also both equally patrons of
Traffic and Merchandise.

We shall divert a little to speak of another kind of statues, called
Hermheracles, consisting, the lower part of Hermes, the upper of Hercules. Both
these and the Hermathenas, were placed in the places of public exercises,
Mercury and Hercules, implying strength and slight. The reason why Mercury was
so often joined with the other Gods, was, that he could conform to any, and was
one with all; as Iamblichus affirms, Isque (says he) de Diis verae scientiae
praesidium ac tutelam tenens, unus extat idem in universis: for which reason,
the Ancients dedicated all their works under his only name. Hercules was held
in such veneration for the God and Genius of all Gymnick engagements, that they
came to be called (angustiori vocabulo) Herculea certamina. He was the
institutour of the Olympic Games, wherein having had the honor to wrestle
with Jupiter, he was thought fit to be the patron of them: whence Lycophron
call's him (...), the Wrastler.

The second Medall.
M. ANTONIUS IMP. AUG. IIIVIR. R. P. C. Marcus Antonius Imperator Augur
Triumvir Reipublicae constituendae. A sacrificing vessel called praefericulum,
and the augurall stick called Lituus. On the reverse there is L. PLANCUS IMP.
COS. An urne between a thunderbolt and a Caduceus. It is to be noted first,
that there is a vessel on either side of this Medall, and therefore it is not
enough to say, that that on one side with the Lituus, is the mark of an
augurall dignity, which Antonius obtained from his favorite L. Plancus being
Consul; but something must be said of this urne, so honorably placed between a
thunderbolt and a Caduceus, on the other. Appianus Alexandrinus in his book of
the wars against the Parthians, speaking of the design which Mark Antony had,
being at Athens, to undertake the war against them, and to partake of the
glory might follow the ruining of so great and powerful a nation, says, that,
to satisfy the admonition of a certain Oracle, he carried with him a vessel
full of water, taken out of the sacred fountain which was in that City, called
Clepsydra. Et ut oraculo cuidam satisfaceret, etiam e Clepsydra font vas
repletum aqua secum asportavit. This fountain Hesychius says was within the
Cittadell of Athens. Now this is the representation of that vessel, and a
monument of the transportation of that water by Mark Antony, which must needs
be of great concernment to him, since he was advised to do it by the Oracle,
and specified the fountain. As for the thunderbolt and Caduceus, they signify
that Mark Antony should in that expedition make a thundering and dismal war
against the Parthians, with a great number of old experienced Legions, who
should tread underfoot the Parthian greatness, elevated against the Romans by
the miscarriage of C^assus and his flourishing Legions; or those Barbarians
should buy their peace very dear, which the Heralds of Mark Antony should
offer them with the Caduceus in their hands, that being the emblem of an
assured reconciliation.

ATILIVS CIMBER.
WE should have no more to say of this Cimber, then we have of Brutus, Cassius,
and the other Massacrers of Caesar, were it not that his Medall serves to
correct diverse passages in History (which it has been the main design of
these our observations to clear up) wherein his name is corrupted.

All who have mentioned this man, have been mistaken in his name, except
Appianus Alexandrinus, and that in one place only, for in some others he calls
him (...). Others call him Tillius, others Tullius, or Annius. Seneca Epist. s
3. Cai Caesaris caede (illius dico qui, superato Pompeio, Rempublicam tenuit)
tam creditum est Tillio Cimbro quam Cassio: Cassius tota vita aquam bibit,
T^llius Cimber and nimius erat in vino and scordalus. In hanc rem jocatus est
ipse; Ego, inquit, quenquam feram, qui vinum far non possum? Upon which
passage (which gives a strange intimation of the vicious qualities of this man)
Pintianus says, it ought to be read Tullius Cimber, as the same Seneca
elsewhere calls him, and as he is called in Plutarch and Suetonius. But it is
doubtless he should be called Atilius Cimber, and that Suetonius, Quintilian,
and the other later Authors should be corrected, as having trusted the corrupt
Manuscripts, and not seen this Medall.

But to come to the Devise on the reverse first. The Cap signifies (as is
obvious to any one) the Liberty obtained by the means of the poniard wherewith
Caesar, who oppressed the Commonwealth, was dispatched. The wings, or Talaries
of Mercury, with the serpents, and the rod, which was ceremonious at the
manumission of slaves, or rather the wand which Mercury made use of to conduct
the souls delivered out of the miseries of this life to their expected rest,
signify that the diligence, dexterity, and prudence which Atilius Cimber had
used in this execution, had restored the Universe to its Liberty, the Romans
from the Tyranny of Caesar, and had established peace and tranquillity in all
families. The conduct and assistance of Mercury to the departed souls with this
wand, is expressed by Statius in these Verses. Summa pedum propere plantaribus
illigat alis,
Obnubitque comas, and temperat astra galero;
Tum dextrae virgam inseruit qua pellere dulces,
Aut suadere iterum somnos, qua nigra subire
Tartara, and exsangues animare adsueverat umbras.


There is yet another thing whence it may be inferred that Mercury was a God
very anciently esteemed well-affected to Liberty; which is, that in the Isle of
Creet, (now Candia) they celebrated an anniversary, with they called (...), to
the honor of this God, wherein, after the manner of the Saturnalls at Rome,
Slaves and servants had all manner of Liberty, and were magnificently waited on
at table by their Masters, as Athenaeus affirms l. 14.

On the other side we have this inscription, ATILIVS CIMBER, a man beyond
middle-aged, with a great beard, and a rustic countenance, with a long poniard
before him. That which may be more particularly deduced hence is, that he was
more then ordinarily desirous that the conspiracy should prosper, though before
he had been a great creature of Caesar's (as Seneca affirms in his Book de
Ira.) Nay, under pretense of presenting a Petition to him, he was so
importunate with him, and held him in discourse with such eagerness till he
came into the Senate, that he had not the time to read a note which was
presented to him, wherein the whole conspiracy was discovered. This poniard
therefore stands to signify the great Zeal he had to this execution, wherein
he thought the Liberty of his Country was concerned; to vindicate which, as it
was his ambition to appear the most eager and the most resolute of all the
gang, so he thought it his glory to give Caesar the first wound. Which
consideration leads us by the hand to what we had designed for the last part of
this discourse, namely the tragical Catastrophe of this miraculous person.

For motives to the conspiracy, we may lay down partly the irreconcilable
hatred that some bare, in others, the aversion they had from Tyranny, in
others, a kind of zeal to public Liberty: the encouragements, Caesar's own
carelesseness of himself, according to that Apophthegme of his, when advised to
take a guard about his person, That it was better to die once then live in
continual fear; his not humouring that people who, if courted with Majesty (as
they had been wont in the time of the Commonwealth) had suffered any thing; his
derisory expressions of the Commonwealth, saying that it was a shadow, and an
imaginary notion; Antonius his profering him a Crown, which though (seeing the
acclamations of the people backward) he accepted not, yet was his design
easily discovered; the report that he was to be declared King, and would
translate the Seat of the Empire to Troy, whence he pretended to descend, or to
Alexandria, to spend his days with Cleopatra; the Tribunes showing a certain
law to a friend of his, in writing, whereby it was lawful to take as many
wives as one would, the better to people the Commonwealth. These and such like
passages gave occasion to Libels and placards, which were set up at every
Corner, whereof diverse particularly addressed to Brutus, who by his influence
over the chiefest Citizens got together above 60. who under the conduct of
Brutus (whose very name they thought to be fatal to Tyrants) would prefer
the Liberty of their Country before Lives, Fortunes, or Relations. Some time
before his death, so many signs and prodigies happened, that it was become the
general belief that Caesar's death was near at hand. Among other things, his
soothsayer Spurina bid him beware of the Ides of March. All which put together,
somewhat startled him, insomuch that he was once resolved to defer the Senate
for that day, had not Brutus advised him in no case to betray so much fear;
whereupon he went.

Going therefore in his litter toward the Senate the fifteenth day of March,
it could not be but diverse would be presenting petitions, and discoursing with
him; but the Conspiratours kept some of them so close to him, that he had not
the leisure to peruse any thing he had taken, which if he had, he had in an
epistle given him by Artemidorus, or some other, discovered the whole plot.
Meeting by the way with Spurina, he told him the Ides of March were come: to
which he answered, it is true, but they are not past. Being come to the Temple,
where the Senate was to sit that day, and sacrifice done according to the
custom, he took his chair in the Senate. The first came up to him was one
Celer, who while he was entreating him to release a Brother of his that was in
captivity, the rest came up to him: whereat he suspecting some violence, cried
out, what force is this? To which the abovementioned Atilius Cimber answered
him with a wound in the throat, which the rest of the Conspiratours seconded
with others. But that which amazed him above all, was to see Brutus among them,
one whose authority was great, and one whom he had obliged beyond all
expression of gratitude, when a conquered enemy; upon which he could not but
break forth into these words, And thou, son Brutus, art thou one? Whereupon
seeing there was no possibility of escaping, he remembered to keep the honor of
his person, covering his head with part of his robe, and with his left hand
settling his clothes about him; and so having received 23. wounds, he fell to
the ground a sacrifice to the public Liberty, near the base of Pompey's
statue, which was noted as a judgment of the Gods.

Caesar having neither Son nor Daughter legitimate, at his death, had by his
will before, adopted his Nephew Octavius Caesar, who was afterward called
Octavianus Augustus, who studied in Apollonia at the time of this murder of
Caesar, and expected to go with him to the war against the Parthians, being
then about 17. years of age.

This death (as all extraordinary accidents) must needs beget tumult and
confusion in the City; All Offices ceased, the Temples, and Courts of Justice
were shut up; Caesar's friends were afraid of the Conspiratours, and they
reciprocally of them. This Tumult somewhat startled the Conspiratours, who
seeing the design took not with the people as they expected, to secure
themselves, seized the Capitol, crying as they went, Liberty, Liberty,
Liberty. Whereupon, Antonius and Lepidus being all this while in Arms, diverse
treaties of accommodation passed between them, whereby it was at last agreed
the Senate should sit, whither Brutus and Cassius came, Antonius's Sons being
hostages for their return. The Senate approves the fact, the people dissemble
their satisfaction: for, as the Authority of Brutus and Cassius, with the name
of Liberty, was very charming on one side; so the horror of the fact, and the
love some bare Caesar, exasperated them against the Murderers. But Mark
Antony, endeavoring to trouble the waters as much as he could, among other
things got Caesar's testament to be opened, wherein he had bequeathed to the
people of Rome certain gardens and heritages near the River Tiber, and to every
Citizen of Rome a certain sum of money: which being known, it re-enflamed
their old affection to Caesar, and raised a compassion and a regret for his
death. The day appointed for his funeral (the ceremony whereof was to burn his
body in the field of Mars) Antonius being to make the Oration, brought with him
the robe wherein Caesar was assassinated, which being all bloody he showed to
the people, using some expressions which raised in them both indignation and
pity; insomuch as before the solemnity of the funeral was ended, they all
departed in great fury with the brands of the same fire, to set afire the
houses of Brutus and Cassius, and the rest of the Conspiratours, whom they
sought running up and down the streets. In which fury they killed Aelius Cinna,
mistaking him for Cornelius Cinna, who indeed was one of them. This Tumult
forced Brutus, Cassius, and all who conceived themselves guilty of Caesar's
death, to depart from Rome: whereupon Antonius took occasion to dispense with
the decree of the Senate, and assuming Caesar's power and authority persecuted
them all he could. Brutus and Cassius went into Greece, to govern those
Provinces which Caesar (whom they had murdered) had conferred on them, which
were Macedonia and Syria; and in like manner were all the rest dispersed, and
that so unfortunately, that within the space of three years they all came to
violent deaths.

He was slain in the 56. year of his age, somewhat above four years after the
death of Pompey, 700. years after the foundation of Rome, 3010. years after the
Creation, but according to the 70. Interp. 5157. in the 184. Olympiad, and 42.
years before the birth of Christ. Having made himself perpetual Dictator, he
enjoyed it 3. years, 4. months, and 6. days.

Thus have we traced this transcendent Personage through all his great and
incomparable actions and achievements, we have viewed him in his distresses
and extremities, and we have also seen him in his victories and triumphs,
expressing the same greatness, that is, the same equality of mind in both; we
have surveyed him in all his excellencies and abilities both of mind and body;
we have considered the invincibility of his spirit, his incomparable courage,
his clemency and magnanimity, his policy, vigilance, prudence, conduct; we
have, as near as we can, enumerated the many battles he fought, the many
victories obtained, the many people and provinces reduced, the many Kings and
Countries subdued, so to figure a person imitable in all things, that may be
called great or virtuous, not exceedable in any; we have described and
dilucidated his Medalls, wherein if we have committed any offense, it has been
in studying brevity, purposely omitting many things that might have been said,
and forbearing the multitude and particularity of citations, least it might be
thought a vanity: lastly, we have accompanied him to his funeral pile, the
fire whereof consumed his murderers and enemies, while he himself is carried
up by the same element, to shine eternally a star of the first magnitude, in
the firmament of famous and heroic spirits. And there we leave him,
recommending the Reader to see and find him happily far greater then our
commendations, in his own everlasting COMMENTARIES.

FINIS.
THe second and seventh pages of this Life of Caesar being rashly put to
working at the Press, before they were corrected, the Reader is desired to take
notice of these ensuing faults with their emendations, and to think never the
worse of the rest of the book.

In page 2. lin. 1. after, be killed, read (as if even virtue may be excessive
and a crime) as he, etc. l. 20. for, paint ever, paint over. l. 33. for,
Cisalphina, Cisalpina. l. 35. for, Lacedemonia, Lacedaemon. l. 37, 38. for,
Sardynia, Creeta, Candia, Cypres, Rhodes and Negrepont; Sardinia, Creet,
Cyprus, Rhodes and Negropont.

In page 7. l. 1. for, which four, with four. l. 9. for, gulf Venice, gulf of
Venice. l. 14. for their forts, their efforts. l. 15. for, Curious, Curio. l.
19. for, that Consul, that, Consul. l. 28. for, Boetia, Lacedaemonia, Creeta,
(in some copies) Baeotia Lacedaemon, Creet. l. 38. for, deferred him, deterred
him. l. 46. for, takes it, takes in.

With some literal faults, and ill pointing.

JULIUS CAESAR



Reading and Discourse are requisite to make a soldier perfect in the Art
military, how great soever his knowledge may be, which long experience and
much practice of Arms has gained.
WHen I consider the weakness of man's judgment in censuring things best known
unto it self, and the disability of his discourse in discovering the nature of
unacquainted objects; choosing rather to hold any sensible impression, which
custom has by long practice inured, then to hearken to some other more
reasonable persuasion: I do not marvel that such soldiers, whose knowledge
grows only from experience, and consists in the rules of their own
practice, are hardly persuaded that history and speculative learning are of any
use in perfecting of their Art, being so different in nature from the
principles of their cunning, and of so small affinity with the life of action;
wherein the use of Arms and achievements of war seem to have their chiefest
being. But those purer spirits embelished with learning, and enriched with the
knowledge of other men's fortunes, wherein variety of accidents affords
variety of instructions, and the mutual conference of things happened,
begets both similitudes and differences, contrary natures, but yet jointly
concurring to season our judgment with discretion, and to enstall wisdom in
the government of the mind: These men I say, mounting aloft with the wings of
contemplation, do easily discover the ignorance of such Martialists, as are
only trained up in the school of practice, and taught their rudiments under a
few years experience, which serves to interpret no other author but it self,
nor can approve his maxims, but by his own authority; and are rather moved to
pity their hard fortune, having learned only to be ignorant, then to envy their
skill in matter of war, when they oppose themselves against so manifest a truth
as this, that a mere practical knowledge cannot make a perfect soldier. Which
proposition that I may the better confirm, give me leave to reason a little of
the grounds of learning, and dispute from the habitude of Arts and sciences;
which are then said to be perfectly attained, when their particular parts are
in such sort apprehended, that from the variety of that individuality, the
intellectual power frames general notions and maxims of rule, uniting terms
of the same nature in one head, and distinguishing diversities by differences
of properties, aptly dividing the whole body into his greatest and smallest
branches, and fitting each part with his descriptions, duties, cautions and
exceptions. For unless the understanding be in this sort qualified, and able
by logisticall discourse, to ascend by way of composition, from singularity to
catholic conceptions, and return again the same way to the lowest order of his
partitions, the mind cannot be said to have the perfection of that Art, nor
instructed in the true use of that knowledge: but guiding her self by some
broken precepts, feels more want by that she has not, then benefit by that
she has. Whereby it follows that a science divided into many branches, and
consisting in the multiplicity of diverse members, being all so interessed in
the Bulk, that a maime of the smallest part causes either debility or
deformity in the body, cannot be said to be thoroughly attained, nor conceived
with such a profiting apprehension as steeleth the mind with true judgment,
and makes the scholar master in his Art, unless the nature of these
particularities be first had and obtained.

And for as much as no one science or faculty whatsoever, in multitude and
plurality of parts, may any way be comparable to the Art military, wherein
every small and unrespected circumstance quite alters the nature of the
Action, and breeds such disparity and difference, that the resemblance of
their equal participating properties is blemished with the dissimilitude of
their disagreeing parts; it cannot be denied, but he that is acquainted with
most of these particular occurrences, and best knows the variety of chances
in the course of war, must needs be thought a more perfect soldier, and
deserves a title of greater dignity in the profession of Arms, then such as
content themselves with a few common precepts and over-worn rules: without
which as they cannot be said at all to be soldiers; so with them and no more,
they no way deserve the name of skillful and perfect men of war. Now whether
mere experience, or experience joined with reading and discourse, do feast the
mind with more variety and choice of matter, or entertain knowledge with
greater plenty of novelties, incident to expeditions and use of Arms, I will
use no other reason to determine of this question, then that which Franciscus
Patricius alleges in his parallels, where he handles this Argument which I
entreat of.

He that follows a war (says he) does see either the course of the whole, or
but a part only. If his knowledge extend no farther then a part, he has
learned less then he that saw the whole: but admit he has seen and learned
the instructions of one whole war, he has notwithstanding learned less then
he that has seen the proceeding of two such wars: and he again has not seen
so much as another that has served in three several wars: and so by degrees,
a soldier that has served ten years, must needs know more then one that
has not served so long. And to conclude, he that has received 22 years
stipend (which was the just time of service amongst the Romans before a
soldier could be dismissed) has greater means of experience then another, that
has not so long a time followed the camp, and cannot challenge a discharge by
order and custom. And hence it consequently follows, that if in one or more
or all these wars, there have happened few or no actions of service, which
might teach a soldier the practice of Arms; that then his learning does not
countervail his labor. And if the war through the negligence, or ignorance of
the chief commanders have been ill carried, he can boast of no knowledge, but
that which acquainted him with the corruptions of military discipline; if the
part which he followed were defeated and overthrown, he knows by experience
how to loose, but not how to gain. And therefore it is not only experience and
practice which makes a soldier worthy of his name, but the knowledge of the
manifold accidents which rise from the variety of humane actions; wherein
reason and error, like merchants in traffic, enterchange contrary events of
fortune, giving sometime copper for silver, and balm for poison, and repaying
again the like commodity as time and circumstances do answer their directions.
And this knowledge is only to be learned in the registers of antiquity and in
histories, recording the motions of former ages.

Caius Julius Casar (whose actions are the subject of these discourses) after
his famous victories in France, and that he had gotten the provinces of Spain,
broken the strength of the Roman Empire at Pharsalia, was held a soldier
surmounting envy and all her exceptions; and yet notwithstanding all this, the
battle he had with Pharnaces king of Pontus, was like to have buried the glory
of his former conquests, in the dishonorable memory of a wilful overthrow.
For having possessed himself of a hill of great advantage, he began to encamp
himself in the top thereof: which Pharnaces perceiving, (being lodged likewise
with his camp upon a mountain confronting the Romans) imbattelled his men,
marched down from his camp into the valley, and mounted his forces up the hill,
where the Romans were busied about their intrenchments, to give them battle.
All which Caesar took but for a bravado: and measuring the enemy by himself,
could not be persuaded that any such fool-hardinesse could carry men headlong
into so dangerous an adventure, until they were come so near, that he had
scarce any time to call the legions from their work, and to give order for the
battle: which so amazed the Romans, that unless, as Caesar himself says, the
advantage of the place and the ^^nignity of the gods had greatly favored them;
Pharnaces had at that time revenged the overthrow of Pompey and the Senate, and
restored the Roman Empire to liberty. Which may learn us how necessary it is
(besides experience, which in Caesar was infinite) to perfect our knowledge
with variety of chances: and to meditate upon the effects of other men's
adventures, that their harms may be our warnings, and their happy proceedings
our fortunate directions.

And al^eit amongst so many decads of History, which pregnant wits have
presented to these later ages, we seldom or never meet with any one accident
which jumpeth in all points with another of the like nature, that shall happen
to fall out in managing a war, or setting forth of an army; and so do seem to
reap little benefit by that we read, and make small use of our great travel:
yet we must understand that in the Audit of Reason, there are many offices,
which through the sovereign power of the discursive faculty, receive great
commodities by whatsoever falls under their jurisdiction, and suffer no
action to pass without due trial of his nature, and examination of his state;
that so the judgment may not be defrauded of her revenues, nor the mind of her
learning: For notwithstanding disagreeing circumstances, and differences of
forms, which seem to cut off the privilege of imitation, and frustrate the
knowledge we have obtained by reading; the intellectual faculty has authority
to examine the use, and look into the inconveniences of these wants and
diversities, and by the help of reason to turn it to her advantage; or so to
counterpoise the defect, that in trial and execution it shall not appear any
disadvantage. For as in all other sciences, and namely in Geometry, of certain
ba^e elements, and common sentences, which sense admits to the apprehension,
the powers of the soul frame admirable Theorems and Problems of infinite use,
proceeding with certainty of demonstration, from proposition to proposition,
and from conclusion to conclusion, and still make new wonders as they go,
besides the strangeness of their Architecture, that upon such plain and easy
foundations, they should erect such curious and beautiful buildings: so in the
Art Military, these examples which are taken from histories, are but plain kind
of principles, on which the mind works to her best advantage, and uses
reason with such dexterity, that of inequalities she concludes an equality,
and of dissimilitudes most sweet resemblances; and so she works out her own
perfection by discourse, and in time grows so absolute in knowledge, that her
sufficiency needs no further directions. Lib. 3.
But as Lomazzo the Milanese, in that excellent work which he writ of
picturing, says of a skillful painter, that being to draw a portraiture of
graceful lineaments, he will never stand to take the symmetry by scale, nor
mark it out according to rule; but having his judgment habituated by
knowledge, and perfected with the variety of shapes and proportions, his
knowledge guides his eye, and his eye directs his hand, and his hand
follows both with such facility of cunning, that each of them serves for a
rule whereby the true measures of nature are exactly expressed: The like may I
say of a skillful Soldier, or any Artizan in his faculty, when knowledge has
once purified his judgment, and turned it to the key of true apprehension.

And although there are many that will easily admit a reconciliation of this
disagreement, in the resemblance of accidents being referred to the arbitrament
of a well-tempered spirit; yet they will by no means acknowledge, that those
monstrous and inimitable examples of valor and magnanimity (whereof antiquity
is prodigal, and spends as though time should never want such treasure) can
any way avail the manners of these days, which if they were as they ought to
be, would appear but counterfeit to the luster of a golden age, nor yet
comparable to silver or brass, or the strength of iron, but deserve no better
title then earth or clay, whereof the frame of this age consists. For what
resemblance (say they) is between the customs of our times, and the actions of
those ancient Heroes? They observed equity as well in war as in peace; for
virtue rather flourished by the natural disposition of men, then by law and
authority; the greatest treasure which they esteemed, were the deeds of arms
which they had achieved for their country, adorning the temples of their gods
with piety, and their private houses with glory, pardoning rather then
persecuting a wrong, and taking nothing from the vanquished but ability of
doing injury: But the course of our times has another bias, for covetousness
has subverted both faith and equity, and our valor affects nothing but
ambition, pride and cruelty tyrannize in our thoughts, and subtilty teaches us
to carry rather a fair countenance, then a good nature; our means of getting
are by fraud and extortion, and our manner of spending is by wast and
prodigality, not esteeming what we have of our own, but coveting that which is
not ours; men effeminated and women impudent, using riches as servants to
wickedness, and preventing natures appetite with wanton luxury; supplanting
virtue with treachery, and using victory with such impiety, as though injuriam
facere, were imperio uti: and therefore the exemplary patterns of former times
wherein true honor is expressed, may serve to be gazed upon, but no way to be
imitated by this age, being too subtle to deal with honesty, and wanting
courage to encounter valor. I must needs confess, that he that compares the
history of Livie with that of Guichardine, shall find great difference in the
subjects which they handle; for Livie triumphs in the conquests of virtue,
and in every page erecteth trophies unto valor, making his discourse like
Cleanthes table, wherein virtue is described in her entire majesty; and so
sweetened with the presence and service of the graces, that all they which
behold her are rapt with admiration of her excellency, and charmed with the
love of her perfection: but Guichardine has more then Theseus task to perform,
being to wind through the labyrinths of subtilty, and discover the quaint
practices of politicians, wherein public and open designs are oftentimes but
shadows of more secret projects, and these again serve as foiles to more
eminent intentions; being also discolored with dissimulation, and so ensnared
in the sleights of subtilty, that when you look for war, you shall find peace;
and expecting peace, you shall fall into troubles, dissentions and wars: So
crabbed and crooked is his argument in respect of Livies fortune, and such art
is required to unfold the truth of those mysteries.

But to answer this objection in a word, and so to proceed to that which
follows; I say those immortal memories of virtue which former time
records, are more necessary to be known, then any stratagems of subtler ages:
for equity and valor being truly apprehended so season the motions of the
soul, that albeit in so corrupt a course, they cannot peradventure stir up
imitation; yet they oftentimes hinder many malicious practices, and devilish
devises, when evil is reproved by the knowledge of good, and condemned by the
authority of better ages. And if we will needs follow those steps which the
present course of the world has traced, and play the Cretian with the Cretian;
this objection hinders nothing, but that history, especially these of later
times, affords sufficient instructions to make a soldier perfect in that
point.

Let not therefore any man despise the sound instructions which learning
affords, nor refuse the helps that history does offer to perfect the
weakness of a short experience, especially when no worth can countervail the
weight of so great a business: for I take the office of a chief commander, to
be a subject capable of the greatest wisdom that may be apprehended by
natural means, being to manage a multitude of disagreeing minds, as a fit
instrument to execute a design of much consequence and great expectation, and
to qualify both their affections and apprehensions according to the accidents
which rise in the course of his directions; besides the true judgment which he
ought to have of such circumstances as are most important to a fortunate end,
wherein our providence cannot have enough either from learning or experience,
to prevent disadvantages, or to take hold of opportunities. Neither can it be
denied, but as this knowledge adds perfection to our judgment, so it serves
also as a spur to glory, and increases the desire of honor in such as behold
the achievements of virtue, commended to a perpetual posterity, having
themselves the like means to consecrate their memory to succeeding a^es,
wherein they may serve for examples of valor, and reap the reward of true
honor. Or to conclude, if we thirst after the knowledge of our own fortune,
and long to foresee the end of that race which we have taken, which is the
chiefest matter of consequence in the use of Arms; what better conjecture can
be made, then to look into the course of former times, which have proceeded
from like beginnings, and were continued with like means, and therefore not
unlikely to sort unto like ends?

And now if it be demanded whether reading or practice have the first place in
this Art, and serves as a foundation to the rest of the buildings; let Marius
answer this question, who envying at the nobility of Rome, says thus, Qui
postquam consules facti sunt, Salu^^. de bello Jogur.
acta Majorum and Graecorum militaria praecepta legere ceperint: homines
praeposteri, nam legere quam fieri, tempore posterius, re and usupriusest;
Whereas (says he) reading ought to go before practice (although it follow it
in course of time, for there is no reading, but of something practiced before)
these preposterous men, after they are made Consuls and placed at the helm of
government, begin to read, when they should practice that which they had read;
and so bewray their insufficiency of knowledge by using out of time that, which
in time is most necessary. This testimony gave Marius of reading and
book-learning, being him (...) an enemy to the same, for as much as all his
knowledge came by mere experience. But howsoever his judgment was good in this
point: for since that all motion and action proceeds from the soul, and
cannot well be produced, until the Idea thereof be first imprinted in the
mind, according to which pattern the outward being and sensible resemblance is
duly fashioned; how is it possible that any action can be well expressed, when
the mind is not directed by knowledge to dispose it in that sort, as shall best
agree with the occurrents of such natures, as are necessarily interessed both
in the means and in the end thereof? And therefore speculative knowledge as the
Tramontane, to direct the course of all practice is first to be respected.

But that I may not seem partial in this controversy, but carry an equal hand
between two so necessary yoak-fellowes, give me leave to conclude in a word the
benefit of practice, and define the good which comes from experience; that so
nothing that has been spoken may seem to come from affection, or proceed from
the forge of unjust partiality. And first it cannot be denied, but that
practice gives boldness and assurance in action, and makes men expert in
such things as they take in hand: for no man can rest upon such certainty,
through the theorick of knowledge, as he that has seen his learning verified
by practice, and acknowledged by the testimony of assured proof. Besides,
there are many other accomplements gotten only by practice, which grace the
presence of knowledge, and give credit to that which we have read: as first to
learn the use and advantage of the arms which we bear: secondly, by frequent
aspect and familiarity of dangers, and accidents of terror, to learn to fear
nothing but dishonor, to make no difference between heat and cold, summer and
winter, to sleep in all places as on a bed, and at the same time to take pains
and suffer penury, with many other difficulties which custom makes easy, and
cannot be gotten but by use and practice.

And thus at length, I have brought a shallow discourse to an abrupt end,
wishing with greater zeal of affection then I am able with manifest proof of
reason, to demonstrate the necessity, that both these parts were by our
soldiers so regarded, that neither practice might march in obstinate
blindness without learned knowledge; nor this again be entertained with an
idle apprehension without practice: but that both of them may be respected, as
necessary parts to make a complete nature; wherein knowledge as the
intellectual part gives life and spirit to the action, and practice as the
material substance makes it of a sensible being, and like a skillful workman
expresses the excellency, which knowledge has fore-conceived: wishing no man
to despair of effecting that by practice which the Theorick of knowledge
commends. For Cur desp^res nunc posse fieri, quod jam totie^ factum est?

The sum of the first book of Caesar's commentaries; with observations upon
the same, discovering the excellency of Caesar's Militia.
The Argument.
IN this first book are contained the specialities of two great wars, begun and
ended both in a summer: the first, between Caesar and the Helvetii: Suitzers.
the second, between him and Ar^ovistus, king of the Germans. The history of
the Helvetians may be reduced to three principal heads: under the first, are
the reasons that moved the Helvetians to entertain so desperate an expedition,
and the preparation which they made for the same. The second contains their
defeat by Caesar: and the third their return into their Country. That of
Ariovistus divides it self into two parts: the first gives the causes that
induced Caesar to undertake that war: the second entreats of the war it self,
and particularly describes Ariovistus overthrow.

CHAP. I.
Gallia described: the Helvetians dislike their native seat, and propound to
themselves larger territories in the Continent of Gallia. Orgetorix seedeth
this humor, for his own advantage.
GAllia is all divided into three parts; whereof the Belges do inhabit one,
the Aquitanes another, and those which they call Celtes, and we Galls, a
third: all these do differ each from others in manners, language, and in laws.
^he river Garun does separate the Galls from the Aquitans, and Marne and Seine
do bound them from the Belges. M^tron^.
Of these the Belges are most warlike; S^quara.
as furthest off the civility and politure of the Province, and less
frequented with Merchants, or acquainted with such things as are by them
imported to effeminate men's minds; as likewise being sited next to the Germans
beyond the Rhene, with whom they have continual wars. For which cause also the
Helvetians do excel the rest of the Galls in deeds of Arms, being in daily
conflicts with the Germans, for defense of their own territories, or by
invading theirs. The part inhabited by the Galls, begins at the river
Rhone, and is bounded with Garun, the Ocean, and the confines of the Belges;
and reaching also to the Rhene, as a Limit from the Sequans and Helvetians, it
stretched northward. The Belges take their beginning at the extreme confines of
Gallia, and inhabit the Country which lies along the lower part of the Rhene,
trindling to the North, and to the East. Aquitania spreads it self between
the river Garun and the Pyrenean hills, and butteth upon the Spanish Ocean,
between the West and the North.

Amongst the Helvetians, Orgetorix did far exceed all others, both for noble
descent and store of treasure: and when M. Messala and M. Piso were Consuls,
being stirred up with the desire of a kingdom, he moved the Nobility to a
commotion; persuading the State to go out of their confines with their whole
power: as an easy matter for them, that excelled all other in valor and
prowess, to seize upon the Empire of all Gallia. To which he did the rather
persuade them, for that the Helvetians were on every side shut up, by the
strength and nature of the place wherein they dwelt; on the one side, with the
depth and breadth of the river Rhene, which divides their Country from the
Germans; on the other side, with the high ridge of the hill Jura, which runs
between them and the Sequans; and on the third part they were flanked with the
lake ^ Lemanus, and the river Rhone, parting their territories from our
Province.

Hence it happened, that being thus straightned, they could not easily enlarge
themselves, or make war upon the bordering Countries: and thereupon, being men
wholly bent to Arms and war, were much grieved, as having too little elbow-room
for their multitude of people, and the renown they had got of their Valor;
their whole country containing but 240 miles in length, and 180 in breadth.
Spurred on with these inducements, and moved specially with the authority of
Orgetorix, they resolved to make provision of such things as were requisite for
their expedition, bought great numbers of Carrs, and horses, for carriages;
sowed much tillage, that they might have plenty of Corn in their journey; made
peace and amity with the confining Countries. Curardum vi^in^s populis (...)
in^^r (...) ^opulos col. (...).
For the perfecting and supply of which things, they took two years to be
sufficient; and in the third, enacted their setting forward by a solemn Law,
assigning Orgetorix to give order for that which remained.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
HE that will examine this expedition of the Helvetians, by the transmigrations
and flittings of other Nations, shall find some unexampled particularities in
the course of their proceeding: for, first it has never been heard, that any
people u^terly abandoned that Country which Nature or providence had allotted
them, unless they were d^iven thereunto by a general calamity, as the
infection of the air, the cruelty and oppression of a neighbor nation, as
were the Suevians, who thought it great honor to suffer no man to border upon
their confines; or some other universal, which made the place inhabitable, and
the people willing to undertake a voluntary exile. But oftentimes we read, that
when the inhabitants of a Country were so multiplied, that the place was
overcharged with multitudes of offspring, and like a poor father, had more
children then it was able to sustain, the abounding surplus was sent out to
seek new fortunes in foreign Countries, and to possess themselves of a
resting seat; which might recompense the wants of their native Country, with a
plenteous revenue of necessary supplements. And in this sort we read that Rome
sent out many Colonies into diverse parts of her Empire. And in this manner the
ancient* Galls disourdened themselves of their superfluity, and sent them into
Asia. The Goths came from the Islands of the Baltic sea, and in Sulla his
time swarmed over Germany: besides many other Nations, whose transmigrations
are particularly described by Lazius. But amongst all these, we find none that
so forsook their Country, but there remained some behind to inhabit the same;
from whence, as from a fountain, succeeding ages might derive the stream of
that overflowing multitude, and by them take notice of the causes, which moved
them unto it. For their manner was in all such expeditions, and sending out of
Colonies, to divide themselves into two or three parts, equal both in equality
and number: for after they had parted their common people into even companies,
they divided their Nobility with as great equality as they could, among the
former partitions: and then casting lots, that part which went out to seek new
adventures, left their lands and possessions to the rest that remained at home;
and so by industry they supplied that defect which continuance of time had
drawn upon them. And this was the means, which the first inhabitants of the
earth found out after the flood, to people the uninhabited places, and to keep
often the inconveniences of scarcity and famine.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
HE that would prognosticate by the course of these several proceedings,
whether of the two betokened better success, has greater reason to foretell
happiness to these which I last spoke of, then to the Helvetians; unless
their valor were the greater, and quitted all difficulties which hatred and
envy would cast upon them: for an action which savoureth of necessity (which
was always understood in sending out a Colony) has a more plausible pasport
amongst men, then that which proceeds from a proud voluntary motion. For, as
men can be content to tolerate the one, if it concern not their particular; so
on the other side, they count it gain to punish pride with shame, and to oppose
themselves against the other.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
ORgetorix, thirsting after princely dignity, discovers the humor of vain
glory. For, not contented with the substance of honor, being already of
greatest power amongst the Helvetians, and ordering the affairs of the State
by his own direction, thought it nothing without the marks and title of
dignity, unto which the inconveniences of Majesty are annexed: not considering
that the best honor sits not always in imperial thr^^^s, nor wears the
Diad^ms of Princes; but oft^ntimes rests it self in meaner places, and
shines better with obscurer titles.

For proof whereof, to omit antiquity, take the f^mily of the Medic^s in
Florence, and particularly Cos^mo and Lorenzo, whose virtue raised them to that
^eight of honor, that they were nothing inferi^^^ to the greatest P^tentates
of their time, being themselves ^ut private Gentlemen in that State, and
bearing their proper names as their greatest titles. But howsoever, the
opportunity of changing their soil was well observed by Orgetorix, as the
fi^^st means to attempt an innovation: ^ut the success depended much upon the
fortunate proceeding of their expedition.

For, as a multitude of that nature can ^e content to attribute a great part of
their happiness, wherein every man thinks himself particularly interessed,
to an eminent Leader; and in that universal ecstasy of joy, will easily admit
an alteration of their State: so, if the issue be in any respect unfortunate,
no man will acknowledge himself faulty ^ut, every one desiring to discharge his
passion upon some object, a chief directour is likeliest to be the mark, at
which the darts of their discontent will be thrown; and then he will find it
hard to effect what he intends.

Chap. II.
Orgetorix practices are discovered: his death. The Helve^ians continue the
resolution of their expedition, and prepare themselves accordingly.
ORgetorix thereupon undertook employment to the ad^oyning States; Caesar.
and first persuaded Casticus, the son of Catamantalides a Sequan (whose
father had for many years reigned in that place, and was by the Senate and
people of Rome styled with the title of a Friend) to possess himself of the
Signiory of that State which his Father formerly enjoyed; and in like manner
dealt with Dumnorix the Heduan, Divitiacus brother (who at that time was the
only man of that Province, and very well beloved of the Commons) to endeavor
the like there; and withal, gave him his daughter in marriage* showing them by
lively reasons, that it was an easy matter to effect their designs; for that
he being sure of the sovereignty of his State, there was no doubt but the
Helvetians would do much throughout all Gallia, and so made no question to
settle them in those kingdoms, with his power and forces. Drawn on with these
inducements* they gave faith and oath each to other, hoping with the support of
the sovereignty of three mighty Nations, to possess themselves of all Gallia.

This thing being discovered, the Helvetians (according to their customs)
caused Orgetorix to answer the matter in durance: whose punishment upon the
Attaint, was to be burned alive. Against the day of trial, Orgetorix had got
together all his Family, to the number of ten thousand men, besides diverse
followers, and others far indebited, which were many; by whose means he
escaped a judicial hearing. The people thereupon being much incensed, agreed
the Magistrate should execute their laws with force of Arms, and to that end
should raise the country: but in the mean time Orgetorix was found dead, not
without suspicion (as was conceived) that he himself was guilty thereof.

Notwithstanding his death, the Helvetians did pursue their former design of
leaving their Country: and when they thought themselves ready prepared, they
set fire on all their Towns (which were in number twelve) together with ^our
hundred Villages, besides private houses, and burnt likewise all the Corn, save
that they carried with them; that all hope of return being taken away, they
might be the readier to undergo all hazards: And commanded that every man
should carry so much Meal with him, as would serve for three Months.

Moreover also they persuaded the Rauraci, the Tulingi, and Latobrigi, their
neighbor borderers, that putting on the same resolution, they would set fire
on all their habitations, and go along with them. And likewise took unto them
the Boii, which had dwelt beyond the Rhene, but were now seated in the
Territories of the Norici, and had taken the Capital town of that Country.
There were only two ways which gave them passage out of their Country: the
one through the Sequans, very narrow and difficult, between the hill Jura, and
the River Rhone, by which a single Cart could scarce pass; and had a high hill
hanging over, that a small force might easily hinder them. The other was
through our Province* far easier and readier; forasmuch as the river Rhone,
running between the Helvetians and the S^voyards
Allobroges (who were lately brought in obedience to the people of Rome) did
give passage in diverse places by Fords.

The ^tmost town belonging to the Allobroges,; that bordereth upon the
Helvetians is Geneva whereunto adjoyneth a bridge leading to the Helvetians;
who doubted not but to persuade the Allobroges (that seemed as yet to carry no
great affection to the people of Rome) or at least to force them to give them
passage. Things being now ready for their journey, they assigned a day when
all should meet together upon the banks of Rhone: which day was the first of
the Calends of April, in the Consulship of Lu. Piso, and A. Gabinius.

OBSERVATION.
AS these provisoes were all requisite; so one thing was omitted, The omission
in the Helvetian expedition.
which might have furthered their good fortune more then any thing thought of:
which was, to have concealed by all means the time of their departure. For all
the beasts of the wood must needs stand at gaze, when such Lions rouzed
themselves out of their dens; and be then very watchful of their safety, when
they knew the instant of time, when some of their spoils must needs be offered
to appease their fury. Or at the least it behooved them so to have dealt by
hostages and treaty, that such as were likeliest and best able to cross their
designments might have been no hinderance of their proceedings: considering
there were but two ways out of their Country by which they might go; the one
narrow and difficult, between the hill Jura and the river Rhone, by the
Country of the Sequani; the other through Provence, far easier and shorter,
but not to be taken but by the permission of the Romans. But howsoever, their
error was, that after two years provision to go, and having made an
exterminating decree which enjoined them to go, when they came to the point,
they knew not what way to go.

Chap. III.
C^^s^r denies the Helvetians passage through the Roman Province: he
fortifieth the passage between the hill Jura, and the lake of Geneva.
AS soon as Caesar was advertised that their purpose was to pass through our
Province, Caesar.
he hasted to leave the Rome.
City, and posting by great journeys into the further Gallia, he came to
Geneva. And inrolling great forces throughout all the Province, for that there
was but one legion in those parts, he brake down the bridge at Geneva.

The Helvetians having intelligence of Caesar's arrival, sent diverse of the
best of their Nobility Ambassadors unto him, whereof Numeius and Veredoctius
were the chief, to give him notice, that they had a purpose to pass peaceably
through the Province, having no other way to go: and therein to pray his
suff^rance and permission.

Caesar, well remembering how Lu. Cassius the Consul was slain, his Army beaten,
and the soldiers put under the yoke, did not hold it convenient to grant their
request. Neither did he think that men so ill-affected could forbear to offer
wrongs and insolences, if leave were given them as was required. Howbeit, for
the better gaining of time, and getting such forces together as were caused to
be enrolled, he answered the Commissioners that he would take a time of
deliberation; and to that end willed them to return again by the Ides of April.
And in the mean time with that legion he had ready, and the soldiers that came
out of the Province, he made a ditch, and a wall of sixteen foot in height,
from the lake Lemanus, which runs into the Rhone, to the hill Jura, that
divides the Sequans from the Helvetians, being in length nineteen miles; and
disposed garrisons and fortresses along the work, the better to impeach them,
if happily they went about to break out by force.

At the day appointed, when the Ambassadors returned for a resolution, he
utterly denied to give any leave to pass through the Province; having neither
custom nor president from the people of Rome to warrant him in that kind. And
if they should endeavor it by force of Arms, he would oppugn them.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis manner of prolonging of time to reinforce the troops or get some other
advantage, as it was then of great use to Caesar, and has oftentimes been
practiced to good purpose; so does it discover to a circumspect enemy, by the
directions in the mean time (which cannot easily be shadowed) the drift of that
delay; and so inviteth him with greater courage to take the opportunity of that
present advantage; especially if tract of time may strengthen the one, and not
further the other: which is easily discerned by the circumstances of the Action.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe request of the Helvetians seemed to deserve a facile answer; being in
effect no more then Nature had given to the river Rhone: which was to pass
through the Province, with as much speed and as little hurt as they could. But
Caesar looking further into the matter, and comparing things already past with
occurrences that were to follow after, found the majesty of the Roman Empire
to be interessed in the answer; being either to maintain her greatness by
resisting her enemies, or to degenerate from ancient virtue by gratifying such
as sought her ruin: which in matter of State are things of great consequence.
And further, he knew it to be an unsafe course to suffer an enemy to have
means of doing hurt; considering that the nature of man is always prone to
load him with further wrongs whom he has once injuried: not but that he could
peradventure be content to end the quarrel upon that advantage; but fearing
the other whom he wronged, to expect but an opportunity of revenge, he gets
what advantage he can beforehand, and so cea^eth not until he have added a
bloody end to an injurious beginning.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
COncerning this mavelous fortification between the hill and the lake, how
serviceable such works were unto him in all his wars, in what sort, and in how
small a time they were made; I will defer the treatise of them until I come
to the height of Alesia, where he gave some ground of that hyperbolicall
speech, An medeleto, non animadverteb. it is december habere lectas quidem
legiones populum Romanum, quae non ^olum vobis obsistere, sed etiam coelum
diruere possent?

Chap. IIII.
The Helvetians failing to pass the Rhone, take the way through the Country of
the Sequani, Caesar hastes into Italy, and there inrolleth more legions: and
returning, overthrows part of them at the river Arar.
THe Helvetians frustrated of their former hope, Caesar.
went about, some with boats coupled together, others with Flats (whereof they
made great store) the rest by foords and places where the River was shallow,
sometimes in the day, and oftentimes in the night to break out: but being
beaten back by the help of the fortification, and the concourse of soldiers,
and multitude of weapons, they desisted from that attempt.

There was only another way left through the Sequans, which they could not take
by reason of the narrowness thereof, but by the favor of the Country. And
forasmuch as of themselves they were able to prevail little therein, they sent
Messengers to Dumnorix the Heduan, that by his mediation they might obtain so
much of the Sequans. Dumnorix, what through favor and bounteous carriage, was
of great power in his Country, much affecting the Helvetians, by reason of his
marriage with Orgetorix daughter; and drawn on with a desire of a kingdom,
gave his mind to new projects; laboring to gratify many States, to tie them
the rather to favor his courses. And thereupon undertaking the business, got
the Sequans to give the Helvetians leave to pass through their Confines;
giving each other Pledges, that the Sequans should not interrupt the Helvetians
in their journey, nor they offer any injury to the Country.

It was told Caesar that the Helvetians were determined to pass through the
Territories of the Sequans and Heduans, on the confines of the Santons, who are
not far from the borders of the Tholosans, a people of the Province: which if
they did, he foresaw how dangerous it would be to have a warlike Nation, and
such as were enemies to the people of Rome to come so near them, and to have
the advantage of an open and plenteous Country.

For which causes he left T. Labienus a Legate to command those works, and he
himself made great journeys to get into Italy; where he enrolled two legions,
and took three more out of their wintering Camps near about Aquileia: and with
these five legions went the next way over the Alps into the further Gallia.
Where by the way the Centrons, Garoceli, and Caturiges taking advantage of the
open ground, did seek to keep the Army from passage: but being beaten and put
off by many skirmishes, they came in seven days from Ocellum, a town in the
furthest parts of the nearer Province, into the confines of the Vocontii, a
people of the further Pr^vince: from whence he led them into the territories of
the Allobroges, and so unto the Sabusians, that are the first beyond the Rhone,
bordering upon the Province.

By that time the Helvetians had carried their forces through the straights and
frontiers of the Sequans, into the Dominions of the Heduans, and began to
forage and pillage their Country. Who finding themselves unable to make
resistance, sent Messengers to Caesar to require aid; showing their deserts to
be such from time to time of the people of Rome, that might challenge a greater
respect then to have their Country spoiled, their children led into captivity,
their towns assaulted and taken, as it were in the sight of the Roman Army. At
the same instant likewise the Ambarri, that had dependency and alliance with
the Heduans, advised Caesar that their Country was utterly wasted, and they
s^arce able to keep the Enemy from entering their towns. In like manner also
the Allobroges that had farms and possessions beyond the Rhone, fled directly
to Caesar, complaining that there was nothing left them but the soil of their
Country.

With which advertisements Caesar was so moved, that he thought it not
convenient to linger further, or expect until the fortunes of their Allies
were all wasted, and that the Helvetians were come unto the Santon^s. The river
So ne.
Arar, that runs through the confines of the Heduans and Sequans into the
Rhone, passes away with such a stillnesse, that by view of the eye it can
hardly be discerned which way the water takes. This river did the Helvetians
pass over by Flotes and bridges of boats. When Caesar was advertised by his
Discoverers that three parts of their forces were already past the water, and
that the fourth was left behind on this side the river; about the third watch
of the night he went out of the Camp with three legions, and surprising that
part which was not as yet got over the river, slew a great part of them: the
rest fled into the next woods.

This part was the Tigurine Canton: (...).
and the Helvetians being all parted into four divisions, this Canton alone in
the memory of our fathers slew L. Cassius the Consul, and put his Army under
the Yoke. So whether it were by chance, or the providence of the Gods, that
part of the Helvetian State which gave so great a blow to the Roman people, was
the first that did penance for the same. Wherein Caesar took revenge not only
of the public, but of his particular loss too; forasmuch as the Tigurines had
in that battle with Cassius slain L. Piso, the Grandfather of L. Piso, his
father in law.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis defeat being chiefly a service of execution upon such as were taken at a
dangerous disadvantage, which men call unaware, contains these two advisoes.
First, not to neglect that advantage which Sertorius by the hairs of his horse
tail has proved to be very important; that beginning with a part, it is a
matter of no difficulty to overcome the whole. Secondly, it may serve for a
caveat, so to transport an Army over a water, where the enemy is within a
reasonable march, that no part may be so severed from the body of the Army,
that advantage may thereby be taken to cut them off altogether, and separate
them from themselves. The safest and most honorable way to transport an Army
over a river, is by a bridge, placing at each end sufficient troops of horse
and foot, to defend the Army from sudden assaults as they pass over the
water. And thus went Caesar over the Rhene into Germany two several times.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COncerning the circumstance of time, The manner of their watch.
when Caesar went out of his Camp, which is noted to be in the third watch, we
must understand that the Romans divided the whole night into four watches,
every watch containing three hours: and these watches were distinguished by
several notes and sounds of Cornets or Trumpets; that by the distinction and
diversity thereof it might easily be known what watch was founded. The charge
and office of sounding the watches belonged to the chiefest Centurion of a
legion, whom they called Primipilus, or Primus Centurio; at whose pavilion the
Trumpeters attended, to be directed by his houre-glasse.

The first watch began always at sunne-setting, and continued three hours (I
understand such hours as the night contained, being divided into twelve: for
the Romans divided their night as well as their day into twelve equal spaces,
which they called hours:) the second watch continued until midnight; and then
the third watch began, and contained likewise three hours: the fourth was
equal to the rest, and continued until sunne-rising. So that by this phrase
de tertia vigilia, we understand that Caesar went out of his Camp in the third
watch, which was after midnight: and so we must conceive of the rest of the
watches, as often as we shall find them mentioned in history.

Chap. V.
Caesar passes over the river Arar: his horsemen encounter with the
Helvetians, and are put to the worse.
AFter this overthrow he caused a bridge to be made over the river Arar, Caesar.
and carried over his Army to pursue the rest of the Helvetian forces. The
Helvetians much daunted at his sudden coming* that had got over the river in
one day, which they could scarce do in twenty, sent Ambassadors unto him, of
whom Divico was chief, that commanded the Helvetians in the war against
Cassius: who dealt with Caesar to this effect; That if the people of Rome would
make peace with the Helvetians, they would go into any part which Caesar should
appoint them: but if otherwise he would prosecute war, that he should
remember the overthrow which the people of Rome received by their valor; and
not to attribute it to their own worth, that they had surprised at unawares a
part of their Army, when such as had passed the river could not come to succor
them. They had learned of their forefathers, to contend rather by valor, then
by craft and devices; and therefore let him beware that the place wherein they
now were did not get a Name, or carry the mark to all future ages of an
eminent calamity to the people of Rome, and of the utter destruction of his
Army.

To this Caesar answered; That he made the less doubt of the success of these
businesses, in that he well remembered and knew those things which the Helvetian
Commissioners had related: and was so much the rather grieved thereat, because
it happened without any cause or desert of the people of Rome; who if he were
guilty of any wrong done unto them* it were a matter of no difficulty to
beware of their practices: but therein was his error, that he could think of
nothing which he had committed, that might cause him to fear; neither could he
fear without occasion. And if he would let pass former insolences, could he
forget those late and fresh injuries? for, that they had attempted to pass
through the Province by force of Arms sacked and pillaged the Heduans, Amba^s,
and Allobrogians that did so insolently vaunt of their victory, admiring that
these injuries were suffered so long time to rest unrevenged, came all in the
end to one pass. For the immortal Gods were went sometimes to give happiness
and long impunitie to men, that by the greater alteration of things, the
punishment should be the more grievous for their offenses. Howbeit if they
would give Hostages for the performance of those things which were to be agreed
upon, and satisfy the Heduans and Allobrogians, together with their Allies,
for the injuries they had done unto them, he would be content to make peace
with them.

Divico replied, that they were taught by their Ancestors to take Hostages
rather then to give them, whereof the people of Rome were witnesses: and
thereupon departed. The next day they removed the Camp, and the like did
Caesar, sending all his horse before, to the number of four thousand (which he
had raised in the Province, and drawn from the Heduans and their Associates) to
understand which way* the Enemy took: who prosecuting the rereward overhotly,
were forced to undertake the Helvetian Cavalry in a place of disadvantage; and
thereby lost some few of their Company.

The enemy made proud with that encounter, having with five hundred horse
beaten so great a multitude, did afterward make head with more assurance; and
sometimes stuck not to ^ally out of the Rereward and assault our Party. Caesar
kept back his men from fighting; and held it enough for the present, to keep
the Enemy from spoiling and harrying the Country: and went on for fifteen days
together in such manner, as there were but five or six miles between the first
troops of our Army, and the Rereward of theirs.

OBSERVATION.
THis example of the Helvetians may lesson a Commander, not to wax insolent
upon every overthrow which the enemy takes, but duly to weigh the true
causes of a victory gotten, or an overthrow taken; that apprehending the right
current of the action, he may neither vaunt of a blind victory, nor be
disma^ed at a casual mishap.

And herein let a heedfull wariness so moderate the sequels of victory in a
triumphing spirit, that the care and jealousy to keep still that
sweet-sounding fame on foot, may as far surpass the indu^trie which he first
used to obtain it, as the continuance of happiness does exceed the beginning
of good fortunes. For such is the nature of our soul, that although from her
infancy even to the manhood of her age she never found want of that which she
lusted after; yet when she meets with a counterbuffe to check her appetite,
and restrain her affections from their satisfaction, she is as much troubled in
that want, as if she had never received any contentment at all: for our will to
every object which it seeks after, begets always a new appetite, which
is not satisfied with a former quittance, but either seeks present payment,
or returns coffeehouse unto the mind.

And as our soul is of an everlasting being, and cannot think of an end to her
beginning; so she seeks a perpetual continuance of such things as she
lusts after: which he that means to hold Fortune his friend, will endeavor
to maintain.

Chap. VI.
Caesar sends to get the advantage of a hill, and so to give the Helvetians
battle: but is put off by false intelligence. The opportunity being lost, he
intends provision of Corn.
IN the mean time Caesar pressed the Heduans from day to day to bring in Corn,
Caesar.
according to their promise: for by reason of the cold temperature of Gallia,
which lies to the Northward, it happened not only that the Corn was far from
being ripe, but also that there was scarce forage for the horses. And the
provisions which were brought along the river Arar stood him in small stead at
that time, forasmuch as the Helvetians had taken their journey clean from the
River, and he would by no means forsake them.

The Heduans putting it off from one day to another, gave out still it was upon
coming. But when Caesar found the matter so long delayed, and that the day of
meting out Corn to the soldiers was at hand, calling before him the chiefest
Princes of the Heduans, of whom he had great numbers in his Camp, and amongst
them Divitiacus and Liscus, who for that time were the sovereign Magistrates
(which they call Vergobret, being yearly created, and having power of life and
death) he did greatly blame them, that he was not supplied with Corn from them,
the Enemy being so near, and in so needful a time, that it could neither be
bought for money, nor had out of the fields: especially when for their sake,
and at their request he had undertook that war. Whereat he was the rather
grieved, because he found himself forsaken of them.

At length Liscus* moved with Caesar's speech, discovered (which before he had
kept secret) that there were some of great authority amongst the Commons, and
could do more being private persons, then they could do being Magistrates.
These, by sedicious and bad speeches, did defer the people from bringing Corn:
showing it better for them, since they could not attain to the Empire of Gallia,
to undergo the soveraigntie of the Galls, then the Romans: for they were not
to doubt but if the Romans vanquished the Helvetians, they would bereave the
Heduans of their liberty with the rest of all Gallia. By these men are our
deliberations and counsels, or whatsoever else is done in the Camp, made known
to the Enemy. that they were not able to keep them in obedience. That he knew
well withal what danger he fell into by acquainting Caesar with these things;
which was the cause he had kept them from him so long.

Caesar perceived that Dumnorix (Divitiacus brother) was shot at by this speech
of Liscus: but forasmuch as he would not have those things handled in the
presence of so many, he speedily bra^e off the Council and retaining Liscus,
asked privately after those things which he had delivered in the Assembly;
whereunto he spoke more freely and boldly then before. And inquiring secretly
of others, he found it to be true, that Dumnorix was of great courage, and
singularly favored for his liberality of the Common people, desirous of
novelties and changes, and for many years had kept at a low rate the Taxes and
Impositions of the Heduans, forasmuch as no man durst contradict what he would
have done. By which courses he had increased his private estate, and got great
means to be liberal: for a great number of horsemen did only live upon his
entertainment, and were continually about him, being not only powerful at
home, but abroad also amongst diverse of the neighbor States; and for this
cause had married his Mother to a great Rich man, and of a Noble house, in the
Country of the Bituriges, himself had took a wife of the Helvetians, had
matched his sister by his Mother, and others of his k^, into other States. For
that affi^ty he favored and wished well to the Helvetians: and on the other
side hated the Romans, and specially Caesar of all others; for that by their
coming into Gallia his power was weakened, and Divitiacus his brother restored
to his ancient honor and dignity. If any miscasualtie happened to the Romans
^is hope was to obtain the Principality by the favor of the Helvetians:
whereas the soveraigntie of the Romans made him not only despair of the
kingdom, but also of the favor, or what other thing soever he now enjoyed. And
Caesar had found out by inquiry, that the beginning of the slight, when the
Cavalrie was routed, came from Dumnorix and his horsemen; for he commanded
those troops which the Heduans had sent to aid Caesar; and out of that
disorder the rest of the Cavalrie took a fright.

Which things being discovered, forasmuch as these suspicions were seconded
with matters of certainty, in that he had brought the Helvetians through the
confines of the Sequans, had caused hostages to be given on either side, and
done all those things not only without warrant from the State, but without
acquainting them therewith, and lastly, in that he was accused by the
Magistrate of the Heduans, he thought it cause sufficient for him to punish
him, or to command the State to do justice upon him. One thing there was which
might seem too oppugn all this; the singular affection of Divitiacus his
brother to the people of Rome; the great love he bare particularly to Caesar,
his loyalty, justice and temperance; and therefore he feared least his
punishment might any way alienate or offend Divitiacus sincere affection. And
therefore before he did any thing, he called Divitiacus, and putting aside ^he
ordinary Interpreters, he spoke to him by M. Valerius Procillus, one of the
principal men of the Province of Gallia, his familiar friend, and whom he
specially trusted in matters of importance, and took notice what Dumnorix had
uttered in his presence, at a Council of the Galls, showing also what
informations he had privately received concerning him: and therefore by way of
advice desired, that without any offense to him, either he himself might call
him in question, or the State take some course in the same.

Divitiacus embracing Caesar with many tears besought him not to take any
severe course with his brother; he knew well that all those things were true,
neither was there any man more grieved thereat then himself. For whereas he had
credit and reputation, both at home and amongst other States of Gallia, and his
brother being of small power by reason of his youth, was by his aid and
assistance grown into favor and authority, he used those means as an
advantage not only to weaken his authority, but to bring him to ruin: And
yet nevertheless he found himself overruled through brotherly affection, and
the opinion of the common people. And if Caesar should take any strict account
of these offenses, there was no man but would think it was done with his
privitie, considering the place he held in his favor; whereupon would
consequently follow on his behalf, a general alienation and distaste of all
Gallia.

As he uttered these things, with many other words accompanied with tears,
Caesar taking his right hand, (...)
comforted him, and desired him to entreat no further: for such was the respect
he had unto him, that for his sake, and at his request he forgave both the
injury done to the Commonwealth, and the displeasure which he had justly
conceived for the same. And thereupon called Dumnorix before him, and in the
presence of his brother showed him wherein he had deserved much blame and
reproof; told him what he had understood, and what the State complained on;
advised him to avoid all occasions of mislike for the future; that which was
past he had forgiven him, at Divitiacus his brothers entreaty. Howbeit he set
espials upon him, to observe his courses, that he might be informed what he
did, and with whom he conversed.

The same day, understanding by the Discoverers that the Enemy was lodged under
a Hill, about eight miles from his Camp, he sent some to take a view of the
Hill, and of the ascent from about the same. Which was found, and accordingly
reported unto him to be very easy. In the third watch of the night he sent
away T. Labienus the Legate with two legions, and those Guides that knew the
way; commanding him to possess himself of the top of that Hill. Himself, about
the fourth watch, marched on after the Enemy, the same way they had gone,
sending all his horsemen before.

P. Causidius, that was held for a great soldier first in the Army of L.
Sylla, and afterward with M. Crassus, was sent before with the Discoverers. At
the breaking of the day, when Labienus had got the top of the Hill, and himself
was come within a mile and a half of the Helvetian Camp, without any notice to
the Enemy either of his or Labienus approach (as was afterward found by the
Captives) Causidius came running as fast as his horse could drive, and told him
that the Hill which Labienus should have taken, was held by the Galls; which
he perceived plainly by the Arms and Ensigns of the Helvetians. Whereupon
Caesar drew his forces to the next Hill, and imbattelled the Army.

Labienus (according to the directions he had from Caesar, not to fight,
unless he saw his forces near the Enemies Camp that they might both at the
same time assault them from diverse parts at once) when he had took the Hill,
kept his men from battle, expecting our Army.

At length when it was far in the day, Caesar understood by the Discoverers
that the Hill was possessed by his Party; as also that the enemy was dislodged,
and that Causidius was so astonished with fear, that he reported to have seen
that which he saw not. The same day he followed the Enemy at the distance he
had formerly used, and encamped himself three miles from them. The day
following, forasmuch as the Army was to be paid in Corn within two days next
after, and that he was but eighteen miles distant from Bibract, a great and
opulent City of the Heduans, he turned aside from the Helvetians, and made
toward Bibract.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe getting of this hill as a place of advantage, Places o^ advantage in the
Roman wars.
was mavelous important to the happy success of the battle: for the
advantage of the place is not only noted as an especial cause of easy victory
throughout this history, but in all their wars, from the very cradle of their
Empire, it cleared their Armies from all difficulties, to what extremities
soever they were put. The first reason may be in regard of their Darts and
Slings, and especially their Piles; which being a heavy deadly weapon, could
not any way be so availeable being cast countermont, or in a plain level, as
when the de^livity and downfall of a swelling bank did naturally second their
violent impression. Neither can the shock at handy-blowes be any thing so
furious (which was a point of great respect in their battles) when the
soldiers spent their strength in franchising the in jury of a rising Mountain,
as when the place by a natural inclination did further their course.

And to conclude, if the battle succeeded not according to the^ desire, the
favor of the place afforded them means of a strong retreat, in the highest
part whereof they had commonly their Camps well fenced, and fortified against
all chances. If it be demanded, whether the upper ground be of like use in
regard of our weapons; I answer, that in a skirmish of shot I take the
advantage to ly in the lower ground rather then on the hill; for the pieces
being hastily charged, as commonly they are after the first volley, if the
bullet chance to ly loose, when the nose of the piece is lower then the breech,
it must needs fly at random, and be altogether uneffectuall: but when the
nose shall be raised upward to the side of a hill, the bullet being rammed in
with his own weight, shall fly with greater certainty and fury: considering the
nature of the powder to be such, that the more it is stopped and shut in, the
more it seeks to enlarge his room, and breaks forth with greater violence
and fury.

Concerning other weapons, I take the upper ground in the shock and encounter
to be advantageous, as well for the sword as the pike, and would deserve as
great respect, if the controversy were decided by these weapons, as seldom
times it is.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
BY Causidius his demeanor we see that verified which Physicians affirm, That
nothing will sooner carry our judgment out of her proper seat, then the
passion of fear; and that amongst soldiers themselves, whom custom has made
familiarlie acquainted with horror and death, it is able to turn a flock of
Sheep into a squadron of Corselets, and a few Canes or Oliers into Pikes and
Lanciers. Which may serve to advise a discreet General not easily to credit a
relation of that nature, when a man of reputation in so perfect a discipline,
and so experienced in the service of three famous Chiefs, was so surprised with
fear, that he could not discern his friends from his enemies. But I will speak
more of this passion in the war with A^^ovistus.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
IN every relation throughout the whole course of this history, Their manner
of victualling.
the first words are commonly these, Re frumentaria comparata, as the
foundation and strength of every expedition, without which no man can manage a
war according to the true maxims and rules of the Art Military, but must be
forced to relieve that inconvenience with the loss of many other advantages of
great consequence. Which gave occasion to Gaspar de Coligm, that famous
Admiral of France, amongst other Oracles of truth wherewith his mind was
marvellously enriched, often to use this saying, That he that will shape that
beast (meaning war) must begin with the belly. And this rule was diligently
observed by Caesar, who best knew how to express the true pourtraiture of that
beast in due proportion and lively resemblance.

The order of the Romans was, at the day of measuring, to give corn to every
particular soldier for a certain time, which was commonly desined by
circumstances: and by the measure which was given them they knew the day of the
next payment; for every footman received after the rate of a bushel a week,
which was thought sufficient for him and his servant. For if they had paid
them their whole stipend in money, it might have been wasted in unnecessarie
expenses: but by this means they were sure of provision for the time
determined; and the sequel of the war was providently cared for by the
General.

The Corn being delivered out, was husbanded, ground with hand-milles, which
they carried always with them, and made into hasty cakes, dainty enough for a
soldiers mouth, by no other but themselves and their servants. Neither could
they sell it or exchange it for bread; for Salust reckons this up amongst
other dishonours of the discipline corrupted, that the soldiers sold away
their corn which was given them by the Treasurer, and bought their bread by the
day. And this manner of provision had many special commodities, which are not
incident to our custom of victualling: for it is impossible that victuallers
should follow an Army upon a service in the Enemies Country, twenty or thirty
days together, with sufficient provision for an Army: And by that means the
General cannot attend advantages and fittest opportunities, which in tract of
time are often offered, but is forced either to hazard the whole upon unequal
terms, or to found an unwilling retreat.

And whereas the Victuallers are for the most part voluntary, respecting
nothing but their gain, and the soldiers on the other side careless of the
morrow, and prodigal of the present; in that turbulent marre-market, where the
seller has an eye only to his particular, and the buyer respects neither
the public good nor his private commodity, there is nothing to be looked for
but famine and confusion. Whereas the Romans, by their manner of provision,
imposed the general care of the public good upon the chief Commander, whose
duty it was to provide store of Corn for his Army; and the particular care
upon every private soldier, whom it especially concerned to see that the
allowance which the Commonweal had in plentiful manner given him for his
maintenance, might not be wasted through negligence or prodigality: which
excellent order the nature of our victuals will no way admit. Their Provinces,
and the next consederate States furnished their Armies continually with Corn;
as it appears by this place, that for provision of grain he depended
altogether upon the Hedui: and when they were in the Enemies Country, in the
time of harvest the soldiers went out to reap and gather Corn, and delivered
it threshed and cleansed to the Treasurer, that it might be kept until the day
of payment.

But to leave this fiugall and provident manner of provision, as unpossible to
be amitated by this age, let us return to our history, and see how the
Helvetians were led, by a probable error, to their last overthrow.

Chap. VII.
The Helvetians follow after Caesar, and overtake the Rereward. He imbattaileth
his legions upon the side of a hill; and gives order for the battle.
WHereof the Enemy being advertised by certain fugitives of the troup of horse
commanded by L. Emilius, Caesar.
presently, whether it were that they thought the Romans did turn away for
fear, (and the rather, for that the day before, having the advantage of the
upper ground, they refused to sight) or whether they thought to cut them off
from provision of Corn, they altered their purpose, and turning back again
began to attack our men in the Rere. Which Caesar perceiving, drew his forces
to the next hill, and sent the Cavalrie to sustain the charge of the Enemy: and
in the mean time in the midst of the hill made a triple battle, of four
legions of old soldiers; and upon the highest ridge thereof he placed the two
legions which he had lately enrolled in the hither Gallia, together with the
associate forces, filling the whole front of the hill with men, and stowing the
carriages in one place, which he commanded to be fenced and guarded by those
that were in the uppermost battalions.

The Helvetians on the other side conveyed their carriages and impediments into
one place; and having beaten back Caesar's horsemen with a thick thronged
Squadron, they put themselves into a Phalanx, and so pressed under the first
battle of the Roman legions.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
COncerning the true sense of this triple battle which Caesar made upon the
side of the hill, The manner of their imbattelling.
I understand it according to the ancient custom of the Romans, who in the
infancy of their Military discipline divided their Army into three sorts of
soldiers, Hastati, Principles, and Triarii; for I omit the Velites, as no part
of their standing battles: and of these they made three several battles, from
front to back. In the first battle were the Hastati, and they possessed the
whole front of the Army, and were called Acies prima. Behind these, By triple^
A^ies.
in a convenient distance, stood the Principes in like sort and order disposed,
and were called Acies secunda. And lastly, in a like correspondent distance
were the Triarii imbattelled, and made Aciem tertiam.

Their legion consisted of ten Companies, which they called Cohorts, and every
Cohort consisted of three small Companies, which they named Manipuli: a maniple
of the Hastati, a maniple of the Principes, and another of the Triarii, as I
will more particularly set down in the second book. And as these three kinds of
soldiers were separated by distance of place from front to back: so was every
battle divided into his maniples; and these were divided by little allies and
ways one from another, which were used to this purpose: The Hastati being in
front, did ever begin the battle: and if they found themselves too weak to
repel the enemy, or were happily forced to a retreat, they drew themselves
through these allies or distances, which were in the second battle, between the
maniples of the Principes, into the space which was between the Principes and
the Triarii; and there they rested themselves, whilst the Princepes took their
place and charged the Enemy. Or otherwise, if the Commanders found it needful,
they filled up those distances of the Principes; and so united with them into
one body, they charged the enemy all in gross; and then if they prevailed not,
they retired into the spaces between the Triarii, and so they gave the last
assault, all the three bodies being joined into one.

Now if we examine by the current of the history whether Caesar observed the
same order and division in his wars, we shall find little or no alteration at
all: for first, this triplex, Acies here mentioned, was no other thing but the
division of the Hastati, Principes and Triarii, according to the manner of the
first institution. And least any man should dream of that ordinary division,
which is likewise threefold, the two cornets and the battle, and in that sense
he might say to have made triplicem Aciem, let him understand that the
circumstances of the division have no coherence with that division: for in that
he says of the Helve^^ans, successerunt sub Aciem primam, they pressed near
the first battle or Vangard, he makes it clear that the Army was divided into
a triple battle from front to back: for otherwise he would have said,
successerunt sub dextrum aut sinistrum cornu, aut mediam Aciem; for so were the
parts of that division termed. Again, in the retreat which the Helvetians made
to the hill, when he says that the first and second battle followed close upon
the enemy, and the third opposed it self against the Boii and Tulingi, and
stood ready at the foot of the hill to charge the legions in the stank and on
the back; it is manifest that no other division can so fitly be applied to this
circumstance, as that from front to back.

But that place in the first of the Civil wars takes away all scruple of
controversy, where he uses the very same terms of prima, secunda, and tertia
Acies: forbeing to encamp himself near unto Afranius, and fearing least his
soldiers should be interrupted in their work, he caused the first and second
battle to stand in Arms, and keep their distance, to the end they might shroud
and cover the third battle (which was employed in making a ditch behind them)
from the view of the enemy; and this kind of imbattelling Caesar observed in
most of his fights: by which it appears that he used the very same order and
discipline for imbattelling, as was instituted by the old Romans.

Concerning the ancient names of Hastati, Principes, and Triarii, which Ramus
in his Militia Julii Caesaris urges to be omitted throughout the whole
history, I grant they are seldom used in these Commentaries in the sense of
their first institution: for the Haestati, when the discipline was first
erected, were the youngest poorest of the legionary soldiers; and the
Principes were the lusty and able-bodied men; and the Triarii the eldest and
best experienced. But in Caesar's Camp there was little or no difference either
of valor or years between the Hastati, Principes and Triarii; which he names
Prima, Secunda, and Tertia Acies; and therefore they were never termed by those
names in respect of that difference.

Notwithstanding in regard of order and degrees of discipline, that virtue
might be rewarded with honor, and that time might challenge the privilege of
a more worthy place, the said distinctions and terms were religiously observed.
For in the battle with Petreius at Ilerda in Spain, Lib. 1. de bello Civili.
he mentions the death of Q. Fulginius, ex primo Hastato legionis quart
aedecimae: and in the overthrow at Dyrrachium, Lib. 3. de bello Civili.
he says that the Eagle-bearer being grievously wounded, commended the safety
of his Ensign to the horsemen, all the Centurions of the first Cohort being
slain, praeter Principem priorem. And for the Triarii, there is no term more
frequent in Caesar then Primipilus; which name, by the rules of the ancient
discipline, was given to none but to the chiefest Centurion of the first
maniple of the Triarii: whereby it appears that the maniples kept the same
names in regard of a necessary distinction, although peradventure the Hastati
were as good soldiers as either the Principes or the Triarii.

As touching the spaces between the maniples, whereinto the first battle did
retire it self if occasion urged them, I never found any mention of them in
Caesar: excepting once here in England, where in a skirmish the Britans so
urged the court of guard, which kept watch before the Roman Camp, that Caesar
sent out two other Cohorts to succor them; who making distance between them as
they stood, the court of guard retired it self in safety through that space
into the Camp. Otherwise we never find that the first battle made any retreat
into the allies, between the maniples of the second battle; but when it failed
in any part, the second and third went presently to second them: as appears
in the battle following with Ariovistus, and in diverse others.

Concerning the use of this triple battle, Lib. 5. de militia Romana.
what can be said more then Lipsius has done? where he lays open the
particular commodities thereof, as far forth as a speculative judgment can
discern of things so far remote from the use of this age, which never imitateth
this triple battle but only in a march: for then commonly they make three
companies, a Vangard, a Battle, and a Rereward: but in imbattelling they draw
these three Companies all in front, making two cornets and the battle, without
any other troops to second them.

But let this suffice concerning Caesar his manner of imbattelling, and his
triplex Acies, until I come to the second book; where I will handle more
particularly the parts of a legion, and the commondity of their small
battalions.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Macedonian Phalanx is described by Polybius to be a square battle of
Pikemen, A Phalanx d^^^ribed.
consisting of sixteen in flank and five hundred in front; the soldiers
standing so close together, that the pikes of the fifth rank were extended
three foot beyond the front of the battle: the rest, whose pikes were not
serviceable by reason of their distance from the front, couched them upon the
shoulders of those that stood before them; and so locking them in together in
file, pressed forward, to hold up the sway or giving back (...) the former
ranks, and so to make the assault more violent and unresistable.

The Graecians were very skilful in this part of the Art Military, which
contains order and disposition in imbattelling: for they maintained public
professors, whom they called Tactici, to teach and instruct their youth the
practice and Art of all forms convenient for that purpose. And these Tactici
found by experience that sixteen in flank, so ordered as they were in a
Phalanx, were able to bear any shock, how violent so ever it charged upon them.
Which number of sixteen they made to consist of four doubles: as first unity
makes no order, for order consists in number and plurality; but unity
doubled makes two, the least of all orders, and this is the double: which
doubled again makes the second order, of four soldiers in a file; which
doubled the third time makes eight; and this doubled makes 16, which is the
fourth doubling from a unite; and in it they stayed, as in an absolute number
and square, whose root is four, the Quadruple in regard of both the extremes.
For every one of these places the Tactici had several names, by which they
were distinctly known. But the particular description requires a larger
discourse then can be comprehended in these short observations. He that
desires further knowledge of them, may read Aelianus, that lived in the time
of Adrian the Emperor; and Arianus in his history of Alexander the great,
with Mauritius, and Leo Imperator; where he shall have the divisions of
Tetraphalangia, Diphalangia, Phalangia unto a unite, with all the discipline of
the Grecians. The chiefest thing to be observed is, that the Grecians having
such skill in imbattelling, preferred a Phalanx before all other forms
whatsoever; either because the figure in it self was very strong; or otherwise
in regard that it fitted best their weapons, which were long pikes and targets.
But whether Caesar termed the battle of the Helvetians a Phalanx, in regard of
their thick manner of imbattelling only, or otherwise forasmuch as besides the
form, they used the natural weapon of a Phalanx, which was the pike, it
remains doubtful. Brancatio in his discourses upon this place, makes it no
controversy but that every soldier carried a pike and a target. The target is
particularly named in this history: but it cannot so easily be gathered by the
same that their offensive weapons were pikes. In the fight at the baggage it is
said, that many of the legionarie shouldiers were wounded through the
cart-wheeles, with tragulae and materae, which are commonly interpreted Spears
and Javelins: and I take them to be weapons longer then common darts; but
whether they were so long as the Sarissas of the Macedonians I cannot tell.
Howsoever this is certain, that the Helvetians have ever been reputed for the
true Phalangitae, next unto the Macedonians; and that in their thick and close
imbattelling, they failed not at this time of the form of a Phalanx: for they
roofed it so thick with targets, that Caesar says they were sore troubled,
because many of their targets were fastened and tied together with piles darted
through them. Which argues that their Phalanx was very thick thronged,
whatsoever their weapon was.

Chap. VIII.
Caesar sends away all the horses of ease; exhorts his men; and begins
the battle.
CAesar to take away all hope of safety by flight, Caesar.
first caused his own, and then all the private horses of ease to be carried
out of sight; and so using some motives of courage, began the battle. The
soldiers casting their Piles, with the advantage of the hill, did easily break
the Helvetians Phalanx, and then with their swords betook themselves to a
furious close.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe ancient Sages found it necessary to a faithful and serious execution of
such an action, Speeches of encouragement before they gave battle
to prepare the minds of their men with words of encouragement, and to take
away all scruple out of their conceits, either of the unlawfulness of the
cause, or disadvantage against the Enemy: for if at any time that saying be
true, that Oration plus potest quam pecunia, it is here more powerful and of
greater effect. For a donative or liberanza can but procure a mercenarie
endeavor, ever yielding to a better offer, and do oftentimes breed a suspicion
of wrong, even amongst those that are willingly enriched with them; and so
makes them slack to discharge their service with loyalty, yea oftentimes of
friends to become enemies. But inasmuch as speech discloseth the secrets of the
soul, and discovers the intent and drift of every action, a few good words
laying open the injury which is offered to innocence, how equity is
controlled with wrong, and justice controlled by iniquity (for it is necessary
that a Commander approve his Cause, and settle an opinion of right in the mind
of his soldiers, as it is easy to make that seem probable which so many offer
to defend with their blood; when indeed every man relieth upon another
knowledge, and respects nothing less the right) a few good words I say, will
so stir up their minds in the ferventnesse of the cause, that every man will
take himself particularly engaged in the action by the title of Equity; and
the rather, for that it jumpeth with the necessity of their condition. For men
are willing to do well, when welldoing agrees with that they would do:
otherwise the Act may happily be effected, but the mind never approves it by
assent.

And this manner of exhortation or speech of encouragement was never emitted by
Caesar in any conflict mentioned in this histori^: but he still used it as a
necessary instrument to set virtue on foot, and the only means to stir up
alacrity. Or if it happened that his men were at any time discouraged by
disaster or cross accident, Lib. 7. de bello Gallico.
as they were at Gergobia, and at the two overthrows he had at Dyrrachium, he
never would adventure to give battle until he had encouraged them again, and
confirmed their minds in valor and resolution. But this age has put on so
scornful a humor, that it cannot hear a speech in this key, sound it never so
gravely, without scoffing and derision: and on the other side discontinuance of
so necessary a part has bred at length such an inutilent pudorem in our chief
Commanders, that they had rather lose the gain of a great advantage, then buy
it with words to be delivered in public.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IN this Chapter we may further observe the violence of the Roman pile, which
being a heavy deadly weapon, could hardly be frustrated with any resistance,
and in that respect was very proper and effectual against a Phalanx, or any
other thick and close battle, or wheresoever else stroke was certain, or could
hardly deceive the aim of the caster: for in such encounters it so galled the
enemy, that they were neither able to keep their order, nor answer the assault
with a resisting counterbuffe. By which it appears that the only remedy
against the Pile was to make the ranks thin; allowing to every soldier a large
podisme or place to stand in, that so the stroke might of it self fall without
hurt, or by foresight be prevented; as it shall plainly appear by the sequel
of this history, which I will not omit to note, as the places shall offer
themselves to the examination of this discourse.

But as touching the Pile, The Roman Pile described.
which is so often mentioned in the Roman history, Polybius describes it in
this manner; A Pile, says he, is a casting weapon, the staff whereof is
almost three cubits long, and it has palmarem diametrum, a hand-breadth in
thickness. The staves were armed with a head of iron, equal in length to the
staff it self: But in that sort, that half the head was fastened up to the
middle of the staff, with plates of iron, like the head of a Halbert; and the
other half stuck out at the end of the staff like a pike, containing a fingers
breadth in thickness, and so decreasing less and less upto the point, which
was barbed. This head was so slender toward the points, that the weight of the
staff would bend it as it stuck, as appears in this battle of the
Helvetians. This weapon was peculiar to the Romans, and was called Pilum, as
Varro notes, Lib. ^. de militia Romans.
of Pilum a Pestell, quod Hosts feriret ut pilum. Lipsius finding that
Palmarem diametrum was too great a thickness to be managed by any man's hand,
interprets it to be four inches in circuit, if the staff were either round
or square, for they had of both sorts, and so he makes it very manageable; but
nothing answerable to the description given by Polybius, either inform or
weight.

Patricius in his Paralleli makes the staff to have Palmarem diametrum in the
butt end, Lib. 5.
but the rest of the staff he makes to decrease taperwise, unto the head of
iron, where it has the thickness of a man's finger; and so it answers both
in form and weight to a Pestell, as may be seen by the figure, and I take it to
be the meaning of Polybius. Patricius in that place sets down four
discommodities of the Pile. First, a furious and hot-spirited enemy will
easily prevent the darting of the Pile, with a nimble and speedy close. And so
we read that in the battle which Caesar had with Ariovistus, the Germans came
so violently upn them, that the soldiers cast away their piles and betook them
to their swords. And likewise in that worthy battle between Catiline and
Marcus Petreius, Salus^.
they cast away their piles on either part. The second discommodity was, that
the piles being so heavy could not be cast any distance, but were only
serviceable at hand. Thirdly, they could not be cast with any aim, or as they
say, point blank. And lastly, the soldiers were to take advantage of ground
backward when they threw them: which might easily disorder their troops, if
they were not very well experienced.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THe last thing which I observe in this speciality is, that the legionary
soldiers had no other offensive weapon but one pile or two at the most, and
their swords. By which it may be gathered that all their victories came by
buckling at handy-blowes; for they came always so near before they cast their
pile, that they left themselves no more time then might conveniently serve them
to draw their swords: neither would their Arms of defense, which was complete,
besides a large target which they carried on their left arm, suffer them to
make any long pursuit, or continued chase, whenever a light-armed enemy did
make any speedy retreat; as will more plainly appear by that which follows.

Chap. IX.
The Helvetians fainting in the battle, retire to a Hill: the Romans follow
after, and the battle is continued.
IT was a great hinderance to the Galls in their fight, Caesar.
that many of their Targets were struck through, and tied together with one
fall of a Pile: for so it happened that it could neither be THE BATTLE WHICH
CAESAR HAD WITH THE HELVETIANS.

led out, by reason of the bowing of the Iron, nor could they use their left
hand for the defense of themselves. Whereby it fell out that many of them
(after a wearisome toil) did cast away their targets, and fought naked and
unarmed. At length, fainting with wounds, they began to give place, and
retreated to a Hill a mile off.

The Hill being taken, and the Legions following on to drive them from thence,
the Boii and ^ulingi, to the number of fifteen thousand, being in the Rere of
the Enemy, to guard the lag of their Army, setting on our men as they were in
pursuit of the rest, did charge them upon the open side, and began to enclose
them about: which the Helvetians that had got the Hill perceiving began again
to fall upon our men, and renewed the battle. The Romans dividing themselves,
turned their Ensigns two ways; the first and second Army fought against the
Helvetians that returned from the Hill; and the third battle took charge of
them that stood ready to enclose them about. And here the fight was doubtful
and furious for a long time; until at length they were no longer able to
endure the violence of the legionary soldiers: and so one part betook
themselves as at the first to the Hill; and the other, to the place where their
Carts and baggage were lodged.

And hitherto there was not one man seen to have turned his back in all this
conflict; although the fight continued from the seventh hour until the evening.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
COncerning the Ensigns of the Romans, The Ensigns of the Romans.
we are to understand that the chiefest Ensign of every Legion was an Eagle,
which always attended upon the Primipile or chief Centurion of the said
Legion. The Ensign of a Maniple was either a Hand or a Dragon, a Wolf or a
Sphinx; as it appears (besides the testimony of history) by the Column of
Trajan in Rome, wherein the Ensigns are figured with such pourtraitures: so
that these Ensigns resembling the proportions of living creatures, had their
foreparts always carried that way which the legious were to march, or where
they were to fight. And therefore in this history by the aspect and carrying of
the Ensigns, the front of the Army was commonly noted: as in this place it is
said, that the Ensigns of the first and second battle were carried toward the
hill, whither the Helvetians had made their retreat; and the Ensigns of the
third battle looked another way, toward the Boii and Tulingi, which stood on
the foot of the hill. By which is signified how the legions were divided to
resist the brunt of the double encounter.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COncerning the time of the day, we are to understand that the Romans used not
the same division of the day as we commonly do: The division of their day.
for they divided their artificial (which is the space between sunrising and
setting) into twelve equal parts, which the Astronomers called unequal or
planetary hours. The first hour of the day began always at sunrising; the
sixth hour was always high noon; and the twelfth hour was sunsetting. And
as the day waxed longer or shorter, so these hours were either greater or
less: neither did they agree with equal or equinoctial hours, such as are
now used, but only at the Aequinoctium: so that by this manner of reckoning, Ab
hora septima ad vesperum is meant, the battle began about one of the clock
according to our Computation, and continued until the evening. The like we
must understand throughout this whole history, as often as there is mention
made of the circumstance of time.

Chap. X.
The Helvetians continue their fight at the carriages: but at length they leave
the field, and march toward Langres.
IN like manner the fight was kept on foot at the carriages, Caesar.
until it was far in the night; the place being fortified with Carts instead
of a Rampire: and the Enemy casting their weapons from the upper ground, and
with Darts and Javelins under the wagons, and from between the wheels, did
wound and gall many of our men. After a long conflict our soldiers took their
carriages and their Camp; wherein Orgetorix daughter and one of his sons were
taken. There were saved out of that battle about one hundred and thirty
thousand persons; who marching continually all that night, and making no stay
in any place, came the fourth day into the confines of the Lingones: Langres.
for by reason of the soldiers hurts, and the burial of the slain, wherein
there was spent three days, there was no pursuit made after them.

OBSERVATION.
IF we consider the nature of the action, and look into the true cause of their
overthrow, as far as the right sense of the history shall direct our judgment,
we shall find valor not to be wanting in the Helvetians, but rather
superlatively abounding in the Romans. For that vehement opinion of their
valiancy and manhood, which carried them out of the starits of the Country to
seek larger fortunes in other kingdoms, was not so abated with the loss of the
fourth part of their Host at the river Arar, nor with the terrible fury of
those veterane legions; but it yielded this effect, which Caesar in his
estimate of valor thought memorable, that for five hours space or more there
was not one man seen to have turned his back. Their manner of imbattelling, had
not the Romans been the enemy, was unresistable. For being cast into a Ph^lanx,
which in the Plains of Asia had made Alexander the great and the Macedomans
famous, they did as far surpass any other form of imbattelling (supposing
that the convenience of the place did fit that disposition) wherein the
strength of the whole is divided into many particulars, as the violence of a
great body exceeds the force and motion of his parts, when it is divided into
smaller cantons. For as in a phalanx many particular soldiers are by a close
and compact order incorporated into one entire body; so their several virtues
are gathered into one head, and are as parts united into one general force;
which easily swalloweth up the ability of many other lesser quantities, into
which a greater strength is equally divided.

The advantage of the place which they got by retreat, and the double charge
wherewith they engaged the Romans, both in front and flank, was able in an
indifferent conflict to have made Fortune fugitive, and bear arms on their
side; or at the least so to have st^^med the swelling tide of victory, which
carried the Romans so violently in the chase, that they might have been equal
shaters in the honor of the day; had it not followed from an Ocean of valor,
whose course could not be hindered with any stops and oppositions, until it
came to that height which true valor and unexampled resolution affected. And
yet the height of this courage could not so allay the heat of the Helvetians
fury, but it brake forth into dangerous flames, when it came to the place where
their carriages were laid, and cost much blood and many men's lives before they
quitted the place: for they fought with that spirit and industry, as though
they meant to make trial whether their fortune would prove no better in the
might, then it had done in the day.

The overthrow of the Tig^r^e Canton at the river Arar proceeded rather from
want of good duc^tions (which is the less to be marvelled at, considering they
had no chief Commander as we read of) then from any defect of valor: Periculum
(...).
for the rules of Military government: (...) especial care in passing, over a
water; for then especially an Army is in greatest danger, when it is disordered
and divided. And therefore the Romans achieved this victory by the horrible
vigilance (as Tully calls it) of their Commande^, who always watched
opportunitates re^ been gerendae, as necessary and speedy means to overcome in
all his wars.

Chap. XI.
Caesar, after three days respite, follows after the Helvetians: he takes
them to mercy, and sends them back again to the Country.
Caesar sent Letters and Messengers to the Lingones, Caesar.
forbidding to supply them either with Cornor any other thing; which if they
did, he would esteem of them as of the Helvetians. Himself, after three days
respite, follwed after with all his forces. The Helvetians, pressed with the
want of all necessary provisions, sent Commissioners unto him to treat of their
rendition. Who meeting him on the way, cast themselves at his feet, and with
humble words and tears desired Peace. Being commanded to attend in the place
they then were, they accordingly obeyed. Caesar being come up unto them,
required hostages, together with their Arms and servants; as also the fugitives
that were sled unto them.

While those things were sought out and brought, in the night time, six
thousand men or there abouts of the Canton called Verbigene, whether moved
through fear of being executed after their Arms were given up, or induced with
hope of escaping (as thinking that amongst such a multitude of people that were
there to be rendered, their flight should not be missed, or at least would be
concealed) did in the beginning of the night leave the Helvetian Camp, and made
toward the Rhene, and the confines of the Germans.

Caesar understanding through whose territories they passed, commanded them to
seek them out, and bring them back again, if they would be blameless in that
behalf: And being brought back, dealt with them as enemies. All the rest,
after Hostages, Arms and fugitives were given in, he received to mercy; and
commanded the Helvetians, Tulinges, and Latobriges to return into their Country
from whence they came. And forasmuch as having lost all their provision of
Corn, there remained nothing at home to satisfy hunger, he gave order to the
Allebroges to supply them with Corn; and willed the Helvetians to reedify their
Towns and Cities, that they had before destroyed and forsaken. Which he did
specially for this cause; that the Germans inhabiting beyond the Rhene might
not be invited with the richness of that soil, to seat themselves so near
neighbors to the Province of Gallia, and the Allobroges. The Boij, at the
mediation of the Heduans, as knowing them to be men of great valor, were
permitted to dwell in their Country; to whom they gave lands and possessions,
and received them into the same liberties and immunities as they themselves
enjoyed.

In the Helvetian Camp was found a List, or Register, writ in Greek, and
brought to Caesar, containing by pole the whole number that left their Country,
how many of them were able to bear Arms: and in like manner the boys, old men
and women were enrolled apart by themselves. The summary whereof was, that the
whole number of the Helvetians amounted to two hundred sixty three thousand,
the Tulinges to thirty six thousand, the Latobriges to fourteen, the Rauracks
to twenty three, the Boii to thirty two. Of these there were that bare Arms,
one hundred ninety two thousand. The total of all were three hundred sixty
eight thousand. A view being taken by Caesar's appointment of those that
returned home, there were found one hundred and ten thousand.

OBSERVATION.
THe directions concerning their rendry and return were very sound, and of good
consequence. For first, in that he commanded them to attend his coming in the
place where they were, he took away all motions of new trouble, which often
removes might have caused, by the opportunity of some accident which might have
happened: assuring himself that their abode in that place would increase their
miseries, and consequently ripen that desire of peace which they made show of;
considering that the Langones, in whose territories they were, durst not for
fear of Caesar's displeasure furnish them with any necessaries in that
extremity. Touching the security which the Romans required of the loyalty of
such people as they conquered, their manner was to take as hostages a
sufficient number of the men-children of the chiefest men of that Nation; whose
lives depended upon their Parents fidelity, and ended with the first suspicion
of their rebellion. Which custom, besides the present good, promised the like
or better security to the next age; when as those children by conversation and
acquaintance should be so affected to the Roman Empire, that returning to their
own country, their actions might rather tend to the advancement thereof, then
any way be prejudicial to the same. And least the love of liberty and freedom
should prevail more with them, then that affection which Nature had enjoined
them to bear to their children; he did what he could to take away the means and
instruments of their rebellion, by causing them to deliver up such Arms and
weapons as were there present: and so to become suitable to that petition of
peace which they had made.

The sum of all is this; he corrected the insolency of a furious people, and
reduced them to a feeling of their own madness. He kept them from sacking the
possessions of many thousands in the continent of Gallia, and sent them back
again to continue their name and Nation in the place where they first
inhabited; which continues unto this day. And thus we see that there is no
humor so headstrong, nor so backed with strength of circumstances, but it may
meet with a remedy to qualify the insolency thereof, and make it subject to
correction and controulment.

Chap. XII.
The States of Gallia congratulate Caesar's victory: they call a council, and
discover their inward grief concerning Ariovistus and his forces.
THe Helvetian war being thus ended, Caesar.
the Princes and chief men of all the States of Gallia came to Caesar, to
congratulate the happiness of this victory; insomuch as they well understood,
that albeit the people of Rome had by the course of this war revenged the
injuries which heretofore they had done unto them: yet nevertheless the issue
thereof did redound no less profitable to the peace of Gallia, then to the
Roman Empire; forasmuch as the Helvetians left their houses and Country
abounding with all plenty and prosperity, for no other purpose but to invade
the whole Country of Gallia, and to bring it in subjection to themselves; and
choosing out of that large Continent some fit and fruitful place of
habitation, to make the rest of the States their Tributaries. They required
further, that with his good leave they might call a general assembly at a day
prefixed, of all the States of Gallia, forasmuch as they had matters of great
importance to be handled, which they desired (with a common consent) to prefer
to his consideration. Which being granted, and the day of meeting appointed,
they bound themselves by oath not to reveal the causes of their assembly, but
to such as should be designed by common counsel.

The Parliament being broken up, the same Princes returned to Caesar, and
desired that they might in secret treat with him of the safety of themselves,
and all the rest: which being granted, they cast themselves in lamentable
manner at his feet, contending with a great earnestness that those things
which they delivered might not be revealed, as they did to have their petition
granted: forasmuch as they saw that the discovery of such declarations as they
propounded, would necessarily pull upon them most grievous afflictions.

Divitiacus the Heduan, in the name of the rest, delivered, That Gallia was
divided into two factions: the Hedui were the head of the one, and the Arverni
of the other. These two States contending many years for the principality, the
Arverni with the Sequans their Clients, hired the Germans to take their part;
of whom at first there passed over the Rhene some fifteen thousand: but
afterward, these barbarous people having tasted the plenty and civility of the
Galls, drew over many more, that now there were no less then one hundred and
twenty thousand. With these the Hedui and their Clients had once or oftener
fought; but the success sorted to their own calamity, and the utter overthrow
of their Nobility and Senate: with which losses they were so broken and
decayed, that whereas heretofore as well by their own credit, as by the favor
of the people of Rome, they struck a great stroke throughout all Gallia; they
were now driven to deliver the chiefest of their State as pledges to the
Sequans, and to bind themselves by oath never to seek their release or
freedom, nor to implore the aid of the people of Rome, nor to seek means to
free themselves from their sovereignty; only himself of all the Heduans could
not be brought to take that oath, or to give his children as hostages: for
which cause he fled to Rome, and besought help of the Senate, being no way
obliged to the contrary either by oath or hostages.

But it so fell out, that the victory became more grievous to the Sequans then
to the Heduans: for that Ariovistus king of the Germans was planted in their
territories; and being already possessed of a third part of their Country, which
was the best part of all Gallia, did now require the Sequans to forgo another
third part, for that a few months before there were come unto him twenty four
thousand Harudes, to whom lands and possessions were to be allotted. Whereby it
would come to pass within a few years that all the Galls would be driven out
of their dwellings, and all the Germans would come over the Rhene; for there
was no comparison between Gallia and Germany, either in richness of soil or
fashion of life.

Concerning Ariovistus, after he had once defeated the Galls in a battle near
Amagetobrig, he carried himself very cruelly and insolently, requiring the
children of all the Nobility for hostages, and showing strange examples of
torture upon them. If any thing were done not according to his command or
desire, he would easily show himself to be a barbarous, fierce and hasty man,
whose tyranny they could no longer endure: and unless there were help to be
found in Caesar and the people of Rome, all the Galls must, as the Helvetians
did, forsake their Country, and seek new houses and seats of habitation, far
remote from the Germans, and try their fortunes, whatever befell them. If these
things should happily be discovered to Ariovistus, he would doubtless take a
severe revenge of all the pledges in his custody. Caesar might by his own
authority, or the presence of his Army, or by the renown of his late victory,
or by the countenance of the people of Rome, keep the Germans from transporting
any more Colonies into Gallia, and defend it from the injuries of Ariovistus.
This speech being delivered by Divitiacus, all that were present with much
weeping besought Caesar to give them relief.

Caesar observed that only the Sequans of all the rest did no such matter, or
were so affected as the others were; but with their heads hanging down, looked
mournfully upon the ground: and wondering at it, asked them the cause thereof.
To which they made no reply, but stood silent, with the same countenance of
sorrow. And having oftentimes iterated his demand, without gaining any word of
answer; Divitiacus the Heduan replied that the state of the Sequans was herein
more miserable and grievous then the rest; that they of all others durst not
complain, or implore aid, although it were in secret, as having before their
eyes the cruelty of Ariovistus being absent, no less then if he were present.
And the rather, for that other men had safe means of flying away; but the
Sequans, having received Ariovistus into their Country, and made him Master of
their towns, were necessarily to undergo all miseries.

These things being known, Caesar encouraged the Galls with good words, and
promised them to have a care of that matter, as having great hope, that by his
means and power Ariovistus should be forced to offer no further injuries. And
thereupon dismissed the Council.

OBSERVATIONS.
IN this relation there are diverse points worthily recommended to the
discretion of such as are willing to be directed by other men's misadventures.
As first, into what extremities ambition does drive her thirsty favorites, by
suppressing the better faculties of the soul, and setting such unbridled
motions on foot, as carry men headlong into most desperate attempts. For as it
had deserved commendation in either faction, so to have carried their
emulation, that by their own means and strength applied to the rule of good
government, their authority might wholly have swayed the inclination of the
weaker states: so was it most odious in the Sequani to call in foreign forces,
to satisfy the appetite of their untempered humor; and in the end they were
accordingly rewarded.

Secondly, it appears how dangerous a thing it is to make a stranger a
stickler in a quarrel which civil dissension has broached, when the party
that called him in shall not be as able to refuse his assistance upon occasion,
as he was willing to entertain it for advantage.

Lastly, the often discontents of these States show the force of a present
evil, which possesses so vehemently the powers of the soul, that any other
calamity, either already past, or yet to come, how great soever, seems
tolerable and easy, in regard of that smart which the present grief inflicteth.

So the Sequani chose rather to captivate their liberty to the Barbarism of a
savage Nation, then to endure the Hedui to take the hand of them. And again, to
make themselves vassals to the Romans, rather then endure the usurping cruelty
of the Germans. And finally (as the sequel of the history will discover) to
hazard the loss of life and Country, then to suffer the taxes and impositions
of the Romans. So predominant is the present evil in men's affections, and so it
prevails at the seat of our judgment.

Chap. XIII.
The reasons that moved Caesar to undertake this war.
MAny were the inducements which moved him to take that business to heart.
Caesar.
As first, that the Heduans, who were oftentimes styled by the Senate with the
title of Brethren, Cousins and Allies, were in the servitude and thraldom of
the Germans, and that their hostages were with Ariovistus and the Sequans:
which in so great a sovereignty of the people of Rome, he took to be very
dishonorable both to himself and the Commonweal. As also for that he saw it
very dangerous for the Roman Empire, that the Germans should accustom by
little and little to stock in such multitudes into Gallia. Neither did he think
he could moderate or restrain such fierce and barbarous people; but that having
possessed all the Continent of Gallia, they would, as the Cimbri and Teutons
had done before, break out into the Province, and so into Italy: especially the
Sequans, being divided from the Province but with the river Rhone.

These things he thought fit with all speed to prevent: and the rather, for
that Ariovistus was grown to that pride and arrogance, as was not to be
suffered. For which respect he thought it expedient to send Ambassadors unto
him, to appoint some indifferent place for parlee; for that he had to treat
with him concerning public affairs, and some matters that did much import both
of them.

OBSERVATIONS.
I May here take an occasion to speak somewhat concerning the authority of the
Roman Generals, Tthe authority of the Roman Generals.
which we see to be very large; considering that Caesar of himself, without any
further leave of the Senate and people of Rome (for what may be gathered by
this history) did undertake a war of that consequence, and put in jeopardy the
Legions, the Province, or what other interest the Romans had in Gallia.

Wherein we are to understand, that when the State of Rome did allot the
government of any Province to a Proconsul, they did likewise recommend unto him
the careful managing of such accidents as might any way concern the good of
that regiment. For considering that such causes as may trouble a well-ordered
government, are as well external and foreign, as internal and bred within
the bounds of that Empire: it had been to small purpose to have given him only
authority to maintain a course of wholesome government at home, and no means to
take away such oppositions which foreign accident might set up against him.
And so we see that Caesar undertook the Helvetian war, in regard of the safety
of the Province: and this again with Ariovistus, least the Germans should so
multiply in Gallia, that the Province it self might at length be endangered.
Neither had their Generals authority only to undertake these wars; but the
absolute disposition also of the whole course thereof, whether it were to
treat, capitulate, compound, or what else they thought convenient for the
advancement of the Commonweal, did wholly rest upon their direction; republica
been gesta being the style of the warrant for all their actions.

Neither may we think that any subordinate or depending authority can be so
powerful in the course of businesses as that which absolutely commands
without controulment, and proceeds according to the opportunity of time and
occasion, further then either prescription or limitation can direct it. And
therefore whenever the Roman affairs were distressed, and driven to an
exigent, they created a Dictator, that had regiam potestatem, such an absolute
command, that whatsoever power rested either in the Consuls or in the Tribunes,
in the Senate or in the people, it gave way to the greatness of that
Magistrate; that there might be no let or retracting power to weaken that
course, which nothing but an absolute command could establish for the good of
the Commonweal. And yet notwithstanding this absolute government, they
attributed such power to the course of humane actions, that by the punishment
which they inflicted upon dissolute and unfortunate Leaders, they seemed to
acknowledge that no man, how circumspect soever, could promise more then
likelihoods or probabilities of good fortune, as far forth as his means and
industry could atchieve it. Live. lib. 8.
For old M. Fabius pleading for the life of his gallant son, and opposing the
rigor of Papirius the Dictator with examples of antiquity, says, Populi
quidem, penes quem potestas omnium rerum ofset, ne iram quidem unquam
atrociorem fuisse in eos qui temeritate atque inscitia exercitus amisissent,
quam ut pecunia eos multaret: capite anquisitum ob rem male gestam de
imperatore nullum ad eam diem esse. The people, says he, in whom the sovereign
power of things consists, never showed greater displeasure against such as
had lost an Army either by rashness or unskilfulnesse, then imposing a fine
upon them: but to bring the life of a General in question for failing in his
endeavors, was never heard of to that day.

The condition of the inferior Officers of their Camp was far otherwise in
regard of Military discipline: for prescription guided them in all their
services, and the chiefest part of their duty was obedience; although they saw
evident reason to the contrary, and found their directions unperfect in that
behalf: and therefore Caesar says upon that occasion, Lib. 3. de bello Civili.
Aliae sunt legati parts atque imperatoris: alter omnia agere ad praescriptum,
alter libere ad summam rerum consulere debet. The office of a Legate or
Lieutenant differs from that of a General: the one doing all things by
prescription; and the other freely deliberating of whatsoever may concern the
cause. And this course the Romans held concerning the authority of their
Generals.

Chap. XIV.
Ariovistus his answer. A second Embassage, with the success thereof.
TO that Embassage Ariovistus answered; Caesar.
That if his occasions had required Caesar's assistance, he would have furthered
them with his own presence: and he thought it as reasonable, that if it were in
his hand to pleasure the Romans, Caesar ought not to think much of the like
labor. For his own part, he durst not come into those parts of Gallia which
Caesar possessed, without an Army; nor could he draw an Army to a head
without great trouble and expense. The thing that he most wondered at was, that
the Romans or Caesar had to do in that part of Gallia, which the law of Arms
had made his inheritance.

Upon the return of this answer Caesar framed a second Embassage, the purport
whereof was; Forasmuch as he thus requited the honor wherewith the people of
Rome had beautified his best dignity (for in Caesar's Consulship the authority
of their Empire had vouchsafed to esteem of him as a King in his dominions, and
as a friend unto their State) and that he disdained to admit of a Parlee
concerning the common good; let him know that these were the things that he
required to be performed by him: First, that he should not suffer any more
troops of Germans to be transported over the Rhene into Gallia. Secondly, that
he should deliver up those Hostages which he had of the Heduans and Sequans,
and should cease to molest them further with war or other injuries. These
things if he did perform, Caesar would assure him of a greatefull acceptance on
the behalf of the people of Rome: otherwise, forasmuch as in the Consulships of
M. Messala and L. Piso the Senate had decreed, That he that should obtain the
government of the Province, should as near as it would stand with the good of
the Commonweal endeavor the defense of their Associates and Friends, he would
not neglect the injuries done unto the Heduans.

To these Mandates Ariovistus replied: The law of Arms kept this tenure
amongst all Nations, That a Conqueror might govern a subdued people according
as he thought best for his own safety. The people of Rome did not direct the
course of their government by another man's prescript, but by their own
arbitrament: and as he had not directed the Romans, so ought not they to meddle
with his proceedings.

The Heduans having tried the fortune of war, were by right become his
Stipendaries; wherein Caesar offered great wrong, for that his coming thither
had made their tribute much less unto him then before. Touching their
Hostages, his purpose was still to retain them. Neither would he make any
unjust war upon any of their Associates, if they observed the Articles of
agreement, and paid their yearly tribute: but if they failed in that, the
fraternity of the Romans would come too late to their succor. If Caesar would
needs undertake their quarrel, he was to let him know, that no man ever
contended with Ariovistus but to his own destruction. Try when he would, he
should find what valor consisted in the Germans, that for fourteen years
space never were covered with other roof then the Heavens.

OBSERVATION.
ANd thus far proceeded Caesar with Ariovistus, in debating the wrongs and
grievances of the Hedui. Wherein appears the difference between a matter
handled according to moral civility, in terms of mildness and pleasing accent,
and that which is rudely delivered, and depends rather upon the plainness of
the project, then suited with words fit for persuasion. For that which
Ariovistus alleged to make good his interest in Gallia, was as consonant to
reason as any thing to the contrary urged by Caesar.

But as the Lacedemonian said of one, That he spoke the truth otherwise then it
should be spoken: so it may be said of Ariovistus his answer, that it wanted
that sweeting humanity which gives credit to verity it self, forasmuch as it
proceeds from a well-tempered spirit, wherein no turbulent passion seems to
control the force of reason, nor hinder the sentence of true judgment; but
rather seasoning her conceptions with humility, does convertly complain of open
Wrong, and strengthen her assertions with a pleasing delivery. And therefore
how great soever the controversy be, that party which exceeds not the bounds
of modesty, but makes mildness his chiefest advocate, will so prevail in any
auditory, that albeit equity does disallow her title, yet the manner of his
carriage will clear him from offering wrong, in that he uses the sequels of
innocence to prove his interest in that which he demands. But to leave this
circumstance, as only to be noted, let us proceed to the war it self, which I
made the second part of this history.

Chap. XV.
The Treviri bring news of one hundred townships of the Suevi that (...) come
to the Khene. Caesar takes in Besanson: his soldiers are surprised with an
extreme fear of the Germans.
AT the same time that this answer was returned to Caesar, Caesar.
there came likewise Ambassadors from the Heduans and Trevires. The Heduans
complained that the Harudes lately transported into Gallia, did depopulate and
waste their borders, and that they could not buy their peace of Ariovistus with
giving of Hostages for their allegiance. The Trevires brought news of one
hundred townships of the Suevi that were come to the river Rhene, to seek a
passage into Gallia, conducted by Nasua and Cimberius, two brethren. Whereat
Caesar bring exceedingly moved, thought his best means of prevention to consist
in celerity, least the difficulty of resisting should grow greater, when those
new forces of the Suevi were joined with the power which was already with
Ariovistus. And therefore having provided Corn, he made have to seek the
Germans. And having gone three days journey on his way, he had intelligence
that Ariovistus with all his forces was gone to take in Besanson, the greatest
town of the Sequans; and that he was three days journey on his way already.

Caesar knowing how much it imported him to prevent that disadvantage
(forasmuch as the Town abounded with all necessary provisions for war, and
was so sited, that he that commanded it might prolong the war at his own
pleasure; being incircled with the river Alduabis, le Doux.
excepting a small space of six hundred foot, which was fortified with an
exceeding high Hill, the foot whereof did at each end join unto the river, and
the Hill strengthened with a wall, and so joined to the town) made all the have
he could to take the town, and there left a garrison. And as he rested there a
few days, to make provision of Corn and other necessaries, the Romans
enquiring of the Galls and Merchants concerning the quality of the Germans,
understood that they were men of a huge stature, of courage invincible, and of
great practice and experience in feats of Arms; whereof the Galls had
oftentimes made trial: For when they encountered them, they were not able to
endure so much as the sternenesse of their countenance, or the fierceness of
their looks. The whole Army conceived such a fear thereat, that all men's minds
were wonderfully appalled. This fear began first amongst the Tribunes and
Commanders of horse, and such others as for friendship sake followed Caesar
from Rome, and had small or no skill in matter of war. These men faining some
one excuse and some another, of very earnest business which called them home,
desired leave to depart. Some others, whom shame would not suffer to forsake
the Camp, bewrayed the like passion in their countenances and behavior: for
hiding themselves in their Tents, they either bewailed their destiny secretly
to themselves, or otherwise with their acquaintance and familiar friends. They
lamented the danger they were all like to fall into; so that throughout the
whole Camp there was nothing but making and signing of Testaments. And through
the tal^ and fearfulness of these men the old soldiers and Centurions, and
such as had great experience in the Camp, began by little and little to
apprehend the terror wherewith the rest were amazed: and those that would seem
to be less fearful, said, they feared not the enemy, but the narrowness of
the ways, and the greatness of the woods that were between them and
Ariovistus; or otherwise they cast doubts where they might have provision of
Corn. And many stuck not to tell Caesar, that whenever he should give
commandment to march forward, or advance the Standards, the soldiers would
refuse to do it.

OBSERVATION.
WHerein for that we find a strange alteration, no way answerable to that
courage which a late-gotten victory does usually breed in noble spirits; it
shall not be amiss a little to insist upon the quality of the accident, and to
gather such brief instructions from their weakness, as may best serve to
qualify the amazement of horror, and mitigate the frensy of so violent a
passion. And albeit my ignorance in the works of Nature cannot promise any such
learning, as may discover the true means and secret motions whereby a
fore-conceived fear does trouble the senses, and astonish the mind; yet since
the history offers it to our scanning, give me leave only to note the
strangeness of the circumstance, and rudely to delineate the pourtraiture of a
beast oftener seen then well known, using the unwieldy pile for my pencill, and
suting my speech to a warlike auditory. I know not how it happens, but thus
it may happen, that when the senses receive intelligence of an eminent evil,
which may either dispossess the soul of this earthly mansion, or trouble the
quiet wherein she rests, the spirits (as it seems) by the direction of
their sovereign Mistress, retire themselves into the inner cabinets and
secreter pavillions of the body, where the chiefest part of the soul is most
resident: and so they leave the frontier quarters of her kingdom naked and
ungarrisoned, the better to strengthen that capital City of the heart, out of
which the life cannot fly, but to the utter ruin and destruction of the whole
body. For fear is not only a perturbation of the soul proceeding from the
opinion it has of some evil to come; but it is also a contraction and closing
up of the heart, when the blood and the spirits are recalled from the outward
parts, to assist that place which gives life and motion to all the rest. In
this Chaos and confusion of humors and spirits, when the multiplicity of
faculties (which otherwise require an ordinate distinction in their service,
and by the order of nature should be disposed into several instruments, and be
dilated throughout the body) are thus blended confusedly together, the
conceptions of the mind, which presently rise from these advertisements, are
suddenly choked with the disordered mixture of so many several properties,
and are stifled as it were in the throng, before they can be transported to our
judgment or examined by reason, for want of that ordinate uniformity of place
which nature requires in the powers of the mind. And hence proceeds that
amazedness and astonishment, which so daunteth the hearts of men, when they
are taken with this passion, that because the soul gives no counsel, the body
can afford no motion, but stands forzen through the extremity of the
perturbation, benumbed in sense, and forsaken of the spirits. So we read that
Theophilus the Emperor, in an overthrow which he had given him by the
Hagarens, was stricken with such an excessive fear, that he could not betake
himself to ^light (Adeo pavor etiam auxilia formidat) until one of his chief
Commanders shaking him by the shoulder, as though he were to awake him out of a
deep sleep, threatened him with present death, if he would not prevent the ruin
of the Empire, by using that means which was only left for his safety.

Again, if in that turbulent consistory the spirits chance distinctly to
receive any apprehension proceeding from the forgeing faculty of the soul, they
carry it presently to execution before it be examined by reason, and follow the
action with such vehemence, that they leave no place for better advice and
reknowledgement. And this is the cause that oftentimes through extremity of
fear, to avoid one evil we run headlong into a worse, and find a greater danger
in the means we use to avoid a less; because reason did not first try the
apprehension, before it was delivered to external Agents. And so we find in
the battle between Germanicus and the Almans, that two gross troops of
soldiers were driven into such an ecstasy of fear, that taking, contrary
courses to avoid one and the same danger, they either of them fled to that
place which the other had quitted: neither could they be advised by each others
flight, that the places which they sought after afforded them no remedy.

And albeit reason be called to counsel when a parlee is summoned of
composition, yet it bears so small a sway in the consultation, that the will
of it self concludes to betray virtue to dishonor, and so to purchase peace
with the loss of the souls chiefest treasure: which ought ever to be estimated
at a higher rate then any other happiness which can betide the mind. For among
all the sensible things of this world, there is no creature that has such a
confused fear, or is more amazed therewith, then man is: neither is there any
misery greater, or any bondage more shameful, servile or vile, then this,
which makes men very abjects of all other creatures, to redeem the evil which
the danger threatens: and then does shame follow after so base a part, and
aggravate the burden of the sin with loathsome disgrace, and penitent
coffeehouse; adding oftentimes Aloes to Wormwood, and making the end
grievouser then the beginning. And thus does danger breed fear, and fear
yields to dishonor, and dishonor brings shame, and shame being always
mingled with wrath and anger, revengeth it self upon it self, and brings more
peril then the first danger could threaten.

Whereby it appears that as the affections of the mind are bred one of
another; so on the contrary part some are bridled and restrained by others: for
as envy, hatred and anger rise oftentimes of love; so is joy lessened with
grief, envy with mercy, and fear with shame.

But forasmuch as all such perturbations proceed of ignorance and
inconsiderateness, whereby we think that the evil is greater then indeed it
is; let us consider what disposition of our judgment best moderateth the
violent heat of these affections. And first, touching the passages whereby the
soul receives her advertisements, as they are of diverse natures, the chiefest
whereof are the eye and the ear; so are their avisoes different in quality, and
require a several consideration to be rightly discerned. The intelligence by
the eye is more certain then that which comes by the way of hearing; forasmuch
as the eye is a witness it self of every action whereof it takes notice,
neither is it deceived in its proper object: and therefore the judgment is not
much troubled to determine definitively how great or how small the danger is,
when the relations carry always that certainty. And albeit the care in like
manner be not deceived in her proper object, for it faithfully gives up that
sense which sound has delivered unto it; yet forasmuch as the fantasy has
greater scope to coin her vain conceptions, in regard of the absence of the
action, it is necessary that the discoursing faculty be called for an
assistant, before the judgment can truly determine: and then it will appear
that the truth does not always answer the report which is made thereof;
inasmuch as diseased spirits will not stick to dilate or qualify relations,
according to the key wherein they themselves are tuned. And therefore this
first comes to be considered of in all such violent commotions, by which of
these two senses the first intelligence was received. But concerning the
judgment it self this is most certain, that the more it is infected with the
corruptions of the flesh, the more violent are the affections of the soul. And
again, the purer the judgment is, and the higher it is lifted up from earthly
natures, being no further interessed therein then to hold a resolution of well
doing, the fewer and lighter are the affections which trouble and molest it:
for then it better discerns the truth and falsehood, good or evil that is in
things.

To redress this inconvenience, Caesar betook himself to the fittest and most
proper remedy; which was by the authority of his speech to restore reason to
her former dignity, and by discourse, which fear had interrupted in them, to
put down a usurping passion, which had so troubled the government of the soul,
recalling it to the mean of true resolution, which was to moderate audacity
with wariness, but not to choke valor with beastly cowardice: for these
Oratory inducing persuasions were not the least point of their discipline;
considering how they framed the inward habit of the mind (being the fountain
and beginning of all motion) to give life and force to those actions, which the
severity of outward discipline commanded. For as laws and constitutions of men
enforce obedience of the body: so reason and persuasions must win the souls
consent, according to that saying, Homines duci volunt, non cogi.

Chap. XVI.
Caesar his speech to the Army concerning this fear.
CAesar being informed of these things, Caesar.
called a Council of war, admitting all the Centurions, of what degrees or
orders soever, unto the same. And being thus assembled, he greatly blamed them,
First, that any should be so inquisitive, as to imagine to themselves whither,
and upon what service they were carried. Concerning Ariovistus, he had in the
time of Caesar's Consulship most earnestly sued for the friendship of the people
of Rome: and why then should any man misdeem that he should so unadvisedly go
back from his duty? For his own part he was verily persuaded, that if
Ariovistus once knew his demands, and understood the reasonable offers that he
would make him, he would not easily reject his friendship, or the favor of the
people of Rome. But if he were so mad as to make war upon them, why should they
fear him? or why should they despair either of their own prowess, or of
Caesar's diligence? For if it came to that point, the enemy that they were to
encounter had been tried what he could do twice before; first in the memory of
their fathers, when the Cambri and Teuton^ were vanquished by Marius, at what
time the Army merited no less honor then the General: and now of late again
in Italy, at the insurrection of the Bondmen; who were not a little furthered
through the practice and discipline they had learned of the Romans. Whereby it
might be discerned how good a thing it is to be constant and resolute; insomuch
as whom for a time they feared without cause, being naked and unarmed, the same
men afterward (although well armed and Conquerers withal) they nobly
overcame. And to be short, these were no other Germans then those whom the
Helvetians had vanquished in diverse conflicts; and not only in their own
Country, where the Helvetians dwelt themselves, but also even at home at their
own doors: and yet the same Helvetians were not able to make their party good
against our Armies.

If any man were moved at the flight and overthrow of the Galls, upon inquiry
he should find, that being wearied with continual wars (after that A^^ovistus
had for many months together kept himself within his Camp, in a boggy and fenny
Country) and despairing of any occasion of battle, he suddenly set upon them as
they were dispersed, and so overcame them, rather by policy then by force.
Which although it took place against savage and unskilful people, yet was not
Ariovistus so simple as to think that he could ensnare our Armies with the like
subtilties. As for those that fained the cause of their fear to be the
difficulty of provision of Corn, and the dangerousnesse of the way, they seemed
very arrogant in their conceits, in presuming to direct their General, as if
he had not known what pertained to his duty. The Sequans and Lingons had
undertook that charge; besides that Corn was almost ripe every where in the
fields: and what the ways were should shortly be seen.

Whereas it was given out that the soldiers would not obey his Mandates, nor
advance their Standards, he little valued it; for he was well assured, that if
an Army refused to be obedient to their General, it was either because he was
thought to be unfortunate in his enterprises, or else for that he was
notoriously convicted of Avarice: but the whole course of his life should
witness his innocence, and the overthrow of the Helvetians his happiness. And
therefore that which he was minded to have put off for a longer time, he would
now put in execution out of hand: for the night following, at the fourth watch
he would dislodge from thence; that without further delay he might understand,
whether shame and respect of their duty would prevail more with them, then fear
or cowardice. And though he wist that no man else would follow him, yet
notwithstanding he would go with the tenth legion alone, of whom he had no
doubt or suspicion, and would take them as a guard to his person.

Caesar had chiefly favored this legion, and put much trust in them for their
valor.

Upon the making of this speech, the minds of all men were wonderfully changed;
for it bred in every one a great alacrity and desire to fight: neither did the
tenth legion forget to give him thanks by their Tribunes for the good opinion
he had of them, assuring him of their readiness to set forward to the war. And
then likewise the rest of the legions made means by the Tribunes of the
soldiers and Centurions of the first Orders, to give Caesar satisfaction;
protesting they neither doubted nor feared, nor gave any censure of the issue
of that war, but always left it to the wisdom of the General.

Their satisfaction being taken and a view being made of the ways by
Divitiacus (whom of all the Galls he best trusted) and report being by him
made, that in fetching a compass of fifty miles he might carry his Army in
open and champain Countries; in the fourth watch of the night, according to his
former saying, he set forward.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IN the speech it self are presented many specialities, both concerning their
discipline and Military instructions, which deserve examination: amongst which
I note first, the extraordinary number admitted to the Council; Omnium ordinum
ad id concilium ad^ibitis Conturionibus: whereas there were usually no more
admitted to their council of war but the Legates, Questor, Tribunes, and the
Centurions of the first Orders: which I understand to be the first Hastate, the
first Pri^^eps, and the first Pilu^^ of every legion. And this is manifestly
proved out of the fi^th Commentary, where Cicero was besieged by Ambiorix: in
which, amongst other, there were two valiant Centurions, Puisio and Varenus,
between whom there was every year great emulation for place of preferment: and
jam primis ord^^bus (...), says Caesar, that is, they had passed by degrees
through the lower orders of the legion, and were very near the dignity of the
first cohort; wherein, as in all the rest, there were three maniples, and in
every maniple two orders.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe first motive which he uses to recall their exiled judgment, discovered
their breath of discipline: for contrary to the course of Military government,
they had presumed not only to make inquiry, but to give out whether, and upon
what service they were carried; which in the rigor of Camp-policy could not
pass without due punishment. For what can more contradict the fortunate
success of an expedition, then to suffer it to be measured with the vulgar
conceit, or weighed in the balance of such false judgments? especially when
those weak Censors are to be Actors and Executioners of the design: for then
every man will suit the nature of the action according to his own humor;
although his humor be led with blindness, and have no other direction then an
uncertain apprehension of profit or disadvantage.

And in this case there cannot be a better president then Nature has
prescribed: for as natural Agents, whilst they concur to produce a work of
absolute perfection, neither know what they do, nor can discern the things they
look upon, but yield themselves to be guided by a Moderatour of infinite
knowledge: so ought a multitude to submit their ability to the direction of
some wise and prudent Captain, that beholds the action in true honor, and
balanceth the loss of many particulars with the health and safety of the
public good. For if every man should prescribe, who should obey? Tam nescire
quaedam milites, quam scire oportet, says Otho in Tacitus, upon the like
disorder: and again, Parendo potius quam imperia ducum sciscitando, res
militares continentur. Which proves that the greatest virtue which is required
in a soldier is obedience; as a thing wherein the force of all discipline
consists.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
IN the reason which he uses to prove their disparity of valor in regard of
the Romans, Whether men have greater co^rage in their own or in a strangers
Country.
who were superior to the Helvetians that had oftentimes overthrown the
Germans, he strengthens the argument with the advantage of the place, and
says that the Helvetians had put them to the worst, not only where the
Helvetians dwelt themselves, but even in their own Country, and at home at
their own doors: as though an enemy were charged with greater fury in the
presence of a man's own Country and dearest friends, then in a strange and
unknown land.

This question was handled in the Roman Senate by Fabius Maximus, and Scipio
surnamed Africanus, when they sat in council how to rid their Country of that
subtle Carthaginian, that for sixteen years space had fretted like a canker
the beauty of Italy, wasted the land, and brought it to desolation, sacked
their confederates, or alienated them from their duty, overthrown their Armies,
slain their Consuls, and threatened their imperial City with ruin and
destruction. Fabius, upon the motion to make war in Africa, thought it
agreeable to nature first to defend that which was their own, before they
attempted other men's possessions: when peace was established in Italy, then let
war be set on foot in Africa; and first let them be without fear themselves,
before they went about to terrify others: for those forces afforded little hope
of victory in another kingdom, that were not able to free their own Country
from so dangerous an enemy. Alcibiades overthrew the Athenian Commonweal with
the like counsel: and concerning Hannibal, let them be sure of this, that they
should find him a sorer enemy in his own Country then in another kingdom.

Scipio on the other side, carried on with the honor of so glorious an
enterprise, wanted neither reasons nor example to impugn Fabius his authority:
for he showed that Agathocles the Syracusian king, being a long time afflicted
with the Punick war, averted the Carthaginian from Sicily by transporting his
forces into Africa. But how powerful it was to take away fear by retorting
danger upon the Oppressor, could there be a presenter example then Hannibal?
There was great difference in the nature of the action, between the spoil and
wast of a strangers Country, and to see their own native Country wasted with
sword and destruction: Plus animi est inferenti periculum, quam propulsanti.
For he that invadeth another kingdom, easily discovers both the advantage
which may be taken against the enemy, and the strength whereupon he rests.
And amongst the variable events of war, many unexpected occasions arise, which
present victory to him that is ready to take it; and many strange chances so
alter the course of things, that no foresight can discern what may happen.

With these and the like remonstrances, this question of no less doubt then
importance was handled by two famous and worthy Captains, whose minds (as it
seemed) were entangled with such particular affections for the present, as
might rather draw them to wrest reason to their own humor, then to determine
in sincerity of judgment upon what specialities the truth was grounded, in the
contrariety of their positions. But to leave other commodities or disadvantages
which were annexed unto either part, I will only set down some reasons, to
prove how valor and courage may either grow or be abated by the accidents
which rise in a war of that nature. And first this cannot be denied, the
testimony of an infallible truth being grounded upon the property of man's
nature, that as advantage brings hope of victory, and hope conceives such
spirits as usually follow, when the thing which is hoped for is effected, and
thereby the courage becomes hardy and resolute in victory: so on the other
side, disadvantage and danger breed fear, and fear so checketh valor, and
controuleth the spirits, that virtue and honor give place to distrust, and
yield up their interest to such directours as can afford nothing but diffidence
and irresolution.

Neither can to be denied but he that sets upon an enemy in a strange
country, and so preventeth such attempts as might be made upon his own
territories, has that advantage which gives life unto action, and steeleth
his enterprise with resolution. For besides the commodity of leaving when he
list, and proceeding as far forth as he shall find his means able to fortunate
his attempts, he knows that the strife and controversy is not forth is native
Country, which he quietly enjoys, and is reserved at all times to entertain
him, howsoever Fortune shall favor his designs: but for a Strangers kingdom,
which his ambition thirsts after, wherein, forasmuch as the riches and wealth
of that State are laid before them as the recompense of their labor, besides
the honor which is achieved thereby, every man's valor soareth at a high
pitch, and their courage is increased, without any trouble or disturbance of
the other faculties of the mind. But when a Prince shall be assaulted in his
own ^ingdome, and in the sight of his subjects have ^is land consumed with
ruin and destruction; the danger will so disturb the powers of the soul, tha^
^^ough the turbulent disorder of the weaker parts, the better faculties will
lose their prerogative of advising how the enemy may be best resisted, when as
every man shall apprehend the terror of the danger, and few or none conceive
the true means to avoid it.

And albeit the presence of such things as are dearest to his soul, as the
piety and respect of aged parents, the tender affection toward wife and
children, are sufficient to raise valor to the highest point of resolution;
yet the motives are of such weight, as will rather make them dissident of their
own worth, as unsufficient to maintain so great a cause, then hold them in that
key which true honor affects: forasmuch as the terror and fear of so great
a danger will present a greater measure of woes to their mind, then the hope of
victory can afford them joy.

Hence therefore grows the difference between him that seeks to maintain
that estate which he has in possession by force of Arms, and another that
seeks to increase his means by valor. For the former is presented with the
danger of losing all his estate; which affrighteth and troubles, having no
other reward propounded unto him: and the other looks upon the advantage
which he gains by overcoming, which much increases his valor, without any
loss or disadvantage, if he chance to be put to the worst. And therefore there
is always great odds between him that has already lost his goods, and is by
that means become desperate, having nothing further to lose; and another that
yet keeps his substance, but is in danger to lose it: for fear will so dismay
his mind, that he will rather distrust his own ability, then entertain a
resolution of valor.

To prove this, we need not seek other examples, then those imperial Cities in
whose cause this controversy was first moved. For when Hannibal was come into
Italy, and had defeated Sempronius the Consul at Trebia, the Romans were driven
into such an ecstasy of terror, that they believed verily that the enemy was
then coming to assault the City; neither had they any hope or aid in
themselves to keep or defend the same. On the other side, Scipio was no sooner
landed in Africa, but there was such a tumult in Carthage, as though the City
had been already taken: neither could the opinion of victory, which Hannibal by
a conquering Army in Italy had confirmed for sixteen years together, prevail in
the apprehension of so imminent a danger. And then that which Fabius borrowed
of Nature to teach the Romans (that first men ought to defend their own, before
they seek other men's possessitons) was carefully followed by the Carthaginians:
for with all speed they sent for Hannibal out of Italy, to be their Champion
against young Scipio. If therefore other things be correspondent (as there are
many other particularities concerning the power and strength of either Nation
to be considered) I take it much better for a Prince to invade an enemy in his
own country, then to attend him at home in his own kingdom.

THE FOURTH OBSERVATION.
THe last circumstance which I note in this speech, was the trust which he
reposed in the tenth legion, being in it self peradventure as faulty as any
other: wherein he showed great Art and singular Wisdom. For he that has once
offended, and is both burdened with the guilt of conscience and upbraided with
the reproach of men, can hardly be persuaded that his fault can be purged with
any satisfaction. And although the punishment be remitted, yet the memory of
the fact will never be blotted out with any virtuous action, but still
remains, to cast dishonor upon the offender, and to accuse him of disloyalty.

And therefore it oftentimes happens, that an error being once rashly
committed, through despair of remission admits no true penitency, but either
draws on more grievous crimes, confirming that of the Poet, Scelere scelus
^uendum est; or maintains his error by wilful obstinacy: as it is said of
the Lion, that being found by Hunters in a Cave, he will rather die in the place
then quit it, for shame that he was found in so base a place of refuge; and
therefore his property is thus expressed, ingrediendo caecus, exeundo
protervus. This did Caesar wisely prevent, by clearing the tenth legion of that
of which he accused the rest of the Army; which made them the more earnest to
answer his expectation, inasmuch as they were witness to themselves of a
common error: and the other legious envying at their fortune, resolved to show
as great alacrity in the sequel of the war, and to deserve more then the
judgment of the Emperor had imputed to their fellows.

Chap. XVII.
The treaty between Caesar and Ariovistus.
THe seventh day, Caesar.
as he continued on his march, his Espials brought him word that Ariovistus
with all his forces was within twenty four miles of that place: who as soon as
he understood of Caesar's coming, sent Ambassadors unto him, declaring that
forasmuch as he was come somewhat nearer, and that he might do it without
danger, he was content to admit of a parlee. Caesar refused not the offer,
thinking now to find him reasonable, in that he offered of his own accord what
he had formerly denied at Caesar's request: and thereby was in good hope, that
understanding what was required, he would in the end consider of the many
favors he had received from the people of Rome, and desist from such wilful
courses.

The fifth day following was appointed for the Treaty. In the mean time there
passed often Messages reciprocally between them. Ariovistus required that
Caesar would not bring any footmen to the parlee, for that he feared to be
circumvented by treachery; and therefore thought fit that either party should
come only with their Cavalrie: otherwise he would not give meeting.

Caesar, not willing to put off the Treaty for any such cause, nor yet daring
to put himself in trust to the French horse, thought it most convenient to
leave the French Riders behind him, and to set the soldiers of the tenth
legion (whom he best trusted) upon their horses; that if he stood in need, he
might have a faithful guard of his friends about him. Whereupon one of the
soldiers said prettily, that Caesar had done more for them then he had
promised; for he had said before he would make the tenth legion as a guard to
his person, and now he had enrolled them all for horsemen.

There was a great and open Plain, and in the midst thereof a rising Mount,
which was almost in the mid way between both the Camps: and thither, according
to the agreement, they came to parlee. The legion which Caesar had brought with
him on horseback, he placed two hundred paces from the said Mount: and likewise
the horsemen of Ariovistus stood in the same distance. Ariovistus requested
they might talk on horseback, and bring each of them ten persons to the
conference. At their meeting, Caesar began his speech with a commemoration of
the favors and benefits the Senate had done unto him, in that he was by their
authority entitled by the name of a King and a Friend, and thereupon had
received great gifts: Which favor fell but unto a few, and was by the Romans
given only to men of great desert: whereas he, without any occasion of access
unto them, or other just cause on his behalf, had obtained those honors
through his courtesy, and the bounty of the Senate.

He showed him further what ancient and reasonable causes of amity tied them so
firm to the Heduans: what Decrees and orders of Senate had oftentimes been made
in their favor and behoof: That from all antiquity the Heduan^ had held the
principality of Gallia, and that long before they were in amity with the
Romans. The people of Rome had always this (...), not only to endeavor that
their Allies and confederates should not lose any thing of their proper; but
also that they might increase in dignity and reputation: and therefore who
could endure to see that forced from them, which they quietly possessed when
they entered league with the Romans?

In like manner he required the performance of such things which he had
formerly given in charge to his Ambassadors; that he should not make war
either upon the Heduans, or their Associates: that he should restore their
hostages: and if he could not return any part of the Germans back again over
the Rhene, yet he should forbear to bring any more into that Coun^^y.

Ariovistus made little answer to Caesar's demands, but spoke much of his own
virtues and valor; That he was come over the Rhene, not out of his own desire,
but at the mediation and entreaty of the Galls; that he had not left his house
and kindred but with great hope of high rewards; the possessions he had in
Gallia were given him by themselves; their hostages were voluntarily delivered
unto him; he took tribute by the law of Arms, which was such as Conquerours
might lay upon the vanquished; he made no war upon the Galls, but the Galls
made war upon him: All the States of Gallia came to fight against him, and had
put themselves into the field, whose forces were in one battle all dispersed
and overthrown. If they were desirous to make another trial, he was ready to
undertake them: but if they would have peace, it were an injury to retract that
tribute which of their own accord they had paid until that time. He expected
that the Amity of the people of Rome should be rather an honor and a safety,
then a loss unto him, and that he had sought it to that end: but if by their
means the tribute due unto him should be retracted, he would as willingly
refuse their friendship as he had desired it. In that he had brought so many
Germans into Gallia, it was rather for his own defense, then of any purpose to
subdue the Country; as might appear by that he had not come thither but upon
entreaty, and set no war on foot but for his own defense. He was seated in
Gallia before the Romans came thither; neither had the people of Rome before
that time carried their Army beyond the bounds of their Province: and therefore
he knew not what he meant to intrude himself into his possessions. This was his
Province of Gallia, as that was ours: and as it was not lawful for him to
command in our quarters, so it was not fitting that they should disturb his
government.

In that he alleged the Heduans were by decree of Senate adopted into the
amity of the people of Rome; he was not so barbarous, or unacquainted with the
course of things, as to be ignorant that in the last war of the Allobroges
they were aiding and assisting to the Romans: and in the quarrel the Heduans
had with the Sequans, the Romans were in like manner assisting unto them.
Whereupon he had good occasion to suspect that Caesar, under pretense of league
and amity, kept his Army in Gallia for his ruin and destruction: and that if
he did not depart and withdraw his Army out of those Countries, he would no
longer take him for a friend, but for an enemy. And if his fortune were to stay
him, he should perform a very acceptable service to many noble and chief men of
Rome (as he had well understood by Letters and Messengers he had received from
them) whose favor and amity he should purchase by taking away his life. But if
he would depart, and leave him the free possession of Gallia, he would gratify
him with great rewards: and what war soever he desired to be undertaken, should
be gone through withal, without his peril or charge.

Many things were spoken by Ca^sar, to show why he could not desist from that
course; for neither was it his use, nor the custom of the people of Rome, to
forsake their wel-deserving Associates: neither could he think that Gallia did
rather belong to Ariovistus then the Romans. The Arve^s and Rutenes were in due
course of war subdued by Q. Fabius Maximus: whom the people of Rome had
pardoned, and not reduced to a Province, or made them stipendiaries. And if
antiquity were looked into, the people of Rome had good claim to that
Country: but forasmuch as the intention and will of the Senate was they should
remain a free people, they were suffered to be governed by their own laws, and
left unto themselves, notwithstanding any former conquest by force of Arms.

Whilst these things were treated of in parlee, it was told Caesar that
Ariovistus horsemen did approach nearer to the Mount, and that accosting our
men they assaulted them with stones and other weapons: whereupon he brake off,
and betook himself to his Party, commanding them not to cast a weapon at the
enemy. For albeit he well perceived he might without peril of that elect legion
give battle to his Cavalry; yet he thought sit to refrain, least it should be
said he had intrapped them with a parlee, contrary to faith made and agreement.
After it was reported amongst the vulgar soldiers how arrogantly Ariovistus
had carried himself in the treaty, forbidding the Romans to frequent any part
of Gallia, and that their Cavalry had assaulted our men, and that thereupon the
parlee brake off; the Army was possessed with a greater alacrity and desire to
fight then before. Two days after Ariovistus sent Messengers to Caesar,
signifying that he desired to treat with him concerning those things which were
left unperfect, and thereupon willed him to appoint another day of meeting; or
if he liked not that, to send some unto him with authority to conclude of such
things as should be found expedient. Caesar was unwilling to give any further
meeting; and the rather, for that the day before the Germans could not be
restrained from violence and force of Arms. Neither did he think he might
safely expose the person of any of his followers to the inhumanity of such
barbarous people; and therefore thought it fittest to send unto him M. Valerius
Procillus the son of C. Valerius Caburius, ae virtuous young man, and well
bred, whose father was made free of Rome by C. Valor. Flaccus: which he did the
rather in regard of his singular integrity, and his perfectness in the French
tongue, which Ariovistus through long continuance had learned; and that the
Germans had no cause of offense against him. And with him he sent M. Titius,
that was familiarly acquainted with Ariovistus, with instruction to hear what
was said, and to make report thereof to Caesar. Whom as soon as Ariovistus saw
come into his Camp, he cried out in the presence of his Army, demanding
wherefore they came thither, and whether they were not sent as Spies. And as
they were about to make answer, he cut them off and commanded them to be put in
Irons.

The same day he removed his Camp, and lodged himself under a hill, six miles
from Caesar. The next day he brought his forces along by Caesar's Camp, and
encamped himself two miles beyond him; of purpose to cut off all such corn and
convoies as should be sent to the Romans by the Heduans and Sequans. From that
day forward by the space of five days together, Caesar imbattelled his men
before his Camp; to the intent that if Ariovistus had a mind to give battle,
he might do it when he would. But Ariovistus all this while kept his Army
within his Camp* and daily sent out his horsemen to skirmish with the Romans.

This was the manner of fighting which the Germans had practiced: there were
6000 horsemen, and as many strong and nimble footmen, whom the horsemen had
selected out of the whole host, every man one for his safeguard: these they had
always at hand with them in battle, and unto these they resorted for succor.
If the horsemen were overcharged, these ever stepped in to help them. If any one
were wounded or unhorsed, they came about him and succored him. If the matter
required either to adventure forward, or to retire speedily back again, their
swiftness was such (through continual exercise) that hanging on the
horse-mane by the one hand, they would run as fast as the horses.

OBSERVATION.
IT may seem strange unto the soldiers of our time, Footmen intermingled
amongst horsemen.
that the footmen should be mingled pellmell amongst the horsemen, without hurt
and disadvantage to themselves; so unlikely it is that they should either
succor the horsemen in any danger, or annoy the enemy: and therefore some have
imagined that these footmen in the encounter cast themselves into one body, and
so charging the enemy assisted the horsemen. But the circumstances of this
place, and of others which I will allege (...) purpose, plainly evince that
these footmen were mingled indifferently amongst the ^orsemen, to assist every
particular man as his (...) and occasion required: and therefore the choice of
these footmen was permitted to the horsemen, in whose service they were to be
employed, that every man might take his friend, in whom he reposed greatest
confidence. When they were overcharged, these stepped in to help them; if any man
were wounded or unhorsed, he had his footman ready to assist him: and when they
were to go upon any speedy service, or suddenly to retire upon advantage, they
stayed themselves upon the mane of the horses with one hand, and so ran as fast
as the horsemen could go. Which services they could not possibly have performed
without confusion and disorder, if the footmen had not severally attended upon
them, according to the affection specified in their particular election.

The principal use of these footmen of the Germans consisted in the aid of
their own horsemen upon any necessity, not so much regarding their service upon
the enemy, as the assistance of their horsemen. But the Romans had long before
practiced the same Art to a more effectual purpose; namely, as a principal
remedy not only to resist, but to defeat far greater troops of horse then the
enemy was able to oppose against them. Whereof the most ancient memory which
history mentions, is recorded by Livie in the second Punick war, at the siege
of Capua, under the regiment of Quintus Fulvius the Consul; where it is said
that in all their conflicts, as the Roman legions returned with the better, so
their cavalry was always put to the worst: and therefore they invented this
means, to make that good by Art which was wanting in force.

Out of the whole army were taken the choicest young men, both for strength and
agility, and to them were given little round bucklers, and seven darts apiece
in stead of their other weapons: these soldiers practiced to ride behind the
horsemen, and speedily to light from the horses at a watchword given, and so to
charge the Enemy on foot. And when by exercise they were made so expert, that
the novelty of the invention no whit affrighted them, the Roman horsemen went
forth to encounter with the enemy, every man carrying his foot-souldier behind
him; who at the encounter suddenly alighting, charged upon the enemy with such
a fury, that they followed them in slaughter to the gates of Capua. And hence,
says Livie, grew the first institution of the Velites: which ever after that
time were enrolled with the legions. The author of this stratagem is said to
be one Q. Navius a Centurion, and was honorably rewarded by Fulvius the
Consul for the same.

Salust in the history of Jugurth says, that Marius mingled the Velites with
the Cavalry of the associates, ut quacunque invaderent equitatus hostium
propulsarent. The like practice was used by Caesar, as appears in the third
book of the Civil war; saving that in stead of the Velites, he mingled with his
horsemen four hundred of the lustiest of his legionary soldiers, to resist the
cavalry of Pompey, while the rest of his Army passed over the river Genusum,
after the overthrow he had at Dyrrachium: qui tantum profecere, says the text,
ut equestri praelio commisso, pellerent omnes, complures interficerent, ipsique
incolumes ad agmen se reciperent. Many other places might be recited; but these
are sufficient to prove that the greatest Captains of ancient times
strengthened their cavalry with footmen dispersed amongst them. The Roman
horsemen, Lib. 6.
says Polybius, at the first carried but a weak limber pole or staff, and a
little round buckler; but afterward they used the furniture of the Graecians:
Lib. 3. de ex^id.
which Josephus affirms to be a strong lance or staff, and three or four
darts in a quiver, with a buckler, and a long sword by their right side. The
use of their lance was most effectual when they charged in troup, pouldron to
pouldron; and that manner of fight afforded no means to intermingle footmen:
but when they used their darts, every man got what advantage of ground he
could, as our Carbines for the most part do, and so the footmen might have
place among them: or otherwise for so good an advantage they would easily make
place for the footmen to serve among them. But howsoever it was, it appears
by this circumstance how little the Romans feared troops of horse, considering
that the best means to defeat their horse was by their foot companies. But to
make it more plain, of many examples I will only allege two; the one out of
Livie, to prove that the Roman horsemen were not comparable for service to
footmen: Lib. 3. De bello Africano.
the other out of Hirtius, to show the same effect against strangers, and
Numidian horsemen.

In the Consulships of L. Valerius and Marcus Horatius, Valerius having
fortunately overthrown the Equi and the Volsci, Horatius proceeded with as
great courage in the war against the Sabines; wherein it happened, that in the
day of battle the Sabines reserved two thousand of their men to give a fresh
assault upon the left Cornet of the Romans, as they were in conflict: which
took such effect, that the legionary footmen of that Cornet were forced to
retreat. Which the Roman horsemen (being in number six hundred) perceiving, and
not being able with their horse to make head against the enemy, they presently
forsook their horses, and made have to make good the place on foot; wherein
they carried themselves so valiantly, that in a moment of time they gave the
like advantage to their footmen against the Sabines, and then betook themselves
again to their horses, to pursue the enemy in chase as they fled. For the
second point; the Numidians, as Caesar witnesses, were the best horsemen that
ever he met with, and used the same Art as the Germans did, mingling among them
light-armed footmen. And Ambuscado of these Numidians charging the legions upon
a sudden, the history says that primo impetu legionis Equitatus and levis
armatura, hostium nullo negotio, loco pulsa and dejecta est de colle. And as
they sometimes retired, and sometimes charged upon the rereward of the Army,
according to the manner of the Numidian fight, the history says, Caesariani
interim non amplius tres ant quatuor milites veterani si se convertissent, and
pila viribus contortain Numidas infestos con^ecissent, amplius duorum millium
ad unum terga vertebant. So that to free himself of this inconvenience, he took
his horsemen out of the rereward, and placed his legions there, ita vim hostium
per legionarium militem commodius sustinebat. And ever as he marched, he caused
three hundred soldiers of every legion to be free and without burden, that
they might be ready upon all occasions; Quos in Equitatum Labie^ immisit. Tum
Labienus, conversis equis, signorum conspectu perterritus turpissime contendit
fugere, multis ejus occisis, compluribus vulneratis: milites legionarii ad sua
se recipient signa, atque iter inceptum ire coeperunt. I allege the very words
of the history, to take away all suspicion of falsifying or wresting any thing
to an affected opinion. If any man will look into the reason of this disparity,
he shall find it to be chiefly the work of the Roman pile (an unresistable
weapon) and the terror of horsemen; especially when they were cast with the
advantage of the place, and fell so thick that there was no means to avoid them.

But to make it plain that any light-armed footmen could better make head
against a troup of horse, then the Cavalrie of their own party, although they
bear but the same weapons: let us consider how nimble and ready they were that
fought on foot, either to take an advantage, or to shun and avoid any danger;
casting their darts with far greater strength and more certainty, then the
horsemen could do. For as the force of all the engines of old time, as the
Balistae, Catapultae and Tolenones, proceeded from that stability and resting
Center which nature affords as the only strength and life of the engine* so
what force soever a man makes, must principally proceed from that firmness
and stay which Nature, by the earth, or some other unmovable rest, gives to
the body, from whence it takes more or less strength, according to the
violence which it performs; as he that lifts up a weight from the ground,
by so much treads heavier upon the earth, by how much the thing is heavier
then his body. The footmen therefore having a surer stay to counterpoize their
forced motion then the horsemen had, cast their darts with greater violence,
and consequently with more certainty.

Chap. XVIII.
Caesar preventeth Ariovistus of his purpose, by making two Camps.
WHen Caesar perceived that Ariovistus meant nothing less then to fight,
Caesar.
but kept himself within his Camp; least peradventure he should intercept the
Sequans, and other of his Associates, as they came with convoies of Corn to the
Romans, beyond that place wherein the Germans abode about six hundred paces
from their Camp, he chose a ground meet to incamp in: and marching thither in
three battles, commanded two of them to stand ready in Arms, and the third to
fortify the Camp. Ariovistus sent sixteen thousand foot and all his horse to
interrupt the soldiers, and hinder the intrenchment. Notwithstanding Caesar,
as he had before determined, caused two battles to withstand the enemy, and
the third to go through with the work: which being ended he left there two
legions, and part of the associate forces, and led the other four legions back
again into the greater Camp.

The next day Caesar, according to his custom, brought his whole power out of
both his Camps; and marching a little from the greater Camp, he put his men in
array, and proffered battle to the enemy: but perceiving that Ariovistus would
not stir out of his trenches, about noon he conveyed his Army into their
several Camps. Then at length Ariovistus sent part of his forces to assault
the lesser Camp. The encounter continued very sharp on both parts until the
evening; and at sunsetting, after many wounds given and taken, Ariovistus
conveyed his Army again into their Camp. And as Caesar made inquiry of the
captives, what the reason was that Ariovistus refused battle, he found this to
be the cause; The Germans had a custom, that the women should by casting of
Lots and Southsaying declare whether it were for their behoof to fight or no:
and that they found by their Art the Germans could not get the victory, if they
fought before the new Moon.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
FIrst, we may observe what especial importance this manner of incamping
carried in that absolute discipline which the Romans observed, and by which
they conquered so many Nations: for besides the safety which it afforded their
own troops, it served for a hold well-fenced and manned, or as it were a strong
fortified town in any part of the field where they saw advantage; and as often as
they thought it expedient, either to fortify themselves, or impeach the enemy,
by cutting off his passages, hindering his attempts, blocking up his Camp,
besides many other advantages, all averring the saying of Domitius Corbulo,
dolabra vincendum esse hostem: a thing long time neglected, but of late happily
renewed by the Commanders of such forces as serve the States in the United
Provinces of Belgia; whom time and practice of the wars has taught to
entertain the use of the spade, and to hold it in as great reputation as any
weapons whatsoever, which may be thought worthy executioners of the deeds of
Arms.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IN the second place we may observe that there was no Nation so barbarous (for
I understand the Germans to be as barbarous, in regard of the motions of
religion, as any known Nation of that time, being in a Climate so near the
North, that it afforded no contemplation at all) that could not make use in
their greatest affairs, of that superstition to which their mind was naturally
inthralled, and forge prophesies and divinations, as well to stir up as to
moderate the irregular motions of a multitude, according as they might best
serve to advantage their proceedings. Neither did Caesar let slip the occasion
of making use of this their religion: for understanding by their prisoners that
their divinations forbad them to fight before the new Moon, he used all the
means he could to provoke them to battle; that their religious opinion of
mischieving might prejudice their resolution to return Conquerers. Which may
serve to prove, that a superstitious people are subject to many inconveniences,
which industry or Fortune may discover to their overthrow.

It is recorded that Columbus being General of some forces which Ferdinando
king of Castile sent to discover the West Indies, and suffering great penury
for want of victuals in the I Will of Jamaica, after that he had observed how the
Ilanders worshipped the Moon, and having knowledge of an Eclipse that was
shortly after to happen, he told the inhabitants that unless they would
furnish him with such necessaries as he wanted for the time, the wrath of their
God should quickly appear toward them, by changing his bright shining face
into obscurity and darkness: which was no sooner happened, but the poor
Indians, stricken with a superstitious fear of that which the course of nature
required, kept nothing back that might assist their enemies to depopulate and
overrun their own Country.

Chap. XIX.
Caesar seeks means to give them battle, and the Germans dispose themselves
thereunto.
THe next day Caesar left a sufficient Garrison in each of his Camps; and
forasmuch as the number of his legionary soldiers was small, Caesar.
in respect of the multitude of the Germans, he placed all the Auxiliarie
troops for a show before the lesser Camp: and putting his legions in a triple
battle, he marched toward the Camp of Ariovistus. And then at length were the
Germans constrained to bring out their power, setting every Tribe and people by
themselves, in like distance and order of battle (as the Harudes, Marcomans,
Triboces, Vangiones, Nemetes, Sedusians and Swevians) and environing their
whole Army with Carts and carriages, that there might be no hope at all left to
save any man by flight. And in these they placed their women, that they by
their outstretched hands and tears moving pity, might implore the soldiers,
as they descended by course to the battle, not to deliver them into the
bondage and thraldom of the Romans.

Caesar assigned to every legion a Legate and a Questor, that every man might
have an eyewitness of his valor: and he himself began the battle with the
right Cornet, forasmuch as he perceived that part of Ariovistus Army to be the
weakest.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe Romans, even from the infancy of their state, were ever zealous admirers
of true honor, and always desired to behold with the eye to what measure of
virtue every man had attained; that the tongue with greater fervency of spirit
might sound out the celebration of Macte virtute, which imported more honor
then any wealth that could be heaped upon them. Neither was this the least part
of their wisdom; considering that the most precious things that are lose much
of their worth, if they be not suited with other correspondent natures, whose
sympathy adds much more excellency then is discerned when they appear by
themselves without such assistance. For how small is the beauty which Nature
has given to the eye-pleasing Diamond, when it is not adorned with an
artificial form? or what perfection can the form give, without a foil to
strengthen it? or what good is in either of them, if the light do not
illuminate it? or what avail all these, where there wants an eye to admire
it, a judgment to value it, and an heart to embrace it? Such a union has
Nature imprinted in the diversity of creatures concurring to perfection, and
especially in moral actions, in whose carriage there is a far greater
exactness of correspondencie required to approve them honorable, then was
requisite to make the jewel beautiful. And this did Caesar in all his battles;
amongst the rest, that at Alesia is particularly noted in this manner, Quod in
conspectu imperatoris res gerebatur, neque recte aut turpiter factum celari
poterat, utrosque and laudis cupiditas, and timor ignominiae ad virtutem
excitabat And when Livie would express how valiantly an action was carried, he
says no more but in conspectu imperatoris res gerebatur: which is as much as
to say, that forasmuch as the Romans were diligent observers of every man's
worth, rewarding virtue with honor, and cowardice with reproach, every man bent
his whole endeavor to deserve the good opinion of his General, by discharging
that duty which he owed to the Commonwealth with all loyalty and faithfulness
of spirit.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Romans had four forms of the front of their battle. The first was called
Acies Recta, when neither the cornets nor the battle was advanced one before
another, but were all carried in a right line, and made a straight front; and
this was their most usual manner of imbattelling.

The second form of the front was called Obliqua, when as one of the cornets
was advanced nearer unto the enemy then the rest, to begin the battle: and
this was commonly as Vegetius notes the right cornet; for the right cornet of
an Army had great advantage against the left of the enemies, in regard of their
weapons and furniture. But Caesar did it in this place, because he perceived
that the enemy was weakest in that part; following a Maxim of great authority,
That the weakest part of an enemy is in the beginning to be charged with the
strength of an Army: for so favorable are men's judgments to that which is
already happened, that the sequel of every action depends for the most part
upon the beginning. Dimidium facti qui been coepit habet, says a Poet: and not
without great reason, so forcible continually is the beginning, and so connexed
to the sequel by the nature of a precedent cause, that the end must needs err
from the common course, when it does not participate of that quality which was
in the beginning. Neither can there be any good end without a good beginning:
for although the beginning be oftentimes disastrous and unluckie, and the end
fortunate and happy, yet before it came to that end there was a fortunate
beginning: for the bad beginning was not the beginning of a good, but of an
evil end. And therefore that his men might foresee a happy end in a good
beginning, it behoved him with the best of his Army to assault the weakest part
of the enemy.

The third form of the front is called Sinnata, when both the cornets are
advanced forward, and the battle stands backward off from the enemy, after
the fashion of a half moon. Scipio used it in Spain, having observed some days
before that the enemy continually so disposed of the battle, that his best
soldiers were always in the midst; and therefore Scipio put all his old
soldiers in the cornets, and brought them out first to charge upon the weakest
part of the enemy, that those might decide the controversy, before the other
that were in the midst could come to fight.

The last form is called Gibbosa, or gibbera Acies, when the battle is
advanced, and the two cornets lag behind. This form did Hannibal use in the
battle of Cannae; but with this Art, that he strengthened his two cornets with
the best of his soldiers, and placed his weakest in the midst, that the Romans
following the retreat of the battle, which was easily repelld, might be
enclosed on each side with the two cornets.

Chap. XX.
The Battle between Caesar and Ariovistus.
THe sign of the battle being thereupon given, Caesar.
our men charged upon the enemy very fiercely; and they on the otherside
returned so speedy a counterbuffe, that the legions had no time to cast their
piles, and in that regard made have to betake themselves to their swords: But
the Germans, according to their manner, putting themselves into a Phalanx,
received the force of their swords. In the battle there were many legionary
soldiers seen to leap upon the Phalanx, and to pull up with their hands the
targets that covered it, and so to wound and kill those that were underneath:
and so the left Cornet of the enemy was overthrown and put to flight.

Now while the right Cornet was thus busied, the left Cornet was overcharged
with an unequal multitude of the Germans: which young Crassus the General of
the horse no sooner perceived (having more scope and liberty then any of the
Commanders that were in the battle) but he sent tertiam Aciem, the third
battle, to rescue and aid their fellows that were in danger; by means whereof
the fight was renewed, and all the enemy was put to flight, and never looked
back until they came to the Rhene, which was about fifty miles from the place
where they fought. Where some few of them saved themselves by swimming: others
found some boats, and so escaped. Ariovistus lighting upon a little Bark tied
to the shore, recovered the other side, and so saved himself: the rest were all
slain by the horsemen. Ariovistus had two wives: one a Swevian, whom he brought
with him from home; and the other of Norica, the sister of King Vocion, sent
unto him by her brother into Gallia, and married there: both these perished in
that fight. His two daughters likewise being there, one was slain, and the
other taken.

As Caesar pursued the German horsemen, it was his chance to light upon
Valerius Procillus, as he was drawn up and down by his Keepers bound in three
chains: which accident was as grateful to him as the victory it self; being so
fortunate to recover his familiar friend, and a man of sort in the Province,
whom the barbarous enemy (contrary to the law of Nations) had cast into prison.
Neither would Fortune by the loss of him abate any thing of so great pleasure
and contentment: for he reported that in his own presence they had three
several times cast lots whether he should be burned alive; and that still he
escaped by the fortune of the lots. And M. Titius was found in like manner, and
brought unto him. The same of this battle being carried beyond the Rhene, the
Swevians that were come to the banks of the Rhene returned home again: whom the
inhabitants near upon that river pursued, finding them terrified and
distracted, and slew a great number of them.

Caesar having thus ended two great wars in one Summer, brought his Army into
their wintering Camps, somewhat sooner then the time of the year required; and
leaving Labienus to command them, himself returned into the hither Gallia, to
keep Courts and public Diets.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis Phalanx here mentioned can hardly be proved to be the right Macedonian
Phalanx; but we are rather to understand it to be so termed, by reason of the
close and compact imbattelling, rather then in any other respect: and it
resembled much a testudo, as I said of the Helvetian Phalanx. Secondly, I
observe that Caesar kept the old rule concerning their discipline in fight: for
although the name of Triaries be not mentioned in his history; yet he omitted
not the substance, which was, to have primam, secundam, and tertiam Aciem; and
that prima Acies should begin the battle, and the second should come fresh and
assist them: or peradventure if the enemy were many and strong, the first and
second battle were joined together, and so charged upon the enemy with greater
fury and violence; but at all adventures the third battle was ever in
subsidio, as they termed it, to succor any part that should be overcharged;
which was a thing of much consequence, and of great wisdom. For if we either
respect the encouragement of the soldiers, or the casualty of Fortune, what
could be more added to their discipline in this behalf, then to have a second
and a third succor, to give strength to the fainting weakness of their men,
and to repair the disadvantage which any accident should cast upon them? Or if
their valor were equally balanced, and victory stood doubtful which of the
two parties she should honor, these always stepped in, being fresh, against
weary and over-laboured spirits, and so drew victory in despite of casualty
unto themselves.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COncerning use of lots, The use of lots.
it shall not be amiss to look into the nature of them, being in former times
so general, that there was no Nation, civil or barbarous, but was directed in
their greatest affairs by the sentence of lots. As we may not refuse for an
undoubted truth, that which Solomon says in the sixteenth of Proverbs, The
lots are cast into the lap, but the direction thereof belongs to the Lord:
through the knowledge whereof Josua was directed to take Achan, the Mariners
Jonas, and the Apostles to consecrate Matthias: So whether the heathen and
barbarous people, whose blindness in the way of truth could direct them no
further then to senseless superstition, and put them in mind of a duty which
they owed, but could not tell them what it was, nor how to be performed;
whether these, I say, were persuaded that there was any supernatural power in
their lotteries, which directed the action to the decree of destiny, and as the
Gods would have it, it remains doubtful.

Aristotle, the wisest of the heathen concerning things natural, names that
event casual, or proceeding from Fortune, of which the reason of man could
assign no cause, or (as he says) which has no cause. So that whatsoever
happened in any action besides the intent of the agent and workman, was termed
an effect of Fortune, or chance of hab-nab: For all other effects, which
depended upon a certainty and definite cause, were necessarily produced; and
therefore could not be casual, or subject to the inconstancy of chance. And
because many and sundry such chances daily happened, which like terrae filii
had no Father, and could not be warranted as lawful children either to nature
or to reason, by the appearance of an efficient cause, they reduced them all to
the power of Fortune, as the principal efficient and sovereign Motor of all
such unexpected events: that is, they made nothing else the Governesse and
Directresse of many things. Which afterward grew to such credit amongst men,
that it surpassed in dignity all natural causes, and was deified with
celestial honor, as the Poet says, Te Nos facimus Fortuna deam, coeloque
locamus. By the providence of this blind Goddess, which held her Deity by the
Tenure of men's ignorance, were all causuall actions directed, and especially
lots; the event whereof depended only upon her pleasure and decree. Neither
could their direction be assigned to any other power; for then their nature had
been altered from chance to certainty, and the event could not have been called
Sors, but must have been reputed in the order of necessary effects, whereof
discourse of reason acknowledges a certain foregoing cause.

Whereby we see upon how weak an axletree the greatest motions of the goodlesse
world were turned, having irregularity and uncertainty for the Intelligentiae
that governed their revolutions. And herein all sorts of men (although in
diverse respects) rested as well contented as if an Oracle had spoken unto them,
and revealed the mysteries of fatal destiny.

Rome directed the main course of her government by the fortune of this
mock-destiny. For although their Consuls and Tribunes were elected by the
people, who pleased their own fancy with the free choice of their Commanders,
and suited their obedience with a well-liking authority: yet the public affairs
which each Consul was severally to manage, was shared out by lots. For if an
enemy were entered into their confines to depopulate and wast their
territories, the lots assigned this Consul for the government of the City, and
the other to command the legions, and to manage the war.

If forces were to be sent into diverse Provinces, and against several enemies,
neither the Senate nor the people could give to either Consul his task; but
their peculiar charges were authorized by lots. If any extraordinary actions
were to be done in the City, as the dedication of a Temple, the sanctifying of
the Capitol after a pollution; Sors omnia versat, that did all in all. And yet
(notwithstanding the weak foundation of this practice in their Theology and
deepest Divinity) we may not think but these skillful Architects of that
absolute government, wherein virtue joined with true wisdom to make an
unexampled pattern, we may not think, I say, but they foresaw the manifold
danger, which in the course of common actions could not other way be prevented
but by the use of lots. For when things are equally levelled between diverse
objects, and run with indifferency to equal stations, there must be some
controlling power to draw the current toward one Coast, and to appropriate it
unto one channel, that the order of Nature be not inversed, nor a
well-established government disturbed. So the state of Rome casting many things
with equal charge upon her two sovereign Magistrates, which could not be
performed but by one of them; what better means could there be invented to
interesse the one in that office, and to discharge the other, then to appoint
an Arbiter, whose decree exceeded humane reason? Of which it could not be said
why it was so, but that it was so. For if the wisdom of the Senate had been
called to counsel, or the voices of the people calculated to determine of the
matter; it might easily have burst out into civil discord, considering the
often contentions between the Senate and the people, the factions of Clients,
and the constant mutability of every man's private affections necessarily
inclining unto one, although their worth were equal, and by true reason
indiscernable; which might have made the one proud of that which peradventure
he had not, and cast the other lower then would have well beseemed his virtues:
and therefore to cut off these with many other inconveniences, they invented
lots, which without either reason or will might decide such controversies.

By this it appears how little the ancient Lawmakers respected the ground and
reason of an ordinance, so the commodity were great, and the use important to
the good of the State: for as they saw the thing it self to be casual, so they
saw that casual things are sometimes more necessary then demonstrative
conclusions: neither ought the nature, and speculative consideration of Laws
and Statutes to belong to the common people; but the execution and obedience
thereof makes the Commonwealth flourish. And thus ends the first Commentary
of Caesar his war in Gallia.

The second Commentary of the wars in GALLIA.
The Argument.
LIke as when a heavy body lies upon the skirt of a larger continued quantity,
although it cover but a small parcel of the whole surface, yet the other
quarters are burdened and kept under with a proportionable measure of that
weight; and through the union and continuation which binds all the parts into
one Totality, feel the same suppression which has really seized but upon their
fellow part: In like manner the Belgae, inhabiting the furthest skirt of that
triple Continent, seemed to repine at that heavy burden which the Roman Empire
had laid upon the Province, the Hedui, and other States of that kingdom. And
least it might in time be further removed, and laid directly upon their
shoulders, they thought it expedient whilst they felt it but by participation,
to gather their several forces into one head, and try whether they could free
their neighbor Nations from so grievous a yoke, or at the least keep it from
coming any nearer unto themselves. And this is the Argument of this second
book; which divides it self into two parts: the first containing the wars
between Caesar and all the States of Belgia united together; the second
recording the battles which he made with some of the States thereof in
particular, as time and occasion gave him means to effect it.

CHAP. I.
Caesar hastes to his Army, marches toward the Confines of the Belgae, and
takes in the men of Rheims.
WHile Caesar was in his winter quarters in the hither Gallia, Caesar.
there came every day fresh rumors to him (the same thing being also certified
by letters from Labienus) that all the Belgae, being a third part of Gallia,
had leagued together against the people of Rome, and had given mutual hostages
one to another. The grounds of their confederacy were these: First, they were
afraid that Caesar having settled all the rest of Gallia in quiet, would bring
his armies upon them. Secondly, they were solicited to do it by some of the
Galls, such namely who, as they did not desire the company of the Germans
longer in Gallia, so they were very much troubled to think that the Roman army
should winter and settle themselves there; and such again as levity and
inconstancy prompted to seek new governments; lastly such as saw that it was an
easy matter for those men that were powerful and had the command of moneys to
seize upon kingdoms in Gallia, which they could not so easily do in those
parts where the Romans bare sway. Caesar being moved with letters and other
intelligence to this purpose, levied two new legions in the hither Gallia, and
as soon as Summer came on sent them by Q. Pedius his Legate into the further
Gallia: and as soon as there was forage in the fields he himself came to the
army. He had before given charge to the Senones and other of the Galls that
bordered upon the Belg^e, to learn every day what they could of their doings,
and to give him an account thereof. These presently informed him that of a
certainty there was nothing in Belgia but mustering of soldiers, and gathering
their forces into one head. He thought it not therefore safe to make any
further delay; but having made provision of corn, he drew out his Army from
their wintering camps, and within fifteen days he came to the borders of the
Belgae. As Soon as he was come thither, which was much sooner then was looked
for, the men of Rhemes being the uttermost of the Belgae, next adjoining to the
Celtae, thought it best to entertain a peaceable resolution, and sent Iccius
and Antebrogius, two of the chief men of their State, unto Caesar, to submit
themselves and all that they had to the mercy of the Roman Empire; affirming
that they were innocent both of the counsel of the Belgae, and of their
conspiracy against the Romans. For proof whereof they were ready to give
hostages, to receive them into their towns, and to furnish them with corn or
what other thing they stood in need of. That the rest of the Belgae were all in
Arms, and the Germans on the other side of the Rhene had promised to send them
succor: yea their madness was so great, that they themselves were not able to
hold back the Suessones from that attempt being their brethren and kinsmen in
blood, and using the same laws and customs as they did, having both one
magistrate and one form of government; but they would needs support the same
quarrel which the rest of the Belgae had undertaken.

OBSERVATION.
I Might here take occasion to speak somewhat of a particular revolt in a
general cause; and how a confederate State may in regard of their own safety
forsake a common quarrel, or whatsoever the universal society has enacted
prejuciall to their common weal; but that I only intend to discover warlike
practices, leaving these questions of law and policy to men of greater
judgment and better experience. Only* I observe in the behalf of the Roman
government, that such cities as yielded to the Empire, and became tributary to
their treasury (howsoever they were otherwise combined by confederacy) seldom
or never repented them of their fact, in regard of the noble patronage which
they found in that State, and of the due respect observed toward them.

Chap. II.
The power of the Belgae, and their preparation for this war.
CAesar inquiring of the Ambassadors which came from Rhemes what the States
were that had taken Arms, Caesar.
and what they were able to do in matter of War, found the Belgae to be
descended from the Germans, who passing over the Rhene time out of mind, and
finding it to be a fertile country, drove away the Galls and seated
themselves in their possessions: and that these only of all the Galls kept
the Cimbti and Teutoni from entering into their country; and in that regard
they challenged to themselves great authority, and vaunted much in their feats
of Arms. Concerning their number they had these advertisements; The The
country about B^auvois.
Bollovaci exceeded all the Belgae in prowess, authority, and number of men,
being able to make 100000 fighting men, and out of that number had promised
60000 toward this undertaking, and in that regard they demanded the
administration of the whole war. Next to them lay the The country about
So^ssons.
Suessones, who dwelt in a large and fruitful country, and had lately
Divitiacus for their king, being the most powerful man in all Gallia, who had
in possession a great part of these countries, and also of Britain it self.
Galba was their king now, on whom, for his singular justice and prudence,
generally with one consent they bestowed the management of the war. They had 12
walled towns, and promised to set forth 50000 men. The The people about Tournay.
Nervii, who were the most barbarous amongst them all, and dwelt furthest off,
promised as many; the Arras.
Atrebatii 15000. the Amiens.
Ambian^ 10000. the Vellocassii and Vermandois.
Veromandui as many; the Tervenne.
Morini 25000. the Menapii 9000. the Caletes 10000. the Aduatici 29000. the
Liege.
Eburones, Condrusi, and others 40000. 308000. in all.
Caesar encouraging the men of Rhemes to persist in their faithfulness to the
Roman Empire, propounded unto them great offers and liberal promises of
recompense, and commanded all their Senate to come before him, and bring with
them their Noble-mens Sons to be given up for hostages: which they diligently
performed by a day appointed. And having received two especial advertisements
from the men of Rhemes, the one concerning the multitude of the enemy; and the
other touching the singular opinion which was generally held of their manhood:
he provided for the first by persuading Divitiacus the Heduan, that it much
imported the whole course of those businesses, to keep asunder the power of the
enemy; and to withhold their forces from making a head, that so he might avoid
the danger of encountering so great a power at one instant. Which might easily
be brought to pass, if the Hedui would enter with a strong power into the
Marches of the Bellovaci, and sack their Territories with sword and confusion.
Which Divitiacus promised to perform, and to that purpose he speedily returned
into his country. Upon the second advertisement, which presented unto him the
great valor and manhood of his enemies, he resolved not to be too hasty in
giving them battle, but first to prove by skirmishing with his horsemen what
his enemies by their prowess could do, and what his own men durst do.

OBSERVATION.
THis rule of making trial of the worth of an enemy, has always been
observed by prudent and grave commanders, as the surest principle whereon the
true judgment of the event may be grounded. For if the doctrine of the old
Philosophers, which teaches that the word non putabam, I wist it not, was
never heard out of a wise man's mouth, has any place in the course of humane
actions; it ought especially to be regarded in managing these main points,
whereon the State of Kingdoms and Empires depends. For, unless was be
persuaded that blind Chance directs the course of this world with an
uncertain confusion, and that no foresight can sway the balance of our hap
into either part of our fortune, I see no reason why we should not by all means
endeavor to ground our knowledge upon true causes, and level our proceedings
to that certainty which rises from the things themselves. And this is the
rather to be urged, inasmuch as our leaders are oftentimes deceived when they
look no further then to match an enemy with equality of number, referring their
valor to be tried in the battle; not considering that the eye of it self
cannot discern the difference between two champions of like presence and
outward carriage, unless it see their strength compared together and weighed
as it were in the scale of trial: which Caesar omitted not diligently to
observe, before he would adventure the hazard of battle. For, besides his own
satisfaction, it gave great encouragement to his men, when they saw themselves
able to countermatch an enemy, and knew their task to be subject to their
strength. Neither did he observe it only at this instant, but throughout the
whole course of his actions; for we find that he never incountered any enemy,
but with sufficient power, either in number or in valor, to make head against
them: which equality of strength being first laid as a sure foundation, he used
his own industry and skill, and the discipline wherein his men were trained, as
advantages to oversway his adversary; and so drew victory maugre fortune unto
himself, and seldom failed in any of his battles.

Chap. III.
Caesar passes his Army over the river La Disne.
Axona, leaving Titerius Sabinus encamped on the other side with six cohorts.
AS soon as Caesar understood as well by his discovers, Caesar.
as from the men of Rhemes, that all the power of the Belgae was assembled
together into one place, and was now making toward him no great distance off;
he made all the haste he could to pass his Army over the River Axona, which
divided the men of Rhemes from the other Belgae, and there encamped. Whereby he
brought to pass that no enemy could come on the back of him to work any
disadvantage; and that corn might be brought unto him from Rhemes and other
cities without danger. And further, that he might command the passage back
again, as occasion should serve* to his best advantage, he fortified a bridge
which he found on the river with a strong garrison of men, and caused Titurius
Sabinus a Legate to encamp himself on the other side of the river with six
cohorts, commanding him to fortify his camp with a rampire of 12 foot in
altitude, and a trench of 18 foot in breadth.

OBSERVATION.
IF it be demanded, why Caesar did pass his Army over the river, leaving it on
his back, and did not rather attend the enemy on the other side, and so take
the advantage of hindering him, if he should attempt to pass over; I will set
down the reasons in the sequel of this war, as the occurrences shall fall
out to make them more evident. In the mean time let us enter into the
particularitie of these six cohorts, that we may the better judge of such
troops which were employed in the services of this war. But that we may the
better conjecture what number of soldiers these six cohorts did contain, it
seems expedient a little to discourse of the companies and regiments which
the Romans used in their Armies.

And first we are to understand, that the greatest and chiefest regiment in a
Roman Army was termed by the name of Legio; A legion what it was.
as Varro says, quod leguntur milites in delectu; Lib. 4.
or as Plutarch speaks, De vita Romuli.
quod lecti ex omnibus essent militares; so that it takes the name Legio, of
the choice and selecting of the soldiers. Romulus is said to be the first
author and founder of these legions, making every legion to contain 3000
soldiers: but shortly after they were augmented, as Festus records, unto
4000; and afterward again from 4000, to 4200. And that number was the common
rate of a legion until Hannibal came into Italy, Live. lib. 22.
and then it was augmented to 5000: but that proportion continued only for that
time. And again, when Scipio went into Africa, the legions were increased to
6200 footmen, and 300 horse. And shortly after the Macedonian war, the
legions that continued in Macedonie to keep the Province from rebellion,
consisted of 6000 footmen and 300 horse. Out of Caesar it cannot be gathered
that a legion in his time did exceed the number of 5000 men, but oftentimes it
was short of that number: for he himself says that in this war in Gallia his
soldiers were so wasted, that he had scarce 7000 men in two legions. And if we
examine that place out of the 3. of the civil war, where he says that in
Pompey his Army were 110 cohorts, which amounted to the number of 55000 men;
and it being manifest as well by this number of cohorts, as by the testimony of
diverse authors, that Pompey his Army consisted of 11 legions; if we divide
55000 into 11 parts, we shall find a legion to consist of 5000 men. Which
number or thereabout being generally known to be the usual rate of a legion,
the Romans always expressed the strength of their Army by the number of
legions that were therein: as in this war it is said that Caesar had eight
legions; which by this account might arise to 40000 men, besides associates,
and such as necessarily attended the Army. Further we are to understand that
every legion had his peculiar name, by which it was known and distinguished
from the rest: and that it took either from their order of muster, or
enrollement; as that legion which was first enrolled, was called the first
legion, and that which was second in the choice, the second legion, and so
consequently of the rest; and so we read in this history, the seventh, the
eighth, the ninth, the tenth, the eleventh and twelfth legion: or otherwise
from the place of their warfare, and so we read of legiones Germanicae,
Pannonica, Britannicae, and such others: and sometime of their General, as
Augusta, Claudia, Taci^us ^. hist.
Vitelliana legiones, and so forth: or to conclude, from some accident of
quality, as Rapax, Victrix, Fulminifera, Plundring, Victorious, Lightning, and
such like. And thus much of the name and number of a legion: which I must
necessarily distinguish into diverse kinds of soldiers, according to the first
institution of the old Romans, and the continual observation thereof unto the
decay of the Empire, before I come to the description of these smaller parts
whereof a Legion was compounded.

First therefore we are to understand that after the Consuls had made a
general choice and sworn the soldiers, the Tribunes chose out the youngest
and poorest of all the rest, and called them by the name of Velites. Velites.
Their place in regard of the other soldiers was both base and dishonorable:
not only because they fought afar off, and were lightly armed; but also in
regard they were commonly exposed to the enemy, as our forlorn hopes are.
Having chosen out a competent number for this kind, they proceeded to the
choice of them which they called Hastati, Hastati.
a degree above the Velites both in age and wealth, and termed them by the name
of Hastati, forasmuch as at their first institution they fought with a kind of
Javelin, which the Romans called Hasta: but before Polybius his time they used
Piles; notwithstanding their ancient name continued unto the later time of the
Empire. The third choice which they made, was of the strongest and
lustiest-bodied men, who for the prime of their age were called Principes:
Principes.
the rest that remained were named Triarii, Triarii.
as Varro says, Quod tertio ordine extremis sub sidio deponuntur: These were
always the eldest and best-experienced men, and were placed in the third
division of the battle, as the last help and refuge in all extremity. Lib.
(...)
Polybius says that in his time the Velites, Hastati, and Principes did
consist of 1200 men apiece, and the Triarii never exceeded the number of 600.
although the general number of a legion were augmented: Lib. 1. de mil. Romans
whereof L^psius alleges these reasons; First, because these Triarii
consisted of the best of the soldiers, and so might countervail a greater
number in good worth and valor. Secondly, they seldom came to buckle with the
enemy, but when the controversy grew very doubtful. Lastly, we may well
conjecture that the voluntaries and extraordinary followers ranged themselves
amongst these Triaries, and so made the third battle equal to either of the
former: but howsoever they never exceeded the number of 600. And by this it
appears that in Polybius his time the common rate of a legion was 4200.

In this division of their men, consisted the ground of that well-ordered
discipline; The use of this division.
for in that they distinguished them according to their years and ability,
they reduced their whole strength into several classes; and so disposed of
these different parts, that in the general composition of their whole body,
every part might be fitted with place and office, acc^^ding as his worth was
answerable to the same: and so they made not only a number of gross, but a
number distinct by parts and properties; that from every accident which met
with any part of the Army, the judgment might determine how much or how little
it imported the whole body: besides the great use which they made of this
distinction in their degrees of honor and preferment, a matter of no small
consequence, in the excellency of their government.

The soldiers at their enrollement being thus divided according to their
years and ability, The distinction of their companies.
they then reduced them into smaller companies, to make them fitter for command
and fight: and so they divided the Hastat^, Principes, and Triarii, each of
them into 10 companies, making of those three sorts of soldiers 30 small
regiments, which they called Manipuli: Manipuli.
And again, they subdivided every maniple into two equal parts, and called them
Ordines, which was the least company in a legion, Ordines.
and according to the rate set down by Polybius, contained 60 soldiers. In
every Ordo there was a Centurion or Captain, and a Lieutenant, whom they named
Optio or Tergiductor. The maniples of the Triarii were much lesser then the
maniples of either the Hastati or the Principes; forasmuch as their whole band
consisted but of 600 men. The Velites were put into no such companies, but were
equally distributed amongst the other maniples; and therefore the Hastati,
Principes and Triarii were called subsignani milites, to make a difference
between them and the Velites, which were not divided into bands, and so
consequently had no ensign of their own, but were distributed amongst the
other companies: so that every Maniple had 40 Velites attending upon it. And
now I come to the description of a Cohort, which the history here mentions.

The word Cohors in Latin does signify that part of ground which is commonly
enclosed before the gate of a house, Cohors.
which from the same word we call a court: Lib. 3. de re ^ust.
and Varro gives this reason of the metaphor. As in a farm house, says he,
many out-buildings joined together make one enclosure; so a cohort consists
of several maniples joined together in one body. This cohort consisted of
three maniples; for every legion had ten cohorts, which must necessarily
comprehend those thirty maniples: but these three maniples were not all of one
and the same kind of soldiers, as three maniples of the Hastati, three of the
Principes, and three of the Triarii, as Patricius in his Paralleli seems to
affirm; for so there would have remained an odd maniple in every kind, that
could not have been brought into any cohort: But a cohort contained a maniple
of the Hastati, a maniple of the Principes, and a maniple of the Triarii; and
so all the thirty maniples were included into ten cohorts, and every cohort was
as a little legion, forasmuch as it consisted of all those sorts of soldiers
that were in a legion. So that making a legion to contain five thousand men, a
cohort had five hundred; and so these six cohorts which he encamped on the
other side of the river under the command of Titurius Sabinus, contained three
thousand soldiers: but if you make a legion to consist but of four thousand
two hundred, which was the more usual rate, there were two thousand five
hundred and twenty soldiers in these six cohorts.

By this therefore it may appear that a legion consisted of four sorts of
soldiers, which were reduced into ten cohorts, and every cohort contained
three maniples, and every maniple two orders, and every order had his Centurion
marching in the head of the troup, and every Centurion had his Optionem, or
Lieutenant, that stood in the tail of the troup.

When a legion stood ranged in battle ready to confront the enemy, A legion
ranged in battle.
the least body or squadron that it contained was a maniple; wherein the two
orders were joined together, making jointly ten in front, and twelve in file:
and so every five files had their Centurion in front, and Lieutenant in the
rereward, to direct them in all adventures. In the time of the Emperors, their
battalions consisted of a cohort, and never exceeded that number how great
soever the Army were.

Polybius distinguishing a maniple into two centuries or orders, says, that
the Centurion first chosen by the Tribunes, The first order.
commanded the right order, which was that order which stood on the right hand,
known by the name of Primus ordo; and the Centurion elected in the second
course, commanded the left order; and in the absence of either of them, he that
was present of them two commanded the whole maniple. And so we find that the
Centurion of the first place was called Prior Centuri^: 3 De bello civili.
in which sense Caesar is to be understood, where he says that all the
Centurions of the first cohort were slain, praeter principem priorem. From
whence we gather two specialities: first, the priority between the Centurions
of the same Maniple; for a cohort consisting of three Maniples, whereof the
first Maniple were Triarii, the second Principes, and the third Hastati, and
every Maniple containing two orders, and every order a Centurion, he says that
all the Centurions of this cohort were slain, saving the first or upper
Centurion of the Principes. The second thing which I observe, Prima cohor^.
is the title of the first cohort: for these ten cohorts whereof a Legion
consisted, were distinguished by degrees of worthiness; and that which was
held the worthiest in the censure of the Electors, took the priority both of
place and name, and was called the first cohort; the next, the second cohort;
and so consequently unto the tenth and last.

Neither did the Legions want their degrees of preeminence, both in
imbattelling and in encamping, according either to the seniority of their
inrollment, or the favor of their General, or their own virtue: And so we
read that in these wars in Gallia the tenth Legion had the first place in
Caesar's Army. And thus much concerning the divisions and several companies of
a Legion, and the degrees of honor which they held in the same.

Upon this description it shall not be amiss briefly to lay open the most
apparent commodities depending upon this discipline; The benefit of this
discipline.
the excellency whereof more plainly appears, being compared to that order
which Nature has observed in the frame of her worthiest creatures: for it is
evident that such works of Nature come nearest to perfect excellency, whose
material substance is most particularly distinguished into parts, and has
every part endued with that property which best agrees to his peculiar
service. For being thus furnished with diversity of instruments, and these
directed with fitting abilities, the creature must needs express many
admirable effects, and discover the worth of an excellent nature: whereas those
other bodies that are but slenderly labored, and find less favor in Natures
forge, being as abortives, or barbarously composed, wanting the diversity both
of parts and faculties, are no way capable of such excellent uses, nor fit for
such distinct services, as the former that are directed with so many
properties, and enabled with the power of so wel-distinguisht faculties. Which
better works of Nature the Romans imitated in the Architecture of their Army,
dividing it into such necessary and serviceable parts as were best fitting all
uses and imploiments; as first Legions, and legions into cohorts, and cohorts
into maniples, and maniples into centuries or orders, and these into files;
wherein every man knew his place, and kept the same without exchange or
confusion: and thus the universal multitude was by order disposed into parts,
until it came unto a unity. For it cannot be denied but that these centuries
were in themselves so sensibly distinguished, that every soldier carried in
his mind the particular Map of his whole century: for in imbattelling, every
century was disposed into five files, containing twelve in a file; whereof the
leaders were always certain, and never changed but by death or some other
special occasion; and every leader knew his follower, and every second knew
the third man, and so consequently unto the last.

Upon these particularities it plainly appears how easy a matter it was to
reduce their troops into any order of a march or a battle, to make the front
the slank, or slank front, when they were broken and disrankt to rally them
into any form, when every man knew both his own and his fellows station. If any
companies were to be employed upon sudden service, the general Idea of the
Army being so deeply imprinted in the mind of the commanders, would not suffer
them to e^re in taking out such convenient troops, both for number and quality,
as might best agree with the safety of the Army, or nature of the action. At
all occasions and opportunities these principles of advantage offered
themselves as ready means to put in execution any design or stratagem
whatsoever: the project was no sooner resolved of, but every man could readily
point out the companies that were ^it to execute the intention. And which is
more important in regard of the life and spirit of every such part, their
sodality was sweetened, or rather strengthened with the mutual acquaintance and
friendship one of another; the captain marching always in the head of the
troup, the ensign in the midst, and the lieutenant in the rereward, and every
man accompanied with his neighbor and his friend: which bred a true and
unfeigned courage, both in regard of themselves and of their followers. Besides
these specialities, the places of title and dignity depending upon this order
were no small means to cut off all matter of civil discord, and intestine
dissension: for here every man knew his place in the File, and every File knew
his place in the Century, and every Century in the Maniple, and every Maniple
in the Cohort, and every Cohort in the Legion, and every Legion in the Army;
and so every soldier had his place according to his virtue, and every place
gave honor to the man, according as their discipline had determined thereof.

The want of this discipline has dishonored the martial government of this
age with blo^dshed and murders; whereof T^ance is too true a witness, as well
in regard of the French themselves, as of our English forces that have been
sent thither to appeal their tumults: for through defect of this order, which
allotteth to every man his due place, the controversy grew between Sir William
Drurie and Sir John Burrowes, the issue whereof is too well known to the world:
wherein as our Commanders in France have been negligent, so I may not forget to
give due commendation to the care which is had of this point amongst the
English troops in the service of the States in the United Provinces, where they
are very curious in appointing every man his place in the File, and every File
in the Troup, and find much benefit thereby, besides the honor of reviving the
Roman discipline.

To conclude this point, The benefit of small battalions, and the disadvantage
of great squadrons.
I will only touch in a word the benefit which the Romans found in their small
battalions, and the disadvantage which we have in making great squadrons. And
first it cannot be denied but that such troops stand best appointed for
disposition and array of battle, which standing strong to receive a shock,
bring most men to ^ight with the enemy: for the principal things which are
required in setting of a battle, are so to order the troops, that the depth in
slank may serve conveniently to withstand the assault, taking up no more men
then may well serve for that purpose, and giving means to the rest to fight
with the enemy: and in these two points were both their defensive and offensive
considerations comprehended. But smaller troops and battalions afford this
convenience better then great squadrons, which drown up many able men in the
depth of their ^lanks, and never suffer them to appear, but when the breaking
of the squadron does present them to the butchery of the enemy. The Macedonian
Phalanx, as I have noted in the first book, never carried above sixteen in
slank, and brought five hundred to fight in front. And these little battalions
(considering them as they stood in battle ray) made as great a front or
greater then that of the Phalanx, keeping a depth answerable to the same;
besides the second and third battle, which always were to succor them, which
the Phalanx wanted: neither would their thick and close imbattelling admit any
such succor behind them. Now if we compare the advantages and discommodities
which by place and accident were incident to either of these, we shall find
great odds between them. These great squadrons are not feasible but in plain
and open places, where they may either stand immovable, or make easy and slow
motions without shaking or disordering their body: but the lesser are a
scantling for all places, champain or woody, level or uneven, or of what site
or quality soever. And to conclude, if two or three ranks of these great
battalions chance to be broken and disordered, the whole body is as much
interessed in the disorder as the said ranks are, and has less means to rally
it self then any other lesser company: but if any violence chance to rout a
Maniple, it proceeds no further in the Army then that part which it takes:
Neithe can the disranking of any one part betray the safety of the Army to
disorder and confusion, forasmuch as their distinction served to cut off such
inconveniences, and yet no way hindered the general uniting of their strength
into one body. More may be said concerning this matter; but I only point at it,
and leave the due consideration thereof to the judgment of our Commanders, and
return to our history.

CHAP. IV.
The Belgae attempt the surprise of Bray in the county of Re^ell.
Bibrax: Caesar sends succor unto it.
THere was a town called Bibrax, belonging to the state of Rhemes, about eight
miles from Caesar's camp, which the Belgae thought to have surprised as they
came along to meet with Caesar; and suddenly assaulted it with such fury, that
the townsmen could hardly hold out the first day. The Celtae and Belgae use one
and the same manner in assaulting a town: For having beset the whole compass
of the wall with ranks of soldiers, they never cease flinging of stones
until they find the wall naked of defendants; and then casting themselves into
a Testudo, they approach to the gate and undermine the walls. Which thing was
easily effected here; for so great was the number of them that threw stones and
darts, that it was impossible for the defendants to abide upon the walls.
As Soon as the night had made an end of the assault, Iccius of Rhemes, a man of
great birth and authority in his country, who at that time was governor of
the town, and had been before with Caesar, to treat and conclude a Peace, sent
him word by messengers, that if there came not present succor, he was not able
to hold out any longer. The same night about midnight (using the same
messengers for guides) he sent both Numidian and Cretian Archers, and Slingers
of the Isles of Baleares to relieve the town; by means whereof the townsmen
were put in good hope to make their party strong, and the enemy made hopeless
of winning the town: and therefore after a small stay, having depopulated their
fields, and burned their villages and out-buildings, they marched with all
their power toward Caesar's Camp, and within less then two miles of the Army
they encamped their whole host; which, as was gathered by the smoke and fire,
took up more ground then eight miles in breadth.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IN the description of their assault, we are to observe two circumstances. The
first is, the manner they used in a sudden surprise: The second is, To take a
town by surprise.
the form and quality of a Testudo. Although Caesar seems to attribute this
manner of assaulting a town as peculiar to the Galls, yet we may not think but
that the Romans used it as often as they had occasion to surprise any city: but
because the Galls knew no other means to take a town but this, therefore he
sets it down as peculiar unto them. The Romans called this manner of assault
Corona; and so we read oftentimes this phrase, Cingere urbem corona, forasmuch
as the soldiers enclosed the town with a circle, and so resembled a crown or
garland. Ammianus speaks of a triple crown of soldiers which encompassed a
town: And Josephus tells of Jotapata, which the Romans besieged duplici
peditum corona, with a double circle of footmen: and besides these, there was a
third circle of horsemen outmost of all. There is no further matter to be
observed but this, that in surprising a town, they incircled it round about
with thick continued ranks of men, and where they found the wall weakest, there
they entered as they could.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Testudo requires a larger discourse, and is lively described in Livie
after this manner. A Testudo described.
In the Amphitheatre, Lib. 44.
where the people did often assemble to see strange sights and public shows,
were brought in (says he) sixty lusty young men, who after some motion and
seemly march, cast themselves into a square troup, and roofing their heads
close with their targets, the first rank which made the front of the Testudo,
stood up right on their feet; the second rank bowed it self somewhat lower; the
third and fourth ranks did more incline themselves, and so consequently unto
the last rank, which kneeled on the ground: and so they made a body resembling
half the side of an house, which they called Testudo. Unto this squadron so
strongly combined together came two soldiers running some an hundred and fifty
foot off, and threatening each other with their weapons, ran nimbly up the side
of the roof; and sometimes making as though they would defend it against an
enemy that would have entered upon it, sometimes again encountering each other
in the midst of it, leaped up and down as steadily as if they had been upon
firm ground. And which is more strange, the front of a Testudo being applied to
the side of a wall, there ascended many armed men upon the said Testudo, and
fought in an equal height with other soldiers that stood upon the said wall
to defend it. The dissimilitude in the composition was this, that the soldiers
that were in front, and in the sides of the square, carried not their Targets
over their heads as the other did, but covered their bodies with them; and so
no weapons either cast from the wall, or otherwise thrown against it, could any
way hurt them; and whatsoever weight fell upon the Testudo, it quickly glyded
down by the declivity of the roof, without any hurt or annoiance at all.

Thus far Livie goes; neither do I know what to say further of it: the
chiefest use thereof was in a surprise or sudden attempt against a town, before
the townsmen were thoroughly prepared to defend the same. This invention served
them to approach the wall with safety, and so either to undermine it, or to
climb up: and to that end they oftentimes erected one Testudo upon another.
Tacitus says that the soldiers climbed upon the wall super iteratam
testudinem, by one Testudo made upon another. And this was the ancient form and
use of a Testudo in a sudden assault or surprise.

Dio Cassius in the acts of Antony says, Lib. 4^
that being galled with the Parthian Archers, he commanded his whole Army to
put it self into a Testudo: which was so strange a sight to the Parthians, that
they thought the Romans had sunk down for weariness and faintness; and so
forsaking their horses, drew their swords to have made execution: and then the
Romans, at a watchword given, rose again with such a fury, that they put them
all to sword and ^light. Dio describes the same Testudo after this manner:
They placed, says he, their baggage, their light-armed men and their horsemen
in the midst; and those heavy-armed footmen that carried long gutter-tiled
Targets, were in the utmost circles next unto the Enemy: the rest (which bare
large ovall Targets) were thronged together throughout the whole troup, and so
covered with their Targets both themselves and their fellows, that there was
nothing discerned by the Enemy but a roof of Targets, which were so tiled
together, that men might safely go upon them.

Further, we oftentimes read that the Romans cast themselves into a Testudo, to
break through an Enemy, or to rout and disrank a troup. And this use the Romans
had of a Testudo in field services, and only by the benefit of their Target. It
was called a Testudo in regard of the strength, for that it covered and
sheltred as a shell covers a fish. And let this suffice concerning a Testudo.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THirdly, The necessity of good discovery.
we may observe how carefully Caesar provided for the safety of such succors
as he sent unto Bibrax: for he commanded the same messengers that came from the
town to direct them, as the best and surest guides in that journey; least
peradventure through ignorance of the way, they might fall into inconveniences
or dangers. A matter of no small consequence in managing a war; but deserves
an extraordinary importunity to persuade the necessity of this diligence: for a
General that has perfectly discovered the nature of the country through which
he is to march, and knows the true distances of places, the quality of the
ways, the compendiousnesse of turnings, the nature of the hills, and the
course of the rivers, has all these particularities as main advantages, to
give means of so many several attempts upon an enemy. And in this point
Hannibal had a singular dexterity, and excelled all the Commanders of his time,
in making use of the way by which he was to pass. But he that leads an Army
by an unknown and undiscovered way, and marches blindfold upon uncertain
adventures, is subject to as many casualties and disadvantages as the other
has opportunities of good fortune. Let every man therefore persuade himself
that good Discoverers are as the eyes of an Army, and serve for lights in the
darkness of ignorance, to direct the resolutions of good providence, and make
the path of safety so manifest, that we need not stumble upon casualties.
Caesar in his journey to Ariovistus, used the help of Divitiacus the Heduan, in
whom amongst all the Galls he reposed greatest confidence, to discover the
way, and acquaint him with the passages: and before he would undertake his
voyage unto Now England.
Britanie, he well informed himself by Merchants and travailers of the quantity
of the Island, the quality of the people, their use of war, and the opportunity
of their havens. Neither was he satisfied with their relations, but he sent
Caius Volusenus in a ship of war, to see what he could further discover
concerning these points. Suetonius adds moreover, that he never carried his
Army per insidiosa itinera, through places where they were subject to be
waylaid, unless he had first well discovered the places.

Concerning the order which skillful Leaders have observed in discoveries, The
order which is to be observed in discovery.
we are to know that this point consists of two parts; the one, in
understanding the perfect description of the country; the second, in observing
the motions of the enemy. Touching the first, we find as well by this as other
histories, that the Romans used the inhabitants of the country for Guides, as
best acquainted with their native places, that they might not err in so
important a matter; provided always that their own scouts were ever abroad to
understand what they could of themselves, that they might not altogether rely
upon a strangers direction. The motions of the Enemy were observed by the
horsemen: and these for the most part were Veterani, well experienced in the
matter of war, and so the General received sound advertisements: and yet
they were not too forward upon any new motion, unless they found it confirmed
by diverse ways; for some Espials may err, either through passion or
affection, as it happened in the Hel^^tian war. If therefore the use and
benefit which prudent and wise Commanders made of this ^^igence, or the
misfortune which the want of this knowledge brought upon the ignorant, have any
authority to persuade a circumspect care herein, this little that has been
spoken may be sufficient for this point.

THE FOURTH OBSERVATION.
THe soldiers which Caesar sent to relieve Bibrax were Archers of Creta and
Numidia, Slingers with their art and use.
and Slingers of the Isles Baleares, which are now called Majorica and Minorica:
which kind of weapon because it seems ridiculous to the soldiers of these
times, whose conceits are held up with the fury of these fiery engines, I will
therefore in brief discover the nature and use thereof.

The Latins (says Isidore) called this weapon funda, quod ex ea fundantur
lapides, because out of it stones are cast. Pliny attri^uteth the invention
thereof to the Islander^ called Baleares. Florus in his 3 book and ^ chap.
says that these Baleares used three sorts of slings, and no other weapon
besides; and that a boy had never any meat given him before he had first struck
it with a sling. Strabo distinguishes these three sorts of slings which the
Baleares used, and says that they had one sling with long reins, which they
used when they would cast afar off; and another with short reins, which they
used near at hand; and the third with reins of a mean sise, to cast a
reasonable distance. Lipsius says that in Columna Antonina at Rome he observed
that the Balearean was made with one sling about his head, another about his
belly, and the third in his hand; which might be their ordinary manner of
carrying them. The matter whereof they were made was threefold: the first was
hemp or cotton, the second hair, and the third sinews; for of either of these
stuffs they commonly made them. The form and fashion of a sling resembled a
platted rope, somewhat broad in the midst, with an Ovall compass, and so by
little and little decreasing into two thongs or reins. Their manner of
slinging was to whirle it twice or thrice about their head, and so to cast out
the bullet. Virgil speaking of Mezentius says, Ipse ter adducta circum caput
egit habera.
He fetched the rein three times about his head,
But Vegetius prefers that skill which cast the bullet with once turning it
about the head. In Suidas we find that these Baleares did commonly cast a stone
of a pound weight: which agrees to these names in Caesar, fundas librales. The
leaden bullets are mentioned by Salust, in the war with Jugurth, and by
Livie, where he says that the Consul provided great store of arrows, of
bullets, and of small stones to be cast with slings. This weapon was in request
amongst diverse nations, as well in regard of the readiness and easy
reiterating of the blow, as also for that the bullet fled very far, with
great violence. The distance which they could easily reach with their sling, is
expressed in this verse,

Fundu^ Varro vocat, Lib. ^.
quem possis mittere funda. Fundum according to Varro is so much ground as a
man may sling over. Which Vegetius interprets to be six hundred foot. Their
violence was such, as the same author affirms in his first book and
sixteenth chap. that neither helmet, gaberdine, nor co^selet could bear out the
blow; but he that was hit with a sling, was slain sine invidia sanguinis, as he
says in the same place. Lucrece, Ovid, and Lucan, three of the Latin Poets
say, that a bullet skilfully cast out of a sling went with such violence, that
it melted as it flew: Lib. 2. (...). quest.
whereof Seneca gives this reason, Motion, says he, does extenuate the air,
and that extenuation or subtilty does inflame; and so a bullet ca^^ out of a
sling melts as it flies. But howsoever* Diodorus Siculus affirms that
these Balearean slingers brake both target, headpiece, or any other armor
whatsoever.

There are also two other sorts of slings, the one mentioned by Livie, and the
other by Vegetius. That in Livie is called Cestrophendo, which cast a short
arrow with a long thick head: the other in Vegetius is called Fustibalus, which
was a sling made of a cord and a staff. But let this suffice for slings and
slingers, which were reckoned amongst their light-armed soldiers, and used
chiefly in assaulting, and defending towns and fortresses, where the
heavy-armed soldiers could not come to buckle; and present the place of our
Harquebusiers, which in their proper nature are levis armatur^ milites
light-armed soldiers, although more terrible then those of ancient times.

Chap. V.
Caesar confronteth the Belgae in form of battle, but without any blow given:
the Belgae attempt the passing of the river Axona; but in vain, and to their
loss: they consult of breaking up the war.
CAesar at the first resolved not to give them battle, (...)
as well in regard of their multitude, as the general fame and opinion
conceived of their valor: notwithstanding he daily made trial by light
skirmishes with his horsemen, what the enemy could do, and what his own men
durst do. And when he found that his own men were nothing inferior to the
Belgae, he chose a convenient place before his camp, and put his Army in
battle: the bank where he was encamped rising somewhat from a plain level,
was no larger then would suffice the front of the battle; the two sides were
steep, and the front rose aslope by little and little, until it came again to
a plain, where the legions were imbattelled. And least the enemy abounding in
multitude, should circumvent his men and charge them in the flank as they were
fighting, (which they might easily do with their number) he drew an overthwart
ditch behind his Army from one side of the hill to the other, six hundred paces
in length; the ends whereof he fortified with bulwarks, and placed therein
store of engines. And leaving in his Camp the two legions which he had last
enrolled in Lombardy, that they might be ready to be drawn forth when there
should need any succor, he imbattelled his other six legions in the front of
the hill, before his Camp. The Belgae also bringing forth their power,
confronted the Romans in order of battle. I here lay between both the Armies a
small Marish: over which the enemy expected that Caesar should have passed, and
Caesar on the other side attended to see if the Belgae would come over, that
his men might have charged them in that troublesome passage. In the mean time
the Cavalry on both sides incountered between the two battles: and after long
expectation on either side, neither party adventuring to pass over, Caesar
having got the better in the skirmish between the horsemen, thought it
sufficient for that time, both for the encouraging of his own men, and the
contesting of so great an Army, and therefore he conveyed all his men again
into their Camp. From that place the enemy immediately took his way to the
River Axona, which lay behind the Romans Camp: and there finding foords, they
attempted to pass over part of their forces, to the end they might either take
the fortress which Q. Titurius kept, or break down the bridge, or spoil the
territories of the state of Rhemes, and cut off the Romans from provision of
corn. Caesar having advertisement thereof from Titurius, transported over the
river by the bridge all his horsemen, and light-armed Numidians, with his
Slingers and Archers, and marched with them himself. The conflict was hot in
that place: the Romans charging their enemies as they were troubled in the
water, slew a great number of them; the rest like desperate persons,
adventuring to pass over upon the dead carkases of their fellows, were beaten
back by force of weapons: and the horsemen encompassed such as had first got
over the water, and slew every man of them.

When the Belgae perceived themselves frustrated of their hopes of winning
Bibrax, of passing the River, and of drawing the Romans into places of
disadvantage, and that their own provisions began to fail them; they called a
council of war, wherein they resolved that it was best for the State in
general, and for every man in particular, to break up their Camp, and to
return home unto their own houses: and into whose confines or territories
soever the Romans should first enter, to depopulate and wast them in hostile
manner, that thither they should hasten from all parts, and there give them
battle; to the end they might rather try the matter in their own country, then
abroad in a strange and unknown place, and have their own household provision
always at hand to maintain them. And this the rather was concluded, for as
much as they had intelligence, that Divitiacus with a great power of the Hedui
approached near to the borders of the Bellovaci; who in that regard made have
homeward to defend their country.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
FIrst we may observe the Art which he used to countervail the strength of so
great a multitude, by choosing out so convenient a place, which was no broader
in front then would suffice the front of his battle: and having both the sides
of the hill so steep, that the enemy could not ascend nor climb up, but to
their own overthrow; he made the back-part of the hill strong by Art, and so
placed his soldiers as it were in the gate of a fortress, where they might
either issue out or retire at their pleasure. Whereby it appears how much he
preferred security and safety before the vain opinion of foolhardy resolution,
which savoureth of Barbarism rather then of true wisdom: for he ever thought
it great gain to loose nothing; and the day brought always good fortune, that
delivered up the Army safe unto the evening; attending until advantage had
laid sure principles of victory: and yet Caesar was never thought a coward.

And now it appears what use he made by passing his Army over the river, and
attending the enemy on the further side, rather then on the side of the state
of Rhemes: for by that means he brought to pass, that whatsoever the enemy
should attempt in any part or quarter of the land, his forces were ready to
trouble their proceedings; as it happened in their attempt of Bibrax: and yet
notwithstanding he lost not the opportunity of making slaughter of them as they
passed over the river. For by the benefit of the bridge which he had fortified,
he transported what forces he would, to make head against them as they passed
over; and so he took what advantage either side of the river could afford him.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
ANd here the Reader may not marvel, if when the hills are in labor, they
bring forth but a mouse; for how soon is the courage of this huge Army abated?
or what did it attempt worthy such a multitude? or answerable to the report
which was bruted of their valor? but being hastily carried together by the
violence of passion, were as quickly dispersed upon the sight of an enemy:
which is no strange effect of a sudden humor. For as in Nature all violent
motions are of short continuance, and the durability or lasting quality of all
actions proceeds from a slow and temperate progression; so the resolutions of
the mind that are carried with an untemperate violence, and savor so much of
heat and passion, do vanish away even with the smoke thereof, and bring forth
nothing but leasurable repentance. And therefore it were no ill counsel for
men of such natures, to qualify their hasty resolutions with a mistrustfull
lingering; that when their judgment is well informed of the cause, they may
proceed to a speedy execution.

But that which most bewrays their indiscreet intemperance in the hot pursuit
of this enterprise is, that before they had scarce seen the enemy, or had
opportunity to contest him in open field, their victuals began to fail them:
for their minds were so carried away with the conceit of war, that they had no
leisure to provide such necessaries as are the strength and sinew of the war.
It was sufficient for every particular man to be known for a soldier in so
honorable an action, referring other matters to the care of the State. The
States in like manner thought it enough to furnish out forty or fifty thousand
men apiece, to discharge their oath, and to save their hostages, committing
other requisites to the general care of the confederacy: which being directed
by as unskilful governors, never looked further then the present multitude,
which seemed sufficient to overthrow the Roman Empire. And thus each man relied
upon another care, and satisfied himself with the present garb. So many men
of all sorts and qualities, so many helmets and plumed crests, such strife and
emulation what state should seem in greatest forwardness, were motives
sufficient to induce every man to go, without further inquiry how they should
go. And herein the care of a General ought especially to be seen, considering
the weakness of particular judgments, that having the lives of so many men
depending altogether upon his providence, and engaged in the defense of their
state and country, he do not fail in these main points of discipline, which are
the pillars of all warlike designs. To conclude this point, let us learn by
their error so to carry a matter (especially of that consequence) that we make
it not much worse by ill handling it, then it was before we first took it to
our charge; as it here happened to the Belgae. For their tumultuous arms
sorted to no other end, then to give Caesar just occasion to make war upon
them, with such assurance of victory, that he made small account of that which
was to follow, in regard of that which had already happened: considering that
he should not in all likelihood meet with the like strength again, in the
continuance of that war. And this was not only gravius bellum successori
tradere, to leave a more considerable war unto his successor, as it often
falls out in the course of a long continued war; but to draw a dangerous war
upon their heads that otherwise might have lived in peace.

Chap. VI.
The Belgae break up their Camp, and as they return home, are chased and
slaughtered by the Romans.
THis general resolution being entertained by the consent of the whole
council of war, Caesar.
in the second watch they departed out of their camp with a great noise and
tumult, without any order (as it seemed) or government, every man pressing to
be foremost on his journey, and to be first at home: in such a turbulent manner,
that they seemed all to run away. Whereof Caesar having notice by his spies,
and mistrusting some practice, not as yet perceiving the reason of their
departure, he kept his Army within his Camp. In the dawning of the day, upon
certain intelligence of their departure, he sent first his horsemen under Q.
Pedius and L. Aurunculcius Cotta two Legates, to stay the rereward, commanding
Labienus to follow after with three legions: these overtaking the Belgae, and
chasing them many miles, slew a great number of them. And while the rereward
sta^ed, and valiantly received the charge of the Romans, the vantguard being
out of danger, and under no government, as soon as they head the alarm behind
them, brake out of their ranks and betook themselves to flight: and so the
Romans slew them as long as the sun gave them light to pursue them; and then
sounding a retreat, they returned to their Camp.

OBSERVATION.
IT has been an old rule amongst soldiers, That a great and negligent error
committed by an enemy, is to be suspected as a pretense to treachery. We read
of Fulvius a Legate in the Roman Army lying in Tusc^nie; The Consul being gone
to Rome to perform some public duty, the Tuscans took occasion by his absence
to try whether they could draw the Romans into any inconvenience; and placing
an ambuscado near unto their camp, sent certain soldiers attired like
shepherds, with droves of cattle to pass in view of the Roman Army: who
handled the matter so, that they came even to the rampire of the camp. Whereat
the Legate wondering as at a thing void of reason, kept himself quiet until he
had discovered their treachery, and so made frustrate their intent. In like
manner Caesar not persuaded that men should be so heedlesse, to carry a retreat
in that disorderly and tumultuous manner, would not discamp his men to take the
opportunity of that advantage, until he had found that to be true, which in
all reason was unlikely. And thus 308000 Belgae were chased and slaughtered by
three legions of the Romans, for want of government and order in their
departure.

Chap. VII.
Caesar follows after the Belgae into the Country of the Suessones; and
there besieges No^on. Caesar.
Noviodunum.
THe next day after their departure, before they could recover themselves of
their fear and flight, or had time to put themselves again in breath, Caesar,
as it were continuing still the chase and victory, led his Army into the
country of the Soyssons.
Suessones, the next borderers unto the men of Rhemes: and after a long journey
came unto Noviodunum a town of good importance, which he attempted to take by
surprise, as he passed along by it. For he understood that it was altogether
unfurnished of defensive provision, having no forces within to defend it: but
in regard of the breadth of the ditch and height of the wall, he was for that
time disappointed of his purpose: and therefore having fortified his camp, he
began to make preparation for a siege. The night following the whole multitude
of the Suessones, that had escaped by flight, were received into the town:
howbeit when the Vineae were with great expedition brought unto the wall, the
mount raised, and the turrets built, the Galls being amazed at the highness
of the works, such as they had never seen nor heard of before, and the speed
which was made in the dispatch thereof, sent ambassadors to Caesar, to treat
of giving up the town; and by the mediation of the men of Rhemes obtained their
suit.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IN this relation we may observe the industrious art which the Romans used in
assaulting, and taking holds and towns; wherein we find three sorts of engines
described, Vinea, Agger, and Turres.

Vinea is thus described by Vegetius: Lib. 4.
A little strong-built house or hovell, A Vinea or Vine described.
made of light wood, that it might be removed with greatest ease; the roof was
supported with diverse pillars of a foot square, whereof the foremost were eight
foot high, and the hindmost six, and between every one of these pillars there
was five foot distance. It was always made with a double roof, the first or
lower roof was of thick planks, and the upper CAESAR'S march where in every
Legion had his Cariadges in front

roof of hurdles, to break the force of a weight without further shaking or
disjoyning the building: the sides were likewise walled with hurdles, the
better to defend the soldiers that were under it: the whole length was about
sixteen foot, and the breadth seven, the upper roof was commonly covered with
green or raw hides, to keep it from burning. Many of these hovels were joined
together in rank, when they went about to undermine a wall: the higher end was
put next unto the wall, that all the weights which were thrown upon it might
easily tumble down, without any great hurt to the engine: the four sides and
groundsils had in every corner a wheel, and by them they were driven to any
place as occasion served. The chiefest use of them was to cover and defend the
soldiers, as they undermined or overthrew a wall. This engine was called
Vinea, which signifies a Vine, for it sheltered such as were under the roof
thereof, as a Vine covers the place where it grows.

Agger, Agger or mount.
which we call a mount, is described in diverse histories to be a hill or
elevation made of earth and other substance, which by little and little was
raised forward, until it approached near unto the place against which it was
built; that upon this mount they might erect fortresses and turrets, and so
fight with an advantage of height. The matter of this mount was earth and
stones, faggots and timber. Josephus says that at the siege of Jerusalem the
Romans cut down all the trees within 11 mile compass, for matter and stuff to
make a mount. The sides of this Agger were of Timber, to keep in the loose
matter: the forepart which was toward the place of service, was open without
any timber-work; for on that part they still raised it, and brought it nearer
the walls. That which was built at Massilia was 80 foot high, and that at
Avaricum 80 foot high and 30 foot broad. Josephus and Egesippus write that
there was a fortress in Judea 300 cubits high: which Sulla purposing to win
by assault, raised a mount 200 cubits high; and upon it he built a castle of
stone 50 cubits high, and fifty cubits broad; and upon the said castle he
erected a turret of 60 cubits in height, and so took the fortress. The Romans
oftentimes raised these mounts in the mouth of a haven, and commonly to
overtop a town, that so they might fight with much advantage.

Amongst other engines in use amongst the Romans, Towers or Turrets described.
their moveable Turrets were very famous: for they were built in some safe
place out of danger, and with wheels put under them were driven to the walls of
the town. These turrets were of two sorts, either great or little: the lesser
sort are described by Vitruvius to be sixty cubits high, and the square side
seventeen cubits; the breadth at the top was a fifth part of the breath at the
base, and so they stood sure without any danger of falling. The corner pillars
were at the base nine inches square, and six inches at the top: there were
commonly 10 stories in these little turrets, and windows in every story. The
greater sort of towers were 120 cubits high, and the square side was 24
cubits, the breadth at the top was a fifth part of the base; and in every one
of these were commonly 200 stories. There was not one and the same distance
kept between the stories; for the lowest commonly was 7 cubits and 12 inches
high, the highest story 5 cubits, and the rest 4 cubits and a third. In every
one of these stories were soldiers and engines, ladders and casting bridges,
by which they got upon the wall and entered the town. The forepart of these
turrets was covered with iron and wet coverings, to save them from fire. The
soldiers that removed the tower to and fro, were always within the square
thereof, and so they stood out of danger. The new water-work by Broken-wharfe
in London much resembles one of these towers.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
UPon the building of these mighty engines, it was no marvel if the Suessones
submitted themselves to such powerful industry. For whatsoever is strange and
unusual, does much affright the spirits of an enemy, and breed a motion of
distrust and diffidency, when as they find themselves ignorant of such warlike
practices: for novelty always breeds wonder; in as much as the true reasons
and causes being unknown, we apprehend it as diverse from the usual course of
things, and so stand gazing at the strangeness thereof: and wonder, as it
adds worth to the noveltie, so it infers diffidencie, and so consequently
fear, the utter enemy of martial valor.

Chap. VIII.
Caesar carries his Army to the Territories of the Bellovaci, Ambiani and the
Nervii.
CAesar taking for pledges the chiefest of their City, Caesar.
and amongst the rest king Galba's own two sons, upon the delivery of all their
Arms received the Suessones to mercy: and from thence led his Army against the
Bellovaci; The Bellovaci taken to mercy.
who having conveyed both themselves and their goods into the town called
Bratuspantium, and understanding that Caesar was come within five mile of the
place, all the elder sort came forth to meet him, signifying by the stretching
forth of their hands, and by their suppliant words, that they yielded
themselves up to Caesar's disposal, and would no longer bear arms against the
people of Rome. And so again when he was come near the town, and had there set
down his army, the very boys and women appearing upon the walls with extended
hands (as their custom is) besought sought peace of the Romans. For these
Divitiacus became a mediator, who after the Belgae had broken up their Camp,
had dismissed his Heduan forces and was returned to Caesar. The Hedui, says
he, have always found in the Bellovaci a faithful and friendly disposition to
their State: and if they had not been betrayed by their nobility (who made them
believe that the Hedui were brought in bondage by the Romans, and suffered all
villainy and despite at their hands) they had never withdrawn themselves from
the Hedui, nor consented to conspire against the Romans. The authors of this
counsel perceiving into what great misery they had brought their country, were
fled into Britanie: wherefore not only the Bellovaci, but the Hedui also in
their behalf besought him to use his clemency toward them. Which thing if he
did, it would very much greaten the esteem and authority of the Hedui amongst
the Belgae, who formerly in their wars had recourse to them for supplies and
assistance. Caesar, in regard of the Hedui and Divitacus, promised to receive
them to mercy; but for as much as the State was very great, and more populous
and powerful then other towns of the Belgae, he demanded six hundred hostages.
Which being delivered and their armor brought out of the town, he marched from
thence into the coast of the Ambiani: The Ambiani yield up themselves.
who without further lingering, gave both themselves and all that they had into
his power. Upon these bordered the Nervii; The Nervii.
of whom Caesar found thus much by inquiry, That there was no recourse of
Merchants unto them, neither did they suffer any ^^ine, or what thing else
might tend to riot, to be brought into their country: for they were persuaded
that by such things their courage was much abated, and their virtue weakened.
Further, he learned that these Nervii were a savage people, and of great
valor; often accusing the rest of the Belgae for yielding their necks to the
Roman yoke, openly affirming that they would neither send Ambassadors, nor
take peace upon any condition.

Caesar having marched three days journey in their country, understood that
the river Sambre near Namur.
Sabis was not past ten miles from his camp; and that on the further side of
this river all the Nervii were assembled together, and there attended the
coming of the Romans. With them were joined the At^ebates and Veromandui, whom
they had persuaded to abide the same fortune of war with them. Besides they
expected a power from the Aduatici. The women and such as were unmeet for the
field, they bestowed in a place unaccessible for any Army, by reason of fens
and bogs and marshes. Upon this intelligence, Caesar sent his discoverers and
Centurions before to choose out a fit place to incamp in.

Now whereas many of the surrendered Belgae and other Galls were continually in
the Roman Army, certain of these (as it was afterward known by the captives)
observing the order which the Romans used in marching, came by night to the
Nervii, and told them that between every legion went a great sort of carriages;
and that it was no matter of difficulty, as soon as the first legion was come
into the camp, and the other legions yet a great way off, to set upon them upon
a sudden before they were disburdened of their carriages, and so to overthrow
them: which legion being cut off and their stuff taken, the rest would have
small courage to stand against them. It much furthered this advice, that
forasmuch as the Nervii were not able to make any power of horse, but what they
did they were wont to do with foot, that they might the better resist the
cavalry of their borderers, whenever they made any rode into their marches,
their manner was to cut young trees half asunder, and bowing the tops down to
the ground, plashed the boughs in breadth, and with thorns and briars planted
between them they made them so thick, that it was impossible to see through
them, so hard it was to enter or pass through them: so that when by this
occasion the passage of the Roman Army must needs be hindered, the Nervii
thought the foresaid counsel not to be neglected.

The place which the Romans chose to incamp in was a hill of like level from
the top to the bottom, at the foot whereof ran the river Sabis: and with the
like level on the other side rose another hill directly against this, to the
quantity of two hundred paces; the bottom whereof was plain and open, and the
upper part so thick with wood, that it could not easily be looked into. Within
these woods the ^ervians kept themselves close: and in the open ground, by the
river side, were only seen a few troops of horse, and the river in that place
was about three foot deep.

Caesar sending his horsemen before, followed after with all his power. But the
manner of his march differed from the report which was brought to the Nervii:
for inasmuch as the enemy was at hand, Caesar (as his custom was) CAESAR'S
march where the Enemy was nearer at hand*

led six legions always in a readiness, without burden or carriage of any
thing but their Arms: after them he placed the baggage of the whole Army. And
the two legions which were last enrolled, were a rereward to the Army, and
guarded the stuff.

OBSERVATION.
THis treacherous practice of the surrendered Belgae has fortunately discovered
the manner of Caesar's march, The manner of the Roman march.
as well in safe passages, as in dangerous and suspected places: which is a
point of no small consequence in martial discipline, being subject to so many
inconveniences, and capable of the greatest art that may be showed in managing
a war. Concerning the discreet carriage of a march, by this circumstance it may
be gathered that Caesar principally respected safety, and secondly convenience.
The two respects which Caesar had in ordering a m^r^h.
If the place afforded a secure passage, and gave no suspicion of hostility, he
was content in regard of convenience, to suffer every legion to have the
oversight of their particular carriages, 1 Safety.
and to insert them among the troops, 2 Convenience.
that every man might have at hand such necessaries as were requisite, either
for their private use or public discipline. But if he were in danger of any
sudden attempt, or stood in hazard to be impeached by an enemy, he then omitted
convenient disposition in regard of particular use, as disadvantageous to their
safety; and carried his legions in that readiness, that if they chanced to be
engaged by an enemy, they might without any alteration of their march or
encumbrance of their carriages, receive the charge in that form of battle as
was best approved by their military rules, and the ancient practice of their
fortunate progenitors.

The old Romans observed likewise the same respects: for in unsafe and
suspected places they carried their troops again quadrato, Agmen quadratum.
in a square march, which, as Livie seems to note, was free from all carriage
and impediments which might hinder them in any sudden alarm. Neither does
that of Lib. 8. de bell. Gall.
Hirtius any way contradict this interpretation, where he says that Caesar so
disposed his troops against the Bellovaci, that three legions marched in front,
and after them came all the carriages, to which the tenth legion served as a
rereward; and so they marched pene agmine quadrato almost in a square march.
60. Epist.
Seneca in like manner notes the safety of agmen quadratum, where he says
that where an enemy is expected, we ought to march agmine quadrato ready to
fight. The most material consequence of these places alleged is, that as often
as they suspected any onset or charge, their order in a march little or nothing
differed from their usual manner of imbattelling; and therefore it was called
agmen quadratum or a square march, inasmuch as it kept the same disposition of
parts as were observed in quadrata Acie, in a square body. For that triple
form of imbatteling which the Romans generally observed in their fights,
having respect to the distances between each battle, contained almost an equal
dimension of front and file: and so it made Aciem quadratam a square body; and
when it marched, Agmen quadratum a square march.

Polybius expresses the same in effect, Lib 6.
as often as the place required circumspection; but alters it somewhat in
regard of the carriages: for he says that in time of danger, especially where
the country was plain and champain, and gave space and free scope to clear
themselves, upon any accident the Romans marched in a triple battle of equal
distance one behind another, every battle having his several carriages in
front. And if they were by chance attacked by an enemy, they turned themselves
according to the opportunity of the place either to the right of left hand; and
so placing their carriages on the one side of their Army, they stood
imbattelled ready to receive the charge.

The contrary form of marching, where the place afforded more security, and
gave scope to convenience, Agmen longum.
they named agmen longum a long march or train; when almost every maniple or
order had their several carriages attending upon them, and strove to keep that
way which they found most easy both for themselves and their impediments. Which
order of march as it was more commodious then the former in regard of
particularity, so was it unsafe and dangerous where the enemy was expected:
Lib. 5. de bello Gall.
and therefore Caesar much blamed Sabinus and Cotta for marching, when they
were deluded by Ambiorix, longissimo agmine in a very long train; as though
they had received their advertisements from a friend, and not from an enemy.

And albeit our modern wars are far different in quality from them of ancient
times, The use that may be made of this, in our modern wars.
yet in this point of discipline they cannot have a more perfect direction then
that which the Romans observed, as the two poles of their motions, Safety and
Conveniencie: whereof the first depends chiefly upon the provident
disposition of the leaders; and the other will easily follow on, as the
commodity of every particular shall give occasion.

Concerning safety in place of danger, what better course can be taken then
that manner of imbattelling, which shall be thought most convenient if an enemy
were present to confront them? for a well-ordered march must either carry the
perfect form of a battle, or contain the distinct principles and elements
thereof, that with little alteration it may receive that perfection of strength
which the fittest disposition can afford it. First therefore a prudent and
circumspect Leader, that desires to frame a strong and orderly march, is
diligently to observe the nature and use of each weapon in his Army, how they
may be placed for greatest use and advantage, both in respect of their
different and concurring qualities, as also in regard of the place wherein they
are managed: and this knowledge will consequently infer the best and exactest
disposition of imbattelling, as the said forces are capable of; which, if it
may be observed in a march, is no way to be altered. But if this exactness of
imbattelling will not admit convenient carriage of such necessary adjuncts as
pertain to an Army, the inconvenience is to be relieved with as little
alteration from that rule, as in a wary judgment shall be found expedient;
that albeit the form be somewhat changed, yet the principles and ground,
wherein their strength and safety consists, may still be retained.

Neither can any man well descend to more particular precepts in this point: he
may exemplify the practices of many great and experienced commanders, what sort
of weapon marched in front, and what in the rereward, in what part of the Army
the Munition marched, and where the rest of the carriage was bestowed,
according as their several judgments thought most expedient in the particular
nature of their occurrences. But the issue of all will fall out thus; that he
that observed this rule before prescribed, did seldom miscarry through an
unsafe march. Let a good Martia list well know their proper use in that
diversity of weapons in his Army, how they are serviceable or disadvantageous,
in this or that place, against such or such an Enemy; and he will speedily
order his battle, dispose of his march, and bestow his carriages, as shall best
fall out both for his safety and convenience.

Caesar's custom was to send his Cavalry and light-armed footmen before the
body of his Army, both to discover and impeach an Enemy; for these troops were
nimble in motion and fit for such services: but if the danger were greater in
the rereward then in the front, the horsemen marched in the tail of the Army,
and gave security where there was most cause of fear. But if it happened that
they were found unfit to make good the service in that place, as oftentimes it
fell out, and especially in Africa against the Numidians; he then removed them
as he best found it convenient, and brought his legionary soldiers, which were
the sinews and strength of his forces, and marched continually in the bulk of
the Army, to make good that which his horsemen could not perform. And thus he
altered the antique prescription and uniformity of custom, according as he
found himself best able to disadvantage an Enemy, or make way to victory.

Chap. IX.
The Romans begin to fortify their camp: but are interrupted by the Nervii.
Caesar makes have to prepare his forces to battle.
THe Roman horsemen, Caesar.
with the slingers and archers, passed over the river, and encountered the
Cavalry of the Enemy: who at first retired back to their companies in the wood,
and from thence sallied out again upon them; but the Romans durst not pursue
them further then the plain and open ground. In the mean time the six legions
that were in front, having their work measured out unto them, began to fortify
their camp. But as soon as the Ne^vii perceived their former carriages to be
come in sight, which was the time appointed amongst them to give the charge, as
they stood imbattelled within the thicket, so they rushed out with all their
forces, and assaulted the Roman horsemen: which being easily beaten back, the
Nervii ran down to the river with such an incredible swiftness, that they
seemed at the same instant of time to be in the woods, at the river, and
charging the legions on the other side: For with the same violence having
passed the river, they ran up the hill to the Roman camp, where the soldiers
were busied in their intrenchment. Caesar had all parts to play at one instant:
the flag to be hung out, by which they gave the soldiers warning to take Arms,
the battle to be proclaimed by sound of trumpet, the soldiers to be recalled
from their work, and such as were gone far off to get turf and matter for the
rampire, to be sent for, the battle to be ordered his men to be encouraged, and
the sign of battle to be given: the most of which were cut off by shortness of
time, and the sudden assault of the Enemy.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
AS the Romans excelled all other nations in many good customs, The descript
on of the Roman Camp with all the parts belonging unto it.
so especially in their camp-discipline they strove to be singular: for it
seemed rather an Academy, or a City of civil government, then a camp of
soldiers; so careful were they both for the safety, and skillful experience
of their men at Arms. For touching the first, they never suffered their
soldiers to lodge one night without a camp, wherein they were enclosed with
ditch and rampire, as in a walled town: neither was it any new invention or
late found out custom in their State, but in use amongst the ancient Romans,
and in the time of their kings. Their manner of encamping was included within
these circumstances.

The Centuri^^s that went before to choose out a convenient place, The
Centurions made (...) of (...) place
having found a fit situation Porta Praetoria THE ROMAN CAMP Porta Dceumana

for their camp, first assigned the standing for the Emperors pavilion, which
was commonly in the most eminent place of the camp; from whence he might easily
overview all the other parts, or any alarm or signum pugnae might from thence
be discovered to all quarters. The Praetorium.
This pavilion was known by the name of Praetorium, for as much as amongst the
ancient Romans the General of their Army was called Praetor. In this place
where the Praetorium was to be erected, they stuck up a white ensign, and from
it they measured every way a hundred foot, and so they made a square containing
two hundred foot in every side; the Area or content whereof was almost an acre
of ground: the from of the Praetorium was round and high, being as emient among
the other tents, as a Temple is amongst the private buildings of a City; and
therefore Josephus compares it to a Church. In this Praetorium was their
Tribunal or chair of the estate, and the place of divination, which they called
Augurale, with other appendices of majesty and authority.

The Generals tent being thus placed, The lodging of the legions.
they considered which side of the pavilion lay most commodious for forage and
water, and on that side they lodged the legions, every legion divided one from
another by a street or lane of fifty foot in breadth; and according to the
degree of honor that every legion had in the Army, so were they lodged in the
camp, either in the midst which was counted most honorable, or toward the
side which was of meaner reputation. And again, according to the place of every
cohort in his legion, so was it lodged nearer the pavilion of the Emperor,
toward the heart of the camp; and so consequently every maniple took place in
the cohort, distinguishing their preeminence by lodging them either toward the
middle or to the outsideward, according as they distinguished the place of
their legions. There went a street of fifty in breadth overthwart the midst of
all the legions, Quintana.
which was called Quintana, for that it divided the fifth cohort of every
legion from the sixth.

Between the tents of the first maniples in every legion and the Praetorium,
there went a way of a hundred foot in breadth throughout the whole camp,
Principia.
which was called Principia; in this place the Tribunes sat to hear matters of
justice, the soldiers exercised themselves at their weapons, and the leaders
and chief commanders frequented it is as a public place of meeting; and it was
held for a reverent and sacred place, and so kept with a correspondent decency.
On either side the Emperors pavilion, in a direct line to make even and
straight the upper side of the Principia, the Tribunes had their Tents pitched,
The tents of the Tribunes.
every Tribune confronting the head of the legion whereof he was Tribune: above
them, toward the head of the camp, were the Legates and Treasurer: the upper
part of the camp was strengthened with some select cohorts and troops of horse,
according to the number of legions that were in the Army.

Polybius describing the manner of encamping which the Romans used in his time,
when as they had commonly but two legions in their Army, with as many
associates, places the Ablecti and Extraordinarii, which were select bands and
companies, in the upper part of the camp, and the associates on the outside of
the legions.

The ditch and the rampire that compassed the whole camp about, The space
between the tents and the rampire.
was two hundred foot distant from any tent: whereof Polybius gives these
reasons; first, that the soldiers marching into the camp in battle array,
might there dissolve themselves into maniples, centuries and decuries, without
tumult or confusion; for order was the thing which they principally respected,
as the life and strength of their martial body. And again, if occasion were
offered to sally out upon an Enemy, they might very conveniently in that
spacious room put themselves into companies and troops: and if they were
assaulted in the night, the darts and fireworks which the Enemy should cast
into their camp, would little indamage them, by reason of the distance between
the rampire and the tents.

Their tents were all of skins and hides, held up with props, and fastened with
ropes: there were eleven soldiers, as Vegetius says, in every tent,
Contubernium.
and that society was called Contubernium, of whom the chiefest was named
Decanus, or Caput Contubernii.

The ditch and the rampire were made by the legions, The ditch and the rampire.
every maniple having his part measured out, and every Centurion overseeing his
Century; the approbation of the whole work belonged to the Tribunes. Their
manner of intrenching was this: the soldiers being girt with their swords and
daggers, dug the ditch about the camp, which was always eight foot in
breadth at the least, and as much in depth, casting the earth thereof inward;
but if the enemy were not far off, the ditch was always eleven or fifteen or
eighteen foot in latitude and altitude, according to the discretion of the
General: but what scantling soever was kept, the ditch was made directis
lateribus, that is, as broad in the bottom as at the top. The rampire from the
brim of the ditch was three foot in height, and sometimes four, made after the
manner of a wall, with green turfes cut all to one measure, half a foot in
thickness, a foot in breadth, and a foot and a half in length. But if the
place wherein they were encamped would afford no such turfe, they then
strengthened the loose earth which was cast out of the ditch with boughs and
faggots, that it might be strong and well-fastened. The rampire they properly
called Agger: Agger.
the outside whereof, which hung over the ditch, they used to stick with thick
and sharp stakes, fastened deep in the mound, that they might be firm; and
these for the most part were forked stakes; which made the rampire very strong,
and not to be assaulted but with great difficulty. Varro says that the front
of the rampire thus stuck with stakes, Vallum.
was called vallum a varicando, for that no man could stride or get over it.

The camp had four gates: the first was called praetoria Portae, Praetoria
porta.
which was always behind the Emperors tent; and this gate did usually look
either toward the east, or to the Enemy, or that way that the Army was to
march. The gate on the otherside of the camp opposite to this, was called
Portae Decumana, Portae Decumana.
a decimis cohortibus; for the tenth or last Cohort of every legion was lodged
to confront this gate: by this gate the soldiers went out to fetch their wood,
their water, and their forage, and this way their offenders were carried to
execution. The other two gates were called Portae principales, Portae
principales.
forasmuch as they stood opposite to either end of that so much respected place
which they called principia, Laeva Dextra.
only distinguished by these titles, laeva principalis and dextra, the left and
the right hand principal gate. All these gates were shut with doors, and in
standing Camps fortified with Turrets, upon which were planted Engines of
defense, as Balistae, Catapulta, Tolenones, and such like.

The Romans had their summer Camps, which they termed Aestiva, and their winter
Camps, which they called Hiberna, Castra Aestiva.
or Hibernacula. Their summer camps were in like manner differenced, according
to the time which they continued in them. For if they remained in a place but a
night or two, they called them Castra or Mansiones; but if they continued in
them any long time, they called them Aestivas or Seeds: And these were more
absolute, as well in regard of their tents, as of their fortification, then the
former wherein they stayed but one night. The other which they called Hiberna
had great labor and cost bestowed upon them, Hiberna.
that they might the better defend them from the winter season. Of these we
read, that the tents were either thatched with straw, or roofed with boards,
and that they had their armory, hospital, and other public houses. These camps
have been the beginning of many famous towns, especially when they continued
long in a place, as oftentimes they did, upon the banks of Euphrates, Danow,
and the Rhene. The order which they always observed in laying out their Camp
was so uniform, and well known to the Romans, that when the Centurions had
limited out every part, and marked it with different ensigns and colors, the
Soldiers entered into it as into a known and familiar City; wherein every
society or small contubernie knew the place of his lodging: and which is more,
every particular man could assign the proper station of every company
throughout the whole Army.

The use and commodity of this incamping I briesly touched in my first book:
The commodity of this incamping.
but if I were worthy any way to commend the excellency thereof to our modern
Soldiers, or able by persuasion to restablish the use of incamping in our
wars, I would spare no pains to atchieve so great a good, and vaunt more in the
conquest of negligence, then if my self had compassed a new-foundout means: and
yet reason would deem it a matter of small difficulty, to gain a point of such
worth in the opinion of our men, especially when my discourse shall present
security to our forces, and honor to our leaders, majesty to our Armies, and
terror to our enemies, wonderment to strangers, and victory to our nation. But
sloth has such interest in this age, that it commends vainglory and
fool-hardinesse, contempt of virtue and derison of good discipline, to repugne
the designs of honor, and so far to overmal^^reason, that it suffers not
former harms to bear witness against error, nor correct the ill achievements
of ill directions: and therefore ceasing to urge this point any further, I will
leave it to the careful respect of the wise.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe fury of the Enemy and their sudden assault so disturbed the ceremonies
which the Roman discipline observed, The ceremonies which they used in their
preparation to battle.
to make the Soldiers truly apprehend the weight and importance of that
action, which might cast upon their state either sovereignty or bondage, that
they were all for the most partomitted: notwithstanding they are here noted
under these title; the first was vexillum proponendum, quod erat insigne cum ad
Arma concurri oporteret, the hanging out the flag, which was the sign for
betaking themselves to their arms: for when the General had determined to
fight, he caused a skarlet coat or red flag to be hung out upon the top of his
tent, that by it the Soldiers might be warned to prepare themselves for the
battle; and this was the first warning they had; which by a silent aspect
presented blood and execution to their eyes, as the only means to work out
their own safety, and purchase eternal honor. The second was Signum tuba
dandum, the proclaiming the battle by sound of trumpet: this warning was a
noise of many trumpets, which they termed by the name of classicuma calando,
which signifies calling; for after the eye was filled with species suitable to
the matter intended, they then hasted to possess the ear, and by the sense of
hearing to stir up warlike motions, and fill them with resolute thoughts, that
no diffident or base conceits might take hold of their minds. The third was
milites cohortandi, the encouraging of the soldiers: for it was thought
convenient to confirm this valor with motives of reason, which is the strength
and perfection of all such motions. The use and benefit whereof I somewhat
enlarged in the Helvetian war, and could afford much more labor to demonstrate
the commodity of this part, if my speech might carry credit in the opinion of
our soldiers, or be thought worthy regard to men so much addicted to their own
fashions. The last was signum dandum, the sign giving; which, as some think,
was nothing but a word, by which they might distinguish and know themselves
from their enemies. Hirtius in the war of Africa says, that Caesar gave the
word Felicity; Brutus and Cassius gave Liberty; others have given Virtus, Deus
nobiscum, Triumphus Imperatoris, and such like words, as might be ominous to a
good success.

Besides these particularities, the manner of their delivery gave a great grace
to the matter. And that was distinguished by times and cues; whereof Caesar now
complains, that all these were to be done at one instant of time: for without
all controversy, there is no matter of such consequence in it self, but may be
much graced with ceremonies and complements, which like officers or attendants
add much respect and majesty to the action; which otherwise being but barely
presented, appears far meaner and of less regard.

CHAP. X.
The battle between Caesar and the Nervii.
IN these difficulties two things were a help to the Romans: Caesar.
the one was the knowledge and experience of the soldiers; for by reason of
their practice in former battles, they could as well prescribe unto themselves
what was to be done, as any other commander could teach them. The other was,
that notwithstanding Caesar had given commandment to every Legate, not to leave
the work or forsake the legions until the fortifications were perfected; yet
when they saw extremity of danger, they attended no countermand from Caesar,
but ordered all things as it seemed best to their own discretion. Caesar having
commanded such things as he thought necessary, ran hastily to encourage his
soldiers, and by fortune came to the tenth legion; where he used no further
speech, then that they should remember their ancient valor, have courageous
hearts, and valiantly withstand the brunt of their enemies. And therefore I
rather take it be something else then a word.
And forasmuch as the enemy was no further off, then a weapon might be cast to
encounter them, he gave them the sign of battle: and hastening from thence to
another quarter, he found them already closed and at the encounter. For the
time was so short and the enemy so violent, that they wanted leisure to put on
their head-pieces, or to uncase their targets: so that what part they lighted
into from their work, or what ensign they first met withal, there they stayed;
least in seeking out their own companies, they should lose that time as was to
be spent in fighting. The Army being imbattelled rather according to the nature
of the place, the declivity of the hill, and the brevity of time, then
according to the rules of art; as the legions incountred the enemy in diverse
places at once, the perfect view of the battle being hindered by those thick
hedges before spoken of, there could no succors be placed any where; neither
could any man see what was needful to be done: and therefore in so great
uncertainty of things, there happened diverse casualties of fortune.

The soldiers of the ninth and tenth legion, as they stood in the left part of
the Army, casting their piles with the advantage of the hill, did drive the
Atrebates, breathless with running and wounded in the encounter, down into the
river; and as they passed over the water, slew many of them with their swords.
Neither did they stick to follow after them over the river, and adventure into
a place of disadvantage, where the battle being renewed again by the Enemy,
they put them to flight the second time. In like manner two other legions, the
eleventh and the eighth having put the Veromandui from the upper ground, fought
with them upon the banks of the river; and so the front and the left part of
the camp was well-near left naked. For in the right cornet were the twelfth and
seventh legions, whereas all the Nervii, under the conduct of Boduognatus, were
heaped together; and some of them began to assault the legions on the open
side, and other some to possess themselves of the highest part of the camp.

At the same time the Roman horsemen, and the light-armed footmen that were
intermingled amongst them, and were at first all put to flight by the Enemy, as
they were entering into the camp, met with their enemies in the face, and so
were driven to fly out another way. In like manner the pages, and soldiers
boys, that from the Decumane port and top of the hill had seen the tenth
legion follow their enemies in pursuit over the river, and were gone out to
gather pillage, when they looked behind them, and saw the enemy in their camp,
betook them to their heels as fast as they could. At the same time rose a great
hubbub and outcry of those that came along with the carriages, who being
extremely troubled and dismayed at the business, ran some one way and some
another. Which accident so terrified the horsemen of the Treviri (who for their
prowess were reputed singular amongst the Galls, and were sent thither by
their State to aid the Romans) first when they perceived the Roman camp to be
possesst by a great multitude of the Enemy, the legions to be overcharged and
almost enclosed about, the horsemen, slingers, and Numidians to be dispersed
and fled, that without any further expectation they took their way homeward,
and reported to their State that the Romans were utterly overthrown, and that
the Enemy had taken their carriages.

Caesar departing from the tenth legion to the right cornet, finding his men
exceedingly overcharged the ensigns crowded together into one place, and the
soldiers of the twelfth legion so thick thronged on a heap, that they hindered
one another; all the Centurions of the fourth cohort being slain, the
ensign-bearer killed, and the ensign taken, and the Centurions of the other
cohorts either slain, or sore wounded; amongst whom Pub. Sextus Baculus, the
Primipile of that legion, a valiant man, so grievously wounded that he could
scarce stand upon his feet; the rest not very forward, but many of the hindmost
turning tail and forsaking the field; the Enemy (...) the other side giving no
respite in front, although he fought against the hill, nor yet sparing the open
side, and the matter brought to a narrow issue, without any means or succor to
relieve them: he took a target from one of the hindmost soldiers, (for he
himself was come thither without one) and pressing to the front of the battle,
called the Centurions by name, and encouraging the rest, commanded the ensigns
to be advanced toward the enemy, and the Maniples to be enlarged, that they
might with greater facility and readiness use their swords.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis Publius Sextus Baculus was the chiefest Centurion of the twelfth legion,
The place and offices of (...) Primipile.
being the first Centurion of that Maniple of the Triarn that was of the first
Cohort in that legion: for that place was the greatest dignity that could
happen to a Centurion; and therefore he was called by the name of Centurio
primipili, or simply Primipilus, and sometimes Primiopilus, or Primus Centurio.
By him were commonly published the mandates and edicts of the Emperor and
Tribunes: and therefore the rest of the Centurions at all times had an eye unto
him; and the rather for that the eagle, which was the peculiar ensign of every
legion, was committed to his charge and carried in his Maniple. Neither was
this dignity without special commodity, as may be gathered out of diverse
Authors. We read farther, that it was no disparagement for a Tribune, after
his Tribuneship was expired, to be a Primipile in a legion; notwithstanding
there was a law made, I know not upon what occasion, that no Tribune should
afterward be Primipile. But let this suffice concerning the office and title of
P. S. Baculus.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
ANd here I may not omit to give the Target any honor I may: The Target
described.
and therefore I will take occasion to describe it in Caesar's hand, as in the
place of greatest dignity, and much honoring the excellency thereof. Polybius
makes the Target to contain two foot and an half in breadth, overthwart the
unequal surface thereof, and the length four foot, of what form or fashion
soever they were of: for the Romans had two sorts of Targets amongst their
legionaries; the first carried the proportion of that figure which the
Geometricians call Ovall, a figure of an unequal latitude, broadest in the
(...), and narrow at both the ends like unto an egg, described in plano: the
other sort was of an equal latitude, and resembled the fashion of a
gutter-tile, and thereupon was called Scutum imbricatum. The matter whereof a
target was made was a double board, one fastened upon another with lint and
Bulls glue, and covered with an Ox hide, or some other stiff leather; the
upper and lower part of the target were bound about with a plate of iron, to
keep it from cleaving; and in the midst there was a bosse of iron or brass,
which they called Umbo. Romulus brought them in first among the Romans, taking
the use of them from the Sabines. The wood whereof they were made was for the
most part either sallow, alder, or fig tree: Lib. 16. cap. 40.
whereof Pliny gives this reason; forasmuch as these trees are cold and
waterish, and therefore any blow or thrust that was made upon the wood, was
presently contracted and shut up again. But forasmuch as the Target was of such
reputation among the Roman Arms, and challenged such interest in the
greatness of their Empire, let us enter a little into the consideration of the
use and commodity thereof; which cannot be better understood then by that
comparison which Polybius has made between the weapons of the Romans and the
Macodonians: and therefore I have thought good to insert it in these
discourses. And thus it follows.

Of the difference of the Roman and Macedonian Weapons.

I Promised in my sixth book that I would make a comparison between the weapons
of the Romans and Macedonians: and that I would likewise write of the
disposition of either of their Armies, how they do differ one from another; and
in what regard the one or the other were either inferior or superior: which
promise I will now with diligence endeavor to perform. And forasmuch as the
Armies of the Macedonians have given so good testimonies of themselves by their
actions, by overcoming the Armies as well of Asia as of Greece, and that the
battles of the Romans have conquered as well those of Africa, as all the
Eastern countries of Europe; it shall not be amiss, but very profitable, to
search out the difference of either; especially seeing that these our times
have not once, but many times seen trial both of their battles and forces:
that knowing the reason why the Romans do overcome, and in their battle carry
away the better, we do not as vain men were wont to do, attribute the same to
fortune, and esteem them without reason happy victours; but rather looking into
the true causes, we give them their due praises, according to the direction of
reason and sound judgment. Concerning the battles between Hannibal and the
Romans, and concerning the Romans losses, there is no need that I speak much.
For their losses are neither to be imputed to the defect of their Arms, or
disposition of their Armies; but to the dexterity and industry of Hannibal. But
we have entreated thereof when we made mention of the battles themselves; and
the end it self of that war does especially confirm this our opinion: for
when they had gotten a Captain equal with Hannibal, even consequently he with
all his victories vanished. And he had no sooner overcome the Romans, but by
and by rejecting his own weapons, he trained his Army to their weapons: and so
taking them up in the beginning, he continued them on unto the end.

And Pyrrhus in his war against the Romans did use both their weapons and
order, and made as it were a medly both of the cohort and phalanx: but
notwithstanding it served him not to get the victory, but always the event by
some means or other made the same doubtful: concerning whom it were not unfit
that I should say something, least in being altogether silent, it might seem to
prejudice this mine opinion. But notwithstanding I will hasten to my purposed
comparison.

Now touching the phalanx, if it have the disposition and forces proper to it,
nothing is able to oppose it self against it, or to sustain the violence
thereof; as may easily by many documents be approved. For when an armed man
does stand firm in the space of three foot in so thick an arraie of battle, and
the length of their pikes being according to the first basis or scantling
sixteen foot, but according to the true and right convenience of them fourteen
cubits, out of which are taken four allowed for the space between the left
hand, which supporteth the same, and the butt end thereof, whiles he stands in
a readiness to attend the encounter; being thus ordered, I say, it is manifest
that the length of ten cubits does extend it self before the body of every
armed man, where with both his hands he does advance it ready to charge the
Enemy. By which means it follows that some of the pikes do not only extend
themselves before the second, third, and fourth rank, but some before the
foremost, if the phalanx have his proper and due thickness, according to his
natural disposition, both on the sides and behind: as Homer makes mention
when he says, that one target does enclose and fortify another; one headpiece
is joined to another, that they may stand united and close together.

These circumstances being rightly and truly set down, it must follow that the
pikes of every former rank in the phalanx do extend themselves two cubits
before each other, which proportion of difference they have between themselves:
by which may evidently be seen the assault and impression of the whole phalanx,
what it is, and what force it has, consisting of sixteen ranks in depth or
thickness. The excess of which number of ranks above five, forasmuch as they
cannot commodiously couch their pikes without the disturbance of the former,
the points of them not being long enough to enlarge themselves beyond the
foremost ranks, they grow utterly unprofitable, and cannot man by man make any
impression or assault: but serve only by laying their pikes upon the shoulders
of those which stand before them, to sustain and hold up the swayes and giving
back of the former ranks which stand before them, to this end, that the front
may stand firm and sure; and with the thickness of their pikes they do repel
all those darts, which passing over the heads of those that stand before, would
annoy those ranks which are more backward.

And farther, by moving forward with the force of their bodies, they do so
press upon the former, that they do make a most violent impression. For it is
impossible that the foremost ranks should give back.

This therefore being the general and particular disposition of the phalanx,
we must now speak on the contrary part touching the properties and differences,
as well of the Arms, as of the whole disposition of the Roman battle. For
every Roman soldier for himself and his weapon, is allowed three foot to stand
in, and in the encounter are moved man by man, every one covering himself with
his target, and mutually moving whenever there is occasion offered. But those
which use their swords, do fight in a more thin and distinct order; so that it
is manifest that they have three foot more allowed them to stand in both from
shoulder to shoulder, and from back to belly, that they may use their weapons
with the better commodity. And hence it comes to pass that one Roman soldier
takes up as much ground, as two of those which are to encounter him of the
Macedonian Phalanx: so that one Roman is as it were to oppose himself against
ten pikes, which pikes the said one soldier can neither by any agility come to
offend, or else at handy blows otherwise annoy: And those which are behind him
are not only unable to repel their force, but also with convenience to use
their own weapons. Whereby it may easily be gathered, that it is impossible
that any battle being assaulted by the front of a phalanx, should be able to
sustain the violence thereof, if it have his due and proper composition.

What then is the cause that the Romans do overcome, and that those that do use
the phalanx are void of the hope of victory? Even from hence, that the Roman
Armies have infinite commodities, both of places and of times to fight in. But
the phalanx has only one time, one place, and one kind whereto it may
profitably apply it self: so that if it were of necessity that their enemy
should encounter them at that instant, especially with their whole forces, it
were questionless not only not without danger, but in all probability likely
that the phalanx should ever carry away the better. But if that may be avoided,
which is easily done, shall not that disposition then be utterly unprofitable,
and free from all terror? And it is farther evident that the phalanx must
necessarily have plain and champain places, without any hindrances or
impediments, as ditches, uneven places, valleys, little hills and rivers; for
all these may hinder and disjoyn it. And it is almost impossible to have a
Plain of the capacity of twenty stadia, much less more, where there shall be
found none of these impediments. But suppose there be found such places as are
proper for the phalanx: if the Enemy refuse to come unto them, and in the mean
time spoil and sack the Cities and country round about, what commodity or
profit shall arise by any Army so ordered? for if it remain in such places, as
has been before spoken of, it can neither relieve their friends, nor preserve
themselves. For the convoies which they expect from their friends are easily
cut off by the Enemy, whiles they remain in those open places.

And if it happen at any time that they leave them upon any enterprise, they
are then exposed to the Enemy. But suppose that the Roman Army should find the
phalanx in such places, yet would it not adventure it self in gross at one
instant, but would by little and little retire it self; as does plainly appear
by their usual practice. For there must not be a conjectur of these things by
my words only, but especially by that which they do. For they do not so equally
frame their battle, that they do assault the Enemy altogether, making as it
werebut one front: but part make a stand, and part charge the Enemy, that if at
any time the Phalanx do press them that come to assault them and be repelled,
the force of their order is dissolved. For whether they pursue those that
retire, or fly from those that do assault them, these do disjoyn themselves
from part of their Army; by which means there is a gap opened to their
Enemies, standing and attending their opportunity: so that now they need not
any more to charge them in the front, where the force of the phalanx
consists, but to assault where the breach is made, both behind and upon the
sides. But if at any time the Roman Army may keep his due propriety and
disposition, the phalanx by the disadvantage of the place being not able to do
the like, does it not then manifestly demonstrate the difference to be great
between the goodness of their disposition, and the disposition of the phalanx?

To this may be added the necessities imposed upon an Army: which is, to march
through places of all natures, to encamp themselves, to possess places of
advantage, to besiege, and to be besieged; and also contrary to expectation
sometimes to come in view of the Enemy. For all these occasions necessarily
accompany an Army, and oftentimes are the especial causes of victory, to which
the Macedonian phalanx is no way fit or convenient; forasmuch as neither in
their general order, nor in their particular disposition, without a convenient
place, they are able to effect any thing of moment: but the Roman Army is apt
for all these purposes. For every soldier amongst them being once armed and
ready to fight, refuses no place, time nor occasion; keeping always the same
order, whether he fight together with the whole body of the Army, or
particularly by himself man to man.

And hence it happens, that as the commodity of their disposition is
advantageous, so the end does answer the expectation.

These things I thought to speak of at large, because many of the Graecians are
of an opinion that the Macedonians are not to be overcome. And again, many
wondered how the Macedonian phalanx should be put to the worse by the Roman
Army, considering the nature of their weapons.

Thus far goes Polybius in comparing the weapons and embattelling of the
Romans, with the use of Arms amonst the Macedonians: wherein we see the Pike
truly and exactly ordered, according as the wise Gracians could best proportion
it with that form of battle, which might give most advantage to the use
thereof: so that if our squadrons of Pikes jump not with the perfect manner of
a phalanx, (as we see they do not) they fall so much short of that strength,
which the wisdom of the Grecians and the experience of other nations imputed
unto it. But suppose we could allow it that disposition in the course of our
wars, which the nature of the weapon does require; yet forasmuch as by the
authority of Polybius, the said manner of imbattelling is tied to such
dangerous circumstances of one time, one place, and one kind of fight, I hold
it not so profitable a weapon as the practice of our times does seem to make
it, especially in woody countries, such as Ireland is, where the use is cut off
by such inconveniences as are noted to hinder the managing thereof. And
doubtless, if our Commanders did but consider of the incongruity of the Pike
and Ireland, they would not proportion so great a number of them in every
company as there is; for commonly half the company are Pikes, which is as much
as to say in the practice of our wars, that half the Army has neither
offensive nor defensive weapons, but only against a troup of horse. For they
seldom or never come to the push of pike with the foot companies, where they
may charge and offend the enemy: and for defense, if the enemy think it not
safe to buckle with them at hand, but makes more advantage to play upon them
afar off with shot, it affords small safety to shake a long pike at them,
and stand fair in the mean time to entertain a volley of shot with the body of
their battalion. As I make no question but the pike in some services is
profitable, as behind a rampire, or at a breach; so I assure my self there are
weapons, if they were put to trial, that would countervail the pike, even in
those services wherein it is thought most profitable.

Concerning the Target, we see it take the hand, in the judgment of Polybius,
of all other weapons whatsoever, as well in regard of the diverse and sundry
sorts of imbattelling, as the quality of the place wheresoever: for their use
was as effectual in small bodies and centuries, as in gross troops and great
companies; in thin and spacious imbattelling, as in thick-thronged Testudines.

Neither could the nature of the place make them unserviceable; for whether it
were plain or covert, level or unequal, narrow or large, if there were any
commodity to fight, the target was as necessary to defend as the sword to
offend: besides the convenience which accompanies the target in any necessity
imposed upon an Army, whether it be to march through places of all natures, to
make a fast march, or a speedy retreat, to incamp themselves, to possess
places of advantage, to besiege and to be besieged, as Polybius says, with
many other occasions which necessarily accompany an Army. The use of this
weapon has been too much neglected in these later ages, but may be happily
renewed again in our Nation, if the industry of such as have labored to
present it unto these times in the best fashion, shall find any favor in the
opinion of our Commanders. Concerning which target I must needs say thus much,
that the light target will prove the target of service, whenever they shall
happen to be put in execution: for those which are made proof are so heavy and
unwieldy (although they be somewhat qualified with such helps as are annexed to
the use thereof) that they overcharge a man with an unsupportable burden, and
hinder his agility and execution in fight with a weight disproportionable to
his strength. For our offensive weapons, as namely the Harquebusiers and
Musketeers, are stronger in the offensive part, then any arms of defense,
which may be made manageable and fit for service. Neither did the Romans regard
the proof of their targets further then was thought fit for the ready use of
them in time of battle, as it appears in many places both in the Civil wars,
and in these Commentaries: for a Roman Pile has oftentimes darted through the
Target, and the body of the man that bare it, and fastened them both to the
ground; which is more then a Musket can well do, for the bullet commonly
rests in the body. And although it may be said that this was not common, but
rather the effect of an extraordinary arm; yet it serves to prove that their
targets were not proof to their offensive weapons, when they were well
delivered, and with good direction. For I make no doubt but in their battles
there were oftentimes some hindrances, which would not suffer so violent an
effect as this which I speak off: for in a volley of shot we must not think
that all the bullets fly with the same force, and fall with the like hurt; but
as Armor of good proof will hardly hold out some of them, so slender Arms,
and of no proof, will make good resistance against others. And to conclude, in
a battle or encounter at hand, a man shall meet with more occasions suiting
the nature and commodity of this light Target, then such as will advantage the
heavy Target of proof, or countervail the surplus of weight which it carries
with it.

Some men will urge, that there is use of this Target of proof in some places
and in some services: which I deny not to those that desire to be secured from
the extremity of peril. But this falls out in some places, and in some
particular services; and hinders not but that the universal benefit of this
weapon consists in the multitude of light Targetiers, who are to manage the
most important occasions of a war.

Thus much I am further to note concerning the sword of the Targetiers, that
according to the practice of the ^mans, it must always hang on the right side;
for carrying the Target upon the left arm, it cannot be that the sword should
hang on the left side, but with great trouble and annoiance. And if any man
say, that if it hang on the right side it must be very short, otherwise it will
never be readily drawn out: I say, that the sword of the Targetiers, in regard
of the use of that weapon, ought to be of a very short scantling, whenas the
Targetier is to command the point of his sword within the compass of his
Target, as such as look into the true use of this weapon will easily discover.
But let this suffice concerning the use of the Pike and the Target.

Chap. XI.
The battle continues, and in the end Caesar overcomes.
AT the presence of their General the soldiers conceived some better hopes;
Caesar.
and gathering strength and courage again, when as every man bestirred himself
in the sight of the Emperor, the brunt of the enemy was a little stayed.
Caesar perceiving likewise the seventh legion, which stood next unto him, to be
sore over-laid by the enemy, commanded the Tribunes by little and little to
join the two legions together, and so by joining back to back, to make two
contrary fronts; and being thus secured one by another from fear of being
circumvented, they began to make resistance with greater courage. In the mean
time the two legions that were in the rereward to guard the carriages, hearing
of the battle, doubled their pace, and were descried by the enemy upon the top
of the hill. Titus Labienus, having won the Camp of the Nervii, and beholding
from the higher ground what was done on the other side of the river, sent the
tenth legion to help their fellows: who understanding by the horsemen and
Lackies that fled in what case the matter stood, and in what danger the Camp,
the legions, and the General was, made all the haste they possibly could. At
whose coming there happened such an alteration and change of things, that even
such as were sunk down through extreme grief of their wounds, or leaned upon
their Targets, began again to fight afresh; and the Pages and the boys
perceiving the enemy amazed, ran upon them unarmed, not fearing their weapons.

The horsemen also striving with extraordinary valor to wipe away the
dishonor of their former flight, thrust themselves in all places before the
legionary soldiers. Howbeit the Enemy in the utmost peril of their lives
showed such manhood, that at fast as the foremost of them were overthrown, the
next in place bestrid their carcasses, and fought upon their bodies: and these
being likewise overthrown, and their bodies heaped one upon another, they that
remained possessed themselves of that Mount of dead carcasses, as a place of
advantage, and from thence threw their weapons, and intercepting the piles
returned them again to the Romans.

By which it may be gathered that there was great reason to deem them men of
haughty courage, that durst pass over so broad a River, climb up such high
rocks, and adventure to fight in a place of such inequality; all which their
magnanimity made easy to them. The battle being thus ended, and the Nation and
name of the Nervii being well-near swallowed up with destruction the elder sort
with the women and children, that before the battle were conveyed into Islands
and Bogs, when they heard thereof, and saw now that there was nothing to hinder
the conqueror, nor any hope of safety to the conquered, by the consent of all
that remained alive sent Ambassadors to Caesar, and yielded themselves to his
mercy; and in laying open the misery of their State affirmed, that of six
hundred Senators they had now left but three, and of sixty thousand fighting
men, there was scarce five hundred that were able to bear Arms. Caesar, that
his clemency might appear to a distressed people, preserved them with great
care, granting unto them the free possession of their towns and country, and
straightly commanding their borderers not to offer them any wrong or injury at
all.

OBSERVATION.
ANd thus ends the relation of that great and dangerous battle, Lib. de
Militia Ju. Cae.
which Ramus complains of as a confused narration, much differing from the
direct and methodicall file of his other Commentaries. But if that rule hold
good which learned Rhetoricians have observed in their Oratory, That an
unperfect thing ought not to be told in a perfect manner; then by Ramus leave,
if any such confusion do appear, it both savoureth of eloquence, and well
suteth the turbulent carriage of the action, wherein order and skill gave place
to Fortune, and providence was swallowed up with peradventure. For that which
H^rtius says of the overthrow he gave to Pharnaces, may as well be said of
this, that he got the victory, plurimum adjuvante deorum benignitate, qui cum
omnibus belli casibus intersunt, tum praecipue iis quibus nihil ratione potuit
administrari, by the very great favor and assistance of the gods; who as they
give aid in all cases of war, so especially in those where reason and good
skill are at a loss. For so it fell out in this battle, and the danger
proceeded from the same cause that brought him to that push in the battle with
Pharnaces: for he well understood that the Nervii attended his coming on the
other side the river Sabis: Neither was he ignorant how to fortify his Camp in
the face of an enemy without fear or danger, as we have seen in his war with
Ariovistus; when he marched to the place where he purposed to incamp himself
with three battles, and caused two of them to stand ready in Arms to receive
any charge which the enemy should offer to give, that the third battle in the
mean time might fortify the Camp. Which course would easily have frustrated
this stratagem of the Nervii, and made the hazard less dangerous: but he
little expected any such resolution, so contrary to the rules of Military
discipline, that an enemy should not stick to pass over so broad a river, to
climb up such steep and high Rocks, to adventure battle in a place so
disadvantageous, and to hazard their fortune upon such inequalities. And
therefore he little mistrusted any such unlikely attempt, wherein the enemy had
plotted his own overthrow, if the legions had been ready to receive them.

Which may teach a General that which Caesar had not yet learned, that a
Leader cannot be too secure in his most assured courses, nor too careful in
his best advised directions; considering that the greatest means may easily be
prevented, and the safest course weakened with an unrespected circumstance: so
powerful are weak occurrences in the main course of the weightiest actions,
and so infinite are the ways whereby either wisdom or fortune may work.
Neither did this warm him to provide for that which an enemy might do, how
unlikely soever it might seem unto him; as appears by that accident in the
battle with Pharnaces. Which practice of attempting a thing against reason and
the art of war, has found good success in our modern wars, as appears
by the French histories: notwithstanding it is to be handled sparingly, as no
way favoring of circumspect and good direction, forasmuch as Temeritas non
semper felix, Rashness does not always speed well, as Fabius the great
answered Scipio.

The chiefest helps which the Romans found, were first the advantage of the
place; whereof I spoke in the Helvetian war. Secondly, the experience which
the soldiers had got in the former battles, which much directed them in this
turbulent assault; wherein they carried themselves as men acquainted with such
casualties. Lastly, the valor and undanted judgment of the General, which
overswaied the peril of the battle, and brought it to so fortunate an end.
Wherein we may observe, that as in a temperate course, when the issue of the
battle rested upon his directions, he wholly intented wariness and
circumspection: so in the hazard and peril of good hap, he confronted
extremity of danger with extremity of valor, and over-topt fury with a higher
resolution.

Chap. XII.
The Aduatici betake themselves to a strong hold, and are taken by Caesar.
THe Either Doway or Bolda^ in Brabant.
Aduatici beforementioned coming with all their power to aid the Nervii,
Caesar.
and understanding by the way of their overthrow, returned home again; and
forsaking all the rest of their Towns and Castles, conveyed themselves and
their wealth into one strong and well-fortified town, which was compassed about
with mighty rocks and steep downfalls, saving in one place of two hundred foot
in breadth, where there was an entry by a gentle and easy ascent: which passage
they had fortified with a double wall of a large altitude, and had placed
mighty great stones and sharp beams upon the walls, ready for an assault. This
people descended from the Cimbri and Teutoni, who in their journey into Italy,
left such carriages on this side of the Rhene, as they could not conveniently
take along with them, and 6000 men to look to them: who, after the death of
their fellows, being many years disquieted by their neighbors, sometimes
invading other States, and sometimes defending themselves, at length procured a
peace, and chose this place to settle themselves in.

At the first coming of the Roman Army, they sallied out of the town, and made
many light skirmishes with them: but after that Caesar had drawn a rampire
about the town of twelve foot in height, fifteen miles in compass, and had
fortified it with Castles very thick about the town, they kept themselves
within the wall. And as they beheld the Vines framed, the Mount raised, and a
tower in building afar off; at first they began to laugh at it, and with
scoffing speeches from the wall, began to ask with what hands, and with what
strength, especially by men of that stature (for the Romans were but little men
in respect of the Galls) a tower of that huge massy weight should be brought
unto the walls. But when they saw it removed, and approaching near unto the
town (as men astonished at the strange and unaccustomed sight thereof) they
sent Ambassadors to Caesar to entreat a peace, with this message; They
believed that the Romans did not make war without the special assistance of
the Gods, that could with such facility transport engines of that height, and
bring them to encounter at hand, against the strongest part of their town: and
therefore they submitted both themselves and all that they had to Caesar's
mercy, desiring one thing of him earnestly, which was, that if his goodness
and clemency (which they had heard so high praises of) had determined to save
their lives, he would not take away their Arms from them; forasmuch as all
their neighbors were enemies unto them, and envied at their valor; neither
were they able to defend themselves, if they should deliver up their Armor: so
that they had rather suffer any inconvenience by the people of Rome, then to be
butcherly murdered by them, whom in former time they had held subject to their
command.

To this Caesar answered; that he would save the City rather of his own
custom, then for any desert of theirs, so that they yielded before the Ram
touched the wall; but no condition of remedy should be accepted without present
delivery of their Arms: for he would do by them as he had done by the Nervii,
and give commandment to their neighbors, that they should offer no wrong to
such as had commended their safety to the people of Rome. This answer being
returned to the City, they seemed contented to do whatsoever he commanded them:
and thereupon casting a great part of their Armor over the wall into the
ditch, insomuch as they filled it almost to the top of the rampire, and yet (as
afterward was known) concealing the third part, they set open the gates, and
for that day carried themselves peaceably. Toward night Caesar commanded the
gates to be shut, and the soldiers to be drawn out of the town, least in the
night the townsmen should be any way injured by them. But the Aduatici, having
consulted together before (forasmuch as they believed that upon their
submission the Romans would either set no watch at all, or at the least keep it
very carelessly) partly with such Armor as they had retained, and partly with
targets made of bark, or wrought of wicker, which upon the sudden they had
covered over with Leather, about the third watch, where the ascent to our
fortifications was easiest, they issued suddenly out of the town with all
their power: but signification thereof being presently given by fires, as
Caesar had commanded, the Romans hasted speedily to that place. The Enemy
fought very desperately, as men in the last hope of their welfare, incountering
the Romans in a place of disadvantage, all their hopes now lying upon their
valor: at length, with the slaughter of four thousand, the rest were driven
back into the town. The next day, when Caesar came to break open the gates, and
found no man at defense, he sent in the soldiers, and sold all the people and
spoil of the town: the number of persons in the town amounted to fifty three
thousand bondslaves.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IN the surprise attempted by the Belgae upon Bibract, I set down the manner
which both the Galls and the Romans used in their sudden surprising of a town:
whereof if they failed (the place importing any advantage in the course of war)
they then prepared for the siege in that manner as Caesar has described in
this place. They environed the town about with a ditch and a rampire,
Circumvallatio.
and fortified the said rampire with many Castles and Fortresses, erected in a
convenient distance one from another; and so they kept the town from any
foreign succor or relief: and withal secured themselves from sallies, or
other stratagems which the townsmen might practice against them. And this
manner of siege was called circumvallatio; In the seventh Commentary.
the particular description whereof I refer unto the history of Alesia, where
I will handle it according to the particulars there set down by Caesar.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Ram, Aries, or the Ram.
which Caesar here mentions, was of greatest note amongst all the Roman
Engines, and held that place which the Canon has in our wars. Vitruvius does
attribute the invention thereof to the Carthaginians, who at the taking of
Cadiz, Cales.
wanting a fit instrument to raze and overthrow a Castle, they took a long beam
or timber-tree, and bearing it upon their arms and shoulders, with the one end
thereof they first brake down the uppermost rank of stones; and so descending
by degrees they overthrew the whole tower. The Romans had two sorts of Rams;
the one was rude and plain, the other artificial and compound: Aries simplex.
the first is that which the Carthaginians used at Cadiz, and is pourtrayed in
the column of Tra^an at Rome.

The compound Ram is thus described by Josephus; Aries composita.
A Ram, says he, is a mighty great beam, like unto the mast of a ship, and is
strengthened at one end with a head of iron fashioned like unto a Ram, and
thereof it took the name. This Ram is hanged by the midst with ropes unto
another beam, which lies cross a couple of pillars: and hanging thus equally
balanced, it is by force of men thrust forwar and recoild backward, and so
beats upon the wall with his iron head: neither is there any tower so strong,
or wall so broad, that is able to stand before it.

The length of this Ram was of a large scantling; for Plutarch affirms that
Antony in the Parthian war had a Ram fourscore foot long. And Vitruvius says
that the length of a Ram was usually one hundred and six, and sometimes one
hundred and twenty; and this length gave great strength and force to the
engine. It was managed at one time with a whole Century or order of soldiers;
and their forces being spent, they were seconded with another Century; and so
the Ram played continually upon the wall without intermission. Josephus says
that Titus, at the siege of Jerusalem, had a ram for every legion. It was
oftentimes covered with a Vine, that the men that managed it might be in more
safety. It appears by this place, that if a town had continued out until the
ram had touched the wall, they could not presume of any acceptance of rendry;
forasmuch as by their obstinacy they had brought in peril the lives of their
enemies, and were subdued by force of Arms, which affords such mercy as the
Victor pleases.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THe Aduatici, as it seems, were not ignorant of the small security which one
State can give unto another, that commends their safety to be protected by
it: for as Architas the Pythagorean says, A body, a Family, and an Army are
then well governed, when they contain within themselves the causes of their
safety; so we must not look for any security in a State, when their safety
depends upon a foreign protection. For the old saying is, that Neque murus,
neque amicus quisquam teget, quem propria arma non texere, Neither walls nor
friends will save him, whom his own weapons do not defend. Although in this
case the matter was well qualified by the majesty of the Roman Empire, and the
late victories in the continent of Gallia; whereof the Hedui with their
associates were very gainful witnesses: but amongst kingdoms that are better
suited with equality of strength and authority, there is small hope of safety to
be looked for, unless the happy government of both do mutually depend upon the
safety of either Nation, For that which Polybius observed in Antigonus king of
Macedonia, takes place for the most part amongst all Princes; that Kings by
nature esteem no man either as a friend or an enemy, but as the calculation of
profit shall find them answerable to their projects. And contrariwise it
cutteth off many occasions of practices and attempts, when it is known that a
State is of it self able and ready to resist the designs of foreign enemies,
according to that of Manlius; Ostendite modo bellum, pacem habebitis: videant
vos paratos ad vim, jus ipsi remittent, Do but show them war, and you shall
have peace: let them see you are provided to repel force, and they will do you
nothing but right.

THE FOURTH OBSERVATION.
THe manner of signifying any motion or attempt by fire, To give notice of an
Alarm by fire.
was of great use in the night season, where the fortification was of so large
an extension: for fire in the night does appear far greater then indeed it is;
forasmuch as that part of the air which is next unto the fire, as it is
illuminated with the light thereof, in a reasonable distance cannot be
discerned from the fire it self, and so it seems much greater then it is in
substance. And contrariwise in the day time it shows less then it is; for
the clear brightness of the air does much obscure that light which proceeds
from a more gross and material body: and therefore their custom was to use
fire in the night, and smoke in the day, suting the transparent middle with a
contrary quality, that so it might more manifestly appear to the beholder.

THE FIFTH OBSERVATION.
ANd albeit after the victory, the Romans inflicted diverse degrees of
punishment, according to the malice which they found in an enemy; yet as
Flavius Lucanus says in Livie, Lib. 25.
there was no Nation more exorable, nor readier to show mercy then the Romans
were. The punishments which the Romans laid upon a conquered Nation.
The punishments which we find them to have used toward a conquered Nation
were these; either they punished them by death, or sold them for bondslaves sub
corona, or dismissed them sub jugum, or merced them in taking away their
territories, or made them tributary States.

Of the first we find a manifest example in the third of these Commentaries,
where Caesar having overthrown the Veneti by sea, inasmuch as they had retained
his Ambassadors by force, contrary to the law of Nations, he put all the
Senate to the sword, and sold the rest sub corona.

Festus says that an enemy was said to be sold sub corona, inasmuch as the
captives stood crowned in the Marketplace where they were set out to sale: as
Cato says in his book De re militari, Ut populus sua opera potius ob rem been
gestam coronatus supplicatum eat; quam re male gesta coronatus vaeneat; That
the people may rather for well performing go to supplicate crowned, then for
ill performance be sold crowned. And Gellius affirms the same thing, but
adds also another reason, forasmuch as the soldiers that kept them while
they were in selling, incircled them round about to keep them together; and
this round-about-standing was called corona. Festus says that oftentimes they
used a spear, and therefore they were said to be sold sub hasta: forasmuch as
amongst the Greeks, by the spear or pike was signified the power of Arms, and
majesty of Empires.

When they dismissed them sub jugum, their order was to erect three trees like
a pair of gallows, under which they caused all the captives to pass, as a
sign of bondage: for they had so conquered them by force of Arms, that they
laid upon their neck the yoke of thraldom.

Livie says that Quintius the Dictator dismissed the Aequos sub jugum; and
this jugum was made of three spears, whereof two were stuck upright in the
ground, and the third was tied overthwart them. The soldiers that passed sub
jugum were ungirt, and their weapons taken from them, as Festus says.

Sometimes again they took away their lands and territories, and either sold it
for money, and brought it into the treasury, or divided the land amongst the
Roman people, or let it out to farmerent: of all which Livie has many pregnant
examples.

Of the second sort, the selling of the Veii in his fifth book, and of 7000
Samnites in his ninth book. Of the third, that remarkable example of passing
the two Consuls T. Veturius Calvinus, and Spurius Postumius, with the Legates,
Tribunes, and whole Roman Army sub jugum, by Caius Pontius leader of the
Samnites, in his ninth book. Of the fourth, in all kinds thereof frequently
through his history.

Chap. XIII.
Crassus takes in all the maritime Cities that ly to the Ocean: the legions
carried into their wintering Camps. Caesar.

THe same time Pub. Crassus, whom he had sent with one legion to the Veneti,
Unelli, Osis^^^, Curiosolitae, Sesuvii, Aulerci, and Rhedones, being the
maritime Cities that lay to the Ocean, advertised him that all those States had
yielded themselves to the people of Rome. The wars being thus ended, and all
Gallia being settled in peace, there went such a fame of this war among other
barbarous people, that from Nations beyond the Rhene there came Ambassadors to
Caesar, offering both hostages, and obedience to whatsoever he commanded them.
But Caesar, forasmuch as he then hasted into Lombardie, after he had placed his
legions in their wintering Camps, willed them to repair unto him again in the
beginning of the next Summer. He himself therefore, after he had first disposed
his army into winter quarters amongst the Carnutes, Andes, and Turones, cities
next to those places where his wars had been, took his journey forthwith for
Italy. Of this suppli^^tion I ^ill speak in the latter end of the fourth book.
For these things, upon the sight of Caesar's Letters, a general supplication
was proclaimed in Rome for fifteen days together: which honor before that
time had happened to no man.

The third Commentary of the wars in GALLIA.
The Argument.
THis Commentary begins with an Accident which happened in the latter end
of the former Summer, wherein the Belgae had so lean a harvest: and then it
proceeds to the war between Caesar and the Veneti; Crassus and the Aquitani;
Titurius Sabinus and the Curiosolitae; and Titus Labienus with the Treviri.

CHAP. I.
Sergius Galba being sent to clear the passage of the Alps, is besieged by the
Seduni and Veragri.
Caesar taking his journey into Italy, Caesar.
sent Sergius Galba with the twelfth legion and part of the horsemen unto the
Nantuates, Veragri and Seduni, whose territories are extended from the river
Rhone and the lake Lemanus, unto the tops of the highest Alps, The end of this
voyage was chiefly to clear the Alps of thieves and robbers, that lived by the
spoil of Passengers that travailed between Italy and Gallia. Galba having
order, if he found it expedient, to winter in those parts, after some fortunate
incounters, and the taking of some Castles and holds. Ambassadors coming to
him from round about, and giving hostages for their fidelity he concluded a
peace, and resolved to place two cohorts of his legion amongst the Nantuates,
and himself to winter with the other cohorts in a town of the Veragri named
Octodurus. This town being sited in a narrow valley, and incircled about with
mighty high hills, was divided by a river into two parts; whereof he gave one
part to the Galls, and the other he chose for his wintering Camp, and
fortified it about with a ditch and a rampire. After he had spent many days of
wintering, and given order that corn should be brought thither for provision;
he had intelligence upon a sudden, that the Galls in the night time had all
left that part of the town that was allotted unto them; and that the hills
which hung over the valley wherein the town stood, were possessed with great
multitudes of the Seduni and Veragri. The reasons of this sudden commotion were
chiefly the paucity of the Roman forces, not making a complete legion,
forasmuch as two cohorts wintered amongst the Nantuates; besides many
particular soldiers that were wanting some being gone to fetch in provisions,
and others upon other necessary occasions. And besides their being thus
contemptible in regard of themselves, the place afforded such advantage, that
they were persuaded by reason of the steep declivity of the hill, that the
Romans would not endure the brunt of the first assault. Besides this, it
grieved them exceedingly to have their children taken from them under the title
of hostages; and the Alps, which nature had exempted from habitation, and
placed as bounds between two large kingdoms, to be seized upon by the Roman
legions, not for their passage so much, as for their perpetual possession, and
to be united to their Province.

Upon these advertisements Galba; not having as yet finished the fortification
of his Camp, nor sufficiently made provision of corn and forage for the winter
season, in that he little feared any motion of war, being secured of their
amity and obedience, both by hostages and rendry, presently called a Council
of war, to determine what course was best to be taken. In which Council the
minds of many were so amazed with the terror of so unexpected a danger, when
they beheld the hills pestered with armed soldiers, the passages taken and
intercepted by the Enemy, and no hope left of any succor or relief, that they
could think of no other way for their safety, then leaving behind them their
baggage and impediments, to sallie out of their Camp, and so to save themselves
by the same way they came thither. Notwithstanding the greater part concluded
to refer that resolution to the last push, and in the mean time to attend the
fortune of the event, and defend the Camp.

OBSERVATION.
Which advise although at this time it sorted to small effect, yet it better
suited the valor of the Romans, and savoured more of tempered magnanimity then
that former hazard, which argued the weakness of their minds, by their
overhasty and too forward resolution. For as it imported greater danger, and
discovered a more desperate spirit, to break through the thickest troops of
their enemies, and so by strong hand to save themselves by the help of some
other fortune; so it manifested a greater apprehension of terror, and a
stronger impression of fear, which can afford nothing but desperate remedies:
for desperate and inconsiderate rashness rises sooner of fear, then of any
other passion of the mind. But such as beheld the danger with a less troubled
eye, and qualified the terror of death with the life of their spirit,
reserving extremity of help to extremity of peril, and in the mean time
attended what chances of advantage might happen unto them upon any enterprise
the enemy should attempt; they, I say, so gave greater scope to Fortune, and
enlarged the bounds of changing accidents.

CHAP. II.
The enemy sets upon the wintering Camp: Galba overthrows them.
THe Council being dismissed, Caesar.
they had scarce time to put in execution such things as were agreed upon for
their defense, but the enemy, at a watchword given, assaulted the Camp on all
sides with stones and darts, and other casting weapons. The Romans at first
when their strength was fresh, valiantly resisted the brunt of the charge;
neither did they spend in vain any weapon which they cast from the rampire; but
what part soever of their camp seemed to be in greatest danger, and want of
help, thither they came with succor and relief. But herein they were
overmatched; for the enemy being spent and wearied with fight, whenever any
of them gave place and forsook the battle, there were always fresh combatants
to supply it. But the Romans, by reason of their small number, had no such
help: for their extremity in that point was such, that no man was permitted
neither for weariness nor wounds to forsake his station, or abandon his
charge. And having thus fought continually the space of six hours when both
strength and weapons wanted, the enemy persisting with greater fury to fill the
ditch, and break down the rampire, and their hopes relying upon the last
expectation, P. S. Bacu. the Primipile of that legion, whom we said to be so
sore wounded in the Nervian battle, and Caius Volusenus Tribune of the
soldiers, a man of singular courage and wisdom, ran speedily to Galba and
told him, that the only w^y of safety was to break out upon the enemy, and to
try the last refuge in that extremity. Whereupon they called the Centurions,
and by them admonised the soldiers to surcease a while from fighting, and
only to receive such weapons as were cast into the Camp; and so to rest
themselves a little and recover their strength: and then at a watchword to
sallie out of their Camp, and lay their safety upon their valor. Which the
soldiers executed with such alacrity and courage of spirit, that breaking out
at all the gates of the Camp, they gave no leisure to the enemy to consider
what was done, nor to satisfy his judgment touching so unexpected a noveltie.
And thus Fortune being suddenly changed, the Romans encompassing those who came
with full expectation of spoiling their camp, slew more then the third part of
thirty thousand, and put the rest to flight, not suffering them to stay upon
the hills near about them. Having thus overthrown the enemies whole strength,
and taken their arms, they drew again into their quarters.

OBSERVATION.
WHich strange alteration lively describes the force of ^ovelty, The force of
novelty, turning the fortune of a battle.
and the effectual power of unexpected adventures: for in the first course of
their proceeding, wherein the Romans defended the Camp, and the Galls charged
it by assault, the victory held constant with the Galls, and threatened death
and mortality to the Romans. Neither had they any means to recover hope of
better success, but by trying another way; which so much the more amazed the
Galls, in that they had vehemently apprehended an opinion of victory, by a set
fight continuing the space of six hours, without any likelihood of contrariety
or alteration. Which practice of frustrating a design intended by an indirect
and contrary answer, served the Romans oftentimes to great advantage; as
besides this present example, in this commentary we shall afterward read, how
Titurius Sabinus defeated the Unelli with the same stratagem, and overthrew
them by eruption and sallying out, when they expected nothing but a defensive
resistance from the rampire. From whence a Commander may learn to avoid two
contrary inconveniences, according as the quality of the war shall offer
occasion: first (if other things be answerable, which a judicious eye will
easily discover) that a sally made out at diverse ports of a hold, will much
mitigate the heat of a charge, and control the fury of an Enemy. And on the
other side, he that besieges any place, what advantage soever he has of the
defendant, may much better assure himself of good fortune, if he appoint
certain troops in readiness to receive the charge of any eruption, that the
rest that are busily employed in the assault may provide to answer it without
disorder or confusion. Which order if the Galls had taken, they had not in
likelihood so often been deceived.

CHAP. III.
Galba returns into the Province: the Vnelli give occasion of a new war.
AFter this battle, Caesar.
Galba unwilling to try fortune any further, and considering that he had met
with businesses which he never dreamed of when first he came thither to
quarter, especially finding himself in want both of corn and forage, having
first burned the town, the next day he returned toward the Province, and
without let or resistance brought the legion safe into the Nantuates, and from
thence to the Savoyards.
Allobroges, and there he wintered.

After these things were dispatched, Caesar supposing for many reasons that all
Gallia was now in peace, and that there was no further fear of any new war,
the Belgae being overthrown, the Germans thrust out, and the Seduni amongst the
Alps subdued and vanquished, in the beginning of the winter was gone into
Illyricum, having a great desire to see those nations. But there grew a sudden
tumult and dissension in Gallia upon this occasion: Pub. Crassus wintering with
the seventh legion in Aniou near unto the Ocean, and finding scarcity of corn
in those parts, he sent out the Prefects of the horsemen and Tribunes into the
next cities to demand corn, and other provisions for his legion: of whom Titus
Terrasidius was sent unto the Le Perch.
Unelli, Marcus Trebius to the Cornoaille in Bretaigne. (...)
Curiosolitae, Q. Velanius and Titus Silius to the Vannes.
Veneti. These Veneti were of greatest authority amongst all the maritime
nations in that coast, by reason of their great store of shipping, with which
they did traffic in Britanie, and exceeded all their neighbor States in skill
and experience of seafaring matters; having command of as many ports as lay to
those seas, and the most part of such as used those seas tributaries to their
State. These Veneti first adventured to retain Silius and Velanius, hoping
thereby to recover their hostages which they had given to Crassus. The
finitimate Cities induced by their authority and example, (as indeed the
resolutions of the Galls are sudden and hasty) for the same reason laid hold
upon Trebius and Terrasidius; and sending speedy ambassages one unto another,
conjured by their princes and chiefest magistrates to do nothing but by common
consent, and to attend all the same event of fortune; soliciting also other
cities and States, rather to maintain that liberty which they had received of
their Ancestors, then to endure the servile bondage of a stranger.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe circumstance in this history which notes the sudden breaking out of wars,
The weakness of our judgment in^eg^^rd of the knowledge of (...)
when the course of things made promise of peace, shows first, what small
assurance our reason has of her discourse in calculating the nativity of
Afterchances: which so seldom answer the judgment we give upon their
beginnings, that when we speak of happiness, we find nothing but misery; and
contrariwise, it goes often well with that part which our Art has condemned
to ill fortune. And therefore I do not marvel, if when almost all nations are
at odds, and in our best conceits threaten destruction one to another, there
happen a sudden motion of peace: or if peace be in speech, soothing the world
with pleasing tranquillity, and through the uncertainty of our weak
probabilities, promise much rest after many troubles; there follow greater wars
in the end then the former time can truly speak of. Which being well
understood, may humble the spirits of our haughty politicians, that think to
comprehend the conclusions of future times under the premises of their weak
projects, and predestinate succeeding ages according to the course of the
present motion: when an accident so little thought of shall break the main
stream of our judgment, and falsify the Oracles which our understanding has
uttered. And it may learn them withal, how much it imports a wise commander
to prevent an evil that may cross his design, (how unlikely soever it be to
happen) by handling it in such manner as though it were necessarily to confront
the same. For then a thing is well done, when it has in it self both the
causes of his being, and the direct means to resist the repugnancy of a
contrary nature: and so hap what will, it has great possibility to continue
the same.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THis practice of the Veneti may instruct a circumspect Prince in cases of this
nature, to have a more watchful eye over that Province or city which shall be
found most potent and mighty amongst the rest, then of any other inferior
State of the same nature and condition: for as example of it self is of great
authority, The Authority of example.
making improbabilities seem full of reason, especially when the intention
shall sympathize with our will; so when it shall happen to be strengthened with
powerful means, and graced with the Act of superior personages, it must needs
be very effectual to stir up men's minds to approve that with a strong
affection, which their own single judgment did no way allow of. And therefore
equality brings this advantage to a Prince, which differency cannot afford,
that albeit example do set on foot any rebellious motion, yet no supereminency
shall authorize the same.

CHAP. IIII.
Caesar having advertisement of these new troubles, hastes into Gallia, and
prepares for the war.
ALL the maritime States being by this means drawn into the same conspiracy,
Caesar.
they sent an embassage unto Crassus in the name of them all, that if he would
have his men again, he must deliver up the hostages which he had taken from
them. Whereof Caesar being certified by Crassus, inasmuch as he was then a
great way distant from his Army, he commanded Galleys and ships of war to be
built upon the river Lig^ris.
Loire, which runs into the Ocean, and that Gallie-men, Mariners, and
ship-masters should be mustered in the Province: which being speedily
dispatched, as soon as the time of the year would permit him, he came into
Gallia. The Veneti and the rest of the confederacy understanding of Caesar's
arrival, and considering how heinous a fact they had committed, in detaining
the Ambassadors and casting them into irons, whose name is held sacred and
inviolable amongst all nations; prepared accordingly to answer so eminent a
danger, and especially such necessaries as pertained to shipping and sea fights.

THE OBSERVATION.
FRom hence I may take occasion briefly to touch the reverent opinion which all
nations, The grounds of that reverent opinion which is held of Ambassadors.
how barbarous soever, have generally conceived of the quality and condition of
Ambassadors: and what the grounds are of this universally received custom,
which in all ages and times has held authentical. And first we are to
understand that all mankind (as endued with the same nature and properties) are
so linked together in the strict alliance of humane society, that albeit their
turbulent and disagreeing passions (which in themselves are unnatural, as
proceeding from corruption and defect) drive them into extreme discord and
disunion of spirit, and break the bonds of civil conversation, which otherwise
we do naturally affect; yet without a necessary intercourse and traffic of
society, we are not able to keep on foot the very discord it self in terms of
reason and orderly proceeding, but all parts will be blended with disordered
confusion and go to wrack, for want of these mutual offices performed by
messengers: so straight are the bonds of Nature, and so powerful are the laws
which she enacteth. And therefore if it were for no other end which might sort
to the benefit of either party, (as there are many good uses thereof) yet to
hold up the quarrel and keep it from falling, making war according to the
grounds of reason, the intercourse of messengers is not to be interrupted, nor
their persons to be touched with hateful violence: but that which the common
reason of nations has mad^ a law, ought as religiously to be observed as an
Oracle of our own belief. Secondly, forasmuch as the end of war is, or at the
least should be, peace, which by treaty of mutual messenge^s is principally to
be confirmed, to the end that no people may seem so barbarous as to maintain a
war which only intends blood, and proposes as the chiefest object the death
and mortality of mankind, no way respecting peace and civil government; such
as refuse the intercourse of messengers, as the means of amity and concord, are
justly condemned in the judgment of all nations as unworthy of humane society.
Last of all, it is an injury of great dishonor, and deserves the reward of
extreme infamy, to revenge the master his quarrel upon a servant, and punish
Ambassadors for the faults of their State: considering that their chiefest
duty consists in the faithful relation of such mandates as they have
received; which may as well tend to the advancement and honor of that City to
which they are sent, as to the dishonor and ruin of the same, whereof the
messengers take no notice. And therefore whether we desire war or peace, the
free liberty and holy order of Ambassadors is reverently to be respected, and
defended from brutish and unnatural violence.

CHAP. V.
The proceedings of either party in the entrance of this war.
THe Veneti conceived great hope of their enterprise, Caesar.
by reason of the strength of their situation: forasmuch as all the passages by
land were broken and cut off with arms and creeks of the sea; and on the other
side navigation and entrance by sea was so troublesome and dangerous, in that
the Romans were altogether unacquainted with the channels and shelves of the
coast, and there were so few ports. Neither did they think that the Roman Army
could long continue there without corn, which was not to be had in those
quarters. And if it happened that the course of things were carried contrary to
this probable expectation, yet they themselves were strong in shipping, whereas
the Romans had none at all: Neither had they knowledge of the flats and
shallows, Ports and Islands of that coast where they were to fight. And to
conclude, they should find the use of Navigation in that narrow sea to be far
different from that which they were accustomed unto in the vast and open Ocean.
In this resolution they fortified their towns, Lendriguer.
stored them with provision, Lisieux.
and brought all their shipping to Vannes, Nantes.
against whom Caesar (as it was reported) would begin to make war, Auren be.
taking the Osismi, Le^^do^^.
Lexovii, Cities in Little Britain.
Nannetes, Ambialites, Morini, Menapii, Diablintres, as consorts and partakers
in this quarrel. Notwithstanding these difficulties, many motives stirred up
Caesar to undertake this war: as namely the violent detaining of the Roman
knights; their rebellion after they had yielded themselves by rendry, and given
hostages of their loyalty; the conspiracy of so many Cities, which being now
neglected, might afterward incite other nations and States to the like
insolency. And therefore understanding that almost all the Galls were
inclining to novelty and alteration, and of their own nature were quick and
ready to undertake a war; and further, considering that all men by nature
desired liberty, and hated the servile condition of bondage, he prevented all
further insurrections of the other States with the presence of the Roman forces
in several places at once; and sent Titus Labienus with the Cavalry unto the
Triers.
Treviri, that bordered upon the Rhene: to him he gave in charge to visit the
men of Rhemes and the rest of the Belgae, to keep them in obedience; and to
hinder such forces as might peradventure be transported over the river by the
Germans, to further this rebellious humor of the Galls. He commanded likewise
Pub. Crassus with twelve legionary cohorts and a great part of the horse to go
into Aquitane, least there might come any aid from those nations, and such
considerable forces join together. He sent also Q. Titurius Sabinus with three
legions unto the Lexovii, Curiosolitae, and Unelli, to disappoint any practice
which rebellioks minds might intend. And making D. Brutus chief Admiral of the
navy, and of those French ships which he had got together from the Pictones,
Santones, and other provinces which continued quiet and obedient, he gave him
in charge to make toward Vannes with what speed he could: and he himself
marched thitherward with the foot forces.

THE OBSERVATION.
IN the first book I observed the authority which the Roman Leaders had to
undertake a war, without further acquainting the Senate with the consequence
thereof: in this place let us observe the care and circumspection which the
Generals had, who did not undertake a troublesome and dangerous war upon a
humor, or any other flender motion; but diligently weighing the circumstances
thereof, and measuring the peril and hazard of the war, with the good and
consequence of the effect, informed their judgments of the importance of that
action, and so tried whether the benefit would answer their labor. And thus we
find the reasons particularly delivered that moved Caesar first to undertake
the Helvetian war; and then the causes which drew him on to the quarrel with
Ariovistus; then follows the necessity of that war with the Belgae; and now
the motives which induced him to this with the ma^itime Cities of Bretagne; and
so consequently of his passage into Germany, or what other enterprise he
attempted: which he lays down as the grounds and occasions of those wars, and
could not be avoided but with the loss and dishonor of the Roman Empire.

Further, let us observe the means he used to prevent the inclination of the
Galls, and to keep them in subjection and peaceable obedience, by sending his
men into diverse quarters of that Continent, and so settling the wavering
disposition of the further skirts with the weight of his Army, and the presence
of his legionary soldiers, which he sent ready to stifle all motions of
rebellion in the beginning, that they might not break out to the prejudice and
diminution of the Roman Empire, and the good success of his proceedings:
besides the advantage which he gained in the opinion of the Enemy; whom he so
little feared concerning the upshot of that quarrel, that he had dispersed the
greatest part of his Army upon other services, the rest being sufficient to end
that war.

CHAP. VI.
The manner of their shipping, and their sea-sight.
THe situation of almost all these Cities was such, Caesar.
that being built in points and promontories, they could not at full sea, which
happened always twice in 12 hours, be approached by foot-forces nor yet with
shipping; for again in an ebb the vessels were laid on the groun^ and so left
as a prey to the enemy. And if the Romans went about to shut out the sea with
mounts which they raised equal to the walls of the town, and were at the point
of entering and taking it; yet the townsmen having such store of shipping,
would easily convey both themselves and their carriages into the next towns,
and there help themselves with the like advantage of place. And thus they
deluded Caesar the greatest part of the summer: for the Roman fleet by reason
of continual winds and foul weather, durst not adventure to put out of the
river Loire into so vast a sea, wherein the havens and roads were few, and
far distant one from another, and the tides great. The shipping of the Galls
was thus built and rigged: the keel was somewhat flatter then the Romans
shipping, the better to bear the ebbes and shallowes of that coast: the
fore-deck was altogether erect and perpendicular; the poupe was made to bear
the hugeness of the billows and the force of the tempest. And in a word they
were altogether built for strength: for the ribs and seats were made of beams
of a foot square, fastened with iron pinnes of an inch thick: in stead of cables
they used chains of iron; and raw hides and skins for sails, either for want
of linen, or ignorant of the use thereof, or because sails of linen would
hardly serve to carry ships of that burden, or endure the tempestuousnesse of
those seas, and the violence of the winds.

The meeting and conflict of the Roman navy with this kind of ships was such,
that they only excelled them in celerity and speedy nimblenesse with force of
oars; but in all other things, either concerning the nature of the place, or
the dangers of the foul weather, were far inferior unto them: for the
strength of them was such that they could neither hurt them with their
beak-heads, nor cast a weapon to any purpose into them by reason of their
altitude, and high-built bulkes. And if any gust chanced in the mean time to
rise, that forced them to commit themselves to the mercy of the weather, their
shipping would better bear the rage of the sea, and with greater safety shelter
it self amongst flats and shallowes, without fear of rocks or any such hazard:
of all which chances the Roman navy stood continually in danger.

OBSERVATION.
ANd here let it not seem impertinent to the argument which we handle, The
causes of the ebbing and flowing of the sea.
considering the general use which we Islanders have of navigation, briefly to
set down the most eminent causes of the flowing and ebbing of the sea, as far
forth as shall seem necessary to the knowledge of a soldier: which albeit they
may fall short of the true reasons of this great secret: yet forasmuch as they
stand for true principles of regularity, and well-approved rules in our Art of
navigation, let us take them for no less then they effect, and give them that
credit in our imagination, which tract of time has gained to those forged
circles in the heavens: that albeit their chiefest essence consists in
conceit and supposall; yet forasmuch as they serve to direct our knowledge to a
certainty in that variety and seeming inconstancy of motion, we esteem of them
as they effect, and not as they are.

Considering then the globe of the world, as it makes a right sphere (for in
that position the Naturalists chiefly understand celestial influence to have
operation in this liquid element of the water) it is divided by the Horizon and
Meridian into four quarters: the first quarter is that between the east horizon
and the noon meridian, which they call a flowing quarter; the second from the
noon meridian to the west horizon, which they make an ebbing quarter; the third
from the west horizon to the midnight meridian, which they likewise call a
flowing quarter; and again from the midnight meridian to the east horizon, the
second ebbing quarter: And so they make two flowing quarters, and two ebbing
quarters of the whole circuit of heaven. The instruments of these sensible
qualities and contrary effects are the sun and the moon, as they are carried
through these distinct distinct parts of the heaven. And although experience
has noted the moon to be of greatest power in watery motions; yet we may not
omit to acknowledge the force which the sun yields in this miracle of nature.

First therefore we are to understand, that when the moon or the sun begin to
appear above the right horizon, and enter into that part of the heaven which I
termed the first flowing quarter, that then the sea begins to swell: and as
they mount up to their meridian altitude, so it increases until it come to a
high flood. And again, as those lights passing the meridian decline to the
west, and run the circuit of the ebbing quarter, so the water decreaseth and
returns again from whence it came. Again, as they set under the west horizon,
and enter into the second flowing quarter, so the sea begins again to flow,
and still increases until they come to the point of the night meridian: and
then again it refloweth, according as the sun and moon are carried in the other
ebbing quarter from the night meridian to the west horizon.

And hence it happens that in conjunction or new of the moon, Spring^ides.
when the sun and the moon are carried both together in the same flowing and
ebbing quarters, that then the tides and ebbs are very great: and likewise in
opposition or full of the moon, when these lights are carried in opposite
quarters, which we have described to be of the same nature, either ebbing or
flowing, that then in like manner the tides are great: forasmuch as both these
Planets, through the symbolizing quarters wherein they are carried, do join
their forces to make perfect this work of Nature in the ebbing and flowing of
the Sea. And contrariwise in a quadrate aspect (as the Astronomers call it) or
quarter age of the moon, whenas the moon is carried in a flowing quarter, and
at the same instant the sun does happen to be in an ebbing or decreasing
quarter, as the course of Nature does necessarily require, then are the tides
lessened, as daily experience does witness.

And forasmuch as both the right horizon and the meridian also divide every
diurnall circle, which either the sun or the moon make in their revolutions,
into equal parts; it follows that every tide is continually measured with
the quantity of six hours: and therefore that which Caesar here says must
needs be true, that in the space of twelve hours there are always two high
tides. And least any man should imagine that every inland City standing upon an
ebbing and flowing river, may take the computation of the tide according to
this rule; let him understand that this which I have delivered is to be
conceived principally of the sea it self, and secondarily of such ports and
havens as stand either near or upon the sea: but where a river shall run many
miles from the sea, and make many winding Meanders before it come to the place
of calculation, it must needs lose much of this time before mentioned. And thus
much I thought convenient to insert in these discourses touching the ebbing and
flowing of the sea, as not impertinent to martial knowledge.

Concerning the shipping of the Romans, The manner of their shipping.
whereof posterity has only received the bare names, and some few
circumstances touching the manner of their Equipage, the Critics of these
times have labored to set forth a fleet answerable to that which the terms and
title mentioned in history seem to report: but yet the gain of their voyage
does not answer their charge. For many men rest unsatisfied, first touching the
names themselves, whereof we find these kinds;

Names
Longas. Onerarias. Actuarias. Triremes. Quadriremes. Quinqueremes.
The first we may understand to be Galleys or ships of service; the second
ships of burden; the third ships that were driven forward with force of oars;
and the rest sounding according to their Names, for I dare not entitle them
with a more particular description. Now whether these Names Longas and
Actuarias, were a several sort of shipping by themselves, or the general
Names of the Quadriremes, Triremes and Quinqueremes, forasmuch as every kind of
these might be called both Longas and Actuarias; as it yet remains in
controversy, so it is not much material to that which we seek after. But that
which most troubles our sea-Criticks is, in what sense they may understand
these vocabularies, Triremes, Quadriremes, and Quinqueremes: whether they were
so termed in regard of the number of rowers or watermen that haled continually
at an oar, as the custom of the Galleys is at this day; or otherwise, because
a Trireme had three orders of oars on either side, a Quadrireme four, and a
Quinquereme sive, whereof they took their distinction of Names.

Such as hold that a Trireme had on each side three ranks of oars, and so
consequently of a Quadrireme and Quinquereme, Lib. 28.
allege this place of Livie to make good their opinion. In the wars between
Rome and Carthage, Laelius meeting with Asdrubal in the streights of Gibralta,
each of them had a Quinquereme and seven or eight Triremes a piece: the current
in that place was so great that it gave no place to Art, but carried the
vessels according to the fall of the Billow: in which uncertainty the Triremes
of the Carthaginian closed with the Quinquereme of Laelius; which either
because she was pondere tenacior, as Livie says, or otherwise for that
pluribus remorum ordinibus scindentibus vertices, facilius regeretur, in regard
of the plurality of banks of oars which resisted the billow and steamed the
current, she sunk two of the Triremes, and so got the victory. From hence they
prove that a Quinquereme had plures remorumordines then a Trireme had; and
therefore it took the name from the plurality of banks of oars, and not from
the number of men that rowed at an oar.

But the contrary opinion does interpret Ordo remorum to be a couple of oars
one answering another on each side of the vessel, which we call a pair of
oars: So that a Quinquereme being far greater and longer then a Trireme, had
more paires of oars then a Trireme had, and those oars were handled with five
men at one oar, according to the use of our Galleys at this day.

But to leave this, The manner of sea-sights.
and come to their manner of sea-sights: we must understand that the Romans
wanting the use of Artillery, and managing their shaps of war with force of
oars, failed not to make use of their Art in their conflicts and encounters by
sea: for all their ships of service, which we term men of war, carried a strong
beak-head of ^^on, which they called rostrum, with which they ran one against
another, with as great violence and fury as their oars could carry them. And
herein Art gave great advantage; for he that could best skill to turn his ship
with greatest celerity, and so frustrate an offer, or with speedy and strong
agitation follow an advantage, commonly got the victory.

In the battle which D. Brutus had with the Massilians, Lib. 2. de bello civili.
we read that two Triremes charging the Admiral wherein Brutus was, one at the
one side and the other at the other, Brutus and his Mariners so cunningly
handled the matter, that when they should come to the hurt, they speedily in a
trice of time wound themselves from between them, and the two Triremes met with
such a carriere one against another, that one brake her beak-head, and the
other split with the blow.

For this skill and fortune withal Euphranor; the Rhodian was of great fame in
Caesar's time although his end found too true the saying of the Historian, that
whom Fortune honors with many good haps, she oftentimes reserveth to a
harder destiny; as other seamen besides Euphranor can truly witness.

This first brunt being ended, when they came to grapple and bording one of
another, then the art and practices of their land services came in use: for
they erected turrets upon their decks, and from them they sought with engines
and casting-weapons, as slings, arrows, and piles; and when they entered, they
fought with sword and target. Neither did the le^^onary soldier find any
difference when he came to the point between their fight at sea and that at
land; saving that they could not be martialled in troops and bands, in regard
whereof the sea-service was counted more base and dishonorable; and the
rather, inasmuch as it decided the controversy by slings and casting-weapons,
which kind of fight was of less honor then buckling at handy-blowes.

CHAP. VII.
The battle continues: and Caesar overcomes.
THe Romans having taken one town after another, Caesar.
the enemies still conveyed themselves to the next; so that Caesar deeming it
but lost labor, whilst he could neither hinder their escape, nor do them any
mischief, resolved to wait the coming of his navy. Which was no sooner arrived,
but the enemy descrying it, presently made out 220 sail of ships wel-appointed
and furnished in all respects to oppose them. Neither did Brutus the Admiral,
nor any Tribune or Centurion in his navy know what to do, or what course of
fight to take: for the shipping of the Galls was so strong, that the beak-head
of their Quinqueremes could perform no service upon them; and although they
should raise turrets according to their use, yet these would not equal in
height the poup of the Enemies shipping; so that therein also the Galls had
advantage. For as the Romans could not much annoy them with their weapons, in
regard they lay so low under them; so on the contrary their darts must needs
fall with great advantage upon the Romans. Yet one thing there was amongst
their provisions which stood them in great stead: for the Romans had provided
great sharp hooks or sickles, which they put upon great and long poles; these
they fastened to the tackling which held the main-yard to the mast; and then
haling away their ship with force of Oars, they cut the said tackling, and the
main-yard fell down. Whereby the Galls, whose only hope for their navy
consisted in the sails and tackling, lost at one instant both their sails and
the use of their shipping: And then the controversy fell within the compass of
valor, wherein the Romans exceeded the Galls; and the rather, inasmuch as
they fought in the sight of Caesar and the whole Army, no valiant act could be
smothered in secret; for all the hills and clifts which afforded near prospect
into the sea, were covered with the Roman Army.

Their main-yards being cut down, and the Romans (though every ship of theirs
had two or three of the enemies about it) endeavoring with great fury to board
them, failed not to take many of their ships: which the Galls perceiving, and
finding no remedy nor hope of resistance, began all to fly, and turning their
ships to a fore-wind, were upon a sudden so becalmed, that they were able to
make no way at all. Which fell out very fitly for the Romans, who now fighting
ship to ship easily took them, insomuch that of so great a navy very few
(through the help of the evening) escaped to land, after they had fought the
space of eight hours: with which battle ended the war with the Veneti, and
the rest of the maritime nations. For all sort of people both young and old, in
whom there was either courage, counsel, or dignity, were present at this
battle, and all the shipping they could possibly make was here engaged, taken
and lost; so that such as remained knew not whither to go, nor how to defend
their towns any longer; and therefore yielded themselves to Caesar: toward
whom he used the greater severity, that he might thereby teach all other
barbarous people not to violate the law of nations by injurying Ambassadors:
for he slew all the Senate with the sword, and sold the people for bondslaves.

THE OBSERVATION.
IN this battle I chiefly observe the good fortune which usually attends upon
industry: The force of industry
for amongst other provisions which the diligence of the Romans had furnished
out to the use of this war, they had made ready these hooks, not for this
intent wherein they were employed, but at all occasions and chances that might
happen, as serviceable complements rather then principal instruments: and yet
it so fell out, that they proved the only means to overthrow the Galls. Which
proves true the saying of Caesar, that industry commands fortune, and buyeth
good success with extraordinary labor: for industry in action is as
importunity in speech, which forces an assent beyond the strength of reason,
and striveth through continual pursuit, to make good the motives by often
inculcations; and at length finds that disposition which will easily admit
whatsoever is required. In like manner diligence and laboursome industry, by
circumspect and heedfull carriage, seldom fail either by hap or cunning to
make good that part whereon the main point of the matter depends. For every
action is entangled with many infinite adherents, which are so interessed in
the matter, that it succeeds according as it is carried answerable to their
natures. Of these adherents, some of them are by wisdom foreseen, and directed
to that course which may fortunate the action; the rest being unknown, continue
without either direction or prevention, and are all under the regiment of
fortune; forasmuch as they are beyond the compass of our wisest reach, and in
the way either to assist or disadvantage. Of these industry has greatest
authority, inasmuch as she armeth her self for all chances, whereby she is said
to command fortune.

Chap. VIII.
Sabinus overthrows the La Perch^
Vnelli, with the manner thereof.
WHile these things happened in the state of Vannes, Caesar.
L. Titurius Sabinus enters with his forces into the confines of the Unelli.
Over these Viridovix ruled, who was at present made commander in chief of all
the revolted cities, which furnished him with a great and potent army. Besides
this the Roane.
Aulerci, Eureux.
Eburonices, and Lexovii having slain their Senate, because they would not
countenance the war, shut their gates, and joined with Viridovix. Also there
came great multitudes to them out of Gallia, men of broken fortunes, thieves
and robbers, whom the hope of prey and spoil had made to prefer the wars
before husbandry and day-labour. Sabinus incamping himself in a convenient
place, kept his soldiers within the rampire. But Viridovix being lodged within
less then two miles of Sabinus his camp, brought out his forces daily, and
putting them in battle gave him opportunity to fight if he would: which Sabinus
refused in such sort, that he began not only to be suspected by the Enemy of
cowardice, but to be taunted with the reproachful speeches of his own
soldiers. The opinion of his being fearful thus settled in the minds of the
enemy, he used all means to increase it, and carried it so well, that the Enemy
durst approach the very rampire of the Camp. The color that he pretended was,
that he thought it not the part of a Legate, in the absence of the General, to
sight with an Enemy of that strength, but upon some good opportunity, or in a
place of advantage. In this general persuasion of fear, Sabinus chose out a
subtle-witted Gall, an auxiliarie in his army, whom he persuaded with great
rewards and further promises to fly to the Enemy, and there to carry himself
according to the instructions which he should give him. This Gall coming as a
revolter to the Enemy, laid open unto them the fear of the Romans; the
extremity that Caesar was driven into by the Veneti; and that the night
following Sabinus was about to withdraw his forces secretly out of his camp,
and to make all the haste he could to relieve Caesar. Upon which advertisement,
they all cried out with one consent, that this opportunity was not to be
omitted; but setting apart all other devises, they would go and assault the
Roman camp. Many circumstances persuaded the Galls to this resolution: as
first the lingering and doubt which Sabinus had made, when he was offered
battle; secondly, the intelligence which this fugitive had brought; thirdly,
the want of victuals, wherein they had been negligent and unadvisedly
careless; fourthly, the hope they conceived of the war of Vannes; and lastly,
for that men willingly believe that which they would have come to pass. The
force of these motives was so strong, that they would not suffer Viridovix nor
the rest of the Captains to dismiss the Council, until they had yielded that
they should take Arms, and go to the Roman Camp. Which being granted, they
gathered rubbish and faggots to fill up the ditch; and with cheerful hearts,
as though the victory were already gotten, they marched to the place where
Sabinus was encamped; which was the top of a hill, rising gently from a level*
the quantity of one thousand pases. Hither the Galls hasted with all
expedition: and to the intent the Romans might not have so much time as to put
on their Armor, the Galls for haste ran themselves out of breath.

Sabinus encouraging his soldiers, gave the sign of battle; and sallying out
at two several gates of his Camp upon the enemy, who were hindered with their
loads of rubbish, it fell out that through the opportunity of the place, the
weariness and unexperience of the Enemy, the valor of the Roman soldier, and
their exercise informer battles, that the Galls could not endure the brunt of
the first encounter, but presently betook themselves to flight. Ours being
fresh and lusty pursued after and slew great numbers of them: then chasing
their horse, suffered very few of them to save themselves by flight. And so it
happened, that at one time Sabinus had news of the overthrow at Sea, and Caesar
of Sabinus victory by Land. Upon these victories all the Cities and States
yielded themselves to Titurius: for as the Galls are prompt to undertake a
war; so are they weak in suffering, and impatient of the consequents and
calamities thereof.

OBSERVATION.
THis practice of a counterfeit fear was often put in use by the Roman Leaders,
The use which the Romans made of a counterfeit fear.
as well to disappoint the expectation of an Enemy, as to draw them into an
inconvenience, and so to defeat them of their greatest helps in time of battle.
Caesar coming to succor the camp of Cicero, Lib. 5.
made such use of this Art, that he put to rout a great Army of the Galls with
a handful of men: which I will refer unto the place where it is particularly
set down by Caesar.

The chiefest thing in this place which brought them to their overthrow was
disappointment: for it is a thing hardly to be digested in businesses of small
consequence, to be frustrated of a settled expectation, when the mind shall
dispose her self to one only intent, and in the upshot meet with a counterbuffe
to cross her purposes, and so defeat her of that hope which the strength of
her reason has entertained: how much more then in things of such importance,
when we shall proceed in a course of victory, and humor our conceits with that
we wish and would have to happen, and in the end meet either with bondage or
death, must our best wits be appalled, having neither respite nor means to
think how the evil may be best prevented? Which the wise Romans well understood,
and counted it no dishonor to be reproched with shameful cowardice, by such
as knew not the secrets of wisdom; while they in the mean time foresaw their
good fortunes, shrouded under the cloak of a pretended distrust.

Let these examples instruct a Leader so to take the opportunity of any such
fortune, that in the execution he omit not the chiefest points of order and
discipline, as well for the better effecting of the design, as for his own
safety, and the security of his Army. For order is as the sinews and strength
of martial discipline, uniting the particular members into the firm
composition of a wel-proportioned body: and so it makes it more powerful then
any number of disunited parts, how able or infinite soever.

I might here allege infinite examples to confirm this truth: but let the
battle of Dreux serve for all; wherein the Protestants, overcharging the
Catholic Army, followed the retreat so hard, that they quickly became Masters
of the field; and then neglecting martial discipline, fell in confusedly with
the broken multitude, to make the victory more glorious by slaughter and
mortality. The Duke of Guise all this while budged not a foot; but in
unexampled patience kept his regiment close together, and would not suffer them
to rescue their General that was taken, until the regiment of the Prince of
Condie was likewise dispersed and broken: and then perceiving no difference of
order between the victor Protestant and the vanquished Catholic, he dissolved
that terrible cloud that had hung so long in suspense, and so changed the
fortune of the day, that he took the chiefest of their Princes prisoners, with
little or no loss of his own men: So powerful is order in the deeds of Arms,
and of such consequence in obtaining victory. And thus we have first seen the
inconveniences which a counterfeit fear, well dissembled, may cast upon a
credulous and unadvised enemy, when pretense and appearance has brought them
into an error, which their own credulity does afterward avouch: and secondly,
what strength and safety consists in order; and how powerful it is to throw
down, and to set up.

CHAP. IX.
The proceedings of Crassus in Aquitanie.
AT the same instant of time it happened also, Caesar.
that Pub. Crassus coming into Aquitania (which both in regard of the large
extension of the Country, as also for the multitude of the inhabitants, was
named the third part of Gallia) and considering that he was to make war in
those parts where L. Valerius Praeconius the Legate was slain, and the Army
overthrown, and where Lucius Manlius was fain to fly, with the loss of his
carriages; he thought that his affairs required no mean diligence: and
therefore having made provision of Corn, and mustered many Auxiliary forces,
and Evocati.
sent for many valiant and prudent men by name from Tolouse, Carcasone, and
Narbone, cities bordering upon the province, he carried his Army into the
confines of the Sontiates. Which was no sooner known, but they levied great
forces both of horse and foot, and with their horse, in which their principal
strength consisted, charged upon the Romans in their march: which being easily
repelled, as ours followed the retreat, suddenly the infantry of the Galls
showed it self in a Valley as it lay in ambush. These setting upon the Romans
renewed the battle, and there the fight continued hot a long time. The
Sontiates being animated with the former victories, saw all the hope of
Aquitanie rely upon their virtue; and the Romans on the other side desired to
show what they were able to do of themselves, without their grand Captain, and
under the conduct of a young soldier. At length the enemy overwaged with
prowess, and wearied with wounds, betook themselves to flight; of whom the
Romans slew a great number, and then marched directly to the town of the
Sontiates, and laid siege unto it: the siege grew hot, the Romans approaching
the walls with vines, turrets, and mounts. The townsmen defended themselves
sometimes by sallying out, sometimes by undermining the mounts and
fortifications, wherein the Aquitani are very skillful. But when they perceived
the industry of the Romans to exceed all that they were able to do, they
entreated Crassus to accept their rendry. Which being granted, and all the Army
intending the delivery of their Arms, Adcantuanus their chief Magistrate fled
out in the mean time at another port of the City, with six hundred devoted
companions, whom they called Soldurii; whose manner is to enjoy all good things
in common with those whom they have chosen for their friends; and if any
misfortune befall them, either to die with them, or presently kill themselves:
neither was it ever known in the memory of man, that any of them refused to die
when his friend was slain. But as they attempted to escape, the soldiers that
kept that part of the fortification, as they signified his evasion by a clamor
and shout, the rest betook themselves to Arms, and so after a sharp conflict
repelled him again into the town; where he desired to be taken in the number of
the submissive multitude; which was granted. Crassus, having taken hostages of
them, went into the confines of the Vocates and Tarusates.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THese skillful and experienced men which Crassus sent for out of all the
Cities in Aquitani^, Evocati.
were those whom the Romans called Evocati, such as were free from warfare, and
exempted by their laws from giving their names in musters, either by reason of
their years, or the magistracy which they had born, or for some other causes
which gave them that privilege: and in that regard were sent for by Letters,
entreating their assistance in the carriage of that war, as men well acquainted
with the nature of such businesses. Their places were nothing inferior to the
Centurions for advise and direction, although they had no part in command or
authority.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IN this fight we may further observe their manner of defense against Mounts
and Cavalieros; which we find chiefly to be Mines. Josephus in the Jewish war
says, that the Romans having raised an exceeding high mount, the Jews
undermined the same with such Art, that as they dug underneath, they
supported the Mount with huge props and planks that it might not shrink: and
watching a time of greatest advantage, they set all the timber-work which
underpropped the mount on fire; which taking fire with the help of Brimstone
and Pitch, the Mount fell upon a sudden, to the great terror and amazement of
the Romans.

At the siege of Avaricum, Lib. 7. de Bello Gall.
we find how the Galls by undermining did take the earth from the Mount, as
fast as it was carried unto it by the Romans; and so kept it from rising, and
made it uneffectuall. But if it were for the most part made of wood, or other
combustible matter, they sought then by all means to burn it; as it happened at
the siege of Massilia: and oftentimes when both burning and undermining failed,
they confronted it with another Mount within the walls, to disappoint the
disadvantage by equal contesting of it, and so made it unprofitable.

Concerning Mines, thus much may I say without prejudice to that Art, that the
chiefest points to be respected are these: First, the true distance to a
designed place; which is best got by instrument, and help of Geometry, where
other marks of certainty are wanting. Secondly, the direction of the Mine, that
we may not err in our course which the Compass affords. Thirdly, the
strengthening of the Mine with timber-work, if need require. Lastly, the
countermining and crosse-meeting. All which parts have very many circumstances,
and require a larger discourse then may be thought pertinent for this place.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THe strange contract between these Soldurii and their Chieftain may well
deserve a place amongst these observations, especially considering the
obligatory conditions which either party stood bound to o^serve: for the
Captain was to make his Soldurii partakers of all his happiness in this life,
in regard whereof they were to take ^ar^ of whatsoever ill chance or disaster
should happen to befall him. If death, which is the last end of all sensual
misery, took hold of their head, these devoted were tied voluntarily to follow
him the self-same way: neither in any memory was there (says he) ever man
found that refused to die, if he to whom he was devoted chanced to be slain.
Which bloody league of amity as it was repugnant to the course of Nature,
multiplying particular destiny to a general calamity; so was it dangerous in a
wel-ordered State, if the Ringleader were either ambitious, or sought to
practice any thing contrary to good government: for he himself would presume
much upon the assistance of his Soldurii; and they on the other side must needs
wish well to his attempts, that were so interessed in his life and death.

CHAP. X.
The Galls raise new forces against Crassus.
THe barbarous Galls were much troubled, Caesar.
that a town of that strength both by nature and art should so soon be taken;
and therefore they sent Ambassadors into all quarters, conjured one with
another, confirmed their covenants with mutual hostages, and levied what power
they were able to make; sending for aid out of Spain, and from other States
that bordered upon Aquitanie. At the coming of these forces they began to make
war with a great power, and with many soldiers of great fame: for they
appointed such Leaders as had seen the experience of Sertorius his wars, and
were great in the opinion of men for their skill and knowledge in the Art
Military. These, according to the custom of the people of Rome, began to take
places of advantage, to fortify their Camp, and to intercept the Romans from
free passage of convoyes, and necessary intercourses. Which when Crassus
perceived, and considering withal that his own forces were so few that he
could not well dismember them upon any service or advantage, and that the enemy
went out at his pleasure, kept the passages, and left notwithstanding a
sufficient garrison in his Camp, by which means corn and provision would in
time grow scarce with him, whilst the enemy waxed every day stronger; he
thought it his best course not to linger any longer, but presently to give them
battle.

The matter being referred to a Council of war, when he understood that all
men were of the same opinion, he appointed the next day to give them battle:
and in the dawning putting his men in a double battle, and placing the
Auxiliarie forces in the midst, he attended to see what the enemy would do.
The Galls, although they were persuaded that they might adventure battle, both
in regard of their multitude and ancient prowess of war, as also in respect
of the paucity of the Romans; yet they thought it better to block up the
passages, and so cut off all carriages and convoies of corn, and so the victory
would follow without bloodshed: and if the Romans for want of Corn should offer
to make a retreat, they would then set upon them as they marched, wearied with
travel, heavily laden with their burdens, and dejected in their spirits. This
resolution being approved by the whole Council of the Galls, when the Romans
imbattelled their forces, they kept their men within their Camp.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis Sertorius had followed the faction of Marius and Cinna, Sertorius.
and when Sylla had overthrown both the elder and younger Marius, he fled into
Spain, and there maintained the quarrel on foot against Pompey and Metellus,
and overthrew them in many battles: but in the end was treacherously slain by
Perpanna at a banquet. He was a man of great spirit, and of admirable dispatch;
and under him were these Captains brought up which Caesar commends for their
skill in Arms.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IN histories propounding to our consideration the deeds and monuments of
former ages, we may observe two especial means which the great Commanders of
the world have entertained to atchieve victory, Two means to atchieve victory
and to over-master our enemies.
and over-master their enemies: the first by cunning and wise carriage of a
matter before it come to trial by blows; the second by forceable means and
waging of battle: the one proceeding from wisdom and the better faculties of
the soul; and the other depending upon the strength and ability of the body.

Concerning the first, it has ever been held more honorable, as better suting
the worth of the spirit and the divine essence of our nature, so to direct the
course of an action, that the adverse part may be weakened by wit, and prevented
in the projects of their better fortunes by anticipation of means and
occasions, and so through advantages taken from their own proceedings, to be
driven to that exigent which may determine of the controversy before they come
to blows, and conclude the matter by terms of Art taken from the directions of
good providence. For to speak a truth, the action of battle, as it is the last
part in that faculty, so it is the worst in regard of Christian duty, and
better fitteth the progeny of Lamech his second wife (which the Divines do note
to be born to the ruin and destruction of mankind) then the children of grace,
Tuba (...) by war, and Naamah by the flood.
whose joy consists in peace and love.

Caesar in the first of the Civil wars respected the same thing, but from
other grounds: for having shut up Afranius and Petreius in a place of
disadvantage, so as he might have cut them off without further trouble; yet
forasmuch as he foresaw the victory coming toward him without blow or wound,
he thus answered his Captains that were earnest upon the enemy; Cur, etiam
secundo praelio, aliquos ex suis amitteret? cur vulnerari pateretur optime de
se meritos milites? cur denique fortunam periclitaretur? Why should he lose any
of his soldiers in battle, though he got the day? why should he suffer those
to be wounded who had deserved so highly at his hands? or why should he hazard
his good fortune? And this course did these Galls take which under Sertorius
had learned the Roman Art, and the Roman industry: and were now become so
expert, that they had almost beaten the Romans at their own weapon.

This first means is principally to be embraced, as the safest way in these
uncertain and casual events: for that which rests upon corporal strength,
and makes execution the means to a conclusion, is very terrible even to the
better party, full of hazard, and of little certainty. For it were a miracle of
Fortune never heard of yet, so to carry a battle upon what advantage or means
soever, that the victor Army should buy so great a fortune without bloodshed or
loss of men; and erect a Trophy to Honor at the sole cost of the Enemy,
without loss or expense of his own treasure.

And for the uncertainty in a battle, who knows not what infinite chances and
changes may happen in every small moment of time, to turn the fortune of the
day to this or that party, and make both sides unconstant in their affections,
by presenting them interchangeably with hope and fear, joy and sorrow? And
therefore Caesar thought it not best to tempt the waywardness of Fortune, when
by other means he might obtain his desires.

This, I say, is chiefly to be embraced, if our means will afford us that
happiness: but howsoever I hold it wisdom so to entertain this course of
victory, that we omit not the chiefest helps of furtherance when it comes to
blows; but to think of this conquest by art and wit, as necessary if our means
will serve us to compass it; and of the other, as necessary whether we will or
no: for the history makes it plain, that when Brutus found himself destitute
of means to undertake that course of victory which proceeds from providence
and discreet carriage, he then betook himself necessarily to the later, and by
the help of battle sought to free himself from those disadvantages into which
the Galls had brought him.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
I Observe further out of this place, that what course soever be taken, a
discreet Leader will not easily forgo an advantage without great assurance of
a better fortune, Not to forgo an advantage.
nor change the certainty of a benefit upon probabilities of other hopes,
until it have paid him the interest of his expectation, and wrought that
effect which it promised to perform. For so he might forgo his fortune, by
presuming too much upon the favor of future chances, which are often seen to
cross our purposes, rather then to further the way which is taken.

THE FOURTH OBSERVATION.
FUrther I observe this double battle to be answerable to the paucity of the
Roman forces: for their usual manner was to make a triple battle, that the
first might have a second and a third help; but where their number would not
afford that commodity, they then made two battles, that there might be the
succor of a second supply. But they never fought with one single battle, for
ought that may be gathered by their histories.

THE FIFTH OBSERVATION.
THe last thing which I observe is the place where Crassus bestowed the
Auxiliary forces, The place where suspected forces are best bestowed in battle.
in the disposition of his troops to battle, which is here said to be in mediam
Aciem; for as their Armies were divided into three battles, so every battle was
divided into three parts, the two cornets and the battle, wherein these
Auxiliary forces were in this service bestowed: of these he afterward says,
that inasmuch as he durst not put any confidence in them, he commanded them to
serve the Romans in time of battle with stones and weapons, and to carry earth
and turf to the Mount. The reason why suspected troops are placed in the
battle, rather then in either of the cornets, is, for that the battle has not
such scope to fling out, or take advantage of place to do mischief, as the
cornets have: for wheresoever there have been set battles fought, the strength
of their Army consisted always in the cornets, as the two principal
instruments of the battle; and as long as these stood sound, the victory went
always certain on that part; for the cornets both kept the enemy from
incompassing about the body of their Army, and had the advantage also of
charging upon the open side of their adversary.

At the battle of Cannae, Hannibal put the weakest of his forces in the battle,
and advancing them toward the enemy left the two cornets behind: so that when
the enemy came to charge upon the battle, they easily beat them back, and as
they followed the retreat fell in between the two cornets, wherein the strength
of the Army consisted; and being by them encompassed on each side, were
defeated and overthrown. And thus we see the advantage which a General has
when his two cornets stand firm, although the battle shrink in the encounter.
Hannibal in the battle he had with Scipio in Africa placed the Strangers in the
front and in the rereward; according peradventure as he found their number, and
the use of their Arms: which are circumstances to be considered in this case,
and depend rather upon the judgment of a General, then of any prescription
that can be given in this matter.

CHAP. XI.
Crassus takes the Camp of the Galls: and with their overthrow ends that
war.
CRassus understanding their drift, Caesar.
and finding his men cheerful and willing to fight, the whole army crying out
that they would stay no longer, but immediately set upon the enemies in their
camp, encouraged his soldiers, and to the contentment of all men went directly
to the place where they were lodged: and as some began to fill up the ditch,
and others with casting weapons to beat the Galls from the rampire, he
commanded the Auxiliary forces, of whom he had no great assurance, to bring
stones and weapons to the soldiers that fought, and to carry earth and turf to
the Mount, that so they might make a show of fighting. And on the other side,
as the enemy began valiantly to make resistance, and to cast their weapons from
the higher ground to the great hurt of the Roman soldier; the horsemen in the
mean time riding about the Camp of the Galls, brought word to Crassus, that
the rampire at the Decumane port was not fortified with such diligence as they
found it in other places, but would admit an easy entrance. Crassus dealt
earnestly with the Commanders of the horse to encourage their men with great
promises and rewards, and instructed them what he would have done. They,
according to their instructions, took four cohorts that were left in the Camp
fresh and no way tired, and carrying them a further way about, that they might
not be discovered by the Enemy, while all men's eyes and minds were intent upon
the fight, they speedily came to the place of the fortifications which the
horsemen had found to be weak; which being easily broken down, they had entered
the Camp before the Enemy either saw them or could tell what was done. And then
a great clamor and shout being heard about that place, the Roman legions
renewing their force, as it falls out always in hope of victory, began to
charge them afresh with great fury. The Galls being circumvented on each side,
and despairing of their safety, casting themselves over the rampire, sought by
flight to escape the danger. But forasmuch as the Country was open and
champain, the horsemen pursued them with that execution, that of fifty thousand
which came out of Aquitanie and Spain, there scarce remained the fourth part.

Upon the news of this fight the most part of the Aquitani yielded to Caesar,
and of their own accord gave him hostages: amongst these were the Tarbelli,
Bigerriones, Preciani, Vocates, Tarusates, Elusates, Garites, Ausci, Garumni,
Sibutzates, and Cocasates. Only some few that lived farther off, trusting upon
the coming on of winter, held off and did not submit themselves.

OBSERVATION.
FRom this place Brancatio takes occasion to dispute, Lib. 3.
how an Enemy that is strongly encamped, Avertimen. to secundo.
and for some advantage will not remove, may be dislodged whether he will or
no. A point of great consequence in matter of war, and therefore deserves
due consideration. Concerning which he lays this down for a maxim, that all
sorts and strong holds are taken by the foot; and that camps and lodgings are
taken by the head. By which is meant, that he who purposes to win a fortress
well manned and provided, must first get the foot, and take hold of the ditch,
and then seize himself upon the rampire, and so get the place: for he says
that mounts and eminent elevations are of little use against fortresses or
sconses, unless they overtop them; which may be easily prevented, by raising
the parapet of the fortress in front, and the curtain in slank, according as
the enemy shall carry his mounts aloft; and so they shall never come to
overtop the holds. But all Camps and lodgings are taken by the head; that is,
by mounts and elevations, which by the advantage of their height command the
champain: for he holds it impossible to raise a mount within the Camp in so
short a time, to contest that which the enemy shall make without.

This foundation being laid, he proceeds to discover a way how to raise a
mount, maugre the enemy, which shall dislodge them by force of Artillery, or
murder them all within their trenches. And this he takes from Caesar at the
siege of Gergobia. Lib. de bello Gallico.
The substance of the matter consists in a double d^tch, running like unto
the line which the (...) call Helicall. By this double ditch he makes his
approach to any place of most advantage, where he may in a night raise a mount
high enough for the ordinance to play upon any quarter of the Camp. The censure
of this practice I refer to our judicious soldiers, who may, if it please
them, take a better view of the particularities of this stratagem in Brancatio
himself. Thus much I dare affirm in the behalf of these works, that they were
of high esteem amongst the Romans, whom daily experience and exigents of hazard
had taught to (...) the readiest means both for security and victory. And if
our soldiers could be brought to (...) the commodity of these works, either by
persuasion or impulsion, it were the best part of their warlike practices: but
our men had (...) upon desperate adventures, and seek victory in the jaws of
death, then to clear all hazard with pains and diligence.

CHAP. XII.
Caesar undertaketh the war with the Menapii and Morini.
AT the same time also, Caesar.
although the Summer was almost at an end, yet forasmuch as all Gallia was in
peace, and the T^roane.
Morini only with the Cl^ve and (...).
Menapii stood out in Arms, and had never either sent Ambassador, or
otherwise treated of Peace; Caesar thinking that war might quickly be ended,
led his Army into their Country. At his coming he found them to carry their
wars far otherwise then the rest of the Galls had done: for understanding
that the greatest Nations of Gallia, which had waged battle with the Romans,
were beaten and overthrown; and having whole continents of woods and bogs in
their territories, they conveyed both themselves and their goods into those
quarters. Caesar coming to the beginning of the woods, began to fortify his
Camp, not discovering any enemy near about him; but as his men were dispersed
in their charges, they suddenly sallyed out of the woods, and assaulted the
Romans; but being speedily driven in again, with the loss of many of them, as
the Romans followed them far into the woods, they had some few of their men
slain.

The time that remained Caesar resolved to spend in cutting down the woods: and
least the soldiers might be taken unawares while they were busied in that
work, he caused them to place all the trees which they cut down on either side
of the Army, that they might serve for a defense against sudden assaults. A
great quantity of ground was thus rid within a few days, so that their goods
and cattle was ta^en by the Romans: but they themselves were fled into thicker
woods. At which time there happened such a continual rain, as forced them to
leave off the work; and the soldiers could no longer endure to ly in sents of
skins: and therefore Caesar, after he had wasted and spoiled their Country,
burned their towns and their houses, carried back his Army, and placed them
amongst the Aulerci, Lexovii, and in other cities to winter in, which were
subdued in the late wars.

OBSERVATION.
THe Irish rebels having the like commodity of woods and bogges, do entertain
the like course of war as the Morini did with Caesar. The means which he
used to disappoint them of that practice was, to cut down the woods; which if
it be thought monstrous in this age, or ridiculous to our men of war, let them
consider that the Roman discipline wrought greater effects of valor, then can
be made credible by the use of these times. For besides their exquisite
discipline, which of it self was able to frame patterns of unexampled
magnanimity, their industry was admirable in the execution thereof, and
carried it with such uncessant travel, that the soldiers thought it great
happiness when they came to wage battle with the Enemy; and could have means
to quit their continual travel with the hazard of their lives.

Neither let it seem strange that the Romans undertook to cut down the woods;
but rather let us admire their facility in so difficult a task: for as the
history witnesses, magno spacio paucis diebus confecto, incredibili
celeritate, a great quantity of ground was rid in a few days, with incredible
speed. And after the woods were cut down, they took more pains in placing it
on each side of the legions to hinder any sudden assault, then they did in
cutting it down: which deserves as great admiration as the former part. There
is another place in the sixth book of these Commentaries, which expresses more
particularly the nature of such wars, and may serve to acquaint us with that
which Caesar did in these difficulties.

The Eburones, or the men of Liege, had the like commodity of woods and bogges,
and made use of them in the war they had with Caesar. The matter, says he,
required great diligence, not so much in regard of the peril of the whole Army
(for there could no danger come from an enemy that was frighted and dispersed)
as the safety of every particular soldier, which in part did pertain to the
welfare of the whole Army. For the desire of a booty carried many of the
soldiers far from the body of the Army; and the woods being full of unknown
and secret passages, would not suffer them to go either thick together, or
close imbattelled. If he desired to have the war ended, and the race of those
wicked men to be rooted out, he must of force make many small companies, and
divide his men into many bodies: but if he would have the Maniples to keep at
their Ensigns, as the discipline and custom of the Roman Army required, then
the place was a shelter and defense to the enemy. Neither did they want courage
to lay Ambushments, and to circumvent such as they found alone straggling from
their companies. In these difficulties there was as much done as diligence
could do, providing rather to be wanting in the offensive part (although all
men's minds were set on fire with revenge) then to hurt the enemy with the loss
of the Roman soldier. Caesar sent messengers to the bordering States, to come
out and sack the Eburones, and they should have all the prey for their labor:
that the life of the Galls rather then his legionary soldiers, might be
hazarded in those woods; as also that with so great a multitude, both the race
and name of that people might be quite extinguished.

There are many particularities in this relation which concern the true motion
of the Irish wars, which may be better observed by such as know those wars by
experience, then by my self that understand them only by relation: and
therefore to prevent such exceptions as my rule shall make of the parallel in
these two cases, I will leave it to be done by themselves. And thus ends the
third Commentary.

The fourth Commentary of the wars in GALLIA.
The Argument.
THe Usipetes and Tenchtheri are driven to seek new seats in Gallia; they drive
the Menapii out of their territories: but in the end are overthrown by Caesar.
That war being ended, he makes a bridge upon the Rhene, and carries his
Army over into Germany. He takes revenge upon the Sicambri; and gives liberty
to the Ubii: returns into Gallia, and carries his Army over into Britanie;
with the occurrences of that war.

CHAP. I.
The Those of Zutphen.
Vsipetes and Of Hassia.
Tenchtheri bring great multitudes of people over the Rhene into Gallia. The
nature of the Suevi.
THe winter following, Caesar.
Pompey and Crassus being Consuls, the Usipetes and Tenchtheri, two German
nations, passed over the Rhene with great multitudes of people, not far from
the place where it falls into the sea. The reason of their slitting was, the
ill entreaty which for many years together they had received of the Suevi, the
greatest and warlikest nation amongst the Germans. For these Suevi had one
hundred Cantons or shires, which yearly furnished their wars with a thousand
men apiece; and kept as many at home to maintain both themselves and their
Armies abroad: and these the year following were in Arms, and the other stayed
at home and performed the like duty; and so by this means they all continued
their experience both of tillage and matter of war. No man had any ground
proper to himself, neither might they abide longer then a year in one place.
They lived chiefly upon cattle and milk, and used much hunting; which was the
cause (what through the quality of their diet, their continual exercise, and
liberty of life, being never brought up to any calling or tied to any
discipline, nor urged to any thing against their disposition) that they were
strong and of a large stature: and they had used themselves so to it, that they
never cared for any clothing in the coldest place they came in, more then
skins and hides, which covered but part of their body, the rest being naked:
and they wash their bodies usually in the rivers. They have merchants that
frequent their ports, not so much to bring them any commodities from abroad, as
to buy the prey and spoil they take in war. And whereas the Galls take much
delight in oxen and other beasts, and stick not to give any price for them; the
Germans care not for the bringing of them amongst them, but rather use their
own misshapen ugly cattle, which by daily inuring they bring to perform any
service. Their horsemen oftentimes in time of battle forsook their horse, and
fought on foot; their horses being taught to stand still in one place, that
when they would they might return unto them. Neither was there any thing
accounted more base, or useless in the course of their life, then to use
furniture for horses: and therefore they would adventure to charge upon great
troops of horse that used Equipage, with a few of their own quality. They
admitted no wine to be brought in unto them, least it might effeminate their
warlike inclination, or make them unapt for labor. The greatest honor in
their opinion was, to have then bordering Territories ly waste and desolate:
for so it would be thought that many States together could not resist their
conquering valor: and it was reported that the country lay waste from the
Suevi one way six hundred miles together.

THE OBSERVATION.
BY this practice of the Suevi it appears how little a naked resolution of
valor avails, when it wants the ornaments of moral (...) and civil
discretion, to make use of that greatness which prowess has obtained: for
notwithstanding that they were a nation both warlike and of good ability, they
were so vainly carried on with a conceit of manhood, that it sorted to no other
end then to maintain barbarism at home, and desolation abroad; whereas true
valor is always subordinate to the preservation of Commonweals, and is as the
defensive Arms of civil society. Which I have the rather noted, inasmuch as
it resembles an humor that abounds in this age, especially in the
particular haviour of our young Gallants; whose naked valor revealing it self
only in the lie and in the stabb, for want of other assistant virtues to temper
the heat of so brittle a metal, leads them into such inconveniences and
disordered actions, that it changes the nature thereof into giddy-headed
rashness; and in lieu of virtues guerdon, is repaied with irrision.

CHAP. II.
The motives inducing the Vsipetes to come over the Rhene into Gallia.
NExt unto these Suevi inhabited the Ubii, Caesar.
a very ample and potent State: and through their intercourse and traffic with
merchants, being seasoned also with the manners of the Galls their neighbors,
somewhat more civil then the rest of the Germans. With these the Suevi had
often waged battle: and albeit they could not expel them out of their country,
forasmuch as their State was very great and populous; yet by continual
incursions they brought them under, and much weakened their estate. In the same
case were the Usipetes and Tenchtheri before mentioned: for having made head
against the Suevi for many years together, they were constrained in the end to
forsake their possessions, and wandering the space of three years through the
Continent of Germany, at last they arrived where the Geldres and Cleve.
Menapii inhabited the banks on either side the river Rhene: who being
terrified with the arrival of such a multitude, forsook all their dwellings
beyond the river, and planted themselves on this side of the water, to hinder
the Germans from further passage.

The Usipetes with their associates having tried all means, and not finding
themselves able to pass over by force for want of boats, nor by stealth by
reason of the diligent watch of the Menapii, fained a retreat to their old
habitation: and after three days journey, their horsemen in one night speedily
returned again, and slew the Menapii both unguarded and unprovided, For they
upon the departure of the Germans, feared not to return over the river into
their towns and houses. These being slain and their shipping taken, they got
over the river before the rest of the Menapii had any notice of their coming:
by which means they easily dispossessed them of their dwelling places, and
lived that winter upon the provision they found there.

Caesar understanding of these things, and fearing the weakness of the Galls,
inasmuch as they are sudden and quick in their resolutions, and withal
desirous of novelty, he durst no way trust their unconstancy: for it was their
practice and custom to stay travelers and passengers, and inquire of them
what they either heard or knew concerning any thing that had happened; and the
common people would flock about Merchants in faires and markets, and learn of
them whence they came, and what news they brought from thence: and by these
rumors and hearsayes they directed the main course of their actions; whereof
they could not but soon repent themselves, being grounded upon such weak
intelligence as was usually coined to please the multitude. Which custom being
known, Caesar to prevent a greater war, hasted to his Army sooner then he was
wont to do.

OBSERVATION.
SUch as have spent their time in the contemplation of Nature, and have made
diligent search of the temperature and quality of climates and nations, have
all with one consent made Choler the Regent of the French complexion;
distinguishing the people with such attributes as the said humor usually
breeds. Neither have these conditions which Caesar so long ago observed in
the ancient Galls, any disresemblance from that which the learned of this age
have delivered concerning the nature of the said inhabitants; but that
irresolute constitution, which breeds such novelties and contrarieties of
actions, continues the same unto these times in the inhabitants of that
country, notwithstanding the alteration of customs and people, or what else so
long a time has changed: which argues the unresistable power of celestial
influence, establishing an uniformity of nature, according as the site of the
place lies capable of their powerful aspect.

The reason of the diversity in the temperature of nations which are
differenced by North and South, is not without apparent cause attributed to
their propinquity or distance from the course of the sun, which distinguishes
by heat and cold the Northern and Southern climates of the earth, and
separateth the inhabitants thereof by the dominion of their active qualities.
But the reason why two Nations which are both in the same climate, and under
the same parallel, receiving the virtue of the celestial bodies by the same
downfall and rebound of their beams, being differenced only by East and West,
are so much disunited in nature, and so unlike in disposition, is not so
apparent: whether it be, as some have imagined, forasmuch as the all-inclosing
sphere, which remains quiet and immovable above the circuit of the first
motor, has his parts diversely distinguished with variety of properties, which
by continual reference and mutual aspect are imprinted in the correspondent
quarters of the earth, and so keep a perpetual residency of one and the same
quality in one and the same place, and make also the variety of fashions in
such parts as otherwise are equal favorites of the heavens majesty, by
receiving an equal measure of light, heat and virtue; or whether the said
quarters of the earth are in themselves diversely noted with several qualities,
which appropriate the self-same influence to their particular nature, and so
alter it into many fashions; or whether there be some other unknown cause: I
will leave every man to satisfy himself with that which seems most probable
unto him, and proceed to the discovery of this choleric passion. Wherein I
will endeavor to show how impatiency, sudden resolution, and desire of
novelty, are natural adjuncts of this humor. And if Caesar made use of this
Philosophy in the managing of that war, let it not be thought impertinent to
the knowledge of a General to enter into the consideration of this learning.
Wherein first I must lay for a maxim that which long experience has made
authentical, that the motions of the mind are either quick or slow, according
as the complexion is tempered either with heat or cold: for as the
phlegmaticall humor is of a moist, cold and heavy nature, begetting weak and
gross spirits, and benumming the instruments with a livelesse disability; so
is the motion of the internal faculties proceeding likewise after a slow
manner, according to the quality of the instruments whereby it moves: and
therefore men of this waterish constitution are no way apt to receive an
impression, nor to entertain any sensible apprehension, unless it be beaten
into them with often and strong repetitions; and then also they proceed as
slowly in discoursing of the consequence, and linger in the choice of their
resolutions. On the contrary part, this flava bilis, being of a hot piercing
nature, and resembling the active virtue of the fire, does so purify the
instruments of sense, and quicken the spirits with the vivacity of motion, that
they take the first impression as perfectly, as if it had been oftentimes
presented unto them with many strong circumstances. And thence it happens,
that inasmuch as the Species is so readily received, and possesses the
apprehending faculty with such facility of entrance, that it moves the other
powers of the soul with as great efficacy at the first conception, as if it had
been brought in with troops of probabilities, and strengthened with manifest
arguments of undoubted truth. It follows therefore (by reason of the subtle
and fit disposition of the instruments, which proceeds from heat the chiefest
quality in choler) that the object is at the first moment so strongly settled in
the first receiving faculty, that the other powers of the mind with as great
speed manifest their offices concerning the apprehension, and deliver a
sentence answerable to the strength of the first conception: which makes them
so impatient of delay, and so suddenly to alter their former resolutions, not
suffering the discoursive power to examine the substance thereof by conference
of circumstances, nor to give judgment according to the course of our
intellectual court. It behooves therefore every man in that unsteady
disposition, especially in matter of moment, to be suspicious of his own
credulity, and not to give place to resolution, before his judgment be
informed by discourse of the strength or weakness of the conceived opinion.

But to leave these speculative meditations to Philosophers of learned conceit;
forasmuch as the right use of passions is either true wisdom, or comes
nearest to the same; I will only touch in a word what degree of choler best
befitteth a soldier, or how it avails or disadvantageth in matter of war.
And first it cannot be denied, that there is almost no passion that does more
eclipse the light of reason, or sooner corrupts the sincerity of a good
judgment, then this of anger which we now speak of: Neither is there any
motion that more pleases it self in his own actions, or follows them with
greater heat in the execution. And if the truth chance to show it self, and
convince a false pretended cause as the author of that passion, it oftentimes
redoubleth the rage even against truth and innocence. Piso condemned a soldier
for returning from forraging without his companion, being persuaded that he had
slain him: but at the instant of the execution the other that was missing
returned, and with great joy of the whole Army they were carried to the
General, thinking to have much gratified him with the manifestation of the
truth: but he through shame and despite, being yet in the torture of his
wrath, redoubled his anger, and by a subtilty which his passion furnished him
withal, he made three culpable for that he found one innocent; the first
because the sentence of death was past against him, and was not to be recalled
without the breach of law: the second for that he was the cause of the death of
his companion: and thirdly the executioner, for not obeying his commandment.

Concerning matter of war, as it consists of differenced parts, so has
choler diverse effects. In case of discourse and consultation, whenas the powers
of the mind ought to be clear of all violent affections, it greatly darkeneth
the understanding, and troubles the sincerity of a good judgment, as Caesar
noted in his speech to the Senate concerning Catiline: Salust.
and therefore a Commander must by all means endeavor to avoid even the least
motions of so hurtful a passion, and season his affections with that gravity
and constancy of spirit, that no turbulent disposition may either hinder his
understanding, or withhold his will from following that course, which reason
appoints as the best means to a fortunate success; always remembering that
all his actions are presented upon a stage, and pass the censure of many
curious beholders, which applaud grave and patient motions, as the greatest
proof of true wisdom, and disallow of passionate and headstrong affection, as
derogating from the sincere carriage of an action, how just soever otherwise it
seems.

Concerning execution and fury of battle, I take anger to be a necessary
instrument to set valor on foot, and to overwage the difficulties of terror
with a furious resolution: for considering that the noblest actions of the mind
stand in need of the impulsions of passions, I take anger to be the fittest
means to advance the valiant carriage of a battle; for as fear is treacherous
and unsafe, so anger is confident and of an unquencheable heat. And therefore a
Commander ought by all means to suggest matter of anger against an Enemy, that
his men may behold them with a wrathful regard, and thirst after the day of
battle, to satisfy their fury with the blood of their adversaries. If any urge
that it has been heretofore observed of the Galls, that in the beginning of a
battle they were more then men, and in the later end they were less then
women; and therefore a choleric disposition is not so fit for service, as we
seem to make it: I answer, that there is a difference between a disposition to
choler, such as was observed in the Galls, and the passion of anger well
kindled in the mind: for the first is subject to alteration and contrariety of
actions; but the other is furious, invincible, never satisfied but with
revenge. And so that of Aristotle is proved true, that anger serves oftentimes
as a weapon to virtue: whereunto some answer very pleasantly, saying, it is a
weapon of a strange nature; for we do manage other weapons, and this does
manage us; our hand guides not it, but it guides our hand; it possesses us,
Tacit.
and not we it, as it happened in the reign of Tiberius amongst the mutinous
legions at Vetera: 1. Annal.
and therefore a Commander ought to take great heed, whom he makes the object
of that anger which kindles in his Army. For as it is a passion of terrible
execution, and therefore needs to be wisely directed; so is it dangerous in
regard of obedience, which was the only thing which Caesar required in his
soldiers.

But to leave this hasty matter, and fall nearer that which we seek after: I
may not omit the Prognostication which Caesar made of the consequence of this
accident, by the natural disposition of the people; the event whereof proved
the truth of his predictions: which shows what advantage a learned General
that has been somewhat instructed in the school of Nature, has gained of him
whom only experience has taught the active rudiments of the war, and thinks
of no further lession in that art, then that which the office of a Sergeant or
Lancepresado contains.

CHAP. III.
Caesar comes to his Army, marches toward the Germans, and by the way
treats of conditions of Peace.
CAesar being come to his Army, Caesar.
found that to have happened which he before suspected: for some of the States
of Gallia had sent messengers unto the Germans, to leave the banks of Rhene,
and to come further into the Continent, where they should find ready whatsoever
they desired. Whereupon the Germans began to make further incursions, and to
waste the land as far as the confines of the Liege.
Eburones and the Condrusi, who were under the protection of the Treviri. The
Princes of the Galls being called together, Caesar thought it best to
dissemble what he had discovered concerning their revolt; and confirming their
minds with an approbation of their loialty, he commanded certain troops of
horse to be levied, and resolved to make war upon the Germans: and having made
provision of corn, he directed his march toward them. From whom, as he was on
the way within a few days journey of their Camp, he received this message: The
Germans as they were not willing to make war upon the Romans first, so they
would not refuse to make trial of their manhood if they were justly provoked;
for their ancient custom was to answer an Enemy by force, and not by treaty:
yet thus much they would confess, that they came thither very unwillingly,
being driven by violence out of their possessions. If the Roman people would
accept of their friendship, and either give them territories to inhabit, or
suffer them to keep that which they had got by the law of Arms, they might
prove profitable friends unto them. They only yielded to the Suevi, to whom the
Gods in feats of Arms were inferior; any other Nation they would easily
conquer.

To this Caesar answered what he thought fit; but the purport of his speech
was, That he could not make any league with them if they continued in Gallia:
neither was it probable that they that could not keep their own, would get
possessions out of other men's hands: Gallia had no vacant place to entertain so
great a multitude: but if they would they might find a welcome amongst the
Co^o^ia Agrippina.
Ubii, whose agents were at that instant in his Camp, complaining of the injury
of the Suevi, and desiring aid against them; thus much he himself would entreat
of the Ubii. The messengers went back with these Mandates, promising within
three days to return again to Caesar: in the mean time they desired him not to
bring his Army any nearer their quarters. Which request Caesar denied. For
understanding that a few days before a great part of their Cavalry were passed
over the Mosa to the Ambivariti, there to pillage and get provisions, he
suspected that this delay imported nothing more then the return of their
horsemen.

The river Mosa has its rise from the mount Vogesus in the dominions of the
Lingones, and having run far, it receives the river Wael.
Walis, which is a part of the Rhene: these two joining make the island of the
Batavi: fourscore miles below which it falls into the sea. The Rhene arises
amongst the Lepontii, a people inhabiting the Alps; and after a tedious course
through the Nantuates, Helvetii, Sequani, Mediomatrices, Triboci and Treviri,
drawing near the sea, it divides into several branches, and so makes many
considerable islands, most of which are inhabited by savage and barbarous
people, some whereof live only upon fish and the eggs of birds: after this the
river empties it self at several mouths into the Ocean.

When Caesar was come within twelve miles of their Camp, their Ambassadors
returned, and meeting him on the way, entreated him earnestly to march no
further toward them. But being denied of their suit, they besought him to send
to those troops of horse which marched before the Army, that they should not
fight nor make any hostile encounter; and that he would give them leave to send
messengers to the Ubii: of whose entertainment they would willingly accept, if
the Princes and Senate would swear faith and safe continuance unto their
people: neither would they require more then three days to negotiate this
business. Caesar conceived this entreaty to import nothing else then the
return of their horsemen that were absent in pillage, whom they expected within
three days; notwithstanding he promised them to march but four miles further
that day, to a convenient watring-place, and bade that a considerable number of
them should come thither to him next day, that he might know what they desired:
in the mean time he sent to the Commanders of the horse that were before, not
to provoke the Enemy to fight; and if they were set upon, to sustain the charge
until he came nearer with the Army.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
FIrst, we may observe his dissembling of the practice of the Galls with the
Germans; and the encouragement which he gave them in a faithful and loyal
affection to the people of Rome, when he himself knew they had started from
that duty which both their honor and a good respect of their friends required:
for he well understood that his presence did take away all scruple of any
further motion in that kind; and therefore to have objected unto them their
errors, had not been to heal, but to discover their wound. Only he took the
way to cut off their hopes of any practices which they might attempt against
the Roman people; and held them in the mean time in the appearance of faithful
friends, that they might not be discouraged by the detection of their revolt.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SEcondly, upon this resolution that there was no league to be made with the
Germans if they continued on this side the Rhene, we may observe how he
entertained a treaty of peace, with such consents and denials, as might
manifest his readiness to further what he made show of, and not weaken the
means of his best advantage. For as he was content they should take a quiet
farewell of Gallia, and plant themselves in the possessions of the Ubii; so was
he loath to yield to any condition which might disadvantage his forcible
constraint, or weaken his command, if persuasion failed: for he well knew that
powerful means to effect that which he required, would further the course of a
peaceable conclusion, and carry more authority in a parlee, then any other
motive how reasonable soever.

Moreover we may observe how careful he was not to impose upon the Germans a
necessity of fighting; Vincitur haud gratis jugulo qui provocat hostem.
but opened a passage (by propounding unto them the association of the Ubii) by
which they might avoid the hazard of battle. Which thing was always observed
by Commanders of ancient times, who diligently searching into the nature of
things, found that neither of those noble instruments whereby man works such
wonders (I mean the hand and the tongue) had ever brought so many excellent
works to that type of perfection, unless they had been forced thereunto by
necessity: and therefore we are wisely to handle the course of our actions,
least while we stand too strict upon a violent guard, we give occasion to the
Enemy, by the way of Antiperistasis, to redouble his strength, and so furnish
him with that powerful engine, which Vetius Mescius calls ultimum and
maximum telum, the last and greatest weapon; the force whereof shall better
appear by these examples.

Some few of the Samnites, Live. lib. 9.
contrary to the articles of peace between them and the Romans, having made
incursions into the territories of the Roman confederats, the Senate of that
State sent to Rome to excuse the fact, and to make offer of satisfaction. But
being rejected, Claudius Pontius General of their forces, in an excellent
Oration which he made, showed how the Romans would not hearken to peace, but
chose rather to be revenged by war; and therefore necessity constrained them to
put on Arms: Justum est bellum (says he) quibus necessarium; and pia arma
quibus nulla nisi in Armis spes est, That war is just which is necessary; and
it is piety in those men to take up arms, who have no hope but in taking up
arms. The issue thereof was, that the Samnites intrapped the Romans in a place
of advantage, so that they were forced upon dishonorable terms to save their
lives, as it is at large in the ninth book of Livie.

Caius Manlius conducting the Roman legions against the Veii, Live. lib. 7.
part of the Veian Army had entered the Roman Camp; which Manlius perceiving, he
hasted with a band of men to keep the breach, and to shut in the Veii: which
they no sooner perceived, but they fought with that rage and fury that they
slew Manlius; and had overthrown the whole Camp, had not a Tribune opened them
a passage by which they fled away.

In like manner Camillus, the wisest of the Roman Captains, being entered into
the City of the Veii, that he might take it with greater facility, and disarme
the Enemy of that terrible weapon of necessity, he caused it to be proclaimed,
that no Veian should be hurt that was found unarmed. Whereupon every man cast
away his weapon, and so the town was taken without bloodshed.

Let a soldier therefore take such hold of occasions and opportunities as are
offered unto him, that in time of battle he may seem to cast necessity upon his
own cause, and retain it in his pay: considering how the power thereof alters
the works of Nature, and changes their effects into contrary operations; being
never subject to any ordinance or law, and yet making that lawful which
proceeds from it.

CHAP. IIII.
The Germans, contrary to their own request made to Caesar, set upon the Roman
horsemen, and overthrow them.
NOtwithstanding the Germans request concerning the truce, Caesar.
as soon as they saw the Roman horsemen, which were in number five thousand
(whereas the Germans had not above eight hundred horse, those that went over
the Mosa to forage not being yet returned) they charged upon the Romans not
expecting any hostile encounter, inasmuch as their Ambassadors were newly
departed from Caesar, and had obtained that day of truce: but being set upon,
they made what resistance they could. The Germans, according to their usual
custom, for sook their horse, and fighting on foot ran our horses into the
bellies, and overthrew many of our men, so that they easily put the Romans to
flight; who never looked back, until they came into the sight of the legions.
In that battle were slain 74 Roman horsemen, and amongst the rest Piso an
Aquitane, a valiant man, and born of noble parentage, whose grandfather was the
chief ruler in his city, and called friend by the Roman Senate. This Piso
seeing his brother compassed about by the enemy, brake in upon them and rescued
him: but having his horse wounded under him in the action, and being
dismounted, he fought stoutly on foot, till such time as the enemy hemmed him
in, and gave him in, and gave him several wounds; then he fell down. Which his
brother seeing afar off (for he had left the battle) he clapped spurrs to his
horse, and rushing upon the throng to rescue him, was there slain.

After this battle Caesar thought it not safe either to hearken to any
conditions, or to receive any message from them that by fraud and deceit had
sought for peace, and meant nothing but war: And to attend any longer until
their horsemen returned, was but to give them that advantage against him,
especially considering the weakness of the Galls, amongst whom the Germans by
this battle had gained great reputation; and therefore he durst not give them
space to think upon it.

OBSERVATION.
THis cunning of the Germans offers occasion to speak somewhat concerning
that main controversy of policy, which is, whether the actions of Princes and
great Commanders are always to be attended with integrity and faithful
accomplishment thereof. Wherein I will only set down such arguments and grounds
of reason, which virtue and moral honesty on the one part, (for we will make
it no question to a Christian mind) and the daily practice of Statesmen on the
other side, allege to make good their contrary assertions.

The great Politicians of the world, that commend virtue in a show, and not in
esse and being, and study to maintain their states only with humane reason, not
regarding the authority of divine ordinance, set this down as a maxim in their
Art; That he that is to negotiate a matter, and means to bring it to an end
sorting to his contentment, must in all respects be like qualified, both in
judgment and disposition, as the party is with whom he deals: otherwise he
cannot be sufficiently prepared to hold himself strong in the matter, which he
undertaketh. For a wrastler that comes with mere strength to encounter another
that has both strength and cunning, may beshrew his strength that brought him
thither, to be cast by skill, and be laughed at as an unworthy Champion for
serious sports: in like manner in this universal confusion of infidelity,
wherein subtilty flies at so high a pitch, he that thinks with simplicity of
spirit to wind through the labyrinths of falsehood, and avoid the snares of
deceit, shall find himself too weak for so difficult a task, and beshrew his
honesty, if he regard his commodity. For it is the course that every man takes
which must bring us to the place to which every man goes: and he that opposes
himself against the current of the world, may stand alone in his own conceit,
and never attain that which the world seeks after. Forasmuch therefore as
craft and deceit are so general, it behooves a man of public negotiations to
carry a mind apt and disposed to these qualities. This was signified by that
which ancient writers report of Achilles, who was sent to Chiron the Centaur,
half a man and half a beast, to be instructed in the rudiments of Princely
carriage; that of the brutish part he might learn to strengthen himself with
force and courage, and of the humane shape so to manage reason, that it might
be a fit instrument to answer or prevent whatsoever man's wit might forge to
overthrow it. Neither ought a private man to wonder at the strangeness of
these positions, considering that the government of kingdoms and Empires is
carried with another bias, then that which concerns particular affairs in a
wel-ordered State: wherein truth-breakers and faithless dissemblers are
worthily condemned, inasmuch as they necessarily enforce the ruin thereof. But
these that sit at the helm of government, and are to shape the course of a
State according to the variation of times and fortunes, derive their
conclusions from other principles, whereof inferior subjects are no more
capable then men are able to understand the works of the Gods: and therefore
they are called arcana imperii, secrets of State, to be reverenced rather then
looked into.

To conclude, the affairs of particular persons are of so short extension, and
incircled in so small a compass, that a mean capacity may easily apprehend the
advantages or inconveniences which may ensue upon the contract; and therefore
it is requisite they should stand to the adventure, and their judgment is
worthily taxed with the loss: but the businesses of the Commonweal are both
subject to so many casualties of fortune, and rely upon such unexpected
accidents, that it is impossible for any spirit, how provident soever, to
foresee the issue in that variety of chances. Besides that every particular
subject is much interessed in the fortune of the event, and may justly challenge
an alteration of the intended course, rather then suffer shipwreck through the
error of their Pilot: And so the safety of the State does balance out the
loss of credit in the Governor.

On the other side, such as zealously affect true honor, affirm virtue to be
the same both in Prince and people; neither does condition of state or calling,
or the quality of public or private businesses alter the nature and essence of
goodness: for to deprive the tongue of truth and fidelity were to break the
bond of civil society, which is the basis and ground-plot of all States and
Commonweals. They do not deny but that a wise Prince may so carry a treaty,
that he may seem to affect that most which he least intends; or answer
doubtfully concerning the propositions; and that he may use with great honor
the practices and stratagems of war, when the fortune of both parties
consists upon their own industry: but to break any covenants agreed upon may
well get a kingdom, but never honorable reputation.

And thus they contend concerning the means whereby a State is continued in
happy government: whereof thus much I dare say by the warrant of this History,
that he who fal^^fieth his word upon advantage, howsoever he regards his
honor, had need to pay them home in regard of his own safety: for if they once
recover the loss, and get any advantage against those truth-breakers, they
will find as little favor as the Germans did with Caesar.

CHAP. V.
Caesar marches directly to the Camp of the Germans, and cutteth them all in
pieces, and so ends that war.
Upon these considerations, Caesar.
Caesar manifesting his resolution to the Legates and Questor, there happened a
very fortunate accident. For the next day very early in the morning, most of
the Princes and chiefest of the Germans came unto Caesar into his Camp, to
excuse their fraudulent practice, and withal to continue their petition of
truce. Whereof Caesar was exceeding glad, and caused them to be kept in hold;
and at the same instant brought his Army out of the Camp, commanding his
horsemen to follow the legions, because they had been daunted with so late an
overthrow: And making a triple battle, marched speedily eight miles, and so
came upon the Germans before they had notice what had happened. Who being
terrified with our sudden arrival, and the departure of their own leaders,
knew not whether it were their best course to bring forth their forces, or
defend their Camp, or otherwise to seek their safety by flight. Which tumult
and fear was no sooner perceived by the Roman soldiers, but calling to mind
their perfidious treachery, they brake into the Camp, and were at first a
little resisted. In the mean time the women and children (for they had brought
all they had over the Rhene) fled every one away: which Caesar perceiving sent
his horsemen to pursue them. The Germans hearing the clamor and scr^echings
behind their backs, and seeing their friends pursued and slain, did cast away
their weapons, forsake their ensigns, and fled out of the Camp: and coming to
the confluence of the Mase and the Rhene, such as had escaped cast themselves
into the river; where what through fear, weariness, and the force of the
water, they were all drowned. In this conflict the Romans lost not a man. The
number of the enemy was 430000, with women and children. To them whom he had
retained in his Camp, he gave leave to depart: but they fearing the cruelty of
the Galls for the mischief they had done them, desired that they might
continue with the Romans: which Caesar agreed unto.

OBSERVATION.
THis relation affords little matter of war, but only a severe revenge of
hateful treachery: notwithstanding I will hence take occasion to discover the
offices of the Quaestor and the Legates; and show what place they had in the
Army. And first concerning the Quaestor, we are to understand that he was
elected by the common voice of the people, in the same Court which was called
to create the General. His office was to take charge of the public treasure,
whether it came out of their A^rarium for the pay of the Army, or otherwise was
taken from the enemy.

Of him the soldiers received their stipend, both in corn and money: and what
other booties were taken from the enemy, he either kept them or sold them for
the use of the Commonweal.

The Legates were not chosen by the people, but appointed by the Senate, as
Assistants and Coadjuto^s to the Emperor for the public service, and were
altogether directed by the General, in whose absence they had the absolute
command: and their number was for the most part uncertain, but proportioned
according to the number of legions in the Army.

CHAP. VI.
Caesar makes a bridge upon the Rhene, and carries his Army over into Germany.
THe German war being thus ended, Csar
Caesar thought it necessary to transport his Army over the Rhene into the
Continent of Germany for many causes: whereof this was not the least, that
seeing the Germans were so easily persuaded to bring their Colonies and their
vagrant multitudes into Gallia, he thought good to make known unto them, that
the Roman people could at their pleasure carry their forces over the Rhene into
Germany. Moreover, those troops of horse which were absent at the late
overthrow of the Germans, being gone as I said before for spoil and provision
over the Mosa, after they saw their friends overthrown, were fled into the
confines of the Sicambri, and joined with them. To whom when Caesar sent
Messengers to demand them to be sent unto him, they answered that the Roman
Empire was limited by the Rhene: and if the Germans were interdicted Gallia,
why should Caesar challenge any authority in their quarters? Lastly the Ubii,
who amongst all the rest of the Germans had only accepted of Caesar's
friendship, and given pledges of their fidelity, had made earnest suit unto him
to send them aid against the Suevi; or at the least to transport his Army over
the Rhene: that would serve their turns, that would be help and encouragement
enough to them; for the name and opinion of the Roman Army was so great, and of
such fame, what with Ariovistus overthrow, and this last service, that it
sounded honorable amongst the farthest Nations of Germany, so that it was the
greatest safety to have them their friends. For these reasons Caesar resolved
to pass the Rhene; but to carry his Army over by boat was neither safe, nor
for his own honor, nor the majesty of the people of Rome. And albeit it seemed
a matter of great difficulty, by reason of the breadth, swiftness and depth of
the river, to make a bridge: yet he resolved to try what he could do, otherwise
he determined not to pass over at all. And so he built a bridge after this
manner.

At two foot distance he placed two trees of a foot and half square, sharpened
at the lower end, and cut answerable to the depth of the river: these he let
down into the water with engines, and drove them in with commanders, not
perpendicularly after the fashion of a pile, but gablewise, and bending with
the course of the water: opposite unto these he placed two other trees, joined
together after the same fashion, being forty foot distant from the former, by
the dimension between their lower parts in the bottom of the water, and
reclining against the course of the river. These two pair of couples thus
placed he joined together with a beam of two foot square, equal to the
distance between the said couples, and fastened them at each end on either side
of the couples with braces and pins: whereby the strength of the work and
nature of the frame was such, that the greater the violence of the stream was,
and the faster it fell upon the timber-work* the stronger the bridge was united
in the couplings and joints. In like manner he proceeded with couples and
beams, until the work was brought unto the other side of the river: and then
he laid straight planks from beam to beam, and covered them with hurdles; and
so he made a floor to the bridge. Moreover on the lower side of the bridge he
drove down supporters, which being fastened to the timber-work* did strengthen
the bridge against the force of the water: and on the upper side of the bridge,
at a reasonable distance, he placed piles to hinder the force of trees or
boats, or what else the enemy might cast down to trouble the work or hurt the
bridge. Within ten days that the timber began to be cut down and carried* the
work was ended, and the Army transported. Caesar leaving a strong garrison at
either end of the bridge, went into the confines of the Sicambri. In the mean
time Ambassadors came to him from many cities desiring peace and the
friendship of the Romans: whom Caesar answered courteously, and required
hostages of their fidelity.

OBSERVATION.
IT shall not be amiss to enter a little into the consideration of this
bridge, as well in regard of the ingenious Architecture thereof, as also that
we may somewhat imitate Caesar; whom we may observe to insist with as great
plenty of wit and el^quence, in presenting unto us the subtilty of his
invention in such manner of handy-works, as upon any other part of his actions;
as this particular description of the bridge may sufficiently witness: besides
the fortifications at Alesia, and the intrenchments in Britany, for the safety
of his shipping, with many other works, which he might well record as the
greatest designs of an heroic spirit, and the wonderful effects of
magnanimous industry, that succeeding ages might not boast either of Art or
prowess which his virtue had not expressed, or otherwise might wonder at that
worth which they themselves could not attain unto. And to that purpose he
entertained Vuruvius the Father of Architecture, and as worthily to be imitated
in that faculty, as his Master Caesar is in feats of Arms. By whose example a
great Commander may learn, how much it imports the eternity of his fame to
beautify his greatest designs with Art, and to esteem of such as are able to
entreat the Mathematical Muses to show themselves under the shape of a
sensible form; which albeit, through the rudeness of the matter, fall far
short of the truth of their intellectual nature, yet their beauty expresses
such a majesty of Art, that no time will suffer the memory thereof to perish.

The workmanship of this bridge consisted chiefly in the oblique situation of
the double posts, whereof the first order bending with the stream, and the
lower rank against the stream, when they came to be coupled together with
overthwart beams, which were fastened in the couplings with braces which he
names Fibulas, the more violent the stream fell upon the work, the faster the
joints of the building were united, as may better appear by a model of that
making, then can be expressed by any circumstance of words.

I might hence take occasion to speak of the diversity of bridges, and of the
practices which antiquity has devised to transport Armies over Rivers: but
inasmuch as it is a common subject for all that undertake this Military task,
Lib. de Machin.
and has been handled by Lapsius upon the occasion of this bridge, I will
refer the Reader to that place; and only note the singular disposition of this
action, inasmuch as Caesar made the means correspondent to that end which he
intended. For considering that the chiefest end of his passage was, to let the
Germans understand that the power of the Roman Empire was not bounded with the
Rhene, and that a river could not so separate their territories, but that they
were able to join both the Continents together, and make a common road-way
where it seemed most unpassable: he thought it best to pass over his Army by a
bridge, that so the Germans might know the power of his forces, and also
conceit their Territo^ies as united unto Gallia, or to be united at the
pleasure of the Romans with a firm Isthmus, and plain passage by foot, which in
times past had always been separated by a mighty river. Neither would a
transportation by boat have wrought that effect, forasmuch as the daily use
thereof was so familiar to the Germans, that it nothing altered their
imagination of an unaccessible passage: but when they saw so strange a thing
attempted, and so suddenly performed, they would easily understand that they
were not so far off, but that they might be overtaken, and so direct their
demeanor accordingly.

Let this suffice therefore to prove that a passage over a river by a bridge is
more honorable, safe, and of greater terror to the enemy, then any other way
that can be devised; especially if the river carry any depth, such as the Rhene
is: otherwise, if it have either shallows or fords, whereby men may wade over
without any great encumbrance, it were but lo^^ labor to stand about a bridge,
but rather to think of it as of a place encumbered with such hindrances as men
often meet with in a march.

CHAP. VII.
Caesar takes revenge upon the Sicambri: gives liberty to the Ubii; and
returns again into Gallia.
THe Sicambri understanding that Caesar was making a bridge over the Rhene,
Caesar.
prepared themselves to fly; and at the persuasion of the Usipetes and
Tenchtheri forsook their country, and conveyed themselves and their possessions
into woods and solitary Deserts. Caesar continuing a few days in their
quarters, having set on fire their villages and houses, and burned up their
Corn and provision, came to the Ubii, promising them aid against the Suevi: by
whom he understood, that as soon as the Suevi had intelligence that he went
about to make a bridge, calling a Council, according to their manner, they
sent unto all quarters of their State, that they should forsake their towns,
and carry their wives and children and all that they had into the woods; and
that all that were able to bear Arms should make head in one place, which they
appointed to be the midst of their Country; and there they attended the coming
of the Romans, and were resolved in that place to give them battle. Which when
Caesar understood, having ended all those things in regard whereof he came into
Germany, which was chiefly to terrify the Germans, to be revenged upon the
Sicambri, to set the Ubii at liberty; having spent in all eighteen days beyond
the Rhene, and done enough as well in regard of his own honor, as the good of
the commonweal, he returned into Gallia, and brake up the bridge.

CHAP. VIII.
Caesar thinks of a voyage into Britanie: he enquireth of Merchants
concerning the nature of that people.
ALthough the Summer was almost spent, Caesar.
and that in those parts the winter hastened on a pace, inasmuch as all Gallia
inclines to the North; notwithstanding he resolved to go over into Britanie,
^orasmuch as he understood that in all the former wars of Gallia, the Enemy had
received most of their supply from thence. And although the time of the year
would not suffer him to finish that war; yet he thought it would be to good
purpose, if he went only to view the Island, to understand the quality of the
inhabitants, and to know their coast, their ports, and their landing-places,
whereof the Galls were altogether ignorant; for seldom any man but merchants
did travel unto them. Neither had they discovered any thing but the seacoast,
and those regions which were opposite unto Gallia. And therefore calling
merchants together from all quarters, he neither could understand of what
quantity the Island was; what nations, or what power they were that inhabited
^t; what use or experience of war they had; what laws or customs they used;
nor what havens they had to receive a navy of great shipping.

OBSERVATION.
AS the Germans had oftentimes stirred up motions of rebellion amongst the
Galls, by sending their superfluous multitudes into their kingdom; so the
Britans had upheld most of their wars, by furnishing them with such supplies as
from time to time they stood in need of. So that if Caesar or the Roman people
would rest secure of their quiet and peaceable government in Gallia, as they
had chastised the insolency of the Germans, and sent them back again with
greater loss then gain; so was it necessary to make the Britans know, that
their assistance in the war of Gallia would draw more businesses upon them then
they were well able to manage. For as I have noted in my former discourses, the
causes of an unpeaceable government are as well external and foreign, as
internal and bred in the body; which need the help of a Physician to continue
the body in a perfect state of health, and require as great a diligence to
qualify their malicious operations, as any internal sickness whatsoever.

In the second Commentary I briefly touched the commodity of good discovery:
but because it is a matter of great consequence in the fortunate carriage of a
war, I will once again by this example of Caesar remember a General not to be
negligent in this duty. Suetonius in the life of our Caesar reports, that he
never undertook any expedition, but he first received true intelligence of the
particular site and nature of the Country, as also of the manners and quality
of the people; and that he would not undertake the voyage into Britany, until
he had made perfect discovery by himself of the magnitude and situation of the
Island. Which Suetonius might understand by this first voyage, which Caesar
would needs undertake in the later end of a Summer, although it were, as he
himself says, but to discover.

It is recorded by ancient Writers, that those demigods that governed the
world in their time, gave great honor to the exercise of hunting, as the
perfect image of war in the resemblance of all parts, and namely in the
discovery and knowledge of a Country; without which all enterprises, either of
sport in hunting, or earnest in wars, were frivolous and of no effect. And
therefore Xenophon in the life of Cyrus shows, that his expedition against
the King of Armenia was nothing but a repetition of such sports as he had used
in hunting. Howsoever, if the infinite examples registered in history, how by
the dexterity of some Leaders it has gained great victories, and through the
negligence of others irrecoverable overthrows, are not sufficient motives to
persuade them to this duty; let their own experience in matters of small moment
manifest the weakness of their proceedings, when they are ignorant of the
chiefest circumstances of the matter they have in hand. But let this suffice in
the second place to prove the necessity of good discovery, and let us learn of
Caesar what is principally to be inquired after in the discovery of an unknown
country: as first, the quantity of the land; secondly, what Nations inhabit
it; thirdly, their use of war; fourthly, their civil government; and lastly,
what Havens they have to receive a Navy of great shipping. All which
circumstances are such principal Arteries in the body of a State, that the
discovery of any one of these demands would have given great light concerning
the motion of the whole body.

CHAP. IX.
Caesar sends C. Volusenus to discover the coast of Britanie; and prepares
himself for that voyage.
CAesar sent out Caius Volusenus with a Galley to discover what he could
concerning these things, Caesar.
with charge that having made perfect discovery, he should return again unto
him as speedily as might be: he himself marching in the mean time with all his
forces unto the (...) Monstr^ul.
Morini; forasmuch as from thence lay the shortest cut into Britanie. Thither
he commanded that ships should be brought from all the maritime Cities of that
quarter, and namely that fleet which he had built the year before for the war
at Vannes. In the mean time his resolution being known, and carried into
Britanie by Merchants and others, many private States of that Island sent
Ambassadors unto him, promising him hostages of their loyalty, and signifying
their readiness to submit themselves to the Roman Empire. To these he made
liberal promises, exhorting them to continue in that obedience; and so sent
them back again. And with them he sent Comius, whom he had made King of Arras,
whose wisdom and virtue he held in good account, and whom he took to be
faithful to him, and of great authority in those Regions. To him he gave in
charge to go to as many of the States as he could, and persuade them to accept
of the friendship of the Roman Empire, and acquaint them that Caesar himself
would presently follow after.

Volusenus having taken what view of the Country he could (for he durst not go
on shore to commit himself to the barbarism of the enemy) after five days
returned to Caesar, and related unto him all that he had discovered. Whilst
Caesar stayed in those parts for the furnishing of his fleet, the Morini sent
messengers unto him, excusing themselves for their former faults, that being a
rude and barbarous people, and altogether unacquainted with our customs, they
had made war against the people of Rome; and withal manifesting their
readiness to obey his commands.

Caesar not willing to leave any enemy behind him, or to engage in a new war at
this time of the year, or to neglect his voyage into Britanie for such small
matters, willingly accepted of their submission, having first received many
hostages of them: and having made ready eighty ships of burden, which he
thought sufficient to transport two legions, he divided the Galleys to the
Questor, the Legates, and the Commanders of the horse. There were also eighteen
ships of burden more, which lay wind-bound at a Port eight miles off, and them
he appointed for the horsemen. The rest of the Army he committed to Q. Titurius
Sabinus and Luc. Aurunculcius Cotta, commanding them to go to the confines of
the Menapii, and into those parts of the Morini who had sent no Ambassadors to
him: and appointed P. Sulp. Rufus a Legate to keep the Port with a sufficient
garrison.

CHAP. X.
Caesar fails into Britanie, and landeth his men.
THese things being thus d^spatched, Caesar.
having a good wind, in the third watch he put out to Sea, commanding his
horsemen to ^mbark themselves at the further Port and follow him; which was but
slowly performed. He himself arrived upon the coast about the fourth hour of
the day, where he found all the Clifts possessed with the forces of the enemy.
The nature of the place was such, that the hills lay so steep over the sea, that
a weapon might easily be cast from the higher ground upon the lower shore: and
therefore he thought it no fit landing-place; notwithstanding he cast anchour
until the rest of the Navy were come up unto him.

In the mean time calling a Council of the Legates and Tribunes, he declared
unto them what advertisements he had received by Volusenus, and told them what
he would have done; and withal admonished them that the course of Military
affairs, and especially Sea matters, that had so sudden and unconstant a
motion, required all things to be done at a beck, and in due time. The Council
being dismissed, having both wind and tide with him, he weighed anchours, and
sailed eight miles from that place, unto a plain and open shore.

The Britains perceiving the Romans determinations, sent their horse and
chariots (which they commonly use in war) before, and the rest of their forces
followed after to the place where the Romans intended to land. Caesar found it
exceeding difficult to land his men for these respects: the ships were so great
that they could not be brought near unto the shore; the soldiers in strange
and unknown places, having their hands laden with great and heavy weapons, were
at one instant to go out of the ship, to withstand the force of the billow, and
to fight with the enemy; whereas the Britains either standing upon the shore,
or making short sallies into the water, did boldly cast their weapons in known
and frequented places, and managed their horses accustomed to such services.

The Romans being terrified with these things, and altogether unskilful of
this kind of fight, did not use the same courage as they were wont to do in
land-services. Which when Caesar perceived, he caused the Galleys, that were
both strange to the Britains, and readier for use, to be removed from the sh^ps
of burden, and to be rowed up and down, and laid against the open side of the
enemy; that from thence with slings, engines, and arrows, the Enemy might be
beaten up from the water side: which stood the Romans in good stead. For the
Britains being troubled with the strangeness of the Galleys, the motion of
their Oars, and the unusual kind of engines, were somewhat dismayed, and
began to retire back, and give way to the Romans. But the soldiers still
lingering, and especially for fear of the depth of the sea, the Eagle-bearer of
the tenth legion desiring the Gods that it might fall out happily to the
legion, If you will, says he, forsake your Eagle, O ye soldiers, and betray
it to the enemy; for mine own part, I will do my duty both to the Commonweal
and to my Imperator. And hav^ng spoken this with a loud voice, he cast himself
into the Sea, and carried the Eagle toward the Enemy. The Romans exhorting one
another not to suffer such a dishonor to be committed, they all leaped out of
the ship: which when others that were near at hand perceived, they followed
them with as great alacrity, and pressed toward the enemy to encounter with
them.

The fight on both parts was very eager: the Romans (not being able to keep any
order of battle, nor to get any firm footing, nor to follow their Ensigns,
forasmuch as every man kept with those Ensigns which he first met withal)
were wonderfully troubled. But the Enemy acquainted with the flats and
shallows, as they beheld them from the shore to come single out of their ships,
putting spurs to their horse, would set upon them encumbered and unprepared, and
many of them would over-lay a few: others would get the advantage of the open
side, and cast their weapons amongst the thickest troops of them. Which when
Caesar perceived, he caused the shipboats and smaller vessels to be manned with
soldiers; and where he saw need of help, he sent them to rescue such as were
overcharged.

As Soon as the Romans got footing on the firm land, they made head together and
charged the enemy, and so put them to flight: but they were not able to follow
them, nor take the Island at that time, for want of horsemen, which thing was
only wanting to Caesar's wonted fortune.

THE FIFTH OBSERVATION.
UPon this circumstance of landing, I may justly take occasion to handle that
controversy which has been often debated by our English Captains; which is,
whether is be better in question of an invasion, and in the absence of our
shipping, to oppose an enemy at his landing upon our Coast, or quietly to
suffer him to set his men on shore, and retire our forces into some inland
place, and there attend to give him battle. It seems that such as first set
this question on foot, and were of an opinion that we ought not by any means
to encounter an enemy at his landing, for so we might much endanger our selves
and our Country, did ground themselves upon the authority of Monsieur de
Langey not observing the difference between an Island and a Continent. For
where he sets down that position, he plainly aims at such Princes as
border one upon another in the same Continent: but where their territories are
disjoined by so great a bar as the Ocean, and they have not such means to
surprise one another, it were mere folly to hold good that rule, as shall
better appear by the sequel of this discourse. Wherein I will first lay down
the reasons that may be urged to prove it unsafe to oppose an enemy at his
landing, not as being urged by that party (for I never heard any probable
motive from them which might induce any such opinion) but set down by such as
have looked into the controversies, both with experience and good judgment.

And first it may be objected, that it is a hard matter to resist an enemy at
his landing, as well in regard of the uncertainty of place, as of time: for
being ignorant in what place he will attempt a landing, we must either defend
all places of access, or our intentions will prove m^re frivolous; and to
perform that, it is requisite that our defensive forces be sufficient according
to the particular quality of every place subject to danger: which, considering
the large extension of our maritime parts, and the many landing-places on our
Coast, will require a greater number of men then this Island can afford. And
although it could furnish such a competent number as might seem in some sort
sufficient, yet the uncertainty of the time of the enemies arrival would
require that they should be lodged either upon, or near the places of danger
many days at least, if not many weeks, before the instant of their attempt;
which would exhaust a greater mass of Treasure, then could be well afforded by
the State.

Secondly, it may be objected that all our landing-places are of such
disadvantage for the defendants, that it were no safety at all to make head
against him at the landing: for inasmuch as such places are open and plain,
they yield no commodity to shelter the defendants from the fury of the
artillery, wherewith the Enemy will plentifully furnish their long boats and
landing vessels; which beating upon the beach (for most of our landing-places
are of that quality) will so scatter them, that no man shall be able to endure
the inconvenience thereof.

The third objection may arise from the disparity both of numbers, and
condition of the forces of either party. For the first, it must needs be
granted that the defendants, being to guard so many places at once, cannot
furnish such numbers to every particular place for defense, as the assailants
may for offense.

Concerning the quality of the forces, it is without question that a great and
potent Prince (for such a one it must be that undertaketh to invade the
territories of so absolute and well-obeyed a Princess as her Majesty is) would
draw out the (...) of his soldiery wheresoever; besides the ga^^ant troops of
voluntaries which do commonly attend such services. Now these being h^s
qualified and drawn into one head, and being to make as it were but one body,
how can it be reasonably imagined (the time and place of their attempt being
uncertain) that the defendants should equal them with forces of like virtue
and experience.

These are the reasons which may be drawn from the disadvantage which they have
that go about to oppose an enemy at his landing: the rest that have been urged
by such as maintain ^his opinion, are either (...) to the question, or taken
altogether from false grounds. But before I proceed to the answer of these
reasons, I will ^ay this down for a principle, That it is impossible for any
foreign Prince, how puissant soever, to make such a preparation as shall be
fitting to invade a State so populous, and respective of their Sovereign
(notwithstanding the pretenses devised to dissemble the same) but it must of
necessity be discovered before it can be made able to put any thing in
execution: which I might enlarge by particularizing the infinite equipage which
is required for so great a fleet. But I will rest my self in the example of the
year eighty eight, which proves the discovery of the pretended invasion before
it could come to execution.

Concerning therefore the first objection, Ans^er to the first objection.
it cannot indeed be denied but the place of the enemies landing will be
doubtful, and therefore our ^^re must generally extend it self to all places
of access: but that our defensive forces are not sufficient in a competent
manner to guard all such places, according as the necessity of them shall
require, that is the point in question.

To prove that our forces are sufficient, we must necessarily enter into
particularities, wherein I will take Kent for a president, as not altogether
unacquainted with the state thereof; which, if I deceive not my self, is a
shore of as large extension upon the maritime parts as any other within this
kingdom. For the breadth thereof enlarging it self from the point of N^sse by
Lyd, which is the uttermost skirt upon the coast of Sussex, unto Margate upon
the coast of Essex, is by computation about twenty four miles: but
notwithstanding this large circuit, who knows not that the sixth part thereof
is not subject to the landing of such an enemy as we speak of; partly in regard
of the hugeness of the cliffs, which do enclose a great part of that skirt,
and partly in regard that much of that quantity which may be landed upon has
such eminent and difficult places near adjoining, as an Army that should put it
self there on shore, should find it self, being opposed but by a small force,
so streightened, as they would not easily find a way out, without apparent
ruin of their whole forces.

Further, it cannot be denied but that generally along the coast of Kent there
are so many rocks, shelves, flats, and other impediments, that a Navy of great
ships can have no commodity to anchour near the shore; and for the most part
the coast lies so open to the weather that the least gale of wind will put
them from their Anchour: all which particularities duly considered, it will
appear that this large sk^^t of Kent will afford a far lesser part fit for the
landing of an Army, then was thought of at the first. And were it that so
public a treatise as this is would admit with good discretion such an exact
relation as falls within my knowledge concerning this point, I would
undertake to make it so evident, by the particular description both of the
number, quantity, and quality of the places themselves, as no man of an
indifferent judgment would imagine our forces to be insufficient to afford
every of them such a safe and sure guard, as shall ^e thought requisite for the
same. But forasmuch as it is unfitting to give such particular satisfaction in
this public discourse, give me leave, submitting my self always to better
judgments, to give a general taste of that means as would secure all places
with a competent number of men.

Having showed you before the circuit of the maritime parts of Ke^t, I would
observe this order: first, to make a triple division of all such forces as
shall be appointed for this service; as for example, I will suppose the number
to be twelve thousand, of which I would lodge three thousand about the point of
Nesse, and three thousand about Margate, and six thousand about F^ulks^on,
which I take to be as it were the center; for my greatest care should be so to
dispose of them, as they might not only succor one another in the same shire,
but as every shire Lordereth one upon another, so they should mutually give
help one unto another, as occasion should be ^ffered: as if the enemy should
attempt a landing about Nesse, not only the six thousand lodged as before
should march to their succors, but such also of the Sussex forces as were near
unto that part, and so likewise of the ^est. By which you may see, how great a
force would in few hours ^e assembled for the renforcing of any of these
out-skirts; and the rather, forasmuch as the one half of the whole forces are
thus lodged in the center of the Shire, which is nearer to all parts then any
other place whatsoever. There would also in the quartering of them an especial
care ^e had to the places of danger, as might be answerable to the importance
thereof: for my meaning is not to lodge them close together, but to stretch
them out along the coast by regiments and companies, as the Country might
afford best opportunity to entertain them.

Now concerning the later part of this objection, which urges the uncertainty
of time when the enemy shall make his approches, I hold it most requisite that
our defensive forces should be drawn into a head, before the enemy should be
discovered near our coast, ready to put himself on shore: for it were a gross
absurdity to imagine that companies could upon such a sudden be assembled,
without confusion; and make so long a ma^ch, with such expedition as the
necessity of the occasion would require. Now, for that husbanding respect of
her Majesty's (...), which ^s urged to such extremity, as it would be
unsupportable for this State to ^e^r, as I doubt not but good intelligence
would much qualify that supposed immoderate expense; so I assure my self, that
men of ^ound judgment will deem it much out of season to dispute about
unnecessary th^ift, when the whole kingdom is brought in question of being
made subject to a stranger.

Ut jugule^^ homines surgunt de nocte latrones:
Non experg^scer^s, ut te ^psum serves?
Thieves rise by night to cut the throats of men.
Wilt not thou then arise to save thy self?
The enemy (peradventure) has kept thirty thousand men in pay two months
before, to make havoc of our Country, and to ^ring us into perpetual
thraldom; shall we (...) it much to maintain sufficient forces upon (...)
Coast, to assure our selves that no such (...) shall enter into our Country?
The (...) of this charge would be qualified by our good (...), which would
proportion our attendance with the necessity which is imposed upon us to be
careful in businesses of this nature. Let this suffice therefore to prove that
our forces are sufficient to keep the Seacoast, and that the uncertainty of
time when the enemy will make his attempts, ought not to hinder us from
performing that duty which the care and respect of our Prince and Country
imposes upon every good subject; which is the substance of the first reason
which I set down in the beginning of this discourse.

Now concerning the second reason, The answer to the second reason.
which urges the disadvantage of the place in regard of the fury of the
Enemies artillery; true it is, that such places as yield the Enemy commodity of
landing are for the most part plain and open, and afford naturally no covert at
all. What then? shall a soldier take every place as he finds it, and use no
Art to qualify the disadvantages thereof? Or shall a man forgo the benefit of a
place of advantage, rather then he will relieve with industry the discommodity
of some particular circumstance? I make no question but an ingenious Commander,
being in seasonable time lodged with convenient forces upon any of those
places, yea upon the beach it self, which is as unapt to make defensible as any
place whatsoever, would use such industry as might give sufficient security to
his forces, and over-weigh the Enemy with advantage of place; especially
considering that this age has afforded such plentiful examples of admirable
inventions in that behalf. But this cannot be done, if our forces do not make
head before the instant of the Enemies attempt, that our Commanders may have
some time to make ready store of Gabio^s, and hand-baskets, with such moveable
matter as shall be thought fit for that service.

Neither let this trouble any man; for I dare avouch it, that if our forces are
not drawn into a head before the Enemy be discovered upon the Coast, although
we never mean to oppose their landing, but attend them in some inland place to
give them battle, our Commanders will be far to seek of many important
circumstances, which are requisite in a matter of that consequence. And
therefore let us have but a reasonable time to bethink our selves of these
necessaries, and we will easily overcome all these difficulties, and use the
benefit of the firm land to repel an Enemy, weakened with the Sea, tossed with
the billow, troubled with his weapons, with many other hindrances and
discouragements, which are presented unto him both from the Land and the Sea.
He that saw the landing of our forces in the Island of Fiall in the year ninety
seven, can somewhat judge of the difficulty of that matter: for what with the
working of the Sea, the steepness of the Cliffs, and the troublesomnesse of
their Arms, the soldiers were so encumbered, that had not the Enemy been more
then a coward, he might well with two hundred men have kept us from entering
any part of that Island.

Concerning the third Objection, The answer to the third reason.
this briefly shall be sufficient, that we are not so much to regard that our
forces do equal them in number, as to see that they be sufficient for the
nature of the place, to make it good against the Enemies landing: for we know
that in places of advantage and difficult access, a small number is able to
oppose a great; and we doubt not but, all circumstances duly considered, we
shall proportionably equal the Enemy both in number and quality of their
forces: always presupposed, that our State shall never be destitute of
sufficient forces trained and exercised in a competent manner, to defend their
Country from foreign Enemies. For the neglect thereof were to draw on such as
of themselves are but too forward to make a prey of us, and to make us unapt
not only to oppose an Enemies landing, but to defend our selves from being
overrun, as other Nations living in security without due regard thereof have
been.

And thus much concerning the answer to those three reasons, which seem to
prove that an Enemy is not to be resisted at his landing. Now if we do but look
a little into the discommodities which follow upon the landing of an Enemy, we
shall easily discover the dangerousnesse of this opinion: as first, we give him
leave to live upon the spoil of our Country; which cannot be prevented by any
wasting, spoiling, or retiring of our provisions, in so plentiful a Country as
this is, especially considering that we have no strong towns at all to repose
our selves upon. Whereof we need no further testimony then is delivered unto us
out of the seventh book of these Commentaries, in that war which Caesar had
with Vercingetor^x.

Secondly obedience, which at other time is willingly given to Princes, is
greatly weakened at such times; whereby all necessary means to maintain a war is
hardly drawn from the subject. Thirdly, opportunity is given to malcontents
and ill-disposed persons either to make head themselves, or to fly to the
Enemy. Fourthly, it is madness to adventure a kingdom upon one stroke, having
it in our disposition to do otherwise: with many other disadvantages which the
opportunity of any such occasion would discover.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe word Imperator, Of the name Imperator.
which the Eagle-bearer attributes to Caesar, was the greatest title that
could be given to a Roman Leader: and as Zo^aras in his second Tome says, was
never given but upon some great exploit, and after a just victory obtained* and
then in the place where the battle was fought, and the Enemy overthrown, the
General was saluted by the name of Imperator with the triumphant shout of the
whole Army; by which acclamation the soldiers gave testimony of his worth, and
made it equivalent with the most fortunate Commanders.

This Ceremony was of great antiquity in the Roman Empire, 3. Ann^l.
as appears by many Histories, and namely by Tacitus, where he says that
Tiberius gave that honor to Blesus, that he should be saluted Imperator by the
legions; which he shows to be an ancient dignity belonging to great Captains,
after they had foiled the Enemy with an eminent overthrow. For every victory
was not sufficient whereby they might challenge so great an honor, but there
was required (as it seems) a certain number of the Enemies to be slain.
Appian in his second book says, that in old time the name of Imperator was
never taken but upon great and admirable exploits: but in his time ten thousand
of the Enemy being slain in one battle was a sufficient ground of that honor.
Phil. 14.
Cicero says that two thousand slain in the place, especially of Thracians,
Spaniards or Galls, Lib. 2 epist. 9.
did worthily merit the name of Imperator. Howsoever, it seems by the same
Author that there was a certain number of the Enemy required to be slain,
where he says, Se just a victoria Imperatorem appellatum, that he was called
Imperator upon a due and full victory.

CHAP. XI.
The Britans make peace with Caesar, but break it again upon the loss of the
Roman shipping.
THe Britans being overthrown in this battle, Caesar.
as soon as they had recovered their safety by fligh^, they presently dispatched
messengers to Caesar to entreat for peace, promising hostages, and obedience in
whatsoever he commanded. And with these Ambassadors returned Comius of Arras,
whom Caesar had sent before into Britany, and whom the Britans at his first
landing with Caesar's mandates, had seized upon and thrown into prison; but
after the battle they released him, and becoming now suitours for peace, threw
all the blame thereof upon the multitude, excusing themselves as ignorant of
it, and so desiring to be pardoned. Caesar complained; that whereas they sent
unto him into Gallia to desire peace, notwithstanding at his coming they made
war against him without any cause or reason at all; but excusing it by their
ignorance, he commanded hostages to be delivered unto him: which they presently
performed in part, and the rest being to be set further off, they promised
should likewise be rendered within a short time. In the mean while they
commanded their people to return to their possessions, and their Rulers and
Princes came out of all quarters to commend themselves and their States to
Caesar. The peace being thus concluded, four days after that Caesar came into
Britany, the eighteen ships which were appointed for the horsemen, put out to
sea with a gentle wind: and approaching so near the coast of Britany, that they
were within view of the Roman Camp, there arose such a sudden tempest, that
none of them were able to hold their course; but some of them returned to the
port from whence they came, other some were cast upon the lower part of the
Island, which lies to the Westward, and there casting anchour took in so much
water, that they were forced to commit themselves again to the sea, and direct
their course to the coast of Gallia. The same night it happened that the moon
being in the full, the tides were very high in those seas; whereof the Romans
being altogether ignorant, both the Galleys that transported the army which
were drawn up upon the shore were filled with the tide, and the ships of
burden that lay at anchour were shaken with the tempest. Neither was there any
help to be given unto them; so that many of them were rent and split in pieces,
and the rest lost both their anchours, cables and other tackling, and by that
means became altogether unserviceable. Where at the whole Army was exceedingly
troubled; for there was no other shipping to recarry them back again, neither
had they any necessaries to new furnish the old; and every man knew that they
must needs winter in Gallia, forasmuch as there was no provision of corning
those places where they were. Which thing being known to the Princes of
Britany, that were assembled to confer of such things as Caesar had commanded
them to perform, when they understood that the Romans wanted both their
horsemen, shipping and provision of corn, and conjecturing of the paucity of
their forces by the small circuit of their Camp, (that which made it of less
compass then usual being, that Ca^sar had transported his soldiers without
such necessary carriages as they used to take with them;) they thought it their
best course to rebel, and to keep the Romans from corn and convoyes of
provision, and so prolong the matter until winter came on. For they thought
that if these were once overthrown and cut off from returning into Gallia,
never any man would afterward adventure to bring an Army into Britany.
Therefore they conspired again the second time, and conveyed themselves by
stealth out of the Camp, and got their men privily out of the fields, to make
head in some convenient place against the Romans.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
COncerning the ebbing and flowing of the sea, and the causes thereof, it has
already been handled in the second book: to which I will add thus much, as may
serve to show how the Romans became so ignorant of the spring-tides, which
happen in the full and new of the Moon. It is observed by experience, that the
motion of this watery element is altogether directed by the course of the moon;
wherein she exercises her regency according as she finds the matter
qualified for her influence. And forasmuch as all mediterranean seas, and such
gulfs as are enclosed in sin^es and bosoms of the earth, are both abridged of
the liberty of their course, and through the smallness of their quantity, are
not so capable of celestial power as the Ocean it self; it consequently
follows that the Tuscan seas, wherewith the Romans were chiefly acquainted,
were not so answerable in effect to the operation of the moon as the main sea,
whose bounds are ranged in a more spacious circuit, and through the plentious
abundance of his parts, better answers the virtue of the Moon. The Ocean
therefore being thus obedient to the course of the celestial bodies, taking
her course of slowing from the North, falls with such a current between the
Orcades and the main of Norvegia, that she fills our channel between England
and France with great swelling tides, and makes her motion more eminent in
these quarters then in any other parts of the world. And hence it happens
that our river of Thames, lying with her mouth so ready to receive the tide as
it comes, and having withal a plain levelled belly, and a very small fresh
current, takes the tide as far into the land as any other known river of
Europe. And for this cause the Romans were ignorant of the spring-tides in the
full of the moon.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SUch as either by their own experience, or otherwise by observation of that
which history records, are acquainted with the government of Commonweals, are
not ignorant with what difficulty a nation that either has long lived in
liberty, or been governed by Commanders of their own choosing, is made subject
to the yoke of bondage, or reduced under the obedience of a stranger. For as we
are apt by a natural inclination to civil society; so by the same nature we
desire a free disposition of our selves and possessions, as the chiefest end of
the said society: and therefore in the government of a subdued State, what
loss or disadvantage happens to the Victour, or how indirectly soever it
concerns the bond of their thraldom, the captive people behold it as a part
of their adversaries overthrow; and conceive thereupon such spirits as answer
the greatness of their hope, and sort with the strength of their will, which
always makes that seem easy to be effected which it desires. And this was
the reason that the Britans altered their resolution of peace, upon the loss
which the Romans had received in their shipping.

CHAP. XII.
Caesar new tri^ameth his late shaken navy: the Britans set upon the Romans as
they harvested; but were put off by Caesar.
CAesar, Caesar.
although he had not discovered their determination, yet conjecturing of the
event by the loss of his shipping, and by their delay of giving up hostages,
provided against all chances: for he brought corn daily out of the fields into
his Camp; and took the hulls of such Ships as were most dismembered, and with
the timber and brass thereof he mended the rest that were beaten with the
tempest, causing other necessaries to be brought out of Gallia. Which being
handled with the great industry and travel of the Soldiers, he lost only
twelve ships, and made the other able to abide the Sea.

While these things were in action, the seventh legion being sent out by course
to fetch in corn, and little suspecting any motion of war, as part of the
soldiers continued in the field, and the rest went and came between them and
the Camp, the station that watched before the gate of the Camp gave
advertisement to Caesar, that the same way which the legion went there appeared
a greater dust then was usually seen. Caesar suspecting that which indeed was
true, that the Britans were entered into some new resolution, he took those two
cohorts which were in station before the port, commanding other two to take
their place, and the rest to arm themselves, and presently to follow him; and
went that way where the dust was descried. And when he had marched some
distance from the Camp, he saw his men overcharged with the Enemy, and scarce
able to sustain the assault, the legion thronged together on a heap, and
weapons cast from all parts amongst them. For when they had harvested all other
quarters, there remained one piece of corn, whither the Enemy suspected the
Romans would at last come, and in the night time conveyed themselves secretly
into the woods, where they continued until the Romans were come into the
field: and as they saw them disarmed, dispersed, and occupied in reaping, they
suddenly set upon them, and slaying some few of them, routed the rest, and
encompassed them about with their horsemen and Chariots. Their manner of fight
with Chariots was, first to ride up and down, and cast their weapons as they
saw advantage; and with the terror of their horses and rattling of their wheels
to disorder the companies; and when they had wound themselves between any
troops of horse, they forsook their Chariots, and fought on foot: in the mean
time the guiders of their chariots would drive a little aside, and so place
themselves, that if their masters needed any help, they might have an easy
passage unto them. And thus they performed in all their fights both the nimble
motion of horsemen, and the firm stability of footmen; and were so ready with
daily practice, that they could stay in the declivity of a steep hill, and turn
short or moderate their going as it seemed best unto them, and run along the
beam of the coach and rest upon the yoke, or harness of their horses, and
return as speedily again at their pleasure. The Romans being thus troubled,
Caesar came to rescue them in very good time: for at his coming the Enemy stood
still, and the soldiers gathered their spirits unto them, and began to renew
their courage that was almost spent. Caesar taking it an unfit time either to
provoke the Enemy or to give him battle, continued a while in the same place,
and then returned with the legions into the Camp. While these things were a
doing, and the Romans thus busied, the Britans that were in the field
conveyed themselves all away.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
BY this we plainly find that there were usually two cohorts (which according
to the rate of one hundred and twenty in a maniple amounted to the number of
720. men) which kept the day-watch before the gate of the Camp, and were
always in readiness upon any service. The commodity whereof appears by this
accident: for considering that the advertisement required haste and speedy
recourse, it greatly furthered their rescue, to have so many men ready to march
forward at the first motion, that they might give what help they could until
the rest of their fellows came in.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THeir manner of fight with Chariots is very particularly described by Caesar,
and needs not to be stood upon any longer: only I observe that neither in
Gallia, nor any other country of Europe, the use of Chariots is ever mentioned;
but they have ever been attributed as a peculiar fight unto the Eastern
Countries, as suitable to the plain and level situation of the place, whereof
we find often mention in the Scripture. Which may serve for an argument of
Geoffrey of Monmouth, to prove the Britans descent from Troy in Asia, where we
likewise find mention of such Chariots.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THirdly, we may observe the discreet and moderate temper of his valor, and
the means he used to make his soldiers confident in his directions: for
notwithstanding the Britans had exceedingly urged him to make hazard of a
present revenge; yet finding it an unfit time, (inasmuch as his men had been
somewhat troubled with the fury of the Britans) he thought it best to expect
some other opportunity. And again, to avoid the inconveniences of a fearful
retreat, he continued a while in the same place, to imbolden his men with the
sight of the Enemy. And this manner of proceeding wrought a full persuasion in
his soldiers that his actions were directed with knowledge, and with a
careful respect of their safety: which gave his men resolution when they were
carried upon service, being assured that what service soever they were employed
upon was most diligently to be performed, as a matter much importing the
fortunate issue of that war: whereas if they had perceived that headstrong fury
(which carries men on with a desire of victory, and never looks into the
means whereby it may be obtained) had directed the course of their proceedings,
they might with reason have drawn back from such employments, and valued their
safety above the issue of such an enterprise. And hence arises that confident
opinion which the soldiers have of a good General; which is a matter of great
importance in the course of war.

CHAP. XIII.
The Britans make head with their forces; and are beaten by Caesar: his return
into Gallia.
AFter this for many days together there followed such tempests and foul
weather, Caesar.
that both the Romans were constrained to keep their Camp, and the Britans were
kept from attempting any thing against them. But in the mean time they sent
messengers into all quarters, publishing the small number of the Roman forces,
and amplifying the greatness of the booty, and the easy means offered unto
them of perpetual liberty, if they could take the Roman Camp. Shortly upon
this, having gathered a great company both of horse and foot, they came to the
place where the Romans were encamped. Caesar (although he foresaw the event by
that which before had happened, that if the Enemy were beaten back, he would
avoid the danger by flight) yet having some thirty horse, which Comius of Arras
had carried with him at his coming into Britany, he imbattelled his legions
before his Camp, and so gave them battle. The Enemy not being able to bear the
assault of the Roman soldiers, turned their backs and fled: the Romans
followed them as far as they could by running on foot, and after a great
slaughter, with the burning of their towns far and near, they returned to their
Camp. The same day the Britans sent messengers to Caesar to entreat for peace;
whom he commanded to double their number of hostages, which he commanded to be
carried into Gallia. And forasmuch as the Aequinoctium was at hand, he thought
it not safe to put himself to the sea in winter with such weak shipping: and
therefore having got a convenient time he hoised sail a little after midnight,
and brought all his ships safe unto the Continent. Two of these ships of
burden, not being able to reach the same haven, put in somewhat lower into the
land: the soldiers that were in them which were about three hundred being set
on shore, and marching toward their Camp, the Morini, with whom Caesar at his
going into Britany had made peace, in hope of a booty, first with a few of
their men stood about them, commanding them upon pain of death to lay down
their weapons: and as the Romans by casting themselves into an Orb began to
make defense, at the noise and clamor amongst them there were suddenly
gathered together about six thousand of the Enemy. Which thing being known,
Caesar sent out all the horsemen to relieve them. In the meantime the Romans
sustained the force of the Enemy, and fought valiantly about the space of four
hours; and receiving themselves only some few wounds, they slew many of the
Enemy. As soon as the Roman horsemen came in sight, the Enemy cast away their
weapons and fled, and a great number of them fell by the horsemen.

OBSERVATION.
OF all the figures which the Tactici have chosen to make use of in military
affairs, the circle has ever been taken for the fittest to be applied in the
defensive part, as enclosing with an equal circuit on all parts whatsoever is
contained within the circumference of that Area: and therefore Geometry terms
a circumference a simple line, forasmuch as if you alter the site of the parts,
and transport one arch into the place of another, the figure notwithstanding
will remain the same, because of the equal bending of the line throughout the
whole circumference. Which property as it proves an uniformity of strength in
the whole circuit, so that it cannot be said that this is the beginning or this
is the end, this is front or this is flank: so does that which Euclide does
demonstrate in the third of his Elements, concerning the small affinity between
a right line and a circle (which being drawn to touch the circumference, does
touch it but in a point only) show the greatness of this strength in regard of
any other line, by which it may be broken. Which howsoever they seem as
speculative qualities, conceived rather by intellectual discourse then
manifested to sensible apprehension; yet forasmuch as experience has proved
the strength of this figure in a defensive part, above any other manner of
imbattelling, let us not neglect the knowledge of these natural properties,
which discover the causes of this effect: neither let us neglect this part of
military knowledge, being so strong a means to maintain valor, and the sinew
of all our ability: for order correspondent to circumstances is the whole
strength and power of an Army. Neither ought there any action in a wel-ordered
discipline to be irregular, or void of order. And therefore the Romans did
neither eat nor sleep without the direction of the Consul, or chief Commander;
otherwise their valor might rather have been termed fury then virtue: but when
their courage was ranged with order, and disposed according to the occurrences
of the time, it never failed as long as the said order continued perfect.

It appears therefore how important it is for a Commander to look into the
diversity of orders for imbattelling, and to weigh the nature thereof, that he
may with knowledge apply them to the quality of any occasion. The Romans termed
this figure Orbis, which signifies a round body both with a concave and a
unequal surface: in resemblance whereof I understand this Orb of men
imbattelled to be so named; which might peradventure consist of five, or more,
or fewer ranks, enclosing one another after the nature of so many circles
described about one Center; so that either the midst thereof remained void, or
otherwise contained such carriages and impediments, as they had with them in
their march. This form of imbattelling was never used but in great extremity:
for as it was the safest of all other, so it gave suspicion to the soldiers of
exceeding danger, which abated much of their heat in battle; as will hereafter
appear by the testimony of Caesar himself in the fifth Commentary, upon the
occasion which happened unto Sabinus and Cotta.

CHAP. XIIII.
THe next day Caesar sent Titus Labienus a Legate, Caesar.
with those legions which he had brought out of Britany, against the revolted
Morini; who having no place of refuge because their bogs and fens were dried
up, where they had sheltred themselves the year before, they all fell under the
power of his mercy. Q. Titurius and A. Cotta the Legates, who had led the
legions against the Menapii, after they had wasted their fields, cut up their
corn, burned their houses (for the Menapii were all hid in thick woods)
returned to Caesar. These things being thus ended, Caesar placed the wintering
Camps of all his legions amongst the Belgae; to which place two only of all the
Cities in Britany sent hostages unto him, the rest neglecting it. These wars
being thus ended, upon the relation of Caesar's letters, the Senate decreed a
supplication for the space of twenty days.

OBSERVATION.
IN the end of the second Commentary we read of a supplication granted by the
Senate for fifteen days; which was never granted to any man before that time
since the first building of the City: but forasmuch as in this fourth year of
the wars in Gallia it was augmented from fifteen unto twenty days, I thought
it fit to refer the handling thereof unto this place. We are therefore to
understand, that whenever a Roman General had carried himself well in the
wars, by gaining a victory, or enlarging the bounds of their Empire, that then
the Senate did decree a supplication to the gods in the name of that Captain.
And this dignity was much sought after: not only because it was a matter of
great honor, that in their names the Temples of their gods should be opened,
and their victories acknowledged with the concourse and gratulation of the
Roman people; but also because a supplication was commonly the forerunner of a
triumph, which was the greatest honor in the Roman government: Lib. 15. ^a^
Cicero.
And therefore Cato names it the prerogative of a triumph. And Livie in his 26
book says that it was long disputed on in the Senate, how they could deny one
that was there present to triumph, whose absence they had honored with
supplication and thanksgiving to the gods for things happily effected. The
manner of the Ceremony was, that after the Magistrate had publicly proclaimed
it with this form or style, quod been and feliciter rempublicam administrasset,
that he had happily and succesfully administered the affairs of the commonweal,
the Roman people clothed in white garments and crowned with garlands, went to
all the Temples of the gods, and there offered sacrifices, to gratulate the
victory in the name of the General. In which time they were forbidden all
other businesses but that which pertained to this solemnity. It seems that
this time of supplication was at first included within one or two days at the
most, as appears by Livie in his third book, where he says that the victory
gained by two several battles was spitefully shut up by the Senate in one
days supplication; the people of their own accord keeping the next day holy,
and celebrating it with greater devotion then the former.

Upon the victory which Camillus had against the Veii there were granted four
days of supplication; to which there was afterward a day added, which was the
usual time of supplication unto the time that Pompey ended the war which they
called Mithridaticum, when the usual time of five days was doubled and made
ten, and in the second of these Commentaries made fifteen, and now brought to
twenty days. Which sets forth the incitements and rewards of well doing,
which the Romans propounded both at home and abroad to such as endeavored to
enlarge their Empire, or manage a charge to the benefit of their Commonwealths.
And thus ends the fourth Commentary.

The fifth Commentary of the wars in GALLIA.
The Argument.
CAesar causes a great navy to be built in Gallia: he carries five legions
into Britany, where he makes war with the Britans on both sides the river
Thames. At his return into Gallia most of the Galls revolt; and first the
Eburones, under the conduction of Ambiorix, set upon the Camp of Q. Titurius
the Legate, whom they circumvent by subtilty, and then besiege the Camp of
Cicero: but are put by, and their Army overthrown by Caesar.

CHAP. I.
Caesar returns into Gallia: finds there great store of shipping made by
the soldiers, and commands it to be brought to the haven Itius.
Lucius Domitius and Appius Claudius being Consuls, Caesar at his going into
Italy from his winter quarters (which he yearly did) gave order to the Legates
to build as many ships that winter as possibly they could, and to repair the
old; commanding them to be built of a lower pitch then those which are used in
the mediterranean sea, for the speedier lading and unlading of them, and
because the tides in these seas were very great: and forasmuch as he was to
transport great store of horse, he commanded them to be made flatter in the
bottom then such as were usual in other places, and all of them to be made
for the use of Oars, to which purpose their low building served very
conveniently. Other necessaries and furniture for rigging he gave order to have
brought out of Spain. Caesar, after an assembly of the States in Lombardy, went
presently into Illyricum, where he heard that the Pirustae infested the
province by their incursions. As Soon as he came thither he levied soldiers,
and appointed them a rendezvous. Which the Pirustae hearing of, they sent
ambassadors presently to him, excusing the business as not done by public
consent, and expressing a readiness to make any satisfaction that should be
demanded. Caesar having heard their message, appointed them to give hostages,
and to bring them by such a day, or else they must expect notbing but war and
ruin to their city. Hostages were brought by the appointed time; whereupon
Caesar deputed certain to arbitrate differences between the cities, and to
punish as they saw cause for it. These things being over, he returned forthwith
into Lombardy, and thence to his army in Gallia.

THE OBSERVATION.
THis Itius Portus Floide thinks to be Callis; others take it to be Saint
Omer: partly in regard of the situation of the place, which being in it self
very low, has notwithstanding very high banks, which incompasse the town
about, and in times past was a very large haven. To this may be added the
distance from this town to the next Continent of the Island of Britany, which
Strabo makes to contain 320. stadia; which agrees to the French computation
of 13. leagues: Caesar makes it thirty miles. This is the haven which Pliny
calls Britannicum portum Morinorum.

CHAP. II.
Caesar preventeth new motions amongst the Treviri, and goes to his navy.
Dumnorix refuses to accompany him into Britain: his flight and death.
CAesar leaving soldiers enough to do that business, himself marched with
four legions and eight hundred horse into the country of the Treviri, in regard
they neither came to the assembly of States, nor were obedient to his commands,
and were farther reported to solicit the Germans beyond the Rhene to new
commotions. This city was the most powerful of all Gallia for matter of horse,
having likewise a great force of foot, and lying so conveniently upon the Rhene
for assistance: wherein there was at th^s time a contention betwixt
Induciomarus and Cingetorix who should be chief ruler. Cingetorix, as soon as
he heard of the coming of Caesar with his army, came in to him, assuring him of
the fidelity of his party, and their constancy to the friendship of the people
of Rome; discovering withal unto him the present proceedings amongst the
Treviri. On the contrary Induciomarus gathered together what horse and foot he
could, resolving upon nothing else then war: securing all the old and young
folk not fit to bear arms in the wood Arduenna, which is a very large wood,
beginning at the Rhene, and running through the middle of the Treviri, to the
borders of the people of Rheims. While things were thus preparing, diverse of
the chief of the city, some through the favor they bare to Cingetorix, others
affrighted at the coming of our army, came forth to Caesar; and since they
could not do it for the whole city, they endeavored to make every man his own
peace. Induciomarus seeing this, and fearing to be left at last alone, sent
Ambassadors to Caesar, excusing what he had done in not coming to him, which
he sa^d was done only to keep the city the better in obedience; for if all the
nobility should have left it, the common people would have been apt to have
made new troubles: that the city was now at his command, and if Caesar would
give leave, he was ready to wait upon him in his camp, and to lay the lives and
fortunes of himself and the whole city at his feet. Caesar, albeit he well knew
why all this was spoken, as also what had put him besides his former
resolution, yet rather then spend the summer in those parts, having all things
in readiness for his British war, he commanded Induciomarus to come to him,
and bring two hundred hostages with him. Induciomarus did as Caesar commanded,
and withal brought along with him his son and all that had any near relation
unto him: whom Caesar bade be of good cheer, and exhorted to continue firm in
his duty and fidelity. After this calling to him the chief of the Treviri man
by man, he reconciled them to Cingetorix, as well looking at the desert of the
man himself, as at his own interest and advantage, to have such a man bear the
chief sway in his city, who had expressed so notable affection and goodwill
toward him in this business. It troubled Induciomarus not a little to find
his respect and authority thus impaired; insomuch that he who before was no
friend to us, being vexed at this became a bitter enemy.

Things thus settled here, Caesar came with his legions back to the port called
Itius: where he understood that forty ships which were built amongst the Meldae
were hindered by tempests that they could not keep their course, but were forced
back from whence they came; the rest were well provided and ready to set sail.
Hither also were gathered all the cavalry in France, to the number of four
thousand, and the chief men of every city: some few of which, whose fidelity
Caesar had had experience of, he intended to leave at home; and to take the
rest along with him for hostages, lest in his absense they should begin any new
stirs in Gallia.

Amongst the rest was Dumnorix the Heduan formerly mentioned. Him of all the
rest Caesar intended to take with him, knowing him to be a man desirous of
change, greedy of rule, a man of courage and resolution, and one of greatest
authority amongst the Galls. Besides this, Dumnorix had given out at a meeting
of the Hedui, that Caesar had conferred upon him the government of the city:
which much troubled the Hedui, yet they durst not send any man to Caesar to
hinder or revoke it. This Caesar came to hear of. When he saw he must go with
the rest, first he besought with all the intreatyes he could that he might stay
in Gallia; alleging one while that he was afraid of the sea, having as yet
never been used to sailing, another while that he had some religious accounts
that kept him here. When he perceived this would not serve his turn, but go he
must, he began to deal with the rest of the chief men of the Galls, taking
them man by man, and persuading them to continue in their own country; telling
them that it was not without ground Caesar went about to despoile Gallia thus
of its nobility, his drift being to carry them over into Britain and there
murder them, whom he was afraid to put to death amongst their friends at
home. He went farther, to engage them to fidelity, and to tie them by oath to
proceed upon joint consultation to the acting of what should be thought of most
concernment and behoof for the good of Gallia. These things were by diverse
persons related to Caesar: who as soon as he knew thereof, in regard of the
great respect he bare to the Heduan State, he resolved by all means possible
to curb and deter Dumnorix from those courses: and in regard that he saw him
thus to increase in his madness, he thought it seasonable to prevent his
endamaging either the Commonwealth or himself. So staying in the place where he
was about twenty five days, the North-west wind (a wind that usually blows in
those parts) all that while hindering his putting to sea; he made it much of
his business to keep Dumnorix quiet, and yet at the same time to spy out the
whole drift of his designs. At last the wind and weather serving, he commanded
his soldiers and horsemen on shipboard. And whilst every man's mind was taken
up about this, Dumnorix with the rest of the Heduan horsemen, unknown to
Caesar, had left the camp, and were marching homewards. Which when Caesar
heard, he stopped his voyage, and letting every thing else alone, sent a great
part of his cavalry to attach him, and bring him back, with command that if he
stood upon his defense and did not readily obey, they should dispatch him. For
he could not believe that this man could mean any good to him if he once got
home, since he made so light of his commands when present with him. The horse
having overtaken him, he stood upon his guard and made resistance, imploring
also the aid of those that were with him; still crying out, that he was a
Freeborn man and of a Free city. Whereupon they, as they were commanded,
hemmed him in, and so killed him: the Heduan horsemen returning every man to
Caesar.

CHAP. III.
Caesar saileth into Britain: landeth his forces, and seeks the enemy.
CAesar having prepared all things in readiness, Caesar.
he left Labienus in the Continent with three legions, and two thousand horse,
both to keep the haven and make provision of corn, and also to observe the
motion of the Galls, and to do according as he saw time and occasion, and
with five legions, and the like number of horse as he left in the continent,
about sunsetting he put out to sea with a soft southwind, which continued
until midnight; and then ceasing he was carried with the tide until the
morning; when he perceived that the Island lay on his left hand: and again as
the tide changed, he labored by rowing to reach that part of the Island where
he had found good landing the year before. Wherein the soldiers deserved great
commendation; for by strength and force of Oars, they made their great ships
of burden to keep way with the Galleys. About high noon they arrived in
Britany with all their ships: neither was there any Enemy seen in that place:
but as afterward Caesar understood by the Captives, the Britans had been there
with a great power, but being terrified with the infinite number of shipping
which they discovered from the shore (for with the ships of provision, and
private vessels which several persons had for their own convenience, there
were in all above either hundred) they forsook the shore, and hid themselves in
the upland country. Caesar having landed his men, and chosen a convenient place
to incamp, as soon as he understood by the captives where the enemy lay, in the
third watch of the night he marched toward them; leaving ten cohorts and three
hundred horse under Quintus Atrius for a garrison to his shipping: which he the
less feared, because it lay at anchour in a soft and open shore. He marched
that night about twelve mile before he found the Enemy. The Britans sending out
their horse and chariots to a river that ran between them and the Romans, and
having the advantage of the upper ground, began to hinder the Romans and to
give them battle: but being beaten back with our horsemen, they conveyed
themselves into a wood. The place was strongly fortified both by Art and
Nature, and made for a defense (as it seems) in their civil wars: for all
the entrances were shut up with great trees laid overthwart the passages. And
the Britans showed themselves out of the wood but here and there, not suffering
the Romans to enter the fortification. But the soldiers of the seventh legion,
with a Testudo which they made, and a mount which they raised, took the place,
and drove them all out of the woods, without any loss at all, saving some few
wounds which they received. But Caesar forbade his men to follow after them
with any long pursuit, because he was both ignorant of the place, and a great
part of that day being spent, he would employ the rest thereof in the
fortification of his Camp.

OBSERVATION.
CAesar having taken what assurace of peace he could with the Galls, both by
carrying the chiefest of their Princes with him, and by leaving three legions
in the Continent to keep the vulgar people in obedience; he embarked all his
men at one place, that they might be all partakers of the same casualties, and
take the benefit of the same adventures: which being neglected the year before,
drew him into many inconveniences for want of horse, which being embarked at
another Haven, met with other chances, and saw other fortunes, and never came
to him into Britany. The place of landing in this second voyage was the same
where he landed the year before; and by the circumstances of this history, may
agree with that which tradition has delivered of Deal in Kent, where it is
said that Caesar landed. In the first year we find that he never removed his
Camp from the sea shore, where he first seated himself; although his men went
out to bring in corn, as far as they might well return again at night: but now
he entered further into the Island, and within twelve miles march came unto a
river, which must needs be that of Canterbury, which falls into the Sea at
Sandwich.

In that he says that the garrison of his shipping consisted of ten Cohorts,
which I have said to be a legion: we must understand that Caesar left not an
entire legion in that garrison; but he took ten cohorts out of his whole
forces, peradventure two out of every legion, and appointed them to take the
charge of his shipping.

CHAP. IV.
Caesar returns to his Navies, to take order for such losses as had happened
by tempest the night before.
THe next day early in the morning he divided his forces into three companies,
Caesar.
and sent them out to pursue the enemy: but before they had marched any far
distance, and came to have the rereward of the Enemy in view, there came news
from Q. Atrius, with whom he left the ten cohorts, and the charge of the
shipping, that the night before there was such a tempest at sea, that the whole
Navy was either fore beaten, or cast on shore; and that neither anchour nor
cable could hold them, nor yet the Sailers endure the force of the weather: and
that there was great loss in the shipping, by running against one another in
the violence of the tempest.

Upon these news Caesar caused the legions to be called back again, and to
cease for that time from following the enemy any further. He himself returned
to the navy; where he found that to be true which he had heard, and that about
forty ships were lost, and the rest not to be repaired but with great industry
and pains. First therefore he chose ship-wrights and carpenters out of the
legions, and caused others to be sent for out of Gallia, and wrote to Labienus
to make ready what shipping he could. And although it seemed a matter of great
difficulty and much labor, yet he thought it best to hale up all the ships on
shore, and to enclose them within the fortification of his camp. In this
business he spent ten days, without intermission either of night or day, until
he had drawn up the ships, and strongly fortified the camp; leaving the same
garrison which was there before, to defend it.

THE OBSERVATION.
WHerein we may behold the true image of undaunted valor, and the horrible
industry (as Tully terms it) which he used to prevent Fortune of her stroke
in his business, and comprehend casualties and future contingents within the
compass of order, and the bounds of his own power; being able in ten days
space to set almost eight hundred ships from the hazard of wind and weather,
and to make his Camp the Road for his Navy, that so he might rest secure of a
means to return at his pleasure.

CHAP. V.
The Britans make Cassivellaunus General in this war. The Island, and the
manners of the people described.
CAesar returning to the place from whence he came, Caesar.
found far greater forces of the Britans there assembled then he left when he
went to the Navy: and that by public consent of the Britans the whole
government of that war was given to Cassivellaunus, whose kingdom lay divided
from the maritime States with the river Thames, beginning at the sea, and
extending it self four score miles into the Island. This Cassivellaunus made
continual war with his neighbor States: but upon the coming of the Romans they
all forgot there homebred quarrels, and cast the whole government upon his
shoulders, as the fittest to direct in that war.

The inner part of Britany is inhabited by such as memory records to be born
in the Island; and the maritime coast by such as came out of Belgia, either to
make incursions or invasions; and after the war was ended they continued in the
possessions they had gained, and were called by the name of the cities from
whence they came. The country is very populous, and well inhabited with houses,
much like unto them in Gallia. They have great store of cattle; and use brass
for money, or iron rings weighed at a certain rate. In the mediterranean parts
there is found great quantity of Tyn, and in the maritime parts, iron; but they
have but little of that: their brass is brought in by other Nations. They have
all sorts of trees that they have in Gallia, excepting the Fig and the Beech.
Their religion will not suffer them to eat either Hare, Hen, or Goose;
notwithstanding they have of all sorts, as well for novelty as variety. The
Country is more temperate, and not so cold as Gallia. The Island lies
triangle-wise; whereof one side confronteth Gallia, of which side that angle
wherein Kent is, the usual place of landing from Gallia, points to the East,
and the other angle to the South. This side contains about 500 mile. Another
side lies toward Spain and the West, that way where Ireland lies, being an
Island half as big as England, and as far distant from it as Gallia. In the
midway between England and Ireland lies an Island called Mona, besides many
other smaller Islands; of which some write, that in Wintertime for thirty days
together they have continual night: whereof we learned nothing by inquiry;
only we found by certain measures of water, that the nights in England were
shorter then in the Continent. The length of this side, according to the
opinion of the inhabitants, contains seven hundred miles. The third side
lies to the North and the open sea, saving that this angle does somewhat point
toward Germany. This side is thought to contain eight hundred miles. And so
the whole Island contains in circuit 2000 miles. Of all the inhabitants they
of Kent are most courteous and civil; all their Country bordering upon the
sea, and little differing from the fashion of Gallia. Most of the inland
people sow no Corn, but live with milk and flesh, clothed with skins, and
having their faces painted with a blew color, to the end they may seem more
terrible in sight: they have the hair of their head long, having all other
parts of their body shaven saving their upper lip. Their wives are common to
ten or twelve, especially brethren with brethren, and parents with children;
but the children that are born, are put unto them unto whom the mother was
first given in marriage.

OBSERVATION.
IN the descriptions of the ancient Britans we may first observe their
pedigree, according to the Heraldry of that time: wherein we must understand,
that in those ages the Nations of the world thought it no small honor to
derive their descent from a certain beginning, and to make either some of their
Gods, or some man of famous memory the Father of that progeny, and founder of
their State; that so they might promise a fortunate continuance to their
government, being first laid and established by so powerful a means. But if
this failed, they then bragged of antiquity, and cast all their glory upon the
fertility of their soil, being so strong and fruitful that it yielded of it
self such a people as they were. And so we read how the Athenians, forasmuch as
they were ignorant from whence they came, ware an Oaken leaf, in token that
they were bred of the earth where they dwelled. And hereupon also grew the
controversy between the Egyptians and the Scythians concerning antiquity:
wherein the Egyptians seemed to have great advantage, because of the fertility
and heat of of their country; whereas the Scythians inhabited a cold climate,
unfruitful, and an enemy to generation. Of this sort were the Britans that
inhabited the mediterranean part of the Island: who not knowing from whence
they came, nor who first brought them thither, satisfied themselves with that
common received opinion, that they were born and bred of the earth. The
seacoast was possessed by such as came out of the Continent, and retained the
names of the Cities from whence they came, as a memorial of their progenitors.

The form of the Island is very well described, and measured out according to
the scale of our modern Geographers. For concerning the difference of longitude
between the Eastern angle of Kent, and the furthest point of Cornwall, they
make it eight degrees; which in a manner jumpeth with Caesar's dimensuration.
The other sides are somewhat longer: and therefore Tacitus in the life of
Agricola, compares it to a Carpenters Axe, making that side which bordereth
upon France to resemble the edge, and the other two sides to incline by little
and little one toward another, and so make the Island narrower at the top,
according to the form of that instrument. He sets down the whole compass of
the Island, according to the manner of the ancient Geographers; who by the
quantity of the circuit did usually judge of the content: not considering that
the Area of every figure depends as well on the quantity of the angle, as the
length of the side.

Concerning the temperature of Britany in regard of the cold Winters in France,
we must understand that Britany has ever been found of a more temperate
constitution in regard of sharp and cold winters, then any other country lying
under the same parallel: Whether the cause thereof may be imputed to the
continual motion of the sea about the Island, which begets heat, as some
have imagined; or to the site thereof in regard of other Continents from whence
the wind always rises, and carries with it the nature of the Country by
which it passes; (and so the Island having no other Continent lying North to
it, from whence the wind may rise, but all for the most part upon the South,
has no such cold winds to distemper it, as other parts of Germany, which are
under the same parallel: but the Southern wind, which is so frequent in
Britany, tempereth the air with a mild disposition, and so keeps it warm; or
whether it besome other unknown cause, our Philosophers rest unsatisfied. But
as touching Gallia it may be said, that forasmuch as it bears more to the
South then this Island does, the air thereof (by reason of the continual heat)
is of a far purer disposition; and so pierces more then this grosser air of
Britany, and carries the cold further into the pores; and so seems sharper,
and of a far colder disposition.

This Island which Caesar names Mona, is known at this time by the name of Man,
and lies between Cumberland and Ireland. Ptolemy calls it Monaeda. Tacitus
calls Anglesey by the name of Mona, peradventure from the nomination of the
Britans, who called it Tyrmon, the land of Mon.

Concerning those places where the night continues in the midst of winter for
thirty days together, they must be sited 6. degrees beyond the circle Artick,
and have a day in summer of like continuance, according to the rules of
Astronomy. In that he found the nights in Britany shorter then in the
Continent, we must understand it to be only in summer: for the more oblique
the horizon is, the more uneven are the portions of the diurnall circles which
it cutteth; and the nearer it comes to a right horizon, the nearer it comes
to an equality of day and night: and hence it happens, that in summer time,
the nights in France are longer then here in England; and in winter, shorter.
The like we must understand of all Southern and Northern Countries.

To conclude, I may not omit the civility of the Kentish men, and their
courteous disposition above the rest of the Britans, which must be imputed to
that ordinary course which brought civility unto all other Nations: of whom
such as were first seated in their possessions, and entertained society, were
the first that brought in civil conversation, and by little and little were
purified, and so attained to the perfection of civil government. So we find
that first the Assyrians and Babylonians (as nearest to the Mountains of
Armenia where the Ark rested, and people first inhabited) reduced their States
into Commonweales or Monarchies of exquisite government, flourishing with all
manner of learning and knowledge; when as yet other Countries lay either waste,
or overwhelmed with Barbarism. From thence it flowed into Egypt; out of Egypt
into Greece; out of Greece into Italy; out of Italy into Gallia; and from
thence into England: where our Kentish men first entertained it, as bordering
upon France, and frequented with Merchants of those Countries.

CHAP. VI.
Diverse skirmishes between the Romans and the Britans.
THe Cavalry of the enemy and their chariots gave a sharp conflict to the Roman
horsemen in their march: Caesar.
but so that the Romans got the better every way, driving them with great
slaughter to the woods and hills, and loosing also some of their own men, being
too venturous in the pursuit. The Britans after some intermission of time, when
the Romans little thought of them, and were busied in fortifying their Camp,
came suddenly out of the woods, and charged upon those that kept station
before the Camp. Caesar sent out two the chiefest cohorts of two legions, to
second their fellows. These two cohorts standing with a small alley between
them, the other that were first charged being terrified with that strange kind
of fight, boldly brake through the thickest of the enemy, and so retired in
safety to their fellows. That day Quintus Laberius Durus, a Tribune of the
soldiers, was slain. The Britans were repelled with more cohorts, which Caesar
sent to second the former. And forasmuch as the fight happened in the view of
all the Camp, it was plainly perceived that the legionary soldiers, being
neither able for the weight of their Armor to follow the enemy as he retired,
nor yet daring to go far from their several Ensigns, was not a fit adversary
to contest this kind of enemy: and that the horsemen likewise fought with no
less danger, inasmuch as the enemy would retire back of purpose, and when they
had drawn them a little from the legions, they would then light from their
chariots, and encounter them with that advantage which is between a footman and
a horseman. Furthermore, they never fought thick and close together, but thin,
and at great distances, having stations of men to succor one another, to
receive the weary, and to send out fresh supplies.

OBSERVATION.
UPon this occasion of their heavy Armor, I will describe a Legionary soldier
in his complete furniture, that we may better judge of their manner of warfare,
and understand wherein their greatest strength consisted. And first we are to
learn, that their legionary soldiers were called milites gravis armaturae,
soldiers wearing heavy Armor, to distinguish them from the Velites, the
Archers, Slingers, and other light-armed men. Their offensive Arms were a
couple of Piles, or as some will but one Pile, and a Spanish sword, short and
strong, to strike rather with the point then with the edge. Their defensive
Arms were a helmet, a corslet, and boots of brass, with a large Target; which
in some sort was offensive, in regard of that umbo which stuck out in the midst
thereof. The Pile is described at large in the first book, and the Target in
the second. The sword, as Polybius witnesses, was short, two-edged, very
sharp, and of a strong point. And therefore Livy in his 22. book says, that
the Galls used very long swords without points; but the Romans had short
swords, readier for use. These they called Spanish swords, because they
borrowed that fashion from the Spaniard. The old Romans were so girt with their
swords, as appears by Polybius, and their monuments in Marble, that from
their left shoulder it hung upon their right thigh, contrary to the use of
these times; which, as I have noted before, was in regard of their target,
which they carried on their left arm. This sword was hung with a belt of
leather, beset with studs, as Varro notes. Lib. ^.
And these were their offensive weapons.

Their Helmet was of brass, Plin. lib. 10
adorned with three Ostrich feathers of a cubit in length; by which the
soldier appeared of a larger stature, and more terrible to the Enemy, as
Polybius says in his sixth book. Their breast plate was either of Brass or
Iron, jointed together after the manner of scales, or platted with little rings
of Iron: their boots were made of bars of brass, from the foot up to the knee.
And thus were the legionary soldiers armed, to stand firm, rather then to use
any nimble motion, and to combine themselves into a body of that strength,
which might not easily recoile at the opposition of any confrontment: for
agility stands indifferent to help either a retreat or a pursuit; and
nimble-footed soldiers are as ready to fly back, as to march forward; but a
weighty body keeps a more regular motion, and is not hindered with a common
counterbuffe. So that whenever they came to firm buckling, and felt the
enemy stand stiff before them, such was their practice and exercise in
continual works, that they never fainted under any such task, but the victory
went always clear on their side. But if the enemy gave way to their violence,
and came not in but for advantage, and then as speedily retired before the
counterbuffe were well discharged, then did their nimbleness much help their
weakness, and frustrate the greatest part of the Roman discipline. This is also
proved in the overthrow of Sabinus and Cotta, where Ambiorix finding the
inconvenience of buckling at handy-blowes, commanded his men to fight a far
off; and if they were assaulted, to give back, and come on again as they saw
occasion: which so wearied out the Romans that they all fell under the execution
of the Galls. Let this suffice therefore to show how unapt the Romans were to
fly upon any occasion, when their Armor was such that it kept them from all
starting motions, and made them suitable to the stayed and well assured rules of
their discipline, which were as certain principles in the execution of a
standing battle; and therefore not so fit either for a pursuit, or a flight.

Concerning the unequal combat between a horseman and a footman, it may be
thought strange that a footman should have such an advantage against a
horseman, being overmatched at least with a Sextuple proportion both of
strength and agility: but we must understand that as the horse is much swifter
in a long cariere, so in speedy and nimble turning at hand, wherein the
substance of the combat consists, the footman far exceeds the horseman in
advantage, having a larger mark to hit by the Horse, then the other has.
Besides the horseman ingageth both his valor and his fortune in the good speed
of his horse, his wounds and his death do consequently pull the rider after,
his fear or fury makes his master either desperate or slow of performance, and
what defect soever arises from the horse, must be answered out of the honor
of the rider. And surely it seems reasonable, that what thing soever draws
us into the society of so great a hazard, should as much as is possible be
contained in the compass of our own power.

The sword which we manage with our own hand affords greater assurance then
the harquebuse, wherein there are many parts belonging to the action, as the
powder, the stone, the spring, and such like; whereof if the least fail of his
part, we likewise fail of our fortune. But how probable soever this seems,
this is certain, that in the course of the Roman wars the horse were ever
defeated by the foot, as is manifestly proved in the first of these books.

CHAP. VII.
Caesar gives the Britans two several overthrowes.
THe next day the Enemy made a stand upon the hills a far off from the camp,
Caesar.
and showed themselves not so often; neither were they so busy with our
horsemen as they were the day before. But about noon, when Caesar had sent out
three legions and all his cavalry to get forage, under the conduction of Caius
Trebonius a Legate, they made a sudden assault upon the forragers, and fell in
close with the Ensigns and the legions. The Romans charged very fiercely upon
them, and beat them back: neither did they make an end of following them,
until the horsemen trusting to them, put them all to flight, with the
slaughter of a great number of them; neither did they give them respite either
to make head, to make a stand, or to forsake their chariots.

After this overthrow all their Auxiliary forces departed from them; neither
did they afterward contend with the Romans with any great power. Caesar
understanding their determination, carried his Army to the river Thames, and so
to the confines of Cassivellaunus; which river was passable by foot but in one
place only, and that very hardly. At his coming he found a great power of the
Enemy to be imbattelled on the other side, and the bank fortified with many
sharp stakes, and many other also were planted covertly under the water. These
things being discovered to the Romans by the Captives and fugitives, Caesar
putting his horse before, caused the legions to follow suddenly after: who
notwithstanding they had but their heads clear above the water, went with that
violence, that the enemy was not able to endure the charge, but left the bank,
and betook themselves to flight.

OBSERVATION.
THis attempt of Caesar seems so strange to Brancatio, that he runs into
strange conclusions concerning this matter: as first, that he that imitateth
Caesar may doubt of his good fortunes; for his proceeding in this point was not
directed by any order of war: and that a great Commander has nothing common
with other Leaders: but especially he cries out at the baseness of the
Britans, that would suffer themselves so cowardly to be beaten. But if we look
into the circumstances of the action, we shall find both Art and good direction
therein: for being assured by the fugitives that the river was passable in that
place, and in that place only, he knew that he must either adventure over
there, or leave Cassivellaunus for another Summer, which was a very strong
inducement to urge him to that enterprise. The difficulty whereof was much
relieved by good direction, which consisted of two points; First, by sending
over the horsemen in the front of the legions, who might better endure the
charge of the enemy then the footmen could, that were up to the neck in water;
and withal to shelter the footmen from the fury of the Enemy.

Secondly, he sent them over with such speed, that they were on the other side
of the water before the enemy could tell what they attempted: for if he had
lingered in the service, and given the enemy leave to find the advantage which
he had by experience, his men had never been able to have endured the hazard of
so dangerous a service. It is hard to conjecture at the place where this
service was performed; for since the building of London bridge, many foords
have been scoured with the current and fall of the water, which before that
time carried not such a depth as now they do.

CHAP. VIII.
The conclusion of the British war. Caesar returns into Gallia.
CAssivellaunus having no courage to contend any longer, Caesar.
dismissed his greatest forces, and retaining only four thousand chariots,
observed our journeys, keeping the wood-Countries, and driving men and cattle
out of the fields into the woods, where he knew the Romans would come: and as
their horse strayed out either for forage or booty, he sent his chariots out
of the woods by unknown ways, and put their horsemen to great peril: in
regard whereof the horsemen durst never adventure further then the legions,
neither was there any more spoil done in the Country, then that which the
legionary soldiers did of themselves.

In the mean time, the Trinobantes, being almost the greatest State of all
those Countries (from whom Mandubratius had fled to Caesar into Gallia, for
that his father Imanuentius holding the kingdom, was slain by Cassivellaunus)
sent Ambassadors to Caesar, to offer their submission, and to entreat that
Mandubratius might be defended from the oppression of Cassivellaunus, and sent
unto them to take the kingdom. Caesar having received from them forty pledges,
and Corn for his Army, sent Mandubratius unto them. The Trinobantes being thus
kept from the violence of the soldiers, the Cenimagni, Seguntiaci, Ancalites,
Bibroci and Cassi yielded themselves to Caesar. By these he understood that
Cassivellaunus his town was not far off, fortified with woods and bogs, and
well stored with men and cattle. The Britans call a town, a thick wood
enclosed about with a ditch and a rampire, made for a place of retreat, when
they stood in fear of incursions from the borderers. Thither marched Caesar
with his Army, and found it well fortified both by Art and Nature: and as he
assaulted it in two several places, the enemy unable to keep it, cast himself
out of the town by a back way: and so he took it. Where he found great store of
cattle, and slew many of the Britans.

While these things were a doing, Cassivellaunus sent messengers into Kent,
which as was said lies upon the sea, and wherein there were four several
Kings, Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus and Segonax: them he commanded with
all the power they could make to set upon the camp where the Navy was kept. The
Kings coming to the place were overthrown by a sally which the Romans made out
upon them, many of them being slain, and Lugotorix a great commander taken
prisoner. This battle concurring with the former losses, and especially moved
thereunto with the revolt of the forenamed cities, Cassivellaunus entreated
peace of Caesar by Comius of Arras. Caesar being determined to winter in the
Continent, for fear of sudden commotions in Gallia, and considering that the
Summer was now far spent, and might easily be lingered out, he commanded pledges
to be brought unto him, and set down what yearly tribute the Britans should pay
to the Romans; giving withal a strict charge to Cassivellaunus to do no injury
either to Mandubratius or the Tribonantes. The hostages being taken, he carried
back his Army to the sea, where he found his shipping repaired: which as soon
as he had caused to be set aflote, in regard partly of the great number of
prisoners he had, and that some of his ships were cast away, he determined to
carry his Army over at twice. And so it happened, that of so great a fleet, at
so many voyages, neither this year nor the year before there was not any one
ship missing which carried over our soldiers: only of those which were to be
sent back to him after they had landed the first half, and those which Labienus
caused afterward to be made, threescore in number, few could make to the
place, the rest were all kept back. Which Caesar having for some time expected
in vain, and fearing that the time of year would not long serve for sailing,
for the Equinoctial was at hand; was forced to dispose his soldiers closer
and in less room. So taking the opportunity of a calm sea, he set sail about
the beginning of the second watch, and came to land by break of day, his whole
fleet arriving in safety.

OBSERVATION.
ANd thus ended the war in Britany: which affords little matter of discourse,
being indeed but a scambling war, as well in regard of the Britans themselves,
who after they had felt the strength of the Roman legions, would never
adventure to buckle with them in any standing battle; as also in regard there
were no such towns in Britany as are recorded to have been in Gallia, which
might have given great honor to the war, if there had been any such to have
been besieged and taken in by Caesar.

And although Tacitus says that Britany was rather viewed then subdued by
Caesar, being desirous to draw that honor to his father in law Agricola; yet
we find here that the Trinobantes, which were more then either the skirt or the
heart of Britany (for our Historians do understand them to have inhabited that
part which lies as far as Yorkshire and Lancashire) were brought under the
Roman Empire by Caesar: who was the first that ever laid tribute upon Britany
in the behalf of the people of Rome; or cast upon them the heavy name of a
subdued people.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
BUt least I may seem negligent in these occurrences of Britany, as not deeming
the alteration happening in this Island by the power of Rome worthy due memory;
I will briefly set down the state thereof from this Area, during the lives of
the twelve Emperors.

Julius Caesar's next successors, first Augustus and then Tiberius, thought it
policy to restrain the infinite desire of enlarging the Roman Empire, and so
left this entrance into Britany unseconded. Caius is said to have had a meaning
to invade it, but did nothing. Claudius transported legions and aides, and
first sent Aulus Plautius Governor, and after him Ostorius, who overthrew king
Caradocus in battle, and showed him at Rome to Claudius, to Agrippina, Tacit.
12. Annal.
and the Lords of the Senate: who affirmed the sight to be no less honorable
then when P. Scipio showed S^phaces, or L. Paulus Perses. Him Didius Gallus
succeeded, who being old and full of honor, thought it sufficient to keep that
which his predecessors had gotten. Next unto Didius came Veranius, only
memorable in dying the first year of his Propraetorship: but Suetonius Paulinus
following, got a great name, first by invading Anglesey, strong with
inhabitants, and a receptacle for fugitives; secondly, by overthrowing Boadicea
Queen of the Iceni, in a battle comparable to the victories of old times:
wherein fourscore thousand Britans were slain, with the loss of four hundred
Roman soldiers. But being thought to be over-severe, he left his charge to
Petronius Turpilianus; who composing former troubles with a milder carriage,
was succeeded by Trebellius Maximus; whose easy course of government taught
the Britans good manners, and made the soldiers first wanton with ease, and
then mutinous: which by his gentle entreaty being ended without bloodshed, he
left his place to Vectius Bolanus, of like looseness of discipline, but in
stead of obedience got much good will. The errors of these three soft
Propraetors were helped by Petilius Caerealis, a great Commander, and worthy
his place; he subdued the Brigantes, and left the place to Julius Frontinus,
who with no less happiness vanquished the Silures. The last was Agricola,
fortunate in diverse battles against the Britans, and as unhappy in his reward;
for Domitian maligning his honor, first discharged him of his place, and then,
as it is thought, poisoned him. And this was the state of Britany under the
twelve Emperors.

CHAP. IX.
Caesar disposes his legions into their wintering Camp, and quieteth the
Carnutes.
AFter he had put his ships in harbor, Caesar.
and held a Council of the Galls at Either Cambray, Amien^, or S. Quintin.
Samarobrina; forasmuch as that year, by reason of the drought, there was some
scarcity of corn in Gallia, he was constrained to garrison his Army, and to
disperse them into more cities then he had done the years before. And first he
gave one legion to Caius Fabius, to be led among the Morim; another to Quintus
Cicero, to be carried to the Nervii; another to L. Roscius, to be conducted to
the Essui; a fourth he commanded to winter amongst the men of Rhemes, in the
marches of the Treviri, under T. Labienus; three he placed in Belgium, with
whom he sent Mar. Crassus his Questor, L. Munatius Plancus and C. Trebonius,
Legates; he sent one legion, that which he had last enrolled beyond the river
Po in Italy, with five cohorts, unto the Eburones, the greatest part of whose
country lies between the Mase and the Rhene, and was under the command of
Ambiorix and Cativulcus; with them he sent Q. Titurius Sabinus and Lucius
Aurunculeius Cotta. By distributing his legions in this manner, he thought to
remedy the scarcity of corn; and yet the garrisons of all these legions,
excepting that which Roscius carried into a quiet and peaceable part, were
contained within the space of one hundred miles. And until his legions were
settled, and their wintering camps fortified, he determined to abide in Gallia.

There was amongst the Carnutes a man of great birth called Tasgetius, whose
ancestors had born the chief rule in their State. This man, for his singular
prowess and good will toward him, for he had done him very good service in
all his wars, Caesar restored to the dignity of his forefathers. Before he had
reigned three years, his enemies with the complotment of diverse of his citizens
killed him in the open streets: which thing was complained of to Caesar. Who
fearing in regard so many men had a hand in it, lest that the city should by
their instigation revolt, commanded L. Plancus immediately to march with his
legion thither from his quarters in Belgium, and there to winter: and
whomsoever he could learn to be the ringleaders in the death of Tasgetius, he
should take hold of them, and send them to him. Mean while Caesar had notice
from all his Legates and Quaestors to whom he had delivered his legions, that
they were settled in winter garrisons, and their garrisons fortified.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
I Have heard it oftentimes contradicted by some that understand not the weight
of a multitude, when it was said, that an Army keeping head continually in one
part of a kingdom, was more burdensome to the Commonwealth in regard of the
expense of victuals, then when it was dispersed into particular Cities and
Families, before the time of the master and inrollment: for, say they, in the
general account of the public weal it differs nothing, whether a multitude
of 30000. men be maintained with necessary provisions in one entire body
together, or dispersed particularly throughout every part of the Country;
forasmuch as every man has but a competent quantity allotted unto him, which
he cannot want in what sort or condition of life soever he be ranged: neither
does the charge of a multitude grow in regard they are united together, but in
regard they amount to such a multitude wheresoever. But such as look into the
difference with judgment, shall find a mavelous inequality, both in regard
of the portion of victuals which is spent, and the means whereby it is
provided: for first we must understand, that an Army lying continually in one
place, falls so heavy upon that part that it quickly consumes both the fat
and the flesh, (as they say) and leaves nothing unspent, which that part can
afford them; and without further supply of provisions would in a small time
come to utter destruction. This want then must be relieved by taking from the
plenty of other bordering quarters, to furnish the wants of so great a
multitude: wherein there cannot be observed that proportion of moderate taking,
to victual the Army with a sufficient competency, but the partial respect
which the purveiours and victuallers will have to their private commodity, will
quickly make an inconvenience either in the country from whence it is taken,
or in the Army for which it is provided, according as the error may best
advantage their particular, what discipline soever be established in that
behalf. Whereas on the contrary part, when every particular man of that
multitude shall be billetted in a several family, throughout all parts of the
kingdom, the charge will be so insensible in regard of the expense of the said
families, that the country will never feel any inconvenience. And if every
householder that had received into his house one of the said Army, should give a
true account of that which rises above his ordinary expense by the addition of
one man, it would fall far short of that treasure which is necessarily required
to maintain the said number of men united together into one body.

Neither does the difference consist in the quantity of victuals which every
man has for his portion, whether they be dispersed or united; but in the
manner of provision, and the means which is used to maintain them: wherein
every master or steward of a family endeavors to make his provisions at the
best hand, and so to husband it that it may serve for competency, and not for
superfluity; and by that means the general plenty of the country is
maintained, and the commonwealth flourishes by well-directed moderation. But
in the victualling of an Army there is no such respect had which may any way
advantage the public good; for there the gain of the purveiour rises by
expense and superfluous wasting, rather then by thrift and saving frugality:
and so the commonwealth is weakened by the ill-husbanding of that great
portion of victual which is allowed for so great a multitude. And if they
should have such variety of viands in an Army as they have when they are in
several families, it were unpossible it should continue any time together. And
therefore the Romans, notwithstanding the exactness of their discipline, could
afford their Armies no other provision but corn and larde, as well in regard of
the commodity which that kind of diet afforded them in the course of their
wars, as also for the good of that country wherein they were resident. And if
it so fell out, that the extremity of the season, or any other cause had
brought a dearth into the land, there was no readier way to help that
inconvenience, then by dispersing their Armies into diverse quarters; which
Caesar disposed with that care, that they might be as near together as they
could.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COncerning the choice of their soldiers and their manner of inrolement, I had
rather refer the Reader to Polybius, then enter into the particular discourse
of that action; which was carried with such gravity and religious ceremonies,
as might best serve to possess their minds of the weight and consequence of
that business. But forasmuch as the largeness of their Empire and the
necessity of their occasions would not admit that the inrolement should still
be made at Rome amongst the citizens, as it appears by this legion which was
enrolled beyond the river Po, it consequently follows, that such Ceremonies
which were annexed to the place, were altogether omitted: and therefore I
cannot speak of that which the old Romans did in that part of their discipline,
as a thing continued unto Caesar's time. But he that desires to see the manner
of their choice, with such complements as might add both a reverent respect
and a Majesty to the work, let him read Polybius of that argument.

CHAP. X.
Ambiorix attempteth to surprise the Camp of Sabinus and Cotta; and failing,
practices to take them by guile.
FIfteen days after the legions were settled in their wintering-camps, Caesar.
there began a sudden tumult and rebellion by the means of Ambiorix and
Cativulcus, who having received Sabinus and Cotta into their confines, and
brought them in corn to the place where they lay; at the inducement of
Induciomarus of Triers, they stirred up their people to rebellion: and suddenly
surprising those that were gone abroad to get wood, came with a great power to
assault the camp. But when our men had took Arms, and were got up upon the
rampire, and had overmatched them in a skirmish of horse, which made a sally
out of the camp upon the Galls; Ambiorix despairing of good success, withdrew
his men from the assault: and then after their manner they cried unto us, that
some of our company should come and speak with them, for they had somewhat to
discover touching the public state, whereby they hoped all controversies might
be ended. Whereupon Caius Carpineius a Roman horseman, and one of Titurius his
familiar friends, and one Q. Junius a Spaniard, who diverse times before had
been sent by Caesar to Ambiorix, were sent out to treat with them. Ambiorix
first acknowledged himself much indebted to Caesar for many courtesies; in that
by his means he was freed from a pension which he paid to the Aduatici; and
for that both his own son and his brothers son, whom the Aduatici had held in
prison under the name of hostages, were by Caesar released and sent home again.
And touching the assault of the camp, he had done nothing of himself, but by
the impulsion of the State; among whom such was his condition, that the people
had as great authority over him, as he himself had in regard of the people: who
were likewise enforced to this war, because they could not withstand the sudden
insurrection of the Galls, whereof his small means might be a sufficient
argument. For his experience was not so little, to think himself able with so
small a power to overthrow the people of Rome; but it was a general
appointment throughout all Gallia, upon this day to assault all Caesar's
garrisons, to the end that one legion might not give relief unto another.
Galls could not easily deny the request of Galls, especially when it
concerned their public liberty. Now having satisfied that duty which he owed
to his Country, he had respect to Caesar and his benefits; in regard whereof he
admonished them, and prayed Titurius for the hospitality that had been between
them, that he would look to the safety of himself and his soldiers. There was
a great number of Germans that had already passed the Rhene, and would be here
within two days: and therefore let them adv^se themselves, whether they thought
it good before the next borderers perc^ived it, to depart with their soldiers
out of their wintering-places either to Cicero or Labienus, of whom the one was
not past fifty mile off, and the other a little further. For his own part he
promised them thus much, and confirmed it by oath, that they should have sa^e
passage through his territories; for so he should both do a pleasure to his
country in disburthening it of garrisons, and show himself thankful to Caesar
for his benefits. This spee^h being ended Ambiorix departed, and Carpineius and
Junius made report thereof to the Legates.

OBSERVATION.
LEander his counsel, to use the Foxes skin where the Lions fails, does show
that the discourse of our reason is sooner corrupted with error, then the
powers of our body are overcome with force. For oftentimes the mind is so
disquieted with the extremity of perturbation, that neither the apprehension
can take sound instructions, nor the judgment determine of that which is most
for our good; but according as any passion shall happen to reign in our
disposition, so are we carried headlong to the ruin of our fortune, without
sense of error, or mistrust of well-succeeding: whereas the body continues
firm in his own strength, and is subject only to a greater weight of power,
by which it may be subdued and overthrown. It behooves us therefore to take
good heed, that our surest hold be not unfastned by the subtilty of the Fox,
when it has continued firm against the force of the Lion: and that the
treachery of the spirit do not disadvantage those means, which either our own
power or opportunity has gained in our actions. Wherein a Commander cannot
have a better rule for his direction, then to beware that violence of passion
do not hinder the course of sound deliberation: and withal to be jealous of
whatsoever an Enemy shall, either by speech or action, seem to thrust upon him,
how colorable soever the reasons may be which are alleged to induce him
thereunto. For first, if the mind be not conf^^med by the virtue of her better
faculties to resist the motion of fruitless apprehensions, it may easily be
seduced (either by fear or vain imagination, diffident conceptions or
over-easie credulity, with many other such disturbing powers) from that way
which a good discretion, and an understanding free from passion would have
taken.

First therefore I hold it necessary to have the consistory of our judgment
well settled with a firm resolution, and with the presence of the mind, before
we enter into deliberation of such things as are made happy unto us by good
direction. And then this, amongst other circumstances, will give some help to a
good conclusion, when we consider how improbable it is that an Enemy, whose
chiefest care is to weaken his adversary, and bring him to ruin, should advise
him of any thing that may concern his good; unless the profit which he himself
shall thereby gather, do far exceed that which the contrary part may expect.

I grant that in civil wa^s, where there are many friends on either party, and
have the adverse cause as dear unto them as their own, there are oftentimes
many advertisements given, which proceed from a true and sincere affection, and
may advantage the party whom it concerns, as well in preventing any danger,
as in the furtherance of their cause; and therefore are not altogether to be
neglected, but to be weighed by circumstances, and accordingly to be respected;
whereof we have many pregnant examples in the civil wars of France, and
particularly in Monsieur l^ No^ his discourses: but where there are two Armies,
different in nation, language and humor, contending for that which peculiarly
belongs unto one of them, where care to keep that which is dearest unto them
possesses the one, and hope of gain stirs up the other, there is commonly
such an universal hatred between them, that they are to look for small
advantage by advertisements from the enemy. Which if the Romans had well
considered, this subtle Gall had not dispossessed them of their strength, nor
brought them to ruin.

CHAP. XI.
The Romans call a council upon this advertisement, and resolve to depart, and
join themselves to some other of the Le^ions.
THe Romans being troubled at the suddenness of the matter, Caesar.
albeit the things were spoken by an Enemy, yet they thought them no way to be
neglected; but especially it moved them, for that it was incredible that the
Eburones, being base and of no reputation, durst of themselves make war against
the people of Rome. And therefore they propounded the matter in a council:
wherein there grew a great controversy among them. L. Aurunculeius, and most
of the Tribunes, and Centurions of the first orders, thought it not good to
conclude of any thing rashly, nor to depart out of their wintering-camps
without express commandment from Caesar; forasmuch as they were able to resist
never so great a power, yea even of the Germans, having their garririsons well
fortified: an argument whereof was, that they had valiantly withstood the first
assault of the Enemy, and given them many wounds. Neither wanted they any
victuals; and before that provision which they had was spent, there would come
succor from other garrisons and from Caesar. And to conclude, what was more
dishonorable or ^avoured of greater inconstancy, then to consult of their
weightiest affairs by the advertisement of an Enemy? Titurius urged vehemently
to the contrary, that it then would be too late for them to seek a remedy, when
a greater power of the Enemy, accompanied with the Germans, were assembled
against them; or when any blow were given to any of the next wintering-camps.
He took Caesar to be gone into Italy; for otherwise the Carnutes would not have
adventured to kill Tasgetius, neither durst the Eburones have come so proudly
to the camp. Let them not respect the author, but the thing it self: the Rhene
was not far off, and he knew well that the overthrow of Ariovistus, and their
former victories were grievous to the Germans. The Galls were vexed with the
contumelies they had received, being brought in sub^ection to the Roman Empire,
and having lost their former reputation in deeds of Arms.

And to conclude, who would imagine that Ambiorix should enterprise such a
matter without any ground or certainty thereof? but howsoever things stood, his
counsel was sure and could bring no harm: for if there were no worse thing
intended, they should but go safely to the next garrisons; or otherwise, if the
Galls conspired with the Germans, their only safety consisted in celerity. As
for the counsel of Cotta and such as were of the contrary opinion, what
expectation could be had thereof? wherein if here were not present danger, yet
assuredly famine was to be feared by long siege. The disputation being thus
continued on either part, and Cotta with the Centurions of the first orders
earnestly repugning it; Do as please you, since you will needs have it so, says
Sabinus, (and that he spoke with a loud voice, that a great part of the
soldiers might well hear him) for I am not he that most fears death among
you: let these be wise; and if any mischance happen unto them, they shall ask
account thereof at thy hands, inasmuch as if thou would let them, they might
join themselves within two days to the next garrisons, and with them sustain
what chance soever their common destiny should allot them, and not perish with
famine and sword, like a people cast off and abandoned from their fellows.
After these words they began to rise out of the Council; but hold was laid
upon them both: entreaty was made that they would not by their dis^ension and
obstinacy bring all unto a desperate hazard; the matter was all one whether
they went or stayed, so that they all agreed upon one thing; whereas in
disagreeing there was no liklihood of well doing. The disputation was prolonged
until midnight; at length Cotta yielded, and the sentence of Sabinus took
place. And thereupon it was proclaimed that they should set forth by the break
of day. The rest of the night was spent in watching. Every soldier sought out
what he had to carry with him, and what he should be constrained to leave
behind him of such necessaries as he had prepared for winter. All things were
disposed in such sort, to make the soldiers believe that they could not stay
without danger, and that the danger might be augmented by wearying the
soldiers with watching.

OBSERVATION.
BY the resolution in this disputation it appears how little a grave and wise
deliberation avails, when it is impugned with the violence of passion,
according to the truth of my former observation: for the matter was well
reasoned by Cotta, and his positions were grounded upon things certain, and
well known to the whole Council; and yet the fear of Sabinus was such, that it
carried the conclusion by such supposed assertions as the quality of his
passion had ratified for true principles; being grounded altogether upon that
which the Enemy had suggested, and not upon any certain knowledge of the truth.
Neither is it often seen when a Council disputes upon matters of such
consequence, that their deliberations are altogether clear from such
troublesome motions, but that it will somewhat incline to the partiality of a
strong affection; so powerful is passion in the government of the soul, and so
interessed in the other faculties. And this is one cause of the uncertainty of
man's judgment, from whence all contrary and different opinions do arise.
Neither is this so strange a matter, that a council of war should so much vary
in case of deliberation, when as many especial points of military discipline
remain yet undecided, having the authority of the great Commanders of all ages
to ratify the truth on either part; whereof I could allege many examples. But
concerning the issue and event of our deliberations, what can be more truly
said then that of the Poet?

Et male consultis pretium est prudentia fallax,
Nec fortuna probat causas sequiturque merentes;
Sed vaga per cunctos nullo discrimine fertur.
Sciliee^^st aliud quod nos cogatque regatque
Majus, et in proprias ducat mortalia leges.
Notwithstanding, forasmuch as our wisdom is not so subject to fortune, but
that it may comprehend within it self the good direction of most of the
occurrences which fall within the course of our business^* or if we must needs
miscarry, yet it somewhat helps our ill fortune to think that we went upon
best probabilities; it shall not be amiss to set down some rules for the
better directing of a mature consultation. Wherein we are to understand that as
all our knowledge arises from some of our senses, and our senses comprehend
only particularities, which being carried unto the apprehension are disposed
into forms and degrees, according as they either concur or disagree in their
several properties; from whence there arise intellectual notions, and rules
of Art, wherein the science of the said particulars consists: so he that
intends to debate a matter with sound deliberation, must descend from
confused conceptions and a knowledge in general, to the exact distinction of
particular parts, which are the occurrences to be directed, and the material
substance of every action. He therefore that can give best direction, either by
experience or judicious discourse, concerning such particularities as are
incident to the matter propounded, can best advise which is the safest way to
avoid the opposition of contradicting natures. But to make this somewhat
plainer, I will allege two examples: the one modern in case of consultation;
the other ancient, and may seem not so pertinent to this matter, in regard it
is a mere Apology: yet forasmuch as it freely censureth the quality of
particular circumstances, it may give great light to that which we seek after.

The modern example is taken out of Guicerardin, Lib. 9.
from the wars which Lewis the French King had with the Pope and the Venetians,
concerning the State of Ferrara and the Duchy of Millain: wherein there arose
a controversy among the French Captains, whether it were better to go directly
to seek the Enemy, who albeit they were lodged in a strong and secure place,
yet there was hope that with the virtue of Arms and importunity of artillery
they might be dislodged, and driven to retreat; or otherwise to take the way
either of Modena or Bolognia, that so the Enemy for fear of losing either of
those towns might quit their hold, and by that means Ferrara should be freed
from the war. Monsieur Chaumont the General of the French inclined to the
former advise: But Trivulce, a man of great authority and experience, having
been an executioner in 18. battles, reasoned thus in particulars to the
contrary. We debate (says he) to go seek the Enemy to fight with him; and I
have always heard great Captains hold this as a firm principle, Not to attempt
the fortune of a battle, unless there be either an offer of an especial
advantage, or otherwise compulsion by necessity. The rules of war give it to
the enemy that is the invader, and has undertaken the conquest of Ferrara, to
seek to assail and charge us; but to us, to whom it is sufficient to defend our
selves, it cannot be but impertinent to undertake an action contrary to all
direction and discipline of war. I am of opinion, which is confirmed by evident
reason, that there is no possibility to execute that devise but to our harms
and disadvantage: for we cannot go to their camp but by the side of a hill, a
straight and narrow way, where all our forces cannot be employed; and yet they
with small numbers will make resistance, having the opportunity of the place
favorable to their virtues. We must march by the rising of a hill, one horse
after another, neither have we any other way to draw our Artillery, our
baggage, our carts and bridges, but by the straight of the hill: and who
doubts not but in a way so narrow and cumbrous, every artillery, every cart,
or every wheel that shall break will stay the Army a whole hour at the least?
By which impediments every contrary accident may put us to disorder. The Enemy
is lodged in covert, provided of victuals and forage; and we must incamp all
bare and naked, not carrying with us that which should serve for our necessary
nouriture, but expect the things to come after, which in reason ought to go
with us. To attempt new enterprises, whereof the victory is less certain then
the peril, is contrary to the gravity and reputation of a Leader; and in
actions of the war, those enterprises are put to adventure that are done by
will and not by reason. Many difficulties may compel us to make our abode
there two or three days; yea the snows and rains, joined with the extremity of
the season, may suffice to detain us: how shall we then do for victuals and
forrages? What shall we be able to do in the wars, wanting the things that
should give us strength and sustenance? what is he that considers not how
dangerous it is to go seek the Enemy in a strong camp, and to be driven at one
time to fight against them and against the discommodity of the place? If we
compel them not to abandon their camp, we cannot but be enforced to retire; a
matter of great difficulty in a country so wholly against us, and where every
little disfavour will turn to our great disadvantage, etc.

And thus proceeded that grave discourse, in the discovery of the particular
occurrences incident to that enterprise; which being laid open to their
confused judgments, did manifestly point at the great disadvantages which were
to be undergone by that attempt.

The other example is of more antiquity, taken out of Tacitus, Annal. ^.
and concerns the arraignment of certain Senators for the friendship that had
past between Sejanus and them. Amongst whom M. Terentius thus answered for
himself, according as it has of late been published by translation.

It would be peradventure less behovefull for my estate to acknowledge, then to
deny the crime I am charged with: but hap what hap may, I will confess that I
have been Sejanus friend, and that I desired so to be, and that after I had
obtained his friendship I was glad of it. I had seen him joint-officer with my
father in the government of the praetorian cohort, and not long after in
managing the City affairs, and matters of war: his kinsmen and allies were
advanced to honor: as every man was inward with Sejanus, so he was graced by
Caesar: and contrariwise such as were not in his favor lived in fear, and
distressed with poverty. Neither do I allege any man for an example of this;
all of us who were not privy to his last attempts, with the danger of my only
estate I will defend: not Sejanus the Vulsiniensis, but a part of the Claudian
and Julian family, which by alliance he had entered into. Thy son in law,
Caesar, thy companion in the Consulship, and him who took upon him thy charge
of administering the Commonwealth, we did reverence and honor. It is not our
part to judge of him whom thou do exalt above the rest, nor for what
considerations: to thee the highest judgment of things the gods have given,
and to us the glory of obedience is left. We look into those things which we
see before our eyes, whom thou do enrich, whom thou do advance to honors,
who have greatest power of hurting or helping; which Sejanus to have had no man
will deny. The Princes hidden thoughts, or if he go about any secret drift it
is not lawful to sound, and dangerous; neither shall thou in the end reach
unto them. Think not only, Lords of the Senate, of Sejanus last day; but of
sixteen years* in which we did likewise fawn upon and court Satrius and
Pomponius; and to be known unto his freed men and partners was reckoned for a
high favor. What then? shall this defense be general, and not distinguished,
but a confusion made of times past and his later actions? No: but let it by
just bounds and terms be divided: let the treasons against the Commonwealth,
the intentions of murdering the Emperor be punished; but as for the
friendships, duties, pleasures and good turns, the same end shall discharge and
quit thee, O Caesar, and us.

The constancy of this Oration prevailed so much, that his Accusers were
punished with exile. And thus we see how particularities decide the
controversy, and make the way plain to good direction.

CHAP. XII.
The Romans take their journey toward the next legion; and are set upon by the
Galls.
AS soon as the daylight appeared, (...)
they set forth of their Camp (like men persuaded that the counsel had been
given them not by an Enemy, but by Ambiorix an especial friend) with a
long-tailed march, and as much baggage as they were able to carry. The Galls
understanding of their journey by their noise and watching in the night,
secretly in the woods some two miles off laid an Ambuscado in two several
places of advantage, and there attended the coming of the Romans: and when the
greatest part of the troops were entered into a valley, suddenly they showed
themselves on both sides the vale, pressing hard upon the rereward, and
hindering the foremost from going up the hill, and so began to charge upon the
Romans in a place of as great disadvantage for them as could be. Then at length
Titurius, as one that had provided for nothing beforehand, began to tremble,
ran up and down, and disposed his cohorts, but so fearfully and after such a
fashion, as if all things had gone against him; as it happens for the most
part to such as are forced to consult in the instant of execution.

OBSERVATION.
IT now plainly appears by this negligent and ill-ordered march, and the
unlooked for encounter which the Galls gave them, that fear had ratified in
the judgment of Sabinus the smooth suggestion of Ambiorix, with an approbation
of a certain truth; and laid that for a principle, which a discourse free from
passion would have discerned to be but weak, and of no probability: which so
much the more amazed Titurius, by how much his apprehension had erred from the
truth, and betrayed good counsel to a course full of danger; which, as Caesar
notes, must needs fall upon such, as are then to seek for direction when the
business requires execution. I have handled already the inconveniences of
disappointment, and therefore at this time will but bring it only into
remembrance, that we may take the greater care to prevent an accident of that
nature: wherein as the best remedy for an evil is to foresee it, according to
the saying, Praevisa pereunt mala, evils foreseen fall of themselves; so the
greatest mischief in an evil is when it comes unthought of, and besides our
expectation, for then it falls upon us with a supernatural weight, and
affrighteth the mind with a superstitious astonishment, as though the divine
powers had prevented our designments with an irremediable calamity, and cut off
our appointment with a contrary decree: although peradventure the thing it self
carry no such importance, but might be remedied, if we were but prepared with
an opinion that such a thing might happen.

It were no ill counsel therefore, what resolution soever be taken, to make as
full account of that which may fall out to cross our intentions, as that which
is likely to happen from the direction of our chiefest projects; and so we
shall be sure to have a present mind in the midst of our occasions, and feel no
further danger then that which the nature of the thing inforceth.

CHAP. XIII.
The Romans cast themselves into an Orb, and are much discouraged.
BUt Cotta, C^^sar.
who had before thought that these things might happen by the way, and for that
cause would not be the author of the journey, was not wanting in any thing
that concerned their common safety: for both in calling upon the soldiers and
encouraging them, he executed the place of a Commander; and in fighting, the
duty of a soldier. And when they found that, by reason of the length of their
troup, they were not able in their own persons to see all things done, and to
give direction in every place; they caused it to be proclaimed, that they
should all for sake their baggage, and ^ast themselves into an Orb. Which
direction although in such a case it be not to be reproved, yet it fell out ill
favouredly: for it both abated the courage of the Romans, and gave the Enemy
greater encouragement, inasmuch as it seemed that that course was not taken but
upon a great fear and in extremity of peril. Moreover it hapened, as it could
not otherwise choose, that the soldiers went from their Ensigns, to take from
the carriages such things as were most dear unto them: and there was nothing
heard amongst them but clamours and weepings. But the Barbarous Galls were not
to learn how to carry themselves. For their Commanders caused it to be
proclaimed, that no man should stir out of his place; for the prey was theirs,
and all that the Romans had laid apart was reserved for them: and therefore let
them suppose that all things consisted in the victory. The Romans were equal
to the Galls both in number of men and valor; and albeit they were destitute
of good Captains and of good fortune, yet they reposed in their manhood all the
hope of their safety: and as often as any cohort issued out, they failed not to
make a great slaughter of the Enemy on that part.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
I Have already handled the nature of an Orb, with such properties as are
incident to a Circle; wherein I showed the convenience of this figure, in
regard of safe and strong imbattelling. I will now add thus much concerning the
use thereof, that as it is the best manner of imbattelling for a defensive
strength, and therefore never used but in extremity; so we must be very
careful that the sudden betaking of our selves to such a refuge do not more
dismay the soldiers, then the advantage of that imbattelling can benefit them.
For unless a Leader be careful to keep his men in courage, that their hearts
may be free from despair and amazement, what profit can there arise from any
disposition or body soever, when the particular members shall be senseless of
that duty which belongs unto them? For order is nothing but an assistance to
courage, giving means to manage our valor with advantage. In the war of Africa
we rea^, that Caesar's legions being incircled about with great multitudes of
enemies, were forced to make an Orb; but he quickly turned it to a better use,
by advancing the two Cornets two contrary ways; and so divided the Enemy into
two parts, and then beat them back, to their great disadvantage.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
I Need not stand upon this order which the Galls here took concerning
pillage, that no soldier should forsake his station, or disrank himself in
hope of spoil; which is a thing that from the very infancy of wars has often
changed the fortune of the day, and sold the honor of a public victory for
private lucre and petty pilfering. Amongst other examples, let that which
Guicciardine reports of the battle of Taro suffice to warn a well-directed
Army, Lib. 20
as well by the good which Charles the eighth of that name King of France
received at that time, as by the loss which the Italians felt by that
disorder, not to seek after pillage until the victory be obtained.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THe insufficiency of these Commanders, whereof Caesar now complains as the
only want which these Romans had to clear themselves of this danger, brings
to our consideration that which former times have made a question; which is,
Whether is were the virtue of the Roman Leaders, or the valor of their
soldiers, that enlarged their Empire to that greatness, and made their people
and Senate Lords of the world. Polybius weighing the causes of a victory which
the Carthaginians gained of the Romans, by the counsel and good direction of
one Zantippus a Grecian, having before that time received diverse overthrows
during the time of those wars in Africa; concludes that it was more in the
worthiness of the Commanders, then in any extraordinary virtue of the
soldiers, that the Romans achieved so many conquests. And besides the present
example of Zantippus, he confirmed his opinion with the proceedings of
Hannibal; who from the beginning of the second Punick war, still gained of the
Roman Empire, enlarging the territories of Carthage, and streightning the
jurisdiction of mighty Rome, until it had got a Leader matchable to that
subtle Carthagiman, and found a Scipio to confront their Hannibal. To this may
be added that famous battle between the old Romans and the last Latins;
wherein both parties were equally balanced, both in number and quality of
their soldiers, having both the same Arms, the same use of their weapons, and
the same discipline, as if it had been in a Civil war. Neither could Fortune
tell by the presence of their Armies where to bestow her favor, or where to
show her disdain; but that the worthiness of the Roman Leaders brought the
odds in the trial, and made Rome great with the ruin of the Latins. Whereby
it appears how much it imports the whole fortune of the Army, to have a
Leader worthy of the place which he holds: forasmuch as nothing does make a
greater difference of inequality between two equal Armies, then the wisdom
and experience of a grave Commander, or the disability of an unskilful Leader;
which are so powerful in their several effects, that there is greater hope of
a herd of Hearts led by a Lion, then of so many Lions conducted by a Heart.

CHAP. XIV.
Ambiorix directs the Galls how they might best fight with advantage, and
frustrate the weapons of the Roman soldiers.
THe which thing when Ambiorix perceived, Caesar.
he commanded his men to throw their casting weapons afar off, and keep
themselves from coming near at hand, and where the Romans charged them to give
way, for that by reason of the lightness of their arms and their daily
exercise the Romans could do them no harm: and again, as they saw them ret^re
to their Ensigns, then to pursue them. Which commandment was so diligently
observed by the Galls, that as often as any cohort sallied out of the Orb to
give an assault, the Enemy gave back as fast as they could; and in the mean
time there was no help but that part must be left naked and open to the
inconvenience of casting weapons: and again, as they retired to their place,
they were circumvented, as well by them that had given place unto them, as by
such as stood next about them. And if they went about to keep their ground,
they could neither help themselves by their manhood, nor standing thick
together avoid the darts that such a multitude cast upon them. And yet
notwithstanding these inconveniences, besides the wounds which they had
received, they stood still at their defense; and having so spent the greatest
part of the day (for they had fought eight hours together) they committed
nothing dishonorable, or unworthie of themselves.

THE OBSERVATION.
I Have spoken already of the manner of the Roman fight, consisting altogether
in good disposition of imbattelling, and in firm standing, and buckling at
handy-blowes: as may appear by this circumstance, where Ambiorix forbids his
men to buckle with them, but to give back and follow on again, as the
lightness of their Arms gave them opportunity. In like manner in the first
book of the Civil wars, in the battle between Caesar and Afranius, it
appears that Caesar his soldiers were bound to keep their array, not to
leave their Ensigns, nor without a weighty occasion to forsake their stations
appointed them: whereas the Afranians fought thin and scattered here and there;
and if they were hard laid unto, they thought it no dishonor to retire and
give back, as they had learned of the Portugals and other Barbarous Nations.

CHAP. XV.
The Romans are overthrown.
THen T. Baluentius, who the year before had been primipile of that legion,
Caesar.
a valiant man and of great authority, had both his thighs darted through with
a javelin; and Q. Lucanius, of the same order, valiantly fighting to succor
his son, was sla^n; and L. Cotta the Legate, as he busily encouraged all the
cohorts and centuries, was wounded in the mouth with a sling. Titurius moved
with these things, as he beheld Ambiorix afar off encouraging his men, sent C^.
Pompeius unto him, to entreat him that he would spare him and his soldiers.
Ambiorix answered, that ^f he were desirous to treat, he might: for he hoped to
obtain so much of the people, to save the soldiers; but for himself, he should
have no harm at all: for the assurance whereof he gave him his faith. Titurius
imparted the matter to Cotta, and that if he liked that they two should goout
of the battle, and have conference with Ambiorix, he doubted not but to obtain
of him the safety of themselves and their soldiers. Cotta absolutely denied to
go to an armed enemy, and continued resolute in that opinion. Titurius
commanded such Tribunes and Centurions as were present to follow him; and when
he came near to Ambiorix, being commanded to cast away his arms, he obeyed, and
willed those that were with him to do the same. In the mean time while they
treated of the conditions, and Ambiorix began a solemn protestation of purpose,
Titurius was by little and little encompassed about and slain, Then, according
to their custom, they cried victory; and taking up a houling, charged the
Romans with a fresh assault, and routed their troops. There L. Cotta fighting
valiantly was slain, and the most part of the soldiers with him. The remnant
retired into their camp; amongst whom L. Petrosidius the Eagle-bearer, when he
saw himself overcharged with enemies, threw the Eagle within the rampire, and
fighting with a great courage before the Camp was slain. The rest with much ado
endured the assault until night: and in the night, being in despair of all
succor, slew themselves every man. A few that escaped from the battle came by
unknown ways through the woods to Labienus, and certified him how all things
had fallen out.

OBSERVATION.
ANd thus have we heard of the greatest loss that ever fell at any one time
upon Caesar his Army, from the time that he was first Proconful in Gallia, unto
the end of his Dictatorship. For in the two overthrows at Dyrrach^um he lost
not above 1000 men, and in that at Gergovia not so many: but here fifteen
cohorts were cut in pieces, which amounted to the number of 7000 men or
therea^out. Which makes cowardice and ill direction the more hateful, in
regard that the great victory which his valor obtained in Pharsalia cost him
but the lives of two hundred men.

The resolution of such as returned to the Camp witnesses the exceeding valor
of the Roman soldier, if a valiant Leader had had the managing thereof; or if
Cotta alone had been absolute Commander, there had been great hope of better
fortune in the success. But here it happened as it commonly does, that where
there are many that are equal sharers in the chief authority, the direction
for the m^st part follows him that is more violent in opinion then the rest:
which being a property rather of passion then of judicious discourse, forces a
consent against the temperate opposition of a true discerning understanding.
And so consequently it falls out, that one coward having place and authority
in the Council, does either infect or anni^ilate the sound deliberations of
the rest of the Leaders: for his timorousness flies always to extremities,
making him rash in consultation, peremptory in opinion, and base in case of
peril; all which are enemies to good direction, and the only instruments of
mischieving fortune.

CHAP. XVI.
Ambiorix hastes to besiege Cicero, and stirs up the Aduatici, the Nervii,
and so raises a great power.
AMbiorix took such spirits unto him upon this victory, Caesar.
that with his horsemen he went immediately unto the Aduatici, being the next
borderers upon his kingdom, without intermission of night or day, commanding
his footmen to follow him. The Aduatici upon his opening the matter being
stirred up to commotion, the next day after he came to the Nervii, exhorting
them not to let slip this occasion of recovering to themselves perpetual
liberty, and revenging them of the Romans for the wrongs they had received. He
told them that two Legates were already slain, and a great part of the Army
overthrown: it was now no great matter suddenly to surprise the legion that
wintered with Cicero; to the performance whereof the offered himself to be
their assistant. These remonstrances easily persuaded the Nervii; and therefore
they dispatched speedy messengers to the Centrones, Grudii, Leuaci, Pleumosii
and Gorduni, who were all under their dominion, and raised very great forces;
and ^ith them they hasted to the camp where Cicero wintered, before any inkling
of the death of Titurius was brought unto him.

OBSERVATION.
THe ambitious and working spirit of Ambiorix, that could attempt to raise the
baseness of a small and ignoble State to so high a point of resolution, that
they durst adventure upon the Roman legions, being settled in the strength of
their Empire by the memory of so many victories in Gallia, wanted now no means
to make an overture to a universal commotion, propounding liberty and revenge
to the Galls (two the sweetest conditions that can happen to a subdued people)
if they would but stretch out their hands to take it, and follow that course
which his example had proved sure and easy. Which may serve to show, that he
that will attempt upon doubtful and unsafe Principles, will take great
advantage from a probable entrance, and make a small beginning a sufficient
means for his greatest designs.

CHAP. XVII.
Cicero defends his Camp from the surprise of the Nervii, and prepares
himself against a Siege.
IT happened to Cicero also (as it could not otherwise choose) that many of the
soldiers that were gone into the woods for timber and munition, Caesar.
were cut off by the sudden approach of the Enemies horsemen. These being
c^rcumvented, the Eburones, Nervii, and Aduatici, with all their confederates
and clie^^s began to assault the Camp. The Romans betook them speedily to their
weapons, and got upon the ramp^er. With much ado they held out that day: for
the Galls trusted much upon celerity; hoping if they sped well in that action,
to be victors ever after.

Cicero dispatched letters with all speed to Caesar, promising great rewards to
him that should carry them: but all the ways were so fore-laied that the
Messengers were taken. In one night there was built in the camp one hundred and
twenty towers, of such timber as was brought in for fortification; and
whatsoever wanted of the rest of the work was perfected.

The enemy the next day with a far greater power assaulted the Camp, and filled
up the d^tch. ^he Romans made the like defense as they had done the day before;
the like was continued diverse days after. The Romans made no intermission of
their work at any part of the night, nor gave any rest either to the sick or
the wound^d. Whatsoever was needful for the next days assault, was provided
in readiness the night before: a great number of stakes hardened in the fire
were prepared, and many murall piles were made; the towers were (...) in their
stories; Pinacles and Parap^ts ^ere set up of hurdles; and Cicero himself being
sickly and of a weak constitution, took not so much leisure as to rest himself
in the night time: so that the soldiers of their own accord compelled him by
entreaty to spare hims^^f.

OBSERVATION.
THis Q. Cicero is said to be the brother of Marcus (...) the famous Orator,
and to him were the letters sent which are found in his ^pistles directed
Quinto fratri. In this action (...) carriage deserved as great reputation in
the true censure of honor, as ever his brother did for his el^quence pro
Rostris. And if it had been the (...) fortune to h^ve performed the like
service. (...) ^ave made it the greatest exploit that ever^ (...) had achieved
by arms. Wherein partic^^^^ly may be commended the diligence and industry which
was used, in raising so many (...) in so small a time; for providing the (...)
before such things as were necessary for the next days defense; for making so
many stakes h^rdened in the end with fire for the defense of the rampire; and
for the store of these murall p^les, which resembled the form of the ordinary
pile, but were far greater and weightier, in regard they were to be cast from
the rampire; which gave them such advantage by reason of the height, that being
cast by a strong and well practiced arm, they were very effectual and of great
terror.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Nervii propound the same things to Cicero which Ambiorix had done to
Sabinus; but are reject
THen the Princes and chief Commanders of the Nervii, Caesar.
which had any entrance of speech and cause of acquaintance with Cicero,
signified their desire to speak with him. Which being granted, they propounded
the same things which Ambiorix had used to deceive Sabinus; all Gallia were in
Arms; the Germans were come over the Rhene; Caesar and the rest were besieged
in their wintering-camps; Sabinus and his men were cut in pieces; and for the
more credit to it they show him Ambiorix. They said, they were much deceived if
they expected any help from those who were at present scarce able to help
themselves. Notwithstanding they carried this mind to Cicero and the people of
Rome, that they refused nothing but their wintering among them, which they
would not suffer to be made a common practice. They might depart in safety
whither they would, without disturbance or fear of danger. Cicero only made
this answer; That it was not the custom of the people of Rome to take any
article or condition from an armed Enemy; but if they would lay their Arms
aside, let them use his furtherance in the matter, and send some to negotiate
it with Caesar: there was great hope, in regard of his justice and equity, that
they should not return unsatisfied.

OBSERVATION.
THe first attempt which Ambiorix made upon the Camp of Sab^nus and Cotta was
but short; but here, what with the pride of the former victory, and the great
multitude of the assailants, they continued it longer, in hope to carry it by
assault. For the first assault of a place, especially when it comes by way of
surprise, is of greater hope to the assailant, and of greater danger to the
defendant, then such as afterward are made in the sequel of the war: for after
the first brunt the heat of the enemy is much abated, as well through the
nature of a hot desire, which is most violent in the beginning, and afterward
grows cold and remiss, as also with the harms and peril which they meet with
in the encounter; and on the contrary side, the defendants having withstood the
first fury, wherein there is most terror and distrust, grow more confident and
better assured of their manhood, and in experience of their strength stand firm
against any charge whatsoever.

CHAP. XIX.
The Nervii besiege Cicero with a ditch and a rampire, and work means to set
fire on their Tents.
THe Nervii disappointed of this hope, Caesar.
carried a ditch and a rampire round about the camp: the rampire was eleven
foot high, and the ditch fifteen foot deep: which they had learned of the
Romans, partly by being conversant among them certain years before, and partly
by the prisoners and captives which they had taken. But they had no iron tools
fit for that purpose, but were driven to cut up turf with their swords, and
gather earth with their hands, and carry it away with their Mantles and
Gaberd^nes. Whereby may be gathered what a multitude of men there were at the
siege; for in less then three hours they finished the fortification of fifteen
miles in circuit. The days following the enemies built towers to the height of
the rampire, prepared great hooks and strong penthouses, or safegards of boards
and timber, according as the captives had given them instruction. The seventh
day of the siege being a very windy day, they cast hot bullets of clay out of
slings, and burning darts upon the cabines of the Romans, which after the
manner of the Galls were that^hed with straw. These cabines were quickly set
on fire, which by the violence of the wind was carried over all the camp. The
enemy pressing forward with a great clamor, as though the victory were already
gotten, began to bring their Turrets and Testudines to the rampire, and to
scale it with ladders. But such was the valor of the Roman soldiers, that
albeit they were scorched on all sides with fire, and overcharged with
multitude of weapons, and saw all their wealth burned before their face; yet no
man forsook the rampire, or scarce looked back at that which had happened, but
they all fought valiantly, and with an (...) courage. ^his was the sorest day
the Romans had, and yet it had this issue, that a very great number of the
enemies were slain and wounded; for they ha^ so thronged themselves under the
rampire, that the hindmost hindered the foremost from retiring back. The flame
at length abating, and the enemies having brought on one of their towers to the
very works, the Centurions of the third cohort drew back themselves and their
men from the place where they stood, and with signs and voices called to the
enemies to enter if they thought good: but none of them durst approach. Then
did they by casting stones from all parts beat them from the works, and set
their tower on fire.

OBSERVATION.
THis one example may serve to show the excellency of the Roman discipline, and
the wisdom of the first founders of that Art. For they perceiving that the
fortune of wars consisted chiefly in the mastering of particular occurrences,
trained their soldiers in that form of discipline as might struggle with
inconveniences, and strong oppositions of contradicting accidents; and so
overwage all difficulties and hindrances with a constant perseveration and a
courage invincible. For the great attempting spirit of an ambitious Commander,
that seeks to overtop the trophies of honor with the memory of his exploits,
will quickly perish by his own direction, if the instruments of execution be
weaker then the means which lead him to his designments. For where the weight is
greater then the strength, the engine will sooner break then lift it up. Let a
discreet Leader therefore so level his thoughts, that his resolution may not
exceed the ability of his particular means: but first let him be well assured
what his soldiers can do, before he resolve what he will do: or otherwise let
him so enable them by discipline and instructions, according to the example of
the old Romans, that their worth may answer the height of his desires, and
follow his aspiring mind with a resolution grounded upon knowledge and valor;
and so making their ability the ground of his designs, he shall never fail of
means to perform what he intends. The want of this consideration has within
these late years repaied our Commanders in many parts of Christendom with
loss and dishonor, when as they have measured the humor of their poor needy
and undisciplined soldier by the garb of their ambitious thoughts, and so laid
such projects of difficulty, as were very unsuitable in the particularity of
occurrences to that which their soldiers were fit to execute.

CHAP. XX.
The emulation between two Centurions, Pulfio and Varenus, with their fortunes
in the encounter.
THere were in that legion two valiant men, Caesar.
Titus Pulfio and L. Varenus, Centurions, coming on apace to the dignity of the
first orders. These ^wo were at continual debate which of them should be
preferred one before another, and every year contended for place of preferment
with much strife and emulation. Pulfio, at a time that the fortification was
very sharply assaulted, called to Varenus, and asked him why he now stood
doubtful; or what other place he did look for to make trial of his manhood.
This is the day, says he, that shall decide our controversies. And when he had
spoken these words, he went out of the fortification; and where he saw the
Enemy thickest, he fiercely set upon them. Then could not Varenus hold himself
within the rampire, but for his credit sake followed after in a reasonable
distance. Pulfio cast his pile at the enemy, and struck one of the multitude
through that come running out against him. He being slain, the enemies cover
him with their shields, and all cast their weapons at Pulfio, giving him no
respite or time of retreat. Pulfio had his target struck through, and the dart
stuck fast in his girdle. This chance turned aside his scabbard, and hindered
his right hand from pulling out his sword; in which disadvantage the enemy
pressed hard upon him. Varenus came and rescued him. Immed^ately the whole
multitude, thinking Pulfio to be sla^n with the dart, turned to Varenus: who
speedi^y betook him to his sword, and ca^e to handy-stroaks; and having slain
one, he put the rest somewhat back. But as he followed over-hastily upon them,
he fell down. Him did Pulfio rescue being circumvented and in danger: and so
both of them, having slain many of the enemy, retired to their Camp in safety,
to their great honor. Thus Fortune carried as well the contention, as the
encounter of them both, that being Enemies, they nevertheless gave help to
save each others life, in such sort as it was not to be judged which of them
deserved greatest honor.

OBSERVATION.
CAesar inserteth* this accident of the two Centurions, as worthy to be related
amongst the deeds of Arms contained in these Commentaries. Wherein we are
first to observe the grounds of this quar^ell, which was their continual
strife for place of preferment, which they sought after, by showing their
valor in time of danger, and approving their worth by the greatness of their
desert: a contention worthy the Roman discipline, and may serve for a pattern
of true honor full of courage, accomplished with virtue. For these Simultates
which desire of honor had cast between them, brought forth emulation, which is
the spurr of virtue, far from enmity or hateful contention: for the
difference between these two qualities is, that enmity hunteth after
destruction, and only rejoices in that which brings to our adversary utter
ruin, dishonor, or ill achievement; but emulation contendeth only by well
deserving to gain the advantage of another man's fame, that uses the same ^eans
to attain to the like end; and is always mixed with love, in regard of the
affinity of their affections, and the sympathy of their desires, not seeking
the overthrow of their Competitour, but succouring him in time of danger, and
defending him from foul and unfortunate calamity, that he may still continue to
show the greatness of his worth, by the opposition of inferior actions, which
are as a lesser scantling of desert to measure the estimation of the others
honor.

A virtue rare and unknown in these days, and would hardly find subjects to be
resident in, if she should offer her help in the course of our affairs, or sue
to be entertained by the crooked dispositions of our times: For we can no
sooner conceive the thoughts that breed emulation, but it turns presently to
hatred, which is followed to the uttermost of our malice, and rests better
satisfied with the miserable end of our opposed partner, then with thousand of
Trophies deservedly erected to our honor. Which makes me wonder, when I look
into the difference of these and those ages, whether it were the discipline of
that time which brought forth such honest effects of virtue, to their glory and
our ignominy, having learned better rules then were known unto them; or whether
the world weakened with age, want strength in these times to bring forth her
creatures in that perfection as it did in those days; or what other cause has
made our worst affections so violent, and our better faculties so remiss and
negligent, that virtue has no part in us but words of praise, our whole
practice being consecrated to actions of reproach. The injuries, murders,
scandalous carriages of one toward another, which in these days are so
readily offered and so impatiently digested, will admit no satisfaction but
private combat; which in the first Monarchies was granted only against
strangers and foreign enemies, as the only objects of Arms and wrath, and
capable of that justice which the private sword should execute: for they well
perceived that these single battles were as sparkles of civil discord, and
intestine wars; although not so apparent in the general view of their State,
yet as odious in particular, and as dishonorable to good government. And if
there were a true record of such as have been either slain or wounded within
these forty years, either in this kingdom, or in France, or in Germany, by
this licentious and brutish custom^, I make no question but they would amount
to a number capable of that fearful style which is attributed to Civil wars.

Neither is there any law, how rigorous or hard soever, that can give relief
to this disorder, but the restraint will draw on as great enormities, and as
intolerable in a good governmen^. (...) King of the Lumbards for^ade his
subj^^ts this manner of combat: but shortly afte^ he was constrained to recall
the Edict for the avoiding of greater evils; although he protested the thing to
be both inhumane and barbarous. The like Edict was published in France by
Philip the Fair; but was within two years revoked again at the instant request
of his Su^jects, in regard of the murders and assasinats committed in that
kingdom.

The only remedy that I find to take effect in this case, was that of late
time which the Prince of Melphe in Pi^mo^t invented to prevent this evil: for
perceiving how ordinary quarrels and bloodshed were in his camp, he assigned a
place between two bridges for the performance of the Du^ilum, with this charge,
that he that had the w^^st should always be slain, and cast from the bridge
into the water. The danger joined with dishonor (which by this Decree attended
such as undertook private combat) made the soldiers wiser in their carriage,
and put an end to their sedition and civil discords. But that which is yet
worst of all is, that custom has now made it so familiar, that every (...)
seems sufficient to call the matter to a private combat: a cross look
calls another man's honor in question; but the word Lie is of as great
consequence as any stab or villainy whatsoever. Whereat we may well wonder, how
it happens that we feel our selves so much exasperated at the reproach of
that vice which we so ordinarily commit: for in the custom of these times, to
cast upon us the Lie is the greatest in jury that words can do unto us; and yet
there is nothing more frequent in our mouth. It may be a property in our
nature, to stand chiefly in the defense of that corruption unto which we are
most subject.

I speak not this to qualify the foulness of this vice; for I hold a Liar to
be a monster in nature, one that contemns GOD, and fears man, as an ancient
Father says: but to show the crookedness of our disposition, in disdaining to
acknowledge that fault which we so commonly commit. But I would fain learn when
honor first came to be measureD with words: for from the beginning it was not
so. Caesar was often called to his face thief and drunkard, without any further
matter: and the liberty of invectives which great personages used one against
another, as it began, so it ended with words. And so I think our Lie might too;
for I take him that returns the Lie, and so lets it rest until further
proof, to have as great advantage in the reputation of honor as the former
that first gave the disgrace.

CHAP. XXI.
Ci^^ro finds means to advertise Caesar of this Accident; who hasting,
raises the siege, and puts the Enemy to a great ^laughter.
AS the siege grew daily hoter and sharper, Caesar.
and specially for that a great part of the soldiers were laid up with wounds,
and the matter brought into a few men's hands that were able to make any
defense; so they sent out Letters and Messengers the more often to Caesar: of
whom some were taken, and in the sight of our soldiers tortured to death.
There was one within the place besieged of the Nation of the Nervii, called
Vertico, of honest parentage, who in the beginning of the siege had fled to
Cicero, and carried himself faithfully in that service. This man did Cicero
choose, persuading him with hope of liberty, and other great rewards, to carry
Letters to Caesar: which he took, and having t^ed them up in his Dart,
traveled as a Gall amongst the Galls, without any suspicion, and so came to
Caesar. Of whom he understood how dangerously Cicero and the legion was beset.

Caesar having received those Letters about the eleventh hour of the day,
d^spatched presently a Messenger to M. C^assus the Treasurer in the country of
the Bellovaci, twenty five miles off, commanding the legion to set out at
midnight, and speedily to come unto him. Crassus set out and came along with
the Messenger. He sent another Post to C^ius Fabius the Legate, to bring that
legion to the confines of the Atrebates, through which he was to pass. And
wrote in like manner to Labienus, that if it stood with the convenience of the
State, he should bring his legion to the territories of the Nervii: for the
rest of the Army that were further off he thought good not to expect. He drew
four hundred horse or thereabouts from the nearest wintering-Camps. And being
advertised about the third hour (by the forerunners) of Crassus coming, he
marched that that day twenty miles.

He made Crassus Governor of Samarobrina, Cambray.
and gave him one legion for the defense thereof; in regard that the baggage of
the whole Army, the hostages of the Provinces, the public transactions and
Letters, together with all the Corn which he had got for the provision of the
Winter, was left in that place. Fabius, according to his directions, without
any delay met him with his legion.

Labienus understanding of the death of Sabinus, and the slaughter of the
Cohorts, and knowing also that the whole forces of the Treviri were marching
toward him, doubted that if his setting forward out of his winter station
should seem as a stealing away, he should not be able to undergo the charge of
the enemy, whom a late victory had made insolent: and therefore informed Caesar
by his Letters, what danger it would be to draw the legion from their
wintering-camp; relating what had happened amongst the Eburones, and how that all
the forces of the Treviri, both horse and foot, lay but three miles distant
from his Camp.

Caesar allowing of these reasons, howsoever his hope of three legions was
fallen unto two, yet his whole trust was in celerity, as the only means of all
their safeties: and so by great journeys came into the consines of the Nervii;
where he understood by the Captives how matters passed with Cicero, and what
danger he was in. At what time he persuaded a certain horseman of the Galls,
by great rewards offered unto him, to carry a Letter unto Cicero; which he sent
writ in Greek Characters, least his purposes should be discovered, if the
Letter had been intercepted: advising, that if he could not come to his
presence, he should tie it to the string of a Dart, and so cast it into the
fortifications. He advertised them by his Letter that he was on the way with
the legions, and would be there instantly to raise the siege, exhorting him to
persevere in his wonted gallantry. The Gall fearing some danger, followed the
directions, and cast it into the works by a Dart; which fell by chance upon a
turret, and there stuck two days before it was perceived: the third day a
soldier finding it, took it down and brought it to Cicero; who read it
publicly in the assembly of the soldiers, and put them all into exceeding
great joy. And at the same time the smoke of their fires began a far off to be
discovered; which put them out of all doubt of the approach of the legions.

The Galls being advertised thereof by their Discoverers, left the siege, and
made toward Caesar with all their power; which consisted of 60000 men or
thereabouts* Cicero finding himself at liberty, sought out the same Vertico
before mentioned, to carry Letters to Caesar; advising him to be wary and
diligent in his passage: signifying by those Letters that the enemy had left
the siege, and turned all his forces toward him. Which Letters being brought
unto Caesar about midnight, he certified his party of the contents thereof, and
prepared them by encouragement to fight. The next day as soon as it began to be
light he removed his Camp; and having marched about four miles, he discovered
the multitude of the enemy beyond a great Valley and a River. It was a matter
of exceeding danger to give battle to so great a number in a place of
disadvantage: and forasmuch as he knew that Cicero was freed of the siege, he
thought he might the better forbear to make such haste; and thereupon sat
down, and in as indifferent a place as he could choose fortified his Camp. Which
being of it self very little, as not having scarce seven thousand men, and
those without any carriages; yet he lessened it as much as he could by
narrowing the usual streets there of, to the end he might the better defend it,
if happily the enemy might be drawn to engage himself seriously in any attempt
upon the same. In the mean time having sent out Discoverers into all parts, he
informed himself which way he might most conveniently pass over the valley.

The same day, after small incounters of the Cavalry at the water, either party
contained themselves within their fortifications: the Galls, as expecting
greater forces, which were not yet come; and Caesar, that by a counterfeit fear
he might draw the Enemy to the place where he was lodged on this side the
valley, and so strike the battle before his Camp; and if he could not bring it
so about, then upon discovery of the ways, to pass the valley and the river
with less danger. As it began to be daylight the Cavalry of the enemy came
near unto the Camp, and began to skirmish with our horsemen. Caesar of set
purpose commanded the horsemen to fall back, and to betake themselves into the
Camp: and withal to fortify their camp on all sides with a higher rampire, to
stop up the Gates; and in doing of these things to carry themselves
tumultuously, and with a feigned show of great fear. With which inducements the
enemy was so drawn on, that he brought over all his forces, and imbattelled
them in an unequal and disadvantageous place. Our men being drawn from the
ra^pier (to make the matter more apparent) they were imboldened to come nearer,
and to cast weapons from all parts into our works: sending Heralds round about
with Proclamation, That if any Gall or Roman would come over unto them before
the third hour, he should be taken into their safe protection; but after that
time there was no hope of any such reception. And they did so contemn our
party, that whereas the Ports were shut up for a show with a single row of
turfs, to the end they might appear to be made up in such manner that they
could not be broken open; some of them began to break down the rampire with
their hands, and others to fill up the ditches.

Which Caesar perceiving, sallied out at all the Ports at once; and sending out
the Cavalry, put the enemy so suddenly to flight, that not one of them
resisted by way of fighting: insomuch as he slew a great number of them, and
put them all besides their Arms. But because he feared to follow them far, in
regard of the woods and bogs that lay in their passage, (being unwilling to
hazard himself upon the least occasion of danger) he returned with all his
forces in safety, and the self-same day came to Cicero. Where he admired the
towers, the mantlets and works which were begun and prepared by the enemy: and
drawing out the legion, he found that the tenth man had not escaped without
wounds. By all which circumstances he understood, with what danger and va^lour
the business had been carried. He commended Cicero and the legion according to
their merit; calls out by name such Centurions and Tribunes of the soldiers,
as by testimony of Cicero were found to have deserved extraordinarily in that
service; informed himself by the captives of the certainty of Sabinus and
Cotta's misfortune. The next day he spoke publicly to the soldiers, opened
the particulars of that matter, and then seasoned them with comfort and
encouragement; showing that the loss which happened through the fault and
temerity of a Legate, was to be born with better patience: and the rather
forasmuch as by the assistance of the immortal Gods, and by their own virtue,
the loss was redeemed in such a fashion, as neither the enemy did long joy it,
nor themselves were long afflicted with grief for the same.

OBSERVATION.
THe passages in this Chapter are of great variety, and do give occasion of
much discourse. But that which is most remarkable is, that to exceed in forces
and troops of men, may be a means to bring a party to an overthrow: for an
extraordinary power does always beget an opinion sorting to their own desires,
and can hardly think of any other end then that which s^^^th with security and
victorious success; which being crossed in any material circumstance, and put
besides the course of their intendments, whereby they fail of what they
expected, does consequently draw all the other way, and changes hope into
mishap: as it fared here with the Galls upon Caesar's sudden sallying out of
the Camp.

CHAP. XXII.
The commotions of the States of Gallia* Induciomarus attempting great matters,
is slain, and the Country quieted.
IN the mean time the report of Caesar's victory was carried to Labienus with
incredible speed, Caesar.
through the country of those of Rheims: insomuch as being fifty miles distant
from that place where Cicero wintered, and that the overthrow was given about
three of the clock in the afternoon, there was a shout at the Camp-gate before
midnight; whereby the men of Rheims congratulated Labienus for that victory.
The fame whereof being carried to the Treviri, Induciomarus, that purposed the
next day to besiege Labienus, fled in the night time, and carried all his
forces back to the Treviri. Caesar remanded Fabius with his legion into their
winter stations: He himself with three legions determined to winter about
Samarobrina. And forasmuch as there were such commotions throughout all Gallia,
himself resolved to abide with the Army all the winter. For upon the news of
the overthrow of Sabinus, almost all the States of Gallia did enter into a
consultation of war; sent Messengers and Ambassadors into all parts, to make
overtures for future resolutions, and to understand in what place the war might
best be set on foot; holding their conventicles by night in secret and desert
places: in such manner as there passed not a day during all that winter which
brought not some new care or trouble to Caesar, whilst he was daily advertised
of new meetings and conspiracies amongst the Galls.

Amongst others he had intelligence from L, Roscius the Leg ate, whom he had
set over the thirteenth legion, that great forces of those States and Cities of
the Galls that are called Armoricae were assembled together to fight against
him, Britany.
and were come within eight miles of his camp: but understanding of Caesar's
victory, they fell back in such a fashion as though they meant to fly away.
But Caesar having called unto him the Princes and chief men of every State,
terrifying some, as seeming to understand their complotments, and persuading
others, kept a great part of Gallia in obedience. Howbeit the Senones (a strong
people, and of great authority amongst the Galls) went about by a public
decree to kill Cavarinus, whom Caesar had set to be king over them; (whose
brother Moritasgus at Caesar's coming into Gallia, and whose ancestors formerly
were possessed of that kingdom) which he perceiving fled away, and was
prosecuted to the very borders, and so driven as well out of his private house
as of his kingdom. And having sent Ambassadors to Caesar to satisfy him
herein; whereas he commanded the whole Senate to come unto him, they refused to
obey his warrant. So much it prevailed amongst barbarous people, that there
were some found that durst avouch the undertaking of a war. Which made such an
alteration in the minds of all men, that besides the Hed^i and the State of
Rheims, whom Caesar had in great favor and respect, (the one for their ancient
and perpetual fidelity to the people of Rome, and the other for their late
services in the war of Gallia) there was almost no State free from suspicion.
Insomuch as I know not well whether it may not be wondered at or no, as well for
many other reasons, as specially for that they greatly grieved, that they who
excelled all other nations in deeds of arms, had now lost their reputation so
far, as they were forced to bear the yoke of the people of Rome.

The Treviri and Induciomarus lost no time of all that winter, but sent
Commissioners beyond the Rhene, soliciting the cities, and promising moneys,
with confident aslurance that the greatest part of our Army was already cut
off, and that which was left was but a small remainder of the same: and yet for
all that no people of the Germans could be persuaded to pass the Rhene. For
having twice made trial to their cost, in the war of Ariovistus, and in the
passage of the * Franckfort.
Tenchtheri, they would tempt Fortune no further.

Induciomarus cast down from his hope, did notwithstanding train and gather
forces, got horses from the bordering States, and with great rewards drew unto
him banished and condemned men from all parts of Gallia; and did thereby get
such an opinion throughout all that Continent, that Ambassadors came flocking
unto him from all quarters, and sought his favor both in publ^ck and private.
When he understood that men made to him of their own accord, and that on the
one side the Senones and Carnutes were ^nstigated with a remembrance of their
offenses, and on the other side the Nervii and Aduatici made provision of war
against the Romans, and that he should not want voluntary forces, if he did but
once go out of his confines; he gave order to call a Council of Arms: which
according to the manner of the Galls, was always the beginning of a war,
being such as constrained all the men that were of years, by the common law of
the land, to assemble together in Arms: and he that came last, was in the sight
of all the rest put to death with exquisite torture. In that Council he took
order to proclaim Cingetorix the chief of the other faction, and his son in
law, (who, as we have before declared, had followed Caesar, and not left him in
any of those services) a Traitor to the State, and that his goods should be
confiscated.

That being done, he published in the Council, that he was sent for by the
Senones and the Carnutes, and many other States of Gallia: whether he meant to
go through the territories of the inhabitants of Rhemes; and that he would
harry and waste their country. But first his purpose was to take the camp of
Labienus, and accordingly gave order what he would have done. Labienus being in
a camp exceedingly fortified, as well by Nature as by Art, did not fear any
danger that might happen to himself or the legion; but rather studied not to
let pass any occasion to carry the matter handsomely and to purpose. And
therefore being advertised by Cingetorix and his allies, what speech
Induciomarus had delivered in the Council, he sent Messengers to all the
confining cities, and commanded horsemen to be sent unto him by a certain day.

In the mean time Induciomarus rid up and down almost every day with all his
cavalry under his camp; sometimes to view the site thereof, otherwhile to
parlee, or else to terrify the soldier: and his horsemen for the most part
would cast their weapons within the rampire. Labienus kept all his men within
the fortifications, and did what he could to make the enemy b^lieve that he was
sore afraid. And as Induciomarus came daily with greater contempt to the camp,
one night having taken in the cavalry of the bordering cities, which he had
formerly sent for, he kept all his party (by good guarding) within his camp
with such diligence, that their reception could not possibly be bruited abroad,
or carried to the Treviri. In the mean time Induciomarus, according to his
wonted custom, approached near the camp, and there spent a great part of the
day: the horsemen cast their weapons, and with words of high reproach called
out our men to fight; without any word given in answer by them. And a little
before the evening, as they dispersed themselves and departed, upon a sudden
Labienus let out all the cavalry at two Ports, commanding them that after the
Enemy was put to slight (which he saw would necessarily happen) that every one
should make after Induciomarus; and that no man should so much as wound any
other enemy, before they saw him slain; being very unwilling to give him time
to escape, while the soldiers were engaged with the rest: and propounded great
rewards to them that slew him. He sent out also several cohorts to assist the
horse. Fortune made good that direction: for as all made after one,
induciomarus was surprised in the foord of a River, and slain, and his head was
brought back into the camp. The horsemen returning, slew as many of the rest as
they could take. This thing being known, all the forces of the Eburones and
Nervii which were met together departed home; and after that time Caesar had
Gallia better settled in quietness.

OBSERVATION.
AS the misfortune which befell Sabinus and Cotta put all Gallia into troubles
and commotions; so the head of Induciomarus reduced all into peace. According
as it is said of the Spaniard, that in some cases one man is worth a thousand.

And thus ends the fifth Commentary.

The sixth Commentary of the wars in GALLIA.
The Argument.
THis Summers Commentary sets forth the malice of an enemy that refuses
open encounter, but keeping himself in the fastness of his holds, forces the
adverse party either to leave him untouched, or to seek him out upon
disadvantage: together with such casualties annexed to the matter, as the power
of fortune does commonly intermingle with such occurrences: as also the manners
and fashions of life then in use amongst the Germans and Galls.

CHAP. I.
Caesar fearing a greater commotion in Gallia, mustereth more forces.
CAESAR for many reasons expecting greater troubles in Gallia, Caesar.
appointed M. Silanus, C. Antistius Reginus, and T. Sextius, Legates in his
army, to make a new choice, and muster up more soldiers; and withal he
entreated Cneius Pompeius Proconsul, forasmuch as he continued at the city
about public businesses, that he would recall to their ensigns, and send unto
him such soldiers as were before discharged of the Consuls oath: for he
thought it very material for the future time to the opinion of the Galls,
when they should see Italy so mighty, that if they had received any loss by
the casualtyes of war, they could not only in a short time make a supply
thereof, but augment their army with greater forces. Which when Pompey had
granted, both for the good of the commonwealth and Caesar's friendship, the
choice being speedily by his ministers performed, before the winter was ended
three legions were enrolled and brought unto him, whereby the number of cohorts
were doubled which were lost with Q. Titurius: and withal he made experience
both by the speed and by the forces, what the wealth and discipline of the
people of Rome could do.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
NOtwithstanding any former purpose, I will begin this Commentary with the
manner of the choice which the Romans used when they mustred soldiers for an
intended war: and will lay it first down as the basis and groundsil of all
military architecture, and carried by them with such a ceremonious and grave
respect, as might best express the seriousness of the action, and make the
soldiers understand what consequence the sequel imported. Polybius, who only
remains of them that have written of the ancient fashion of the Roman war,
amongst other parts of their discipline, has left unto posterity a compendious
relation of their musters and enrollments, which with the help of other
histories may be thus understood.

Upon the choice of their Consuls in the beginning of every year, Polyb.
their custom was to enroll four legions, Lib. 6.
two for either Consul. At which enrollment they first chose fourteen Tribunes
out of the body of their Gentlemen, whom they called Equites. These fourteen
were such as had served five years in the wars, whereby they became eligible of
that dignity. And again, they chose ten other Tribunes out of the Commonalty,
being such as had seen ten years service: grounding this custom upon another
law, which commanded the Equites to serve ten, and the Pedites or Commons
twenty whole years before they could be freed and discharged from the wars. And
therefore according to the proportion of their stipendary time, as the Equites
were admitted Tribunes at five years, so were the legionary footmen at ten, as
at half their complete time of serving in the wars. The general respect which
the Romans had in the choice of every particular man, from the highest to the
lowest, was included in the circumstances of their age, and of their wealth.
The age which they deemed fit to endure the labors of war, was from seventeen
to six and forty, for so says Tubero concerning the first limit of military
ability, that Servius did inrole soldiers from the age of seventeen years,
adjudging such to be sit for the service of the Commonweal. And Censor^nus
expresses the second with an etymology of the name, where he says, that men
were called Juvenes unto the age of forty six years, Quod rempublicam in re
militari possint juvare, because till then they were able to help and serve
their country in war. In this ability of years we are to understand that the
law required every man to perfect the complete number of twenty years stipend;
if there were occasion of so many wars in that space of nine and twenty years,
which is comprehended between seventeen and forty six. The wealth, which is the
second circumstance that made men capable of military dignity, was necessarily
required to amount to the value of Drachmas quadringentas, as Polybius says,
which by the Latin phrase was termed quaterna millia aeris: Thirteen pounds
sterling, or thereabouts.
such as were not worth so much, were neglected in this choice, and reserved
for sea-service: neither was it lawful for any man to attain to any office or
magistracy within the city, until he had merited ten years stipend. Upon a
resolution to make an inrolement, which was almost every year, the Consuls did
proclaim a day when all men of military age were to present themselves. Upon
which day the Roman youth being assembled in the city, and then in the Capitol,
the fourteen Tribunes elected out of the body of the Equites, divided
themselves according as they were chosen by the people into four parts;
forasmuch as in former time the whole forces of their Empire consisted of four
legions or regiments, whereof I have discoursed at large in the former book.
And the four Tribunes first chosen were allotted to the first legion, the three
next to the second legion, the four other to the third, and the three last to
the fourth. In like manner the ten Tribunes which were taken out of the common
body of the people, divided themselves into four parts: and the two first
chosen were enrolled in the first legion, the three next in the second legion,
the two following in the third legion, and the three last in the fourth. By
which ingenious and discreet allotment it came to pass that the communalty
were intermingled in the government of their Armies with the Gentlemen, in such
an excellent mixture, that the Equites were either superior or equal to the
Plebeii; notwithstanding that every legion had an equal number of Tribunes.
The election being thus far carried, the Tribunes of every legion sat them
down by themselves: the people being divided first into their Tribes, and then
into their classes and centuries, casting lots which Tribe should be taken; and
out of that Tribe whereon the lot fell they drew fou^ men, as equal as they
could both in age and habitude, who being brought forth, the Tribunes of the
first legion made the first choice of one of those four; then the Tribunes of
the second legion had their choice, they of the third legion took the next, and
the fourth had the last man. And again out of the same Tribe were other four
chosen; and then the Tribunes of the second legion began first to make their
choice, and so consequently the first legion had the last man. Again four other
being chosen, the Tribunes of the third legion had the first election, and in
that course the second legion had the last man. And by this alternate and
successive election it came to pass, that every legion was equally compounded
both in quality and in number. The inrolement proceeding in this manner until
their numbers were full; the Tribunes of every legion assembled their several
troops together, and took one out of every regiment, and gave an oath unto him
that he should execute and obey, according to his power, whatsoever was
commanded him by his General: the rest being particularly called, were sworn
to keep the same oath which their foreman had taken. And thus we see both who
were the electors, who were eligible, and the manner of their choice. Wherein
we may observe what means they used to engage every particular man with an
interest in the general cause: for they thought it not sufficient to force men
out by public authority, and to bind them si^mply to that service by the
mandates of their Empire, considering the labors and difficulties of war,
which oftentimes are able to dull the edge of the greatest spirit, and to cause
omissions of duty in the most honest and obedient minds; but they tied them
likewise with such particular respects, as did both concern the possessions of
their fortune, and the religion of their soul. For it is observed concerning
man's actions, that unless the mind do faithfully affect the execution, it may
be carried with such a perfunctory service, as shall betray the true intent to
no effect, and deceive the end of that which was promised by designment. And
therefore they refused to inrole any man that had not a convenient proportion
of wealth, to maintain a steadfast and well-resolved courage, and to settle the
motions of a staggering mind, when they bethought themselves that the public
duties wherein they were engaged, were the defensive powers of their Empire,
and the means whereby the public weal continued happy: and so by consequence
their private fortunes were assured from violence, and preserved only by an
effectual observance of their military discipline. I grant that it is not
altogether wealth that does grace and formalize the actions of men; for in some
cases penury and want makes men more valorous, according to the answer which a
soldier once made to Lucullus:

Ibit eo quo vis, Horace.
qul zonam perd^dit, inquit.
Whither you will he will go who is lost his purse.
Notwithstanding, forasmuch as the public cause is either misprised or well
affected, according as it does concern every man in particular; as who will
doubt of the uttermost diligence of those Mariners, that have their vessel
fraught with their own goods? or contrariwise, who will blame a mercenary Pilot
for making peace with death, with the loss of other men's merchandise? for
Patria est ubicunque been est, That Is a man's country where he is well, as one
truly says; and the estimation we have of this life is entertained only by
the benefits we hold by our life: therefore it much imports a State to have
such Agents to negotiate the public businesses, as are engaged in the same by
the interest of their own particular. Neither was it sufficient in that
government to choose men of ability both i^ their body and in their substance,
but they found it necessary to bind their conscience with a religious
consecration, and to swear a faithful obedience to their General, which with
the reverence of the place, being the Capitol, and other ceremonies of majesty
attending the inrolement, does manifestly show how much the Romans imputed to
this part of their discipline, being the foundation of the sequel of that
action.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SEcondly, Reinforcing of troops decayed.
I observe the benefit which an opulent and able State may make of any loss or
misfortune received by an enemy: which consists chiefly in the reinforcing,
or, if it may be, in the redoubling of such troops as the casualties of war
have consumed. For it much abateth the spirit of a people, and turns the
pride of a victory into discouragement and faintness of heart, when they see
their best and most fortunate endeavors atchieve nothing but a reiteration of
their labors, and are driven to begin again that work which with much
difficulty and hazard they had once overcome. For it is the end that makes
any labor to be undertaken, being a otherwise nothing but a pain of the body
and vexation of the spirit. And herefore when it shall be found either
circular, or of many confrontments, before it can answer the designments of our
mind, we choose rather to forgo that contentment which the accomplishment of our
desires would afford us, then to buy it with such a measure of trouble, as
exceeds that which the proportion of our means seems able to effect. In
regard whereof the ancient sages of the world made a task of this quality to be
one of Hercules labors, by faining the serpent Hydra to be of this nature,
that when one head was smitten off, two other heads grew out presently from the
same stump: and so his labor multiplied his travel, and his valor increased
the difficulty of his work. It was Caesar's custom in other cases, to have such
a beginning of strength at his first entrance into a war, as by continuance
might be augmented, and rather increase then decay upon the resistance of an
enemy. So he began the war in Gallia with six legions, continued it with eight,
and ended it with ten: he began the civil war but with one legion; he arrived
at Brundusium with six; he followed Pompey into Greece with fifteen thousand
foot and five thousand horse; and ended that war with two and twenty thousand
foot and a thousand horse. He began the war at Alexandria with three thousand
two hundred foot, and ended it with six legions. He began the war in Africa*
with six, and ended it with eight legions. And thus he imitated natural
motion, being stronger in the end then in the beginning, and made his army as a
plant like to grow great, and sprowt out into many branches, rather then to die
or decay for want of strength or fresh reinforcing.

CHAP. II.
The Treviri solicit the Germans and some of the States of Gallia. Caesar
carries four legions into the territories of the Nervi^.
INduciomarus being slain, Caesar.
as is related in the former book, the Part of the Diocese of Colen.
Treviri gave the government unto his kinsfolk: who intermitted no time to
solicit their borderers with the Germans, and to prom^se them money for the
wars. When they could not prevail with their neighbors, they tried those that
were farther off: and having ^ou^d some that hearkened to their designs, they
confirmed their league with a mutual oath, giving pledges for assurance of
money, and withal they drew Amoiorix into their society and consederation.
Which things being known, Caesar perceiving the preparations which in every
part were made for war, the To ^rmy*
Nervii, (...).
Aduatici, and the (...).
Menapii, with all the Germans on the other side of the Rhene to be in arms,
the Senones not to come being summoned, but to be in council with the (...).
Carnutes and their bordering States, the Germans to be solicited with often
Embassages from the Treviri; he held it best to think of war sooner then
heretofore he was accustomed. And therefore before the winter was ended, with
four legions that lay next together, he entered suddenly upon the confines of
the Nervii, and having taken a great number of men and cattle, before they
could either make head or fly away, he distributed the booty to the soldiers,
wasted the country, caused the people to come in, and to give pledges unto him.
That business being speedily ended, he brought the legions back again into
their wintering camps.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis exemplary course of proceeding in punishing some one for the offenses of
many, Exemplarie justice.
has ever been held the best means to repress rebellious and factious
motions, as well amongst particular subjects which do conspire against the
common Policy of a State, as also of such inferior Cities and States as shall
entertain a confederacy prejudicial to the sovereignty of an Empire: for in
all such combinations the undertakers are ever more confident in the assistance
and mutual encouragement of each others assent and forwardness, then in the
strength of their own particular means. For the mind propounding a course
contrary to a virtuous direction, is always suspicious and mistrustfull of the
issue: for as honest motions and conceptions of the heart are attended with
assurance, so does diffidency wait upon indirect and perfidious designments*
And thence it happens that when the inward thoughts can afford no means of
emboldening, they commonly rely upon each others example, and do make the
action to appear honest unto themselves, forasmuch as so many associates do
approve it. For the prevention whereof in the Continent of Gallia, Caesar first
laid a heavy hand upon the Nervii, being well assured, that as rebellious
motions are strengthened and drawn on by the mutual example of conspiring
members, so they may be weakened and extinguished by the exemplary ruin and
subversion of some one or more of the said members, which is as forcible to
dissuade as the other to encourage: suting right with the tenor of Justice,
which ought to be carried in such sort against offenders, that by the
punishment of some few the fear may touch all. According as the Poet describes
the nature and effect of thunder; Ipse Pater media nimborum in nocte corusca
Fulmina molitur d^^xtra, quo maxima motu
Terra tremit, fugere ferae, and mortalia corda
Per gentes humilis statuit pavor; ille flagranti
Aut Athon, aut Rhodopea, aut alta Ceraunia dextra
Dejicit. --
The whole earth trembled, but one hill only smoaked for it.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SEcondly, I observe the respect which Caesar had to the extraordinary labor
of his soldiers: Upon extraordinary service, the soldier extraordinarily
rewarded.
fore whereas they were drawn out of their wintering-camps before winter was
ended, and were carried unseasonably upon a service, he rewarded them with the
booty and spoil of the enemy, contrary to the ordinary course of the Roman
warfare, which reserved either all or the most part thereof for the public
Treasury, and left the soldier to his stipendary entertainment. Which is a
point very observable in the carriage of a war: wherein are required as well
eminent and extraordinary attempts, as common and usual duties, and in the
judgment of a wise Commander are thought worthy their answerable rewards. At
the siege of Gergovia, as it follows in the seventh Commentary, L. Fabius a
Centurion told his companions, that the booty and pillage which he had got at
the taking of Avaricum would not suffer any man to get up upon the wall before
himself. And so for the most part it falls out, that honorable attempts
being honorably rewarded, do as seed sown in good ground, multiply the
increase of like virtuous actions. And this was one principal means which he
used to give courage and valor to his soldiers; as when he went to get Spain
from Pompey and that faction, Lib. 1. civil. bell.
he borrowed money of the Tribunes and Centurions, and gave it in largess to the
soldiers, whereby he gained (as he says) two advantages, quod pignore animos
Centurionum devinxit, and largitione redemit militum voluntates, for he engaged
the Centurions to him whilst he had this pledge from them, and by his largess
purchased the good will of the soldiers.

CHAP. III.
Caesar summoneth a general Council, and carries his army against the
Senones.
A General Councellor meeting of all the States of Gallia being summoned,
Caesar.
according to his first resolution, in the beginning of the Spring, whereas all
the rest saving the Senones, Carnutes, and Treviri made their appearance; he
conceived of it as the beginning of war and defection, and thereupon setting
all other things aside, he transferred the Council to the city of Paris in the
confines of the Senones, which in the time of their fathers had united their
State unto them, but were held clear of this confederacy. This thing being
published from the Tribunal, the same day he carried the Legions against the
Senones, and by great journeys came into their country. His coming being known,
Acco the chiefest author of that rebellion commanded the multitude to go into
cities and towns of defense: but as they endeavored, before it could be
accomplished, news was brought that the Romans were already come; whereby they
necessarily left off their purpose, and sent Ambassadors to Caesar to entreat
for favor. They used the mediation of the Hedui, whose State had of old time
been in faith and league with the Romans. Caesar at the suit of the Hedui did
willingly afford them pardon, and accepted their excuse, forasmuch as he judged
the summer time fitter to be spent in the war which was coming on him, rather
then in matter of question and judgment: and having commanded an hundred
pledges, he delivered them to be kept by the Hedui. The Carnutes likewise sent
messengers and pledges, and by the entreaty of the men of Rhemes, whose clients
they were, received the same answers. Caesar ended the Council, and commanded
horsemen to be sent him from all the States of Gallia.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IT shall not seem impertinent to the Reader, that I take occasion here to say
somewhat touching the use and benefit of this Parliament or Councell-generall,
The benefit and use of ^ouncel^ and Parliaments.
wherein all the states of Gallia, or at the least such as did acknowledge the
Roman sovereignty, presented their fealty, and were mutual witnesses of each
others allegiance. Concerning which we are to understand, that as all natural
bodies have a transitory being, depending upon motion and function of parts; so
specially States and Commonweals, as sympathizing with natural causes, have no
certain continuance in one and the same being, but are subject to the
alteration of time and fortune, and do pass the ages of a natural life, from
infancy growing to better strength, until it come to the best perfection which
years can afford it, and then decaying again by like degrees, even to the
period and death of that policy. For remedy whereof, and for the prevention of
any weakening disease which might infect either the whole powers of the body,
or so possess any part thereof, as it might thereby prove either dangerous or
unprofitable, amongst other helps, these councels and meetings have been
thought necessary; wherein every particular State and city had some of their
society present, as well to open their grievances, if any were, and to seek
ease and relief by way of treaty and dispute, as also to receive such
directions and mandates as the wisdom of the Prince should think meet for
their government. For as this common council or general assembly may well be
termed the pulse of a politic body, whereby the true state and temperature
thereof is discerned: so is it also as a treaty or parlee, and a renewing of
the conditions of peace between the head and the members; where sovereignty and
obedience being mutually propounded, do concur in the establishing of true
and perfect government. And this is that which the Politicians of later time do
in their writings call the reducing of a commonweal to the first beginning: for
the noisome and super^luous humors being by this means purged and abated, the
body of the public weal is refined into such true and natural elements, and
settled in that disposition of health as may give great hope of long
continuance. Besides this use and benefit of these assemblies, there were many
necessary businesses concluded, and many things agreed unto, serving to the
maintenance of war against parties and factions; as namely the levi^s and
supplies of horse and foot, granted by this Council as a subsidy, which in the
Roman army received stipend and pay by the name of Auxiliary or associate
forces, whereof we read in many places of these Commentaries, and particularly
in this book. But the Romans used specially the service of their horsemen, as
the flower of their strength, and far exceeding their foot companies in
execution of arms and use of war, wherein the Galls have ever challenged a
preeminence before other their neighbor nations, and have continued the same
reputation even unto this time. The French are better horsemen then footman.
Whether it be in regard of the nimble and quick motions of their spirits,
which are better suited with the swift and speedy execution of horse, then with
any readiness which their own strength can afford them, or what other cause it
has, I know not: but this I am sure of, that as the world takes notice of
their hot fantasies, so would the French be reckoned the best horsemen of any
other nation. The last saying which I observe concerning this council is, the
time wherein it was summoned, which was the beginning of the Spring, rather
then any other part of the year, whereof there is this reason; that if any
State neglected the summons, and refused to make their appearance according to
custom, the summer time coming on, gave good means to the Roman legions to
punish the insolency of such a contempt: as it happened in this place to the
Senones, Carnutes and Treviri, whose absence from this meeting was a sufficient
argument to Caesar of their rebellion, and deserved the reward of open revolt.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe second thing which I will briefly observe in this Chapter, Not to misspend
the time in unnecessary services.
is the pardon which Caesar willingly gave the Senones at the mediation of the
Hedui; not so much for the respect he bare unto the Hedui, although they had of
long time performed good service to the Roman Empire, and were found more
faithful then all the States of Gallia; (howbeit I doubt not but that he was
glad of that occasion to gratify the Hedui;) but as a master in that faculty,
well knowing what best suited with the public profit in all times and seasons,
he would not mispend the summer in questions and di^pute concerning former
errors, which might better be remembered upon other occasions, but rather in
prosecuting war against other special revolters, as a matter more behovefull
to the advancement of the Empire, and best fitting the time of summer. For in
following a business, there is nothing more availeable to a fortunate issue,
then to be able to distinguish of the validity of the parties, and to discern
which has most interest in the bulk of the matter, that so we may not be
mistaken in our designs, but follow that course as shall most advantage our
purpose. And here a General is to take special care, that no humorous respect
do hinder that resolution which true judgment approves: for oftentimes it
falls out that either particular profit, delighting pleasures, desire of
revenge, or some other unseasonable affection does so entangle them in their
proceedings, as they never attain to the main drift of the action: and this is
called stumbling by the way.

CHAP. IV.
Caesar intends the war of the Treviri.
THis part of Gallia being quieted, he bent his whole mind to make war against
the Treviri and Ambiorix, Caesar.
commanding Cavarinus with the cavalry of the Senones to go along with him,
least any tumult should happen in his absence, either through his
coffeehouse, or the malice of the State. These things being thus determined,
forasmuch as he well kne^ that Ambiorix would not come to blows in open fight,
he endeavored by what means he could to understand his other purposes. The
Menapii were neighbour-borderers upon the consines of the Eburones, enclosed
about with a defense of bogs and woods; and only they of all the states of
Gallia had never sent to Caesar touching any contract of peace: of them
Ambiorix was received and had familiar entertainment. And further he understood
that by the means of the Treviri the Germans were brought to a contract of
friendship with him also. These helps he thought were fit to be taken from
Ambiorix, before he set upon him with open war; least despairing of his safety,
he should either hide himself amongst the Menapii, or be compelled to fly over
the Rhene to the Germans. In this resolution he sent the baggage of the whole
army with a convoy of two Legions to Labienus, who was then in the territories
of the Treviri, and he himself with five exped^te and unburthened Legions made
toward the Menapii. They having made no head, but trusting to the strength of
the place, ^led into the woods and bogs, and carried all they had with them.
Caesar dividing his forces to C. Fabius a legate, and M. Crassus the treasurer,
having made speedy provision of bridges, did set upon them in three parts, and
burnt houses and villages, and took great numbers of men and cattle, whereby
the Menapii were constrained to send to Caesar for peace. He having taken
pledges of them, assured them that he would esteem them as enemies, if they did
either receive Ambiorix into their country, or any messengers from him. The
matter being thus compounded, he left among them Comius of Arras with certain
horse, as a garrison to that place, and he himself made toward the Treviri.

OBSERVATIONS.
HEnce we may observe, that as it falls out in other things for the most
part, so specially in matter of war there is such a medley and interlacing of
material circumstances with the body of the action, that commonly one
business begets another. Caesar's chief design at this time was the war against
Ambiorix and the Treviri: but considering the contract and league between them
and the Menapii, he would not prosecute the war of the Treviri, until he had
taken away that assistance, and left them in the nakedness of their own
strength. Wherein we may first observe what opinion Caesar held of allies and
associates, Caesar's opinion of allies and associates.
or any other that gave help or assistance to an enemy: for besides this
particular, we may read in the fourth Commentary, that the chiefest cause that
moved him to take the voyage into Britain was, for that the Britans had
underhand given succor and assistance to the Galls; a matter not to be
neglected in his judgment, whether it were in regard of any friendship or good
respect which they bare unto the Galls, or otherwise to keep the Romans
occupied there, that they in the mean time might live quietly at home, which I
need not here dispute: but the matter proves it self plainly by Caesar's own
confession, that the continual supplies sent from Britain were a sufficient
cause to move him to that war. And as it follows in this Commentary
concerning the self same matter, the only cause that drew him to pass the
Rhene the second time into Germany, was the succors which the Germans had
formerly sent to the Treviri; according to reason in cases of other natures,
that he that will extinguish a lamp, must not suffer an addition of oil, nor
admit the influence of lesser streams when he goes about to dry up the greater
river. But that which was the occasion of this business, and might have
challenged the first place in this discourse, was, for that Caesar was almost
assured that Ambior^x would not be brought to a trial of battle; and therefore
he labored to understand his other projects. From whence a Commander may
receive direction what course to hold in a refusal of open encounter: for as
the art and sleight of war is to subdue an enemy so are there more ways and
means to effect that purpose, then by waging battle; as I have discoursed at
large in the third Commentary: Chap. 10.
whereunto I may add thus much, which is generally observed in the carriage of
great and eminent Commanders, that such as failed in matter of negotiation, and
wanted dexterity in managing the course of their business, (notwithstanding
any fortune or singularity in striking a battle,) did never attain to firm and
permanent honor. If any man be desirous to descend into particulars, let him
look into the lives of king Pyrrhus, Demetrius, Hannibal, and Ca^us Mar^us,
whose later ends, or shutting up of their lives, were not answerable to their
excellency in deeds of arms, for want of that judicial disposition of their
business which Caesar might boast of, of whom it may be truly said that
(notwithstanding the many battles which he fought, yet) he did plura consilio,
quam vigerere, do more by his head then his hand.

CHAP. V.
Labienus overthrows the T^eviri by a guile.
WHile Caesar Caesar.
was about these things, the T^eviri having raised great forces both of horse
and foot, had a purpose to assault Labienus wintering in their confines with
one legion. And as they were within two days journey of him they had
intelligence of two legions more which Caesar had sent unto him; whereupon they
encamped themselves some fifteen miles distant from him, and resolved there to
attend the Germans forces. Labienus being advertised of their resolution,
hoping through their rashness to find some good opportunity of encounter, he
left five cohorts for the safety of the carriages, and with five and twenty
other cohorts, besides great forces of horse, he marched toward the enemy, and
encamped himself within a mile of them. Between Labienus and the enemy there
ran (...), the passage whereof by reason of the broken banks was very hard and
difficult: (...) purpose to pass himself, and doubted the enemy would not be
drawn to do it. They had every day more hopes of fresh (...). In the meetings
and councels of war ^e gave out, that forasmuch as the Germans were said to be
at hand, he would neither hazard himself nor the fortunes of the army, but he
would rather remove his camp the next day very early in the morning. This was
quickly carried to the enemy, as amongst many of the Galls that were with him,
some of them did naturally favor the proceedings of their own nation. Labienus
having in the night time called unto him the Tribunes of the soldiers, and the
Centurions of the first Orders, acquainted them with his purpose; and to the
end he might give greater suspicion of fear to the enemy, he caused the camp to
be dislodged with more noise and tumult th^n the Roman discipline had usually
observed; and thereby made the retreat not unlike a slight or escape: which
before daylight (the two camps being so near one to the other) was by the
discoverers brought to the enemy. The last troops of the Romans were scarce
gone out of the camp, but the Galls encouraging one another not to lose so
hopeful a prey, thinking it long (^pecially the Romans being thus affrighted)
to expect the German forces, and that it stood not with their dignity, being so
able, and so many in number, not to adventure upon a handful of men, (...)
from them, and troubled besides with baggage and burden; and therefore they
doubted not to pass the river, and to give them battle in a place of
disadvantage. Labienus suspecting that which now had happened, to the end he
might draw them all over the river, he made as though he would go on forward.
At length sending the carriages a little before, and placing them upon a hill,
Ye have now, (said he) fellow soldiers, that opportunity which ye desired, the
enemy in a cumbersome and unequal place; only afford me your Leader at this
time that valor, which oftentimes heretofore you have showed to your General,
imagine him to be (...), and to see this service with his own eyes. And withal
be commanded the Ensigns to be carried toward the enemy, and the army to be
imbattelled: and leaving a few troops of horse with the carriages, he d^sposed
the rest in the wings of the army. The Romans taking up a cry and a shout, did
speedily cast their pikes at the enemy: who when they saw the Romans ready to
assault them, whom they had thought had fled from them for fear, they were so
discouraged, that even in the first close they betook themselves to flight
toward the next woods. Labienus pursuing them with his horsemen, killed many
of them, and took more prisoners, and within a few days took in the whole
state of the Treviri: for the Germans which came to their succor understanding
of their overthrow, returned home again; and with them went also the kinsmen of
Induciomarus, the authors of that defection. The sovereignty and government
was given to Cingetorix, who from the beginning had ever been true and loyal
to the Romans.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
I Have already handled this practice of a pretended fear, Com. 3. cap. 8.
which the History does so often recommend to our consideration, and have
showed the inconvenience of over-light credulity, leading such easy weeners to
a disappointment of their hopes, and consequently to the hazard of their
fortune. I will now proceed to that which is further employed in this relation,
and respects the chiefest duty of a chief commander: The duty of a General
(...) battle.
and that is, what specially is required of a General in the carriage and
direction of a battle. Concerning which point, as there is nothing more
material to the effecting of any business then opportunity of time,
convenience of place, and an orderly disposition of the means according to time
and place: so in question of encounter or waging battle, the duty of a Leader
may be included in these three circumstances. Concerning the quality of the
place, as the chiefest and first respected in the choice of a judicial
directour, the whole scope of the Roman discipline, from the time of their
first Kings even to the last of their Emperors, did always aim at the
advantage of place, as a necessary help for the obtaining of victory: which I
have already noted in the Helvetian action. Lib. 1. cap. 6.
Yet forasmuch as the wisdom and experience of those times did deem it a
circumstance of such importance, give me leave once again to enforce the use
thereof by these examples. Habetis, milites, (says Labienus in this place)
quam petiistis facultatem, hostem iniquo atque impedito loco tenetis, praes^are
eandem nobis ducibus virtutem, quam saepenumero Imperatori praestitistis, Ye
have, fellow soldiers, that opportunity which ye desired, etc. Whereby he
clears himself of all imputation of ill direction, as having performed the
uttermost duty of a Commander, and given such helps by the advantage of the
place as are requisite to an easy victory, leaving the rest to the execution of
the soldiers. Caesar at the loss he received at Dyrrachium cleared himself to
his soldiers in this sort: Quod esset acceptum detrimenti, cuivis potius quam
suae culpae debere tribui, locum securum ad dimicandum dedisse, etc. the damage
that was received was to be attributed to any body rather then him, he had
chosen them a safe place of fighting, etc. And as it follows in the seventh
Commentary, being imbattelled upon the side of a hill right over against the
army of the Galls, which stood likewise in a readiness to entertain the Roman
valor, he would not suffer his men to hazard themselves in the passage of a
bogge of fifty foot in breadth lying between both the armies, but rather
persuaded his soldiers, disdaining the confrontment of the enemy, to endure
their contumely, rather then to buy a victory with the danger of so many worthy
men, and patiently to attend some further opportunity. Which passage of Caesar,
even in the said terms as it is there related, was urged to good purpose by Sir
Francis Vere in the year one thousand six hundred at a consultation before the
battle of Newport. Battle of Newport.
For the army of the Netherlanders being possessed of the Downs, which are small
swelling hills rising unevenly along the sea shore upon the coast of Flanders,
and the enemy making a stand upon the sands at the foot of those hills, and so
cutting off the passage to Os^end, it was disputed by the Commanders, whether
they should leave the Downs, and go charge the enemy where he stood
imbattelled upon the sands, or attend him in the fastness of the Downs
whereof they were possessed. The whole Council of war were earnestly bent to
forsake the Downs, and to hazard the fight on equal terms, as impatient that
their passage and retreat to Ostend should be cut off. But Sir Francis Vere
well knowing how much it imported the business of that day to hold a place of
such gain and advantage, persuaded Count Maurice by many reasons, and specially
by this of Caesar which I last alleged, not to forgo the help of the Downs,
but to expect the enemy in that place, and so make use of that benefit upon the
first encounter, rather then to adventure the success of the battle in worse
terms, in hope of clearing the passage: and showing also many probable
conjectures, that the enemy would not continue long in that gaze. Wherein as
his opinion then prevailed, so all that were present were eyewitnesses both of
the truth of his conjecture, and the soundness of his judgment. For the enemy
within a while after coming on to charge the troops of the States, was received
with such a counterbuffe from the hills, and were violently beaten back in such
rude manner, as our men had the execution of them for the space of a quarter of
a mile or more, which was no small advantage to the fortune of that day.
Touching the opportunity of time, which Pindarus calls the Mother of worthy
exploits, and oftentimes depends upon the circumstance of place, a General
ought carefully to advise that he neither precipitate nor foreslow the
occasion, which is well expressed in this particular service of Labienus. For
where his purpose was to draw the enemy over a river that had steep and uneasy
banks, and thereby of a hard and difficult passage, he would not show his
resolution until he had drawn them all over the river: for he was well assured
that the Roman legions would so charge the enemy upon their first encounter
with the unresistable weight of their piles, that in their giving back they
could not escape the danger of the river. And therefore to make the victory
more absolute and complete, he suffered them all to come over the water, that
all might be endangered in their passage back again. And this is the benefit
which opportunity brings, which is the rather to be attended with all
carfulness, forasmuch as Non saepe, ac d^u, eadem occasio est, a man has
neither often nor long the same opportunity.

Concerning the last circumstance, of the apt and fit disposition of the forces
according to time and place, which is necessarily required in the duty of a
General; it is referred to this end only, that they may be ranged in such
manner, that as one man is assistant to another in their several files and
ranks, so one troup may be in subsidiis, assistant to another, to the end that
no part may stand naked, or fall in the singleness of its own strength, but
that one may second another from the first to the last. C. Sempron^us a Roman
Consul having fought unadvisedly, and received an overthrow, Julius the Tribune
of the people caused Tempanius a horseman that was present at the battle to be
called, and as Livie reports it, Coram eis, Sexte Tempani, inquit, arbitreris
ne C. Sempronium Consulem, aut in tempore pugnam intisse, aut firmasse
subsidiis aciem? he said thus before them, Sextus Tempanius, do you believe
that C. Sempronius the Consul chose a good time to fight, or that he took order
for assistant supplies to his army? for Livie says, he fought incaute
inconsulteque, non subsidiis firmata acie, non equite apt locato, heedlesly
and without good advice, neither strengthening his army with supplies, nor well
placing his cavalry. And of these three circumstances consists the duty and
office of a General, touching the direction of a battle; wherein whosoever
fails, does hazard the prerogative of his command over that army whic he
leads, according to that of Caesar in the first of his Commentaries, Se
scire, quibuscunque exercitus dicto audiens non fuerit, aut male re gesta
fortunam defuisse, aut aliquo facinore comperto, avaritiae esse convictum, that
he knew well, whenever an army refused to be obedient to their Commander, it
was either because upon some ill success they saw he was unfortunate, or that
by the discovery of some notorious matter they found him convict of avarice.
Which Caesar himself needed not to fear, if we may believe Plutarch, In the
life of Caesar.
who writes that he was endowed by nature with an excellent promptitude and
aptness to take opportunity in any business.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
I May not omit to insist a little upon this noise or shout which the soldiers
took up in the instant of the charge, The use and benefit of a sho^t took up in
a charge or assault.
and is related in this place as a material point in their carriage at this
service. A matter ancient and usual in the Roman armies, as well in the time
of their first Kings, as their first Consuls. Fusi primo impetu and clamore
hosts, the enemies were overthrown at the first onset and shout, Lib. 1.
says Livie concerning Romulus. Lib. 2.
And not long after, Consul nec promovit aciem, nec clamorem reddi passus, the
Consul neither marched his army forward, nor suffered them at all to shout.
Caesar in the censure which he g^ve concerning Pompey his direction for the
battle at Pharsalia, Lib. 3.
does express a double use of this clamor or shouting: Civil.
first the terror of the enemy, and secondly the encouragement or assurance of
themselves: Est quaedam animi incitatio (says he) atque alacritas naturaliter
innata omnibus, quae stud^o pugnae incenditur; hanc non reprimere sed augere
impera^ores debent: neque (...) ant qu tus institutum est ut signa und que
concinerent, clamorem universi tollerent, quibus rebus and hosts terreri and
suos incitari existimaverunt. There is a certain raising and cheerfulness of
the mind imbred naturally in all, which is stirred up by an eagerness to
fight: this a General should not crush but cherish. So that it was not without
cause that in old times they had a custom that the whole army should make a
noise and raise a general shout, whereby they supposed as the enemies were
affrighted, so their own men were encouraged. Two contrary effects proceeding
from a cause, which to common sense carries no show of any such efficacy: Vox
and praeterea nihil, a bare voice and nothing more; as one said of the
Nightingale in another sense. But such as do seriously look into the reasons
thereof, shall find the saying true which is ascribed to the elder and wiser
Cato, Verba plus quam gladium, and voces quam manum hosts territare, and in
fugam vertere; Words will do more then Swords, and Voices sooner then Hands may
affright the enemy and put him to flight. Lib. 1.
The ear, as I have already noted, will sooner betray the soul to the distress
of fear, then any other of the five senses. Lib. 3. cap. 18.
Which Josephus well understood, although peradventure he applied not so fit a
remedy, when he commanded his men to stop their ears at the acclamations of the
Roman legions, lest they might be daunted and amazed thereat. The reason may
be, for that our discourse (diligently attending upon a matter of that
consequence which calls the lives of both parties in question, and valuing
every circumstance at the utmost) does always presuppose a cause answerable to
such an effect of joy and assurance. For these shouts and acclamations are
properly the consequents of joy, and are so availeable that they deceive both
parties: for such as take up the shout by way of anticipation, do seem to
conclude of that which is yet in question; and the enemy thereupon apprehends
danger when there is none at all, whereby it happens, Hosts terreri, and
suos incitari, that the enemies are affrighted, and our own men encouraged, as
Caesar notes. Besides these examples I might allege the authority of Holy
Writ, but that it might seem both unsavory and unseasonable to make a
commixture of such diversities. I will therefore content my self with a
practice of our time at the battle of Newport, where after diverse retreats and
pursuits, either side chasing the other as it were by turn and mutual
appointment, and as it often falls out in such confrontments; at last
commandment was given to the English to make head again, and after some pause
to charge the enemy with a shout: which being accordingly performed, a man
might have seen the enemy startle before they came to the stroke; and being
charged home, were so routed, that they made not head again that day. For the
prevention of such a disadvantage, there can be no better president then that
which Plutarch notes, In Marius life.
touching the battle between the Romans and the Ambrons, a part of that deluge
of people which came down into Italy with the Cimbri and Teutones; for these
Ambrons coming out to give battle, to the end they might strike fear into the
Romans, made an often repetition of their own name with a loud sounding voice,
Ambrons, Ambrons, Ambrons. The Italians on the other side that first came down
to fight were the Ligurians, inhabiting the coast of Genoa, who hearing this
noise, and plainly understanding them, made answer with the like cry, sounding
out their own name, Ligurii, Ligurii, Ligurii. Whereupon the Captains of both
sides made their soldiers cry out altogether, contending for envy one against
another who should cry it loudest: and so both sides were encouraged, and
neither of them disadvantaged, Clamore utrinque sublato, whilst both sides
continued the cry.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THis Labienus was a great soldier, and well acquainted with Caesar's manner in
leading an army, and made many good fights while he continued under his
command: but after he betook himself to Pompeys part, and joined with a faction
against his first master, he never achieved any thing but loss and dishonor.

-- Dux fortis in armis
Caesareis Labienus erat, nunc transfuga vilis.
Once Labienus was a Captain stout
On Caesar's side, now a base Turn-about.
And upon that occasion he is often mentioned as a memorial of his disloyalty,
to prove that good success in matter of war does follow the General rather
then any inferior Captain. For it is observed of diverse, whose fortune has
been great under the conduction of some commanders, and as unlucky under other
leaders: like plants or trees that thrive well in some grounds, and bear store
of fruit, but being transplanted do either dye or become barren. And doubtless
there may be observed the like sympathy or contrariety in the particular
courses of man's life, wherein they are carried upon the stream of their
fortunes, according to the course of their first imbarking. And therefore such
as happen in a way that leads to successful ends, shall much wrong
themselves either to turn back again, or to seek bypath, whose ends are both
unknown and uncertain: and herein the French saying may serve to some purpose,

Si vous estes bien, tenez vous la,
If you find your self well, hold your self there.

CHAP. VI.
Caesar carries his army over the Rhene into Germany.
Caesar Caesar.
being come from the Menapii to the Treviri, did resolve to pass the Rhene for
two causes: the one was, for that the Germans had sent succors and supplies to
the Treviri; the other that Ambiorix might have no reception or entertainment
among them. Upon this resolution, a little above that place where he carried
his army over before, he commanded a bridge to be made after the known and
appointed fashion, which by the great industry of the soldiers was ended in a
few days: and leaving a sufficient strength at the bridge, least any sudden
motion should rise amongst the Treviri, he carried over the rest of his forces
both horse and foot. The Ubii which before time had given hostages and were
taken into obedien^^, sent Ambassadors unto him to clear themselves from
imputation of disloyalty, and that the Treviri had received no supplies from
their State: they pray and desire him to spare them, least the general distaste
of the Germans should cause him to punish the innocent for the guilty: and if
he would ask more hostages, they would willingly give them. Caesar upon
examination of the matter, found that the supplies were sent by the Suevi: and
thereupon he accepted the satisfaction of the Ubii, and inquired the way and
the passages to the Suevi. Some few days after he understood by the Ubii, that
the Suevi had brought all their forces to one place, and had commanded such
nations as were under their dominion, that they should send them forces of
horse and foot. Upon this intelligence he made provision of corn, and chose a
sit place to encamp in. He commanded the Ubii to take their cattle, and all
their other goods from abroad out of the fields into their towns, hoping that
the barbarous and unskilful men might through want of victual be drawn to
fight upon hard conditions. He gave order also that they should every day send
out discoverers to the Suevi to understand what they did. The Ubii did as they
were commanded, and after a few days brought word that all the Suevi, having
received certain news of the approach of the Roman army, had retired themselves
and all their forces to their utmost confines, where there was a wood of an
infinite greatness called Bacenis, which served as a native wall or defense to
keep the Chirusci from the incursions of the Suevi, and the Suevi from the
injury and spoil of the Chirusci. That at the entrance of this wood the Suevi
did expect the coming of the Romans.

OBSERVATIONS.
I Will hold my former purpose, not to deliver any thing concerning Bridges,
Bridges.
whereof there are so many treatises already extant: neither will I go about to
describe the substantial building or ingenious workmanship of this Bridge here
mentioned, which might well beseem Caesar and his army: for as he only could,
or at the least did put in practice the making thereof, so will I leave the
description to himself, as best suting with his eloquence. Brancatio lib. 5.
But forasmuch as Brancatio an Italian Writer takes occasion from hence to run
into ignorance and error, give me leave to set a mark upon this place, lest
others not knowing the ancient course, should run their bark upon the same
shallowes. Amongst other advertisements (being but fourteen in all) which he
has given upon Caesar's Commentaries, he notes and commends the use of
Bridges made of Boats, which are commonly carried in an army-royall to that
purpose, before this or any other invention of former times, specially in
regard of the easiness and expedition which may be used both in making such a
bridge, and taking it up again: for the Boats being prepared ready, as usually
they are in camp-royals, such a bridge may be made in a day, which Caesar could
not do in ten, but with great wonderment and admiration. And therein I hold
well with Brancatio, that for the speedy transportation of an army over a
river, there is no readier means then a bridge of boats, presupposing the boats
to be first in a readiness. But that which he concludes is, Whether men's wits
be sharper and readier th^n in former times.
that men's wits in these times are much sharper and readier then those of
former ages, forasmuch as they have found out an easy and expedite course,
which fomer times could never reach unto. Wherein I will not go about to
derogate any thing from the condition of the time in which we live and breath,
but do desire to find them better accomplished then any other foregoing ages;
howsoever I may suspect a greater weakness of wit in these days, wherein the
temperature of the body is worse conditioned then it was in the time of our
Forefathers, as may appear by many arguments, and serves not so fitly to the
working powers of the mind, as it did before this multiplicity of mixture, when
the state of men's bodies were compounded of those perfect elements which were
in our first Parents. But for this reason which Brancatio alleges, the Reader
may be pleased to understand, that the use of Boat-bridges was both known and
in practice, as well before the Roman Empire, as in the time of their
government. Polyhymi.
Herodotus relating the passage of Xerxes army into Greece, Herodot.
describes this bridge of Boats, (which Brancatio would attribute to the
invention of our times) in the self same manner, or rather more artificially
then has been accustomed in these later ages: for finding that no timber-work
would serve the turn to make a sufficient bridge over the streights of
Hellespont, being seven furlongs in breadth, he caused Biremes and Triremes to
be placed in equal distance one from another, and fastened with anchours
before and behind, and to be joined together with planks and boords, and then
covered with sand and gravel, raising a hedge or blind on each side thereof,
to the end the horse and cattle might not be afraid at the working of the
billow, and so made a bridge for the passage of his army. And in the time of
the Roman Empire, Hist. ^.
Tacitus describes the like bridge to be made over the river Po by Valens and
Cecina, with as great skill as can be showed at these times: for, says he,
they placed boats a cross the river, in equal distance one from another, and
joined them together with strong planks, and fastened them with anchours; but
in such sort, as Anchorarum funes non extenti fluitabant, ut augescente flumine
inoffensus or do navium attolieretur, the cables of the Anchours floated loose,
not being extended to their length, that upon the increase of the river the
ships might be lifted up without any prejudice to them. Whereby it appears
how much Brancatio was deceived in ascribing that to these later times, which
was the invention of former ages; and may serve as a caveat to our out-languist
humorists, that can endure no reading but that which sounds with a strange
idiome, not to trust too much upon their Authors, lest whilst they sti^le
their memory with strange words, in the mean time they starve their
understanding.

CHAP. VII.
The Factions in Gallia in Caesar's time.
BUt here it shall not be amiss to deliver somewhat touching the manner and
fashion of life, Caesar.
both of the Galls and of the Germans, and wherein those two Nations do
differ. In Gallia not only in every city, village, and precinct, but almost in
every particular house there are parties and factions, the heads whereof are
such as they think to be of greatest authority, according to whose opinion and
command the main course of their actions is directed. And this seems a
custom instituted of old time, to the end that none of the common people, how
mean soever, might at any time want means to make their party good against a
greater man: for if they should suffer their parties and followers to be either
oppressed or circumvented, they should never bear any rule or authority amongst
them. And this is the course throughout all Gallia, for all their States are
divided into two factions. When Caesar came into Gallia, the Hedui were chief
ringleaders of the one party, and the Sequani of the other. These finding
themselves to be the worker side, (forasmuch as the principality and chiefest
power was anciently s^ated in the Hedui, having many and great adherents and
clients) drew the Germans and Ariovistus by many great promises on their party:
and after many great victories all the Nobility of the Hedui being slain, they
went so far beyond them in power and authority, that they drew the greatest
part of Clients from the Hedui to themselves, and took the children of their
Princes for pledges, and caused them to take a public oath not to undertake
any thing against the Sequani; besides a great part of their country which
they took from them by force: and so they obtained the principality of Gallia.
And thereupon Divitiacus went unto Rome to seek aid of the Senate, but returned
without effecting any thing. Caesar's coming into Gallia brought an alteration
of these things, for the pledges were restored back again to the Hedui, and
their old followers and clients did likewise return to their protection:
besides other new followers which by Caesar's means did cleave unto them: for
they saw that those which entered into friendship with them, were in a better
condition, and more fairly dealt with. Whereby their nobleness and dignity was
so amplified and enlarged, that the Sequani lost their authority, whom the men
of Rhemes succeeded. And forasmuch as the world took notice that they were no
less favored of Caesar then the Hedui, such as by reason of former enmities
could not endure to join with the Hedui, put themselves into the clientele of
the men of Rhemes, and found respective protection from that State; which
caused a new and sudden raised authority of the men of Rhemes. So that at that
time the Hedui went far beyond all the other States of Gallia in power and
authority, and next unto them were the men of Rhemes.

OBSERVATIONS.
FActions are generally the rent of a State, Factions and parties.
and a disjoynting of those parts which common unity has knit together for the
preservation of good government. But the Galls maintained sides and parties
throughout the whole body of their Continent, and found it necessary for the
upholding of their policy at home; and as it fell out in the course of these
wars, rather a help then otherwise in their general defense against a foreign
enemy. The reason of the former benefit was grounded upon two causes, as Caesar
notes: the one proceeding from the oppression used by the rich and mighty men
toward the poorer and meaner people; and the other from the impatiency of
those of inferior condition, refusing to acknowledge any authority or
preeminency at all, rather then to endure the wrongs and contumelies of the
mighty. And therefore to prevent the licentious might of the great ones, and to
give countenance and respect to the lower sort, these factions and sides were
devised: wherein the foot had always a head sensible of the wrongs which were
done unto it. Things of greater condition are always injurious to lesser
natures, and cannot endure any competency; not so much as in comparison, or by
way of relation. In things without life, the prerogative of the mountains does
swallow up the lesser rising of the downs, and the swelling of the downs, the
unevenness of the mole-hils: the Stars are dimmed at the rising of the Moon,
and the Moon loses both her light and her beauty in the presence of the Sun.
So amongst bruit beasts and fishes, the greater do always devour the less, and
take them as their due by the appointment of nature: and men more injurious in
this point, then either mountains or brute beasts, inasmuch as they do always
overvalue themselves beyond their own greatness, have in all ages verified the
old Proverb, Homo homini lupus, One man's a Wolf to another. And on the other
side, as nature makes nothing in vain, but has given a being to the least of
her creatures: so do they endeavor not to be annulled, but to keep themselves
in being and continuance. Habet and musca splenem, The very Fly has her
spleen, says the Poet: and the Pismires and Bees have their commonweals,
though not equal to a Monarch. And therefore that the mighty and great men of
Gallia might not devour the lowest of the people, but that every man might
stand in his own condition, and by the help of a Rowland live by an Oliver; and
again, that the poorer sort might give as a tribute for their protection, that
respect and obedience to their superiors, as belongs to such high callings,
these factions and bandies were ordained: whereby the Nobles were restrained
from oppressing the poor, and the poor compelled to obey the Nobility, which is
the best end that may be made of any faction.

Concerning the advantage which the Galls received by these factions against
foreign enemies, it was rather in regard of the multiplicitie of States and
Common-weals which were in the continent of Gallia, then otherwise: for it
manifestly appears, that their factions and contentions for sovereign
authority, caused one party to bring in Ariovistus and the Germans; and the
other party the Romans, to make good their bandy. But forasmuch as Gallia had
many divisions, and contained many several States, relying chiefly upon their
own strength, and esteeming the subversion of their neighbor city, Lib. 2.
as a calamity befalling their neighbor, from which the rest stood as yet
free, it was not so easily conquered as if it had been all but one kingdom. The
battle which Caesar had with the Nervij, which was fought so hard, that of
threescore thousand men there were left but five hundred, nor of six hundred
Senators above three; nor again, the selling of three and fifty thousand Galls
for bondslaves at one time, did not so much advantage the conquest of Gallia,
as the battle of Edward the third, or that of Henry the fifth, our two English
Caesar's: in the former whereof were slain at Cressie thirty thousand of the
French, and in the latter at Agincourt but ten thousand. The reason was, for
that the former losses, though far greater, concerned but particular States:
whereas these latter overthrowes extended to the members and branches of the
whole kingdom.

CHAP. VIII.
Two sorts of men in Gallia, Druides and Equites.
THroughout all Gallia there are but two sorts of men that are of any reckoning
or account: Caesar.
for the common people are in the nature of servants, and of no worth of
themselves, nor admitted to any Parliament; but being kept under either by
debts, or by great tributes, Potestas vitae and necis
or by the oppression of the mighty, do put themselves in the service of the
Nobility, and are subject to the authority which the master has over his
Bond-slave. Of these two sorts, the one are Druides and the other Equites or
Gentlemen. The Druides, which are always present at their Holy Duties, do give
order for their public and private sacrifices, and expound their Religion. To
the Druides great numbers of the youth do resort for learnings sa^e, and have
them in great honor and reputation; for they do determine almost of all
controversies both public and private: for if any offense be committed, as
murder or manslaughter, or any controversy arise touching their lands or
inheritance, they sentence it; rewarding the virtuous, and punishing the
wicked. If any private man or State do not obey their decree, they interd^d him
from holy duty, which is the greatest punishment that is amongst them. Such as
are thus interdicted, are reputed in the number of impious and wicked men,
every man leaves their company, and does avoid to meet them, or speak with
them, lest they should receive any hurt by their contagion: neither have they
law or justice when they require it, nor any respect or honor that does belong
unto them. Over all the Druides there is one Primat, that has authority of the
rest. At his decease if any one do excel the rest in dignity, he succeeds:
if many equals are found, they go to election, and sometimes they contend about
the primacy with force and arms. They meet at a certain time of the year in the
confines of the Carnutes, which is the middle part of all Gallia, and there
they sit in a sacred place: thither they resort from all parts that have
controversies, and do obey their orders and judgments. England.
The art and learning of the Druides was first found out in Britany, and from
thence is thought to be brought into Gallia: and at this time such as will
attain to the perfect knowledge of that discipline, do for the most part
travel thither to learn it. The Druides are exempt from warfare and payments,
and have an immunitie from all other duties: whereby it falls out that many
do be take themselves to that profession of their own free will, and diverse
others are sent to that school by their parents and friends. They are said to
learn many verses, and that some do study therein twenty years. Neither is it
lawful for them to commit any thing to writing, beside that in other public
and private businesses they only use the Greek tongue: and that as I take it
for two causes; first, for that their learning may not become common and
vulgar; secondly, that scholars might not trust so much to their writings as to
their memory, as it happens for the most part, that men rely upon the trust
of books and papers, and in the mean time omit the benefit of good remembrance.
They endeavor chiefly to teach men that their souls do not die, but that they
do remove out of one body into another after death; and this they think to be
very important to stir men up to virtue neglecting the fear of death. They
dispute further, and give many traditions to the youth touching the stars and
their motion, the magnitude of the earth and the world, the nature of things,
and the might and power of the Gods.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe quality and condition of the Druides is in this place very particularly
described by Caesar, Druides.
and may be reduced to these heads. First, their Office, extending both to
things Divine and things temporal, whereby they executed the place both of
Priests and of Judges. And for that purpose there was one known place appointed
where they sat in judgment: and as I understand it, there was but one Term
in the year, which both began and ended their suits in law. The second thing is
their Authority, having power to reward virtue and to punish vice. Thirdly,
their privileges and immunities, being free from contribution, from warfare,
and all other burdens of the State. Fourthly, their doctrine and learning,
which was partly Theological, concerning the might and power of the gods, the
immortality of the Soul; and partly philosophical, touching the stars and
their motion, the earth and the magnitude thereof. And lastly, their manner of
learning, which was altogether Pythagoricall, refusing the help of letters and
books, and committing their doctrine to the tradition of their Elders. But that
which is specially to be observed, England.
is, that this learning was not only found out here in Brittanie, but such as
would perfectly attain to the knowledge thereof, came into England to study the
same, contrary to the experience which heretofore has been observed of the
Northern and Southern parts of the world: for as the South gives a temper to
the body fit for the science and contemplation of Arts, whereby the mind being
enlarged and purified in her faculties, does dive into the secret depth of all
learning, and censure the hidden mysteries thereof; so the Northern climats do
bind in the powers of the soul, and restrain all her virtues to the use of the
body, whereby they are said to have animam in digitis, By reason of the curious
and artificial works.
their soul in their fingers, not affording her that delight and contentment
which is usually received by speculation. And thence it happens that all
speculative arts and sciences, and what else soever concerns the inward
contemplation of the mind, was found out and perfected by such as border upon
the South, and from them it was brought by little and little into the Northern
regions: and such as would be masters in the Arts they professed, went always
Southward for the attaining thereof. But here the South was beholding to the
North, as well for their principles of Divinity, as for their Philosophy and
moral learning, being as pure, as that which any heathen people ever drank of.
Which proves an ancient singularity in the inhabitants of this Island, touching
the study of Arts and matter of learning, and may with like evidence be proved
from age to age even to this time. In witness whereof I appeal to the two
Universities of this land, Oxford and Cambridge.
as a demonstration of the love which our Nation has ever born to learning,
being two such Magazins of arts and sciences, so beautified with curious
buildings, and supplied with indowments for the liberal maintenance of the
Muses, enriched with Libraries of learned Works, adorned with pleasant places
for the refreshing of wearied spirits, gardens, groves, walks, rivers, and
arborets, as the like such Athens are not to be found in any part of the world.

CHAP. IX.
The second sort of men in Gallia, called the Equites in Caesar's time.
THe other sort of people are Equites or Gentlemen. Caesar.
These when there is occasion, or when any war happens (as before Caesar his
coming was usual every year, that either they did offer injuries, or resist
injuries,) are always parties therein: and as every man excels other in
birth or wealth, so is he attended with clients and followers* and this they
take to be the only note of Nobility and greatness. The whole nation of the
Galls are much addicted to religions; and for that cause, such as are either
grievously diseased, or conversant continually in the dangers of war do
either sacrifice men for an oblation, or vow the oblation of themselves, using
in such sacrifices the ministry of the Druides, forasmuch as they are
persuaded that the immortal Deity cannot be pleased, but by g^ving the life of
one man for the life of another: and to that purpose they have public
sacrifices appointed. Others have Images of a monstrous magnitude, whose limbs
and parts being made of Osiers, are filled with living men, and being set one
fire, the men are burned to death. The execution of such as are taken in theft
or robbery, or any other crime, they think to be best pleasing to the gods; but
wanting such, they spare not the innocent. They worship chiefly the god
Mercury, and have many of his images amongst them; him they adore as the
inventor of all Arts, the conductor and guide in all voyages and journeys, and
they think him to have great power in all merchandise and gain of moneys. Next
unto him they prefer Apollo, Mars, Jove and Minerva, and of these they carry
the same opinion as other nations do: Apollo to be powerful in healing
diseases, Minerva in finding out artificial works, Jove ruling the celestial
Empire, and Mars for War. When they are to encounter with an enemy, they vow
all the spoil unto him; and such beasts as are taken they sacrifice, other
things they lay up in some one place: and many such heaps of things so taken
are to be seen in the holy places of diverse of their cities. Neither does it
often happen, that any man neglecting his religion in that point, dare either
keep back any thing so taken, or take away ought laid up in their Repositories;
for they incur a heavy punishment and torture for that offense. The Galls do
all boast themselves in the stock from whence they are descended, understanding
by the Druides, that they come of the god Dis. And therefore they end the space
of all their times by the number of nights rather then by the number of days,
observing the days of their nativity, the beginings of their months and their
years, in such sort as the day does always follow the night. And herein they
differ from other nations, that they suffer not their children to come openly
unto them, but when they are grown fit for war: thinking it shameful and
dishonest, that a son in his childhood should in public places stand in the
sight of his father. To the portions which they have with their wives, they add
as much more of their own goods; and the use of this money thus added together,
is kept apart, and the longer liver has both the principal and the interest
for all the former time. The men have power of life and death, both over their
wives and their children. And when a man of great place and parentage shall
happen to decease, his kinsfolks assemble themselves together, to enquire of
his death: if there be any occasion of suspicion, they put his wife to torture
after the manner of a servant; and if it be found, she dies tormented with fire
and all other tortures as may be imagined. Their funerals (according to the
rest of their life) are magnificall and sumptuous, burying with the dead corpse
all that he took delight in while he lived, not sparing living creatures: and
not long out of memory, the custom was to bury with the body such clients and
servants as were favored by him in his lifetime. Such States as are careful
in the government of their common-weals, do prohibit by a special law, that
no man shall communicate a rumor or report touching the State to any man
saving a Magistrate; forasmuch as it had been often found, that rash and
unskilful men were so terrified with false reports, and moved to such
desperate attempts, that they entered into resolutions touching the main points
of State. The Magistrates do keep secret such things as they think fit, and
that which they think expedient they publish: but it is not lawful to speak of
matter of State, but in assemblies of State.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
COncerning the beginning of days and times, The beginning of the day diversely
observed.
which Caesar notes in this place to be observed by the Galls after
Sunsetting; (whereby it happened that in the natural day of four and twenty
hours, the night always preceded the day time, contrary to the use of Italy,
where the day began at Sunrising, and the night followed the artificial day
as the second part of the day natural;) we are to understand, that as all
time, and the distinction of the parts thereof, depends upon the two motions
of the Sun: the one as it moves in its own orb from West to East, begetting
the revolution of years, and the seasons of Summer and Winter, the Spring and
the Autumn, with the measure of months as it passes through the signs of
the Zodiac; and the other, as it is carried from East to West by the first
moving sphere, making the distinction of nights and days, hours and minutes:
so the beginnings of these times and seasons are diversely taken amongst diverse
people and nations of the earth. The Jews had the same computation touching
the beginning of the day as the Galls had, but upon other grounds and reasons
then could be alleged for this custom in Gallia: for they began their day in
the evening at Sunne-setting, as appears by many places of the Scripture: and
Moses in the repetition of the first seven days work, upon the accomplishment
of a day, says, The evening and the morning were one day, giving the evening
precedence before the morning, as though the day had begun in the evening. The
Bohemians in like manner do observe the beginning of their day in the evening,
and do herein follow the use of the Jews. Other nations do begin at Sunrising,
and take the computation of their day natural from the first appearing of the
Sun in the East. The Greeks begin and end their day at midnight, observing the
certainty of that time, and the correspondence between the equal and planetary
hours in the meridian Circle: whereas otherwise by reason of the inequality of
the days and the nights, out of a right sphare there is always some
difference between the said hours. And this use also is observed by us in
England.

This god Dis, whom he names for the father of that nation, is the same whom
the heathen called Pluto, the god of hell and darkness; and for that cause they
put darkness before light, touching the beginning of their natural day.

But forasmuch as this circumstance gives occasion to speak of days and
times, give me leave to insert the reformation of the year, which Caesar so
happily established, that succeeding times have had no cause to alter the same.

And although it neither concerns the art of war, nor happened within the
compass of these seven summers: yet forasmuch as it was done by Caesar, and
deserves as often memory as any other of his noble acts, it shall not seem
impertinent to the reader to take thus much by the way concerning that matter.
There is no nation of any civil government, but observes a course or
revolution differenced with times and seasons, in such manner as may be
answerable to the motion of the Sun, in the circuit which it makes through the
signs and degrees of the Zodiac. But forasmuch as the government of a civil
year does not well admit any other composition of parts, to make it absolute
and complete, then by natural days; and on the other side, the Sun requires
odd hours and minutes to finish his race, and return again to the goal from
whence it came; there has always been found a difference between the civil
and the Solar year. Before Caesar's time, the Romans using the ancient
computation of the year, had not only such uncertainty and alteration in
months and times, that the sacrifices and yearly feasts came by little and
little to seasons contrary for the purpose they were ordained: but also in the
revolution of the Sun or Solar year, no other nation agreed with them in
account; and of the Romans themselves, only the Priests understood it: and
therefore when they pleased (no man being able to control them) they would
upon the sudden thrust in a month above the ordinary number, which as Plutarch
notes, Plutarch
was in old time called Mercedonius, or Mensis intercalaris. To remedy this
inconvenience, Caesar.
Caesar calling together the best and most expert Astronomers of that time,
made a Calendar more exactly calculated then any other that was before: and yet
such a one as by long continuance of time has bred a difference, for the
matter stands thus.

It is found by certain observation of Mathematicians of all ages, that the Sun
being carried from the West to the East by the motion of his own Sphere,
finisheth his yearly course in the space of 365. days, five hours, nine and
forty minutes, and some odd seconds: whereupon it was then concluded that
their civil year must necessarily contain three hundred threescore and five
days, which makes two and fifty weeks and one day. And forasmuch as those
five odd hours, nine and forty minutes, and some seconds, did in four years
space amount unto a natural day, (wanting two and forty minutes and six and
fifty seconds, which was thought nothing in comparison) they devised every
fourth year to add a day more then ordinary, to answer that time which is
usually added to February: whereby it happens that in every fourth year
February has nine and twenty days. And so they made an order to reform their
year without any sensible error for a long time. But since that time, being
one thousand six hundred years and more, those two and forty minutes and six
and fifty seconds, which as I said do want of the natural day of four and
twenty hours which is inserted in every fourth year, have bred a manifest and
an apparent error: for whereas the civil year is by that means made greater
then the solar years, the Sun ending his task before we can end our times, it
happens that such feasts as have relation to seasonable times, do as it were
foreslow the opportunity, and fall out further in the year, as though they had
a motion toward the summer solstice. And as these go forward, so does the
Equinoctial return backwards toward the beginning of the month. For Caesar
by the help of the Astronomers observed the Aequinoctium the five and twentieth
of March. Ptolemy in his time observed the Aequinoctium the two and twentieth
of March. And it was observed the one and twentieth of March in the year from
the incarnation 322. what time was holden the first general Council at Nice a
city of Pontus, in respect whereof the Paschall tables and other rules were
established for the celebration of Easter. But since that time there are passed
1281. years, and the Aequinoctium comes before the one and twentieth of March
ten days.

As this error is reformed among other nations, and reduced to that state as
it was at the Nicene Council: so there might many reasons be alleged to prove
the reformation convenient of a greater number of days then ten. For if the
Calendar were so ordered, that every month might begin when the Sun enters
into that Sign which is for the month, and end when the Sun goes out of that
sign, it would avoid much confusion, and be very easy to all sorts of people
as have occasion to observe the same: which doubtless was the purport of the
first institution of months; and was observed (as it seems) by the old
Romans, who began the year at the winter solstice, as Ovid notes:

Bruma novi prima est, veterisque novissima solis:
Principium capiunt Phoebus and annus idem.
And therefore they called that month January of Ianus that had two faces, and
saw both the old and the new year. Such therefore as would go about to reform
the year to this course, must not cut off ten days only, but one and twenty;
and for one year make December to continue but ten days, and then January to
begin, and so successively to the rest of the months. But it may be said, that
although we help our selves, and put off the inconvenience which is fallen upon
us, yet in tract of time the like error will fall again upon succeeding ages,
and put their yearly Feasts besides the days appointed for them. For remedy
whereof it may be answered; That whereas this error has happened by adding
every fourth year a natural day, which in true calculation wanted two and
forty minutes and six and fifty seconds of four and twenty hours, and in very
136. years has accrued within one minute to a day more then needed: the only
way is every 136. years, to omit the addition of that day, and to make that
year to contain but 365. days, which by the order of Caesar's Calendar, is a
leap year, and has one day more, which has brought this error. And so there
would not happen the error of a day in the space of 111086. years, if the world
should continue so long.

But least we should seem more curious in reforming the course of our civil
year, then the manners of our civil life, I will proceed to that which
follows.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe second thing which I observe in their manner of life, is the respect they
had to matter of State, Their respect to matter of State.
and the care which they took that no man should dispute of the Commonweal,
but in assemblies appointed for the service of the commonweal. Whereby they
gained two special points for the maintenance of good government. The first,
that no man might speak of points of state, but the governors of State: for
such I understand to be admitted to their Councels and Parliaments. Secondly,
that such matters of consequence as touched them so nearly, might not be
handled, but in such places and at such times as might best advantage the
State. Concerning the former we are to note, that Government is defined, to be
an establishing of order best fitting the maintenance of a people, in a
peaceable and happy life. Order requires degrees and distinctions investing
several parts in several functions and duties: to these duties there
belongs a due observancy, according to the motion and place which every part
holds in the general order. Of these degrees and distinctions, Sovereignty
and Obedience are two main relatives, Tibi summam rerum du dede^^, nobis
obsequii gloria relata est: Tacitus.
the one invested in the Prince or Magistrate, the other in the people and
subject, incommunicable in regard of their terms and subjects, and yet
concurring in the main drift of government, intending the benefit of a happy
life. And therefore the Galls did carefully provide, that no man should exceed
the limits of his own rank, but that such as sat at the helm might shape the
course: and for the rest whose lot it was to be directed, they would have them
take notice of their mandates by obedience, and not by dispute.

Touching the second point, we are to consider the danger which may happen to a
State, by common and ordinary discourse of the Principles of that Government,
or of such circumstances as are incident to the same, (without respect of time
or place, or any other due regard) which the wisdom of a well-ordered policy
does hold requisite thereunto: for whatsoever is delivered by speech, without
such helpful attendance, is both unseasonable and unprofitable, and the
Commonweal is always a sufferer when it falls into such rash
considerations; for our most serious cogitations assisted with the best
circumstances, can but speak to purpose. And as the execution falls short of
the purport intended by discourse, so is our speech and discourse lame and
wanting to our inward conceit. And therefore as religious actions stand in need
of hoc age, so may politic consultations use the help of the same remembrancer.

CHAP. X.
The manner and life of the Germans.
THe Germans do much differ from the Galls in their course of life, Caesar.
for they have neither Priests nor sacrifices. They worship no gods but such as
are subject to sense, and from whom they daily receive profits and help, as the
Sun, the Fire, and the Moon; for the rest they have not so much as heard of.
Their life is only spent in hunting, or in use and practice of war. They inure
themselves to labor and hardness even from their childhood; and such as
continue longest beardless are most commended amongst them: for this some think
to be very available to their stature, others to their strength and sinews.
They hold it a most dishonest part for one to touch a woman before he be twenty
years of age: neither can any such matter be hid or dissembled, forasmuch as
they bathe themselves together in rivers, and use skins and other small
coverings on the reins of their backs, the rest of their body being all naked.
They use no tillage, the greatest part of their food is milk, or cheese, or
flesh: neither has any man any certain quantity of land to his own use; but
their Magistrates and Princes do every year allot a certain portion of land to
kindreds and tribes that inhabit together, as much and in such places as they
think fit, and the next year appoint them in a new place. Hereof they give many
reasons: lest they should be led away by continual custom from the practice
of war to the use of husbandry, or lest they should endeavor to get themselves
great possessions, and so the weaker should be thrust out and dispossessed of
their livings by the mighty, or lest they should build too delicately for the
avoiding of cold or heat, or lest they should wax covetous and thirst after
money, which is the beginning of all factions and dissensions; and lastly, that
they might keep the Commons in good contentment, considering the parity between
their revenues and the possessions of the great ones. It is the greatest honor
to their States to have their confines lie waste and desolate far and near
about them: for that they take to be an argument of valor, when their
borderers are driven to forsake their country, and dare not abide near them;
and withal they think themselves by that means much safer from any sudden
incursion. When a State makes war, either by way of attempt or defense, they
choose Magistrates to command that war, having power of life and death: but in
time of peace they have no common Magistrate, but the chiefest men in the
country and the villages, do interpret the Law and determine of Controversies.
Theft committed out of the confines of their State is not infamous or
dishonest, but commended as an exercise of the youth, and a keeping them from
sloth. When any one of their Princes and chief men shall in an assembly or
council publish himself for a leader upon some exploit, and desire to know who
will follow him upon the same, they that have a good opinion of the man and the
matter, and do promise him their help and assistance, are commended by the
multitude: the rest that refuse to accompany him, are held in the number of
traitors, and never have any credit afterward. They hold it not lawful to
hurt a stranger that shall come unto them upon any occasion, but do protect him
from injuries; to such every man's house is open, and his table common. The time
was when the Galls excelled the Germans in prowess and valor, and made war
upon them of their own accord, and by reason of the multitude of their people
and want of ground for habitation, they sent many colonies over the Rhene into
Germany. And so those fertile places of Germ which are near unto the wood
Hercynia, (which Eratosthenes and other Grecians took notice of by the name of
Orcinia) were possessed by the Volcae Tectosages, who dwelt there at this time,
and keep their ancient opinion of justice and warl^ke praise. Now the Germans
still continue in the same poverty, want, and patience, as in former time; do
use the same diet and apparel for their bodies: but the neighborhood and
knowledge of other nations has made the Galls live in a more plentiful
manner, who by little and little have been weakened and overthrown in diverse
battles, so that now they stand not in comparison with the Germans. The breadth
of the wood Hercynia is nine days journey over, for they have no other
differences of space but by means of days iourneys. It begins at the
confines of the Helvetii, Nemetes, and Rauraci, and runs along the river
Danubius to the territories of the Daci; thence it declineth to the left side
from the said river, and by reason of the large extension thereof, it bordereth
the confines of many other countries. Neither is there any German that can say,
that either he durst adventure, or did go to, or had heard of the beginning of
the same, although he had traveled therein threescore days journey. In this
wood are many sorts of wild beasts, which are not to be seen in any other
place: amongst the rest, the most unusual and remarkable are, An Ox like unto
a Heart, that in the midst of his forehead between his ears carries a horn
longer and straighter then usual, divided at the end into many large branches,
the female is in all respects like unto the male, and bears a horn of the
same magnitude and fashion. There is likewise another sort of beasts called
Alces, not unlike unto a Goat, but somewhat bigger, and without horns: their
legs are without joints, that when they take their rest they neither sit nor
lie upon the ground, and if they chance to fall they cannot rise again. When
they take their rest in the night, they lean against trees. The Hunters having
found out their footsteps and their haunt, do either undermine the roots of
such trees, or so cut them asunder that a small matter will overthrow them; so
that when they come according unto their use to rest themselves against those
trees, they overthrow them with their weight, and fall withal themselves, and
so are taken. The 3. kind of beasts are those which are called Uri, somewhat
lesser then an Elephant, and in color, kind and shape, not unlike unto a Bull.
They are both strong and swift, and spare neither man nor beast that comes in
their sight: these they catch with greater labor and diligence in pits and
ditches, and so kill them. The youth do inure and exercise themselves in this
kind of hunting, and such as kill many of these beasts, and show most horns,
are highly commended: but to make them tame, or any their little ones, was never
yet seen. The largeness of their horns, as also the fashion and kind thereof,
does much differ from the horns of the Oxen, and are much sought after for cups
to be used in their greatest banquets, being first bound about the brim and
trimmed with silver.

OBSERVATIONS.
CAesar in this Chapter describes the course of life which the Germans in his
time held throughout the whole policy of their government, the scope whereof
was to make them warlike: to which he says, That in times past the Galls were
as valiant and as warlike people as the Germans; but the neighborhood and
knowledge of other nations had taught them a more plentiful manner of life,
which by little and little had weakened their strength, and made them far
inferior to the Germans. Which brings to our consideration that which is
often attributed to a civil life, that such as taste of the sweetness of ease,
Whether a civil life do weaken a warlike disposition.
and are qualified with the complements of civilitie, have always an
indisposition to warlike practices. The reason is grounded upon use and
custom: for discontinuance does always cause a strangeness and alienation,
benumming the aptest parts with unready and painful gestures; and is so
powerful, that it does not only steal away natural affection, and make
parents forget to love their children; but like a tyrant it is able to force us
to those things which naturally we are unfit for, as though the decrees of
nature were subject to the controllment of custom. Much more then, the things
got by use and practice, are as easily forgot by discontinuance, as they were
obtained by studious exercise. On the other side, there is nothing so horrible
or dreadful, but use makes easy. The first time the Fox saw the Lion, he
swooned for fear, the next time he trembled, but the third time he was so far
from fear, that he was ready to put a trick of craft upon him: whereby it
appears, that the Germans had no further interest in deeds of arms above the
Galls, then what the use of war had gained them: for as usage continues the
property of a tenure, so non-usage implies a forfeiture. Cato was wont to say,
that the Romans would loose their Empire, when they suffered the Greek tongue
to be taught amongst them: for by that means they would easily be drawn from
the study and practice of war, to the bewitching delight of speculative
thoughts. And Marcellus was blamed for being the first that corrupted Rome with
the delicate and curious works of Greece: for before that he brought from the
sacking of Syracusa the well-wrought tables of pictures and imagery, Rome never
knew any such delicacy, but stood full fraught with armor and weapons of
barbarous people, of the bloody spoils and monuments of victories and triumphs;
which were rather fearful shows to inure their eyes to the horror of war,
then pleasant sights to allure their minds to affections of peace. Whereby it
appears, that such as suffer themselves to be guided by the easy rain of
civil government, or take a disposition to that course of life, can hardly
endure the yoke of war, or undergo the tediousness of martial labors.

CHAP. XI.
Basilius his surprise upon Ambiorix.
CAesar finding by the discoverers which the Ubii sent out, Caesar.
that the Suevi had all betaken themselves to the woods, and doubting want of
corn, forasmuch as the Germans of all other nations do least care for tillage;
he determined to go no further. But that his return might not altogether free
the barbarous people from fear, but hinder the helps and succors which they
were wont to send into Gallia, having brought back his army, he cut off so much
of the furthest part of the bridge next unto the Ubii, as came in measure to
two hundred foot and in the end of that which remained he built a tower of four
stories, making other works for the strengthening of that place, wherein he
left a garrison of twelve cohorts under the command of young C. Volcatius
Tullus: he himself as corn waxed ripe, went forward to the war of Ambiorix by
the way of the wood of Arduenna, which is the greatest in all Gallia, and
extends it self from the banks of Rhene and the confines of the Treviri, to
the seat of the Nervii, carrying a breadth of five hundred miles. He sent L.
Minutius Basilius before with all the horse, to see if he could effect any
thing either by prevention and speedy arrival, or by opportunity, commanding
him not to suffer any fires to be made in his camp, least his coming might be
discovered, promising to follow him at his heels. Basilius follows his
directions, and coming upon them contrary to their expectation, took many of
the enemy abroad in the fields, and by their cond^^^^ion made toward Ambiorix,
where he remained in a place with a few horsemen. As fortune is very powerful
in all things, so she challenges a special interest in matter of war: for as
it happened by great luck, that he should light upon him unawares and
unprovided, and that his coming should sooner be seen then heard of; so was it
great hap, that all the arms which he had about him should be surprised, his
horses and his chariots taken, and that he himself should escape death. But
this happened by reason of the wood that was about his house, according to the
manner of the Galls, who for avoiding of heat, do commonly build near unto
woods and rivers: his followers and friends sustaining a while the charge of
the horsemen in a narrow place, while he himself escaped in the mean time on
horseback, and in ^lying was protected and sheltered by the woods: whereby
Fortune seemed very powerful both in drawing on a danger, and in avoiding it.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe prerogative which Fortune has always challenged in the accidents of war,
Fortune.
and the special interest which she has in that course of life more then in
other men's actions, has made the best shouldiers oftentimes to sing a song of
complaint, the burden whereof yet remains, and serves as a reason of all
such misadventures, Fortune de laguerre, The Fortune of the war* Such as have
observed the course of things, and have found one and the same man continuing
the same means, this day happy, and the next day unfortunate; and again, two
other men, the one advised and respective, and the other violent and rash, and
yet both attain the like good fortune by two contrary courses, or otherwise, as
oftentimes it falls out, the more heedless, the more happy; have been
persuaded that all things are so governed by fortune, that the wisdom of man
can neither alter nor amend them: and therefore to spend much time or tedious
labor, either in careful circumspection, or heedfull prevention of that which
is unchangeable, they hold as vain as the washing of an Ethiopian to make him
white. Of this opinion Sylla seemed to be; Plutarch in the life of Sylla.
professing himself better born to fortune then to the wars, and acknowledging
his happiest victories to have proceeded from his most heedless and unadvised
resolutions. And the great Alexander so carried himself, as though he had been
of the same opinion, of whom Curtius says; Quoties illum fortuna a morte
revocavit quoties temere in pericula vectum perpetua felicitate protexit! How
many a time did Fortune call him back from the brink of death! how often did
she happily defend and save him, when he had by his rashness brought himself
into dangers! In the life of Alexander.
And Plutarch says, that he had power of time and place.

Others are not willing to ascribe so much to Fortune, as to make themselves
the Tennis-ball to her Racket: and yet they are content to allow her half of
every thing they go about, reserving the other moitie to their own directions.
And so like partners in an adventure, they labor to improve their share for
their best advantage.

Some other there are that will allow Fortune no part at all in their actions,
but do confront her with a goddess of greater power, and make industry the
means to annul her Deity. Of this opinion was Timotheus the Athenian, Plutarch
in the life of Sylla.
who having achieved many notable victories, would not allow of the conceit
of the painter, that had made a table wherein Fortune was taking in those
cities, (which he had won) with a net whilst he himself slept: but protested
against her in that behalf, and would not give her any part in that business.

And thus the heathen world varied as much in their opinions touching Fortune,
as Fortune her self did in her events to themward: which were so diverse and
changeable, as were able to ensnare the deepest wits, and confound the wisdom
of the greatest judgments: whereby the word Fortune usurped a Deity, and got
an opinion of extraordinary power in the regiment of humane actions. But our
Christian times have a readier lesson, wherein is taught a sovereign
Providence, guiding and directing the thoughts of men's hearts, with the
faculties and powers of the Soul, together with their external actions, to
such ends as shall seem best to that omnipotent wisdom, to whom all our
abilities serve as instruments and means to effect his purposes,
notwithstanding our particular intendments, or what the heart of man may
otherwise determine. And therefore such as will make their ways prosperous
unto themselves, and receive that contentment which their hope expects, or
their labors would deserve, must use those helps which the rules of
Christianity do teach in that behalf, and may better be learned from a Divine,
then from him that writes Treatises of War.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
QUintus Curtius speaking of Alexander, says, Celerity and expedition.
Nullam virtutem Regis istius magis quam celeritatem laudaverim, I can commend
no virtue in this King before his speed and celerity: whereof this might be a
ground, that he followed Darius with such speed after the second battle he
gave him, that in eleven days he marched with his army six hundred miles,
which was a chase well fitting Alexander the Great, and might rest unexampled:
notwithstanding Suetonius gives this general report of Caesar, that in matter
military, aut aequavit praestantissimorum gloriam, aut excessit, he either
equalled or exceeded the glory of the best: and for this particular he says,
quod persaepe nuntius de se praevenit, that he was very often the messenger of
his own success. And to speak truly, he seems to challenge to himself
expedition and speed as his peculiar commendation, grounding himself upon the
danger which lingering and foreslowing of time does usually bring to well
advised resolutions: according to that of Lucan the Poet,

-- Nocuit semper differ paratis.
Delay did always hurt those that were ready.

For by this speedy execution of well-digested directions, he gained two main
advantages. First, the prevention of such helps and means as the enemy would
otherwise have had, to make the war dangerous and the event doubtful. And
secondly, the confusion and fear, which does consequently follow such main
disappointments, being the most dangerous accidents that can happen to any
party, and the chiefest points to be endeavored to be cast upon an enemy by
him that would make an easy conquest.

For proof whereof, amongst many other examples, I will only allege his
expedition to Rome, when he first came against Pompey, according to Plutarchs
relation. Plutarch in the life of Pompey.
In the mean time (says he) news came to Rome, that Caesar had won Ariminum, a
great city in Italy, and that he came directly to Rome with a great power,
which was not true: for he came but with 3000. horse and 5000. foot, and would
not tarry for the rest of his army, being on the other side of the Alps in
Gallia, but made have rather to surprise his enemies upon the sudden, being
afraid and in garboile, not looking for him so soon, then to give them time to
be provided, and so to fight with them in the best of their strength, which
fell out accordingly. For this sudden and unexpected approach of his, put all
Italy and Rome it self into such a tumult and confusion, that no man knew what
way to take for his safety: for such as were out of Rome came flying thither
from all parts, and those on the other side that were in Rome, went out as
fast, and forsook the city. And the amazement was such, that Pompey and the
Senate fled into Greece, whereby it happened that Caesar in threescore days,
was Lord of all Italy without any bloodshed.

Besides this manner of prevention by sudden surprise, we may see the like
expedition in the very carriage and form of his wars. Veni, Vidi, Vici.
For if the enemy had taken the field, he labored by all means to bring him to
sight; or otherwise if he refused to take the field, he then endeavored with
the like speed to besiege him or block him up in some hold, to the end he might
bring the matter to a speedy upshot, as he did with Vercingetorix at Alesia.
But that which is most memorable touching this point, at the first taking in of
Spain in the garboil of the civil wars, Lib. 2. bell. civil.
he defeated two armies, overthrew two Generals, and took in two Provinces in
the space of forty days. Neither did he make use of expedition only in his
carriage of a war, but also in the action and execution of battle: for he never
forsook an enemy overthrown and discomfited, until he had taken their camp,
and defeated them of their chiefest helps, which Pompey felt to his utter
overthrow; for the same day he routed him at Pharsalia, he took his camp, and
enclosed a hill with a ditch and a rampler, where 25000. Romans were fled for
their safety, and brought them to yield themselves unto him: and so making use
(as he says) of the benefit of fortune, and the terror and amazement of the
enemy, he performed three notable services in one day.

And this he used with such dexterity and depth of wisdom, that commonly the
first victory ended the war: as by this at Pharsalia he made himself Commander
of the East, and by that at ^apso he made himself Lord of Africa, and by the
battle at Monda he got all Spain.

To conclude this point, I may not forget the like speed and expedition in his
works. In fifteen days he cast a ditch and a rampire of fifteen foot in
height, between the lake at Geneva and S. Claudes hill, Lib. 1. bell. civil.
containing nineteen miles. He made his bridge over the Rhene in ten days. At
the siege of Marseilles he made twelve galleys, and furnished them out to sea
within thirty days after the timber was cut down. And the rest of his works
with the like expedition.

CHAP. XII.
Cativulcus poysoneth himself. Caesar divides his army into three parts.
NOw whether Ambiorix did not make head and assemble his ^orces of purpose,
Caesar.
for that he determined not to fight, or whether he were hindered by the
shortness of the time, and the suaden coming of the horsemen, thinking the rest
of the army had followed after; it remains doubtful: but certain it is, that
he sent privy messengers about the country, commanding every man to shift for
himself; and so some ^led into the forest Arduenna, others into sens and bogs,
and such as were near the Ocean, did hiae themselves in such Islands as the
tides do commonly make: many forsook their Country, and committed themselves
to their fortunes, to more strangers and unknown people. Cativulcus the king of
the one half of the Ebu^ones, who was a party with Ambiorix in this matter,
being now grown (...) and unable to undergo the labors either of war or of
slying, detesting Ambiorix with all manner of excerations, as the author of
that matter, drank the juice of Yew, (whereof there is great store in Gallia
and Germany,) and so died. The Segni and Condrusi, of the nation and number of
the Germans, that dwell between the Eburones and the Treviri, sent messengers
to Caesar, to entreat him not to take them in the number of the enemy, and that
he would not adjudge all the Germans dwelling on this side of the Rhene to have
one and the same cause: for their part, they never so much as thought of war,
nor gave any did to Ambiorix. Caesar having examined the matter by the torture
of the captives, commanded them, that if any of the Eburones should fly unto
them, to bring them unto him, and in so doing he would spare their country.
Then dividing his forces into three parts, he left the baggage of the whole
army at Vatuca, a castle in the midst of the Eburones, where Titurius and
Aurunculeius were lodged. He made choice of this place the rather, for that the
fortifications made the year before continued perfect and good, to the end he
might ease the soldier of some labor; and there left the fourteenth legion
for a guard to the cariages, being one of the three which he had last enrolled
in Italy, making Q. Tullius Cicero their Commander, and with him he left two
hundred horse.

The army being thus divided, he commanded Titus Labienus to carry three
Legions toward that part of the sea coast which bordereth upon the Menapii,
and sent Trebonius with the like number of Legions to w^^^t and harry that
country which confineth the Aduatici: he himself with the other three
determined to go to the river Scaldis, which runs into the Mase, and to the
furthest parts of the wood Arduenna; for that he understood that Ambiorix with
a few horsemen was fled to those parts. At his departure he assured them that
he would return after the seventh days absence: for at that day he knew that
corn was to be given to that legion which he had there left in garrison. He
counseled Labienus and Trebonius to return likewise by that day, if they
conveniently could, to the end that after communication of their discoveries,
and intelligence of the projects of the enemy, they might think upon a new
beginning of war.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis sudden surprise upon Ambiorix and the Treviri, prevented (as I have
already noted) their making head together, and put the enemy to such shifts for
their safety, as occasion or opportunity would afford them in particular. And
albeit the Treviri were by this means dispersed, yet they were not overthrown,
nor utterly vanquished, but continued still in the nature and quality of an
enemy, although they were by this occasion defeated of their chiefest means.
And therefore the better to prosecute them in their particular slights, and to
keep them disjoined, he divided his army into three parts, and made three
several inroads upon their country, hoping thereby to meet with some new
occasion, which might give an overture of a more absolute conquest: for
diversity of motions do breed diversity of occasions, whereof some may happily
he such, as being well managed, may bring a man to the end of his desires. But
herein let us not forget to observe the manner he used in this service: for
first he left a Rendez-vous where all the carriages of the army were bestowed,
with a competent garrison for the safe keeping thereof, to the end the
soldiers might be assured of a retreat, what difficulty soever might befall
them in that action, according to that of Sertorius, Plutarch in the life of
Sertorius.
that a good captain should rather look behind him then before him; and
appointed withal a certain day when all the troops should meet there again; ^t
rursus (as he says) communicato consilio, exploratisque hostium rationibus,
aliud in (...) belli capere possint, That after communication of their
discoveries, etc.

CHAP. XIII.
Caesar sends messengers to the bordering States, to come out and sack the
Eburones.
THere was (as I have already declared) no certain band or troup of the enemy,
Caesar.
no garrison or town to stand out in arms; but the multitu^e was d^spersed
into all parts, and every man lay hid either in some secret and unknown valley,
or in some rough and woody place, or in some bog, or in such other places as
gave them hope of shelter or safety: which places were well known to the States
of that country. And the matter required great diligence and circumspection,
not so much in regard of the general safety of the army, (for there could no
danger happen unto them, the enemy being all terrified and fled,) as in
preserving every particular soldier; which notwithstanding d^d in part concern
the safety of the whole army: for hope of booty did draw many far off out of
their ranks, and the woods through uncertain and unknown passages would not
suffer the soldiers to go in troops. If he would have the business take an
end, and the very race of those wicked people rooted out, the army must be
divided, and many small bands must be made for that purpose: but to keep the
Maniples at their ensigns, according to the custom and use of the Roman army,
the place it self was a sufficient guard for the barbarous people, who did not
want courage in particular, both to lie in wait for them, and circumvent them
as they were severed from their companies. Yet in extremities of that nature
what diligence could attain unto was provided, but in such manner, that
somewhat was omitted in the offensive part, though the soldiers minds were
bent upon revenge, rather then it should be done with any detriment or loss to
the soldier. Caesar sent messengers to the next bordering States, calling them
out to sack the Eburones, in hope of booty and pillage, to the end the Galls
should rather hazard their lives in the wood, then the legionary soldiers; as
also that there might be many spoilers and destroyers, to the end that both the
name and race of that State might be taken away. Hereupon a great multitude
speedily assembled from all quarters. These things were acted in all parts and
quarters of the Eburones, and the seventh day drew near which he had appointed
for his return to the carriages.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT is a commodity which a General has, when the enemy does not refuse open
encounter, The benefit of open encounter.
for so he may be sure that the weight of the business will rest upon
military virtue and prowess of arms, as ready way-makes to a speedy victory:
but when it shall happen that the country does afford covert and protection to
him that is more malicious then valorous, and through the fastness of the
place refuses to show himself unless it be upon advantage, the war doubtless
is like to prove tedious, and the victory less honorable. In such cases there
is no other way, then so to harry and wast a country, that the enemy may be
famished out of his holds, and brought to subjection by scarcity and necessity.
Which is a means so powerful, as well to supplant the greatest strength, as to
meet with subterfuge and delay, that of it self it subdueth all opposition, and
needs no other help for atchieving of victory, as may appear by the sequel
of this summers action. And herein let us further observe the particular care
which Caesar had of his soldiers, adjudging the whole army to be interessed in
every private man's safety. A matter strange in these times, and of small
consequence in the judgment of our commanders, to whom particular fortunes are
esteemed nonentities, and men in several of no value; forasmuch as conquests
are made with multitudes. Concerning which point, I grant it to be as true, as
it is often spoken in places besieged, that the loss of one man is not the
loss of a town, nor the defeating of twenty the overthrow of a thousand: and
yet it cannot be denied but the lesser is paid for the laurel wreath, the more
precious is the victory: and it sits then at a hard rate, when it makes the
buyer bankerout, or inforceth him to confess that such another victory would
overthrow him. And therefore he that will buy much honor with little blood,
must endeavor by diligent and careful labor to provide for the particular
safety of his soldiers. Wherein albeit he cannot value, an unity at an equal
rate with a number; yet he must consider that without a unity there can be no
multitude: and not so only, but the life and strength of a multitude consists
in unities; for otherwise, neither had Nero needed to have wished the people of
Rome to have had but one head, that he might have cut it off at a stroke,
Plutarch in the life of Sertorius.
nor Sertorius device had carried any grace, making a lusty fellow fail in
plucking off the thin tail of an old lean jade, and a little wearish man leave
the stump bare of a greattaild horse, and that in a short time, by plucking
hair by hair.

CHAP. XIIII.
The Sicambri send out two thousand horse against the Eburones, and by fortune
they fall upon Cicero at Vatuca.
HEre you shall perceive the power that fortune has, Caesar.
and what chances happen in the carriage of a war. There was (as I have already
said) the enemy being scattered and terrified, no troup or band which might
give the least cause of fear: the report came to the Germans on the other side
of the Rhene, that the Eburones were to be sacked, and that all men had liberty
to make spoil of them. The Sicambri dwelling next to the Rhene, who formerly
received the Tenchtheri and Usipites in their flight, set out two
thousandhorse, and sent them over the river some thirty miles below that place
where Caesar had left the half bridge with a garrison. These horse made
directly toward the confines of the Eburones, took many prisoners and much
cattle, neither bog nor wood hindered their passage, being bred and born in war
and theft. They inquire of the prisoners in what part Caesar was, and found him
to be gone far off, and that all the army was departed from thence. But one of
the prisoners speaking to them, said, Why do ye seek after so poor and so
slender a booty, when otherwise you may make your selves most fortunate? in
three hours space you may go to Vatuca, where the Roman army has left all
their fortunes; the garrison in that place is no greater then can hardly
furnish the walls about, neither dare any man go out of the trenches, The
Germans in this hope did hide the pillage which they had already taken, and
went directly to Vatuca, taking him for their guide that gave them first notice
thereof.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT were as great a madness to believe that a man were able to give directions
to meet with all chances, as to think no foresight can prevent any casualty.
For as the soul of man is endued with a power of discourse. whereby it
concludes either according to the certainty of reason, or the learning of
experience, bringing these directions as faulty and inconvenient, and approving
others as safe and to be followed: so we are to understand, that this power of
discourse is limited to a certain measure or proportion of strength, and
inscribed in a circle of lesser capacity then the compass of possibility, or
the large extension of what may happen; for otherwise the course of destiny
were subject to our controllment, and our knowledge were equal to universal
entitie, whereas the infinite of accidents do far exceed the reach of our
shallow senses, and our greatest apprehension is a small an unperfect
experience. And therefore as such as through the occasion of public
employment, are driven to forsake the shore of minute and particular courses,
and to float in the Ocean of casualties and adventures, may doubtless receive
strong directions, both from the loadstone of reason, and tramontane of
experience, to shape an easy and succesfull course: so notwithstanding they
shall find themselves subject to the contrariety of winds and extremity of
tempests, besides many other lets and impediments beyond the compass of their
direction to interrupt their course and divert them from their haven, which
made the Carthaginian that was more happy in conquering then in keeping to cry
out; Ha^nibal.
Nusquam minu* quam in bello eventus rerum respondent, the event of things does
no where answer expectation less then in war, as it happened in this accident.

CHAP. XV.
The Sicambri come to Vatuca, and offer to take the camp.
CIcero having all the days before observed Caesar's direction with great
diligence, Caesar.
and kept the soldiers within the camp, not suffering so much as a boy to go
out of the trenches; the seventh day distrusting of Caesar's return according to
his promise, for that he understood he was gone further into the country, and
heard nothing of his return; and withal being moved with the speeches of the
soldiers, who termed their patient abiding within their trenches, a siege,
forasmuch as no man was suffered to go out of them, and expecting no such
chance within the compass of three miles: which was the furthest; he purposed
to send them for corn: especially considering that nine legions were abroad,
besides great forces of horse, the enemy being already dispersed and almost
extinguished. Accordingly he sent five cohorts to gather corn in the next
fields, which were separated from the garrison only with a little hill lying
between the camp and the corn. There were many left in the camp of the other
legions that were sick, of whom such as were recovered to the number of three
hundred, were sent with them all under one ensign: besides a great company of
soldiers boys, and great store of cattle which they had in the camp. In the
mean time came these German Rutters, and with the same gallop as they came
thither, they sought to enter in at the Decumane gate; neither were they
discovered, by reason of a wood which kept them out of sight, until they were
almost at the trenches; insomuch as such tradesmen and merchants as kept their
booths and shops under the rampire, had no time to be received into the camp.
Our men were much troubled at the unexpectedness of the thing; and the cohort
that kept watch did hardly sustain the first assault. The enemy was quickly
spread about the works, to see if they could find entrance in any other part.
Our men did hardly keep the gates: the rest was defended by the fortification
and the place it self. The whole camp was in a great fear, and one inquired of
another the reason of the tumult: neither could they tell which way to carry
their ensigns, or how any man should dispose of himself. One gave out that the
camp was taken; and another that the army and General was overthrown, and that
the Barbarous people came thither as conquerours: many took occasion from the
place to imagine new and superstitious Religions, recalling to mind the fatal
calamity of Cotta and Titurius that died in that place. Through this fear and
confusion that had possessed the whole camp, the Germans were confirmed in their
opinion which they had received from the prisoner, that there was no garrison
at all in the works. They endeavored to break in, and encouraged one another
not to suffer so great a fortune to escape them. Publius Sextius Baculus, that
had been Primipilus under Caesar (of whom mention has been made in the former
battles) was there left sick, and had taken no sustenance of five days before.
He hearing the danger they were in, went unarmed out of his cabin, and seeing
the enemy ready to force the gates, and the matter to be in great hazard;
taking arms from one that stood next him, he went and stood in the port, The
Centurions of the Cohort that kept watch followed him, and they for a while
engaged the enemy. Sextius having received many great wounds, fainted at
length, and was hardly saved by those that stood next him. Upon this respite
the rest did so far assure themselves, that they durst stand upon the works,
and make a show of defense.

OBSERVATIONS.
IN the former observation I disputed the interest which the whole army has in
one particular man, which out of Caesar's opinion I concluded to be such as was
not to be neglected: but if we suppose a party extraordinary, and tie him to
such singular worth as was in Sextius, I then doubt by this example, whether I
may not equal him to the multitude, or put him alone in the balance to
counterpoise the rest of his fellows. For doubtless if his valor had not
exceeded any height of courage, elsewhere then to be found within those walls
the whole garrison had been utterly slaughtered, and the place had been made
fatal to the Romans by two disastrous calamities. In consideration whereof, I
will refer my self to the judgment of the wise, how much it imports a great
Commander, not only in honor as a rewarder of virtue, but in wisdom and good
discretion, to make much of so gallant a spirit, and to give that respect unto
him, as may both witness his valiant carriage, and the thankful acceptance
thereof on the behalf of the Commonweal, wherein we need not doubt of Caesar's
requital to this Sextius, having by diverse honorable relations in these wars,
touching his valiantness and prowess in arms, made him partaker of his own
glory, and recommended him to posterity for an example of true valor.

CHAP. XVI.
The Sicambri continue their purpose in taking the camp. Caesar.

IN the mean time the soldiers, having made an end of reaping and gathering
corn, heard the cry. The horsemen hasted before, and found in what danger the
matter stood. There was in that place no fortifications to receive the
a^frighted soldiers: such ^as were lately enrolled and had no experience in
matters of war, set their faces toward the Tribunes of the soldiers, and to
the Centurions, and expected directions from them. There was none so assured or
valiant, but were troubled thereat. The barbarous people having spied the
ensigns a far off, left off their assault: and first they thought it had been
the legions that had returned, which the prisoners had told them to be gone a
great way off; afterward contemning the smalness of their number, they set upon
them on all sides. The soldiers boys betook themselves unto the next hill,
and being quickly put from thence, they cast themselves headlong amongst the
Maniples and ensigns, and so put the soldiers in a worse fear then they were
before. Some were of opinion to put themselves into the form of battle which
resembles a wedge, C^n^us.
and so (forasmuch as the camp was at hand) to break speedily through the
enemy: in which course if any part should be circumvented and cut a pieces, yet
they hoped the rest might save themselves. Others thought it better to make
good the hill, and all of them to attend one and the same fortune. This advise
the old soldiers did not like of, who (as I said before) went out with the
others that were sent a harvesting all under one ensign by themselves: and
therefore encouraging one another, Cai^s Trebonius a Roman horseman being their
captain, and commanding them at that time, brake through the thickest of the
enemy, and came all safe into the camp. The boys and horsemen following hard
after them, were lik^wise saved by the valor of the soldiers. But those that
took the hill, having never had any use of service, had neither the courage to
continue in that resolution which they had before chosen, to defend themselves
from that place of advantage, nor to imitate that force and speed which they
had seen to have helped their fellows; but endeavoring to be received into
the camp, fell into places of disadvantage: wherein diverse of their Centurions,
who had lately been taken from the lowest companies of other legions, and for
their valors sake preferred to the highest and chiefest companies of this
legion, least they should lose the honor which they had before gotten,
fighting valiantly died in the place. Part of the soldiers by the prowess of
these men that had removed the enemy, beyond all hope, got safe into the camp;
the rest were defeated and sla^n by the Germans.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis circumstance does afford us two observable points. The one, how much an
old experienced soldier, hat has the use and knowledge of service, exceeds
the rawness of such as are newly enrolled. The second, which depends upon the
former, that valor and military virtue is a consequent of use and practice,
rather then any inherent gift of nature. Camillus being sent with an army
against the Thuscans, the Roman soldier was much affrighted at the greatness
of the host which the enemy had put on foot: which Camillus perceiving, he
used no other motives of persuasion to strengthen their weakened minds, and to
assure them of a happy day, but this; Quod quisque d^dic^t aut consuev^t,
faciat, Let every man do that which he has been taught, and used to; as well
knowing where to rouse their valor, and in what part their greatest strength
rested. For as men cannot prevail in that wherein they are unexperienced, but
will ^e wanting in the supplies of their own particular, and miscarry even
under the directions of another Ann^bal: so a known and beaten track is quickly
taken, and the difficulties of a business are made easy by acquaintance. Use
makes Masteries, says our English Proverb, and Practice and Art do far exceed
Nature. Which continual exercise and use of arms amongst the Romans, attained
to such perfection, as made militum sine rectore stabilem virtutem, the valor
of the soldiery firm without their Commander, as L^v^e witnesses: And as
Antiochus confessed to Scip^o; Quod si v^ncuntur, non minuuntur animis tamen,
though they were overcome, yet their courage abated not. Caesar in all his
battles had a special respect to the inexperience of the new enrolled bands,
placing them either behind the army for a guard to their carriages, as he did
in the Helvet^an action, or leaving them as a defense to the camp, or showing
them aloof off; signifying thereby, as Livie says of the Sidicini, Quod magis
nomen quam vires ad praesidium adferebant, that they made more noise of an
army, then they did good. Whereby it consequently follows, that military
virtue proceeds not so much from nature, or any original habit, as it does
from exercise and practice of arms. I grant there is a disposition in nature,
and a particular inclination to this or that Art; according to that line of the
Poet;

Fortes creantur fortibus and bonis.
Stout men are got by stout and good.
But this disposition must be perfected by use, and falls short of valor or
military virtue, which consists of two parts. The first, in knowledge of the
discipline of war, and the rules of service: whereby they may understand the
course of things, and be able to judge of particular resolutions. The second is
the faithful endeavor in executing such projects, as the rules of war do
propound for their safety. Both which parts are gotten only by use. For as the
knowledge of Military discipline is best learned by practice; so the often
repetition thereof begets assurance in action, which is nothing else but
that which we call Valor. In which two parts these new enrolled bands had
small understanding; for they were as ignorant what course to take in that
extremity, as they were unassured in their worser resolutions.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THis Cuneus, A Cuneus described.
or troup of soldiers disposed into a Triangle, was the best and safest way to
break through an ^nemy. For an Angle has a renting and dividing property, and
is so sharp in the meeting of the two side lines, that the point thereof
resembles indivisibility, and therefore is apt and proper to divide asunder,
and to make a separation of any quantity. Which form Nature has also observed
in the fashion of such creatures as have a piercing and dividing motion; as in
Fishes, that have all heads for the most part sharp, and thence Angle-wise are
enlarged into the grosseness of their body. And Birds likewise, the better to
divide the air, have sharp bills and little heads, with a body annexed of a
larger proportion. The manner of the Romans was (as I have already showed) to
strengthen the piercing Angle with thick compacted targets; and then enlarging
the sides as occasion served, either to the quantity of an acute, or a right,
or an obtuse Angle, they gave the charge in such sort, ut quacunque part
percutere impetu suo vellent, sustineri nequeant, that wheresoever they fell
on, they were not long to be endured, as Livie says.

CHAP. XVII.
The Sicambri give over their purpose and depart.
THe Germans being out of hope of taking the Camp, Caesar.
forasmuch as they saw our men to stand upon the works, they returned over the
Rhene with the boot^e which they had in the woods. And such was the fear of the
Roman soldier, even after the enemy was gone, that Caius Volusenus being sent
that night to the camp with the horsemen, they would not believe that Caesar
and the army were returned in safety. Fear had so possessed their minds, that
they did not let to say, that all the legions were overthrown, and the horse
had escaped by flight, and desired there to be received: for they could not be
persuaded the army being safe, that the Germans would have attempted to
surprise their camp. Of which fear they were delivered by Caesar's arrival. He
being returned, not ignorant of the events of war, complained of one thing
only, that the cohorts that kept the watch were sent from their Stations,
forasmuch as no place ought to be given to the least casualtie. And there he
saw how much Fortune was able to do by the sudden coming of the enemy, and how
much more in that he was put off from the rampire and the gates which he had so
nearly taken. But of all the rest this seemed the strangest, that the Germans
coming over the Rhene, to depopulate and spoil Ambiorix and his country, had
like to have taken the Roman camp, which would have been as acceptable to
Ambiorix as any thing that could happen.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT is an old saying, Nothing ought to be left to the hazard of fortune.
avouched by Plutarch, Fortuna id unum hominibus non aufert, quod been fuerit
consultum, What a man has once well advised, that and only that fortune can
never despoile him of: which Tiberius the Roman Emperor well understood; of
whom Suetonius reports, Quod minimum fortunae, casibusque permittebat, That
he trusted very little to fortune or casualties: and is the same which Caesar
counsels in this place, Ne minimo quidem casui locum relinqui debuisse, That
no place is to be given to the least casualty. It were a hard condition to
expose a naked party to the malice of an enemy, or to disadvantage him with the
loss of his sight. An army without a guard at any time is merely naked, and
more subject to slaughter, then those that never took arms: and the rather
where the watch is wanting, for there sudden chances can hardly be prevented:
and if they happen to avoid any such unexpected casualtie, they have greater
cause to thank Fortune for her favor, then to be angry with her for her
malice; for prevention at such times is out of the way, and they are wholly at
her mercy; as Caesar has rightly delivered touching this accident. And
therefore, whether an army march forward or continue in a place, sleep or wake,
play or work, go in hazard, or rest secure, let not so great a body be at any
time without a competent strength, to answer the spite of such misadventures.

CHAP. XVIII.
Caesar returns to spoil the enemy: and punishes Acco.
CAesar returning again to trouble and vex the enemy, Caesar.
having called a great number of people from the bordering cities, he sent them
out into all parts. All the villages and houses which were any where to be
seen, were burned to the ground; pillage and booty was taken in every place;
the corn was not only consumed by so great a multitude of men and cattle, but
beaten down also by the unseasenableness of the year and continual rain:
insomuch that albeit diverse did hide themselves for the present, yet the army
being withdrawn, they must necessarily perish through want and scarcity. And
oftentimes they happened of the place (the horsemen being divided into many
quarters,) where they did not only see Ambiorix, but kept him for the most
part in sight: and in hoping still to take him, some that thought to demerit
Caesar's highest favor, took such infinite pains; as were almost beyond the
power of nature: and ever there seemed but a little between them and the thing
they most desired. But he conveyed himself away through dens and woods and
dales, and in the night time sought other countries and quarters, with no
greater a guard of horse then four, to whom only he durst commit the safety of
his life. The country being in this manner harried and depopulated, Caesar,
with the loss of two Cohorts, brought back his army to Durocortorum in the
State of the men of Rhemes; where a Parliament being summoned, he determined to
call in question the conspiracy of the Senones and Carnutes, and especially
Acco the principal Author of that Council: who being condemned, was put to
death more majorum. Some others fearing the like judgment, saved themselves by
flight: these he interdicted fire and water. So leaving two legions to winter
in the confines of the Treviri, and two other amongst the Lingones, and the
other six at Agendicum in the borders of the Senones, having made provision of
corn for the Army, he went into Italy, ad conventus agendos.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe conclusion of this Summers work was shut up with the sack and depopulation
of the Eburones, as the extremity of hostile fury, when the enemy lies in the
fastness of the country, and refuses to make open war. That being done,
Caesar proceeded in a course of civil judgment with such principal offenders
as were of the conspiracy: and namely with Acco, whom he punished in such
manner as the old Romans were accustomed to do with such offenders as had
forfeited their loyalty to their country; a kind of death which Nero knew
not, although he had been Emperor of Rome thirteen years, and put to death
many thousand people. The party condemned was to have his neck locked in a
fork, and to be whipped naked to death: and he that was put to death after that
manner, was punished more majorum. Such others as feared to undergo the
judgment, and fled before they came to trial, were banished out of the
country, and made incapable of the benefit of fire and water in that Empire.

And thus ends the sixth Commentary.

The seventh Commentary, of the wars in GALLIA.
The Argument.
THis last Commentary contains the specialities of the war which Caesar made
against all the States of Gallia united into one confederacy, for the expelling
of the Roman government out of that Continent, whom Caesar overthrew in the
end, Horribili vigilantia, and prodigiosis operibus, by his horrible vigilance
and prodigious actions.

CHAP. I.
The Galls enter into new deliberations of revolt.
GAllia being in quiet, (...).
Caesar, according to his determination, went into Italy to keep Courts and
Sessions. There he under stood that P. Clodius was slain, and of a Decree which
the Senate had made, touching the assembly of all the youth of Italy: and
thereupon he purposed to inrole new bands throughout the whole Province. These
news were quickly carried over the Alps into Gallia, and the Galls themselves
added such rumors to it, as the matter seemed well to to bear; that Caesar was
now detained by the troubles at Rome, and in such dissensions could not return
to his army. Being stirred up by this occasion, such as before were inwardly
grieved, that they were subject to the Empire of the people of Rome, did now
more freely and boldly enter into the consideration of war. The Princes and
chiefest men of Gallia having appointed councels and meetings in remote and
woody places, complained of the death of Acco, and showed it to be a fortune
which might concern themselves. They pity the common misery of Gallia, and do
propound all manner of promises and rewards to such as will begin the war,
and with the danger of their lives redeem the liberty of their country: where
in they are to be very careful not to foreslow any time, to the end that
Caesar may be stopped from coming to his army before their secret conferences be
discovered. Which might easily be done, forasmuch as neither the Legions durst
go out of their wintering camps in the absence of their General, nor the
General come to the Legions without a convoy. To conclude, they held it better
to die in fight, then to lose their ancient honor in matter of war, and the
liberty left them by their predecessors.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis Chapter discovers such sparkles of revolt, rising from the
coffeehouse of the conquered Galls, as were like to break out into an
universal burning; and within a while proved such a fire, as the like has not
been seen in the continent of Gallia. For this summers work verified the saying
of the Samnites, Livie, lib 3.
Quod pax servientibus gravior quam liberis bellum esset, That peace is more
grievous to those that are in vassalage, then war is to free men: and was
carried on either part with such a resolution, as in respect of this service,
neither the Galls did before that time engage themselves seriously in their
countries cause, nor did the Romans know the difficulty of their task. But as
Epaminondas called the fields of Boeotia, Plutarch in the life of Marcellus.
Mars his scaffold where he kept his games; or as Xenophon names the city of
Ephesus the Armorers shop: so might Gallia for this year be called the Theater
of war. The chiefest encouragement of the Galls at this time, was the trouble
and dissension at Rome about the death of Clodius, and the accusation of Milo
for killing Clodius.

This Clodius (as Plutarch reports) was a young man of a noble house,
Plutarch in the life of Cicero.
but wild and insolent, and much condemned for profaning a secret sacrifice,
which the Ladies of Rome did celebrate in Caesar's house, by coming amongst them
disguised in the habit of a young singing wench, which he did for the love of
Pompeia, Caesar's wife: whereof being openly accused, he was quitted by secret
means which he made to the Judges; and afterward obtained the Tribuneship of
the people, and caused Cicero to be banished, and did many outrages and
insolences in his Tribuneship: which caused Milo to kill him, for which he was
also accused. And the Senate fearing that this accusation of Milo, being a
bold-spirited man and of good quality, would move some uproar or sedition in
the city, they gave commission to Pompey to see justice executed, as well in
this cause, as for other offenses, Ne quid resp. detrimenti capiat.
that the city might be quiet, and the commonwealth suffer no detriment.
Whereupon Pompey possessed the marketplace, where the cause was to be heard with
bands of soldiers and troops of armed men. And these were the troubles in Rome
upon the death of Clodius, which the Galls did take as an occasion of revolt,
hoping thereby that Caesar (being in Gallia Cisalpina, which province was
allotted to his government, Gallia Cisalpina and Trans^lpina.
as well as that Gallia Northward the Alps,) would have been detained from his
army.

CHAP. II.
The men of Chartres take upon them the beginning of (...), under the
conduction of Cotuatus and Conctodunus.
THese things being thus disputed, Caesar.
the men of Chart^es did make themselves the chief of that war, refusing no
danger for the common safety of their country. And forasmuch as at that present
they could not give caution by hostage, lest the matter should be discovered;
they desire to have their covenants strengthened by oath, and by mutual
collation of their mi^^tary ensigns, which was the most religious ceremony
they could use to bind the rest not to forsake them, having made an entrance
and beginning to that war. The men of Chartres being commended by the rest, and
the oaths of all them that were present being taken, and a time appointed to
begin, they brake up the assembly. When the day came, they of Chartres under
the conduction of Cotuatus and Conetodunus, two desperate fellows, upon a
watchword given, ran speedily to Orleans.
Genabum; and such Roman citizens as were there upon business, namely C.
Fusius Cotta, a knight of Rome, whom Caesar had left overseer of the provision
of corn, they slew, and took their goods. The report thereof was quickly spread
over all the States of Gallia. for when any such great or extraordinary matter
happens, they signify it through the country by an outcry and shout, which
is taken by others, and delivered to the next, and so goes from hand to hand,
as it happened at this time: for that which was done at Genabum at Sunrising,
was before the first watch of the night was ended heard in the confines of the
Arverni, which is above a hundred and threescore miles distant.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis manner of outcry here mentioned to be usual in Gallia, was the same
which remains in use at this present in Wales, The (...) Hooboub.
although not so frequent as in former times. For the custom is there, as
often as any robbery happens to be committed, or any man to be slain, or what
other outrage or riot is done, the next at hand do go to some eminent place
where they may be best heard, and there they make an outcry or howling, which
they call a Hooboub, signifying the fact to the next inhabitants, who take it
as passionately, and deliver it further, and so from hand to hand it quickly
spreads over all the country. It is a very ready way to put the country in
arms, and was first devised (as it seems) for the stay and apprehension of
robbers and outlaws, who kept in strong holds, and lived upon the spoil of the
bordering inhabitants: but otherwise it savoureth of Barbarism, rather then of
any civil government.

CHAP. III.
Vercingetorix stirs up the Arverni to the like commotion and revo^t.
IN like manner Vercingetorix the son of Celtillus, Caesar.
of the nation of the Arverm, a young man of great power and authority, (whose
father was the Commander of all Gallia, and because he sought a kingdom, was
slain by those of his own State,) calling together his followers and clients,
did easily incense them to rebellion. His purpose being known, every man took
arms; and so he was driven out of the town of Gergovia by Gobanitio his uncle
and other Princes, who thought it not safe to make trial of that fortune. And
yet he desisted not, but enrolled needy and desperate people; and with such
troops, whom soever he met withal of the State, he did easily draw them to his
party, persuading them to take arms for the defense of common liberty. And
having at length got great forces together, he expelled his adversaries out of
the town, by whom he was himself before thrust out. He was called of his men by
the title of King, and sent Embassages into all parts, adjuring them to
continue constant and faithful. The Senones, the Parisii, the Pictones, the
Cadurci, the Turones, the Aulerci, the Lemovic^s, the Andes, and all the rest
that border upon the Occan were quickly made of his party: and by all their
consents the chief command was conferred upon him. Which authority being
offered him, he commanded hostages to be brought in unto him from all those
States, and a certain number of soulders to be sent him with all speed. He
rated every city what proportion of arms they should have ready, and specially
he labored to raise great store of horse. To extraordinary diligence he added
extraordinary severity, compelling such as stood doubtful by hard and severe
punishment: for such as had committed a great offense, he put to death by fire
and torture; lesser faults he punished with the loss of their nose or their
eyes, and so sent them home, that by their example others might be terrified.
By these practices and severity having speedily raised a great army, he sent
Lucterius of Cahors, a man of great spirit and boldness, with part of the
forces, toward the Rutheni, and he himself made toward the Bituriges. Upon
his coming the Bituriges sent to the Hedui, in whose protection they were, in
require aid against Vercingetorix. The Hedui, by the advice of the Legates
which Caesar had left with the army, sent forces of horse and foot to the aid
of the Bituriges: who coming to the river Loire, which divides the Bituriges
from the Hedui, after a few days stay, not daring to pass over the river,
returned home again, bringing word to our Legates, that they durst not commit
themselves to the Bituriges, and so returned. For they knew that if they had
passed over the river, the Bituriges had inciosed them in on the one side, and
the Arverni on the other. But whether they did return upon that occasion, or
through perfidious treachery, it remains doubtful. The Bituriges upon their
departure did presently join themseleves with the Arverni.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT is observed by such as are acquainted with matter of Government, There
ought to be a Proportion of quality between a Commander and his soldiers.
that there ought to be always a proportion of quality between him that
commands and them that obey: for if a man of Sardanapalus condition should
take upon him the charge of Marius army, it were like to take no better effect,
then if Manlius had the leading of lascivious Cinaedes. Mu^^ Mariani.
And as we may observe in oeconomicall policy, a dissolute master may as soon
command hair to grow on the palm of his hand, Such a master, such a servant.
as to make a virtuous servant; but the respect of duty between such relatives
does likewise infer the like respect of quality: so in all sorts and
conditions of command, there must be sympathizing means, to unite the diversity
of the parts in the happy end of perfect Government. In this new Empire which
befell Vercingetorix, we may observe a double proportion between him and his
people. The first, of strength and ability; and the other, of quality and
resemblance of affection: upon the assurance of which proportion he grounded
the austerity of his command. For it appears that his first beginning was by
persuasion and entreaty, and would endure no direction, but that which was
guided by a loose and easy reine; holding it neither safe nor seemly, but
rather a strain of extreme madness, first to punish or threaten, and then to
want power to make good his judgments: but being strengthened by authority
from themselves, and backed with an army able to control their disobedience,
he then added punishment as the ensign of Magistracy, and confirmed his power
by rigorous commands; which is as necessary a demonstration of a well-settled
government, as any circumstance belonging thereunto.

Touching the resemblance and proportion of their qualities, it is manifestly
showed by the sequel of this history, that every man desired to redeem the
common liberty of their country, in that measure of endeavor as was fitting so
great a cause. Amongst whom Vercingetorix being their chief Commander, summae
diligentiae (as the story says) added summam severitatem, Li^ie.
to great diligence great severity; as well assured, that the greater part
would approve his justice, and condemn the uncertainty of doubtful
resolutions, desiring no further service at their hands, then that wherein
himself would be the foremost. In imitation of Valerius Corvinus: Factamea, non
dicta, vos milites sequi volo; nec disciplinam modo, sed exemplum etiam a me
petere; I would have you, O my Soldiers, do as I do, and not so much mind what
I say; and to take not your discipline only, but your pattern also from me. And
therefore the party was like to be well upheld; forasmuch as both the Prince
and the people were so far engaged in the matter intended, as by the
resemblance of an earnest desire might answer the measure of due proportion.

CHAP. IV.
Caesar comes into Gallia, and by a device gets to his army.
THese things being told Caesar in Italy; Caesar.
as soon as he understood that the matters in the city were by the wisdom of
Pompey brought into better state, he took his journey into Gallia, and being
come thither he was much troubled how to get to his army. For if he should send
for the Legions into the Province, he understood that they should be certainly
fought withal by the way in his absence. If he himself should go unto them, he
doubted how he might safely commit his person to any, although they were such
as were yet in peace. In the mean time Lucterius of Cahors being sent against
the Rutheni, does easily unite that State to the Arverni: and proceeding
further against the Nitiobriges and the Gabali, he received hostages of both of
them, and having raised a great power, he labored to break into the Province,
and to make toward Narbo. Which being known, Caesar resolved by all means to
put him by that purpose, and went himself to Narbo. At his coming he encouraged
such as stood doubtful or timorous, and placed garrisons amongst the Rutheni,
the Volsci, and about Narbo, which were frontier places and near unto the
enemy, and commanded part of the forces which were in the Province, together
with those supplies which he had brought out of Italy, to go against the
Helvii, which are adjoining upon the Arverni. Things being thus ordered,
Lucterius being now suppressed and removed holding it to be dangerous to enter
among the garrisons, he himself went toward the Helvii. And albeit the hill
Gebenna, which divides the Arverni from the Helvii, by reason of the hard time
of winter and the depth of the snow, did hinder their passage; yet by the
industry of the soldier making way through snow of six foot deep, they came
into the confines of the Arverni: who being suddenly and unawares suppressed,
little mistrusting an invasion over the hill Gebenna, which incloseth them in
as a wall, and at that time of the year does not afford a path to a single man
alone, he commanded the horsemen to scatter themselves far and near to make the
enemy the more afraid. These things being speedily carried to Vercingetorix,
all the Arverni full of fear and amazement flocked about him, beseeching him to
have a care of their State, and not to suffer themselves to be sacked by the
enemy, especially now at this time, when as all the war was transferred upon
them. Upon their instant entreaty he removed his camp out of the territories of
the Bituriges, and marched toward the country of the Arverni. But Caesar
having continued two days in those places, forasmuch as he understood both by
use and opinion, what course Vercingetorix was like to take; he left the army,
pretending some supplies of horse, which he went to raise, and appointed young
Brutus to command those forces, admonishing him to send out the horsemen into
all quarters, and that he himself would not be absent from the camp above three
days. These things being thus settled, none of his followers knowing his
determination, by great journeys he came to Vienna; where taking fresh horse,
which he had laid there many days before, he ceased neither night nor day,
until he came through the confines of the Hedui to the Lingones, where two
legions wintered: to the end if the Hedui should undertake any thing against
him, he might with speed prevent it. Being there, he sent to the rest of the
Legions, and brought them all to one place, before the Arverni could possibly
have notice of it.

OBSERVATIONS.
CAesar upon his first entrance into Gallia, To abuse an enemy by way of
stratageme commendable in a Commander.
was perplexed how to get to his army: and the matter stood in such terms, as
brought either the legions or his own person into hazard. For (as he says) if
he should send for the legions to come unto him, they should doubtless be
fought withal by the way, which he was loath to adventure, unless himself had
been present: or otherwise if he himself had gone unto them, he doubted of the
entertainment of the revolting Galls, and might have overthrown his army, by
the loss of his own person. In this extremity of choice, he resolved upon his
own passage to the army, as less dangerous and more honorable, rather then to
call the legions out of their wintering camps, where they stood as a check to
bridle the insolency of the mutinous Galls, and so to bring them to the hazard
of battle in fetching their General into the field: whereby he might have lost
the victory before he had begun the wars. And for his better safety in this
passage, he used this cunning. Having assured the Roman Province by strong and
frequent garrisons on the frontiers, and removed Lucterius from those parts;
gathering together such supplies as he had brought with him out of Italy, with
other forces which he found in the Province, he went speedily into the
territories of the Ave^g^e.
Arverni, making a way over the hill La montagne de Geneve.
Gebenna, at such a time of the year as made it unpassable for any forces, had
they not been led by Caesar; only for this purpose, to have it noised abroad,
that whereas Vercingetorix and the Arverni had principally undertook the
quarrel against the Romans, and made the beginning of a new war, Caesar would
first deal with them, and lay the weight thereof upon their shoulders, by
calling their fortunes first in question, to the end he might possess the
world with an opinion of his presence in that country, and draw Vercingetorix
back again to defend his state, whilst he in the mean time did slip to his army
without suspicion or fear of peril: for staying there no longer then might
serve to give a sufficient color to that pretense, and leaving those forces to
execute the rest, and to make good the secret of the project, he conveyed
himself to his army with such speed and celerity, Vit^ Caesaris.
as does verify the saying of Suetonius; quod persaepe nuncios de se praevenit,
that he often outwent the ordinary messengers.

These blinds and false intendments are of special use in matter of war, and
serve as well to get advantages upon an enemy, as to clear a difficulty by
cleanly evasion: neither is a Commander the less valued for fine conveyance in
military projects, but deserves rather greater honor for adding art unto
valor, and supplanting the strength of opposition with the sleight of wit.

-- Dolus an virtus quis in host requirit?
Who looks at fraud or valor in a foe? has always been held a principle
amongst men of war. And Lisander his counsel is the same in effect, that
where the Lions skin will not serve the turn, there take the Foxes. Carbo spoke
it to the commendation of Sylla, that he had to do both with a Lion and a Fox,
but he feared more his Foxes pate then his Lions skin. It is reported that
Anniball excelled all other of his time for abusing the enemy in matter of
stratageme, for he never made fight but with an addition of assistants,
supporting force with art, and the fury of arms with the subtlety of wit.

Of late time amongst other practices of this nature, the treaty at Ostend is
most memorable, entertained only to gain time: that while speech of parlee was
continued, and pledges delivered to the Archduke Albertus, for the safety of
such as were sent into the town to capitulate with the General, there might be
time gained for the sending in of such supplies of men and munition as were
wanting, to make good the defense thereof: which were no sooner taken in, but
the Treaty proved a stratageme of war.

In these foiles and tricks of wit, which at all times and in all ages have
been highly esteemed in men of war, as special virtues beseeming the
condition of a great Commander, if it be demanded how far a General may
proceed in abusing an enemy by deeds or words; I cannot speak distinctly to the
question: but sure I am, that Surena, Lieutenant general of the Parthian army,
did his master good service, in abusing Crassus the Roman General by fair
promises; or as Plutarch says, Plut. Crassus.
by foul perjury, till in the end he brought his head to be an actor in a
Tragedy: albeit Surena never deserved well of good report since that time.
Howsoever, men of civil society ought not to draw this into use from the
example of soldiers, forasmuch as it is a part of the profession of cutting of
throats, and has no prescription but in extremities of war.

CHAP. V.
Vercingetorix besigeth Gergovia, Caesar takes in Vellaunodunum and Genabum.
THis being known, Caesar.
Vercingetorix brought back his army again into the country of the Bituriges,
and thence marched to besiege Gergovia, a town held by the Boii, whom Caesar
had left there after the Helvetian war, and given the jurisdiction of the
town to the Hedui. which brought Caesar into great perplexity, whether he
should keep the Legions in one place for that time of winter which remained,
and so suffer the stipendaries of the Hedui to be taken and spoiled, whereby
all Gallia might take occasion to revolt, forasmuch as the Romans should seem
to afford no protection or countenance to their friends; or otherwise draw his
army out of their wintering-camps sooner then was usual, and thereby become
subject to the difficulties of provision and carriage of corn. Notwithstanding
it seemed better, and so he resolved, rather to undergo all difficulties, then
by taking such a scorn to loose the good wills of all his followers. And
therefore persuading the Hedui diligently to make supply of necessary
provisions, he sent to the Boii, to advertise them of his coming, to encourage
them to continue loyal, and nobly to resist the assaults of the enemy: and
leaving two Legions with the carriages of the whole army at Agendicum, he
marched toward the Boii. The next day coming to a Town of the Senones called
Vellaunodunum, he determined to take it in, to the end he might leave no enemy
behind him, which might hinder a speedy supply of victuals: and in two days he
enclosed it about with a ditch and a rampire. The third day some being sent out
touching the giving up of the town, he commanded all their arms and their
cattle to be brought out, and six hundred pledges to be delivered. Leaving C.
Trebonius a Legate to see it performed; he himself made all speed toward
Genabum in the territories of the men of Chartres; who as soon as they heard of
the taking in of Vellaunodunum, persuading themselves the matter would not rest
so, they resolved to put a strong garrison into Genabum. Thither came Caesar
within two days, and incamping himself before the Town, the evening drawing
on, he put off the assault unto the next day, commanding the soldiers to
prepare in a readiness such things as should be necessary for that service.
And forasmuch as the town of Genabum had a bridge leading over the river Loire,
he feared least they of the town would steal away in the night: for prevention
whereof he commanded two Legions to watch all night in arms. The townsmen a
little before midnight went out quietly, and began to pass over the river.
Which being discovered by the Scouts, Caesar with the Legions which he had
ready in arms, burnt the gates, and entering the Town took it; the greatest
number of the enemy being taken, and a very few escaping, by reason of the
narrowness of the bridge and the way which shut in the multitude. The town
being sacked and burned, and given for a booty to the soldiers, he carried his
army over the river Loire, into the territories of the Bituriges.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IT is a known and an approved saying, E malis minimum est eligendum, of evils
the least is to be chosen: but in a presentment of evils to be able to discern
the difference, and to choose the least, Hic labor, hoc opus, here is all the
skill and work. Vercingetorix besieging Gergovia (a stipendary town belonging
to the Hedui, Clermont in Auvergne
that of long time had served the Roman Empire,) at such a time of the year as
would not afford provision of victual for the maintenance of an army, but with
great difficulty and inconvenience of carriage and convoy; Caesar was much
perplexed, whether he should forbear to succor the town and raise the siege,
or undergo the hazard of long and tedious convoyes. A matter often falling into
dispute, although it be in other terms, whether honesty or honorable respect
ought to be preferred before private ease and particular commodity. Caesar has
declared himself touching this point, preferring the honor of the people of
Rome, as the majesty of their Empire, and the reputation which they desired to
hold, touching assistance and protection of their friends, before any
inconvenience which might happen to their army. And not without good reasons,
which may be drawn as well from the worthiness of the cause, as from the danger
of the effect: for duties of virtue and respects of honesty, as the noblest
parts of the mind, do not only challenge the service of the inferior
faculties of the soul; but do also command the body and the casaulties thereof,
in such sort as is fitting the excellency of their prerogative: for otherwise
virtue would find but bare attendance, and might leave her scepter for want of
lawful authority. And therefore Caesar chose rather to adventure the army upon
the casualties of hard provision, then to blemish the Roman name with the
infamy of disloyalty. Which was less dangerous also in regard of the effect:
for where the bond is of value, there the forfeiture is great: and if that tie
had been broken, and their opinion deceived touching the expectation of
assistance and help, all Gallia might have had just cause of revolt, and
disclaimed the Roman government for non-protection. To conclude then, let no
man deceive himself in the present benefit, which private respect may bring
upon the refusal of honest regard, for the end will be a witness of the
error, and prove honesty to be best policy.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IT is observed by some writers, Caesar went always provided of four things.
that Caesar never undertook any action, or at the least brought it not to
trial, but he first assured himself of these four things.

The first was provision of victuals, as the very foundation of warlike
expeditions, whereof I have already treated in the first Commentary: the
difficulty whereof made him so doubtful to undertake the relief of Gergovia.
And doubtless whosoever goes about any enterprise of war, without certain
means of victual and provision, must either carry an army of Camelions that
may live by the air, or intend nothing but to build castles in the air, or
otherwise shall be sure to find his enemy either in his bosom, or as the
Proverb is in Plutarch, Plutarch in the life of (...).
to leap on his belly with both his feet.

The second thing was provision of all necessaries, which might be of use in
that service: wherewith he always so abounded, that there might rather want
occasion to use them, then he be wanting to answer occasion. And these were the
instruments whereby he made such admirable works, such bridges, such mounts,
such trenches, such huge armadoes, as appears by the sea-^ight with the
maritime cities of Gallia: Comment. 3.
according to which his former custom, forasmuch as the day was far spent
before he came to Genabum, he commanded such things to be sitted and had in a
readiness, as might serve for the siege the next day.

The third thing was an army for the most part of old soldiers, whom the
Romans called Veteram, whereof he was likewise at this time provided; for the
two legions which were fresh and lately inroled, he left at Agend^cum with the
carriages, taking only the old soldiers for this service, as knowing that in
pugna usum amplius prodesse quam vires, usefulness is more serviceable in war
then numbers.

The fourth thing was the trial and experience of the enemies forces, which
the former victories assured him to be inferior to the Romans; it being
always a rule in the Roman discipline, (as I have already noted,) Comment. ^.
by light and easy skirmishes, to acquaint the soldiers with the manner of
the enemies fight, Ne eos novum bellum, novus hostis terreret, least a new
kind of fight, or enemy might affright them; as L^vy says.

CHAP. VI.
Caesar takes in Noviodunum, and beats the enemy coming to rescue the Town.
VErcingetorix understanding of Caesar's coming, Caesar.
left the siege, and went to meet him. Caesar resolved to take a town lying in
his way in the territories of the Bituriges, called Noviodunum. Which they of
the town perceiving, sent out unto him to beseech him to spare them, and to
give order for their safety. To the end therefore that he might speed tha^
business with as much celerity as he had accomplished former services, he
commanded them to bring out their arms, their horse, and to deliver pledges.
Part of the hostages being given, while the rest were in delivering over,
diverse Centurions and a few soldiers being admitted into the town, to seek out
their weapons and their horses, the horsemen of the enemy, which marched before
Vercingetorix army, were discovered a far off: which the townsmen had no
sooner perceived, and thereby conceived some hope of relief, but they presently
took up a shout, and betook themselves to their arms, shut the gates, and began
to make good the walls. The Centurions that were in the town perceiving some
new resolution of the Galls, with their swords drawn possessed themselves of the
gates, and saved both themselves and their men that were in the town. Caesar
commanded the horsemen to be drawn out of the camp, and to begin the charge.
And as they began to give ground, he sent four hundred German horsemen to
second them, whom he had resolved to keep with him from the first: who charged
the enemy with such fury, that the Galls could no way endure the assault, but
were presently put to flight; and many of them being slain, the rest retired
back to the army. Upon their overthrow, the townsmen were worse affrighted then
they were before; and having apprehended such as were thought to have stirred
up the people, they brought them to Caesar, and yielded themselves unto him.
Which being ended, Caesar marched toward the town of Avaricum, which was the
greatest and best fortified of all the towns in the territories of the
Bituriges, and situate in the most fertile part of the country; for that being
taken in, he doubted not to bring the whole State of the Bituriges easily into
his subjection.

OBSERVATIONS.
FOrasmuch as nothing is more changeable then the mind of man, which
(notwithstanding the low degree of baseness wherein it often sits,) will as
occasion gives way to revenge, readily amount to the height of tyranny, and
spare no labor to cry quittance with an enemy: it has been thought expedient
in the wisdom of foregoing ages, to pluck the wings of so mounting a bird,
and to deprive an enemy of such means, as may give hope of liberty by mutiny
and revolt.

The practice of the Romans in taking in any town, The means which the Romans
used to weaken an enemy.
was to leave them forceless, that howsoever they might stand affected, their
nails should be surely paid for scratching, and their power confined to the
circuit of their mind. For as it appears by this and many other places of
Caesar, no rendry of any town was accepted, until they had delivered all their
arms, both offensive and defensive, with such engines and instruments of war
as might any way make for the defense of the same. Neither that only, but such
beasts also, whether Horse or Elephant, or any other whatsoever, as might any
way advantage the use of those weapons. Which as it was a great dismay and
weakening to the enemy; so was it short of the third condition, commanding the
delivery of so many hostages or pledges as were thought convenient, being the
prime of their youth, and the flower of their manhood, and were as the marrow
to their bones, and the sinews to that body. Whereby it came to pass, that the
remnant was much disabled in strength, concerning their number of fighting men;
and such as were left had neither arms nor means to make resistance.

The Turk observes the same course with the Christians, but in a more cruel
and barbarous manner: for he comes duly at a certain time, not regarding any
former demeanor, and leads away the flower of their youth, to be invested in
impiety and infidelity, and to be made vassalls of heathenish impurity.

Oftentimes we read, that a conquered people were not only interdicted arms,
but the matter also and the art whereby such arms were made and wrought: for
where the people are great, and metal and matter plenty, it is a chance if
artificers be wanting to repair their loss, and to refurnish their armoury. At
the siege of Carthage the Romans having taken away their arms, they
notwithstanding, finding store of metal within the town, caused workmen to
make every day a hundred targets and three hundred swords, besides arrows and
casting slings, using women's hair for want of hemp, and pulling down their
houses for timber to build shipping. Whereby we may perceive, that a General
cannot be too careful to deprive an enemy of all such helps as may any way
strengthen his hand, or make way to resistance.

CHAP. VII.
Vercingetorix persuades the Galls to a new course of war.
VErcingetorix having received so many losses one in the neck of another,
Caesar.
Ville (...) en la Franche conte.
Vellaunodunum, Or^^^ns.
Genabum and Noyon.
Noviodunum being taken, he calls his men to council, and tells them that
the war must be carried in another course then it has been heretofore; for
they must endeavor by all means to keep the Romans from forage and convoy of
victual: which would easily be brought to pass, forasmuch as they themselves
did abound in horsemen: and for that the time of the year did not yet serve to
get forage in the field, the enemy must necessarily seek it in houses and
barns, whereby the forragers would daily be cut off by their horsemen.
Moreover, for their safety and defense they were to neglect their private
commodity: their houses and their villages were to be burnt up round about as
far as Boia, wheresoever the Romans might go to fetch their forage. For
themselves they thought it reason that they should make supply of victual and
provision, in whose possessions they were, and for whom they fought. By this
means the Romans would never be able to endure that want as would befall them, or
at the least be constrained to fetch their provisions far off, with great
danger and peril to themselves: neither did it make any matter whether they
killed them or put them besides their carriages; for without necessary supplies
they were never able to hold war. And to conclude, such towns were likewise to
be set on fire, as by the strength of their situation were not safe from
danger, lest they should prove receptacles to linger and detract the war, and
serve the Romans for booty and supplies of provision. And albeit these things
might seem heavy and bitter; yet they ought to esteem it more grievous to have
their wives and their children led away into servitude, and themselves to be
slain by the sword of the enemy: which does necessarily fall upon a conquered
people. This opinion was generally approved by the consent of all men, and more
then twenty cities of the Bituriges were burnt in one day: the like was done in
other States, great fires were to be seen in all parts. And although all men
took it very grievously, yet they propounded this comfort unto themselves, that
the enemy being by this means defeated, they should quickly recover their
losses. Touching Avaricum they disputed it in common council, whether it should
be burnt or defended. The Bituriges do prostrate themselves at the feet of all
the Galls, that they might not be forced to set on fire with their own hands,
the fairest city in all Gallia, being both an ornament and a strength to their
State; they would easily defend it by the site of the place, being incircled
round about with a river and a bog, and being accessible by one narrow passage
only. At length leave being granted them to keep it, Ve^cingetorix at first
dissuading them from it, and afterward yielding unto it, moved by the entreaty
of the Galls, and the commiseration of the common multitude; and so a fit
garrison was chosen to defend the town.

OBSERVATIONS.
I Have seen an Imprese with a circle, It is a hard (...) following a business,
to hit that course which may most advantage it.
and a hand with a sharp style pointing toward the center with this motto, Hic
labor, hoc opus, this is a thing of work and labor; signifying thereby, that
albeit the Area thereof were plainly and distinctly bounded, and the Diameter
of no great length, yet it was not an easy matter to find the Center, which is
the heart and chiefest part of that figure. In like manner, there is no
business or other course so easy or plain, but the center may be mistaken, and
the difficulty commonly rests in hitting that point, which gives the
circumference an equal and regular motion.

The Galls were resolved to undertake the defense of their country, and to
redeem their liberty with the hazard of their lives: but it seems they were
mistaken in the means, and ran a course far short of the center. For
Vercingetorix perceiving the Romans daily to get upon the Galls, first by
taking in one town, secondly another, and lastly of a third, he advised them to
set on fire all the country houses, villages and towns for a great circuit
round about, and so force the Romans to fetch their forage and provisions
far off, and undergo the difficulties of long convoyes, whereby the Galls
might make use of their multitude of horse, and keep the Romans without
supplies of necessary provisions: and so they doubted not but to give a speedy
end to that war. And this h^ took to be the center of that business, and the
true use of their advantage.

Polybius writes, Lib. 4.
that M. Regulus having diverse times overthrown the Carthaginians in battle,
one Xantippus a Lacedemonian, clearly perceiving the cause of their often
routs, began openly to say, that the Carthaginians were not overthrown by the
valor of the Romans, but by their own ignorance: for they exceeding the Romans
in horse and Elephants, had neglected to fight in the champain, where their
Cavalry might show it self, but in hills and woody places, where the foot troops
were of more force, and so the Romans had the advantage. Whereby the manner of
the war being changed, and by the counsel of the preguant Greek, brought from
the hills into the level of the plain, the Carthaginians recovered all their
former losses by one absolute victory. In like manner Anniball finding himself
to exceed the Romans in strength of cavalrie, did always endeavor to affront
them in open and champain countries; and as often as the Romans durst meet him,
Plutarch in the life of Fabius.
he put them to the worse: but Fabius perceiving the disadvantage, kept himself
always upon the hills, and in covert and uneven places, and so made the
advantage of the place equal the multitude of the enemies horsemen.

There is no greater scorn can touch a man of reputation and place, then to be
thought not to understand his own business. For as wisdom is the excellency
of humane nature, so does want of judgment deject men to the condition of such
as Aristotle calls servants by nature: Servus a (...).
whose wit being too weak to support any weight, Polit. 1.
do recompense that want with the service of their body, and are wholly employed
in a Porters occupation. Ili^d. 10.
Which Homer lays upon Diomedes shoulders, with as fine conveyance as he does
the rest of his inventions. For Ulysses and he going out on a party to do some
exploit upon the Trojans, they carried themselves so gallantly, that they fell
to share King Rhesus chariot and horses. Ulysses presently seized upon the
horses, being of a delicate Thracian breed, and Diomedes seemed well contented
with the chariot. But being to carry it away, Pallas advised him to let it
alone, lest he might prove his strength to be greater then his wit, and yet not
find so much neither as would carry it away.

But for these directions which Vercingetorix gave unto the Galls, I refer
the Reader to the sequel of the History, wherein he shall find how they
prevailed.

CHAP. VIII.
Caesar besieges Avaricum, and is distressed for want of corn.
VErcingetorix followed Caesar by small and easy journeyes, Caesar.
and chose a place to incamp in, fortified about with bogs and woods, fifteen
miles distant from Avaricum: where he understood what was done at Avaricum
every hour of the day, and commanded likewise what he would have done. He
observed all our forraging and harvesting, and did set upon such as went far
off upon any such occasion, and encumbered them with great inconveniences:
albeit they took what course they could to meet with it, as to go out at
uncertain times, and by unknown and unusual ways. Caesar incamping himself
before that part of the town which was not shut in with the river nor the bog,
and afforded but a narrow and straight passage, began to make a mount, to drive
vines, and to raise two towers; (for the nature of the place would not suffer
him to enclose it round about with a ditch and a rampire;) and never rested to
admonish the Hedui and the Boii to bring in supplies of corn: of whom the one,
by reason of the small care and pains they took, did little help him; the
other, of no great ability, being a small and a weak State, did quickly consume
all that they had. The army was distressed for want of corn, by reason of the
poverty of the Boii, and the indiligence of the Hedui, together with the
burning of the houses in the country, in such manner as they wanted corn for
many days together, and sustained their lives with beasts and cattle which
they had fetched a great way off: and yet no one voice at all was heard to come
from them, unworthy the majesty of the Roman Empire, and their former
victories. And whenas Caesar did speak unto the legions severally as they were
in the works, that if their wants were heavy and bitter unto them, he would
leave off the siege; all of them with one voice desired him not to do so, for
since they had so served many years under his command, as they never had
received any dishonor, neither had they at any time departed and left the
business undone; it would be imputed unto them as an ignominy and disgrace to
leave this siege; and that they had rather undergo all difficulties, then not
to revenge the death of the citizens of Rome that by treachery were slain at
Genabum. The same speeches they delivered to the Centurions and Tribunes, to be
told Caesar.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe worth of a Soldier consists in a disposition of mind and body, Patience
in a soldier excels valor.
which makes him apt to suffer and to undergo the difficulties of war. For let
his resolution otherwise be never so great, and his courage invincible in the
day of battle; yet if he faint under the burden of such tediousness as
usually attends upon warlike designments, he is no way fit for any great
enterprise. Pindarus says, that he understands not the war, that knows not
that the atchieving of one piece of service, is always accompanied with the
sufferance of another difficulty as great as that which was first intended. Et
facere, and pati fortia, Romanum est. It was the peculiar commendation of the
Roman people, patiently to endure the extremities of warfare: which made the
Volsci to cry out, That either they must forswear arms, and forget to make war,
and receive the yoke of thraldom and bondage; Live. lib. 6.
aut it is quibuscum de imperio certetur, nec virtute, nec patientia, nec
disciplina rei militaris cedendum; or else they must show themselves no ways
inferior to their antagonists either in valor, or sufferance, or military
discipline. Appian forgets not to say, that the Roman Empire was raised to
such greatness, not by fortune or good luck, but by mere valor, and patient
enduring of hardness and want. Which is the self-same which Crassus in his
sorrow uttered to his soldiers, who neither did nor spoke many things well:
Plut. Crassus.
for as Plutarch rightly censureth him out of the Comicall Poet, he was

A good man, any way else but in wars.
The Empire of Rome (says he) came not to that greatness which it now
possesses by good fortune only, but by patient and constant suffering of
trouble and adversity; never yielding or giving place to any danger.

Some Italian writers are of an opinion, Boteras di Principe.
that the two chiefest parts of a soldier, Valor and Sufferance, are in these
times divided unto two nations, the French and the Spaniard: the Spaniard
making war rather by sufferance then by violence of assaults; and the French
impatient of delay, and furious in assaults: so that according to his opinion,
a Spaniard and a Frenchman will make one good soldier. Touching the Spaniard,
I cannot deny but that he has the name of one of the best soldiers in
Christendom, and I do gladly allow all that virtue can challenge, for truth
will prevail against all affection: yet I may say thus much on the behalf of
our own people, that we have seldom lost honor in confronting any nation.
Concerning the sufferance, and patient enduring of hardness, which is said to
be in the Spaniard, being able to live long with a little, it may peradventure
not unfitly be attributed to the property of their country, and the nature of
their climate, which will not bear nor digest such plenty of food, as is
required in colder countries: and thereupon being born to so weak a digestion,
they are as well satisfied with a root or a sallet, as others with better
plenty of food; and therein they go beyond other Nations. Of the French I say
nothing, but leave them to make good the opinion of the Italian Writer.

Suetonius witnesses of Caesar, that he himself was laboris ultra fidem
patiens, one that endured toil beyond belief, whereby he might the better move
his army to endure with patience the difficulties of the siege: and yet so
artificially, as he seemed rather willing to leave it uneffected, then to
impose any burden upon them, which they themselves should be unwilling to
bear; the rather to draw the Legions to engage themselves therein, by denying
to forsake it, then to cast that upon them, which their-unwillingnesse might
easily have put off.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
WE may further observe, the means the soldiers used to acquaint Caesar with
their desires, which was by the Tribunes and Centurions. For as these were
mediate Officers between the General and them, and delivered the mandates and
directions of the Emperor to the soldier; so did the soldiers use their help
to make known unto him their requests: as besides this place may appear in the
first Commentary, where they desired to give him satisfaction touching the fear
they had conceived of Ariovistus and the Germans, which they likewise did by
the Centurions and Tribunes.

CHAP. IX.
Caesar leaves the siege, and goes to take the enemy upon advantage; but
returns again without fighting.
WHen the towers began to approach near unto the walls, Caesar.
Caesar understood by the captives, that Vercingetorix having consumed all his
provision of forage, had removed his camp nearer to Avaricum, and that he
himself was gone with the cavalry, and such ready footmen as were accustomed to
fight among the horsemen, to lie in ambush in that place where he thought our
men would come a forraging the next day. Which being known, setting forward
about midnight in silence, in the morning he came to the enemies camp. They
having speedy advertisement by their scouts of Caesar's coming, did hide their
carriages in the woods, and imbattelled all their forces in an eminent and open
place. Which being told Caesar, he commanded the baggage to be speedily laid
together, and their arms to be made ready. There was a hill of a gentle rising
from the bottom to the top, encompassed round about with a difficult and
troublesome bog of fifty foot in breadth. Upon this hill, the bridge being
broken, the Galls kept themselves, trusting to the strength of the place, and
being distributed into companies according to their several States, they kept
all the fords and passages of the bog with watches, with this resolution, that
if the Romans did pass over the bog, they might easily from the higher ground
keep them under, as they stuck in the mire, who little reckoning of so small a
distance, would deem the fight to be upon equal terms, whereas they themselves
well knowing the inequality of the condition, did make but a vain and idle
ostentation. The soldiers disdaining that the enemy could endure their
presence so near at hand, and requiring the sign of battle, Caesar acquainted
them with what detriment and loss of many valiant men, the victory must at
that time be bought, who being so resolute that they refused no danger to
purchase him honor, he might well be condemned of great ingratitude and
villainy, if their lives were not dearer unto him then his own safety: and so
comforting the soldiers, he brought them back again the same day into the
camp, and gave order for such things as were requisite for the siege of the
town.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis Chapter has diverse special particulars worthy observation. The first
is, the opportunity which Caesar took to visit the army of the Galls, when
Vercingetorix was absent and gone to lie in ambush for the Roman forragers:
which was a caveat to Vercingetorix, not to be too busy with the Roman
convoyes, lest his absence might draw on such an inconvenience, as might make
him repent for going a birding.

The second is, the inequality which the advantage of the place gives to a
party: which I have already so often spoken of, as I am almost weary to repeat
it; and the rather, for that I have produced this passage in the former book,
to signify the benefit of such an advantage. Yet forasmuch as it is so
pregnant to that effect, as may well deserve a double consideration, and was
also produced by Caesar himself upon occasion at Gergovia, give me leave to
note how much it swayeth to counterpoise the want of the adverse party. Wherein
as it cannot be denied, but that it may give such help as may make a small
number equal a far greater proportion of men; so in Caesar's judgment it
countervaileth the absence of the General, The advantage of the place does
countervail the absence of the General.
and makes the body perfect without the head. Neither were they weakened only
with the absence of their General; but their cavalry wherein they so much
trusted was absent likewise; and yet more then that too, by how much the Roman
legions excelled the Galls in valor and prowess of arms: which being all put
together is no small advantage. For doubtless if the matter had stood upon
equal terms touching the place, neither the presence of Vercingetorix, nor the
addition of their cavalry to assist them, had hindered the battle, or turned
the Romans back to their camp.

The third thing is, the moderation which he showed, forbearing to fight, the
Galls insolently vaunting, and the Roman soldiers fretting and disdaining the
enemies pride: whereby he settled such a confidence of his directions in the
minds of his men, by shunning the peril of apparent danger which might fall
upon them in particular, as afterward they would make no question of his
commands, but take them as the only means of their safety, being never better
assured then in performing what he commanded. The practice of later times has
not so well deserved of that virtue, but has often showed it self more
prodigal of blood, as though men were made only to fill up ditches, and to be
the woeful executioners of other men's rashness.

The last thing is, the making ready of their weapons, arma expediri iussit.
Concerning which point, we must understand that the Romans always carried
their targets in cases, and did hang their helmets at their backs, and fitted
their piles as might be most convenient with the rest of their carriages. And
therefore whenever they were to give battle, they were first to put on their
helmets, to uncase their targets, to fit their piles, and to make them ready
for the charge: and this was called Arma expedire.

CHAP. X.
Vercingetorix excuses himself to the Galls for his absence.
VErcingetorix returning back to the army, Caesar.
was accused of treason: in that he had removed his camp near unto the Romans;
and further that he had gone away from it, and took all the cavalry with him;
that he had left so great an army without any one to command it; that upon his
departure the Romans should come so opportunely and so speedily: for all these
things could not fall out by chance without counsel and direction: it seemed
he had rather have the kingdom of Gallia by a grant from Caesar, then by their
means and gift. Being thus charg^d, he answers, That he removed the camp for
want of forage, they themselves desiring it. He came near unto the Romans,
being led thereunto by the opportunity of the place, which was such as might
defend it self by its own strength; the cavalry was of no use in a boggy place,
but might do good service there where it went. He left no man to command the
army of purpose, lest by the persuasion of the multitude he should be forced to
fight, which he knew they all desired, as not able long to endure any labor.
If the Romans came by chance, they were to thank fortune; if by any man's
direction, they were beholding unto him that had brought them, where they might
from the higher ground both see how small a number they were, and contemn their
valor; who not daring to fight, did shamefully return into their camp. He
desired to receive no imperial dignity by treachery from Caesar, which he
might otherwise have by lawful victory, which was now most certain and sure,
both to himself and the rest of the Galls. And for that authority which he had
received from them, he was ready to give it up into their hands again, if they
thought the honor which they gave him to be greater then the help and safety
which they received from him. And to the end you may understand these things to
be truly delivered by me, (says he) hear the Roman soldiers. And therewithal
he brought forth servants which were taken forraging a few days before,
miserably tormented with famine and irons. They being taught beforehand what to
answer, said they were legionary soldiers, and had stole out of the camp to
see if they could meet with any corn or cattle in the fields: the whole army
suffered the like penury, and men's strength began to fail them, insomuch much
that they were not able to undergo any labor: and therefore their General had
resolved, that if he prevailed not against the Town, he would withdraw his army
within three days. These benefits (says Vercingetorix) you have of me, whom
you accuse of treason: for by my means without shedding of your blood, you see
so great a conquering army almost consumed with hunger; and by me it is
provided, that when they fly from hence, no State shall receive them into their
territories. The whole multitude applauded his speech, by shaking and striking
their hands together, as their manner is in such cases, commending
Vercingetorix for a great soldier, whose loyalty as it was not to be
distrusted, so the war could not have been carried with better directions. They
agreed further to send 10000 choice men out of all their forces into the town,
as not thinking it fit to commit the common safety of Gallia only to the
Bituriges, for they were persuaded that the sum of all the victory consisted
in making good that town against the Romans.

OBSERVATIONS.
A Multitude is Bellua multorum capitum (as one says) an unreasonable beast of
many heads, Horace.
apt to receive froward and perverse incitements, and hard to be drawn to
better understanding, jealous, impatient, treacherous, unconstant, an
instrument for a wicked spirit, and sooner moved to mischief by Thersites, then
reclaimed to virtue by the authority of Agamemnon, or the eloquence of Ulysses,
or the wisdom of Nestor, more turbulent then the raging either of the sea, or
of a devouring fire. And therefore they may well go together to make a
triplicity of evils, according to the saying, Ignis, mare, populus, tria mala;
Fire, the Sea, and the rabble multitude are three evils.

Vercingetorix had both his hands full in this service, for his care was no
less to keep the Galls from being distasted, then to make his party good
against Caesar. It is disputed touching the government of a multitude, whether
it be fitter to be severe or obsequious. Whether severitie o^ clemency do more
avail in governing a multitude.
Tacitus says peremptorily, that In multitudine regenda plus poena quam
obsequium valet; foul means does more then fair to the governing of a
multitude. But he understands such a multitude as are subject to their
Commander, either by ancient service, or the interest of regal authority,
whereby they are tied to obedience by hereditary duty, and cannot refuse that
which custom prescribes. For otherwise where the people stand free from such
bonds, and have submitted themselves to government for some special service,
there, clemency or obsequious smoothing prevails more then the severity of
command: according to the saying, Homines duci volunt, non cogi; Men will be
led by fair means, not compelled. Upon a dissension which happened at Rome
between the people and the Senate, the people were presently sent into the
field under the leading of two Senators, Quintius and Appius Claudius. Appius
by reason of his cruelty and severity, was not obeyed by his soldiers, but
forsook his Province and returned non proficient, they will do nothing:
Quintius being courteous and benign, had an obedient army, and came home a
Conqueror. In the like terms did Vercingetorix stand with the Galls, who not
long before were all of equal authority, and for the defense of the common
cause had submitted themselves to order and government: and therefore he
carried himself accordingly, but with some cunning too, for he made no scruple
to abuse the beast, and to present them with a lesson of deceit, taught to
servants and Roman slaves, as the confession of legionarie soldiers, which is
a liberty that has ever been allowed to such as had the managing of an unruly
multitude, who have made as much use of the false rein, as the bit or the spur,
or any other help belonging to that art.

CHAP. XI.
Caesar continues the siege at Avaricum, and describes the walls of the towns
in Gallia.
BY the singular valor of our soldiers all the counsels and devices of the
Galls were made void and of none effect. Caesar.
For they are a Nation of great dexterity, apt to imitate and make any thing
which they see other men do before them: for they turned aside the hooks with
ropes, and drew them into the town with engines: they withdrew the earth from
the Mount with Mines with their great skill, by reason of their iron mines
wherein they are much practiced: they set up towers upon every part of the
wall, and covered them with raw hides: they sallied out of the town night and
day, and either set fire to the Mount, or assaulted the soldiers as they were
at work: they did every day make their towers equal to that height of our
towers, which the daily increase of the Mount had added to their height: they
hindered the open trenches, and kept them from approaching the walls with sharp
burned stakes, cast into them with hot pitch and with great stones. All their
walls are almost of this fashion: Long strait beams are placed upon the ground,
with an equal distance of two foot one from another, and bound together on the
inside of the wall, and fastened with great store of earth: the distances
between the beams are filled and fitted with great stones in the front of the
wall. These being thus placed and fastened with mortar, another such a course is
laid upon that, keeping always the same distance, so as one beam be not laid
upon another, but in the second rank placing them upon the distances filled up
with stones, and so forward until the wall be raised to the due height. This
fashion as it is a work not deformed either in show or variety, observing
alternate courses of beams and stones which keep their order by even lines; so
is it profitable also and very much advantaging the defense of the town: for as
the stone keeps it from burning, so does the wood from the violence of the
ram, forasmuch as the beams are for the most part forty foot long, and can
neither be broken nor pulled out.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis Chapter does in some part express the manner of their siege in ancient
time, The use and practice of ancient time in besieging and defending towns.
and the means which the defendant had to frustrate the assaults and approaches
of the enemy. Besides the Ram which the Romans used to shake and overthrow the
wall, (whereof I have already spoken) they had commonly great hooks of iron to
catch hold of a turret, and to pull it over the wall, or to pull down the
parapet, or to disturb any work which was to be made upon the wall. These hooks
were used by the legionary soldiers, being covered with vines in the same
manner as they handled the Ram: and were averted and put off by the ingenious
practices of the Galls, with ropes cast and ensnared about them, and then by
force of engines drawn into the town. In like manner the open trenches, by
which the Romans made their approaches to the wall, were answered from the town
with stakes or piles, hardened at the end with fire, and then cast into them to
hinder such as were at work, together with seething pitch and great stones.
Furthermore, as the Romans raised their Mount, and brought matter unto it to
enlarge it in breadth and height, so did the Galls undermine it, and drew the
earth away, or set it on fire to burn it: for as I have already noted in the
description of a mount, it was made as well with wood and timber, as with earth
and stones. They strengthened their walls with turrets and towers, and covered
them with raw hides to keep them from burning: and as the Romans mounted in
height with their turrets and engines, so the Galls raised their towers
answerable unto them, that in the defense of the town they might sight with
equal advantage.

And thus they proceeded both in the offensive and defensive part, as far as
either valor or wit could improve those means which were then in use in
besieging a town.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IT was the use of all nations, to fortify their strong towns with such walls
as might make best defense against the practice of those times wherein they
lived, touching the taking and besieging of towns. So the Galls, as it
appears by Caesar, raised their walls of wood and stone, laid in mutual
courses one with another, that the wood might make void the violence of the
Ram, and the stone keep it from burning with fire, The manner of fortification
in use in these days.
which in those days were the means to assault and overthrow a wall. In these
times the walls of strong and fortified towns, are only made and raised of
earth, as the best defense against the fury of the artillery. But forasmuch as
the old manner of fortification is here in part delivered by Caesar, give me
leave to have a word or two touching the fortifications of these times.

And first touching the art it self, Fortification defined.
in respect of the matter and the manner, it is a member of architecture, but
the end is military: for to fortify is nothing else but to make a building
answerable to necessity and the occurrences of war. Neither is it the end of
fortification to make a place inexpugnable, or unpossible to be taken, for so
it were Ars artium, but to reduce it to a good and reasonable defense.

Wheresoever then any such defense is required, the mystery of fortification is
to raise such a fort, and to apply such a figure, answering the quality and
site of that place, as may give greatest strength thereunto: for as all places
are not capable in the disposition of their best strength of all sorts of
figures, so there is a difference of strength between this and that figure. And
as the place wants the advantage of motion and agility for its own defense,
so is it requisite it should be furnished with the best means and commodities
both to annoy the enemy, and to defend its own people. Circular forts.
And in that respect all circular forms, as compounded of parts of one and the
same nature, are unfit for fortification: for where a fort ought so to be
disposed, that it may have as many hands to strike as Briar^us, and as a Hydra
never to want a head, it is necessary that the figure thereof be of different
and unlike parts, as apt to work diverse effects. For unless it be able to
discover a far off, to command the country about as far as the artillery will
play, to stop the passages, to hinder approaches and assaults, to damnify the
enemy at hand and far off, sometimes with the artillery, sometimes with small
shot, sometimes with fireworks, and other times by sallies, it has not that
perfection as is requisite.

Admitting therefore composition of parts, Triangular forts.
next unto the circle the triangular fortress is most unperfect; first in
regard it is a figure of less capacity then any other of equal bounds, which
is a great inconvenience in a hold, when the soldiers shall be pinned up for
want of room, and through the straightness of the place, not to be able to
avoid confusion. Secondly, the bulwarks of all such triangular fortresses, have
always such sharp cantons as are easily subject to breaking, which gives the
enemy means to approach them without disturbance from the fort.

The quadrangle fortress has almost the same imperfection of angles as the
triangle has, Quadrangle forts.
but is more spacious within, and of greater capacity.

And therefore Pentagons or Hexagons, Five-sided and six-sided fortresses.
or any other that has more angles, is fittest for fortification,
(understanding the place to be capable of them,) as being of a greater content,
and having their angles more obtuse, and by consequence more solid and strong.

A plain champain level does admit all sorts of figures, Forts in a plain level.
and may take the best; having these advantages: Advantages.
it easily hinders an enemy from approaching near unto it, or incamping
before it, and is not subject to mines, by reason of the water rising in such
levels. But on the other side, Disadvantages.
a small troup will besiege it, and battery may be laid to diverse places of it:
it is always subject to mounts of earth, and needs many bulwarks ^ditches,
and much cost to keep it.

A fortress upon a hill has these advantages: Forts upon a hill.
an enemy can hardly lodge near unto it, Advantages.
or lay battery against it, it requires more men to besiege it, Disadvantages.
and is not subject to mounts. The disadvantages are, that it is not in our
choice to make it in the best form of strength, but must give it such a figure
as may best fit the place, being sometimes too large and spacious, and
sometimes, too strait. The enemies artillery has greater force against it
playing upward, and the artillery of the fort plays not so sure downward.

The hands of all forts are the bulwarks from whence the artillery plays; The
hands of all forts.
the supplements to the bulwarks are the ravelins, the platforms, the casmates,
and the cavaleros. The walls are made in scarp canting inwards, the better to
bear the weight of the earth, with this proportion, that to every five foot and
half, or six foot in height, there be one foot allowed in scarp. The
counterscarp is another wall outward to the first, and stopeth inward in the
same manner as the former.

And thus much touching the general view of fortification, which is as much as
may well be comprehended in these short observations, reserving the further
consideration thereof to a particular treatise by it self.

CHAP. XII.
The siege of Avaricum continued.
THe siege being hindered by so many disturbances, Caesar.
and the soldiers afflicted all the time with cold and continual rain, yet
they overcame all these lets with continual labor, and in five and twenty
days they raised a mount of three hundred and thirty foot in breadth, and
fourscore in height. When it came almost to touch the wall, Caesar himself
attending the work, as his custom was, and encouraging the soldiers to omit
no time from the same: a little before the third watch of the night, the mount
was seen to smoke, the enemy having set it on fire with a mine. And at the same
instant of time, a shout being taken up by them that stood upon the wall, they
made a sally out at two gates on both sides the towers. Some cast firebrands
and dry matter from the wall unto the mount, pouring pitch and other things to
nourish the fire; that no man knew whither to run first, or where to give help.
Notwithstanding forasmuch as Caesar had appointed two legions by turn to watch
before the camp, and two other to follow the works, it happened, and that
quickly, that some were ready to confront the sallies, and others to draw back
the towers from the front of the mount, and to cut the mount asunder, the whole
multitude coming out of the camp to quench the fire. The rest of the night
being now spent, the fight continued every where, and ever the enemy took new
spirits, and had hope of victory, the rather because they saw the sheds or
hovels belonging to the towers burnt, and that the soldiers could not come
near the said towers to manage them as was fitting, without shelter and covert,
and that they ever sent fresh men to take the rooms of such as were weary and
over-laboured: supposing the safety of all Gallia to consist in that instant of
time. There happened, our selves beholding it, an accident worthy memory, which
I think not fit to omit. A certain Gall before the gate of the town, casting
with his hands balls of tallow and pitch to increase the fire, right over
against the tower, was shot through the right side with a cros-bow, and fell
down dead. One that stood next him stepped over him, and began to do the like
service: he likewise was slain with a shot out of a cros-bow. Him a third man
succeeded; and the third, a fourth. Neither was the place forsaken, until the
mount was quenched, the enemy removed, and the fight ceased.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IT were a matter worthy observation to consider, Whether there need not as
many men to defend a town, as to besiege it.
whether there need not as many men to defend a town, as to besiege it. Which
at the first sight may peradventure seem frivolous: forasmuch as the defendants
are but to make good the place which they hold, and to stand only upon their
defensive guard, having the advantage of the place, the shelter of the walls,
the strength of the ditch, and many other like helps for their defense and
safety; whereas the assailant is to strive against all these advantages, and to
oppose himself to the danger of so many difficulties. But if we look a little
nearer into the matter, and consider the service to be performed on either
part, we shall find, that to say, As many men are necessary to defend a town as
to besiege it, is no Paradox.

For the better understanding thereof, The defense of a town consists in four
points.
we are to know, that the defense of a town touching matter of fight,
consists chiefly in these four points. First, in manning and making good all
parts of the wall. For if the defendant be not able to strengthen all parts
with a competent force, then he has not men enough to defend the town;
forasmuch as all parts are subject to assault, and what part soever is not made
good, that lies open to an enemy: or otherwise if the assault be only to be
made at a breach, the rest of the wall being strong enough to defend it self,
there is required a competent strength within the town to defend that breach.
In this point there is little difference touching a competent number of men
between the assailant and the defendant: for if he that lays siege to a town
has men enough to assault all parts at one instant, the enemy must have an
answerable proportion to defend all; or if he have no use of more men then may
serve to give an assault at a breach, the defendant must have the like
proportion for the defense of the breach.

The second point is, in relieving wearied men, either fighting or working,
with fresh supplies to continue that business, as oftentimes it falls out in
the siege of a town. Wherein likewise there is small or no difference touching
an equality between both parties. For if the defendant be not as well able to
relieve his wearied soldiers with fresh supplies, as the enemy is to continue
the assault, the town may quickly have a new master.

The third point is, in defeating and making void such works as the enemy shall
make against the town, as mounts, mines, approaches, and such like
inconveniences; which being suffered to go on without opposition and
prevention, the town cannot hold out long. In this point the defendant has the
disadvantage, having need of more men to overthrow and prevent the works, then
the assailant has to make them good. For there he that besieges the place
fights with the advantage, and has the same helps as the defendant has in
the fastness of his hold: which caused this extraordinary accident, which
Caesar notes, touching the successive slaughter of so many Galls, who
laboring to burn the Roman works with balls of tallow and pitch, were all
slain with the blow of one man's bow.

The last point is in sallies, which is as necessary for the defense of a town
as any thing else whatsoever. For if the defendant be not able to sally out,
the enemy will quickly coop him up, and tread upon his belly. And herein the
defendant needs more men then the assailant. For he that is in the field,
lies in the strength of his trenches; whereas the other comes out naked upon
him.

And thus much touching this question in particular. Concerning the general,
if it be demanded whether there have been more men lost in the defense of
Ostend, then in besieging it; I answer, That neither side can much vaunt of a
small loss.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IN the second place there are two observable points. The eye of the master
feeds the horse.
The one, Caesar's continual attendance upon the works, being present night and
day, without any long intermission, which did much advantage their proceeding
at that time, and was as important to a fortunate issue, as any other thing
whatsoever. For where an enemy is extraordinary, either in valor or diligence,
there must needs be extraordinary means to countervail the height of so great a
resolution: which Caesar overtopt with monstrous and huge works, and speeded
those works with his continual attendance.

The second point is the successive task of the Roman army, being eight legions
present at that siege; (for the other two were left at Agendicum with the
carriages of the army;) in such sort, as half the army was always at rest, and
the other half employed: two legions at work, and two legions in the watch: and
thus they eased each other, and still continued the work. For otherwise they
had not been able to have undergone the burden, as the saying is;

Quod caret alterna requ^e durab^le non est.
It cannot hold that rests not now and then.
CHAP. XIII.
Caesar by an assault takes Avaricum.
THe Galls having tried all means, Caesar.
and none taking effect, the next day they consulted touching their leaving of
the town, Vercingetorix both commanding and persuading them unto it* which they
hoped they might do in the night time, without any great loss unto themselves,
forasmuch as Vercingetorix was not far off with his camp, and all the way
thither was a continual bog, which would hinder the Romans from following
after them. And for that purpose they prepared themselves against the next
night. Which the women perceiving, did run suddenly out into the streets and
other public places, and cast themselves at the feet of their Husbands; and by
all means entreated them, not to leave them and their children to the cruelty
of the enemy, whom nature and infirmity of body would not suffer to fly away.
But finding them to continue resolute in their purpose, forasmuch as in extreme
peril, fear for the most part has no commiseration, they cried out, and
signified their flight unto the Romans. Wherewith the Galls being feared, they
desisted from their purpose, left the ways should be forestalled and laid by
the Roman horsemen. The next day Caesar having advanced forward the tower, and
perfected those works which he had determined to make, there happened to fall a
great rain, which he thought to be a fit occasion for his purpose. And
forasmuch as he saw the guard upon the wall to be somewhat negligently
disposed, he commanded his men to work fair and softly, and showed them what he
would have done. And encouraging the Legions which were hid in a read^ness
under the Vines, at length to enjoy the sweetness of victory for their manifold
labors; he provided a reward for such as were seen first upon the walls, and
gave them the sign to begin. The soldiers flying suddenly out of all parts,
did quickly possess themselves of the walls. The enemy being frighted with so
sudden an accident, and put from the towers and walls, imbattelled themselves
angle-wise in the marketplace, and in other spacious streets of the city,
with this resolution, that if they were assaulted in any part, they would
resist in form of battle. But when they saw no man to descend on even ground,
but to enclose them round about upon the wall, fearing lest there would be no
way to escape, they cast their arms away, and fled all to the furthest part of
the town. Part of them sticking in a throng at the gate, were there slain by
the soldiers; and part being got out of the gate, were slain by the horsemen.
Neither was there any man that looked after pillage, but being moved to anger
with the slaughter of our men at Genabum, and with the travel and labor of
those great works, they neither spared old men, women nor children. In the
end, of all that number, which was about forty thousand, scarce eight hundred
(that upon the first noise forsook the town) came safe to Vercingetorix. These
he received with great silence, being now far in the night, lest any sedition
should have grown in the camp, through the pity and commiseration of the vulgar
people; and sent out his familiar friends and chiefest men of each State to
meet such as had escaped away, and to bring them to their own people as they
lay quartered in the camp.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
WE may see here the saying verified touching the disposition of the Galls for
matter of valor: The Galls in the beginning are more then men, and in the end
less then women.
which in the beginning seemed so great, that it needed no further strain to
countervail the worth of Caesar's army, and was expressed with such industry and
resolution, both in spoiling and disappointing the Roman works, as also by
ingenious fortifying and making good their own labors; that a man would have
deemed them virtute pares, equal in valor. But being a little spent in the
action, like a pot that has a mouth as big as the belly, and powers out all
the liquor at an instant, they fell at length to that baseness, as showed less
spirit then the women did, who chose rather to betray their husbands purposes
to the enemy, then to hazard their lives by escaping to Vercingetorix. And this
is that which is so often noted by Historiographers; Quod multa bella impetu
valida per taedia and moras evanuere: That many wars which are hot at the
first, slacken and vanish upon a tedious continuance. The first thing that I
observe, is, that which Caesar himself notes: Quod plerumque in summo
periculo, timor misericordiam non recipit; That usually in case of extreme
danger, fear has no mercy. Which was true on either side. For the Galls were
so set upon flying to Vercingetorix, that they regarded not the woeful laments
of the women and children, whom they were well content to hazard, whilst they
themselves might escape in safety. And on the other side, the women did forget
to be pitiful to their husbands, whom they would not suffer to escape, and
leave them in their weakness behind as a prey to appease the wrath of the
bloody soldier, which would consequently follow in that escape. Which shows,
that there is notice comparable to the bond of nature, specially when it
concerns the preservation of life. For as in other things, respect and
affection may easily work a communication of good things unto others, as also a
participation of their evils for their relief: so herein we are altogether
senseless, and the love we owe to our lives is so great, that it admits no
respect. Agesilaus to his friend was without respect a friend: and yet
notwithstanding being driven one day to remove upon the sudden, and to leave
one sick behind him whom he loved dearly; the sick man calling him by his name
as he was going away, besought him that he would not forsake him. Agesilaus
turning back again, answered; O how hard it is both to love and to be wise!
according to the saying, Sapere and amare vix Deo conceditur, To be wise and to
love, God himself can scarce do it.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IT is a principle among men of war, A General must not put necessity upon
an enemy.
not to put necessity upon an enemy, nor make him valiant whether he will or
no, (as I have already noted in the former Commentaries;) which the Romans well
observed in this particular service at Avaricum: for being possessed of the
walls, they did not suddenly assault them in the marketplace, where they had
made head for their defense, but gave them a breathing time, the better to
understand what they did, and respite, to bethink themselves of a starting hole
for the safety of their lives. Which as it was quickly apprehended by the
Galls, so it made an easy execution to the Roman soldier.

And as it seems, it was the more carefully handled in respect of the
condition of the enemy being revolters: for such Provinces as have rebelled,
are harder to be recovered after their revolt, then they were at first to be
subdued. For at the first, they have no occasion to fear any hard condition,
but yielding to subjection do look for favor: whereas rebels and revolters,
besides the condition of an enemy, are in the nature of offenders, and stand in
fear of the extremities of war, Revolters are in the condition both of an
enemy and of an offender.
which makes them more obstinate then otherwise they would be. And therefore
it behooves a General not to impose any further necessity upon an enemy, then
the quality of the war does lay upon him: which oftentimes is more then can
be well avoided.

CHAP. XIIII.
Vercingetorix does comfort the Galls for the loss of Avaricum.
THe next day calling a Council, Caesar.
he comforted the Galls, and exhorted them not to be utterly dismayed with
that loss: for the Romans had not overthrown them with valor, nor in a set
battle, but with a kind of Art, and skill in besieging a town, whereof they
themselves were ignorant. He erred much that looked for all the events of war
to fall out prosperously. It was never his opinion, that Avaricum should be
kept; whereof they themselves were witnesses. But it fell out by the imprudency
of the Bituriges, and over great indulgence of the rest, that this loss
happened unto them: which notwithstanding he would speedily heal with greater
helps. For by his diligence he would unite such States unto them, as were not
yet of the confederacy, and make one purpose of all Gallia, which the whole
world was not able to resist: and that he had almost effected it already. In
the mean time he thought it fit that they should yield unto one thing for their
safeties sake, which was to fortify their camp; to the end they might better
sustain the sudden assaults of the enemy. This speech was not unpleasing to the
Galls; and the rather, that he himself was not dejected in spirit upon so
great a loss, nor did hide himself, or fly the presence of the multitude:
being the more esteemed, forasmuch as when the matter was in question, he first
thought it fit that Avaricum should be burned, and afterward he persuaded them
to forsake it: wherein as misfortune and adversity do impair the authority of
other Commanders; so contrariwise his honor daily increased by the loss which
he received. And withal they were in great hope upon his affirmation, to win
the rest of the States unto them. And that was the first time that the Galls
began to fortify their camp, being so appalled in spirit, that where they ever
were unaccustomed to labor, yet they thought it their part to suffer and
undergo all that was commanded them.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
NExt to the knowledge and experience of war, A great Commander must have a
great courage.
there is nothing more requisite in a great Commander, then greatness of
spirit: for where his employment consists in managing the great businesses of
the world, such as are the slaughter of many thousands in an hour, the sacking
of cities, the fighting of battles, the alteration of Commonweals, victories,
triumphs, and the conquest of kingdoms, which like the constellations in the
eighth sphere, are left to succeeding ages in such characters as cannot be
defaced, and make an impression of the greatest measure of joy, or the greatest
heap of sorrow; it is necessary that his courage be answerable to such a
fortune, neither to be crushed with the weight of adversity, nor puffed up with
the pride of victory; but in all times to show the same constancy of mind, and
to temper extremities with a settled resolution.

Of this metal and temper, Homo quadratus.
is the Philosophers homo quadratus made of, such as Camillus was in Rome. For
never speech did better beseem a great personage then that of his, having known
both the favor and the disgrace of fortune: Nec mihi dictatura animos fecit,
necexilium ademit, Neither did my Dictatorship puff me up, nor my banishment
sink my spirits, says he. Whereas weak spirits do either vanish away in the
smoke of folly, being drunk with the joys of pleasing fortune; or otherwise
upon a change of good times, do become more base and abject, then the thief
that is taken in the fact: such as Perseus the last Macedonian king was,
Plutarch Paulus Aemilia
who besides his ill fortune for losing his kingdom in the space of one hour,
has ever since stood attainted of a base and abject mind, unworthy the throne
of Alexander the Great.

The wise Romans used all means to give courage and spirit to their leaders,
and to free their minds from such external respects, which loss or dishonor
might cast upon them. And therefore when Varro had fought so rashly at Cannae,
that he had like to have lost the Roman Empire to Annibal, Plutarch.
upon his return to Rome the whole Senate went out to meet him: and although
they could not thank him for the battle, yet they gave him thanks that he was
returned home again, whereby he seemed not to despair of the State of Rome.

In like manner did the Galls congratulate Vercingetorix, that notwithstanding
so great a loss, he was neither dejected in spirit, nor did hide himself from
the multitude; but as a Commander of high resolution, had found out means to
heal those harms, and to recompense the loss of A^ar^cum, with the uniting of
all the States of Gallia into one confederacy.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SEcondly we may observe, how dangerous it is to be the author of a counsel
touching any important or grave deliberation, It is dangerous to be the author
of a counsel in a State.
or to lay down any project for the service of a State: for all men are blind
in this point, that they judge of good or ill counsel by the success, and look
no further then the end which it takes, which proving disasterous or
unfortunate, does either bring the author to destruction, or into danger both
of life and state.

In the occurrences of this kingdom, it appears that Henry the fifth being
solicited by the Commons touching the Abbeys in England, and moved by Petition
exhibited in Parliament, to that which was afterward accomplished by Henry the
eighth, was diverted from those thoughts by an eloquent oration made in
Parliament by Henry Chicheley Archbishop of Canterbury, Holinshead.
a grave and learned Prelate, persuading the King by many concluding reasons,
to carry a great power into France, and there to make his claim for that
kingdom, according to the right derived unto him from his noble Progenitors.
Whereupon the King was persuaded to undertake that war; which al^ (...) fell
out most happily, yet the Bishop to satisfy both the King and the people for
his former counsel, whereby many men were lost, built a College in Oxford
dedicated to All Souls, wherein (...) placed ^ourty Scholars, to make
supplications for all souls, and specially for such as had been mischieved in
France in the time of that war.

Vercingetorix was happy in this point, for he persuaded the Galls not to keep
Avaricum, but to suffer it to be burned as an enemy to their safety: and
thereupon he did not let to put them in mind of his opinion, as free from the
danger which happened to a great man near unto Perseus whom I last spoke of,
who after his overthrow by Paulus Aemilius, being told by that party of many
errors which he had committed in the carriage of that war, Ut felicitas
rerum gestarum exercitus benevolentiam imperatoribus: ita res adversae odia
conciliant.
turned himself suddenly, saying, Traitor, have thou reserved thy counsel
until now, when there is no remedy? and therewithal (as some report) slew
him with his own hand. And this was it that gave Vercingetorix that happiness:
Ut reliquorum imperatorum res adversae, authoritatem minuunt: sic hujus ex
contrario, d^gnitas incommodo accepto indies augebatur; Lib. 3. bell. civ.
As misfortune and adversity, etc. as before.

CHAP. XV.
Vercingetorix labors to unite all Gallia into one league for the upholding
of their war.
NEither did Vercingetorix omit any endeavor for the accomplishment of his
promise, Caesar.
to draw the rest of the States unto him: and to that purpose he dealt with
their chiefest men both by rewards and promises, and chose out fit men, that
either by subtle speeches, or friendship, or some other means, might win them
unto him. He took order that such as had escaped from Avaricum, should be both
clothed and armed: and withal, that he might reenforce his troops which were
weakened, he commanded every State to furnish out certain supplies, and to be
brought by a day to the camp. He commanded likewise all the Archers, of whom
there is great store in Gallia, to be sought out and sent unto him. And by this
means he speedily repaired his losses at Avaricum. In the mean time Teutomatus
the son of Ollovico King of the Nitiobriges, whose father had the title of a
Friend from our Senate, came to him with a great number of horsemen, which he
had brought out of Aquitain.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT seems by this place, Archery.
that France in those days did favor archery: for (as the story says) they
had great store of Archers amongst them, but of what value they were is not
here delivered. The use they made of them follows after in this Commentary,
which was to intermingle them amongst the horse, and so they fought as
light-armed men.

In the times that our English nation carried a scourging hand in France, the
matter between us and them touching archery, stood in such terms as gave
England great advantage: for I have not heard of any bow-men at all amongst
them; whereas our Nation has heretofore excelled all other, as well in number
of bow-men, as in excellent good shooting, and has made so good proof thereof
against the French, as it needs not any long dispute.

Things considerable* touching Archery.
Concerning Archery I find these things considerable.

First, that every man be so fitted with bow and arrows, In the time of Henry
the fiften the English bow-men did commonly shoot an arrow of a yard long
besides the head.
as he may be apt for strong and quick shooting: wherein I cannot so much
commend these livery bows, being for the most part heavy slugs, and of greater
weight then strength, and of more show then service.

Secondly, that in a day of service the bow-men endeavor so to deliver their
quivers, that the whole band or sleeve of shot may let go all at one instant of
time: for so the shower of arrows will be more fierce and terrible, and more
available against an enemy.

Thirdly, It is not so profitable to intermingle bow-men with other sorts of
weapons, as to put them all into one body.
the fittest form of imbattelling for bow-men; which must not at any hand be
deep in slank, for so such as are in the hindmost ranks, will either shoot
short or to no purpose. And therefore the fittest form of imbattelling for
Archery, has ever been accounted a long-sided square, resembling a At the
battle of Cressie the black Prince leading the vauward, had the archers
standing in the manner of a hearse.
hearse, broad in front, and narrow in flank.

Fourthly, their defance in a day of battle; which must either be a covert
woody place, where the horse of the enemy cannot come at them, or a trench cast
before them, or the place must be fortified with galthrops and stakes, such as
were devised by Henry the fifth at Agincourt field, or some other means to
avoid the cavalry.

The last thing is the effects which the bowmen work: Holinshed.
which are two; first the galling of the enemy, The Archerie works two
effects.
and secondly disorder. Touching the galling of the enemy, 1. Galling the
enemy.
there cannot be a better description then that which Plutarch makes of the
overthrow of the Romans by the Parthian arrows. Plut. Crassus.
The Roman soldiers hands (says he) were nailed to their targets, 2. Disorder.
and their feet to the ground, or otherwise were sore wounded in their bodies,
and died of a cruel lingering death, crying out for anguish and pain they felt,
and turning and tormenting themselves upon the ground, they brake the arrows
sticking in them. Again, striving by force to pluck out the barbed heads, that
had pierced far into their bodies through their veins and sinews, they opened
the wounds wider, and so cast themselves away.

The disorder or routing of an enemy which is caused by the bow-men, comes
from the fearful spectacle of a drift of arrows: for a shower of arrows well
delivered and well seconded, for a while is so terrible to the eye, and so
dreadful in the success, that it is almost unpossible to keep the enemy from
routing.

The two great victories which our Nation had in France at Cressie and
Agincourt, next to the valor of the English, are attributed to our archery:
and the effect of our archery at those times, was first disorder, and
consequently slaughter. The battle of Cressie.
In the battle of Cressie the King of Bohemia fighting for the French, caused
his horsemen to tie the bridles of their horses together in rank, that they
might keep order, notwithstanding the galling which he feared from our English
archery: but it fell out as ill as if he had tied their heads and their tails
together in file; for the drift of arrows fell so terribly amongst them, that
they ran together on heaps with such confusion, as made the slaughter great,
and their particular destinies most miserably fortuned. The battle of
Agincourt.
At Agincourt the number of prisoners which every soldier had, was admirable
to speak of; for some report that many of our English had ten prisoners apiece:
which happened chiefly from the disorder which fell amongst the French, and that
disorder came by our archery. And doubtless if ever we should have occasion to
go against an enemy that so abounds in horse as the French do, there could be
no better means against such horse then our English bow-men. I know it has
been said, that now the times are altered, Harquebuse and musket.
and the harquebuse and musket are so generally received, and of such
reputation in the course of our modern wars, that in comparison of them bow-men
are not worth the naming. Wherein I will not go about to extenuate the use of
either of these weapons, as knowing them to be both very serviceable upon fit
and convenient occasions, nor take upon me to determine which of them is most
effectual in a day of service; but only deliver my conceit touching their
effects, and leave it to the consideration of wise and discreet Commanders.

And first touching shot. How far a wing of shot prevails.
A wing of musketeers is available against an enemy, only in such bullets as
do hit; for such as do not hit, pass away insensibly without any further fear,
and the crack is but as the lose of the bow. Of such bullets as do hit, the
greatest part do not strike to death, but are oftentimes carried until the
skirmish be ended before the party do feel himself hurt: so that an enemy
receives no further hurt by a charge of shot, then happens to such
particular men as shall chance to be slain outright or sore hurt. How far a
sleeve of Archers is available against an enemy.
But a sleeve of Archers is available against an enemy, as well in such arrows
as do not hit, as in such as do hit: for whereas the cloud of arrows is
subject to our sight, and every arrow is both suspected and able to bring death
sitting on the head, an enemy is as much troubled at such arrows as come fair
upon him and do not hit, as at those that do hit; for no man is willing to
expose his flesh to an open and eminent danger, when it lies in his power to
avoid it. And therefore whilst every man seeks to avoid hurt, they fall into
such confusion, as besides the loss of particular men, the enemy does hardly
escape disorder, which is the greatest disadvantage that can befall him.
Moreover, the arrows having barbed heads, although they make but a light hurt,
yet they are not easily pulled out, which makes the soldiers not to intend
the fight until they be delivered of them: and the horse so to fling and
chafe, that it is impossible they should either keep their rank or be otherwise
managed for any service.

And thus much touching bow-men and archery, which is a weapon as ancient as
the first and truest History, Genesis 27. 3.
and is of the number of such weapons as men use to fight with afar off. The
use whereof is too much neglected by the English of these times, considering
the honor they have achieved by it in former ages.

CHAP. XVI.
A controversy fell out in the state of the Hedui touching the choice of their
chief Magistrate.
CAesar sta^ed many days at Avaricum: Caesar.
for finding there great store of corn and of other provisions, he refreshed
his army of their former labor and wants. The winter now being almost ended,
and the time of the year being fit for war, he determined to follow the enemy,
to see whether he could draw him out of the woods and bogs, or besiege him in
some place. Being thus resolved, diverse of the principal men of the Hedui came
unto him, beseeching him that he would stand to them, and assist their State in
a time of great need, the matter being in extreme danger: forasmuch as their
ancient usage was for one to be created their annual Magistrate, having regal
authority for that year; whereas now two had taken upon them the said office,
both of them affirming themselves to belawfully created; the one was
Convictolitanis, a famous and flourishing young man, the other Cotus, born of
an ancient family, and he himself of great power and kindred, whose brother
Vedeliacus had born the said office the year before. All their State was in
arms, their Senate and their people divided, together with their clients and
followers: if the controversy continued for any time, it would come to a
battle; the prevention whereof consisted in his diligence and authority.
Caesar, though he knew it would be disadvantagious unto him to leave the war,
and to forsake the enemy: yet knowing what inconveniences do usually arise of
such discords and d^ssensions, lest so great a State, and so near to the people
of Rome, which he himself had always favored, and by all means honored,
should fall to war amongst themselves; and that faction which distrusted their
own strength, should seek help of Vercingetorix; he thought it most necessary
to be prevented. And forasmuch as such as were created chief Magistrates among
the Hedui, were by their laws forbidden to go out of their confines: to the end
he might not seem to derogate any thing from their laws, he himself determined
to go unto them. At his coming he called before him to Decetia all the Senate,
and those also that were in controversy for the office. And finding in an
assembly almost of the whole State, that one of them was chosen by a few
privily called together, in another place, and at another time then was
accustomed, the brother pronouncing the brother: whereas their laws did not
only forbid two of one family, both being alive, to be created Magistrate, but
also to be of the Senate together: he compelled Cotus to give over his interest
in the magistracy, and confirmed Convictolitanis being created by their
Priests, and according to the custom of their State. This decree being
ratified, he adhorted the Hedui to forget their private controversies and
dissensions, and to give their best help to the war in hand, wherein they might
challenge and expect (the Galls being subdued) such rewards as they deserved;
commanding all their horse and ten thousand foot to be speedily sent unto him,
which he meant to dispose into garrisons for the better provision of corn. And
then dividing his army into two parts, he sent four Legions toward the Senones
and the Pari^ians under the leading of Labienus; the other four he led himself
against the Arverni, to the town of Gergovia, along the r^ver Elaver, sending
part of the horse with him, and keeping part with himself.

OBSERVATIONS.
TO loose the least jot of that which a man has in possession, Non minor est
virtus, quam quae^^re, p^^ta tuer^.
is more dishonorable, then to fail of getting what he has not. And therefore
Caesar chose rather to forgo the advantages which a speedy pursuit of the enemy
might have afforded him to the ending of that war, then to hazard the loss of
so great a State, and so well-affected to the people of Rome as were the Hedui,
wherein he carried so equal and indifferent a hand, that he would do nothing
but what the laws of that State directed him unto, as most assured that such
directions were without exception.

CHAP. XVII.
Caesar passes his army over the river Elaver, and incampeth himself before
Gergovia.
WHich thing being known, Caesar.
Vercingetorix having broken down all the bridges of that river, took his
journey on the other side of Elaver; either army being in view each of other,
and incamping almost over against one another: d^scoverers being sent out to
watch, lest the Romans should make a bridge in any place, and carry over their
forces. Caesar was much troubled, lest he should be hindered by the river the
greatest part of that Summer, forasmuch as Elaver is not passable at any foord
until toward the Autumn. And therefore to prevent that, he encamped himself
in a woody place, right over against one of those bridges which Vercingetorix
had commanded to be broken. The next day he kept himself there secretly with
two legions, and sent forward the rest of the forces, with all the carriages,
as were accustomed, taking away the fourth part of each cohort, that the number
of legions might appear to be the same; commanding them to go on as far as they
could; and making conjecture by the time of the day, that they were come to
their camping-place, upon the same piles, (the lower part whereof remained
there whole) he began to reedify the bridge; and having speedily ended the
work, and carried over the Legions, and chosen a fit place to encamp in, he
called back the rest of his forces. Vercingetorix having notice thereof, lest
he should be forced to fight against his will, went before by great journeys.
Casar with five incampings went from that place to Gergovia, and after a light
skirmish between the horse the same day he came, having taken a view of the
situation of the town, which was built upon a very high hill, and had very hard
and difficult approaches on all sides, he despaired of taking it by assault,
neither would he determine to besiege it, until he had made provision of corn.
But Vercingetorix having set his camp on a hill before the town, had placed the
several forces of the States by themselves, in small distances round about
him, and having possessed himself of all the tops of that hill, made a very
terrible show into all parts where he might be seen: he commanded likewise the
chiefmen of the States, whom he had chosen out to be of the Council of war, to
meet always together with him at the dawning of the day, to know if any thing
were to be communicated unto them, or what else was to be done. Neither did he
omit any day to skirmish with his horsemen, with archers intermingled amongst
them: to the end he might try what courage and valor was in his people. Right
over against the town at the foot of the hill, there was a knowl exceedingly
fortified, and hard to be come unto on all sides, which if our men could get,
they were in hope to hinder the enemy, both of a great part of their water, and
also from free forraging: but the place was kept with a strong garrison.
Notwithstanding Caesar went out of his camp in the silence of the night, and
before any help could come out of the town, he put by the garrison, possessed
himself of the place, left two legions there to defend it, and drew a double
trench of twelve foot in breadth from the greater camp to the less, that
single men might go safe to and fro from any sudden incursion of the enemy.

OBSERVATIONS.
FIrst we may observe his manner of passing over the river Elaver, The means
which Caesar used to pass over the river Elaver.
without any impediment from the enemy, notwithstanding the care which
Vercingetorix had to hinder his passage, which was plotted with as great
dexterity as could be devised in such a matter: and to shadow his purpose the
better, that the number of legions marching up the river might appear to be the
same, he took the fourth part of every cohort, which in the whole amounted to
two legions. Demptis quartis quibusque cohortibus.
For as I have already delivered in my former Observations, a legion consisted
of ten cohorts* and every cohort contained three maniples, and every maniple
had two companies which they called orders: so that every cohort having six
companies, the fourth part of a cohort was a company and a half, and in a
legion came to fifteen companies, and in eight legions to one hundred and
twenty companies; which being reduced make threescore maniples, which were
equal to two legions: and proves that which I have already noted, the fit and
convenient disposition of their troops, to take out at all times competent
forces for any service without seeming to lessen any part. Secondly, I observe
the phrase which he uses in this place, Quintis castris Gergoviam pervenit, he
came to Gergovia at five incampings; which implies their infallible custom of
encamping every night within a ditch and a rampire: for as we usually say, that
to such a place is so many days journey, because an ordinary traveller makes
so many journeys before he come thither; so the Romans reckoned their journeys
with their army by their incampings, which were as duly kept as their journeys,
and were the most signal part of their days journey.

CHAP. XVIII.
Convictolitanis moves the Hedui to a revolt.
WH^lst these things were a doing at Gergovia, Caesar.
Convictolitanis the Heduan, to whom the magistracy was ad^udged by Caesar,
being wrought upon by the Arverni with money, brake the matter to certain young
men, amongst whom Litavicus was chief, and his brethren, being youths of a
great house: with them he treated at first, and wished them to remember, that
they were not only born freemen, but also to empire and government. The Hedui
were the only State which kept Gallia from a most assured victory: for by
their authority and example, the rest would be concluded, which being fet over,
there would be no place in Gallia for the Romans to abide in. Touching himself,
he had received a good turn from Caesar, but in such sort, as he had but his
right: but he owed more to the common liberty. For why should the Hedui rather
dispute of their customs and laws before Caesar, then the Romans come before
the Hedui? These young men were quickly persuaded, as well by the speech of the
Magistrate, as by rewards; insomuch as they offered themselves to be the
authors of that Counsel. But now the means was to be thought on, forasmuch as
they were persuaded that the State would not easily be drawn to undertake that
war. They determined at last, that Litavicus should have the leading of those
ten thousand men that were to be sent to Caesar, and that his brethren should
be sent before to Caesar, and concluded likewise in what sort they would have
other things carr^ed.

Litavicus having received the army, when he was about thirty miles from
Gergovia, calling the soldiers suddenly together, and weeping: Whither do we
go (says he) fellow soldiers? all our horsemen and our Nobility are slain,
the Princes of our State, Eporedorix and Viridomarus, being falsely accused of
treason, are put to death by the Romans without calling them to their answer.
Understand these things from them that are escaped from the slaughter: for I my
self (my brethren and kinsmen being slain) am hindered with grief from telling
you what has happened. Presently those were brought forth, whom he had taught
beforehand what he would have said: who verified to the multitude those things
which Litavicus had spoken: that all the horsemen of the Hedui were slain,
forasmuch as they were said to have had speech with the Arverni: for themselves
they were hid amongst the multitude of soldiers, and were escaped out of the
midst of the slaughter. The Hedui cry out all together, and do beseech
Litavicus to look to himself, and to them also. As though (says he) the matter
needs any advice or counsel, and that it were not necessary for us to go
directly to Gergovia, and to join our selves with the Arverni. For do we doubt,
but that the Romans, having begun so wickedly, will run presently upon us to
take away our lives? And therefore if there be any courage at all in us, let us
persecute their death that have perished so undeservedly, and let us kill these
thieves. He showed them diverse Roman citizens that were in the troops for
safety of convoy: and forthwith he seized upon a great quantity of corn and
other provisions, and tortured them cruelly to death. He sent out messengers
throughout all the State of the Hedui, continuing the same false suggestion
touching the slaughter of the horsemen, and the Princes; persuading them to
revenge their injuries in like manner as he had done.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis treacherous practice of Convictolitanis, who a little before (as we may
remember) had received so great a benefit from Caesar, proves true the saying
of Cornel. Tacitus, That men are readier to revenge an injury then to requite a
good turn; Gratia oneri, ultio in quaestu habetur.
forasmuch as Gratia oneri, ultio in quaestu habetur, A good turn is as a
burden and a debt to a man, whereas revenge is reckoned a gain. The debt of
loyalty and good affection, wherein Convictolitanis stood engaged to Caesar,
for confirming that right unto him which civil dissension had made doubtful,
together with the respect of the general cause, made him so willing to revolt
from the Romans, and in lieu of thankful acknowledgement to requite him with
hostility. A part so odious and detestable, that virtue grieveth to think that
a man should be capable of any such wickedness, or be stained with the infamy
of so horrible a crime. Other vices are faults in special, and are branded
with the several marks of ignominy: but ingratitude is equal to the body of
evil, and does countervail the whole nature of hateful affections; Seneca.
according to that of the Philosopher, Ingratum si dixeris omnia dixeris;
Ingratitude is culpable of all sorts of wickedness, and deserves the greatest
measure of revenge. And the rather for that it takes away the use of virtue,
and makes men forget to do good. For whereas the nature of goodness is
specially seen in communicating it self to the relief of other men's wants, we
ought to give all diligence not to hinder this enlargement, nor by a froward
and crooked example to prejudice others that stand in need of the like favor.

I have often heard it spoken, but I know not how true it is, and am loath to
believe it, that in the exchange of a good turn, the party that receives it
has more assurance of his benefactor, touching a faithful and friendly
disposition for the future time, then he that showed the kindness can have of
the receiver: for men are loath to loose both the fruit and the seed, and will
rather bestow more cost and labor, then forgo the hope of their first
endeavors, expecting both in reason and nature, fruit answerable to their
seed: whereas the badness of our nature is such of it self, Ut gratia oneri,
ultio in quaestu habetur.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION. A multitude is easily abused by false suggestions.

THere is no means so ready to abuse a multitude as false suggestion, which
like a lying spirit seduceth the minds of men from the truth conceived, and
fashioneth their hearts to such purposes, as seems best to the abuser: and
the rather when it is delivered by a man of place and authority, and such a one
as pretends carefulness for the safety of a people; for then it slieth as
fast as the lightning in the air, and deludeth the wisest and best experienced
of the multitude. A mischief that can hardly be prevented, as long as there is
a tongue to speak or an ear to hear. Phaedo Platonis.
But as Socrates said of pain and case, that they are always tied together: so
men must endeavor to redeem the hurts of such an evil, by the benefit which
thereby is consequently employed: for it were hard if wise men could not make
the like use of a multitude to good purposes, as these deceivers do for their
own advantage.

Numa Pompilius (to whom the Roman Empire did owe as much for laws and civil
government, as to Romulus for their martial discipline;) the better to
establish such ordinances and decrees as he made in his kingdom, feigned
familiar acquaintance with a goddess of that time called Egeria, and by her he
said he was assured, that the Statutes which he made were both equal and just,
and good for the Romans to observe: and the people found no hurt in believing
it.

In like manner Lycurgus having given many laws to the Spartans, repaired to
the city of Delphos, and there he got a pleasing Oracle, which he sent to
Sparta, assuring them that his laws were very good, and that city keeping them,
should be the most renowned of the world.

And Sertorius for want of other means used the service of a white Hind, as a
gift sent him from Diana, to make the Lusitanians believe whatsoever might best
advantage his business. And thus a multitude lies open to good and ill
purposes, and is either happy or unfortunate in the counsel of their Leader.

CHAP. XIX.
Caesar hinders the revolt of the Hedui.
EPoredorix the Heduan, Caesar.
a young man of great parentage, and of great power in his country, together
with Viridomarus, of like age and authority, but not so nobly born; who being
preferred to Caesar by Divitiacus, was by him advanced from mean estate to
great dignity, came both to Caesar with the Heduan horsemen, being called out
by name to that war by him. Between these two there was always contention who
should be the chiefest, and in that controversy for magistracy, the one stood
for Convictolitanis, and the other for Cotus. Of these two Eporedorix
understanding the resolution of Litavicus, opened the matter to Caesar almost
about midnight. He prayed him not to suffer their State to fall away from the
friendship of the people of Rom: by the wicked counsel of young men, which
would necessarily fall out, if he suffered so many thousand men to join
themselves to the enemy, whose safety as neither their kinsfolks would neglect,
so the State could not lightly esteem of. Caesar being much perplexed at this
message, forasmuch as he had always cherished the State of the Hedui, without
any further doubt or dispute, he took four expedite and unburthened Legions and
all the horse out of the camp: neither was there space at such a time to make
the camp lesser, forasmuch as the matter seemed to consist in expedition. He
left behind him C. Fabius a Legate with two legions for a garrison to the camp.
And having given order for the apprehending of Litavicus brethren, he found
that a little before they were fled to the enemy. Thereupon adhorting the
soldiers not to think much of their labor in so necessary a time, every man
being most willing, he went five and twenty miles, and then met with the forces
of the Hedui. The horsemen being sent to stay their march, he commanded not to
kill any one of them, and gave order to Eporedorix and Viridomarus (whom they
thought to be slain) to ride up and down amongst the horsemen, and to call to
their countrymen. They being once known, and the fraud of Litavicus discovered,
the Hedui stretched out their hands, making signs of submission, and casting
away their weapons, desired to be spared from death. Litavicus, with his
clients and followers, who by the custom of Gallia must not forsake their
patrons in the extremest danger, fled to Gergovia. Caesar having dispatched
messengers to the State of the Hedui, to acquaint them that he had saved their
people, which by the law of arms he might have slain, gave the army three hours
rest that night, and then returned toward Gergovia. In the midway certain
horsemen sent by Fabius made known unto Caesar in what danger the matter stood:
that the camp was assaulted with all the enemies forces; and forasmuch as such
as were wearied were still relieved with fresh men, it came to pass that our
men fainted with continual labors: for the camp was so great, that they were
always to stana upon the rampire to make it good: and that many were wounded
with the multitude of arrows and other sorts of weapons; wherein their engines
had served them to good purpose for their defense. Fabius when these messengers
came away, had shut up two gates, and left other two open, and had made sheds
and hovels for the better defense of the wall, and prepared himself for the
like fortune the next day. These things being known by the exceeding travel of
the soldiers, Caesar came into the camp before Sunrising.

OBSERVATIONS.
AS often as the people of Rome had occasion to make war, besides the body of
the army enrolled for that service, in such sort and with such ceremonies as I
have formerly delivered; the Consul or General had authority to call out such
others, Evocati, who they were.
either of the Communalty or the Equites, as for their long service were freed
by the laws from giving in their names at a muster: and these they called
Evocati, as a man would say, called out, being all men of special note and
service, and such as were able to give sound advice for matter of war. These
Evocati went all for the most part under an ensign, and were lodged together
in the camp behind the pavilion of the General, near unto the gate which they
called Porta Praetoria, and were always free from ordinary duties, as
watching, incamping and fighting, unless it came to such a pass, that every
man would put to his helping hand: but in all services they had their place
appointed them according to their former experience and worth. And thus the
Romans strengthened their army with the wisdom and experience of such, as for
many years together had been acquainted with the difficulties and casualties of
war, and oftentimes were able to afford such helps, both by example and
otherwise by good directions, as the wisdom of the General did gladly
embrace. Concerning these two young nobles Eporedorix and Viridomarus, whom he
names in this place Evocati, we are to understand that they were called out to
that war under the same title, but to another end: for being men of great place
and authority, he feared least in his absence they might be so wrought to
favor Vercingetorix, as neither himself nor the Hedui should have any cause to
commend them, according as it happened to Litavicus.

CHAP. XX.
The Hedui rob and kill diverse Roman Citizens.
WHile these things were a doing at Gergovia, Caesar.
the Hedui having received the first messages from Litavicus, gave themselves
no time to understand the truth: some being led on by covetousness, others by
anger and rashness, as it is naturally ingrafted in that nation to take a
light hearsay for a certain truth, spoiled the Roman citizens of their goods,
and slew them besides, or drew them into bondage; Convictolitanis stirring up
the common people to madness, that when they had done some wicked fact, they
might be ashamed to be good again. They drew Marcus Aristius a Tribune of the
soldiers, as he went to the Legion, out of the town Cavillonium,
notwithstanding their faith and promise before given, causing the rest to do
the like, which were there for matter of trade: these they set upon forthwith
as they traveled, robbed them of their carriages, and besieged such as made
resistance day and night: many were slain on both sides, and a greater number
were stirred up to take arms. In the mean time news being come that all their
soldiers were under Caesar's power, they run speedily to Aristius, they tell
him that nothing was done by public authority, they called such as robbed the
Romans of their goods to answer the matter, they confiscate the goods of
Litavicus and his brethren, they send Ambassadors unto Caesar to clear
themselves of these disorders: and this they do for the better recovery of
their people that were now with Caesar. But being contaminated with a wicked
fact, and taken with the shame of robbing the Roman citizens, many of them
being touched in the fact, and much perplexed for fear of punishment; they
privily entered into consultations of war, and solicited other States to that
purpose by their Ambassadors. Which although Caesar understood, yet he
entertained them as courteously as he could, telling them that for the
ignorance and levity of the common people he would not think hardly of the
State, nor abate any thing of his good will and favor to the Hedui.

OBSERVATIONS.
A Wicked act is not only hurtful in it self and of its own condition, Ore
ill act begets another.
but is like that box of evil, which the Poets feign to have been given to
Pandora to be kept always shut: for when the way is once made, and the gap
opened, one mischief draws on another, and the tail that follows is more
viperous then the head. There was never any one that stained himself with any
detestable crime, but was moved to commit a second evil that had relation to
the first: for wicked deeds are justified by themselves, and one crime is
upheld by another. When the hand is dipped in blood, it seems no great matter
to imbrue the arm: and the loyalty of a people being once shaken by the
indirect practices of a few, it is no strange matter if the whole body of that
State do immediately enter into treasonable consultations* as it happened in
this place with the Hedui, who from that time which disclosed the treachery of
their heart, carried no faithful regard to the Roman government, until the
bitterness of that war which happened shortly after had made them know their
error.

It shall be necessary therefore, as much as lies in the possibility of our
means, to keep the body of virtue safe from wounding: for albeit the wound be
never so little, yet it is always wide enough to let out both the blood and
the spirits, even to the evacuation of the vital breath of moral honesty.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COnvictolitanis plebem ad furorem impellit, The poorer sort of people do
embrace all means of innovation.
stirred up the common people to madness (says the story) as the sit
instruments to trouble the State, and to leaven the rest of the people with the
fury of madness. For the poorer and meaner people, that have no interest in the
Commonweal but the use of breath, nor any other substance but a Fly in the
commons, are always dangerous to the peace of that kingdom: for having
nothing to lose, they willingly embrace all means of innovation, in hope of
gaining something by other men's ruin, believing altogether in the Proverb,
which averreth the fishing to be good which is in troubled waters.

Catiline conspiring against the Roman Empire, made choice of such to accompany
him whose fortune was desperate. And thereupon Salust says; Salust in the
conspiracy of Catiline.
Homini potentiam quaerenti, egentissimus quisque opportunissimus, cu^^neque
sua chara, quippe quae nulla sunt, and omnia cum pr^tio honesta videntur:
Indigent fellows are the fittest instruments for ambitious men, who regard not
their own, because they have nothing, esteeming all actions honest that they
gain by.

L^v^e writes, that upon the rumor in Greece of war between Perseus and the
Romans, the poorer sort did put themselves in pay under Perseus, with this
resolution, that if there happened no alteration upon this occasion, they would
then cleave to the Romans, and assist them to put the state of Greece into a
garboil. Semper in civitate (says Salust) quibus opes nullae sunt, bonis
invident, malos extollunt; vetera odere, nova exoptant, odio suarum rerum
mutari omnia student.

There are these two means left for a State to ease it self of this sort of
people: either to employ them abroad in wars, or to interesse them in the
quiet of the Commonweal, by learning them such trades and occupations as may
give them a taste of thesweetness of peace, and the benefit of a civil life.

CHAP. XXI.
Caesar spieth an occasion to advance the service at Gergovia.
CAesar suspecting a greater revolt of the Galls, Caesar.
lest he might be hemmed in with the strength of all the States of Gallia, he
entered into deliberation how he might leave Gergovia, and get all his army
together again, that his departure might not seem to rise from the fear of
their revolt, and thereby be thought ^^string away. And as he thought upon
these things, he seemed to spy an occasion of doing somewhat to purpose: for
coming into the lesser camp to view the works, he observed a knoll which was
kept by the enemy to be bare of men, which the day before could scarce be
discerned by reason of the multitude of people: and wondering at it, be
enquired the cause of the runawaies which came daily in great numbers unto him.
They all agreed of that which Caesar had before understood by the discoverers,
that the back of that hill was almost level, but narrow and woody where it
gave passage to the other part of the town. The Galls did much fear that
place, for the Romans having took one knoll, if they should possess themselves
of another, the Galls were almost block in round about, and cut off from
forraging, or any other issuing out of the town: and therefore Vercingetorix
had called them all to fortify that place. This being known, Caesar sent many
troops of horse to that place about midnight, commanding them to ride up and
down all thereabout somewhat tumultuously. And early in the morning he caused
many horses and mules for carriage to be taken out of the camp with
horse-keepers upon them, having casks upon their heads the better to resemble
horsemen, and to be carried round about the hills. And to them he added a few
horsemen, to the end they might spur out the more freely, and so make a better
show, commanding them all to go to the same place by a long circuit about.
These things were done in view of the town; for Gergovia so stood, that they
might from thence see into the camp; but yet in so great a distance they could
not certainly perceive what was done. He sent likewise one Legion to the same
hill, and appointed them to go a little way, and then to make a stand in a
dale, and to hide themselves in the woods. The Galls began more to suspect
that place, and all their forces were drawn thither for the strengthening of
it. Caesar perceiving the enemies camps to be void of men, hiding his ensigns
and colors, he drew the soldiers by little and little out of the greater into
the lesser camp, and acquainted the legates to whom he had given the several
legions in charge, what he would have done; warning them especially to keep in
the soldiers, lest they should be carried out either with a desire of
sighting, or in hope of booty. He propounded unto them the incommodities of the
disadvantage of place, which must only be avoided by expedition, the matter
consisting rather in occasion and opportunity, It is an easier matter to begin
a work, then to quit it again with r^edit.
then in fighting.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IT is an easy matter to begin a business, and to make work for many hands;
but to put it off again, and to quit it without prejudice of other important
respects, is no small labor. Caesar being engaged in the siege of Gergovia,
and fearing a general revolt throughout all Gallia, was not a little troubled
how he might clear himself of that business, without suspicion of fear or
flight, and gather all his forces into one body again, which he had before
divided into two armies: Livie.
for as Marcellus said to Fabius touching the siege of Casselium, Multa magnis
ducibus sicut non aggred^enda, ita semel aggressis non dimittenda esse, quia
magna famae momenta in utramque partem fiunt; Many things as they are not to be
attempted by great Captains; so when they are once attempted they must not be
left unatchieved: for in either their reputation is much concerned. An enemy
will conceive greater hopes from such a retreat, then from a greater advantage.
And therefore a General ought to have as special a regard to the opinion
which he desires to be held of his proceedings, as of any part belonging to
his charge: for fame is the spirit of great actions, and makes them memorable
or unworthy by report. Caeteris mortalibus in co^stare consilia quid sibi
conducere putent; Principum (says Tacitus) diversam esse sortem, quibus
praecipua rerum ad famam dirigenda; Other men's consultations tend only to what
may most advantage themselves: Princes have more to do; to look in their
management of things principally at their honor and reputation. Wherein there
cannot be a better rule for the avoiding of that inconvenience, then that which
Lucretius observed, of whom Livie says; Id prudenter ut in temere suscepta re
Romanus fecit, quod circumspectis difficultatibus, ne frustra rempus tereret,
celeriter abstitit incepto: He did thus far prudently in a business rashly
undertaken; that when he saw what difficulties attended the enterprise, rather
then spend time in vain, he forthwith desisted from his purpose. For the speedy
leaving of any such enterprise, does excuse the rashness which might be
imputed to the beginning; and men are not so much blamed for making trial of
an ill-digested project, as they are for obstinate continuing in the same.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SOme services (says Caesar) are Res occasionis, Some services are Res
occasionis, non praelii.
non praelii, businesses of opportunity, not of war: whereof I have already
disputed. Notwithstanding give me leave to add the mistake, which often falls
out in matter of opportunity. For in viewing the occurrences of the wars of
these later times, we may find that some hot-spur commanders, having tasted of
the good success when occasion affords, have thought of nothing but of
services assided with opportunity, in such manner as at length they forgot that
occasion came but seldom, and carried their men upon such desperate attempts,
as proved the business to be a matter scarce affording means to fight for their
lives, but were often swallowed up with devouring danger: wherein they did
mistake the condition of the service, and fell short of Caesar's example. For
albeit he sent out his men to struggle with the height of the hill, and the
disadvantage of well-fortified camps; yet he knew they should find little
resistance by the enemy, being drawn away upon other occasions, if they made
that expedition as was requisite in this service; whereby he left them not
without means to over^way those difficulties, and so made it Rem occasionis,
non praelii, a business of opportunity, not of war.

CHAP. XXII.
The Romans make an assault upon Gergovia.
THese things being delivered, Caesar.
he gave the soldiers the sign to begin, and at the same time he sent out the
Hedui by another ascent on the right side. The wall of the town was distant by
a right line from the plain and the foot of the hill (if it lay even without
any dale or valley) a thousand and two hundred p^ces: whatsoever more was added
in fetching circuits about to climb the sleep of the hill, was over and besides
that distance. From the midst of the hill in length, as the nature of the
place would bear it, the Galls had with great stones raised a wall of s^x foot
in height, to hinder the assault of our men; and all the lower part being left
void and empty, they filled the upper part of the hill even to the wall of the
town with thick and frequent camps. The soldiers upon the sign given were
quickly come to the works, and passing over them they possessed themselves of
three camps, with such speed and expedition, that Teutomatus the king of the
Nitiobriges, being surprised in his tent as he rested about noon time, the
upper part of his body being n^ked and his horse wounded, did hardly escape the
hands of soldiers occupied in booty. Caesar having got that which he
propounded to himself, commanded a retreat to be sounded; and the Ensigns of
the tenth Legion stayed. But the soldiers of the other Legions not hearing the
sound of the trumpet, forasmuch as a great valley was between them, were staid
notwithstanding at first by the Tribunes of the soldiers and the Legates,
according as Caesar had given in charge. But being carried away as well with a
hope of speedy victory, as by the flight of the enemy, and the fortunate
battles of former times, they thought nothing so difficult but they could
overcome it by their valor, insomuch as they desisted not from following,
until they came to the wall and the gates of the town. Then a great outcry
being took up in all parts of the town, such as were further off being
terrified with the suddenness of the tumult, thinking the enemy had been
within the gates, did cast themselves out of the town: and the women cast down
their apparel and their silver from the walls; and holding out their naked
breasts, with their hands spread abroad, adjured the Romans to save them, and
that they would not (as they had done at Avaricum) destroy both women and
children: and some women slipped down by their hands from the wall, and gave
themselves freely to the soldiers. L. Fabius a centurion of the eighth legon,
who was heard to say that day, that the booty which he had got at Avaricum so
stirred him up, that he would suffer no man to get up upon the wall before
himself; having got three of his manipular soldiers, with their help he
climbed up to the top of the wall, and then he himself did help up his
fellows. In the mean time such as were on the other side of the town, busied
in fortifying that place, (as we have already delivered) first the noise being
heard, and then stirred up by often messengers, that the Romans had took the
town, sending their horsemen before, they hasted thither in great numbers, and
still as they came, they stood under the wall, and increased the number of such
as they found fighting. A great multitude being at length come together, the
women that a little before had reached out their hands from the wall to the
Romans, began now to adjure their own people, and as the manner of the Galls
is, to show their hair lose about their ears, and to bring out their children.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT is both safe and honorable for Soldiers and inferior Commanders to keep
their directions: It is honorable for soldiers to keep their directions.
for whenever they go about to enlarge their business according to their own
fantasy, howsoever occasion may seem to further their desires, they invert the
whole course of discipline, and do arrogate more to themselves, then they do
attribute to their General.

The Romans were strict in this point, as may appear by that of Manlius, who
put his own son to death for making a happy fight against the enemy contrary to
his directions: for although it fortuned to fall out well at that time, yet the
example was so dangerous in a well-ordered war, that he chose rather to bring a
mischief upon his own son, then an inconvenience to their military government.
Injussu tuo (says one in Livie to the Consul) nunquam pugnabo, non si certam
victoriam videam; unless thou biddest, I will never fight, no, though I see
the victory clear before me; making profession of true obedience, and ranging
himself in the order of such parts, as have no other office but observance. For
an army is as a body, and the soldiers are as particular parts, every man
according to his place: the General is as the life and soul, and gives motion
to every part according to reason. And as in a natural body no part can move
without directions from the life; so in the body of an army, when any part
moves without the consent of the head, the motion is either monstrous or
exorbitants, and suteth with such an effect as condemns the instruments of
unadvised rashness.

Polybius says, that men have two ways to come by wisdom, either by their
own harms, or by other men's miscasualties. Such wisdom as is got through
correction happening by their own errors, is dearly bought; but sitting near
them, is not easily forgotten: that which is obtained by other men's
misfortunes, is well come by, and at an easy rate; but for the most part it is
soon forgotten: but such as can retain it to a good use, are most happy men.
This precept to soldiers touching obedience, and the precise keeping of their
directions, has by other men's harms so often been urged, as a man would think
that later ages should beware of this disorder. And yet it falls out almost
in every small service. For the greatest loss which the English received at
any one time at Ostend, was in a sally; wherein captain Woodward having possessed
himself of some of the enemies works, when by his directions he should have
stayed, thinking to improve his reputation by some further service, deeming it
easy peradventure to go forward, he went on beyond the compass of his command:
whereby it happened, that both the enemy had greater scope to revenge their
former dishonor, and the rest of our English troops that had their part in
that project by way of second helps, could not proceed according to their
directions; and so they all returned with loss.

That which Xenophon reports touching one Chrysantas, Institution of Cyrus.
is notable to this purpose; who being in the heat of a conflict, and having
his sword lift up to strike one of the adverse party, he chanced to hear a
retreat sounded, whereupon he presently withdrew his hand, and did forbear to
smite him. Which howsoever to some may seem ridiculous, and unfitting the
temper of a soldier in time of battle; yet let them know that Xenophon a great
Commander, and an excellent historian, did allege that example to the eternal
memory of the forenamed party, for the knowledge and instruction of Cyrus, whom
he propounds to the world as an absolute pattern both of military and civil
virtue.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Romans continue the assault, and are beaten off with loss.
THe contention was not indifferent to the Romans, ^^^sar.
neither in place nor in number of combatants, being wearied withal, both with
the long race which they had run, and with the continuance of their fight,
whereby they did not so easily bear the enemy being whole and fresh. Caesar
seeing the fight to be in an unequal place, and the enemy still to increase
their forces, fearing his people, he sent to T. Sextius the legate, whom he had
left to command the lesser camp, to bring out the cohorts speedily, and to
place them at the foot of the hill on the right side of the enemy; to the end
that if our men were forced to forsake their place, yet the enemy might be
terrified from following them over freely, he himself removing a little out of
that place where he stood with the legion, attended the event of the battle.
And as they fought at hand very fiercely, the enemy trusting in the place and
in the multitude, and our men in their valor, the Hedui suddenly appeared on
the open side of our men, whom Caesar had sent up by another ascent on the
right hand, to keep off part of the enemy. These by the likeness of their
armor did wonderfully astonish our men: who although they saw their right arms
showed or put forth, which was a sign of peace, yet they doubted lest the enemy
had used that policy to deceive them. At the same instant L. Fabius the
Centurion, and those that climbed up upon the wall with him, being slain, were
cast down from the wall again, and M. Petreius a Centurion of the same legion,
as he was about to cut down the gates, being oppressed with the multitude, and
despairing of his own life, having received many wounds; Forasmuch (says he to
his soldiers that followed him) as I cannot save my self and you too, I will
certainly provide for your safety, whom I have brought into danger whilst I
thirsted after honor. You, while you may, shift for your selves. And withal
he brake through the thickest of the enemy, and with the slaughter of a couple
he removed the rest from the gate. And as his soldiers went about to help him,
In vain (says he) do you endeavor to save my life, which blood and strength
have already forsaken: and therefore get you hence while you have means, and
betake your selves to the legion, and so fighting fell down dead, but saved his
men. Our men being overcharge don all sides, with the loss of six and forty
Centurions, were beaten down from the place: but the tenth legion, which stood
for a rescue in a more equal place, hindered the Galls from following over
eagerly. And again, the cohorts of the thirteenth legion, which Sextius had
brought out of the camp, seconded that legion, having got the advantage of the
upper ground. The legions as soon as they came into the plain, stood still, and
turned head to the enemy. Vercingetorix drew back his men from the foot of the
hill, and brought them into their camps. That day few less then seven hundred
soldiers were wanting.

OBSERVATIONS.
ANd this is the end of presumptuous rashness, when men are become so
pregnant, as to take upon them more then is required. But as they say of fair
weather, that it is pity it should do hurt: so is it great pity that valor and
resolution should prove disadvantageous. For this overdoing of a service, is
but the spirit of valiant carriage, and the very motion of prowess and
courage, memorable in the offenders themselves; as we may see by this
particular report of Fabius and Petreius: and much to be pitied, that virtue
should at any time be overquelled with a greater strength.

At this service the Romans stood in these terms; they were overmatched in
number, they had spent their strength in speedy running to the place which in
it self was not favorable unto them, but almost as great an enemy as the
Galls, only they trusted in their valor, and thought by virtue to clear all
difficulties. The Galls had the favor of the place, a far greater number of
fighting men, they came fresh to the battle, and were always seconded with
fresh supplies. Caesar seeing the two armies engaged one with another, could
neither part them nor recall his soldiers, but set such forces as were free in
such convenient places, as might rescue his people in the retreat, and keep the
Galls from following the chase, or making any great slaughter of the Roman
soldier. Whereby it happened, that in so great an inequality, where there were
so many swords drawn to make way to death, there were not seven hundred men
lost of the Roman army. And yet it happened to be the greatest loss that ever
he received in those wars in his own presence, when the issue of the conflict
gave the enemy the better of the day.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Caesar rebukes the rashness of his soldiers; and makes light, but
successful skirmishes upon the enemy.
CAesar the next day calling the army before him, Caesar.
rebuked the temerity and cupidity of the soldiers, forasmuch as they had took
upon them to judge how far they were to go, or what they were to do; neither
would they stay upon the sounding of a retreat, nor hearken to the Tribunes nor
the Legates that would have kept them back. He laid open unto them how
avai^eable the inequality of the place was, and what he himself thought of it,
when at Avaricum he took the enemy without a General and without cavalry, yet
did forgo a most assured victory, lest in the buckling he might have received a
small loss through the inequitie of the place. How admirable was the
greatness of their spirit, whom neither the fortifications of the camps, the
height of the hill, nor the wall of the town could stop or hinder! Wherein he
blamed their licentious arrogance the more, forasmuch as they had took upon
them to judge better of the victory, and the success of that service, then the
General himself: neither did he so much desire to find courage and virtue in
his soldiers, as modesty and sobriety. This speech being delivered, and in the
end confirming their minds that they might not be discouraged at the matter,
nor attribute that to the worth of the enemy, which indeed was in the nature of
the place; keeping his former purpose of departure, he brought the legions out
of the camp, imbattelled them in a convenient place, and finding that
Vercingetorix would not be drawn into an indifferent place, after a light
skirmish of horse, wherein the Romans had the better, he carried his army back
again into the camp: and doing the like the next day, thinking it sufficient to
abate the pride of the Galls, and to strengthen the courage of his soldiers,
he removed his camp into the State of the Hedui, the enemy refusing to make
after him.

OBSERVATIONS.
REparation of honor is a chief point in the carriage of an army: Reparation of
honor, what it is,
for he that leaves an enemy upon a loss received, when his soldiers are
either awed or well beaten, must look to find the same spirit and courage in
them, when they shall come again to confront the enemy, as they had when they
last left him with a disadvantage; which is nothing else but an unskilful
continuance of his own loss, and a preparation to a second overthrow. In the
war the Romans had with Annibal, in all the fights they made, Plutarch in the
life of Marcellus.
they continued their first loss unto the battle at Nola: at what time by
Marcellus good directions, they gave him an overthrow; which was the first time
that ever Annibals soldiers began to give place to the Romans, and repaired
the Romans valor again, after so many battles as they lost. For then they were
persuaded that they fought not with an enemy altogether invincible, but that he
was subject to loss and overthrow. And in respect of this so happy a fortune,
restoring the Roman soldiers to their ancient valor and good fortune, it is
that Livi^ says, Ingens eo die res, ac nescio an maxima ill^ bello gest a sit,
A great piece of service was performed that day, Lib. 3. bell, civil. post
pugna^ Dyrrachianam Caesar neque satis militibus perterritis confidebat,
spatiumque interponendum ad recrcandos animos putabat.
and I think I may say the greatest that was done in that war. Caesar did
well understand this Philosophy: and therefore he labored to repair the
breach which the enemy had made in the valor of his soldiers, by light and
small skirmishes, before he would adventure to hazard the main drife of the
business in any set conflict. And the rather for that he had a purpose to
leave the enemy for a time, whereby he seemed to end the former services;
wherein he had a special care not to depart with the last blow, having always
before that time had the better: for the condition of the end does challenge
much of the former proceedings, and does draw the opinion of men to deem of all
as the conclusion imports. According as Claudius Nero told his soldiers:
Semper quod postremo adjectum sit, id rem totam videri traxisse: As the end of
the service is, so the whole seems to have been.

CHAP. XXV.
The Hedui revolt: Caesar passes his army over the river Loire.
THe third day he repaired the bridge at the river Elevar, Caesar.
and carried over his army. There he understood by Viridomarus and Eporedorix,
that Litavicus was gone with all the enemies horse to solicit the State of
the Hedui, and therefore it was requisite that Caesar should send them before
to confirm the State, and keep them in loyalty. And although Caesar did
mistrust the State of the Hedui for many causes, and did think that the
departure of these two Nobles would hasten their revolt; yet he did not think
it fit to detain them, lest he should either seem to do them wrong, or to give
any suspicion of distrust. At their departure he propounded unto them briefly,
how well he had deserved of their State, how low and weak they were when he
received them, confined within their towns, their lands extended, all their
associates taken from them, a tribute laid upon them, pledges extorted from
them with great contumely; and into what fortune and greatness he had brought
them again, that not only they had recovered their former state, but did exceed
the dignity and favor of all former times: and with these mandates he let them
go. Noviodunum was a town of the Hedui, situate in a convenient place, upon the
bank of the river Loire. Thither had Caesar sent all the hostages of Gallia,
the corn, the public treasure, and the greatest part of the baggage of the
army; and thither he had likewise sent great store of horse, which he had
bought in Spain and Italy for the service of this war. Eporedorix and
Viridomarus coming thither, and understanding touching the affairs of their
State, that Li^avicus was received into Bibract by the Hedui, which is the
Metropolitan city of their State, and that Convictolitanis their chief
Magistrate, and a great part of the Senate were come unto him, and that public
messengers were sent to Vercingetorix touching a league of peace and amity;
they did not think it fit to omit so great an opportunity. And thereupon
having slain the Guard at Noviodunum, with such others as were there either by
way of trade or travel, they divided the money and the horses between them,
and took order that the hostages of the other States should safely be conveyed
to Bibract. For the town, forasmuch as they thought they were not able to keep
it, lest the Romans might make any use of it, they burned it: such corn as they
could carry on the sudden, they conveyed away in boats, the rest they either
burnedor cast it into the river. They began to raise forces in the country,
next adjoining; to dispose of watches and garrisons on the bank of the river
Loire; to show their Cavalrie in all places, to strike fear into the Romans, to
the end they might exclude them from provision of corn, or drive them through
necessity of want to forsake the Province. Whereof they were the rather
assured, forasmuch as the Loire was much swelled by a fall of snow, whereby it
was unpassable at any foard. These things being known, Caesar thought it
necessary for him to make haste, (especially if he must make up the bridges) to
the end he might give them battle before they had gathered a greater head: for
touching his pupose for returning into the Province, he did not think it fit by
any means, both in respect of the shame and in famy thereof, as also forasmuch
as the opposition of the hill Gebenna, and the difficulty of the passage did
hinder him; but especially for that he did exceedingly desire to join himself
with Labienus and the Legions that were with him. And therefore making great
journeys both by day and night beyond all men's expectation, he came to the
river Loire, where the horsemen having sound a convenient foard for the
necessity of the time, that the soldiers might pass over with their arms and
shoulders above the water, to hold up their weapons, disposing the horse in the
river to break the force of the stream, and the enemy being affrighted upon
their first show, he carried over his Army in safety. And having satisfied his
soldiers with corn which he found in the fields, and good store of cattle, he
determined to march toward the Senones.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe greatest difficulty that ever Caesar found in the course of these wars,
The change which the revolt of the Hedui made in Gallia.
was at this instant upon the revolt of the Hedui. For whereas that State after
Caesar's coming into Gallia, was ever reputed the favorite of the Roman Empire,
having received such special privileges and prerogatives above the rest, as
might tie them with an inviolable bond of amity to the people of Rome: it was
not to be expected that they should forsake so great a stay, or favor any
thing that might tend to the weakening of that authority, which preferred them
in dignity before all other States of that Continent: and was as a Remora to
diverse other Nations of Gallia, from showing that defection by plain and open
revolt, which they had so long before conceived in their minds.

But when it appeared (notwithstanding any precedent benefit, or the merit of
imperial favors) that the Hedui did affect the common cause of their
Countries liberty, and were content to engage themselves therein, as far as
their lives or fortunes could any way be valued: it was not to be doubted, but
that such other Commonweals, as before that time had remained neutrall, and had
less cause then the Hedui to keep back their hands from a work of that piety,
would apprehend the matter as a business importing the safety of their
Country, whereunto Caesar and the Legions were common enemies. The
consideration whereof made Caesar to think of returning back into the Province,
had not the dishonor of such a retreat, and the desire he had to join with
Labienus, hindered that purpose.

CHAP. XXVI.
Labienus comes to Lutetia with four Legions.
WHile these things were done by Caesar, Caesar,
Labienus having left those supplies which came last out of Italy, at
Agendicum, for the safety of the carriages, went himself with four Legions
toward Lutetia, a town of the Parisians, built in an Island in the river
Sequana. The enemy understanding of his coming, great forces were speedily
brought together out of the countries near about. The chiefest command was
given to Camulogenus of the nation of the Aulerci, who notwithstanding his
great age, was called to that honor for his singular knowledge in matter of
war. He finding it to be a continued bog that ran into Sequana, and much
hindered all that place, did stay there with his army, and purposed to hinder
the passage of the Romans. Labienus did first endeavor to drive the vines, to
fill up the bog with hurdles and earth, and so to make the passage firm: but
after that he perceived it to be very hard to effect, in the third watch of the
night he went out of the camp with silence, and the same way that he came, he
went to Melodunum a town of the Senones, situate in an Island of Sequana, as
Lutetia is: and having surprised some fifty ships and boats, and manned them
with soldiers, the townsmen being affrighted with the noveltie of the matter,
of whom a great part were called out to that war, he possessed himself of the
town without any resistance. The bridge being repaired which the enemy had cut
down a few days before, he transported over the army, and went down along the
river toward Lutetia. The enemy having notice thereof by such us escaped from
Melodunum, commanded Lutetia to be burned, and the bridges of the town to be
broken: they themselves for saking the bog, sat down upon the banks of
Sequana, right over against the camp of Labienus. By this time Caesar's
departure from Gergovia was known abroad, with the revolt of the Hedui: and
rumors were brought of a secondrising and motion in Gallia. It was certainly
confirmed, that the Galls were in consultation, that Caesar was kept back both
by the difficulties of the passage and the river Loire, and for want of corn
was constrained to return into the Province. The Bellovaci also understanding
of the revolt of the Hedui, whereas they were before treacherous and disloyal
of themselves, did now begin to raise forces and prepare for open war.
Labienus upon so great a change of things, understood that it was necessary for
him to take another manner of course then was before intended. For now he
thought not of making any conquest, or urging the enemy to battle, but to
bring he army back in safety to Agendicum. For on the one side, the Bellovaci
stood ready to charge him, being a people that had the name for deeds of arms
of all the nations in Gallia; the other side was kept by Camulogenus with an
army ready in the field: and last of all, the Legions were kept from their
garrison and their carriages with a great river that ran between them and it.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe great alteration which the revolt of the Hedui made in Gallia, He that
will do things well, must vary with the time.
caused Labienus to let fall his former resolutions, and to shape such a course
as might best answer the extremity of the tempest. For he that will attain the
end of his desires, or make peace with the affections of his mind, must not
think at all times to carry away contentment with the strength of his means, or
subdue resistance with force of arms, but must be well pleased to be driven
with the stream, until he meet with a tide of better opportunity: for
oftentimes it falls out, that the opposition of resisting power is more
available then ten Legions commanded by Caesar, or what the Roman Empire could
add besides, to so great an army. For there is no quantity so great, but
there may be found a greater; nor none so little, but there may be a less:
which may teach a man neither to conceit himself in a matchless singularity,
nor to despair of a weak condition. And this is that which is so often
recommended to the consideration of discreet Governors, whether they be
Magistrates in peace, or Commanders in war, to put them in mind of the
condition of times, and to carry themselves answerable thereunto: forasmuch as
fortunate and happy success, rises for the most part from such means as have
respect to the occurrences of the time, not running always upon one biass, nor
failing at all times with a fore-wind; but sometimes to press forward, and
sometimes to give back, according as the circumstances of the time shall make
way to good fortune.

Fabius the great Roman thought it no scorn to be called coward, Plutarch in
the life of Fabius.
or to undergo the displeasure of the people of Rome, while he gave place to
the fury of the Carthaginian, and refused to receive a third overthrow. And
thus he altered the course of the Roman warfare according to the time, and
overthrew that enemy by shunning to encounter him, which in a battle would
have hazarded the conquest of Rome. In like manner Cn. Sulpitius the Dictator
did imitate this wisdom of Fabius against the Galls, by lingering out the
war: Nolens se fortunae committere adversus hostem (as Livy says) quem
tempus deteriorem indies and locus alienus fuceret; Not willing to put the
trial to Fortune, when as he dealt with an enemy, which time and ignorance of
the place rendered every day weaker and weaker. And to conclude this point,
Caesar upon the loss which he received at Dyrrachium, Omnem sibi commutandam
belli rationem existimavit, thought it his best way to alter the whole course
of the war, as the Story says: which was nothing else but varying with the
time, and helping a bad Fortune with new directions.

CHAP. XXVII.
Labienus passes the river Sequana, and fights with the Galls.
FOr the avoiding of these great difficulties which came so suddenly upon him,
Caesar.
he knew there was no help to be had, but that which the virtue of his mind
would afford him: and therefore calling a council a little before the evening,
he adhorted them to excoute such things as he commanded both with diligence and
industry; and so taking the ships which he had brought from Melodunum, he
divided them amongst the Roman horsemen, and after the first watch he commanded
them to go four miles down the river in silence, and there to attend him. He
left five cohorts, which he thought to be too weak for any fight, as a garrison
to the camp, and sent the other five cohorts of the same legion about midnight
with all the carriages up the river, commanding them to make a great noise and
tumult as they went. He sought out all barges and boats, and sent them up the
river with much noise and beating of oars: and a little while after he himself
went quietly with three legions to the place where he had commanded the ships
to abide him. At his coming thither, the enemies discoverers which were
disposed on all parts of the river, were suddenly and at unawares surprised by
our men, by reason of a sudden tempest that did rise in the mean time: and the
army and the horse were by the diligence of the Roman Knights (to whom he had
committed that business) carried over. At the same time a little before
daylight, the enemy had intelligence that there was an extraordinary noise and
tumult in the Roman camp, and a great troup went up the river, and the beating
of oars was heard that way, and a little below the soldiers were carried over.
Which being known, forasmuch as they judged that the legions were carried over
in three places, and that they were so perplexed at the revolt of the Hedui,
that they fled away; they divided their forces also into three parts* for a
garrison being left right over against the Roman camp, and a small band sent
toward Glossendium, which was to go so far as the boats went, they carried the
rest of their army to meet Labienus. By the dawning of the day all our men were
carried over, and the enemy was discovered ranged in battle. Labienus adhorting
the soldiers to bethink themselves of their ancient virtue, and to recall the
memory of their fortunate battles, and to suppose that Caesar himself was
present, under whose leading they had oftentimes overthrown the enemy; he gave
the sign of battle. Upon the first affront, on the right wing, where the
seventh legion stood, the enemy was beaten back and put to flight; in the left
cornet, where the twelfth legion was, the former ranks of the enemy being
pierced through and beaten dead down with the piles, the rest notwithstanding
did stoutly resist, neither did any man give suspicion of flying. Camulogenus
the General was present with his men, and encouraged them to sight, the
victory being uncertain. When the Tribunes of the seventh legion understood
what was done in the left wing, they showed the legion behind on the back of
the enemy, and there began to charge them: and yet none of them for sook his
place, but were all enclosed and slain, Camulogenus ending his days by the
same fortune. Such of the enemy as were left over against the Roman camps,
understanding that the battle was begun, came to second their fellows, and
took a hill, but were not able to abide our conquering soldiers; but joining
themselves to the rest that fled, were neither protected by the woods nor the
mountains, but were all slain by the horsemen. This business being ended,
Labienus returned to Agendicum, where the carriages of the whole army were
left: and from thence came to Caesar with all the forces.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
LAbienus being to pass the river of Seine, which was strongly guarded by the
Galls, was forced to seek a means out of the virtue of his mind, (as Caesar
says,) and to lay such a project as might amuse the enemy, and keep him in
suspense what way to take to prevent his passage, until he had effected that
which he desired. Which brings to our consideration the saying of Epaminondas
the Theban, that there is nothing more necessary or behovefull for a General,
Necessary for a General to understand the purposes of the enem
then to understand the purposes of the enemy. A point so much the more
commendable, by how much it is in it self difficult, and hard to be discovered;
for it were hard to understand their secret deliberations, which for the most
part are only known to the General, or to such chief Commanders as are near
about him, when then very actions which every man knows, and such things as
are done in the open view of the world, are oftentimes doubtful to an enemy.

Livie has a notable story to this purpose. Sempronius the Roman Consul giving
battle to the Aequi, the fight continued until the night parted them, not
without alteration of fortune, sometimes the Romans prevailing, and sometimes
the Aequi: the night coming on, both sides being weary and half routed, they
forsook their camps, and for their better safety took each of them a hill. The
Roman army divided it self into two parts: the one part followed the Consul,
and the other a Centurion, named Tempanius, a fellow of great spirit, and had
showed much worth in the battle. The next morning the Consul without further
inquiry, made toward Rome; and so did the Aequi withdraw their army back into
their country: either of them deeming themselves overthrown, and casting
victory upon each others shoulders. It happened that Tempanius with that part
of the army that kept with him, inquiring after the enemy, found him to be
overthrown and fled: whereupon he first went to the Roman camp and made that
good, and then marched to the camp of the Aequi, which he took and ri^^ed, and
so returned victor to Rome.

The morning following the battle of Agincourt, Holinshetd, Henry (...).
Mont^oy the French Herald coming to enquire for prisoners, King Henry asked
him who had won the field: To which he answered, That the French had lost it:
which was unknown known to that worthy Conqueror. Plutarch writes, that
Cassius killed himself upon the like error, not knowing the fortune of the
right wing of his army. And therefore it must needs be a commendable matter, to
understand the deliberations of an enemy, when the issue of a battle is
oftentimes so uncertain.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
CAmulogenus has the report in this place of singular knowledge and experience
in matter of war, and being of a grea age he fought as resolutely as the
youngest gallant of them all, which may bring to our consideration the fittest
age of life to be wished in a General, The fittest age of life for a General.
for the atchieving of noble and worthy exploits. Wherein we are to consider,
that the youth and former years of a man's age, are plentifully stored with hot
blood and nimble spirits, which quickly apprehend the conceptions of the mind,
and carry them with such violence to execution, that they bereave the judgment
of her prerogative, and give it no respite to censure them; whereby it comes
to pass, that young men are for the most part heedless, inconsiderate, rash and
resolute, putting more upon hazard then upon good advice.

On the otherside, old age is cold in blood, and not so quick of spirit, but
being beaten with the rod of long experience, it learneth to be slow and
lingering, full of doubts and consideration, inclining rather to a feminine
fear, then to a forward resolution.

Neither of these attributes are simply in themselves the best attendants of
noble enterprises: for a hot-spur gallant may run apace, but not go sure; and
what young man soever is advanced to command, had need of an old man's wit to
discharge it. And if authority did at any time fall into the hands of youth in
the Roman government, which was very seldom, it was Praemium virtutis, non
aetatis; for his virtues sake, not his age. Pompey was extraordinary happy in
that behalf, for he attained the surname of great, because he had deserved the
honor of triumph before his beard was grown. And yet Sertorius took such
advantage at Pompeys youth, Plutarch in the life of Sectorius.
coming against him in Spain, that he said he would have whipped the young boy
to Rome again with rods, had not that old woman (meaning Metellus) come to help
him.

Again, where old age heapeth doubt upon doubt, and falls into the danger of
unprofitable lingering, Nec ausus est satis nec providit, it wants boldness to
steel the enterprise, and falls also short of good providence, as Tacitus
speaks of F. Valens. Hist. 3.
Augustus Caesar purposing to commend Tiberius his successor with an
extraordinary praise, said he was a man that never put one thing to be twice
consulted of. And it is said of Marius, Plutarch in the life of Marius.
that being come to the age of threescore and five years or thereabouts, he
showed himself very cold and slow in all his enterprises, forasmuch as age had
mortified his active heat, and killed that ready disposition of body that was
wont to be in him. The Romans finding Fabius Maximus to be full of doubts and
delay, good to defend but not to offend, and Marcellus of a stirring spirit,
neither quiet with good nor ill fortune, (as Annibal truly said of him) they
thought to join Marcellus youthful courage with Fabius fear and wisdom, and
so make a temperature fit for a General; whereupon they called Marcellus the
sword, and Fabius the buckler: wherein Caesar of himself was excellent, of whom
Suetonius reports, Dubium cautior, an audentior; It is uncertain whether he
was more wary or daring.

The best state of years then for this business, is that which tempereth the
heat of youth with the coldness of age, and quickneth the slow and dull
proceedings of double advice, with the rashness of youthful resolution: and
falls out between the years of five and thirty and five and fifty. Scipio
Africanus commanded the Roman army in Spain at four and twenty years of age,
and died at four and fifty. Annibal was chosen General to Asdrubal at six and
twenty years, and poisoned himself at threescore and ten. Pompey was slain at
nine and fifty, and Caesar at six and fifty. Marcellus kept his youthful
resolution to his old days: forbeing threescore years of age, he never longed
for any thing more then to fight with Annibal hand to hand.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Galls consult of the carriage of that war.
THe revolt of the Hedui being known, Caesar.
the war waxed greater. Ambassadors were sent out into all parts, and they
labored to draw the rest of the States to their party, as far as either
favor, authority, or money could prevail: having got the pledges into their
hands which Caesar had left with them, they terrified such as stood doubtful,
by threatening to kill them. The Hedui do desire Vercingetorix to come unto
them, and to acquaint them with the course of that war* which being yielded
unto, they labor to have the chief command transferred upon them. The matter
growing unto a controversy, a general Council of all Gallia was summoned at
Bibract. Thither they repaired in great multitudes: and the matter being put to
voices, they all with one consent made allowance of Vercingetorix for their
General. The men of Rhemes, with the Lingones and Treviri, were absent from
this Council: the two first continuing their affection to the Roman party: the
Tr^viri were far off, and were annoyed by the Germans; in respect they were
absent from that war, and remained neutrall. The Hedui were much grieved that
they were put by the principality, they complain of the change of their
fortune, and wished for Caesar's former indulgence; neither yet durst they
disjoyn themselves again from the rest, the war being already undertaken; but
Eporedorix and Viridomarus, two young men of great hope, were constrained,
though unwilling, to obey Vercingetorix. He commanded pledges to be delivered
by the rest of the States, and appointed a day for that business. He commanded
fifteen thousand horse to be speedily brought together: touching foot forces,
he would content himself with those which he had; for his purpose was not to
wage battle, but whereas he was very strong in horse, he made no doubt to keep
the Romans from corn and forage: only they must patiently endure to have their
corn spoiled, and their houses burnt; which particular loss would quickly be
recompensed with liberty and perpetual sovereignty. These things being
ordered, he commanded ten thousand foot to be raised by the Hedui and Segusiani
bordering upon the Province; and to them he added eight hundred horse, and sent
them under the command of Eporedorix his brother, to make war against the
Allobroges. And on the other side he caused the Gabali and the nearest villages
of the Arverni to set upon the Helvii, the Rutheni, and the Cadurci, and to
depopulate their country. Notwithstanding by secret messages he dealt with the
Allobroges, whose minds he thought to be scarce settled from the former war
the promised money to their chiefest men, and to give the government of all the
Roman Province to their State. To answer all these chances, there were provided
but two and twenty cohorts, which being raised out of the Province, were
disposed by L. Caesar a Legate to prevent these mischiefs. The Hedui of their
own accord giving battle to their borderers, were beaten out of the field, and
were driven into their towns with the slaughter of C. Valerius Donotaurus, the
son of Caburus the chief man of their State, and of many other. The
Allobroges having set many watches and garrisons upon the river Rhene, did with
great care and diligence defend their borders. Caesar understanding the enemy
to be stronger in horse then he himself was, and the passages being shut that
he could not send either into the Province or into Italy for any supplies, he
sent over the Rhene into Germany, and got horse from such States as he had
quieted the year before, with such light-armed footmen as were accustomed to
sight amongst the horse. At their arrival, forasmuch as they were not well
fitted with horse, he took the horses from the Tribunes, the Roman Knights, and
the Evocati, and distributed them amongst the Germans.

OBSERVATIONS.
THere are three principal means to draw a State into a party which of it
self stands neutrall, Three chief means to win men to favor a matter.
or to win the minds of men, when they carry equal or indifferent affections.
The first is, 1. Favor or friendship.
by favor or friendship; the second, by authority; 2. Authority.
and the third, by money.

Friendship relieth upon former respects, and the exchange of precedent
courtesies. 3. Money.
Authority concludes from future dangers, and the inconveniences which may
follow the refusal. Money does govern the present occasion, and is more
general then either favor or authority. The Galls were not wanting to make
their party good in any of these three persuading motives: but, as Caesar
says, Quantum gratia, authoritate, pecunia valent, ad sollicitandas civitates
n^tuntur: they solicited the neighbor States, as far as friendship,
authority, and money would go.

Wherein as they went about to lay the stock upon it, so they left themselves
but one trial for the right of their cause, and joined issue for all upon the
fortune of that action: for when they should see their best possibilities too
weak, and their uttermost endeavors profit nothing against a mighty prevailing
enemy, the greater their hopes were which they had in the means, the greater
would be their despair when such means were spent; for it is a shrewd thing for
men to be out of means, and not to drive a hope before them.

It is usual upon such main occasions to employ the chiefest man in a State,
in whom the soldiers may have most assurance, and to accompany him with such
means as the strength of the Commonweal may afford him: but if their greatest
hopes die in his ill success, or wax faint through cold fortune, the kingdom
receives loss, and the enemy gets advantage, as may appear by the sequel
of this great preparation.

CHAP. XXIX.
The Cavalrie of the Galls do set upon the Roman army, and are beaten.
WHile these things were a doing, Caesar.
the enemies forces and the horsemen that were commanded to be levied in all
Gallia, met together, and came out of the territories of the Arverni. A great
number of these being gathered together, as Caesar marched against the Sequani
by the borders of the Lingones, to the end he might the easier relieve the
Province, Vercingetorix sat down about ten miles from the Romans in three
several camps, and calling the Captains and Colonels of horse to counsel, he
told them that the time of victory was now come; for the Romans left Gallia,
and fled into the Province: which was sufficient for the obtaining of their
present liberty, but availed little for the peace and quiet of future time,
forasmuch as the Romans did not purpose to make an end of the war, but to
return again with greater forces. And therefore it was necessary to set upon
them in their march lad^^ with carriages. If the foot did assist their horse,
then they were not able to make any way or proceed in their journey. But if
(which he hoped would rather happen) forsaking their carriages every man
shifted for himself, they would depart both robbed of their necessaries and of
their honor: for they need not doubt of the enemies horse, of whom he was most
assured that they durst not go out from amongst the foot forces. And to the end
they might be the better encouraged, he would draw all the forces in a
readiness out of the camp, and place them so as they might be a terror to the
enemy. The horsemen cried out all together, that this resolution might be
strengthened with an holy oath: Let him never be received under any roof, or
have access to his wife, children, or parents, that did not twice run
through the army of the enemy. The thing being well lik^d of, and every man
forced to take that oath, the next day he divided his cavalrie into three
parts: two armies showed themselves on each side, and the third began to make
stay of the vauward. Which being known, Caesar divided his horses likewise into
three parts, and sent them to make head against the enemy. At the same time
they fought in all parts, the army stood still, the carriages were received
within the Legions: if our men were overcharged any where, Caesar bent the
Legions that way, which did both hinder the enemy from following them, and
assure our men of hope of rescue. At length the Germans having possessed
themselves of a hill on the right side, did put the enemy from their place, and
followed them as they fled even to the river, where Vercingetorix stayed with
the foot companies, and slew many of them. Whereupon the rest fearing lest they
should be encompassed about, betook themselves to flight: execution was done in
all places. Three of the Nobility of the Hedui were taken and brought to
Caesar: Cotus the General of the horse, who at the last election of
Magistrates stood in controversy with Convictolitanis; and Cavarillus, who
after the revolt of Litavicus, commanded the foot troops; and Eporedorix, under
whose command, before Caesar's coming into Gallia, the Hedui made war with the
Sequani. All the cavalrie being put to flight, Vercingetorix drew in his forces
which he had imbattelled before his camp, and immediately after began to march
toward Alesia a town of the Mandubii, commanding the baggage to be speedily
brought out of the camp and to follow him. Caesar having conveyed his carriages
to the next hill, under the custody of two Legions, he followed the enemy as
long as the day would give him leave: and having slain some three thousand of
the rereward, the next day following he encamped at Alesia.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe Galls were much stronger then the Romans in Cavalry, Whether the cavalrie
or infanterie be of greater importance and use in a war.
both according to quantity and quality: but the Roman Infanterie was greater
in virtue and worth then any foot forces of the Galls, notwithstanding their
inequality in number. Which shows that the Romans did more rely upon their
legionary soldiers, then upon their Equites: and may serve for an argument in
the handling of that question, which is so much debated amongst men of war,
whether the horse or the foot companies be of greater importance in the
carriage of a war. Which indeed is a question a male d^visis: being both so
necessary for the perfect execution of martial purposes, as they cannot well
be disjoined. And if we look particularly in the nature of their several
services, we shall easily discern the differences, and be able to judge of the
validity of their parts.

Wherein first it cannot be denied, Footmen fitter ^o more services then
horsemen.
but that foot companies are serviceable to more purposes then troops of horse:
for the horsemen are of no use, but in open and champain places; whereas
footmen are not only of importance in fielden countries, but are necessary also
in mountainous or woodie places, in valleys, in ditches, in sieges, and in all
other parts of what site or nature soever, where the horsemen cannot show
themselves. Whereby it appears, that the infanterie extends its service to
more purposes then the cavalrie, and makes the war complete, which otherwise
would prove lame and uneffectuall.

Touching the weight of the business when it comes to a day of battle, The
main stroke in a day of battle is given by the footmen.
it rests for the most part upon the foot troops: for the horsemen are
profitable to the army wherein they serve, by making discoveries, by harrying
the enemies country, The use of horsemen.
by giving succor or rescue upon a sudden, by doing execution upon an
overthrow, and by confronting the enemies horse; but these are but as second
services, and fall short of the main stroke, which for the most part is given
by the footmen. Neither does a rout given to the cavalrie serving an army
royal, concern the body of that army further then the services before
mentioned; but the army does oftentimes go on notwithstanding, and may well
atchieve a happy victory: whereas upon the overthrow of the infanterie, the
horsemen have nothing to do, but to shift for themselves, and get away to their
own home. So that it appears that the foot companies are the bulk and body
of the army, and the horse as the arms and outward parts, having expedient
and necessary offices, but always subordinate to the main stroke given by the
foot.

If any man look for proof hereof by example, he shall not need to seek further
then the Romans, being masters of the art military, who by an ancient law
interdicting the Dictator to have the use of a horse in the wars for his
private case, The Dictator forbidden the use of a horse in the wars: and why.
intimated, as Plutarch says, the strength of their army to consist in their
footmen, which the General in a day of battle should assist with his
presence, and in no wise forsake them if he would. But touching the use of
war amongst them, their Equites were so far short of the service performed
by their foot troops, that when they would stand to it indeed, they forsook
their horses and fought on foot: as in the battle with the Latins at the lake
Regillus, which I have already mentioned in my former observations. Neither
were the Romans tood horsemen, as it seems by Caesar: for he took the horses
from the Tribunes and the Roman Equites, and gave them to the Germans, as
better Rutters then any Romans. But howsoever a State that abounds in horse,
and trusts more in them then in foot companies, may harrie a champain
country, but shall never be able to follow a war with that strength, as is
requisite to make it fortunate.

CHAP. XXX.
Caesar besieges Alesia, and fights with the enemies cavalry.
CAesar having viewed the site of the town, Caesar.
and knowing the enemy to be much troubled for the overthrow of their horse,
in whom they put all their hopes, exhorting the soldiers to take a little
pains, he determined to enclose the town round about with a ditch and a
rampire. Alesia was sited on the top of a hill, in a very eminent place, and
not to be taken but by a continued siege. At the foot of the hill ran two
rivers on each side of the town: before the town there lay a plain of three
miles in length: the other sides were enclosed round about in a reasonable
distance with hills of equal height with the town. Under the wall on the East
side lay all the forces of the Galls, having drawn a ditch and a dry wall on
that part of eight foot in height: the whole circuit of the works which the
Romans made to enclose the town about, contained eleven miles. Their camp was
sited in a convenient place, where there were made three and twenty castles,
which in the day time were kept by garr^sons, to prevent any sudden attempts
of the enemy, and in the night by strong watches. The work being begun, there
happened a skirmish between the cavalrie of both sides in that plain which lay
before the town of three miles in length. They fought eagerly on both sides.
Our men being overcharged, Caesar sent the Germans to second them, and set the
Legions before the camp, lest there might happen any sudden sally by the foot
of the enemy. Upon the safeguard of the Legions our men took courage. The enemy
was put to flight, and being many in number one hindered another, and stuck in
heaps in the straight passage of their gates. The Germans followed them close
to their fortifications, and made a great execution amongst them. Many of them
forsaking their horses attempted to leap the ditch, and to climb over the dry
wall. Caesar commanded the legions imbattelled before the camp to advance a
little forward. The Galls that were within the fortification were no little
troubled: for thinking the enemy would presently have come unto them, they
made an alarm: some were so frighted that they brake into the town.
Vercingetorix commanded the gates to be shut, lest the camp should be left
naked of defendants. Many of the enemy being slain, and very many horses
taken, the Germans fell off and returned to Caesar.

OBSERVATIONS.
FOrasmuch as casualtie and chance have oftentimes the prerogative of a
service, One event is not so certain for the approving of a cause, as when it
is seconded with another of like condition.
and in misdeeming opinions do carry away the honor from virtue and valor:
the first trial of a fortune is not of that assurance, nor so much to be
trusted, as when it is seconded again with the like effect: for when a matter
by often trial falls out to be of one and the same quality, it shows a
certainty of a cause, producing ends of like condition. The Galls (as it
seems) were much discouraged upon the first overthrow of their horse, in whom
they so much believed, and altered the course of their high resolutions so
far, as where before they swear the overthrow of the Romans, they were now
content to take the protection of a strong town: but this second foil which
they received, did so assure them of a harder confrontment and stronger
opposition then they were able to bear, that they never thought of any further
trial, but were content to go away losers, rather then to hazard their lives
in a third combat. And thus, when a second event backeth a former fortune, it
takes away the suspicion of casualtie, and makes the winner bold, and the
loser desperate. Pompey was so transported with joy for the blow which he gave
Caesar at Dyrrachium, that he sent letters of that days victory into all parts
of the world, and made his soldiers so secure touching the issue of that
war, ut non de ratione belli cogitarent, sed vicisse jam sibi viderentur,
that they never thought how the war was to be carried on, esteeming
themselves already absolute victors: not remembering, as Caesar says, the
ordinary changes of war; wherein oftentimes a small matter, either of a false
suspicion, or of a sudden fright, or some other accident, does endanger an
army, which the enemy takes to himself, perinde ac si virtute vicissent, as if
he had overcome by his valor.

CHAP. XXXI.
Vercingetorix sends away the horse: Caesar incloseth Alesia with a strong
wall.
VErcingetorix thought it best to dismiss all the horse, Caesar.
and send them away in the night, before the fortifications were perfected by
the Romans. At their departure he commanded them, that every man should repair
unto his own State, and send all to the war that were able to bear arms. He
lays open his deserts toward them, and does adjure them to have regard to
his safety, and not to suffer him to be delivered over to the torture of the
enemy, that had so well deserved of the common liberty; wherein if they should
prove negligent, fourscore thousand chosen men would perish with him in that
place. And looking into their provisions, he found that they had corn scarce
for thirty days, but by sparing and good husbandry it might be made to serve
longer. With these mandates he sent out the horsemen in silence about the
second watch of the night, at that part of the town where the works were not
perfected: he commanded all the corn to be brought unto him upon pain of death.
The cattle he distributed to the soldiers by pole, whereof there was great
store brought out from the Mandubii: the corn he began to measure out very
sparingly. All the forces which he had placed before the town, he received
within the walls; and so he purposed to attend the supplies of Gallia. Which
being known by therunne-awayes and captives, Caesar appointed to make these
fortifications. He drew a ditch of twenty foot in breadth and depth, with
straight sides, as broad at the bottom as at the top. The rest of the work he
made forty foot short of that ditch, which he did for these reasons; that the
whole body of the Romans might not easily be enclosed about with an army of
soldiers, which he thought to prevent by taking in so great a circuit of
ground; and secondly, lest the enemy sallying out upon a sudden, should in the
night come to destroy the works, or in the daytime trouble the soldiers with
darts and casting weapons as they were busied about the works. This space of
forty foot being left, he made two ditches of fifteen foot in breadth and
depth, the innermost whereof being carried through the fields and the lower
ground, he filled with water drawn out of the river. Behind them he made a
ditch and a rampire of twelve foot, and strengthened it with a parapet and
pinacles, and with great boughs of trees cut in cags like unto a Hearts horn,
which he set where the hovels were joined to the rampire, to hinder the enemy
from climbing up; and made towers round about the whole work, in the distance
of fourscore foot one from another. At the same time the Roman soldiers were
both to get stuff for the fortification, to go a harvesting for provision of
corn, and to make such great works. Our forces being much weakened, and being
to seek corn and stuff far off from the camp; the Galls also oftentimes
attempting to destroy the works, and to sally out of the town at diverse ports:
therefore Caesar thought it fit to add thus much more to the foresaid works,
that the fortifications might be made good with the less number of men. He
made ditches round about the works of five foot deep, and in them he planted
either the bodies of trees, or great firm boughs sharpened into many pikes and
snags, being bound together at the bottom, that they might not be easily
plucked up, and spreading themselves at the top into very sharp cags. There
were of these five ranks, so combined and infolded one in another, that which
way soever the enemy should enter upon them, he would necessarily run himself
upon a sharp stake* these they called Cippi. Before these, in oblique courses,
after the manner of a quincunce, were dug holes of three foot deep, narrow
at the bottom like a sugar loaf: these they set with round stakes of the
bigness of a man's thigh, with a sharp hardened point, in such sort that they
stuck not above four fingers out of the earth; and for the better fastening of
them, they stuck all a foot within the ground: the rest of the hole for the
better ordering of the matter, was hid with osiers and spreads. Of these were
eight courses three foot distant one from another: and these they called
Lillies, from the resemblance they had to the figure of that flower. Before
these were galthrops of a foot long fastened in the earth, and headed at the
top with barbed hooks of iron, sowed up and down in all places in a reasonable
distance one from another: and these they called Stimuli. The inner
fortifications being thus perfected, he followed the even and level ground as
much as the nature of the place would give him leave, and took in fourteen
miles in circuit, and made the like fortifications in all points against the
enemy without, as he had done against the town; to the end that if he were
driven upon occasion to depart and leave the works, it might be no danger for
him to leave the camp; forasmuch as a few men would defend it. He commanded
every man to have forage and provision of corn for thirty days.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
I Promised in my former observation to speak somewhat touching the Roman
works, and to show the use they made of them in their greatest occasions: but
this description of the works at Alesia, does so far exceed the enlargement of
commenting words, that it has drowned the eloquence of great Historians, and
in stead of expositions and inforcements, has drawn from them speeches
expressing greater admiration then belief. Circa Alesiam (says Paterculus)
tantae res gestae, quantas audere vix hominis, perficere nullius nisi Dei
fuerit: So great things were done at Alesia, that they might seem too great for
any man to attempt, or any but a god to effect. To enclose a town with a ditch
and a rampire of eleven miles in circuit, was a matter worthy the Roman army:
but to add such variety of works, and to make such strange trapes and
oppositions against an enemy, was admirable to the hearer; and not that only,
but to make the like works without, to keep the Galls from raising the siege,
did double the wonder: by which works he did besiege and was besieged, took the
town and overthrew the enemy in the field.

Such as since that time have imitated this industry only by a small ditch and
a rampire (for I think no man ever made such works) have wrought wonders in
matter of war. Castruccio got the name of renewing the ancient military
discipline in Italy, chiefly for that he besieged Pistoia, and with the help of
a double trench, according to the example of Caesar, he kept in the Pistoyans
on the one side, and kept out an army on the other side of thirty thousand
foot and three thousand horse, in such manner as in the end he took the city
and made their succors of no effect. The States army of the united Provinces
under the leading of Grave Maurice, did the like at the town of Grave in the
year 1602. But of this at Alesia may well be said that which Livy speaks of
the battle at Nola: Ingens eo die res, ac nescio an maxima illo bello gesta
sit: A great piece of service was done that day, and I think I may call it the
greatest in that whole war.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IT is here delivered, that the outward circuit of the works contained fourteen
miles, and the circuit of the inward works eleven miles: upon which ground
Justus Lipsius makes an unjust conjecture of the space between the outward and
the inward works where the Romans day encamped. Justus Lipsius mistaken.
For according to the proportion between the circumference and the diameter,
(...), Lib. 2. Dial. 2.
he makes the diameter of the greater circle four, and of the lesser three
miles: and then he takes the lesser diameter out of the greater, and
concludes the space to be almost a mile between the inner and the outward
rampire, where the Romans lay encamped between the works: and least the matter
might be mistaken in ciphers, he does express it at large in significant
words, whereby he makes the space twice as much as indeed it was. For the two
circles having one and the same center, the semidiameter of the one was to be
taken out of the semidiameter of the other, and the remainder would amount
almost to half a mile; which according to the ground here delivered, was the
true distance between the works, if the nature of the place (whereunto they had
a respect) would suffer them to keep the same distance in all parts. But
aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus, Homer himself is out sometimes; and no
disgrace neither to the excellency of his learning, deserving all honor for
the great light which he has brought to the knowledge of Histories, and for
redeeming the truth from blots and Barbarism.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Galls raise an army of 248000* to raise the siege at Alesia.
WHile these things were a doing at Alesia, the Galls having summoned a
Council of the Princes and chiefest men of each State, Caesar.
they thought it not convenient to take all that were able to bear arms,
according to Vercingetorix direction; but to proportion out a certain number
for every State; lest that of such a confused multitude there would be no
government, being not able to know their soldiers, or to martial them in any
good order, or to make provision of victual for so great a body. The Hedui
and their clients, the Segusiani, Ambivareti, Aulerci Brannovices, and
Brannovii, were commanded to send out five and thirty thousand: the Arverni
with their clients, the Heleuteri Cadurci, Gaballi, Velauni, as many: the
Senones, Sequani, Bituriges, Santones, Rutheni, Carnutes, twelve thousand: the
Bellovaci, ten thousand: the Lemovices as many: the Pictones, Turones, Parisii,
Heleuteri Suessiones, 8000: the Ambiani, Mediomatrices, Petrocorii, Nervii,
Morini, Nitiobriges, 5000: the Aulerci Cenomani, as many: the Atrebates, 4000.
the Bellocassi, Lexovii, Aulerci Eburones, 3000: the Rauraci and Boii 30000:
the States bordering upon the Ocean, whom by the custom of Gallia they call
Aremoricae, such as are the Curiosolites, Rhedones, Ambibarri, Cadetes,
Osismii, Lemovices, Veneti, Unelli, six thousand. Of these the Bellovaci
refused to give their number, saying, that they would make war with the
Romans in their own name, and according to their own directions, neither would
they serve under any man's command. Notwithstanding being entreated by Comius,
for his sake they sent two thousand. Caesar as we have heretofore delivered,
had used the help of this Comius the years before in Britain, being both
faithful and serviceable: in recompense of which service he had freed his
State of all duties to the Roman Empire, and restored unto them their ancient
laws and customs; and to himself he had given the Mor^^i. Notwithstand^ng
such was the universal consent of all Gallia, to redeem their liberty and
their ancient honor in matter of war, as neither friendship, nor the memory
of former benefits could any way move them, every man intending that war as
far as either the power of his mind or the possibility of his means would
reach unto: and having drawn together eight thousand horse, and two hundred and
forty thousand foot, they mustered their forces in the confines of the Hedui,
where they appointed captains; and the chief command was given to Comius of
Arras, and to Viridomarus and Eporedorix, Hedui, and to Vergasilaunus of the
Arverni, cousin-germa^n to Vercingetorix. To these there were certain chosen
out of every State to give assistance in council of war: and all of them
went jocundly and full of hope to Alesia. Neither was there any man that did
think, that the very sight of such a multitude was able to be endured,
especially when the fight would grew doubtfu^l by sallies made out of the town,
and so great forces of horse and foot should be seen without.

OBSERVATIONS.
VErcingetorix desire was to have had as many of the Galls sent to his rescue
as were able to bear arms, grounding himself upon that maxim; Where the whole
State is in question, there the whole forces of that State are to be employed.
But the other Princes of Gallia thought it not expedient to raise so great a
number: for they would have accrewed to such a multitude of people, as could
not have been contained within the rules of government* which may bring to our
consideration that which the course of these times does not often bring into
dispute: What number of men are a competent proportion for any service.
What number of men well martialled and with good discipline, are a competent
proportion for any service. Xerxes army which he carried into Greece, was
famous for two respects: First, in regard of the multitude, which was so great,
that when he himself returned back into Asia, he left behind him three hundred
thousand of the best soldiers chosen out of the whole army, under the conduct
of one Mardonius. Secondly, that of so many fighting men, there were two
hundred and threescore thousand slain in one battle, with the loss of one
thousand and three hundred Grecians. Whereby it appears, that the conquest of
a kingdom does not necessarily follow the multitude of soldiers in an army;
for either Xerxes army was too few in number to conquer Greece, or too many to
be well martialled.

Marius with fifty thousand men defeated the Cimbri that were so many in
number, Plutarch in the life of Marius.
as they made a battle of thirty furlong square, and of them he slew a
hundred and twenty thousand, and took threescore thousand prisoners. And for
that I do remember of that which I have read, the greatest conquests that ever
were made, were achieved with armies under fifty thousand fighting men. The
great Alexander subdued all Asia, and fet the Monarchy from the Persian into
Greece with thirty thousand men.

The Romans had very seldom ten legions in an army, which was about that rate,
but commonly their conquering armies were far under that proportion. Plutarch
in the life of Paulus Aemilius.
Paulus Aemilius only had a hundred thousand in his army against Perseus, and
won the battle in an hour. The condition of our times requires no dispute
touching this point, for we seldom see an army of fifty thousand men in the
field, unless it be the Turk or some such Monarch.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Critognatus his speech at Alesia, touching the keeping of the town.
THey that were besieged in Alesia, Caesar.
the day being past by which they looked for succor, their corn being spent,
and not knowing what was done abroad, entered into consultations touching the
end of their fortune; and diverse opinions being delivered, some of them tending
to the yielding up of the town, and others persuading that as long as strength
lasted there might be sallies continually made upon the enemy: I will not omit
the speech of Critognatus, for the singular and wicked cruelty which it
imported. He was a man of great birth and authority amongst the Arverni. I will
say nothing (says he) of their opinion, that call base servitude by the name
of rendry: neither do I think them fit to be accounted citizens, or to be
admitted to council of State. With them will I deal that like well of sallies,
in whose advice and counsel, even by all your consents, the memory of ancient
virtue seems to consist. It is no virtue, but a weakness of the mind, not to
be able to bear want a little while. It is an easier matter to find men that
will offer themselves willingly to death, then such as will endure labor with
patience. For mine own part, I could like well of that opinion, (for honor
much prevails with me;) if I did not see a further loss then of our lives.
But in these our consultations let us look upon all Gallia, whom we have called
together to succor us. What spirits do you think would our friends and kinsmen
conceive, fourscore thousand men being slain in one place, if they were
constrained to wage battle upon their dead carcases? I would not have you to
defraud them of your help, that do neglect all peril for your sake; nor by
your foolishness and your rashness, or the weakness of your mind, throw down
all Gallia, and cast it into perpetual bondage. Do you doubt of their faith
and constancy, because they came not by a day? What do the Romans then mean in
these outward works? Do you think they make them for exercise, or to pass away
the time? If you cannot then receive assurance by their messengers, all passage
being stopped, use them for witnesses that their coming is at hand, for fear
whereof they labor night and day. What then? my advice is that we do as our
forefathers did in a war against the Cimbri and Teutones, not equal to this,
who being shut up within their towns, and brought to the like necessity, did
satisfy their hunger with the bodies of such as were found unfit for war,
neither did they yield themselves unto the enemy: whereof if we had not an
example, yet I would judge it an excellent thing to be begun now for liberties
sake, and to be left to posterity. For what war was like this? Gallia being
wasted and dispeopled, and the kingdom brought into great misery, the Cimbri
at length forsook our country, and sought out other territories, and left unto
us our laws, customs, lands and liberty. For the Romans, what is it they
desire? or what would they have? But being drawn on with malice and envy, whom
they understood to be a noble and a warlike nation, their fields and cities
they did desire to take from them, and to yoke them with eternal bondage; as
never making war with other condition. For if you be ignorant what they do
far off in other countries, look at home in that part of Gallia which is
reduced into a Province. Their laws and customs being changed, it is subjected
to the axe and to perpetual servitude. Their opinions being delivered, they
decree, that such as through age or sickness were unfit for war, should
depart the town; and that they should prove all means, before they yielded to
Critognatus opinion: and yet if the matter so required, to consent unto it, and
to attend their succors rather then to yield to any rendry and condition of
peace.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT is oftentimes made questionable in the extremity of a siege, How long a
Commander may hold out in a siege.
how far the Commanders may go in continuing their resistance to the danger
and hazard of the people besieged. whether they may not in honor proceed as
far as Critognatus opinion would draw them: or how they may know when to
leave it, in the very point of discreet and valiant carriage. Which is to be
answered according to the quality of the enemy that gives siege to the place.
For against a t^eacherous and disloyal enemy, that makes profession of
infidelity, and would not stick after a composition to ensnare them in a
greater danger then the peril of death, there would be much endured rather
then to undergo so hard a fortune. And yet I do no way approve the cruel
resolution of this Gall, but do rather commend the example of the Hungarians at
the siege of Agria. Ag^i^.
For in the year 1562. Mahomet Bassa lay before that town with an army of
threescore thousand Turks, and laid battery to it with fifty canons. There
were within the Town two thousand Hungarians, who endured and put off thirteen
most terrible assaults of the enemy: and for the better strengthening of their
high resolution, they took a mutual oath that no man upon pain of death should
once speak of a treaty, or of giving up the Town, or to make any answer to the
enemy but by the harquebuse or the canon: And if the siege should happen to
continue long, rather to die for hunger then to put themselves in the hands of
so cruel and barbarous an enemy. They determined further, that such amongst
them as were not serviceable with a weapon, should attend continually to
^eenforce the rampire and repair the ruins. And to avoid treachery, they took
order that there might be no a^^emblies in the city above the number of three
together. They commanded likewise that all the victual as was either public
or private, should be divided into equal portions amongst the soldiers, and
the best of it should be reserved for such as were hurt in fight. It is further
reported, that the Bassa having oftentimes offered a treaty, they only showed
for an answer to his summons a funeral bier covered with black, lifted up
above the wall between two pikes, to signify thereby that they would not come
out but by death.

As this is a degree short of Critognatus resolution, so I do not deny but that
a General may give up a Town before he come to these terms with true honor
and wisdom. But the matter (as I have said) consists altogether upon the
circumstances interlaced. But that which is further to be observed in this
place, is the extreme contrariety of opinions, which are usually delivered
upon dispute of such difficult cases, wherein Quantum alteri sententiae deest
animi, tantum alteri superesse solet; one man's opinion speaks too much courage,
and another as much too little: Lib. 2. (...). civ.
as Curio said upon the like occasion. Medio tutissimus ibis, -- The mid's the
safest way, was Phoebus direction to his son Phaeton in a matter of
difficulty and great hazard, and observed in this place by the Galls.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
The Galls do set upon Caesar's camp, both from the town and the field side.
THe Mandubii, Caesar.
who had received the army into the town, were themselves thrust out with their
wives and children. They coming to the Roman works, did with weeping tears
beseech them to receive them into bondage, and relieve them with food. Caesar
gave order they should not be received, and set a guard on the rampire to keep
them out. In the mean time Comius, and the rest of the Captains, that had the
chief command given them, came to Alesia with all their forces, and having
taken a hill on the outside, they sat down not above half a mile from our
works. The next day bringing their cavalrie out of their camp, they filled all
that plain, which, as I have already said, extended three miles in length
before the town, setting their foot-forces a little distant from that place,
and hiding them upon higher ground. The prospect lay open out of the town into
the field: and upon the sight of these succors they ran together, and
congratulated each other, and all their minds were filled with gladness. And
thereupon the next day they brought their forces and placed them before the
town, and began to cover the next ditch unto them with hurdles, and to fill it
up with earth, and to provide themselves to sally out, and to endure all
chances. Caesar having disposed of all his army on each side of the works, that
if there were occasion, every man might both know and keep his place, he
commanded the cavalrie to be carried out of the camp, and to charge the enemy.
There was a fair view out of all the camps, which were seated round about upon
the ridge of the hill, and all men's minds were bent upon the expectation of the
event of the fight. The Galls had mingled amongst their horse some few archers
and light-armed soldiers, which might relieve their fellows being overcharged,
and sustain the force and assault of our horse. By these were many hurt upon a
sudden, and forsook the fight. The Galls being persuaded that their men had
the better of the fight, perceiving our men to be overcharged with multitude on
all sides, as well those that were besieged, as the other that came to relieve
them, they took up a shout and a howling to encourage their people. And
forasmuch as the matter was carried in the sight of all men, so that nothing
could be hid whether it were well or ill done; the desire of honor and the
fear of ignominy did stir up both sides to prowess and valor. And having
fought with a doubtful fortune from noontide until almost Sunsetting, the
Germans on the one side with thick-thronged troops gave a fierce charge upon
the enemy, and put them to flight whereby it happened that the archers were
circumvented and slain. In like manner on the other side, our mea finding them
to give ground, did follow them even to their camps, and gave them no time to
recover themselves. Such as were come out of Alesia, returned back sad into the
town despairing of victory. One day being intermitted, in which time they made
provision of great store of hurdles, ladders and hooks, about midnight they
marched silently out of their camp, and came to the works on the field side;
and taking up a sudden shout, to give notice of their coming to them of the
town, they cast their hurdles upon the ditches, and with slings, arrows, and
stones they began to put our men from the rampire, and to put in practice such
things as belong to a siege. At the same time the shout being heard,
Vercingetorix sounded the trumpet, and brought his men out of the town. Our men
betook themselves to the fortifications, according as every man's place was
allotted him the day before; and with slings and bullets which they had laid
ready upon the works, they did beat down the Galls, their sight being taken
away through the darkness of the night. Many wounds were received on both
sides, and many weapons were cast out of engines. M. Antonius, and C.
Trebonius, Legates, who had the charge of those parts where our men were most
laid to, caused men to be taken out of the further Castles, and to be brought
to second them. The Galls being a good way distant from the works, did much
hurt with multitude of weapons: but approaching nearer, either they struck
themselves unwittingly upon the galthrops, or falling into the holes, were
struck through the bodies with the sharp stakes, or died with murall piles,
being cast from the rampire and the towers. Many wounds being received on all
sides, as the day appeared, the Galls fearing lest they should be charged on
the open side by a sallie from the upper camp, retired back again to their
fellows. On the inner side, whilst they brought out such things as were
prepared beforehand by Vercingetorix, and were filling up the first ditches,
being somewhat long in the execution of these things, they understood that the
other Galls were departed before they themselves could come near the works:
and thereupon they returned into the town without doing any thing.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe Galls committed the command of this great army to four Generals, One
army would have one General.
contrary to practice of warlike nations, and the order which nature observes
throughout all the several kinds of creatures: amongst whom there was never
body found of many heads, but one Hydra, being made as it seems, or rather
feigned to be made, to the end that Hercules might have a task answerable to
himself, and make it one of his twelve labors to kill the beast. The serpent
Amphisibaena is said to have two heads, Et gravis in geminum caput Amphisibaena.
whereby she either loses the use of local motion, or at the least moves so
imperfectly, one head taking one way and the other another way, as there is no
certain or direct passage in her creeping.

These many-headed armies do resemble these serpents, being carried according
to the sense of their several heads, and distracted by the diversity of their
many Leaders. The government of Rome consisting of several magistrates having
sovereign authority, gave occasion oftentimes to make two heads to one body,
but with such success, as they were forced in the end to create one head for
the repairing of that loss, which the multiplicity of leaders had brought upon
their State; as it happened in the war against the Fidenates revolted, which
nothing but their recourse to a Dictator could make happy to their Empire.
Whereupon Livie says; Tres Tribuni, potestate consulari, documento fuere quam
plurium imperium bello inutile esset; tentando ad sua quisque consilia, cum
ali^ aliud v^deret^r, aperuerunt ad occasionem locum hosti: The three Tribunes
with consular power, clearly showed how inconvenient a thing it is to have more
then one commander in chief: for while every one adheres to his own advice and
judgment, one man thinking this thing convenient, another that, they open a
way to the enemy to make advantage against them. In the time of their Consuls,
Quintius and Agrippa being sent against the Aequi, Agrippa referred the
business wholly to his colleague, concluding as Livie says: Saluberrimum in
administratione magnarum rerum est summum imperii ad unum esse; It is the
safest way in the managing of great affairs to have one man bear the chief
sway. And therefore as one body requires but one head, so one business would
have but one directour, Tacit^s.
forasmuch as Aemulatio inter pares, and ex eo impedimentum; Aemulation, and
consequently hinderance, will be amongst equals.

CHAP. XXXV.
The Galls do choose out sixty thousand of their best men, and do assault the
weakest part of Caesar's camp.
THe Galls being repelled twice with great loss, Caesar.
do fall into consideration what they were next to do. They call unto them such
as were well acquainted with the nature and site of the place, by whom they
understand of the situation of the upper camp. On the north side there lay a
hill, which by reason of the greatness of the circuit, our men could not take
in within the compass of their works: and thereupon were necessarily
constrained to lay their camp in an unequal place somewhat shelving. This part
was kept by Caius Antistius Rheginus, and Caius Caninius Rebilus with two
Legions. This being known by the discoverers, the Captains of the enemy chose
out sixty thousand of those States which carried the greatest opinion of
manhood, and did secretly determine amongst themselves, how and in what sort
they would have the service carried, and do determine to put it in execution
when the Sun should be near about the noon meridian, appointing Vergasilaunus
to command those forces, being one of the four Captains, and kinsman to
Vercingetorix. He going out of the camp in the first watch of the night, came
to the end of his journey a little before day, and hiding himself behind a
hill, commanded his soldiers to refresh themselves from the former nights
travel. And when it began to be toward noon, he made toward that part of the
camp which I have before mentioned: and at the same time the horsemen began to
approach toward the works, and the rest of the forces showed themselve; before
the camp. Vercingetorix perceiving this out of the watchtower of Alesia, went
out of the town, and carried with him long poles, hooks, and such other
provisions which he had made ready before hand for a salley. They fought at one
instant in all places, all ways were tried: and where they thought it to be
weakest, thither they ran. The Roman forces were dismembered by reason of the
large extension of their works, so that they could not easily defend many
places: and the shout which was made behind their backs, did much affright our
men, forasmuch as they perceived that their danger did consist in other men's
valor. for such things as are absent do for the most part greatly perplex and
trouble men's minds. Caesar having got a convenient place, does see what is done
in every part: if any were overcharged he sent them succor, and was ready to
answer all occasions on both sides the camp. He told them that that was the
time, wherein it was behovefull for them to fight. The Galls would despair of
all good success, unless they brake down the works. The Romans if they
obtained their purpose, might expect an end of their labors. The greatest
contention was about that place to which Vergasilaunus was sent. A small rising
in a place does give much advantage in a shelving descent. Some cast weapons,
others put themselves into a Testudo, and came under the works. The wearied and
overlaboured were seconded by fresh supplies. Every man cast earth into the
works, which raised it so high, that the Galls had advantage of ascent: and
the pikes and sharp stakes which the Romans had cunningly hid under the earth
to annoy the enemy, were thereby covered. It came at last to that pass that
our men wanted both strength and weapons. Which being known, Caesar sent
Labienus with six cohorts to relieve those hat were overcharged, commanding him
(if the could not bear out the charge) to sally out upon them, but not unless
he were constrained unto it. He himself went about to the rest; adhorting them
not to faint under their labor, forasmuch as the fruit and benefit of all
their former battles consisted in that day and that hour. The enemy within
being out of hope of doing any good upon the works made in plain and champain
places, by reason of the strength of the fortifications, tried what they could
do in steep and broken places; and thither they brought those things which they
had prepared. With the multitude of their casting weapons, they cast out such
as fought from turrets, they filled their passages with hurdles and earth, they
brake down the parapet and the rampire with hooks. Caesar sent first young
Brutus with six cohorts, and after him Fabius a Legate with seven more, and at
length as the fight waxed hot, he went himself with a fresh supply. The fight
being renewed and the enemy beaten off, he hasted to that place whither he had
sent Labienus, and took four cohorts out of the next Castle. Part of the
horsemen he commanded to follow him, and the rest to compass about the outward
works, and to set upon the enemy behind. Labienus finding that neither rampire
nor ditches were able to keep out the enemy, having got such forces together as
were drawn by chance from the works nearest hand, to the number of thirty nine
cohorts, he acquainted Caesar by messengers what he thought fit to be done.
Caesar made haste to be at the fight. His coming being known by the color of
his garment, which he was accustomed to wear in time of battle, and the troops
of horse and the cohorts being discovered which he had commanded to follow him,
as the shelving and declining places were subject to the view of higher
grounds; the enemy begun the fight. a great shout was taken up on both sides.
Our men having thrown their piles, betook themselves to their swords. Suddenly
the horsemen were discovered behind them, and other cohorts made their
approches toward them. The enemy turned his back and fled: the horsemen met
them as they fled. the slaughter was great in that place. Sedulius, a Captain
and Prince of the Lemovici, was slain. Vergasilaunus was taken alive.
Threescore and fourteen ensigns were brought unto Caesar: and very few of so
great a number returned safe into their camp. Those of the town beholding the
slaughter and flight of their friends, being out of all hope, drew back their
forces from the works. This being known, the Galls fled presently out of their
camp: and if the soldiers had not been wearied with that days labor, they
might easily have destroyed all their enemies. About midnight the horse being
sent out to fall upon the rereward, a great number was taken and slain, the
rest escaped into their countries.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT is an old saying of a hungry man, That it is an easier matter to fill his
belly then his eye: which is as true in other cases; wherein our desires are
oftentimes so great, that we think no means sufficient to accomplish the same:
but when we shall come to put it in trial, and suffer every man to be measured
with his own foot, it will appear that our desires are better applied to the
infinity of the mind, then to the necessary occasions of our life.
Vercingetorix was so far interessed in the success of this war, that he
thought all the able men of Gallia not enough to make it happy unto him: but
the other Princes that were not so deeply touched, and yet stood as well
affected to the cause, refused to inrole all that were able to bear arms, but
thought two hundred forty and eight thousand men to be a competent force for
this service. But coming to the execution of the business, they employed only
sixty thousand: and when they failed of their endeavor, and were routed and
overthrown by the Romans, the rest staid no longer to dispute the matter, but
sled all away by night. Which shows the difference between the affections
which are forerunners of a cause, and such as grow and increase with a
business, and are not commonly found in one and the same subject in their
greatest strengths. For these antecedent desires are like women's longings; A
little is enough to save a longing.
strong and violent at first, but decaying as fast again before they come to
any ripeness: whereas such affections as rise from the carriage of a
business, and grow from the occurrences of that proceeding, are not so easily
abated, but do hold out strong either for constancy or obstinacy.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Vercingetorix yields himself and the town to Caesar.
THe next day Vercingetorix having called a Council, Caesar.
told them, that he had not undertook that war for his own occasions, but for
the cause of common liberty: and forasmuch as they were necessarily to yield to
fortune, he made offer of himself unto them, either to satisfy the Romans with
his death, or to be delivered unto them alive. Ambassadors were sent to Caesar
touching that point. He commanded their arms to be delivered, and the Princes
to be brought out. He himself sat in the fortifications before the camp:
thither the captains were brought, Vercingetorix was delivered; their weapons
were cast out. The Hedui and the Arverni being reserved, to the end he might
recover the rest of the States by them; of the rest of the captives, he gave
throughout all the army, to every man a prisoner, by the name of a b^otie.
These things being ended, he went to the Hedu^, and received in the State.
Thither did the Arverni send Ambassadors unto him, promising to obey
whatsoever he commanded. He demanded a great number of hostages, and sent the
Legions into their wintering camps. He sent home twenty thousand captives to
the Hedui and the Arverni. He sent T. Labienus with two Legions and the horse
into the Sequani, and gave him M. Sempronius Rutilius to assist him. He lodged
C. Fabius and Lucius Minutius Basilius with two legions amongst the men of
Rhemes, lest they should receive any damage by the near bordering Bellovaci. He
sent C. Antistius Reginus to the Ambivareti, and T. Sextius to the Bituriges,
and C. Caninius Rebilus to the Rutheni, with each of them a Legion. He placed
Q. Tullius Cicero and P. Sulpitius at Cavillonis and Matiscona of the Hedui
upon the river Arar, for provision of corn: he himself determined to winter at
Bibract. These years service being known at Rome, there was a feast of
thanksgiving appointed for twenty days together.

OBSERVATIONS.
VErcingetorix notwithstanding a hard fortune, entertained a noble resolution:
for having first acquainted the Galls that he had not undertook that war for
any respect to himself, but for the cause of Gallia, and the ancient liberty
of that continent; he made offer to satisfy the angry Romans with his body
dead or alive.

Plutarch recites the manner of his deliverie to be in this sort: Plutarch in
the life of Caesar.
Being armed at all parts, and mounted on a horse furnished with a rich
caparison, he came to Caesar, and rode round about him as he sat in his chair
of Estate; then lighting off his horse, he took off his caparison and
furniture, and unarmed himself, and laid all on the ground, and went and sat
down at Caesar's feet, and said never a word. Caesar at length committed him as
a prisoner taken in the wars, to be led afterward in his triumph at Rome:
but the civil wars did cut off that solemnity.

If it be demanded, what became of these great Princes and personages after the
triumph: It will appear that they did not stroke their heads, or make more of
them then of miserable captives. For Paulus Aemilius, Plutarch in the life of
Paulus Aemilius.
after the noble triumph for king Perseus, pitying his fortune and desiring to
help him, could never obtain other grace for him, then only to remove him from
the common prison, which they called Carcer, into a more cleanly and sweeter
house: where being straightly guarded, he died, either by abstinence, or being
kept from sleep by the soldiers. Two of his sons died also, but the third
became an excellent Turner or Joyner, and could write the Roman tongue so well,
that he afterward became Chancellor to the Magistrates of Rome. And thus the
Romans dealt with their captive Princes, making them examples of Fortunes
unconstancy, and turning their diadems into shackles of iron.

And thus far did Caesar comment himself upon the wars he made against the
Galls, being a noble and a worthy people, and bred in a large and fertile
Continent; the inhabitants whereof have in all ages, even to these times,
challenged an eminency, both for politic government and martial prowess,
amongst the Western kingdoms of the world: their actions and carriage from
time to time deserving as honorable memory, as these wars recorded by
Caesar's own hand; whereof Paulus Aemilius, Philip Commines, and of late John de
Seres are very pregnant witnesses. They continued under the Roman government
four hundred forty and one years, according to the computation made by John
Tillius, reckoning from the last victory in Caesar's Proconsulship, to the time
of Marcomerus a General of the French, by whose prowess and means they denied
to pay that homage and tribute to the Emperor Valentinianus, which
Vercingetorix had lost to Caesar.

The next Summers service compiled by Hirtius, I have purposely omitted, as
intending no further matter then what Caesar has related, who best knew the
whole project of that business.

And thus ends the seventh and last Commentary, written by Caesar of the
war he made in Gallia.

FINIS.
OBSERVATIONS Upon CAESAR'S COMMENTARIES of the CIVIL VVARRES betwixt HIM and
POMPEY.

By CLEMENT EDMUNDS Remembrancer of the City of London.

LONDON, Printed by ROGER DANIEL: 1655.

The first Commentary of the Civil VVarres.
The Argument.
THis Commentary contains the Motions and Contentions at Rome, concerning
Caesar's giving up his government: The rent in the State, upon the disagreement
of the Senate: How either side bestirred themselves, to seize upon the
Provinces. Pompey got the East, and Caesar the West part of the Empire; and
defeated Afranius and Petreius in Spain.

CHAP. I.
The Senates affection on Caesar's behalf.
LEtters being delivered by Fabius to the Consuls from C. Caesar, Caesar.
it was hardly obtained by the extreme importunity of the Tribunes, to get
them read in the Senate: but to consult thereof, or to bring the Contents in
question, would not be granted. The Consuls propounded businesses concerning
the state of the City. L. Lentulus, Consul, protested his assistance should not
be wanting, neither to the Senate nor to the Commonweal, if they would speak
their minds freely and boldly: but if they respected Caesar, and had an eye to
his favor (as in former times they usually had) he would then take a course
for himself, and not regard the authority of the Senate; neither wanted he
means of entrance into Caesar's friendship and good acceptance. To the same
effect spoke Scipio; That Pompey was resolved to be aiding to the Commonweal,
if the Senate would stand to him: but if they temporized, and dealth coldly, in
vain hereafter should they seek aid from him, albeit they instantly desired it.
This speech of Scipio's seemed to come from Pompey's own mouth, he himself
being present, and the Senate kept within the City. Some others spoke more
temperately. As first M. Marcellus, who thought it not convenient that the
Senate should bring these things in question, until they had made a levy of
soldiers throughout all Italy, and enrolled an Army; by whose protection,
they might safely and freely determine what they thought fit. At also M.
Calidius, who thought it requisite, that Pompey should go to his Provinces and
Governments, to remove all occasions of taking Arms: For Caesar having two
Legions newly taken from him, feared that Pompey kept them near about the city
to his prejudice. And likewise M. Rufus, varying some few words, declared
himself of Calidius opinion. All these were bitterly reproved by L. Lentulus
the Consul; who utterly denied to publish what Calidius had sentenced.
Marcellus feared with these menaces, retracted his opinion. And so, what with
the clamor of the Consul, the terror of the present Army, and the threatening
used by Pompey's faction, most of the Senators were compelled against their
will, to allow that which Scipio thought fit: which was, that by a certain day
Caesar should dissolve and dismiss his Army; which if he did refuse to do,
that then he openly showed himself an Enemy to the Commonweal. M. Antonius and
L. Cassius, Tribunes of the people, did oppose this decree. Their opposition
was instantly spoken unto; and many sharp and hard censures were given upon the
same: for according as any one spoke most bitterly and cruelly, so they were
most highly commended by Caesar's Enemies.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
AS the former Commentaries do carry in their front the ensigns of honor,
displaying the military valor of the Roman people in the Continent of Gallia,
and other Kingdoms of warlike Nations: so are these Relations branded in the
forehead with a note of Infamy, and titled with the direful name of Civil
war. An odious and decried cause, ill befitting the integrity of that State, or
the excellency of the Actours, which are chief in this Tragedy; who neglecting
all that might either enlarge the Empire, or repair Romes honor for the loss
of Crassus, chose rather to imbrew their ambitious swords in the blood of their
own Country, P^tes Aquilas, and pil^ minantia p^^s Bella ge^i pla^u^e ^ull^s
habitura triumph^s. Luc. lib. 1.
Eagle against Eagle, and Pile against Pile, in a war which could challenge no
Triumph. If it be now demanded, as formerly it was,

Quis furor, o Cives? quae tanta licentia ferri?
What fury's this? what these licentious arms?
Was it Pompey's Ambition, or Caesar's high Thoughts, that bereft the State of
liberty, with the loss of so many Romans? It were besides the scope of these
discourses, to lay an imputation upon either of those Worthies; the one being
chief Assistant to the Empire, when she put off her Consulary Government, and
the other sitting sole at the helm, directing a course to fetch in many
Caesar's. Only this I may truly say with Tacitus; Arm^ civilia neque parati,
neque haberi, per bon^s Arts possun^. Tac. 1. An.
That Civil wars were never set on foot by justifiable courses. Yet for the
Readers better direction, and for opening the truth of this story ( Amicus
Socrates, amicus, Pl^to: m^g^s amica veritas. Aristo. 1. Ethic. Pom. Mag.
Constantine was ^o jealous thereof, that he published an Edict, that the honor
of all victori^s should be attributed to him, although they were achieved 100.
leagues off.
which is more to be regarded then either Socrates or Plato's friendship) it
shall not be impertinent to fetch the causes of this war a little higher in a
word then these Commentaries do afford them.

The histories of that age do all intimate, that when Rome had ennobled Pompey
with her service, and styled him by employments with the title of Greatness,
as a satisfaction for the injuries done unto his father; he (forgetting the
rights of a State, which challenges the renown of other men's labors, and
suffers no subject to be co-partner therein, further then by approbation of
service and obedience) assumed to himself the honor due to the Commonweal, and
became proud of that which was none of his: in which conceit, the ambition of
his spirit kept no measure, but over-valued his merits so far, that he thought
himself rather a Sovereign then a servant. So easily are men bewitched, when
the favor of a State has once made them absolute, and put it self under the
awe of private command. In this height of greatness and authority, he made way
for Caesar, his father in law; who had a spirit as subject to ambition, and as
capable of public dignities, as any one amongst all the Patrician Families:
and upon the ending of his first Consulship, in the year of Rome 695, obtained
the government of Gallia Transalpina, and likewise of that other Gallia which
they called Cisalpina, containing the Countries that lie between the Alps and
the Font cadit medico, parvisque impellitur undis Puni^eas Rubicon, and
Gallica ^^rtus Limes ab Aus^niis disterminat (...) colonis. Lucan. lib. 1.
little River Rubicon, together with Sclavon^a, and four legions of soldiers,
for the term of five years. At the expiration whereof, his charge was
continued, by the like favor and meditation of Facta tribus dominis communis
Roma -- Pompe^o Caesari and Crasso.
Pompey, and the assistance of Crassus, for five years longer, with a
redoubling of his forces. But after that Crassus was slain in the Parthian war,
and that Julia, Caesar's daughter, whom Pompey had married, was deceased
(whereby Caesar stood single, without any tie of alliance, or other Nam sola
futuri Crassus erat belli m^^dius mor --
counterpoise of a third party, to hold them balanced at the same weight as
they stood while Crassus lived) Pompey, jealous of those victories and passages
of Arms which Caesar had achieved by his valor, and impatient of any Nulla
sancta societas, nec fides regni. Ennius. Nec querquam jam far potest,
Caesarve priorem, Po^peiusve parem -- Luc. lib. 1.
partner in point of Lordship; found means first to draw two legions from him,
under color of the Parthian war; and afterward got a Decree of Senate, to
send him a successor before his time was expired; and withal, to return as a
private person to Rome, to render an account of his Actions during his
employment. Which Caesar taking as an assurance of his downfall, gave Ardua res
haec est, opibus non tradere mores. Martial.
huge sums of money to gain Paulus Aemilius, one of the Consuls, and C. Curio, a
Tribune of the people, to resist this Decree. Howbeit, the succeeding Consuls
being both his enemies, having no farther hope of repealing the same, he
entreated in the end, that he might hold only Gallia Cisalpina and Illyricum
with two legions, until he should obtain the Consulship; which was the effect
of these Letters delivered by Fabius. And being denied by Pompey's faction, in
these partial and tumultuous assemblies of the Senate, caused him to forfeit
his loyalty to the State, verifying the old saying, Saepe majori fortunae locum
fecit injuria. Seneca Epist. 91.
That oftentimes an injury makes way to a greater fortune.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COncerning the opposition of the Tribunes, The Tribunes of the people.
it is to be understood, that the people eaten up with usurie and other
grievous exactions, forsook both the City and the Camp, when the State had war
with the Volsci and the Aequi; and taking themselves to a Mountain near unto
Rome, would not return from thence, until the Senate had given order for their
grievances. In which transaction it was agreed, that there should be
Magistrates chosen out of the body of the people, to counterpoise the power of
the Senate, and to restrain the boundless authority of the Consuls: which
office was reckoned in the number of their holiest things, never to be violated
either in word or deed, but the offender should redeem it with the loss of his
life. Their whole power consisted in letting and hindering. As when either the
Senate, or any one Senator, went about a matter which might be prejudicial to
the people in general, or to any one of the commonalty in particular; then did
the Tribunes interpose their authority, to frustrate and avert the same: which
was availeable, albeit the matter was gainsaid but by one Tribune only. By
which intervention they kept the Senate in awful moderation, and were always
profitable to the State, but when they happened upon factious and turbulent
persons; howbeit, their power was bounded with the walls of Rome, and extended
no further then the gates of the City. Their doors were never shut, but stood
open night and day, for a refuge to such as should fly to them for succor:
neither was it lawful for them to be absent from Rome a whole day together.
The robes of their Magistracy were of Purple; as Cicero intimates in his
oration Pro Cluentio. This Tribunitian power began about the year of Rome 260;
was suppressed by Sylla; restored by Pompey; and utterly taken away by the
Emperor Constantine.

If it be demanded what kind of Commonwealth this Roman government was; What
kind of Commonwealth was this of Rome.
it is to be understood, that upon the expulsion of their Kings, the
sovereignty rested in their Consuls. For, as Libe^tatis originem inde magis,
quia annuum consulare Imperium factum est, quam quod diminutum q^icquam sit
e^^egia potestate, numores. Live. lib. 2.
Livie says, there was nothing diminished of kingly government, save only for
the better establishing of liberty, that the Consular dignity was made Annual.
But that held not long, for Publicola imparted this sovereignty to the
Communalty, making it lawful to appeal from the Consuls to the people.
Whereby His legibus dissolutum est imperium consulare. etc. Live. lib. 4.
the Consular sovereignty was dissolved, and the people took occasion to oppose
themselves against the Fathers. Hence grew the reciprocal invectives between
the Senate and the Tribunes; and when the Consul sent a Lictor.
Sergeant to the Tribune, the Tribune would send a Vi^tor.
Pursevant to the Consul. And so the Commonwealth halted between an Aristocracy
and a Democracy, until at length the vogue of the Communalty drew it to a
perfect Democracy, and made their Acts of Senate of no value, unless they were
ratified by the people. Howbeit, the Senate afforded always many famous and
eminent men, such as having enlarged the bounds of their Empire, and kept on
foot their ancient valor, and were the flower of that people, Cyneas
interrogatus a Pyr^ho qualis Roma asset; Respondit, Regum urbem sibi videri.
Just. lib. 8.
which Cyneas called a town of kings, were consequently so engaged in the
businesses of the State, that matters were for the most part carried as they
stood affected; as appears by this passage of Caesar.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THirdly, Faction in a Council, is an enemy to the public good.
we may observe, that violence and partiality are the bane of all
consultations: especially, when the common good is shadowed with private
respects. And albeit the gravity of the Roman Senate far exceeded all that can
be spoken of other Councels of State, rectifying the inordinate affections of
any Catiline that would lift up his head higher then his fellows: yet here it
suffered equity and indifferency to be suppressed with faction, giving way to
violence, Nam male cuncta minist^^t impetus, and stimulat non rato privati odii
pertinaci^ in publicum e^itium. Tac. 1. hist.
which governs all things untowardly, and with cords of private hate
oftentimes draws the Commonwealth into utter desolation. For prevention
whereof, the Athenians swore their Senators to make the common good the
chiefest scope of all their counsels: Atheniensis Senator jurabat se praecipue
populo consulturum. Demost conc. Naearc.
Implying thereby, that private respects are always offensive to public ends;
and the State ever suffers, when favor prevails against the common profit.

Tully going about to direct a Counselor in this behalf, only wishes a man
to deliver sincerely what he thinks of any matter, 1. Philipp.
although he happen to stand alone in his own conceit: for the issue of a
business does not so much concern a Counselor, as to speak truly his
opinion thereof. And to that end, the custom of the Roman Senate was, that the
youngest, and such as came last in place should declare themselves first; that
they might not be forestalled in their opinions, nor put besides that they
would have spoken; together with the equality which it made of their voices:
for things first spoken, do always stick fastest in our apprehensions. And for
that cause, Arist. 7. polit. 17.
Theodorus (a Greek Tragedian) would never show himself on the stage after any
other Actour; as holding the first passages to affect most the Spectatours.
Notwithstanding which custom, Sueton, in vita Julii Caesaris.
it is reported that Caesar, in favor of Pompey, after their new-made
alliance, would take his voice first, thereby to anticipate the opinion of
others that should follow.

The Emperors (as it seems) took what place they pleased: Tacit. 1. Annal.
for Tiberius, in Marcellus cause, said, that he would sentence openly, and
upon oath, that other men might do the like. Whereunto Cn: Piso replied; What
place will thou take to declare thy self, Caesar? for if thou speak first, I
know how to follow; if last, I am afraid I shall dissent from thy opinion. But
that which is most blameable in matter of counsel is, when they come to the
Senate house as to a prize of flattery. Tacit. 6. Annal.
Wherein L. Piso is deservedly commended, for that he never willingly showed
himself of a servile opinion; but when necessity forced him, he tempered it
with wisdom. Neither is it the least mischief, that the condition of
sovereignty is such as will hardly endure reproof, but must be disguised,
Plutarch.
as Apollonius corrected Lions, by bearing Dogs before them.

CHAP. II.
The Senate proceed against Caesar with all eagerness.
THe Senate rising a little before night, Caesac.
were all sent for to Pompey. He commended the forward for what they had done,
and confirmed them for after resolutions; reprehended such as showed themselves
indifferent, and stirred them up to more forwardness. Many which were of
Pompey's former Armies were sent for, upon of reward and advancement: Many of
the two legions which lately came from Caesar, were commanded to attend;
insomuch as the City swarmed with soldiers against the election of new
Magistrates. C. Cu^io called out the Tribunes of the people. All the Consuls
friends, the kinsfolks and allies of Pompey, and such others as had any former
enmity with Caesar, were compelled into the Senate. By the presence and votes
of these men the weakest were terrified, the doubtful confirmed, and the most
part were cut off from giving absolute and free voices. L. Piso the Censor, and
L. Ro^cius the Praetor, offered themselves to go to Caesar, to advise him of
these things; requiring but six days space to return an answer. Others thought
it fit, that Ambassadors should be sent to Caesar, to give him notice of the
pleasure of the Senate. To all these was opposed what the Consul, Scipio, and
Cato thought fit. Cato was incited through former enmity, and specially by the
repulse of the Praetorship. Lentulus, out of a consideration of his great
debts, hoping to command an Army, to govern Provinces, and to receive the
liberal acknowledgements of Kings, whom he should thereby procure to be styled
with the Title of friends to the people of Rome; insomuch as he would not stick
to boast in private, that he was like to prove a second Sylla, on whom the
sovereign command of the Empire would be conferred. Scipio was drawn on by the
same hope of having the government of a Province, or the command of an Army,
which by reason of his alliance he thought to share with Pompey; being
otherwise afraid to be called into justice; as also through flattery and
ostentation, both of himself, and other great friends, which were able to sway
much, as well in the course of justice, as in the commonwealth.

Pompey in his particular was much provoked by Caesar's enemies, Pompeius ut
primum ^empab. ^ggressus est, non quemquam animo pa^em (...) Vell^ias Pater ^ul.
and specially for that he could endare no man to be his equal. He was
alienated altogether from Caesar's friendship, and had reconciled himself to
their common Enemies; the greatest part of whom were by his means gained to
Caesar, in the time of their alliance. He was also moved by the dishonor which
he had gotten by taking those two legions from their journey toward Asia and
Syria, and using them for the advancement of his own particular. Which things
moved him to draw the matter to Arms. For these respects all things were
carried ^mp^tuously and confusedly; neither was (...) sure given to Caesar's
friends to advertise him thereof; nor yet to the Tribunes, to avoid the danger
which was falling upon them, or to use their right of opposition which L. Sylla
left unto them: but within seven days after they were entered into their
office, they were forced to shift for their safety; notwithstanding that the
most turbulent and seditions Tribunes of former times, were never put to look
into their affairs, or to g^ve account of their actions, before the eighth
Month. In the end, they betook themselves to that extreme and last Act of
Senate, which was never thought upon, but when the city was upon the point of
burning, or in the most desperate estate of the Commonweal: That the Consuls,
Praetors, Tribunes of the people, and such as had been Consuls, and were
resident near about the city, should endeavor that the Commonweal might not be
endangered. Ne quid respub, detrimenti capiat. Consecuti sunt dies Co^^iales,
per quos senatus haberi non poterat. Cic. L. frat^i.
This Act was made the seventh of the Ides of January: so that the five first
days, in which the Senate might sit, after that Lentulus was entered into the
Consulship (excepting only two days for the general assembly of the people)
most heavy and cruel Decrees were made against the authority of Caesar, and
against the Tribunes of the people, famous and worthy men; who thereupon fled
presently out of the city, and came to Caesar: who being then at Ravenna,
attended an answer to his easy and modest demands, if by any reasonable course
matters might be drawn to a peaceable end.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IT is the condition of humane nature, to make good that which once it has
avouched, although the matter be of small consequence in particular, and
tends rather to infamy then to profit; neither will it easily be reclaimed by
motives of reason, but is rather incited thereby (per Antiperistasin) to
persist in wilfulness, then to hearken to that which is more convenient; Ut
gratia oneri, sic ultio in quaestu habetur, Tac.
especially, when either jealousy or revenge do imply an advantage: for then
partiality keeps no measure; but to justify an error, runs headlong into
all extremities, and ^^eth to the last refuge of desperate and deplored cases,
to make disordered passions seem good discretion. Which evidently appears by
Pompey's faction, in resolving of that desperate Act of Senate, which was never
thought of but in most eminent danger. For as in foul weather at sea, when a
ship rides in a dangerous road, and through the violence of the tempest, is
upon the point of shipwreck, the Mariners are wont to cast out a sheet-Anchor
as their last refuge: Suprema lex Salus reipub.
so had Rome anciently recourse to this Decree, at such times as the
Commonwealth was in imminent and extreme calamity; whether it were by enemies
abroad, or by serpents in their bosom at home. Lib. 3.
Livie speaking of the war of the Aequi, says; The Senators were so
affrighted, that following the form of the Decree which was always reserved
for cases of extremity, they ordained that Post humius (one of the Consuls)
should take care that the Commonwealth might not be endangered. The like was
used in civil and intestine seditions: as when Manlius Capitolinus aspired to
a Tyranny; Plutarch in the life of Cicero.
and as likewise in the tumults of the Gracchi, the conspiracy of Catiline, and
other times of like danger. For albeit the Consuls had all sovereign authority,
as well in war as in peace: yet nevertheless there were certain reserved
cases wherein they had no power, without express order from the Senate, 5.
Philip. Cons^lious totam Rempub. commendendam censco, ^isque permittendum ut
rempub. defendant, provideantque nequid detrimenti respub. accipiat.
and assent from the people; as, to levy an Army to make war, to take money
out of the Treasury: whereas upon such a Decree, they were enabled to dispose
of all businesses of State, without further moving of the Senate or people,
which Tully notes in his Orations against Antonie. I think it fit (says he)
that the whole state of the Commonweal be left unto the Consuls, and that they
be suffered to defend the same; and to take care that the Commonweal be not
endangered.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
I May not omit (for the better understanding of this noble History) to say
somewhat of the Persons here mentioned. And first of Fabius, Fabius.
as descended of the noblest and most ancient Family of the Patrician Order;
being able of themselves to maintain war a long time against the Veij, a
strong and warlike town, until at length they were all unfortunately slain by
an ambushment: 2. De Fastis.
which Ovid mentions, where he says;

Haec fuit illa dies, in qua, Veientibus arvis,
Tercentum Fab^iter cecidere duo.
This was that black day, when in Veian field
Three hundred and six Fabi^ were killed.
Only there remained of that house a child then kept at Rome; which in tract
of time multiplied into six great Families, all which had their turn in the
highest charges and dignities of the Commonweal: amongst whom, he that
supplanted Hannibal by temporizing, and got thereby the surname of Maximus,
Fab. Max.
was most famous, as Ennius witnesses;

Unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem:
Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem.
Ergo postque magisque viri nunc gloria claret.
One man by wise delay has saved our State;
Who rumors after public safety set.
For which his fame grows every day more great. But C. Fabius, here mentioned,
never attained to any place of Magistracy, other then such commands as he held
in the wars under Caesar.

Lentulus Lentulus.
the Consul was of the house of the Cornelii, from whom are said to come
sixteen Consuls. He was from the begi^ning a mortal enemy to Caesar, and so
continued to his death, which fell unto him in Egypt, by commandment of King
Ptolemy, after Pompey was slain.

Scipio was father in law to Pompey, after the death of Julia, Caesar's
daughter; Scipio.
and by that means obtained the government of Asia. In the beginning of the
Civil war, he brought good succors to assist his son in law, as it
follows in the third Commentary: and upon the overthrow at Pharsalia he fled
into Africa, where he renewed the war, and became chief Commander of the
remaining party against Caesar; but being in the end defeated, he made toward
Spain: and fearing by the way lest he should fall into his enemies hands, he
slew himself.

Marcellus was of the ancient Family of the Claudii, Marcellus.
which came originally from the Sabines: On his behalf there is an Oration
extant of Tullies, entitled, Pro Marcello. He was afterward slain by one
Chilo.

M. Antonius is famous in all the Roman histories, M. Anton.
for attaining in a small time to so great a height in that government. For in
all the wars of Gallia, he was but a Treasurer under Caesar, which was the
least of all public places of charge. In the beginning of the civil war^es he
was made Tribune of the people; and within less then eight years after, came
to be fellow-partner with Octavius Caesar in the government of the Empire. And
if Cleopatra's beauty had not blinded him, he might have easily through the
favor of the soldiers supplanted his Competitor, and seized upon the
Monarchy.

The name of Cassius was ominous for trouble to the state of Rome, Cassi^s.
and their ends were as unfortunate. This L. Cassius, for his part, after the
great troubles he had stirred up in Spain, was drowned in the mouth of the
River Eber.

Piso was made Censor in the Consulship of L. Paulus and Claudius Marcellus,
Piso.
having himself been Consul eight years before, in the year of Rome 695,
succeeding Caesar and Bibulus; and was the man against whom Tullie penned that
Oration which is extant in Pisonem. Touching the office of Censor, it is to be
understood, that about the year of Rome 310, the Consuls being distracted with
multiplicity of foreign business, omitted the Censure or assessment of the
City for some years together: whereupon it was afterward thought fit, that
there should be a peculiar officer appointed for that service, and to be called
Censor; forasmuch as every man was to be taxed, rankt and valued, according to
his opinion and censure. The first part of their office consisted in an account
or valuation of the number, age, order, dignity, and possession of the Roman
citizens: for it was very material for the State to know the number of their
people, To know the number of Citizens.
to the end they might be informed of their own strength, and so shape their
course accordingly, either in undertaking wars, transplanting Colonies, or in
making provision of victuals in time of peace. It was also as requisite to know
every man's age, Their age.
whereby they grew capable of honor and offices, De Fast.
according to that of Ovid;

-- finitaque certis
Legibus est aetas, unde petatur honos.
-- In certain laws
Age is defined, Halicarnasseus, lib. 4.
and thence is honor had. M. Antonius commanded that the names of the Roman
children should be brought into the Treasury within thirty days after they
were born; Go^^fred ad L. aetatem 3.
according to which custom, ^. D^ Cens.
Francis the French king published an Edict, Anno 1539, that every parish
should keep a Register of Burials and Christenings: which since that time is
used in England.

The distinction of conditions and states, Their calling.
ranging every man in his proper order, is as necessary in the Commonweal,
Majorum primus quisquis fuit ille tuorum, Aut Pastor ^uit, aut illud quod
dicere nol^. Their ability.
and as worthy of the Censors notice, as any thing besides. Neither may the
assessment of men's abilities be omitted: which was ordained, that every man
might bear a part in the service of the State. In which respect Florus l. ^.
cap. 6.
Servius Tullus is commended, for rating men according to their wealth; whereas
before that time every man paid alike: for men are taken to be interessed in
the Commonweal according to their means. The last and basest sort of Citizens
were named Capitecensi, Gell. lib. 16. cap. 10. Aetis.
and were set in the Subsidy at three hundred seventy five pieces of money.
Such as were not assessed, had no voice in the Commonweal.

The second and chiefest part of this office was in reforming manners, Poly.
lib. 6.
as the ground-plot and foundation of every Commonwealth; to which end they had
power to enquire into every man's life. If any one had played the ill husband,
and neglected his Farm, or left his Vine untrimmed, the Censors took notice of
it. If a Roman knight kept his horse lean, it was a matter for them to look
into. They deposed, or brought in, new Senators. They reviewed all degrees and
conditions of men: advanced this man from a mean Tribe to a more honorable,
and pulled another down. They had the care of buildings, repairing of high
ways, with other public works; and were reputed of the best rank of
Magistrates in Rome. L. Roscius.
L. Roscius had formerly been one of Caesar's Legates in Gallia: as appears
in the fifth Commentary; Tertiam in Essuos, L. Roscio; the third legion amongst
the Essui, under L. Roscius. The Prator was Judge in causes of controversy, and
differences between party and party; and was as the Caddy amongst the Turks.

CHAP. III.
The Senate prepares for war.
THe next day after the Senate assembled out of the City: Pompey having a
charge of an Army, could not enter into the City, prohibited by diverse laws.
where Pompey (according to such instructions as he had formerly given to
Scipio) extolled their constancy and magnanimity; acquainted them with his
forces, consisting of ten legions in Arms; and further assured them, he knew of
a certain that Caesar's soldiers were alienated from him, and would not be
drawn either to defend or follow him. And upon the assurance of these
remonstrances, other motions were entertained. As first, that a lev^e should be
made throughout all Italy. Faust. Sulla.
That Faustus Sulla should forthwith be sent as Propraetor into Mauritania.
That money should be delivered out of the Treasury to Pompey. That king Juba
might have the title of friend and confederate to the people of Rome. Rex Juba,
socius and ^^micus.
which Marcellus contradicting, stopped the passage thereof for that time.
Philippus, Tribune of the people, countermanded Faustus commission. Other
matters were passed by Act. Gallia and Syria were two consulary Provinces.
The two Consular, and the other Praetorian Provinces, were given to private
men that had no office of Magistracy. Syria fell to Scipio, and Gallia to L.
Domitius. Philippus and Marcellus were purposely omitted, Q^o^um nemo stultior
est quam L. Domitius.
and no lots cast for their employment. Into the other Provinces were sent
Praetors, without any consent or approbation of the people, as formerly had
been accustomed: Cic. ad Atticum. Paludati exeunt.
who having performed their ordinary vows, put on their Military garments, and
so took their journey. The Consuls (which before that time was never seen) went
out of the City, and had their Sergeants privately within the City, and in the
Capitol, against all order and ancient custom. A lev^e was made over all
Italy: Arms and furniture was commanded: Money was required from Municipall
towns, and taken out of Temples and religious places. All divine and humane
Rights were confounded.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe neglect of Ceremonies and forms in matter of State, The use of Ceremonies.
is the ruin and abolishment of a Commonweal. For if it hold generally true
which Philosophers say, Forma dat nomen and esse. Arist.
That the form gives being to whatsoever subsisteth, and that every thing has
his name from his fashion and making: then it must necessarily follow, that the
life and perfection of a State depends wholly of the form; which cannot be
neglected but with hazard of confusion. For complements and solemnities are
neither Nimia nor Minima (as some have imagined,) Nimia nec Minima*
either superfluities, which may be spared, or trifles of small consequence.
But as the flesh covers the hollow deformity of the bones, and beautifieth
the body with natural graces: so are ceremonies, which ancient custom has
made reverent, the perfection and life of any Commonweal; and do cover the
nakedness of public actions, which otherwise would not be distinguished from
private businesses. And therefore the neglect of such ceremonies, as were
usually observed to ennoble their actions, Civitatis legibus conservatis, salva
quoque populi dominatio.
was as injurious to the safety of the Empire, and as evident a demonstration
of faction and disloyalty; as the allotment of Provinces to private persons, or
whatsoever else they broached, Aesch. in C^esiphont.
contrary to the fundamental rights of the public Weal.

Concerning which it is to be understood, The manner of disposing of the
Provinces and governments.
that no man was capable of those governments, but such as had born the
chiefest offices and places of charge. For their manner was, that commonly upon
the expiration of their offices, the Consuls and Praetors did either cast lots
for the Provinces, Sortiri Provincias, Comp^rare Provincias. Lib. 43.
which they called Sortiri provincias; or did otherwise agree amongst
themselves how they should be disposed, and that they termed Comparare
Provincias, L^vie touches both the one and the other; Principio insequentis
anni cum Consules novi de Provinciis retulissent, primo quoque tempore, aut
comparare inter eos Italiam and Macedoniam, aut sortiri placu^t: in the
entrance of the next year, when the new Consuls had proposed the business of
the Provinces; it was forthwith embraced, that they should either divide by
agreement Italy and Macedonia betwixt them, or take them as their lots fell.
Howbeit sometimes the people (whose assent was always necessary) interposed
their authority, and disposed the same as they thought expedient. But such as
had never born office of charge in the State, were no way capable of those
dignities, nor thought fit to command abroad, having never showed their
sufficiency at home.

For the manner of their setting forward out of Rome, The manner of their
setting forward to their governments.
after they were assigned to employments, it appears by infinite examples of
histories, that they first went into the Capitol, and there made public
sacrifices and solemn vows, either to build a Temple, or to do some other work
worthy good fortune, if their designs were happily achieved; Vota nuncupa^^.
which they called Vota nuncuparc, the solemn making of vows. And he that had
made such a vow, Voti reus.
stood voti reus, tied by vow, until his business sorted to an issue: and
after he had attained his desire, Macrob. li. 3. cap. 2. Saturn.
he was voti damnatus, bound to perform his vow, until he had acquitted
himself of his promise.

Touching their habit expressed in this phrase, Paludati exeunt, Paludati.
it appears, as well by ancient Sculptures, as Medalls, that Paludamentum was
a cloak used and worn by men of war, whether they commanded in chief, or as
Lieutenants and Centurions; and was tied with a knot upon their left shoulder.
Festus calls all military garments, ^ib. 6. de (...) Lat.
Paludamenta. And Varro giving a reason of that name, says; Paluda a
Paludamentis, sunt haec insignia and ornamenta Militaria. Ideo ad bellum cum
exit Imperator, ac Lictores mutant vestem, and signa incinuerunt, Paludatus
dicitur proficisci: quae, propterea quod conspiciuntur qui ea habent, and Palam
siunt, Paludamenta dicta. Paludamenta are military ornaments. So when the
Emperor removes, and the Sergeants change their garment, he is then said to
march Paludatus. which garments, in regard they are conspicuous which wear
them, and so are taken notice of, are called thence Paludamenta. The color of
this cloak was either purple or white. And therefore it was held a presage of
ill fortune, Valerius, li. 1. cap. 6.
when at Carrae, a City in Mesopotamia, one gave Crassus a black cloak in stead
of a white, as he went to lose the battle to the Parthians.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Romans not contented with the spacious circuit of the sun, Raptores
orbis, postquam cunctis v^stantibus defuere Terrae, and M^re scrutantur: quos
nec oriens nec occidens sa^^averit. Tac.
bounding their Empire with the East and the West, but for want of Regions and
Countries searching the vastness and depth of the seas, did seldom
acknowledge any other sovereignty, or leave a party worthy their amity, in any
remote angle of the then-known world. But if any Prince had been so fortunate,
as to gain the favor and estimation of a friend or a confederate to the State,
it was upon special and deserved respects, or at the instance of their
Generals abroad, informing the worthiness of such Potentates, and the
advantage they might bring to the service of the Empire. Which appears by
that of Livie concerning Vermina, king Syphax son; that Neminem esse Regem
solitum and amicum a Senatu Populoque Romans appellati, nisi qui optime de
Repmeritus esset, lib. 1. decad. 4.
no man was at any time acknowledged either a king or a friend by the Senate
and people of Rome, unless first he had right well deserved of the Commonweal.

The manner of this acknowledgement is likewise particularly expressed by Livie
in another place, Sequenti dic etc. lib. 10. dec. 3.
speaking of Scipio. The day following (says he) to put king Massinissa out of
his grief and melancholy, he ascended up to his Tribunal, and having called an
assembly of the soldiers, presented him before them: where he first honored
him with the appellation of king, accompanied with many fair praises; and then
gave him a crown of gold, a cup of gold, a chair of State, Lib 1. de bell. Gal.
a scepter of Ivory, and a long robe of Purple. To which agrees that of
Caesar: That Ariovistus was by the Senate styled by the name of King and
Friend, and presented with great and rich gifts; which happened but to few, and
was only given by the Romans to men of great desert. Howbeit, such as had
governments and employments abroad did oftentimes make profit of giving this
honor: Et (pe appellandorum Regum Rex Juba, socius and amicus.
whereof Caesar taxes Lentulus in the former chapter. And in this sense was
king Juba brought in question, to be called by the Senate a Friend and
Associate to the State of Rome.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
TOuching the franchises and liberties of the towns of Italy, and others in the
dominions of the Roman Empire, called Municipia; it is to be noted, Municipes,
Lib. 6. cap. 11.
that according to Gellius, those were called Municipes, that being governed by
their own laws, and their own Magistrates, were nevertheless endowed with the
freedom of Rome. And therefore Adrianus marvelled, that the Italicenses and
Uticenses did rather desire to be Coloni, and so tied to the obedience of
foreign and strange laws, then to live in a Municipall State under their own
Rights and Customs; Lib. 11.
and as Festus adds, with the use of their peculiar rites for matter of
Religion, such as they anciently used, before they were privileged with the
immunities of Rome.

For the better understanding whereof, we are to observe, that there were
degrees and differences of Municipall towns: Municipium. (...).
for some had voices with the Roman people in all their elections and
sus^rages; and some others had none at all. For Gellius in the same place
says, that the Cerites obtained the freedom of the City, for preserving the
holy things of Rome in the time of the war with the Galls, C^^ites Tabulae.
Livie lib. 6.
but without voice in elections. And thence grew the name of Cerites Tabulae,
wherein the Censors enrolled such as were by them for some just cause deprived
of their voices. And the Tusculani, being at first received into the liberties
of the City according to the admission of the Cerites, were afterward, by the
free grace of the people, made capable of giving voices.

The means of obtaining this freedom was first and specially by Birth: Livie
lib. 3.
wherein it was required (as may be gathered by Appius Oration) that both the
Parents, as well the mother as the father, should be free themselves. Howbeit
Ulpian writes, that the son may challenge the freedom of the State, wherein
his father lived and was free. So that the father being of Campania, and the
mother of Puteolis, he judges the son to belong to Campania: According to that
of Canuleius, Livie lib. 3.
That the children inherit the condition of the father, as the head of the
Family, and the better rule to direct in this behalf. Nevertheless Adrianus
made an Act of Senate in favor of issue; That if the wife were a citizen of
Rome, and the husband a Latin, the children should be Roman Citizens. And the
Emperor Justinian caused it likewise to be decreed, that the mother being a
freewoman, and the father a bondman, the son should be free. Such as were
thus born free were called Cives originarii. Cives originarii.


The second means of obtaining this freedom was by Manumission, or setting
bondmen at liberty: for in Rome, all men freed from bondage were taken for
Citizens; and yet rankt in the last and meanest order of the people.

The third means was by gift, or cooptation: and so Romulus at first enlarged
and augmented Rome; Theseus, Athens; Alexander Magnus, Polyder.
Alexandria, sited at the out-lets of Nilus; and Richard the first, Virg.
London; by taking all such strangers into the freedom of the City, as had
inhabited there for ten years together. The Emperors were profuse in giving
this honor. Cicero slouts Caesar, for taking whole nations into the freedom
of the City; 1. Philip.
and Antony gave it to all that lived in the Roman Empire. Whereupon, as Ulpian
witnesses, Rome was called Communis Patria. Popular States were more sparing
in this kind; as may be deemed by the answer of one of the Corinthian
Ambassadors to Alexander: Seneca 1. de benefac. cap. 13.
We never gave the freedom of our City (says he) to any man but to thy self
and Hercules. Herod. lib. 9.
And until Herodotus time, the Lacedaemonians had never admitted any, but only
Tisamenus and his brother.

The privileges of this freedom were great; An quisquam amplissimus Galliae,
cum insimo Cive Romano comparandus est?
for the Citizens of Rome were held to be Majestate plenos. Is the best man of
Gallia (says Tully) to be compared with the meanest Citizen of Rome? And hence
came that law, requiring, that the life of a Citizen should not be brought in
question, but by the general assembly of the people. Cicero pro M. Font. De
cipite Ci^is nisi per maximu^ commicia. tum, ollo^que quos censores in partibus
populi locassint, ne ferunto. Cic. 3. de legib.
Venres having condemned one Cossanus, a Roman Citizen in Sicilia, Tully urges
it as a matter unsufferable: Facinus est (inquit) vinciri Civem Romanum, scelus
verberari, prope parricid^um necari, quid dicam in crucem agi? It is a great
crime to bind a Roman Citizen, an heinous wickedness to beat him, little less
then parricide to kill him; what then shall I call the hanging of him? with
many the like examples* besides the possibility they were in, if their
sufficiency were answerable accordingly, to become great in the State; and
consequently, Commanders of the Empire.

CHAP. IV.
Caesar tastes the affection of the Soldiers.
CAesar understanding of these things, Bellorum O socii, qui mill pericula
mortis Mecum, ait, experti, decia o jam vin^tis anno, etc.
called the soldiers together, and acquainted them with all the injuries which
his Enemies from time to time had done unto him; complaining that Pompey was by
their practice and means alienated from him, and drawn through envy of his good
fortune to partialize against him; notwithstanding that he had always affected
his honor, Luc. lib. 1.
and endeavored the advancement of his renown and dignity: Lamenting likewise
the precedent which this time had brought into the State, that the Tribunes
authority should be opposed and suppressed by Arms, which former ages had by
force of Arms re-established. For Sylla having stripped the Tribuneship naked of
all rights and prerogatives, yet left it the freedom of opposition: But
Pompey, who would seem to restore it to the dignity from which it was fallen,
did take away that power which was only left unto it. The Senate never resolved
of that Act, That the Magistrates should take a course for the safety of the
Commonweal, whereby the people were necessarily summoned to Arms, but in times
of pernicious laws, Whereof Lex Agraria was the chiefest.
upon the violence of the Tribunes, or the mutiny and secession of the people,
when the Temples and high places of the City were taken and held against the
State: which disloyalties of former ages were exp^ated and purged by the
fortune and disaster of Saturmnus and the Gracchi. But at this present, there
was no such matter attempted, so much as in thought; no law published; no
practice with the people; no tumult; no departure out of the City. And
therefore he adhorted them, that forasmuch as under his leading and command,
for nine years together they had most happily carried the government, fought
many prosperous and victorious battles, settled all Gallia and Germany in
peace; they would now in the end take his honor into their protection,
Plutarch says, he had then but 5000 foot, and 300 horse on that side the
Alps: which amounts to the just number of a legion.
and defend it against the malice of his adversaries. The soldiers of the
thirteenth legion which were present (for them only had he called out in the
beginning of the troubles, and the other legions were not as yet come) cried
out instantly, That they were ready to undertake his defense against such
wrongs, and to keep the Tribunes of the people from injury.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
AS Publick-weals and Societies are chiefly supported and maintained by
justice: Cic. 1. ossicio.
so likewise, such as live in the civil community of the same, and enjoy the
benefit of a well-qualified government, do take themselves interessed in the
maintenance of justice, and cannot endure the tyranny of wrongs; Nihil justius
quam propulsare injuriam.
unless happily (as every man is partial in his own cause) they be the
authors thereof themselves. The first duty of justice, Xenophon Cyropaed.
lib. 1.
which is, Ne cui quis noceat, That no man hurt another, did Caesar make the
theme of his Oration to his soldiers; Justitiae primum (...) est ne cui q^is
no^eat.
aggravating his particular injuries, by opening and enforcing the malice of
his Adversaries: and making the State a party in his sufferings, Cic. lib. ^.
de officiis.
through the oppression and defacing of the Tribuneship; which in times of
liberty and just proceeding, was sacred and inviolable.

These remonstrances were apprehended by the soldiers, as matters specially
concerning their duty; Qui non defendit nec o^sistit si pote^ injuriae, (...)
in vitio, qu^m si parents, ^ut amicos, aut patriam, aut so^ios deserat. Cic.
lib. 1. offi.
holding themselves either bound to redress them, or other wise to be guilty
of betraying their parents, country, companions and friends. Some report, that
one ^^elius, a Primipile of Caesar's Army, making answer to this speech, gave
assurance of the soldiers good affection; which the rest approved with a
general acclamation. Howbeit the argument lay couched in a Sophisme,
pretending Caesar's right, but concluding the ruin of the State.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SEcondly, Opulentis civitatibus venenum seditio, magna imperia mortalia
reddidit.
we may observe, that as discord and dissension, ^ending asunder the bonds of
civil community, are the bane of slourishing and opulent Cities, and make the
greatest Empires examples of Mortality: so by the same rule of discourse, it is
also true, that the mutual respects of well-qualified friendship, Live. lib. 2.
are as expedient, both for the fastening of the joints of a public State, Non
Exercitus neque Thesauri praesidia regri sunt, verum amici. Salust. in bello
Jugurth.
and for keeping the particular parts in due temper and proportion, as either
treasure, or Armies, or any other thing required thereunto. Hence it is that
Lib. de amicitia.
Cicero says, that we have as much use of friendship, as of fire and water:
and that he that should go about to take it from among men, did endeavor (as
it were) to take the sun out of the heaven; which by heat, light, and
influence, gives life unto the world. Ut quisque maxim opibus, principatu,
and potestate excellit, ita amicis maxim indiget.
And as men are eminent in place and authority, and have use of many wheels for
the motion of their several occasions; so have they the more need of amity and
correspondency, to second the multiplicity of their desires, and to put on
their businesses to their wished ends. Arist. Etn. 8.


CHAP. V.
Caesar takes Ariminum; receives and answers messages from Pompey.
CAesar having sounded the minds of the soldiers, went directly with that
legion to Ariminum, Rimini.
and there met with the Tribunes of the people that were fled unto him; sent
for the rest of the legions from their wintering Camps, and gave order they
should follow him. Thither came young L. Caesar, L. Caesar.
whose father was a Legate in Caesar's camp. And after some speech of the
occasion of his coming, acquainted Caesar, that Pompey had given him a message
in charge to be delivered unto him: which was, that he desired to clear himself
to Caesar, lest he might peradventure take those things to be done in scorn of
him, which were commanded only for the service of the State; the good whereof
he always preferred before any private respect: and that Caesar likewise was
tied in honor to lay aside his indignation and affection for the Commonwealths
sake; and not to be so transported with anger and disdain of his Adversaries,
as he seemed to be, lest in hoping to be avenged of them, he should hurt the
public weal of his Country. He added somewhat more of the same subject,
together with excuses on Pompey's behalf. Almost the self-same discourse, and
of the self-same things, Roscius the Praetor dealt with Caesar, and said that
he had received them in charge from Pompey. Which although they seemed no way
to satisfy or remove the injuries and wrongs complained of; yet having got fit
men, by whom that which he wished might be imparted to Pompey, he prayed them
both, for that they had brought unto him what Pompey required, they would not
think it much to return his desires to Pompey; if happily with so little labor
they might accord so great differences, and free all Italy from fear and
danger. That he had ever held the dignity of the commonweal in high regard, and
dearer then his own life. He grieved much that a benefit given him by the
people of Rome, should be spightfully wrested from him by his adversaries; that
six months of his government were to be cut off, and so he to be called home
to the City: notwithstanding the people had commanded at the last creation of
Magistrates, that there should regard be had of him, although absent.
Nevertheless, for the Commonwealths sake he could be content to undergo the
loss of that honor. And having writ to the Senate that all men might quit
their Armies, he was so far from gaining the same, that contrariwise a levy
was thereupon made throughout all Italy; and the two legions which were drawn
from him under a pretense of the Parthian war, were still retained about the
City, which was likewise in Arms. And to what tended all this, but his
destruction? And yet notwithstanding he was content to condescend to all
things, and to endure all inconveniences for the cause of the Public weal. Let
Pompey go to his government and Provinces; let both the Armies be discharged;
let all men in Italy lay down their Arms; let the city be freed of fear; let
the assemblies of the people be left to their ancient liberty; and the whole
government of the State remitted to the Senate and people of Rome. For the
better accomplishment whereof, under well-advised and secure conditions, let an
oath be taken for due keeping of the same: or otherwise, let Pompey approach
nearer unto him, or suffer Caesar to come nearer to him, that these
controversies might happily receive an end by conference.

Roscius having this message, Capua. Cicero, lib. 7. ad Atticum, Epist. 13.
says, that this answer was made at Thian^m, in the territories of L^vour, the
25 of January.
went to Capua, accompanied with L. Caesar; where finding the Consuls and
Pompey, he delivered unto them Caesar's propositions. They having consulted of
the matter, made an answer in writing, and returned it by them to Caesar,
whereof this was the effect; That he should return into Gallia, quit Ariminum,
and dismiss his Army: which if he did, Pompey would then go into Spain: In the
mean time, until assurance were given that Caesar would perform as much as he
promised, the Consuls and Pompey would not forbear to levy soldiers. The
condition was too unequal, to require Caesar to leave Ariminum, and to return
into his Province; and Pompey to hold Provinces and legions belonging to other
men: to have Caesar dismiss his Army, and he to raise new troops: to promise
simply to go to his government, but to assign no day for his departure:
insomuch, that if he had not gone until Caesar's time of government had
expired, he could not have been blamed for falsifying his promise. But
forasmuch as they appointed no time for a conference, nor made any show of
coming nearer, there could no hope be conceived of peace.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
CAesar lying at Ravenna, within his government of Gallia, and understanding
how matters past at Rome, Plutarch in vita Caesaris.
according as Plutarch reports, commanded diverse of his Centurions to go
before to Ariminum, without any other armor then their swords; and to possess
themselves thereof with as little tumult as they could. And then leaving the
troops about him to be commanded by Hortensius, he continued a whole day
together in public sight of all men, to behold the fencing of the
Sword-players. At night he bathed his body, and then kept company with such as
he had bidden to supper; and after a while rose from the table, wishing every
man to keep his place, for he would instantly come again. Howbeit, having
secretly commanded some of his followers to attend him, in such manner as might
give least suspicion, he himself took a Coach which he had hired; Multa videri
volumus velle, sed no (...). Seneca, epist. 96.
and making show of going a contrary way, turned suddenly toward Ariminum.
When he came to the little river Rubicon, which divided his government from the
rest of Italy, he stood confounded through remose of his desperate design, and
wist not whether it were better to return or go on: but in the end, laying
aside all doubtful cogitations, he resolved upon a desperate Adage, Let it lie
upon the Dice.
importing as much as Fall back, fall edge: and passing over the River, never
stayed running with his Coach, until he came within the City of Ariminum;
Bonum est dum adhuc stit navis in portu, praecavere tempestatem faturam; and
non eo tempore, quo in medi^s, irrue^is procellas, trepidare. Joseph. de bello
Jud. l. 2.
where he met Curio and Antonius, Tribunes of the people, and showed them to
the soldiers, as they were driven to fly out of Rome, disguised like slaves in
a Carriers cart.

It is said, that the night before he passed over this River, he dreamed that
he lay with his Mother in an unnatural sense. but of that he himself makes no
mention. This City of Ariminum is now called R^mini, and stands in Romania,
upon the Adriat^ck sea, in the Popes dominion. The River Rub^con was anciently
the bounds of Gallia; over which Augustus caused a fair bridge to be built with
this inscription:

JUSSU. MANDATU-VE. P. R. COS. IMP. MILI. TIRO. COMMILITO. MANIPULARIS-VE.
CENT. TURMAE-VE. LEGIONARI-VE. ARMAT. QUISQUIS. ES. HIC. SISTITO. VEXILLUM.
SINITO. NEC. CITRA. HUNC. AMNEM. RUBICONEM. DUCTUM. COMMEATUM. EXERCITUM-VE.
TRADUCITO. SI. QUIS. HUJUSCE. JUSSIONIS. ERGO. ADVERSUS. FECIT. FECERIT-VE.
ADJUDICATUS. ESTO. HOSTIS. P. R. AC. SI. CONTRA. PATRIAM. ARMA. TULERIT.
SACROSQUE. PENATES. E. PENETRALIBUS. ASPORTAVERIT. SANCIO. PLEBISCI.
SENATUS-VE. CONSULT. ULTRA. HOS. FINES. ARMA. PROFERRE. LICEAT. NEMINI. S. P.
Q. R.

The substance whereof is; That it should be unlawful for any man to come over
the said River armed, under penalty of being adjudged an enemy to the
Commonwealth, and an invader of his own Country.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IF this manner of proceeding be brought into dispute, and the reason required
why Caesar kept not himself in the province of Gallia, where he might have held
his government according to his own desire, or otherwise have drawn his
adversaries to buckle with the strength of those conquering Legions, and so
brought the business to a short end, with as great probability of good
success, as by any hazard of undertaking: It is to be understood, that in
cases of this nature, which seldom admit any treaty of accord, he that
strikes first, and has the advantage of the forehand, is well entered into the
way of victory. For the rule is of old, Magis terrorem incu^^, ^t invadere
vo^enti prior occurras, quam ut te repugnaturum significes.
That if an enemy has a design in hand, it is far more safe to begin first,
and by way of prevention to give the onset on him, rather then to show a
readiness of resisting his assaults. For if blows (of necessity) must be
way-makers to peace, it were a mistaking to be either wanting or behind-hand
therein; besides the gain which attends this advantage. Thucyd. lib. 6.
For he that stands affected to deny what is just, -- Arma tenenti Omnia dat,
qui-justae negat --
and of right due, does nevertheless grant all things which the sword
requires; and will not stick to supply all unjust refusals, with as great an
overplus of what may be demanded. Lucan, lib. 1.
For which cause, Caesar staid not the coming of his whole Army, but began with
those forces which were ready at hand: and so preventing all intendments, he
put his adversaries to such a straight, that they quitted Italy for fear, and
left Rome (with whatsoever was sacred or precious therein) to the mercy of them
whom they had adjudged enemies to their Country.

CHAP. VI.
Caesar takes diverse Municipall Towns.
FOr which regard, Caesar.
he sent M. Antonius with five cohorts to Aretium: Half a legion, being about
2500 men.
but he himself stayed at Ariminum with two legions, and there intended to
inroll new troops; Pisaurum, Pesaro Ital. Fanum. Ancona. Tignium.
and with several cohorts took Pisaurum, Fanum, and Ancona. In the mean while,
being advertised that Thermus the Praetor did hold Tignium with five cohorts,
and fortified the place, and that all the inhabitants were well inclined
toward him; he sent Curio thither with three cohorts, which he had at Pisaurum
and Ariminum. Upon notice of whose coming, Thermus (doubting of the affection
of the town) drew his cohorts forth of the City, and fled. The soldiers by the
way went from him, and repaired homeward. Curio was there received with the
great contentment and satisfaction of all men. Upon notice whereof, Caesar
conceiving hope of the favorable affections of the Municipall towns, brought
the cohorts of the thirteenth legion out of their garrisons, Auximum, Actius
Varus.
and marched toward Auximum; a town held by Actius, with certain cohorts which
he had brought thither with him, who having sent out diverse Senators, Picenum.
made a levy of men throughout all the Country of Picenum.

Caesar's coming being known, the Decuriones of Auximum repaired to Actius
Varus, accompanied with great troops of people: and told him that the matter
concerned not him at all; for neither themselves, nor the rest of the
Municipall towns, would shut their gates against such a Commander as Caesar
was, that by great and worthy service had so well deserved of the Commonwealth:
and therefore advised him to consider what might ensue thereof, and the danger
which might befall him in particular. Varus being thoroughly wakened at this
warning, drew out the garrison which he had brought in, and so fled away: and
being overtaken by a few of Caesar's first troops, was compelled to make a
stand; and there giving battle, was forsaken of his men. Some of the soldiers
went home, and the rest came to Caesar. L. Pupius.
Amongst them was taken L. Pupius, Centurion of a Primipile order, which place
he had formerly held in Pompey's Army. Caesar commended Actius soldiers; sent
Pupius away; gave thanks to them of Auximum; and assured them of a mindful
acknowledgement on his behalf for this service.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
AMongst other things which serve to enable our judgments, and do make men
wise to good fortune, that which is gathered from similitude or likeness of
quality, is not the unsurest ground of our discourse; but oftentimes gives
more light to guide our passage through the doubtfulnesse of great enterprises,
then any other help of reason. For he that will attend an overture from every
particular, and tarry for circumstances to accomplish all his purposes, and
make no use of instances to better his advantage, shall never wade far in
businesses of moment, nor atchieve that which he desires, Which Caesar well
observed: for upon the accidental discovery of the disposition of one town, he
thereby took occasion to make trial how the rest stood affected; and either
found them or made them answerable to his hopes.

Concerning these places taken by Caesar, Pesaro Ital. Plut. Anto.
it is to be understood, that Pisaurum is sited on the Adriatic sea, and
belongs to the Duchy of Urbine: a town famous of old, by reason of the
prodigious opening of the earth, and swallowing up the inhabitants before the
battle of Actium, some few years after it was thus taken by Caesar.

Fanum was so called of a fair Temple which was there built to Fortune. Fano
Ital.
Tacit. Annal. 10. Exercitus Vespasiani ad Fanum Fortunae iter sistit; The Army
of Vespasian made a halt at the Temple of Fortune. It is a small town on the
same sea, and belongs to the Pope.

Ancona is a famous town upon the Adriatic sea, Ancona.
sited upon a bow-like promontorie, which takes in the sea between two
fore-lands; and so makes one of the fairest Havens of all Italy, as well for
largeness as for safety. From whence rises that common saying, expressing the
rareness and singularity of three things; Unus Petrus in Roma, One Peter in
Rome; noting the beauty of Saint Peter's Church: Una Turris in Cremona, One
tower in Cremona; the excellent workmanship of a Steeple there: And unus Portus
in Ancona, One Haven in Ancona; which is this Haven. The Emperor Trajan, to
give it more shelter, and keep it from the fury of the wind, raised the top of
the Promontorie in fashion of a half moon, with a mount made of great Marble
stones; and made it Theatre-wise, with descents and degrees to go to the sea;
together with an Ark triumphall in memory thereof. The town is now under the
Pope.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THis word Decurio has a double understanding: Decuriones.
for Romulus having 3000 foot and 300 horse, divided them into three Tribes,
and every Tribe into ten Curies, containing a hundred footmen and ten horsemen.
Whereby Marcellinus concludes, that Decuriones and Centuriones a numero cui in
Militia praeerant d^cebantur; they were called Decurions and Centurions from
the number they commanded in the wars. Lib. ^. cap. 14.
But Vegetius is more particular in this point. A Company of footmen (says he)
was called a Century or Maniple: and a Troup of horse was called Turma, of
Ter-denos, containing thirty men, whereof the Captain was named Decurio. Lib.
^. d^ bell. Gall.
In which sense Caesar speaks; Ea res per fugitivos L. Aemili^ Decurionis
equitum Gallorum hostibus nunciatur: This business was bewrayed to the enemy
by the fugitives of L. Aemilius a Decurion of the French horse. But in this
place it has another signification: for the Romans, when they sent any
Citizens to people and inhabit a place, chose out every tenth man; such as
were found most able, and of best sufficiency to make and establish a public
Council; whom they called Decuriones; according as Pomponius and other
Civilians understand it. So that these Decuriones were the Senate of that place.

CHAP. VII.
Lentulus flies in great fear out of Rome. Caesar comes to Co^finium.
THese things being reported at Rome, Caesar.
the City was suddenly struck into such a terror, that when Lentulus the
Consul came to open the Treasury, to deliver out money to Pompey according to
the Act of Senate, he fled out of the City, Sanctiore Aerario.
and left the inner chamber of the Treasury open. For, it was reported
(although untruly) that Caesar was near approaching, and that his Cavalrie was
hard at hand. Marcellus, the other Consul, together with most of the other
Magistrates, followed after. Pompey departing the day before, was gone to those
legions which he had taken from Caesar, and had left in Apulia to winter. In
the mean while the inrollment of soldiers ceased within the City. No place
seemed secure between that and Capua. Capua.
There they began first ot assemble and assure themselves; impresting for
soldiers such as by Julius law were sent thither to inhabit. ^ex Juli^.
And the Fencers which were there trained and exercised by Caesar, for the
entertainment of the people of Rome, were by Lentulus brought out, set at
liberty, mounted upon horses, and commanded to follow him. But afterward, upon
advice of his friends (every man's judgment disallowing thereof) he dispersed
them here and there throughout Campania, for their better safety and keeping.

Caesar dislodging from Auximum, marched throughout all the country of
Picenum, Picenum.
and was most willingly received by all the Praefectures of those Regions, and
relieved with all necessaries which his soldiers stood in need of. Insomuch as
Commissioners were sent unto him from Cingulum, Cingulum.
a town which Labienus had founded, and built from the ground at his own
charges, promising to obey whatsoever he commanded whereupon he required
soldiers, and they sent them accordingly. In the mean time the twelfth legion
overtook Caesar; and with these two he marched directly to Asculum, Asculum.
a town which Lentulus Spinther held with ten Cohorts: who understanding of
Caesar's approach, left the place; and laboring to carry the troops with him,
was forsaken by the greatest part of the soldiers: and so marching with a few,
happened by chance upon Vibullius Rufus, sent of purpose by Pompey into the
Country of Picenum, to confirm and settle the people. Vibullius being
advertised how matters went there, took the soldiers, and so dismissed him of
his charge: gathering likewise from the confining Regions, what cohorts he
could get from Pompey's former inrollments; and amongst others, entertained
Ulcilles Hirus, Ulcil* Hirus.
flying with six cohorts out of Camerinum, Camerinum.
whereof he had the keeping. These being all put together, made thirteen
cohorts; with which by long marches he made toward Domitius Ae^obarous,
Domtius Aenobarb.
who was at Corfinium, Corfinium.
telling him that Caesar was at hand with two legions. Domitius had raised
twenty cohorts, out of Albania, Marsia, Albania. Marsia.
and Pelignia, Pelignia.
adjacent Countries. Asculum being taken in, and Lentulus driven out, Caesar
made inquiry after the soldiers that had left Lentulus, and commanded them to
be enrolled for him. And after one days abode for the provision of Corn, he
marched toward Corfinium. Upon his approach thither, Domitius sent five
cohorts out of the town, 2500. men.
to break down the bridge of the River, which was about three miles off. The
vauntgard of Caesar's Army incountering with Domitius soldiers, drove them
from the bridge, and forced them to retreat into the town: whereby Caesar past
over his legions, made a stand before the town, and encamped himself under the
walls.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IT is well observed by Guicciardine, Sempre e congiunto in un medesimo ^ugget.
to I'Insolentia con la Timidita. Lib. 2.
That Insolency and Timidity are never found asunder, but do always accompany
one another in the same subject: For the mind being the center of all such
motions, does according to every man's nature, give the like scope to passions
of contrariety, and extend them both to an equidistant circumference: as, if
Courage shall happen to dilate it self to Insolency, then is Doubtfulnesse in
like manner enlarged to Cowardice; and will imbase men's thoughts as low, as
they did rise in height by insulting. For which cause it is advised by such as
treat of Morality, that men be well wary in admitting dilatation of passions,
or in suffering them to fly out beyond the compass of Reason, which
contains the measure of Aequability, De Officiis.
commended by Cicero, to be observed throughout the whole course of man's life.
Lentulus the Consul may be an instance of this weakness, and learn others
moderation by shunning his intemperancy. For in question of qualifying the rage
of these broiles, and sorting of things to a peaceable end, his arrogance was
incompatible with terms of agreement, and overswaid the Senate with heedlesse
impetuosity. And again, when his authority and Consular gravity should have
settled the distracted Commons, and made good his first resolution, his
overhasty flying out of the City did rather induce the people to believe, that
there was no safety within those walls, not for so small a time as might serve
to have shut the Treasury at his heels; and so he became as abject, as before
he showed himself insolent.

Concerning these words (Aperto sanctiore Aerario, Aerarium.
rendered, the inner chamber of the Treasury left open) it is to be noted, that
Aerarium was their public Treasury; and by the appointment of Valerius
Publicola, Plutarch. in vita Publicolae. Aerarium populus Romanus in ^de
Saturni habuit, Festus.
was made within the Temple of Saturn: whereof diverse men make diverse
conjectures. Macrobius says, that as long as Saturn continued in Italy, there
was no theft committed in all the country: and therefore his Temple was thought
the safest place to keep money in. Plutarch thinks rather, that the making of
the Treasury in that place, did allude to the integrity of the time wherein
Saturn reigned; for avarice and deceit was not then known amongst them. S.
Cyprian is of an opinion, that Saturn first taught Italy the use and coinage of
money; and therefore they gave the keeping thereof to his Deity. Howsoever, it
is manifest, that not only the public Treasure was there kept, but also their
Records, Charts, Ordinances and Edicts: together with such books as were, Libri
Elephantini.
for their immeasurable greatness, called Libri Elephantini; containing all
their Acts of Senate, and deeds of Arms achieved by the Commanders abroad, as
also their military Ensigns which they fetched always from thence when they
went into the field: Signa ex^^ Aerario prompta feruntur ad Dictatorem Live.
lib. 4.
and there likewise did such Ambassadors as came to Rome enregister their
names, as Plutarch affirms.

It was called Aerarium of Aes, signifying Brass; for that the first money
used by the Romans was of that metal, until the year of Rome 485, as Pliny
witnesses; Lib. 3. cap. 33.
when they began first to coin pieces of silver marked with the letter X.
whereof the ytook the appellation of Denarium, as valuing ten asses of brass,
which before they used for their coin; and every of the said asses weighed 12
ounces. Touching their order observed in their Treasury, for their disposing
and laying up of their moneys, we must understand, that as bodies politic
require necessary and ordinary treasure to be employed in such manner, as may
best concur with the public honor and weal of the same; so there must be
special care to provide against unusual and extraordinary casualties, which
are not removed but by speedy and effectual remedies. According to which
providence the Romans disposed of their treasure, and took the twentieth part
of their receipt, which they called Aurum vicesimarium, Aurum vicesimarium.
and reserved it apart in an inner chamber; where it lay so privileged, that
it was a capital crime to touch it, but in extreme and desperate necessity: as
in time of war with the Galls, or in a sedition and tumult of the people.
Livie affirms as much, where he says, Lib. 24.
Caetera expedientibus quae ad bellum opus erant consulibus, aurum
vicesimarium, quod in sanctiore Aerario adultimos casus servatur, promi
placuit: prompta ad quatuor millia pondo Auri. The Consuls furnishing all other
things needful for the war, it was resolved that the vicessimary gold should
be brought forth and employed: which said gold was reserved in the inner
Treasury, till such time as affairs happened to be in a desperate condition.
Accordingly, there was 4000 pound of gold taken out.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SUch as affect offices and dignities in a State, must ever have means to court
Sovereignty, according as may best suit with her Politia, either as she is
espoused to a Monarch, or left in trust to a Multitude. Hence it was that the
Romans, to gain the favor of the people, and to make way for their own ends,
were very sumptuous in setting forth shows and spectacles, of diverse sorts and
fashions; and specially of Gladiators or Fencers, as best fitting a Roman
disposition, and more pleasing then others of any kind. Pro Roscio.
Equidem (says Tully) existimo, nullum tempus esse frequentioris populi, quam
illud Gladiatorum, neque concionis ullius, neque vero ullorum Comitiorum; I
verily believe that there is at no time a greater concourse of people, then is
at the fenceing-playes; neither at an Oration, nor at an Assembly of the State.
And in another place; Id autem spectaculi genus erat, quodomni frequentia,
atque omni hominum genere celebratur, quo multitudo maxim delectatur; That is
a kind of show, which is celebrated with the flocking together of all sorts of
people; it being a thing the multitude are extremely delighted with.

Their manner was to keep great numbers of these Fencers, in some convenient
and healthful towns of Italy, as at Ravenna, and Capua (which were as
Seminaries of these people) and there to train them up in the feat of fencing,
until they had occasion to use them in their shows, And therefore ^h^y were
called, Bustuari^, a Bustis.
either at their triumphall entries into the City upon their victories, or at
the funeral solemnity of some personage of memory, or otherwise at their
feasts and jollities.

Quinetiam exhilarare viris convivia caede
Mos olim, Sil. Ita^.
and miscere epulis spectacula dira.
The death of men made mirth at feasts of old,
And banquets then were graced with fencers bold.
They fought commonly man to man, at all advantage, and were seldom excused,
until one of the two lay dead upon the place. Neither was he then quitted that
had slain his companion, but stood liable to undertake another, and so a third,
until he had foiled six or seven Combatants. And if his hap were to prevail so
often, he was then honored with a Garland wound about with ribands of wool,
Lemnisc^.
which they called Lemnisci, and received of the Praetor a great knotted
staff, Spectatum s^tis and don^tum jam ^ude. Hor. The Romans never used these
Gladiators in any u^ilitary service, but only in Civil wars.
called Rudis; which he afterward carried about with him as an ensign of
liberty. These bloody spectacles continued unto the time of Constantine the
great, and were by him prohibited, as likewise also by Arcadius and Honorius;
and utterly abolished after the reign of Theodorick, king of the Goths. Let
him that would look further into the fashion of these shows, read what Lipsius
has written concerning the same. That which I observe herein is, A^ deforme
insuper auxilium, (...) millia Gladiatorum: sed per civilia arma severis
ducibus usurpatu^. Tac. hist. 1.
the use which the State made hereof: for howsoever these sights and
solemnities were set forth for the compassing of private ends; yet
nevertheless the Commonweal drew benefit from the same. For a multitude being
of a fickle and mutable nature, are no way so well settled with contentment of
the time, or kept from novelties and innovations, as with public shows and
entertainments; which are as stays to their affections, that they swerve not
from the government by which they live in civil consociation. So we read how
the Grecians instituted, as popular entertainments, their Olympian, Nemean,
Isthmian, and Pythian Games; The Romans, their Apollinary, Secular, Gladiatory,
and Hunting shows, with Traged^es and Comedies: and all for the satisfaction of
the people. Wherein, howsoever the Grecians seem more judicious, for inventing
such Games as might both exercise and entertain the people; yet the Romans
sailed not of the end aimed at in these spectacles, which was, to inure them to
blood and slaughter, and to make them dreadlesse in cases of horror.

But to leave all shows of this nature, as either too little for earnest, or
too much for pass-time; it shall suffice to note, that these public
entertainments are so far expedient as they consist of pleasure and
comeliness: for as their chiefest end is to pleasure and content the people;
so their manner must be directed by lawfulness and honesty. In which respect,
a Tragedy is more commendable then a Comedy; forasmuch as few comicall
arguments do sympathize with honesty.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
TO be great and of a large proportion, does not take away casualties of
inconvenience; nor can it give a privilege, to free things from
distemperature: Tall men are as subject to Fevers, as others of lesser stature;
and great Empires as easily disturbed, as the States of petty Princes.

O faciles dare summa Deos, Lucan. lib. 1.
eademque tueri,
Difficiles! P^rare, and quaerere (...): tueri diffi^ilius, Liv^e Lib. 37.
--
O Gods easy to grant, but to preserve
Your gifts as hard! --
It is easier to attain the end of high desires, then to keep it being got: and
better is the assurance of seeking, then of possessing. The Roman people that
had overawed the world with Arms, and left no kingdom unfoiled with the fear
of then legions, were as much dismayed at a subjects disloyalty, as was
possible for a mean State to be amuzed upon an alarm of any danger. And that
City which suffered no enemy to approach near her confines, but in the
condition of a Captive, was not trusted as able to give her own people safety.

-- sic turba per Urbem
Praecipiti lymphata gradu, velut unicarebus
Spes foret affl^ctis patrios excedere muros,
Inconsultaru^^. --
-- So through the streets
With headlong madness ran the multitude,
As if their case no other hope had left
Of safety, then to quit their native walls.
The advantage is, that kingdoms of great command have great helps in cases of
disturbance; but are otherwise as subject to apprehensions of distrust, as
those of lesser power to resist.

CHAP. VIII.
C^sar goes on with the siege of Corfinium, and takes it.
DOmitius being thus engaged, Caesar.
sent out skillful men of the Country, with promise of great reward, to carry
Letters to Pompey, entreating and praying, that he would come and relieve him;
for Caesar, by reason of the straightness of the passages, might with two
Armies be easily shut up: which opportunity if he neglected, 15000. men, or
thereabout.
himself, with above 30 cohorts of soldiers, besides a great number of
Senators and Roman Knights, were in danger of running a hard fortune. In the
mean time, he exhorted his men to courage and resolution; placed his Tormenta.
Artillery on the walls; assigned every man his quarter to be made good;
promised in public assembly of the soldiers, four acres apiece to each man
out of his own lands and possessions, and the like rateable parts to the
Centurions and Evocati. Meanwhile it was told C^sar, that the inhab^tants of
Sulmo, a town distant seven miles from Corfinium, Sulmo.
were desirous to receive his commands, but that they were restrained by Q.
Lucretius a Senator, and Actius Pelignus, that kept the town with a garrison
of seven cohorts. Whereupon he sent thither M. Antonius with sive cohorts of
the seventh legion: whose Ensigns were no sooner discovered by those of the
town, but the gates were opened, and the inhabitants and soldiers came all
out, to gratulate and welcome Antonius. Lucretius and Actius conveyed
themselves over the wall. Actius being taken and brought to Antony, desired to
be sent to Caesar. Antonius returning the same day, brought Actius and the
soldiers that were found in Sulmo, to Caesar; whom he took to his Army, and
sent Actius away in safety.

Caesar, the three first days, made great works to fortify his Camp; caused
store of corn to be brought from the towns next about him; and there determined
to stay the coming of the rest of his forces. Within the space of those three
days the eighth legion came unto him, with 22 cohorts newly enrolled in
Gallia, together with three hundred horse, which the King of Noricum had sent
unto him. Upon the arr^vall of which forces, he made a second Camp on the other
side of the town, and appointed Curio to command it. The rest of the time was
spent in compassing the town with a Ramp^er and with Castles. The greatest part
of which work being finished, it chanced at the same time, that such as were
sent to Pompey returned. The Letters being read, Domitius dissembling the
truth, Du^es rebus afflict is (...) de industria simulant. Seneca ad P^ly.
gave out in the council of war, that Pompey would come speedily to succor
them: and therefore wished that no man should be disma^ed, but to prepare such
things as were of use for the defense of the town. but he himself conferring
secretly with some of his familiar friends, consulted how he might escape away.
But forasmuch as his looks agreed not with his words, and that his carriage
seemed more troubled and timorous then usual, and likewise his secret
conferences with his friends were more then ordinary, as also by his avoiding
of public counsels and assemblies as much as he could, the matter could be no
longer dissembled. For Pompey had writ back, that he would not hazard the
cause, by drawing it into such terms of extremity: neither was Domitius,
engaged in the keeping of Co^finium by his advice or consent: and therefore, if
by any means he could, he should quit the place, and bring the forces unto him.
But the siege was so straight, and the works did so begird the town, that there
was no hope of effecting it. Domitius purpose being known abroad, the soldiers
within the town, about the beginning of the evening forsook their stations, and
drew themselves apart; and thereupon had conference with the Tribunes of the
soldiers and Centurions to this effect: That they were besieged by Caesar,
whose works and fortifications were almost finished; their General Domitius
(in hope and confidence of whom they were engaged in that place) setting aside
all matters whatsoever, was bethinking himself how he might escape and fly
away: and in regard thereof, they were not to neglect their own safety. The
Marsi at first began to differ from the rest upon that point, and possessed
themselves of that part of the town which seemed to be strongest: and such a
dissension thereby grew amongst them. that they had almost gone to blows.
Howbeit, understanding a while after (by messengers which past to and fro
between them) of Domitius purpose to fl^e away, whereof formerly they were
ignorant; they agreed together, and with one consent brought Domitius out into
open public; and sent some to Caesar, to let him know, they were ready to open
the gates, to receive his commandments, and to deliver Domitius alive into his
hands. Upon advertisement whereof (albeit Caesar found it a matter of great
consequence, to gain the town with as much speed as he could, and to take the
soldiers into his Camp, lest either by large promises and gifts, or by
entertaining other purposes, or otherwise through false bru^ts or dev^sed
messages, their minds might happily be altered, as oftentimes in the course of
war, great and eminent chances and alterations do happen in a small moment of
time; yet for that he feared lest the nightime might give occasion to the
soldiers upon their entrance to sack and pilfer the town) he commending those
that came unto him, sent them back again, and willed that the gates and the
walls should be kept with a good guard. He himself disposed the soldiers upon
the work, which he had begun; not by certain spaces and distances, as he had
accustomed in former times, but by continual watches and stations, one
touching another round about all the fortifications. Moreover, he sent the
Tribunes and Captains of the horse about, and willed them to have a care that
there might be no eruptions or sallies, and that they should look to the
private slippings out of particular men. Neither was there any man so heavy or
dull, that suffered his eyes to be shut that night: for so great was the
expectation of what would ensue, that no man thought of any other thing, then
of what would happen to the Corfinians, to Domitius, to Lentulus and the rest.
About the fourth watch of the night, Lentulus Spinther.
Lentulus Spinther spoke from the wall to our soldiers that had the watch, and
signified that he would willingly have leave to come to Caesar. Which being
granted, he was sent out of the town, attended with some of Domitius his
soldiers, who left him not until he came in sight of Caesar. With him he
dealt concerning his life, and pra^ed him to pardon him; put him in mind of
their former familiarity; acknowledged the favors received from Caesar, which
were very great; namely, that by his means, Collegium Ponti^^um.
he was chosen into the College of Priests, that upon the going out of his
Praetorsh^p, he obtained the province of Spain, and in his suit to be Consul,
he was much assisted by him.

Caesar, interrupting his speech, told him, that he came not from his
government to hurt any man; but to defend himself from the injuries of his
adversaries; to restore the Tribunes of the people to their dignity, that were
thrust out and expelled the City; and to put himself and the people of Rome
into liberty, which were oppressed with the partialities of a few factious
persons. Lentulus, being reassured upon this answer, prayed leave to return
into the town; and the rather, that this which he had obtained touching his own
safety, might give hope to the rest: amongst whom some were so affrighted, that
be doubted they would fall into some desperate course. And having obtained
leave, he departed. Caesar, as soon as it was day, commanded all the Senators
and Senators children, together with the Tribunes of the soldiers, and the
Roman Knights, to be brought out unto him. Of Senators there were L. Domitus,
P. Lentulus Spinther, Vibullius Rufus, Sex. Quintilius Varus, the Treasurer, L.
Rubrius; besides Domitius his son, and many other young men; with a great
number of Roman Knights and Decurions, whom Domitius had called out of the
Municipall Towns. These being all brought forth unto him, were protected from
the insolences and injuries of the soldiers. Moreover, he spoke a few words
unto them, concerning the ill requital on their behalf, for the great benefits
he had done unto them: and so sent them all away in peace.

The sixty Sestertia of gold which Domitius had laid up in the public
Treasury, being brought unto him by the two chief Magistrates or Ba^lifs of
Corfinium, Duumvir^.
he redelivered to Domitius; lest he should seem more continent in taking away
men's lives, then their moneys: although he knew that this money was part of the
public treasure, and delivered out by Pompey to pay soldiers. He commanded
Domitius his party to be sworn his soldiers. And that day removing his Camp,
went a full days march (after a stay of seven days about Corfinium) through
the confines of the Marrucini, Frentani, and Larinates, and came into Apulia.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
AS it is true, Latius Pat^t ossiciorum qu^m juris Regula.
that a friend is not solely tied to the respects of right, but does give more
advantage by offices of good endeavor, then by that which duty requires: so
is it dangerous for a man to put his ^ickle further into a harvest, then happily
may deserve thanks of the owner. Stultitiae videtur, alienam rem suo periculo
curare.
Neither can it be cleared from imputation of folly, to care another man's
business, with hazard and peril of our own fortune. Howbeit, the current and
drift of things does oftentimes so engage both our persons and affections,
Salust. de b^llo Jugurth.
either in the main action it self, or in some circumstances of the same, that
we cannot avoid the hazard of rebuke, if our endeavors do not sort with his
liking that is to approve them. Whereof Domitius may be an instance; who,
taking Corfinium on the behalf of the State, was nevertheless disavowed in his
merit, and consequently brought into extremity of danger, for his
over-forwardnesse in the service of his Country. Such liberty has
sovereignty, either to take or leave, when the event shall not rise answerable
to a good meaning.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
When a party is fallen into an exigence, it has no better remedy for relief
then that of the Comic, Redimas te captum quam queas minimo; redeem your self
at as cheap a rate as you can. Which is not understood, that we should clear
the head, and leave the rest of the members to misfortune: for that were to
draw a double mischief on the whole body. But the head is to escape with as
little prejudice to the other parts, as by wisdom and virtue may be gained:
and so much the rather, lest in seeking to purchase safety with hazard of the
other members, it draw the whole destruction upon it self; as it fell out with
Domitius: who going about to fly out of the town, and to leave such forces as
by his means were embarked in that cause, was justly made the sacrifice of
their peace. Sulla deserved better to be followed by men of adventure: for,
being moved to escape himself away by night, and to leave his troops to such
fortune as Jugurth upon advantage should put upon them; Salust. de bello
Jug^rth.
he answered, Etiamsi certa pestis adesset, mansurum potius, quam proditis quos
duccbat, turpi fuga, incertae, ac for sitan paulo post morbo interiturae vitae
parceret: Although the plague were never so near and certain to befall him, yet
he would stay by it, rather then by a base slight betray those under his
command, thereby to save his fickle life for a time, which it may be some
disease or other would immediately after deprive him of. And therefore, if a
Commander shall at any time go about to betray his forces, with hope of his
own safety, the issue will bring out either his dishonor, or his confusion.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
SUch as undertake great designs, do likewise project the means of atchieving
the same, and do propound unto themselves such principles to be observed, as
they take to be special way-makers to the fortune they reach at; from which
grounds they seldom or never swerve. As appears by this of Caesar: who
aiming at the sovereignty of that Empire, and knowing no way so direct to lead
him thereunto, as to climb up by the steps of Mildness, and to make his
Adversaries debtors to his Clemency, he left aside his Maxims of war, to
hold firm that principle; and did forbear to gain a town of great importance,
with that speed which occasion and opportunity did afford him, and to take the
troops into his Camp, for the prevention of such chances and changes, as do
happen in a small moment of time, lest his soldiers entering into the town,
after the shutting of the evening, might take leave of the nightime to make
forfeiture of his mercy.

It shall therefore be well beseeming the wisdom of a Leader, to have always
respect to the principles of his Means, and to distinguish between that which
is fit and that which is more fit, in the native carriage of his business.

THE FOURTH OBSERVATION.
COncerning this Coll^gium Pontisicum, Collegium Pontisicum.
the College of Priests, we are to note, that Numa, the founder of the Roman
Commonweal, for the preventing of partialities and factions in that State,
which at that time consisted of two Nations or Tribes, did break the whole body
into many small parts and fractions, Pl^ta^^h in the life of Nu^a.
making his division by Arts and Occupations; whereby he ordained, that all
Minstrels or Trumpeters should be incorporated into one Brotherhood; and that
in like manner, Goldsmiths, Carpenters, Diers, Shoomakers, Coriers, Tanners,
Bel-founders, Potters, and all other trades and Sciences, should have their
peculiar body or Fraternity; appointing them feasts, assemblies, and services,
according to the worthiness of each mystery, as Plutarch has observed in the
life of Numa.

Valerius Maximus makes mention of the College of Pipers or Minstrels. Cap.
de instituti.
And Plinte, in like manner, Lib. 34. cap. 1.
mentions the College of Coppersmiths. Lib. 2.
Cicero takes notice of the college or company of Merchants, Epist. ad Q^.
^ratrem. Epist. 5.
which he calls Collegium Mercurialium; for that of old time, the
nimble-tongued Mercury was believed in, as the Guider and Protector of
Merchants. The privileges and customs wherewith these Fraternities were
endowed, In L. 1..
are set down by Caius the Civilian. There are certain Colleges at Rome, says
he, incorporated by Act of Senate, and established with good ordinances and
constitutions, having certain things in common, in imitation of the public
weal: L. Pater silium..
and as Scevola further notes, with power to make laws, for the better
government of such Colleges and Societies; so the same be not contrary to the
fundamental laws of the State. After the same manner, the Priests had their
peculiar College or corporation; and at the first institution were but four in
number, and all of Patrician families, unto the year of Rome 454; at what time
there were four of the Commons chosen, and added to the former number; Lib. 36.
whom Sulla increased to fifteen, as Dio witnesses. And these were called
Collegium Pontisicum, whereof this Pontifex Maximus was president: one of the
absolutest dignities of Rome, as being for term of life, and of greatest and
divine authority. Which general distribution of the Romans into trad^s and
mysteries, does not unfitly bring into remembrance, that which is usual
amongst the Turks, who by their law are all bound to be of an occupation; not
excepting the Grand Signior himself. For he that now upholds the Ottoman
family, by the name of Sultan Acm^t, Acome^^ the great Turk.
is a professed maker of Rings, which the Turks do wear on their thumb when
they shoot, (...) Bassa, N^iler, or pare^ of nails.
to let the string go easily without hurting them: and his father Mahomet was a
Fletcher, and made arrows. In like manner, all his Courtiers are of trades and
occupations; and every man is called by the title of his Art: Bustangi Bassa,
Gardener.
as, he that was lately Vizier Bassa to the present Sultan, was called by the
name of Natcash Basha, the Vizier Painter, being indeed the Sultans Painter.
Neither are they ashamed to acknowledge as much: for, opening Letters which
were sent into Turkey out of Christendom, that were limmed about the Margin, he
said, he could paint as well as that himself.

THE FIFTH OBSERVATION.
THe fifth thing which I observe out of these passages at Corfinium, is, the
restoring back of such moneys to Domitius, as were brought unto Caesar by the
Officers of the town, and which he knew to be of the public treasure of the
State. Which howsoever it may seem admirable to the hearers of these times,
wherein there is but this one rule for matter of money, Unde habeas quaerit
nemo, sed oportet habere, No body asks how you come by it, but it must be had:
Yet such as will lay a sure foundation of honor, and thrive in the courses
which they follow, must not be ignorant, Caput autem est in omni procuratione
(...), and muneris publici, ut avaritiae pellatur etiam minima suspicio.
that there is nothing more requisite to gain opinion and reputation in the
carriage of any public business, then to be clear of the least suspicion of
covetousness. Neither is there any means that will sooner win a multitude, to
believe in those things which are set abroach by public Authority, then those
two virgin virtues, Abstinence and Continency: especially when they are found
in Princes and chief Commanders, that can otherwise justify their actions with
sovereignty and uncontrollment. Nulla autem re, conciliare facilius been.
volentiam multitudinis (...) qui (...) praesunt, quam abstinentia and
contin^ntia. Cicero.
Nor, on the other side, did ever Apollo give out truer Oracle then that, which
said, That there was no means to ruin Sparta but by Avarice.

In which sense, Cic. lib. Offici.
C. Pontius the Samnite wished, that the Gods had reserved him to times wherein
the Romans would have been corrupted with gifts: for then he would soon have
seen an end of their Commonweal. And certainly that Empire could never have
towred so high, nor continued firm so many ages, had not her foundation been
laid by men of admirable temper in this kind: Such as was Paulus Aemilius; who
having sacked Macedonia, and brought as much wealth into the public Treasury
as gave an end to Tributes and Subsidies, was no way the richer (but in honor)
for all that he had taken. And such also was Scipio Africanus; that of all the
wealth of Carthage, brought nothing into his private house, but a high and
triumphant Name, as a merit of his virtues and deeds of Arms: leaving behind
him this Oracle, as a document to following times; Imperatores muneribus
hi^ntes, Hostibus s^nt perutiles.
That covetous Captains are good to none but to the Enemy. And to conclude,
such was M. Curious; who having triumphed of the Samnites, the Sabines, and
Pyrrhus, refused a great mass of Gold, Appian. de bell. Hispan. Cic. Cato
Major.
which was offered him by the Samnites: esteeming it more honorable to command
them that had Gold, then to have Gold of his own. Howbeit, such is the frailty
of humane nature, that for the most part, men have always suffered their
desire of money to increase with their wealth, although it were to their ruin
and destruction. Which Caesar well discerned, as appears by that which he
writ to Oppius, touching this accident: Haec nova sit vincendi ratio, ut
misericordia and liberalitate nos muniamus; It is a new way of conquering, to
strengthen our selves by mercifulness and liberality.

THE SIXTH OBSERVATION.
UPon occasion of Caesar's calling unto him, out of the town, Senatores,
senatorumque filios, Equitesque Romanos, the Senators, sons of Senators, and
Roman Knights, it shall not seem impertinent, to note the degrees and
conditions of state whereof the Roman people consisted. For the better clearing
whereof, it is to be understood, that by that notable transaction at Comitium,
between Romulus and Tatius, it was agreed, That both those Nations should dwell
together at Romulus town, which after his name, should be called Rome; and that
the inhabitants thereof should be named Quirites, after the name of Tatius
City. Howbeit, specially they were divided into three Tribes, whereof they
which were of Romulus party, Plutarch. in vita Romuli.
were called after his name, Rhamnenses; those that came with Tatius,
Tatienses; and the third Tribe Lucerences, of Lucus, a Grove: forasmuch as they
being neither of Romulus retinue, nor yet of the Sabines, were nevertheless
met together at that place, from diverse parts, as at a Grove, where commonly
assemblies were made to offer sacrifice, and to perform their heathenish
solemnities.

Each of these Tribes were divided by Romulus into ten Curiae; and so made the
number of thirty Curiae. And out of each of these Curiae he chose three
persons, such as by their presence and sufficiency seemed fittest, and most
worthy; which amounted to ninety. To whom, out of every Tribe he further added
three, and one more of his own choosing, to make the number up a hundred; whom
he established as his Council or Senate: Senatus.
by whose advice he resolved of all matters of consequence, either concerning
peace or war, as Dionysius Halicarnasseus notes. Howbeit Plutarch says,
Lib. 2.
they were seldom assembled but to understand the Kings pleasure; and had no
other preeminence in the Commonweal, saving they were the first that did know
what was purposed. Howsoever, they were styled by the name of Senatores, quasi
seniores, as thereby qualified to be admitted to Counsel: and in the same
sense they were called Patres.

The Senate being thus established, Romulus selected out of every of those
Curiae ten young men, and so made up the number of three hundred, for a guard
to his person; who for their readiness and numblenesse were called Celeres,
Celeres or Equites: ordo Equestris.
all mounted on horseback: whence grew their Ordo Equestris, or band of Roman
knights, which were the mean between the Senate and the people, and as a
Seminary to supply the Senate; for out of them were the Senators taken. The
rest, that were not of these two Orders, Plebs, or populus.
were comprehended under the name of the Commons, or Populacy. Whereby it
appears that Rome consisted of three estates, Senators, Knights, and the
Commons, according to that of Ausonius;

Martia Roma triplex; Equitatu, Plebe, Senatu.
Of three sorts Rome consists, Knights, Commons, Senate.
Touching the number of Senators, it is further to be noted, that Tarquinius
Priscus, to gain the favor of the people, took a hundred of the Commons, and
added them to the Senate, who were called Senatores minorum Gentium. Senatores
minorum Gentium.
And Brutus having reduced it to a Commonweal, made them up three hundred out
of the band of Knights; and from that time they were called Patres conscripti.
Patres conscripti.
Neither were they at all times limited in that number: for the seditious
Gracchi added three hundred more unto them; and Julius Caesar admitted unto the
Senate all manner of persons. In which regard Augustus (as Suetonius says)
Senatorum affluentem numerum deformi and incondita turba (erant enim super
mill, Sueton. 35.
and quidam ind^gnissimi) ad modum pristinum and splendorem redegit: Reduced
the excessive number of Senators, which was become a deformed and shapelesse
company (for they were above a thousand, and diverse of them unworthy fellows)
to their ancient way and splendor.

Concerning a competency of wealth, to make a man capable of the place of a
Senator, we may observe, that in the reign of Servius the King, he that was
worth a thousand asses (which are about three hundred pound sterling) was
eligible. But the riches of the Empire increasing, a Senators wealth was rated
at nine thousand pound, according to Suetonius; Senatorum censum ampliavit,
Sueton. 41.
ac pro octing^ntorum millium summa duodecies H^S taxavit, supplevitque non
habentibus. The wealth of a Roman Knight was rated at three hundred threescore,
or thereabouts.

This Corfinium was the chief town of the Pelignians, Corfinium.
and stood in the center of Italy, Strabo, lib. 6.
where all the confederate people assembled when they consulted of war
against the Romans, for their right of Burgeship, or freedom of the City,
which was then denied them: which war was called Bellum sociale Marsicum, and
Italicum. There is now nothing remaining of that town but the ruins, as a mark
of the place where it anciently stood, upon a Plain, commonly called Pentina,
or Sant Peligno.

CHAP. IX.
Pompey goes to Brundusium: Caesar makes means to treat with him.
POmpey understanding of these things which had past at Corfinium, Caesar.
departed from Luceria, and went to Canusium, Luceria.
and from thence to Brundusium; causing all the power he could to be raised by
new musters and inrollments, arming shepherds and slaves, and mounting them on
horseback; of whom he made some three hundred horse. In the mean time L.
Manlius, the Praetor, fled from Alba with six cohorts; and Rutilius Lupus,
Praetor, fled from Tarracina with three cohorts: who descrying afar off the
Cavalry of Caesar, commanded by Bivius Curious, forsaking the Praetor, turned
their Ensigns toward Curious, and joined with him. In like manner the days
following, diverse other cohorts came in as they marched, some to the foot
troops, and some to the horse. Cn. Magius of Cremona, master of the works and
of the munition in Pompey's Army; was taken on the way, and brought back to
Caesar: whom he sent back again to Pompey, with commission to treat with him to
this effect: Forasmuch as there had yet happened no opportunity of meeting or
conference, he was now determined to seek him at Brundusium; for it much
imported the Commonweal, and every man's safety in particular, that they two
might confer together. Neither could things be so well handled upon so great
a distance of way, where the articles of treaty must be carried to and fro by a
third party, as when they met face to face to conclude of the conditions.

This message being first given, he came to Brundusium with six legions; four
legions of old soldiers, and the other raised by new inrollments, or made up
as he came along the Country: for he had presently dispatched Domitius his
cohorts from Corfinium into Sicily. At his coming, he found the Consuls gone
over to Dyrrachium with the greatest part of the Army, and Pompey remaining at
Brundusium with twenty cohorts. Neither could he certainly be informed, whether
he remained at Brundusium to make good the town, whereby he might the easier be
master of the Adriatic sea, and command both the utter parts of Italy, and the
Regions of Greece, and so to keep the war on foot on the one side and on the
other; or whether he stayed there for want of shipping. Howsoever, he would not
endure that Pompey should think he could not be forced to quit Italy; and
therefore resolved to stop up the mouth of the Haven, and to take away the use
thereof: which he went about in this manner. Where the mouth of the Haven was
narrowest, Caesar besieged Pompey at Brundusium, the 23 day of ^ebruary (...)
cond. 704.
he raised great mounts of earth on either side near unto the shore; for there
the Sea was shallow: but going further into the deep, where no such mounts
could be raised, he placed double slottes of wood, right against the same
mounts, of thirty foot square; and at the corners cast out four Anchors to
fasten them, that they might not be tossed up and down by the waves. These
flottes being thus placed, he then added other flottes of the same scantling,
and covered them with bavin and earth, to the end men might come readily upon
them to defend them. He armed them in front and on each side with hurdies and
gabions; and on every fourth flotte made a tower of two stories high, the
better to defend them from violence of shipping, and from burning.

Against this work Pompey sent out great ships of burden, which he found in
the Haven, armed with towers of three stories high, full of munition, and all
sort of weapons, to hinder and disturb the same. So that every day they fought
afar off each with other, with slings, arrows, and other casting weapons.
Which business Caesar so carried, as being willing not to let fall the
conditions of peace, if happily it might be effected. And albeit he greatly
wondered that Magius, whom he had sent to Pompey, did not return again: and
that this Treaty so often attempted, did hinder much his designs: yet he
thought it fit by all means to persevere therein: and therefore sent Caninius
Rebilus, one of his Legates, an inward friend of, Pompey's son married (...)
daughter.
and near allied to Scribonius Libo, to speak with him: commanding him to
persuade Libo to mediate a reconciliation, and that Caesar himself might speak
with Pompey. It might be, that thereupon both of them would yield to lay down
their Arms upon equal conditions: the greatest part of which honor would
redound to Libo, if by his intercession the war might take an end.

Libo having heard Caninius, went straight to Pompey; and within a while
returning, told him, That forasmuch as the Consuls were absent, there could be
nothing done touching an agreement. Whereupon Caesar resolved to let fall the
matter of* Treaty, which he had so often attempted, and to prepare for war.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis accident of taking Cn. Magius, has made known an officer of great place
and use in the Roman Army, Praefectus Fab^um.
of whom otherwise their Histories make little mention. For, howsoever there is
found in these Commentaries many particular descriptions of admirable and
incredible works, such as may seem to be made rather by Giants and Cyclopes,
then any labor of man; yet there is no mention of any Praefectus fabrum, or
Master of the works in any of Caesar's Armies. Howbeit Vegetius, Lib. 2. cap.
11.
expressing their singular care to have in abundance all manner of provisions
requisite for an Army, says; That to every legion did belong Carpenters,
Bricklayers, Smiths, Painters, and other Artizans, skillful and fit to build
lodgings for their wintering Camps; to make Engines and devices for war; such
as were their portative, or ambulatory towers, targets, morions, corslets,
bows, arrows, darts, and piles, or whatsoever else might serve, either for
offense or defense. Which Artificers were all known by the name of Fabri; and
he that was Chief, and had the command of them, was called Praefectus Fabrum.
Plutarch in the life of Cicero.
And in like manner Plutarch shows, that there was such an officer; as also
that the place was given by the General; where he says, that Vibius a
Sicilian refused to lodge Cicero, as he passed to exile through Lucania;
although that in his Consulship he had bestowed upon him the place of
Praefectus Fabrum. And albeit Caesar makes no mention of any such officer; yet
Catullus does it for him, in such biting Trimetres as will not be forgotten:

Quis hoc potest videre, quis potest pati,
Nisi impudicus, and vorax and Helluo,
Mamurram habere, quod Comata Gallia
Habebat and ultima Britannia?
Who can this endure to see,
But must a wanton glutton be,
That Mamurra should have all
Fetched from Britan and from Gall?
Of which Mamurra Pliny thus writes; Lib. 36. cap. 6.
Cornelius Nepos, says he, writes that Mamurra, a Roman knight, born at
Formia, and Master of the works under Caesar in Gallia, was the first that
covered all the walls of his house, which he built in Mount Coelius, with
leaves of Marble. Neither let any man disdain the Author as a mean person; for
this is that Mamurra, whom Catullus does note in his verses; whose house was
far more stately then Catullus did express, by saying he had gotten all the
wealth of Gallia Comata. For the said Cornelius affirms, that he was the
first in Rome that made the pillars of his house of solid Marble, even hewn
out of the quarries of Caristus, or Luna. Thus far goes Pliny. Out of which
may be noted, that exorbitancy in gaining does produce the like course in
spending; and howsoever such comings in may be close and secret, Epist. ad
(...) lib. ^. Epist. 8.
yet the issuings out will proclaim it in profuse and lavishing manner: and
therefore such as command in these places, and have such means to enrich
themselves, had need to be clean-fingered. Caesar writing to Oppius, mentions
the taking of this man, as a thing of some note. Cn. Magium, Pompeii Praefectum
deprehendi scilicet, meo instituto usus sum, and eum statim missum feci: jam
duo Praefecti fabrium in meam potestatem venerunt, and a me missi sunt: When I
had taken Cn. Magius, a master of the works to Pompey, according to my usual
manner, I let him go. So that there have two Masters of the works fallen into
my hands, and I have let them both freely go. Concerning the use of these
manual Arts, and the prerogative they have in well-ordered States; it is to be
noted, that without these, no City can conveniently be built, fortified, or
furnished with Arms. And thereupon such Artizans have always challenged a
place of chief regard in the Commonweal. Whence it was, that Ulysses scorned
not se fabrum profiteri, to profess himself such an Artizan. (...). 23.


THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Maxim proprium, or most proper part of war is opposition; and that
universal, rather then any other kind of repugnancy: for there is no
sympathizing condition between two enemy Armies, otherwise then by* mutual
exchange of velle and nolle, throughout the whole course of their intendments;
as may be here observed upon Caesar's arrival at Brundusium. For finding
Pompey to remain there after the departure of the Consuls, and not certainly
informed of the reason of his stay; lest he should think he could not be forced
to quit Italy, Caesar went about to thrust him out headlong: or otherwise, if
his purpose were to follow after the Consuls to Dyrrachium, Caesar's design
then was to shut him in, and so to have followed the rule of contradiction, by
which soldiers are directed in their achievements.

Concerning the site of Brundusium, which has ever been famous for the
commodiousnesse of the Haven, and the usual port where the Romans took
shipping for Greece, being but a hundred Italian miles distant from Apollonia
in Epirus; (...).
we are to note, that the town stands upon a Langet of earth, extended into
the Haven Peninsule-like from the main land, resembling the neck and head of a
Stagge, and in that regard is called Brundusium, of (...), which signifies a
Stagge: which Langet has many crooked guts, or inlets of the Sea, capable of
great shipping; besides the two main Ports on either side of the town, which
with the rest of the Haven, make the safest and fairest road of that part of
the world. The mouth of the Haven where Caesar made his flottes, is very
straight; and opposite thereunto, some three miles distant into the Sea,
stands a small Island, to abate the violence and rage of the waves. Now to
besiege Brundusium, it was requisite to take away the use and benefit of the
Haven: which Caesar attempted with such rare and artificial works (of mounts
where the Sea was shallow, and of flottes where the water was deep; and those
made firm with earth, and fenced with hurdles and turrets, that the Reader may
discern it, by the description, to be a Masterpiece of excellent invention.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
IT is truly said of old, That peace is not dear at any rate. Which Antiochus
well understood, when he bought it of the Romans for twelve thousand Attick
talents, Livie lib. 8. Dec. 4.
and 540000 bushels of wheat: Esteeming it as the sovereign happiness of man's
fortune, and an extraordinary effect of those intelligent spirits, which guide
the motions of the celestial spheres, to keep the elements in a disagreeing
concord, and the feet of men in the paths of tranquillity. Hence it is, that
such as are instruments of so great a good, and shall thereby happen to redeem
a Nation from horror and confusion, have in all ages been crowned with honor
and renown, as the due reward of a Mediator of Peace. And therefore Caesar,
persuading Libo to negotiate a cessation of Arms, and to work in Pompey a
disposition to an agreement, propounded the honor which attended this service,
and the merit of that endeavor which brought back peace into the Empire.

CHAP. X.
Pompey leaves Brundusium, and shippeth himself for Greece.
THe work being half perfected, Caesar.
and nine days labor bestowed upon it; the ships that had transported the
Consuls and the other part of the Army, returned from Dyrrachium to Brundusium:
and thereupon Pompey began to fit himself for a departure; being induced
thereunto either by the works which Caesar had begun, or by a resolution
formerly taken to quit Italy. And the better to retard Caesar's prosecution
(lest upon his issuing out, the soldiers should enter the town) he mured up
the gates, and stopped the entrances of the streets and passages, sunk ditches
and trenches cross the ways, and therein stuck sharp piles and stakes, and
covering the same with slight hurdles, levelled it with thin and light earth:
leaving only two ways free, which went unto the Haven, which he hedged in
with a strong Palisado of huge sharp Piles.

These things being thus prepared, he commanded the soldiers to get a
shipboard, without noise or tumult; and left upon the walls and in the towers,
here and there, some of the readiest Slingers and Archers, to be called away
upon a warning-signe, when the rest of the soldiers were all shipped;
appointing Galleys to take them in at an easy and safe place. The inhabitants
of Brundusium, oppressed with the injuries and contumelies of Pompey and his
soldiers, did favor Caesar's party; and understanding of this departure,
whilst they were running up and down, and busied about getting abroad, gave
notice thereof from the tops of their houses. Which being perceived, Caesar
(not to omit any opportunity of atchieving his purpose) commanded ladders to
be prepared, and the soldiers to take Arms. Pompey a little before night
weighed Anchour: and the soldiers keeping guard on the wall, upon the
watchword given, were all called from their stations, and by known passages
repaired to the ships. Caesar's soldiers with Ladders got upon the wall: but
being admonished by them of Brundusium to take heed of the blind d^tch, (...)
Vallum.
they stood still. At last, they were brought a great compass about, and so
came to the Haven; and with skiffes and boats, seized two ships with
soldiers, which stuck by chance upon the Mounts which Caesar had made.

OBSERVATIONS.
FOrasmuch as this manner of Pompey's departure from Brundusium, Plutarch in
(...) of Pompey.
and the slight he used to imbark himself and his Army without danger of
Caesar's entering the town, is commended for one of the best stratagems of
war that ever he used; let us a little consider the parts thereof, which
present themselves of two sorts: the one consisting of the works he made, to
hinder and retard Caesar's entrance, if happily he should have knowledge of his
departure; and the other, in the cleanly conveighance of his men aboard,
without noise or tumult, and the semblance he made of keeping the town, by
continuing watch upon the walls, to the end there might be no knowledge taken
thereof. The works were of three sorts. For first he ^ured and stopped up the
ends and entrances of streets and lanes, which might give access to a pursuing
enemy. And to that end also, he sunk ditches, or trenches, cross the ways and
passages: which he stuck full of sharp stakes and galthrops, and covered them
with light and thin hurdles, that the Enemy might not espy them. And thirdly,
hedged in the ways leading to the Port, with a strong Palisado of huge sharp
piles. And so used both the Lions and the Foxes skin, to avoid the danger which
might have fallen upon him, if Caesar happily had found means to attach them,
as they were incumbered in getting to their ships, and disposing themselves to
fly away. Which being an occasion that might have given him great advantage,
was in this manner carefully prevented by Pompey. Howbeit, this his quitting
Brundusium is censured but for a faulty resolution handsomely carried: for
Cicero does much blame him for abandoning Italy; Cicer. Epist. ad Atticum.
calling it a Themistoclean policy, to persuade his party to forsake their
Country, and to leave the best of their pleasures, and the weakest of each
sex, to such misery and desolation, as moved pity in those that considered
but the condition of the dogs and brute beasts; as it fell out at Athens,
when Themistocles persuaded the Athenians to leave their town and Country, and
betake themselves wholly to sea, to fight against Xerxes.

CHAP. XI.
Caesar dispatcheth forces into Sardinia and Sicilie. Cato's endeavor to keep
Sicily for Pompey.
ALbeit Caesar well knew, Caesar.
that it much imported a speedy end of the business, to get ships and pass the
Seas after Pompey, before he could join himself with the forces of the
transmarine parts; yet doubting the lets, and the long time before it could be
effected, for that Pompey had taken with him all the shipping he could get, and
thereby left him for the present no means to follow after: it remained that he
attended shipping to be brought from remote parts, as out of Gallia, from
Ancona and the Streights; which at that time of the year, would require a long
and troublesome passage. In the mean time, he thought it no way fit that
Pompey's old Army, and the two Provinces of Spain should be settled and
assured; (one of them being deeply engaged to Pompey for many great and ample
benefits:) or that they should have time to raise new troops, especially of
horse; or that Gallia or Italy should be solicited or wrought from him in his
absence. And therefore for the present, he resolved to desist from making any
further pursuit after Pompey, Bailiff^.
and to go into Spain; giving order to the Duumviri of all the Municipall
towns, to provide shipping, and send it to Brundusium. He sent Valerius, a
Legate, into Sardinia with one legion; and Curio, the Propraetor, into Sicily
with three legions; commanding him, after he had possessed Sicily, to transport
his Army into Africa. Marcus Cotta governed Sardinia, and M. Cato Sicily.
Tubero should by lot have held Africa.

The Caralitani understanding that Valerius was to be sent unto them, before he
had left Italy, of their own accord thrust Cotta out of the town. Cotta amused
thereat, and perceiving withal that the whole Province gave consent unto it,
fled presently out of Sardinia into Africa. Cato prepared and new trimmed the
Galleys in Sicily, giving order to the towns to build new, and prosecuted his
direction with great diligence. Moreover, by his Legates, he mustered and
enrolled Citizens of Rome in Lucania and Brutia, requiring rateable numbers of
horse and foot from the towns in Sicilie. Which things being almost
accomplished, understanding of Curio his coming, he complained in public how
he was abandoned and betrayed by Pompey; who, without any providence or
preparation, had engaged himself in an unnecessary war: and yet being
demanded by himself and the rest in the Senate, answered confidently, that he
was provided of all necessaries fit for war. And after he had thus publicly
complained, he fled out of the Province. By which means, Valerius found
Sardinia, and Curio Sicily, void of government, and thither brought their
Armies.

Tubero arriving in Africa, found Actius Varus commanding the Province: who (as
we have formerly showed) having lost his cohorts at Auximum, fled forthwith
into Africa, and of his own authority possessed himself of the Province, which
he found without a Governor. He got together by new inrolements two complete
legions, which he raised by his knowledge and experience of the people of that
Country, by reason he had governed that Province as Praetor some few years
before. Tubero arriving with his fleet at Utica, was by Varus kept out of the
town and the Haven; neither would he suffer him to set his son ashore, which
was sick, but compelled him to weigh Anchour and depart.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis Chapter makes the first period of this War, Plutarch in the life of
Pompey.
as it is taken from the beginning of these Civil Broiles, unto Pompey's
forsaking Italy, which was begun and ended in the space of 60 days: and also
opens the gate to second resolutions, which are prosecuted, as the sequel of
the History will manifest: Containing likewise the reasons, why Caesar made
not present pursuit after Pompey, as the hinges of the succeeding War, and the
true causes of the consequents of the same. In the consideration whereof,
albeit Caesar understood the advantage of him that prosecuteth a receding
enemy, and the hopes which might be thereby conceived of a speedy end of that
war; yet having no ready means to accomplish his desire, he thought it better
to prevent such inconveniences as might happily have fallen out upon the same:
and so to keep his party in a progress of their active thoughts, by clearing
and assuring that Western part of the Empire, which Pompey had left unto him by
his departure; rather then to leave an enemy on his back, or to admit a
cooling and languishment of their resolutions, through expectation of shipping,
to follow that course which otherwise had been without exception.

In the carriage whereof we may observe, that as upon the first breaking out of
these troubles, they scambled for the towns of Italy, and sought to strengthen
their parties by such as had no voice in the grand Chapter of the Senate,
Europa prima and prae ^antissima mundi pars, App^^n. Europa (...) victoris
omnium gentium populi, longeque terrarum pulcherrima. Plin. lib. 3. c. 1.
but only injo^ed the benefit of Municipall rights; so now being parted
asunder, and the contagion of this intestine evil spread abroad, and grown to
more ripeness, they made like haste to fasten upon the remoter Provinces,
wherein Caesar had the better portion. For in his share were contained Italia,
Gallia, Britannia, Hispania, Sicilia; which being the prime Countries of
Europe, were consequently the flour of that Empire, for that Europe has ever
been taken for the principal and chiefest part of the world.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SEcondly, we may observe in Cato, the effects of a Stoicall or formal spirit,
which are more valuable in the easiness of peace, then in the difficulties of
war. For, howsoever he made show of bestirring himself, in rigging and
trimming up the Galleys of his Province, commanding more to be built, raising
new troops of horse and foot, and prosecuting his commands with purpose of an
exact account: yet in the end, understanding of Curio his coming, he spent his
fury in complaining of his friends, and laying the cause of those garboiles
upon him, whom by election and consent he had formerly set up, to make head
against such, as otherwise may be supposed would have contained themselves in a
better measure of moderation.

CHAP. XII.
Caesar goes to Rome; and, calling a Senate, complains of the injuries done
unto him.
THese things being ended, Caesar.
that the soldiers might for the residue of the time be a little eased and
refreshed, Caesar brought them back into the next Municipall towns; he himself
went directly to the City: and having called a Senate, he lays open the
injuries and wrongs offered unto him by his Adversaries; shows them, that he
never sought honor in the State by extraordinary means, only he looked to
have enjoyed the full time of his Consulship, and therewith to have been
contented: which was no more then any Citizen might stand for. The Tribunes of
the people had required, that consideration might be had of him in his absence,
notwithstanding the opposition of his enemies, and Cato his bitter resistance,
spending the time, after his old manner, with long and tedious speeches: which
if Pompey (being Consul) had disliked, why did he suffer that to pass which
was enacted? But if then he did allow and like of it, what reason had he to
hinder him from enjoying a benefit which the people of Rome had bestowed upon
him? From that, he fell to speak of his patience: which appeared, in that of
his own accord he moved that either party might quit their forces; which might
have been very pr^^diciall to his honor and dignity: Declared what had been
the malice and bitterness of his Adversaries, who refused to do that
themselves, which they required of another man; choosing rather to imbroile and
confound the whole State, then to forgo the command of an Army: Spoke at large
as well of the wrong done unto him, by taking the two legions from him, as also
for their hard and insolent dealing, in putting the Tribunes of the people by
their place and authority.

He forgot not likewise to relate the conditions which he propounded; the
conference which he desired, and would not be granted. In regard whereof, he
prayed and required, that they would take the charge of the Commonweal, and
give a helping hand to him for the government thereof. But if they should upon
any doubt or mistrust refuse to join with him, he would not much importune
them, but would take it into his own hands* and in the mean time, let
Commissioners be sent to Pompey to treat of peace. Neither did he respect what
Pompey a little before had said in the Senate, That to whom soever Ambassadors
were sent, to such seemed to be ascribed Authority and Preeminence; as, on the
contrary part, such as sent them, manifested an apprehension of fear; for these
were arguments of pusillanimitie. For his part, as he had gone beyond him in
deeds of Arms and noble acts; so would he in like manner, endeavor to excel
him in justice and equity.

The Senators were well pleased that Ambassadors should be sent: but there was
no man found that would go; every man refusing in particular, for fear of
Pompey; who, upon his departure from Rome, had said in the Senate, That he
would hold him that stayed at Rome, in the same condition with them that were
in Caesar's Camp. So that three days were spent in debate and excuses; L.
Metellus, L. Metellus.
Tribune of the people, being drawn by Caesar's adversaries, to protract the
time; and to hinder any matter which Caesar should propound unto them.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
FIrst, we may observe, how irksome it is to humane nature, for him that has
tasted the sweetness of authority, to forgo the reins of command, and again to
inrolle his name in the list of common duty; descending from the throne of
soveraigntie, to the condition of obedience, and to lose his eminency in
respectless equality: especially, Faelicitatis and modera^ienis divid^^^ (...).
if the honor be Military, and of Martial nature. For that fasteneth on us
with a stronger hold, then any other power; being less capable of moderation,
and waited on with the eyes and expectation of present and future ages. Whereby
men grow desperately jealous of the opinion of the world, and cannot endure to
quit themselves of that care, although they have attained to the full time of
their deliverance: but to be supplanted in the midst of so glorious a race, or
to be pulled out of the seat of Magistracy by an abortive miscarriage, is able
to inrage an ambitious spirit so far beyond the bounds of modesty, that it
will not spare any endeavor to confound the greatest Empire, with
irrecoverable calamities.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SEcondly, we may observe the disposition of those Senators, that by their
staying at Rome, became neutrall in that Faction; and thereupon refused either
to take Caesar's commands, or to present themselves to Pompey, as Mediators of
peace. Plutarch has two reasons, why the Senators would undertake no such
matter of Commission as was required by Caesar. The first is this which is here
expressed; Denur^^^^ Pompeio pro hostibus s^ habiturum qui reipub. d^fuissert;
ipse medios and neutrius partis, suorum sibi numero futuros pronunciavit.
Suetonius 75. Ci^^^o 10. Epist. ad At^icum. Plutarch. Lucan. Appian. Horus.
every man fearing the displeasure of Pompey, who at his departure from Rome,
had protested to hold them for enemies that went not along with him: whereas
Caesar censured their forbearance with better advantage to himself, and took
their neutralitie as an argument of becoming his followers. The other reason
which Plutarch avoucheth, is the opinion which the Senators had of Caesar's
double dealing; as not carrying his heart in his mouth, but pretending that
which he never meant. For they could not be persuaded that his end was a
cessation of Arms, or such a peace with Pompey as should have kept on foot
their ancient liberty; but sought rather pretexts of good meaning, to color
his design of making Rome his servant. Howsoever, we may not omit what is
reported to have happened between him and Metellus, more then he himself
speaks of. For, going about to take Money out of the Treasury, he was there
stoutly resisted by this Metellus, of whom he complains; alleging the Laws
and Acts of the State, forbidding any man to touch that Money, but in such
times of extremity as were therein expressed.

To which Caesar answered; That those Laws were only made for time of peace:
but now, Arms and war required another course of proceeding. Nevertheless
Metellus Non nisi per nostrum vobis percussa patebant Templ^ latus, nullasque
feres, sine s^nguine sacro, Sparsa^, raptor, opes. Lucan. lib. 3 Dignum ^e
Caes^ris ita, Nu^^us h^nor faciet^ Idem ^odem.
would not suffer him to break open the doors, until Caesar advised him to be
gone if he loved his life; for it was easier for him to dispatch him then to
speak it: and so entered and carried away the Treasure. Whereupon grows that
of Florus, Censum and patrimonium populi Romani ante rapuit quam Imperium; He
carried away the treasure and patrimony of the people of Rome, before he got
the Empire.

And Appian, deriding the scrupulositie of the ancient Romans, that would not
touch that Treasure but in extremity of war against the Celiae or Galls,
says that Caesar might lawfully take it, for that he had vanquished and
subdued the Galls; whereby the Romans had no further cause to fear them.

CHAP. XIII.
Caesar leaves the City, goes into Gallia, and treats with the
Marseillians.
CAesar perceiving their resolution, Caesar.
after he had spent there in vain some few days (that he might not lose any
more time, and leave those things undone which he purposely intended) he left
the City, and went into the further Gallia. Upon his arrival there, he
understood that Pompey had sent into Spain Vibullius Rufus, whom Caesar had a
little before taken at Corfinium and d^smissed him: and that Domitius likewise
was gone to take Marseilles, with eight Galleys, which he set out from Sicilia
and Sardinia, and manned them with slaves, men infranchised, and his own
husbandmen: sending as messengers before, certain young noblemen of
Marseilles, with whom Pompey upon his departure from the City had earnestly
dealt, that Caesar's new favors might not put out of their remembrance the old
benefits which he had done unto them. Those of Marseilles having received this
message, shut their gates against Caesar, called into the City the Albicans,
barbarous and mountainous people (who of ancient time had held amity with
them, and dwelt upon the hills above Marseilles,) brought Corn from all the
adjacent Regions and castles into the town, set up offices and forges to make
Arms, repaired both their walls, their navy, and their gates.

Caesar called out unto him some fifteen of the chiefest men of Marseilles, and
treated with them, that the beginning of the war might not grow from that
town; who should rather follow the example of all Italy, then apply themselves
to the will of any one man: not omitting such other persuasions as he thought
pertinent to a sound resolution. These men reported at Marseilles what Caesar
had delivered, and by the common consent of the town returned this answer; That
they understood, that the people of Rome was divided into two parts; neither
was it in them to judge, or could they discern which of the two was in the
right. The Leaders of these two factions were Pompey and Caesar, both special
Patrons and Benefactours to their City: of whom, one had augmented the public
revenues of the State, and endowed it with the lands and territories of the
Volcae Arec^mici, and the Helvij; the other, having conquered and subdued By
this Gallias, is understood some place near to Marseilles.
Gallias, gave it unto them, whereby their tributarie In-comes were much
augmented* and therefore, as they were equally bound to both for their favors,
so would they carry to both an equal respect, not ayding either of them
against the other, or receiving them within their gates.

Whilst these things were in handling, Domitius arrived at Marseilles with his
shipping; and being received in, was made Governor of the City, and had the
whole direction of the war committed unto him. By his appointment the ^leet
was sent out into all Coasts; and such ships of burden as they found, they
brought in: the nails, timber, and tackling whereof, they took to mend and
rigge out other ships. What Corn soever was found in the City, was brought in
public keeping; reserving the surplus of victual and provision for a siege,
as occasion should require.

Ca^sar, provoked with these injuries, brought three legions to Marseilles,
determined to make towers and mantelets ready for an assault, and to build
twelve new Galleys at Arles; which were armed, rigged, finished, and brought to
Marseilles, within thirty days after the timber was cut down. Of these he made
D. Brutus Admiral, and left C. Trebonius to follow the siege.

OBSERVATIONS.
FRom the Marseillians we may learn, that it is far easier to say well then
to do well: for howsoever they were able to discern the truth, and to give an
answer to Caesar, well-beseeming the fame and opinion of their literature and
knowledge, August^^ dunum vetustissima post Massiliam bonarum artiu^ ^edes,
Tacit. 3. Annal. Strabo lib. 4.
(being an Academie little inferior to the best, and in later times more
frequented by the Romans, for the study of Oratorie and Philosophy, then
Athens, or any other such chief seat of the Muses;) yet in their actions they
disavowed all: taking upon them most unseasonably to arbitrate those
differences, and to show their opinion of the quarrel, C^^que alii famae
populi terrore paverent, Phocais in dubiis ausa est servare juventu^ Non Graia
levitate ^idem, signataque jura, Et causas, non fata sequi. -- Lucan. l. 3.
by taking part with one faction. Wherein their error the more appeared, in
that the party grieved was not liable to their award, but rather had occasion
to gain thereby a double honor to himself; first, by forcing them, and then by
pardoning their rashness. And yet some Writers do think, they did no more then
they were tied unto by former treaties, and leagues with the Empire (which they
took to consist in Pompey's party) whereof they were loyal and zealous
confederates; as appears by their love, when Rome was taken by the Galls:
for having news thereof, and understanding of the composition which was to be
made to raise the siege from the Capitol, they provided all the gold and
silver they could get, and sent it to Rome for that service. In regard whereof
they were endowed with many Privileges and Immunities, both in the City, and
elsewhere in the Empire. Howsoever, their hap being to respect more an exact
observance of what had passed, then the fatal succeeding course of things,
drew upon them a sharp and bitter war; whereof they could not be freed, but
by submitting themselves to his mercy whom they had rejected. And thus we see
verified that of the Poet; Horace.


Quicquid delirant Reges plectuntur Achivi.
Kings play the fools, and the poor people suffer.
Which implies also how dangerous it is, for men of authority and employment
to be subject to wilful ambition. For as their service is of great importance
to government, when it is attended with well qualified affections; so are their
motions as fearful, which are carried with the violence of exorbitant
passions: especially, considering the means they have, either to misimploy the
power of the State, or to give way to such inconveniences as may necessarily
pervert all things but the ends they aim at: besides the aptness of a high
spirit, not to doubt the truth of that saying which is attributed to Caesar, Si
violandum est jus, regnandi gratia violandum est; If a man would violate all
right and law, he would do it for a kingdom.

CHAP. XIV.
Caesar hastes into Spain.
Whilst these things were prepared and put in order, Caesar.
he sent C. Fabius, one of h^s Legates, with three legions, that had wintered
about Narbone, before him into Spain; commanding him with all speed and
diligence to take the passage of the Pyrenean hills, which were kept at that
time with the forces of L. Afranius: Afranius.
and gave order for the other legions which wintered further off, to follow
after. Fabius, according to his directions, made haste, put the Garrison from
the passage, and by great journeys marched toward Afranius Army.

Upon the arrival of Vibullius Rufus, who (as it is formerly related) was sent
by Pompey into Spain, Petreius. Varro.
Afranius, Petreius, and Varro, Pompey's Legates (of whom* the one governed the
nearest Province of Spain with three legions; the other held the Country from
the Saitus Castalonensis.
forest of Castile, to the river Guadiana. Iure pari rector, castris Afranius
illis, Ac Petreius erat -- Lucan. l. 3.
Ana, with two legions; and the third commanded the Vectones and Lusitania,
with the like number of legions;) did so dispose and divide their charges, that
Petreius was appointed to bring his legions out of Lusitania, through the
territories of the Vectones, and join himself with Afranius; and that Varro
with his power, should keep the further Province of Spain. Which being so
resolved and determined, Petreius having commanded the Lusitanians to levy
horsemen, and other Auxiliarie forces; and Afranius likewise having made the
like levy in the territories of the Nos Celtis geni^i, and ex Iberis. Martial.
lib. 4.
Celtiberi, A valiant people, descended from Lacedemor; of whom Sil. Ital.
says, D^mnatum vivere paci.
Cantabri, and the rest of the barbarous Nations bordering upon the Ocean:
Petreius came speedily through the Vectones to Afranius; and induced by the
opportunity of the place, by mutual consent, they resolved to keep the war on
foot near about Ilerda.

There were with Afranius (as formerly has been showed) three legions, with
Petreius two, besides Scuta^i.
Targetiers of the nearer Province, and Cetrati. Nonrius, Cetra. s^^tum breve.
Quis (...) facere cetram nequeat (...) Evocati.
Buckler-bearers of the further Province, some 80 cohorts, and of both
Provinces about 5000 horse. Caesar had sent his legions into Spain, accompanied
only with six thousand Auxiliary forces, and three thousand horse, which had
been with him in the former wars. And the Galls at his request furnished him
with the like number; besides the noblest and valiantest amongst them, of whom
he had made particular choice to follow him in that war. To these were added
the better sort of the Aquitani, and high-landers, borderers upon the Province
in Gallia. He was advertised that Pompey was on his journey, coming through
Mauritania into Spain, and that he would speedily be therewith his legions: and
thereupon he borrowed money of the Centurions and Tribunes of the soldiers,
and gave it to his Army* whereby he gained two points; For first, he engaged
the captains by that lone to endeavor his good success; and secondly, bought
the good affections of the soldiers by largess and distribution. Fabius
omitted no opportunity to get the favor of the Cities near about him; which he
labored as well by Letters as Messengers: and had already made two bridges
over the river Sicoris, Hesperios inter Sico^is non ultimus amnes, Saxe^s
ingenti quem pons amplectitur arcu, Hybernas passurus aquas -- Luc^n. lib. 4.
d^stant one from another about four miles, and over these bridges sent out his
men to forage; for he had spent all that was to be found on this side the
river. The same thing, and upon the same occasion, did the Leaders of Pompey's
Army; and oftentimes their Cavalry met and incountred together. And as it
happened, that two of Fabius legions going out to forage according to their
daily custom, and had passed the river, the carriage and the Cavalry following
after, upon a sudden (by the over-pestering of horses, and swelling of the
water) the bridge brake, and the rest of the Cavalry was secluded and cut off
from the legions. Plancus sive Plantius, ^ Planitie pedum, Splayfoo^ed.
Which Petreius and Afranius perceiving, by the hurdles and planks that came
down the river; Afranius presently by the bridge which was ad^oyning to the
town and his camp, put over 4 legions, and all his Cavalrie, and went to meet
with Fabius his 2 legions. Upon whose approach, L. Plancus, that commanded the
legions, being constrained by necessity, took the upper ground, dividing his
men into two Battalions, and making their fronts to stand 2 contrary ways, to
the end they might not be circumvented by the horsemen. And although the number
were very far unequal, yet he valiantly withstood very violent charges of the
enemy. The Cavalrie being thus engaged, the Ensigns of two legions were
descried a far off, which Fabius had sent by way of the further bridge, to
second these other two; suspecting that which was come to pass, that the
Commanders of the adverse Army would take the occasion and benefit of this
accident, to cut off our party. Upon whose approach the battle ceased; and the
legions on either side were brought back into their Camps.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe first observation may be taken from this design of Caesar's upon Spain,
being at that time under the government and command of Pompey; the standing or
falling whereof did much import the success of that war: for which respect it
was, that when Caesar could not buckle with the person of his enemy, he used
all means to beat down his authority, as the next in degree to his essence and
being, and most concerning his honor and reputation. For if he took from him
those Provinces, which the State had commended to his charge, and left him no
interest in the obedience of such, whom he might in a sort challenge for his
own people; what assurance could the other parts of the Empire have in his
protection? or what could he elsewhere expect of that which these refused him?

The excellency of a General, is that perfection of judgment commended by
Aristotle, inabling him to discern, Lib. Ethic. 4.
quid primum, or what is most material in that variety of undertaking, which
falls out in following a war. And if that cannot with any conveniencie be
attained, then to know the next point of importance; and so consequently to
distinguish the degrees of difference, as they stand ranked in the order of
judicious proceeding.

For the effectual prosecuting of which design, let us take a short view of
their forces on each side, according as we find them mustered in this chapter;
that by the inequality of their troops, we may judge of the want or
sufficiency of their directions. Afranius, as it is said in the story, had
three legions, and Petreius two legions, together with 80 cohorts of Auxiliarie
forces, supplied unto them by the two Provinces of Spain; which cohorts
equalled the number of eight legions, and so in all made thirteen legions; and
according to the usual rate at that time of 5000 in a legion, amounted to
65000 men: together with 5000 horse; P^ereius and Afranius had 70000 men, or
thereabouts
which came to seventie thousand men, or thereabouts. To confront so great an
enemy, Caesar had five legions, 12000 Auxiliary troupers from the Galls, and
peradventure 1000 Evocati: which according to the former rate of a legion, did
rise to 35000, Caes^r 35000.
or 40000 men at the most. Whereby the one exceeding the other well-near in a
double proportion of strength, and yet failing in correspondencie of success,
calls the verity of that proverb in question, Ne Hercules contra duos,
Hercules himself cannot deal with two. Besides, the inequality of the place
where the trial was to be made, being wholly devoted to the greater party,
was a matter of no small consequence. For he that makes war in a Country
absolutely favoring the enemy, and confronting his purposes, had need of more
forces then the adverse party, or better fortune in his proceedings. And
therefore Fabius, to prevent such mischiefs as might grow by that advantage,
sought all means to draw some of the towns to his faction, and to make himself
friends for his better support and security; according to that which was said
of old, That war cannot be made without some peace.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SEcondy, we may observe the means he used to secure himself of the loyalty of
his Army, and wholly to engage the soldier in his fortune. For the money he
borrowed of the Tribunes and Centurions, Rablais says, that the Creditor
wishes all good (...) his Debt^^^.
was a special Tie of their affections to his service: forasmuch as no man
wishes ill to him, by whose welfare and prosperity he hops to thrive; for
so (wounding himself through another man's body) the hurt would fall upon his
own head: but rather desires such an accomplishment of his hopes, as may make
himself partaker thereof. And on the other side, the largess he made unto the
soldiers did so oblige their endeavor to his purposes, that they were thereby
ready to perform as much as warlike Laelius Laelius.
had promised in his own person, on the behalf of the rest.

Pectore si fratris gladium, juguloque Parentis
Condere me jubeas, Lucan. l. 1
plenaeque in viscera partu
Conjugis, invita peragam tamen omnia dextra.
Bid me to stab my brother, cut
My father's throat, or rip the gut
Of my big-bellied wife, (though loath) I Will do it.
THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THirdly, let us consider the effects of diligence and provident foresight,
which do oftentimes redeem an Army from a dishonorable overthrow; as may be
learned from two circumstances in Fabius directions. Uni (...) non (...) mus.
First, in that he trusted not to one passage over the river Sicoris, but made
two several bridges, as well for the conveniencie as the better security of
his people. Secondly, upon the occasion which the enemy might take by the
breaking of the bridge, to distress the legions on the other side of the
water, he presently sent out succors to prevent such a casualtie: which albeit
it might seem to have proceeded out of curious suspicion, or idle fear, yet it
fell out to be no more then was requisite and expedient. Which may teach a
General to be careful even of possibilities, Quicquid fieri potest, qu^si
futurum cogit^mus. Senec. Epist. 24.
and to prevent contingencies, with the certainty of industrious directions;
accounting always that which may happen, to be as certain as any thing we most
expect.

THE FOURTH OBSERVATION.
COncerning Spain, Spain-Citerior, and Ulterior. Exterior, and Interior. lib. 3.
we are to note that the Romans at first divided it into two Provinces, which
they called the Nearer and the Further; or according to Strabo, the Utter and
the Inner; and they were separated asunder by the river Iberus, now Ebro: And
thence also they were called Cis Iberum, and ultra Iberum, Spain on this side
Ebro, and Spain beyond. The Nearer Province, being the lesser, continued
without alteration during the Roman's government, and was sometimes called
Tarraconensis Provincia, of Tarraeo, the principal town of the same. But the
Further, in process of time was divided into two parts; the one called Betica,
and the other Lusitania: and so the whole Region of Spain came to be divided
into three Provinces. It was first entered by the Romans, by occasion of the
notable siedge of Saguntum: upon which, P. Scipio having subdued the
Carthaginians, reduced Spain into a Province, and left it governed by
Proconsuls, unto the time of Cornelius Lentulus and Lucius Stertinius. Anno) V.
C. 555.
Afterward it was governed by Propraetors, and sometimes by Praetors,
according as the Empire came to be enlarged; and had thereby many governments,
for the preferment of such as had supplied the better places of dignity in the
State. Nevertheless, in the times of trouble the Governors had always
Consularie power; as, in the war against Scrtorius, Quintus Metellus
Proconsul, Livie.
and Cn. Pompeius Questor, cum Consulari potestate missi sunt, were sent with
consular power. And at this time, Pompey governed it by two Deputies or
Legates. Touching the form and figure of the Country, Strabo likeneth it to an
Ox hide; the neck whereof joyneth to the Pyrenean hills, which rise in towers
from one Sea to another, as limits and bounds between France and Spain; taking
their name (as some think) from Pyrene, the Maid that Hercules deflowred, whom
Sil. Ital. mentions, lib. 3.

Pyrene celsa nimbo si verticis arce
Divisos Celtis late prospectat Iberos;
Atque aeterna tenet magnis divortia terris.
Nomen Bebrycia duxere a virgin colles.
Hospitis Alcidae crimen: qui sort laborum
Gerionis peteret cum longa tricorporis arva,
Possessus Baccho, saeva Bebrycis in aula
Lugendam ^ormae sine virginitate reliquit
Pyrenen -- and a little after,
Defletumque tenent Montes per secula nomen.
The lofty tower of Pyren's cloudy head
Over looks the Iberi, whom it parts from Celts,
For aye dividing those two spacious lands.
From Bebryx daughter first these hills took name,
Ravished by Hercules: who as he went
The triple-bodied Gerion's land to seize,
Drunk at the time, and lodged in Bebryx Court,
Pyrene left to be bewailed by beauty,
No more a Virgin --
And her lamented name the Hills still keep.
But according to the opinion more generally received, they are so called of
the Greek word (...); for that Shepherds and Heardsmen set them once on fire,
Lib. 5.
as witnesses Diodorus Siculus. And Aristotle, In libro d^ Mirandis
auscultatioribus.
In Hiberia inquit combustis aliquando pastoribus Sylvis, calenteque ignibus
terra, manifestum argentum defluxisse: cumque postmodum terrae-motus
supervenisset, eruptis hiatibus, magnam copiam argenti collectam; atque inde
Massiliensibus proventus non vulgares obtigisse: He says that on a time in
Spain the Shepherds having set fire on the Woods, the ground was so heated
thereby, that plain rills of silver flowed from the hills; and that afterward
by reason of earthquakes, several gapings being made in the said place, they
gathered great plenty of silver; which the Marscillians made no small benefit
of. The Country of Spain is commended for many things, as may appear by diverse
Elogies: amongst which, that of Claudianus the Poet is written, as though the
Author had been a Pensioner to the Kingdom.

Quid dignum memorare tuis Hispania terris
Vex humana valet? primo lavat aequore solemn
India: tu fessos, exacta luce, jugales
Proluis, inque tuo respirant sydera fluctu.
Dives equis, frugum facilis, pretiosa metallis,
Principibus foecunda piis. --
What noted thing in Spain can man commend?
As Indian seas first drench the morning Sun,
So his tired steeds wash here when day is done:
In Spanish waves the wearied stars take breath.
Spain store of horse, fruits, precious metals has;
Breeds pious Princes. --
CHAP. XV.
Caesar coming to his Army, advances forward, and incampeth near unto the
Enemy.
WIthin two days after Caesar came into the Camp with nine hundred horse,
Caesar.
which he had kept with him for a convoy. The bridge broken by the tempest, was
almost re-edified, and that which remained undone, he commanded to be finished
in the night. And having seen the nature and situation of the place, he left
six cohorts to keep the Camp and the bridge, with all the carriages of the
Army. And the next day, putting all his forces into a triple battle, he
marched toward Ilerda: and there standing a while in Arms, offered battle,
in an equal and indifferent place. Afranius brought out his forces, and made a
stand in the midst of the hill, under his Camp. Caesar perceiving that Afranius
at that time was not disposed to fight, determined to incamp himself some 400
paces from the foot of the hill. Pron^ tum Caesar Olympo, In noctem subiti
^ircumdedit agmina fossa, Du^ primae praestant (...), host ^mque sfellit. Luc.
l. 4.
And least the soldiers should be interrupted in their works by the sudden
assaults and incursions of the enemy, he forbad them to fortify it with a
rampire or wall, which must necessarily be discovered and seen afar off; but
caused a ditch to be made of fifteen foot in breadth, in the front of the Camp
next unto the Enemy. The first and second battle (according as was directed)
continued in Arms; Luc. l. 4.
and the third battle performed the work behind them unseen, before it was
understood by Afranius that Caesar would incamp in that place. Which being
finished, he drew his legions within the ditch, and so stood in Arms all night.

The next day he kept all his Army within the ditch. And forasmuch as the
matter to make the Rampire was to be fetched far off, he kept the like course
for the finishing of the rest; allotting each side of the Camp to be fortified
by a several legion, with a ditch to be sunk about of the same scantling: and
in the mean time, made the other legions to stand ready in Arms against the
enemy.

Afranius and Petreius, to the end they might amuse the soldier, and hinder
the work, brought down their forces to the foot of the hill, and provoked them
to fight. Howbeit, Caesar intermitted not the work, trusting to three legions
in Arms, and the munition of the ditch. The Enemy not making any long stay, or
advancing further then the foot of the hill, led back their troops into the
Camp. The third day Caesar fortified his Camp with a Rampire; and commanded the
rest of the cohorts and the carriages which were left in the other Camps, to be
brought unto him.

OBSERVATION.
IT may be observed for Caesar's custom throughout the whole course of his
wars, to approach as near the enemy as conveniently he could; that so he might
the better observe his passages, and be ready to take the favor of any
opportunity, which either the nature of the place, or the motions of the
adversary would afford him. Which was the rather his advantage, in regard of
his dexterity, and superlative knowledge in the use of Arms, together with
the experience of his old legions: whereby he was able, not only to improve
his own designs to the utmost of an honorable success, but to return the
disgrace of any attempt made upon his Army, upon the heads of them that were
authors of the same. For otherwise, his accosting so near an enemy, might have
turned to his own loss; as being full of hazard, and subject to more
casualties then he that stands further off. And therefore the rule is, That
he that desires to ^it near his adversary, must be exceeding circumspect, and
sure of some advantage, either from the place, or the over-awing power of his
forces, or else out of his own virtue, or by some other means, to over-sway the
inconveniences which attend such engagements. As may appear by that which
Frontinus observes hence, touching the straight whereinto Caesar was fallen;
Lib. 1. cap. 5.
being either to give battle, which the enemy refused; or to make good that
place, from whence he could not retreat but with danger. Whereupon, a little
before night be stole the making of a ditch on the back of his Army; and
retiring himself within the same, stood in Arms all night, for his better
safety.

The use of such ditches are of much importance, and have oftentimes redeemed
an Army from great extremities: and were so frequent upon all occasions with
the Romans, that he that shall deny them to be good ditchers, shall do them
wrong. And not only they, but other Nations could tell how to make use of the
Spade.

Pericles of Athens, being forced by them of Peloponnesus into a place that had
but two outlets of escape, sunk a ditch of a great latitude thwart one of the
passages (as though he meant to keep out the enemy) and set his soldiers to
break out the other way. The Peloponnesians thinking he could no way escape by
the passage where the trench was cut, applied themselves wholly to the other
place, where the soldiers made show of breaking out: whereby (through the help
of bridges which he had formerly provided) he escaped over the ditch without
resistance. Sometimes they added other helps to these trenches, especially when
they sought handsome means to get themselves away: whereof Sertorius may be an
instance; who, having the enemy pressing him in the rere, and being to pass a
River, drew a ditch and a rampire at his back, in the fashion of a halfmoon:
which rampire he heaped with wood and combustible matter, and so setting it on
fire, kept off the enemy, and passed with ease over the water.

In like manner, Herculeius, one of Sertorius Legates, having rashly entered
with a small power into a long and narrow passage between two hills, and
finding himself pursued by great forces of the enemy, sunk a cross trench
between the two Mountains; and piling the rampire with wood, set it on fire,
and so cut off the enemy.

CHAP. XVI.
Caesar's attempt to possess himself of a small hill: what disadvantage he ran
into, by missing of his purpose; what means he used to recover himself.
BEtween the town of Ilerda, Caesar.
and the next hill where Petreius and Afranius were encamped, there was a Plain
of about three hundred paces; in the midst whereof stood a little Mole, rising
higher then the rest: which if Caesar could get and fortify, he hoped to cut
off the enemy from the town and the bridge, and from such victuals and
provisions as were brought to the town. Hereupon he took three legions out of
the Camp; and having put them into order of battle, he commanded the
Antesignani of one legion to run before, and possess the place. Which being
perceived, the cohorts that kept watch before Afranius Camp, were presently
sent a nearer way to take that Mount. The matter came to blows: but forasmuch
as Afranius party came first to the place, our men were beaten back; and by
reason of new supplies sent against them, were constrained to turn their backs,
and retire to the legions.

The manner of fight which those soldiers used, was first to run furiously
upon an enemy, to seize any place boldly and with great courage; not much
respecting their orders or ranks, but fighting in a scattered and dispersed
fashion. If they chaunc't to be thoroughly charged, they thought it no shame to
give way and retire; accustomed thereunto by frequenting the Lusitanians, and
other barbarous people, using that kind of fight: as it commonly falls out,
that where the soldiers have long lived, they get much of the usage and
condition of those places. Notwithstanding, our men were much troubled thereat,
as unaccustomed to that kind of ^ight: for seeing every man leave his rank, and
run up and down, they feared least they should be circumvented, and set upon
inflank, and on their bare and open side; whereas themselves were to keep their
order, and not to leave their places, but upon extraordinary occasion.

Upon the routing of the Antesignani, the legion that stood in the corne^ left
the place, and retreated to the next Hill; almost all the Army being
affrighted, upon that which had happened beyond every man's opinion, contrary to
former use.

Caesar encouraging his men, brought out the ninth legion to second them; by
that means compelling the enemy (insolent of good success, and shrewdly
pursuing our men) to turn their backs, and to retire to the town of Ilerda, and
there to make a stand under the walls. But the soldiers of the ninth legion,
carried on with endeavor, and going about to repair their loss, rashly
followed the enemy into a place of disadvantage, and came under the Hill
whereon the town stood: and as they would have made their retreat, they were
charged afresh from the upper ground. The front of the place had an uneasy
broken ascent, and was on each side steep; extended only so much in breadth,
as would serve three cohorts to imbattell in: neither could the Cavalrie come
to help them. The Hill declined easily from the town about four hundred paces
in length: and that way our men had some convenience of retreat, from the
disadvantage to which their desire had unadvisedly led them. The fight
continued in this place: which was very unequal, both in regard of the
straightness thereof, as also for that they stood under the foot of the Hill,
whereby no weapon fell in vain amongst them. Notwithstanding, by prowess and
valor they patiently endured all the wounds they received. The enemies forces
were supplied and renewed, by such cohorts as were often sent out of the Camp
through the town, that fresh men might take the place of such as were wearied
out. And the like was Caesar fain to do, sending fresh Cohorts to that place to
relieve the wearied.

After they had thus continually fought for the space of five hours together,
and that our men were much overcharged with an unequal multitude: having
spent all their weapons, they drew their swords, and ascended up the hill, to
charge and assault the enemy: and having slain a few of them, the rest were
driven to make retreat. The cohorts being thus put back to the walls, and some
of them for fear having taken the town, our men found an easy retreat. Our
Cavalrie did from a low ground get up unto the top of the hill; and riding up
and down between the two Armies, made our soldiers to retreat with better
case: and so the fight succeeded diversely.

About seventie of our men were slain in the first on set. And amongst these
was slain Q. Fulginius, Captain of the first Hasta^e Centurie of the fourteenth
legion; who, for his exceeding valor, was preferred to that place from the
lower orders. Six hundred at least were wounded. And of Afranius party were
slain T. Caecilius, Centurion of a Primipile order, and four Centurions more,
Et victor subducto Mart pependit. Lucan. lib. 4
besides two hundred soldiers. But such was the opinion of that days
businesses that either side believed they left with the better.

Afranius party was so persuaded, for that they long stood to handy-blows, and
resisted the violence of our soldiers, although in all men's judgment they
were the weaker: as also, for that they at first took and held the place which
gave occasion of that fight; and in the first encounter, compelled our men to
turn their backs. Our men in like manner thought they had the better, in regard
they had maintained fight for five hours together, in a place of disadvantage,
and with an unequal multitude; that they ascended up the hill with their
swords drawn, and compelled their adversaries to turn their backs, and to
retreat into the town, maugre the disadvantage of the place.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IN this direction which Caesar gave, to take the little Hill between Ilerda
and Afranius Camp, we may observe the danger depending upon the mischieving of
an action. For the failing of a purpose, in seeking to obtain that which would
prove of great advantage, does oftentimes draw men into as great
inconveniences. And as the end in every design pretends gain, so the means
thereof do give way to hazard: from whence it consequently follows, that such
as are employed in execution, had need to use all endeavor, not to falsify
the grounds of good directions, by negligent or inconsiderate carriage; but
rather to make good any want or defect, by serious and wary prosecution of the
same.

And the rather, for that it specially concerns their good that have the
charge and handling of commands: for they first are like to feel the smart of
any error committed therein; or otherwise, to have the honor of any fortunate
success, Omnis laus virtutis in action consistit.
forasmuch as Virtue has all her praise from Action.

Concerning the use of running, we are to understand that the Romans (amongst
other their exercises of Arms) had special practice of this, Arist. Eth.
as available in four respects, Lib. 1. cap. 9.
according as Vegetius has noted. The use of running.
First, to the end they might charge the enemy with greater force and violence.
Secondly, that they might possess themselves with speed, of places of
advantage. Thirdly, that they might readily discover, as should be found
expedient upon all occasions. And lastly, to prosecute a flying enemy to better
purpose and effect. Miles in media pace decurrit, sine ullo host, and
supervacuo labor ^aff^tur, ut sufficere necessario possit. Seneca Epist. 18.
And this, as Seneca says, they practiced in peace; that being accustomed to
needless labor, they might be able to discharge necessary duties. And Lib. 26.
Livie, amongst the military exercises used by Scipio, to fit his men for those
glorious exploits which he afterward achieved, says; That the first day, the
legions ran four miles in Arms. And Suetonius affirms, that Nero, having
appointed a race for the Praetorian cohorts, carried a Target lifted up before
them with his own hand. And that Galba did more admirably; for being suited of
purpose to make himself eminent, he directed a field-race with a Target,
himself running as fast as the Emperors Chariot, for twenty miles together.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe second thing to be noted in these specialties, is, the bold enterprise of
Caesar's men, in charging the enemy with their swords drawn, against the Hill;
whereby making them to give back, they had an easy and safe retreat from the
danger wherein they were engaged. Whereby we may observe, that difficulties of
extremity are never better cleared, then by adventurous and desperate
undertakings: According to the condition of diseases and distemperatures of the
body, Medici leviter aegrotantes, leviter curant: gravioribus autem morbis,
periculosis curationes and ancipires adhibere coguntur. Cic. lib. 1. de
officiis.
which being light and easy, are cured with mild and easy potions; but being
grievous and doubtful, do require sharp and strong remedies. Which does also
in like manner appear throughout the whole course of Nature, and particularly
in weights: for as ponderous and heavy bodies are not moved, but with a
counterpoise of greater force; no more can extremities of hazard be avoided,
but by like perilous enforcements.

And hence grows the difference between true valor and foolhardy rashness;
being but one and the same thing, if they were not distinguished by the subject
wherein they are showed. For to run headlong into strange adventures, upon no
just occasion, were to show more levity then discretion: And again, to use the
like boldness in cases of extremity, deserves the opinion of virtuous
endeavor. As is well observed by Homer, Iliad. 6.
in the person of Hector, persuading the Trojans that fled away, to stand and
make a head against the Grecians; This is the time, says he, considering the
danger wherein we are, to use that prowess and courage which we boast of.

And accordingly, Diomedes censured Glaucus in the same place, for offering
himself to the fury of the Grecians; Either thou art some God, says he, or
else but a lost and forlorn man. Which may serve to learn us the true use of
courage; that ordinarily is never more showed then in misemployment.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
I Have already, in the observations of the second Commentary of the wars of
Gallia, The parts of a legion.
discoursed particularly of the parts of a Legion: Where it appears, that in
Caesar's time a legion consisted of five thousand men, or thereabouts; and
according to the sufficiency and experience of the soldiers, was divided into
three parts. The first and meanest of such as followed an Ensign, were called
Hastati; the second, Principes; and the third and chief sort, Triarii: and
according to this division, had their place and precedence in the Army.

Again, each of these three kinds was divided into ten companies, which they
called Maniples; and every Maniple was subdivided into two Centuries or Orders;
and in every Order there was a Centurion or Captain. These Orders were
distinguished by the numbers of the first, second, third, and so consequently
unto the tenth orders, which were the last and lowest of each of these three
kinds. So that this Q. Fulginius, here mentioned, was Centurion of the first
and prime order of the Hastati: and T. Caecilius, Centurion of the first order
of the Triarii, which by excellency was called Primipilus, or the Leader of
the first company of a legion.

Now concerning their imbattelling, we are to note, that according to this
former division of Hastati, Principes, and Triarii, upon occasion of fight,
they made a triple battle, one standing in front to another; which we call the
vant-gard, battle, and rere-ward. Whereof the Hastati were called Antesignani:
Antesignani.
not for that they had no Ensigns of their own, for every Maniple had an
Ensign; but because they stood imbattelled before the Eagle, and other the
chief Ensigns of the legion. Lib. 22.
To which purpose is that of Livie, Pugnaorta est, non illa ordinata per
Hastatos, Principesque and Triarios, nec ut pro signis Antesignanus, post signa
alia pugnaret Acies: The fight began not a regular fight by Hastati, Principes
and Triarii, nor in that orderlinesse that the Antesignani fought before the
Ensigns, and another battle behind the Ensigns. And again; Lib. 9.
Cadunt Antesignani: and ne nudentur propugnatoribus signa, sit ex secunda
prima Acies: The Antesignani were cut down: so that lest the Ensigns should be
le^t naked of defendants, the second battle was made the first. Whereby it
appears that most of the chiefest Ensigns were with the Principes, which were
called Subsignani, as the Triarii Post signani.

Amongst other benefits of these so particular divisions of an Army, that is
not the least which is noted by Thucydides, Lib. 5.
Ut jussa imperatoris brevi spacio ad singulos milites deferri possent; the
commands of the general are thereby suddenly transmitted to every particular
soldier.

CHAP. XVII.
Caesar brought into great extremity by overflowing of two Rivers.
THe enemy fortified the Mount for which they contended, Caesar.
with great and strong works, and there put a Garrison. In the space of those
two days that these things were in doing, there fell out upon a sudden a
great inconvenience: for such a tempest happened, that the like waters were
never seen in those places. And further besides, the snow came down so
abundantly from the Hills, that it overflowed the banks of the River; and in
one day brake down both the bridges which Fabius had made: and thereby brought
Caesar into great extremity. For, as it is formerly related, the Camp lay
between two Rivers, Cinga rapidus magis quam magnus.
Sicoris and Cinga; and within thirty miles neither of these Rivers were
passable, so that all the Army were of necessity couped up in that
straightness: neither could the Cities which had formerly ranged themselves
with Caesar's party, furnish any supplies of victual and provision; nor such
of the Army as had gone far for forage, being hindered by the rivers, could
return to the Camp; nor yet the great convotes and reenforcements, coming to
him out of Italy and Gallia, could get to the Camp.

The time of year was very hard; for there was neither old corn left of their
winter provisions, nor that on the ground was as yet ripe. The cities and towns
near about were all emptied: for Afranius before Caesar's coming, had caused
all the Corn to be brought into Ilerda; and that which remained, was since
Caesar's coming all spent. And for Cattle (which might have relieved this
necessity) by reason of the war, they were removed by the bordering towns,
and carried farther off. Such as were gone out to forage, and to seek Corn,
were by the light-armed Portugalls, and the Buckler-bearers of the hither
Spain, much troubled and molested: for these men could easily pass the river,
forasmuch as none of them used to go to war, without bladders for that
purpose. On the contrary part, Afranius abounded with all necessary provisions:
great quantity of Corn was formerly provided and stored up, much was brought in
from all the Provinces round about, there was also great plenty of forage in
his Camp: for the bridge at Ilerda afforded means of all these things without
danger, and the Country beyond the river was whole and untouched, which Caesar
could not come unto by any means. The waters continued for many days together.
Caesar used all means to re-edifie the Bridges; but neither the swelling of the
River would permit him, nor yet the cohorts of the Enemy, placed on the banks
of the other side, suffer him to go forwards with it: which they might easily
hinder, both in regard of the nature of the river, and the greatness of the
water, as also for that they might easily cast their weapons from along the
bank, unto one place or point. Whereby it was very hard, at one and the same
time (the river running so violently as it did) to do the work, and to shun the
weapons.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
FIrst, we may observe, that the strength of a multitude is not privileged
from such casualties as betide the weaknesses of particular persons; but does
oftentimes undergo extremities, which can neither by providence be prevented,
nor removed by industry: and are such as proceed not from the endeavor of an
enemy, but out of the circumstances of time and place; together with such
accidents as are interlaced with the same. In respect whereof it was, that
Cambyses told Cyrus, Sunt quaedam in quibus non adversus hominus certamen est,
sed cum ipsis rebus: quas superare perdiffi^^e est.
That in the course of war he should meet with some occasions, wherein he was
not to labor and contend with men, but with chances and things; which were not
to be overcome with less difficulty then an enemy; and are the more dangerous,
according as they give way to scarcity and lack of victual. For as it is said
in the same place; Scis brevi finem habiturum imperium, si commeatu exercitus
careat: Xenoph. lib. 1. de Inst. Cyri.
You know that if your Army be once starved, your Empire can be but shortlived.

The remedies whereof are first, Patience: which is as requisite in a soldier,
as either courage or any other ability; and in such cases keeps an Army from
coffeehouse and disorder, until means of better fortune. And secondly, Good
endeavor, Diligentia in omnibus rebus pl^rimum valet.
which avails much in such chances; the effect whereof will appear by that
which Caesar wrought, to redeem his Army from these inconveniences.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COncerning that which is here noted of the Spaniards, Bladders used by the
Spaniards, ^^^aimming over Rivers.
that made nothing of passing a River with the help of bladders, which the
Romans were readier to wonder at then to imitate; it is observed, that as
people exquisitely fashioned to a civil life, by a firm and settled policy of
government, are firm and real in the whole course of their proceedings, and
accordingly do show their punctuality, as well in their solemnities and private
carriages, as in their magnificent and stately buildings: so on the other side,
barbarous and rude Nations, that live under general and slight laws, are as
slight and rude in their actions; as amongst other things, may appear in that
the Spaniards thought it no scorn to use the help of bladders in passing over a
River, as a device coming next to hand; which the people of a wise and potent
State would not have done, but by a sure and substantial bridge.

The use of which bladders, as it has been ancient amongst people of that
nature, so it is continued in the same manner by the Savages inhabiting
Groenland, and the North parts of America; as appears by discoveries made of
late by the Moscovy Merchants, about the North-west passage: from whence such
as are employed in those voiages, have brought great and large bladders or
bags, made of Seal-skins, ingeniously devised to be filled and blowed with
wind, and tied behind at their girdle, and at their collar, to help themselves
in swimming. And after the same easy fashion, Lib. 6. cap. 14.
the Indians of Peru, as Josephus Acosta writes (instead of wood and stone)
made their bridges over great Rivers of plaited Reeds, which they fastened to
the banks on each side with stakes: or otherwise of bundles of straw and weeds,
by which, men and beasts (if there be any credit in his story) pass over with
ease. Howbeit, as when the ancient Greeks would note a man of extreme
insufficiency, they would say, he could neither read nor swim: so Caesar seemed
of the same opinion, by commending the skill of swimming, as a thing of much
consequence in the use of Arms. Whereof he made good experience in Egypt:
where he cast himself into a small boat, for his better safety; and finding it
overcharged, and ready to sink, he leapt into the sea, and swam to his Fleet,
which was two hundred paces off, holding certain papers in his left hand above
the water, and trailing his coat of Arms in his teeth, that it might not be
left to the enemy.

CHAP. XVIII.
Afranius marches with three legions, to cut off a party. The scarcity of
victual in Caesar's Army.
IT was told Afranius, Caesar.
of great troops and convoies that were coming to Caesar, but were hindered by
the waters, and abode there by the Rivers side: for thither were come Archers
out of Ruthenia, and horsemen out of Gallia, with many carres and carriages,
according to the custom of the Galls. There were besides, of all sorts, about
six thousand men, with their servants and attendants; but without order, or any
known command: for every man was at his own liberty, traveling the Country
without fear, according to the former freedom and safety of the ways. There
were likewise many young men of good rank, Senators sons, and knights of Rome;
besides Ambassadors from sundry States, and diverse of Caesar's Legates. All
these were kept back by the River.

Af^anius went out in the night time with three legions, and all his horse, to
cut off this party; and sending his Cavalry before, set upon them unawares.
Howbeit, the Cavalry of the Galls put themselves speedily in order, and
buckled with them. And as long as it stood upon indifferent terms, they being
but a few, did withstand a great number of the enemy: but as soon as they
discovered the Ensigns of the legions coming toward them, some few of them
being slain, the rest betook themselves to the next hills.

This small time of encounter was of great consequence for the safety of our
men: Jam co^e^ semper magnorum pr^ma malorum, Saeva fames aderat: nulloque
obsessus ab host Miles ege^, toto cens^ non prodigus emit Exiguam C^re^em. ^
Luc^n. l. 4.
for by this means they had opportunity to take the upper ground. There were
lost that day two hundred Archers, a few horsemen, and no great number of the
soldiers boys, together with the baggage. Victuals by reason of all these
things waxed very dear, as well in regard of the present want, as also for fear
of future penury, as commonly it happens in such cases; insomuch as a bushel
of Corn was worth fifty pence. Whereby the soldiers grew weak for want of
sustenance: and the inconveniences thereof daily more and more increased. For
so great was the alteration which happened in a few days, that our men were much
afflicted with the extreme want of all necessary provisions: whereas they on
the other side, having all things in abundance, were held for victors. Caesar
sent unto those States which were of his party, and instead of Corn, gave them
order to furnish him with Cattle; dismissed soldiers boys, and sent them to
towns farther off; relieving the present scarcity by all the means he could.

Afranius and Petreius, together with their friends, enlarged these things in
their letters to Rome: rumor and report added much hereunto; as that the war
was even almost at an end. These Messengers and Letters being come to Rome,
there was great concourse from all parts to Afranius house, much congratulation
and rejoicing for these things: and thereupon many went out of Italy to Pompey,
some to be the first messengers of the news; others, that they might not seem
to expect the event of the war, and so prove the last that came to that party.

When the matter was brought to these difficulties and extremities, and all the
ways were kept by Afranius soldiers and horsemen, and no bridges could be
made: Caesar gave order to the soldiers, to make such Prim^m (...) salix m^d
facto (...) parvam Texitur in (...), Vectoris (...) L^^^n. l. 4.
Boats and Barks as he had in former years taught them the use of in the war
of Britain: the keels whereof were built of light stuff, and small timber, and
the upper parts made with wicker, and covered with hides. Which being finished,
he laded them upon Carres, and carried them in the night some twenty two miles
from the Camp. And in those Barks transporting his soldiers over the river,
upon a sudden he possessed himself of a little hill, which lay near unto the
water side: which hill he speedily fortified, before the enemy had notice
thereof. Afterward he brought over a legion to that place, and made a bridge
from side to side in two days space: and so the convoies, which had gone forth
for provisions and forage, returned back in safety; whereby he began to settle
a course for provision of Corn.

The same day he passed over the the river a great part of his Cavalry, who
falling unlooked for upon the forragers (scattered here and there without fear
or suspicion) cut off a great number of men and cattle. Whereupon the Enemy
sending certain Spanish troops, bearing little round bucklers, to second and
relieve the forragers, they divided themselves of purpose into two parts; the
one to keep and defend the booty which they had got, and the other to resist
and beat back the forces sent to charge them. One of our cohorts, which had
easily run out before the Army, was intercepted, and cut off: the rest returned
by the bridge into the Camp in safety with a great booty.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THese Rutheni inhabited that part of Provence where Rhodes now stands:
Rutheni.
amongst whom Caesar had ordinarily a legion or two in Garrison, S^lvuntur
stavi long^ statione Rutheni.
for the better keeping of the Country in obedience, Lucan. l. 1.
being a stout and warlike people, and using archery, as appears in this
place. Which howsoever the course of time has brought into utter contempt, yet
let us not scorn to take notice, that anciently it has been used by such as
performed the greatest feats of Arms: For Hercules had but two sorts of weapons
to atchieve labors of so much variety; a Club for such monsters as would
contest with his valor, Stympha^^dae.
and Bow and Arrows for others that kept farther off. And in the old war of
Troy (if Homer may be believed) Pindarus Duke of Lycia, Iliad. lib. 5.
having a stable of gallant Coursers, left them all at home, lest he should not
find means at Troy to give them their ordinary keeping; and came on foot with
his bow and arrows, with such reputation of his deeds of Arms, that Aeneas
sought him out in a conflict, to resist the rage and extreme pressures of
Diomedes. Iliad. lib. 7.
And on the contrary part, Teucer relieved the distressed Grecians from a hot
and desperate pursuit, by slaying with his bow eight valiant Trojans before he
stirred his foot.

Concerning the use of which weapon, howsoever it may seem ridiculous (to such
as understand nothing but the course of the present age) to recall the long bow
to the service of a battle; yet they may remember, that the Gray-goose wing
gave our forefathers such advantage, that they wrought wonders amongst all
Nations for deeds of Arms: which we should imitate with as much hope of
success, if we could handle our bows in any measure as they did. Of this I
have already formerly treated.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IT is a saying as true as it is old, An ill chance comes not alone.
that An ill hap comes not alone, but is always attended with such
consequents as will enforce other inconveniences; as may be observed by this
extremity here mentioned. For the mischief was not bounded with the affliction
which Caesar suffered for want of needful provision, notwithstanding the
weight was such as could not be born by ordinary patience: but the enemy
enlarged it to his further advantage, vaunting of it as a helpless remedy, and
making out dispatches to send victory to Rome. Which gave him yet further
prejudice in the opinion of the world; and made those his enemies, that
formerly showed no dislike of his proceedings. And thus every ill chance has a
tail of many other misfortunes; which if either providence or endeavor may
prevent, it shall much import a Commander to avoid them.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
AS Necessity makes men constant in their sufferings, Necessit^s fortiter
^e^re docet, consu^tudo facile. S^n. de (...). cap. 10.
so Custom gives easiness and means of deliverance: according as may appear
by this direction of Caesar, which was wholly drawn from former experience. For
first the Boats here prescribed, were such as he used in the war of Britany;
and as far as may be gathered out of the former Commentaries, Lib. 5.
were those he commanded to be built for his second journey: which he would now
imitate in regard of the flatnesse of their bottomes, and not otherwise. For it
is not to be supposed, that those Barks were covered with skins; unless
peradventure he used some such as these upon occasion in that war, not
expressed in the story.

Herodotus in his Clio, describes the like; The boats (says he) which come
from Babylon, down the River Euphrates, are made by the Heardsmen of Armenia,
of light Timber, in a round fashion, without beak or poup, and are covered with
skin, the hiry side inward; and in these they take their passage. Such as
fish for Salmon in the River of Sever^^, use the like boats in all respects,
Corracles.
which they call Corracles of Corium; being all covered with horse-skins tanned.

Secondly, the means he used to pass over without impeachment from the Enemy,
by carrying those boats in the nightime up the River to a place of security,
was such, the like whereof he had formerly practiced in Gallia, to pass the
River Loire, being then guard don the other side by the Enemy. Whereby we see
how much use and continuance does enable men, beyond others of smaller
experience: according to that, Dies Diem docet, One day teaches another; or,
Older and wiser.

CHAP. XIX.
The Massilians encounter with Brutus at Sea, and are beaten.
WHile these things were done at Ilerda, Caesar.
the Massilians (by the direction of L. Domitius) rigged and set out 17
Galleys, whereof eleven were covered; besides many lesser vessels which went
along with them, to make the Navy seem the greater for the astonishment of the
Enemy. In these they put a great number of Archers, and many Albicks, of whom
we have formerly made mention; encouraging them both by rewards and promises.
Domitius required certain ships for himself, and them he filled with Shepherds
and Countrymen, which he had brought thither with him. The Navy being thus
furnished, set forward with great confidence toward our shipping, whereof D.
Brutus was Admiral, and lay at Anchour at an Island right over against
Marseilles. Brutus was far inferior to the enemy in shipping; but Caesar
having picked the chiefest and val^antest men out of all the legions, as well
of the Antesignani as Centurions, put them aboard the Fleet, they themselves
requiring to be employed in that service. These men had prepared hooks and
grapples of Iron, and had likewise furnished themselves with many Piles and
Darts, and other sorts of weapons; and understanding of the Enemies coming* put
to sea, and encountered with the Massilians. They fought on either side very
valiantly and fiercely: neither were the Albicks much inferior to our men in
prowess, being rough mountainous people, exercised in Arms, and having a
little before fallen off from the Massilians, did now remember the late
contract and league they had made with them. The Shepherds, in like manner (a
rude and untamed kind of people, stirred up with hope of liberty,) did strive
to show their valor in the presence of their Master.

The Massilians (trusting to the nimblenesse of their shipping, and in the
skill and dexterity of their Pilots, did frustrate (in a deluding manner) the
shock of our ships, when they came violently to stem them. And forasmuch as
they had sea-room enough, they drew out their Navy at length, to compass and
enclose our men about: and sometimes they would single out one of our ships,
and set upon them with diverse of the^rs together, or wipe off a side of their
oars in their passage along by them.

When they came to deal at hand (leaving aside the art and skill of the P^lots)
they took themselves to the stoutnesse and valor of the Highlanders. Our men
were fain to use worse oar-men, and more unskilful Pilots; who being lately
taken out of ships of burden, did not well know the true names of the tackling,
and were much troubled with the heaviness and sluggishnesse of the shipping;
which being made in haste of unseasoned timber, was not so nimbie or ready for
use. But as the matter came to handy-blows, every single ship did willingly
undertake two at once; and having grapled with either of them, fought on each
side, entering valiantly the enemies ships, killing a great number of the
Highlanders and Shepherds. Part of the ships they sunk, some they took with
the men, and the rest they beat back into the Haven. That day the Massilians
lost nine ships, with those that were taken. This news was brought to Caesar at
Ilerda.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
I Have formerly observed the manner of their sea fight, Sea Fight.
consisting of three parts. The first was, their nimble and skillful managing
of their ships, either forcibly to assault, or to lavire and bear off, as might
fall for their best advantage: wherein the Massilians, by reason of the
skilfulnesse of their Pilots, had great confidence. The second was, their fight
before they came to grappling, as well with great engines, such as were their
Balistae and Catapultae, casting stones and logs of wood one against another,
as also with slings, arrows and da^ts; resembling our great artillery, and
small shot: for which purpose, their ships were built with fore-ca^^les and
turrets, and other advantages of height, for their casting weapons. The third
was, their grappling and forcible entry; wherein, forasmuch as the matter was
referred to the arbitrament of valor, the legionary soldier carried the
cause. Whence we may observe, that their legio^s were the (...) of their
valiant and worthy men, as well for the sea as the land; being ^itted by the
discipline of their Military exercises, to undertake any service subject to
humane industry; whereof they g^ve an account worthy the School wherein they
were instructed.

Neither is (...) at any time, but that such kingdoms as (...) to train up
their men in Academies of virtuous Actual^y, do always keep then honor at a
high (...); affording at all times men of absolute and complete carriage, both
for designment and performance.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
I Have a little before showed out of Livie, that the Antesignani were
ordinarily taken for the Hastati; which being the easiest sort of soldiers,
according to the general division of a legion, does seem to contradict the
passage in this Chapter, Sed delectos ex omnibus legionibus fortissimos viros
Antesignanos, Centuriones Caesar ei classi attribuerat; But Caesar having picked
the valiantest of the Antesignani out of all the Legions, put them into this
Fleet as Centurions. For the better clearing whereof, we are to note, that as
the Hastati, or first battle of a legion, were generally taken for the
Antesignani (as standing before the Eagle and other the chiefest Ensigns,
which were always amongst the Principes or second battle;) so every Maniple
having an Ensign in the midst of the troup, the soldiers that stood in front
before the Ensign were likewise called Antesignani, and were the best soldiers
in the Company: for the Centurion, standing alwai^s in the head of the troup,
was accompanied with the valiantest and worthiest men; the rest filling up the
rere, consorted with the Lieutenant, who thereupon was called Tergi-ductor.

Whence we may admire the temperature and disposition of a Roman Army; being
first generally divided into three battles; whereof the meanest were in the
vantguard, to make trial of their strength, and to spend the heat of their
young blood in the first affront of an enemy: The Veterani, or old soldiers,
being left in the rereward, to repair any loss, which either force or casualty
should cast upon their Leaders. And again, to counterpoise themselves, in such
a manner as the weakest might not alwa^^s go to the wall, their private
Companies were so ordered, that the best men were always in front. Whereby
they made such an exquisite temper, as kept every part of the Army in their
full strength.

CHAP. XX.
Upon the making of the Bridge at Ilerda, the Enemy resolves to transfer the
war into Celtiberia.
Upon Caesar's making of his Bridge, Caesar*
Fortune suddenly changed. The enemy fearing the courage and valor of our
cavalry, did not so freely range abroad as they had wont to do; sometimes
seeking forage within a small distance of the Camp, to the end they might find
a safe and easy retreat if occasion required; sometimes fetching a great
compass about, to avoid the guards and stations of our horsemen. And if they
had received but the least check, or had but descried the Cavalry afar off,
they would have cast down their burdens, and fled away.

At last they omitted forraging for many days together, and (which was never
used by any Nation) sent out to seek it in the night. In the mean time those of
Osca and Calaguris, Osca.
being in league together, Calaguris.
sent Ambassadors to Caesar, with offer of their service, in such sort as he
should please to command it. Within a few days the Tarraconenses, Lacetani,
and Ausetani, together with the Illurgavonenses, which border upon the River
Ebrus, followed after. Of all these he desired supplies of Corn and provision:
which they promised to furnish; and accordingly got horses from all quarters,
and brought grain into the Camp. In like manner, the Regiment of the
Illurgavonenses, understanding the resolution of their State, left the Enemy,
and came unto him with their Colors: and suddenly a great alteration of things
appeared.

The bridge being perfected, five great Cities and States being come in unto
him, a course settled for provision of Corn, and the rumor blown over of the
succors and legions, which Pompey was said to come withal by the way of
Mauritania; many other towns farther off revolted from Afranius, and clave to
Caesar's party.

The enemy being much affrighted and abashed at these things, Caesar (to avoid
the great circuit by which he continually sent his horsemen about by the
bridge) having got a convenient place, resolved to make many trenches of thirty
foot in breadth, by which he might drain some part of the river Sicoris, and
make it passable by a foord. These trenches being almost made, Af^anius and
Petreius did thereupon conceive a great fear, lest they should be cut off
altogether from victual and forage, forasmuch as Caesar was very strong in
horse; and therefore they determined to leave that place, and transfer the
war into Celtiberia, being the rather thereunto induced, for that of those
two contrary Factions, which in the former war had stood for L. Sertorius,
such Cities as were subdued by Pompey, did yet stand in aw of his Name and
Authority: and such as from the beginning had continued firm unto him, did
entirely love him, for the great benefits they had received from him; amongst
whom Caesar's name was not known. There they expected great succors both of
horse and foot, and made no doubt but to keep the war on foot until winter.

This advice being agreed upon, they gave order to take up all the boats that
were on the river Iberus, Octogesa.
and to bring them to Octogesa, a town sited upon Iberus, twenty miles from the
Camp. There they commanded a bridge of boats to be made; and transporting two
legions over Sicoris, fortified their Camp with a rampire of twelve foot in
height. Which being known by the Discoverers, Caesar by the extreme labor of
the soldiers, continued day and night in turning the course of the water: and
at length brought the matter to that pass, that the horsemen (with some
difficulty) durst adventure over; but the foot troops, having nothing above the
water but their heads, were so hindered as well by the depth of the River, as
the swiftness of the stream, that they could not well get over.
Notwithstanding at the same instant of time, news was brought of the making of
the bridge over the River Iberus, and a foord was found in the River Sicoris.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
FIrst, concerning the places here mentioned, the Reader may take notice that
Ilerda (now known by the name of Lerida) stands upon the River Sicoris,
Ilerda.
in the Province of Catalonia; and being sited upon a hill, is enclosed round
with a wall of hewn stone, in a pleasant and fertile Country, Lib. 4.
both for corn, wine, oil, and fruit: as it is graphically described by Lucan;

Colle tumet modico, levique excrevit in altum
Pingue solum tumulo, super hunc sundata vetusta
Surgit Ilerda manu; placidis praelabitur undis
Hesperios inter Sicoris non ultimus amnes:
Saxeus ingenti quem pons amplectitur arcu,
Hybernas passurus aquas. --
With a light rising to a pretty height
The rich ground swells, on which by ancient hand
Ilerda's placed: with gentle waves slides by
The Sicoris, none of Spain's meanest streams*
Over it a bridge of stone with noble Arch,
Subject to suffer by the winter floods.
It was formerly a University, and at all times famous for salt meats and
pickled fish. Whereunto Horace alludeth, when he tells his book, That although
it fell out that no man would regard it, nevertheless it might serve at Ilerda
to wrap Salt-fish in.

Aut fugies Uticam, aut unctus mitteris Ilerdam.
Either to Utica thou wilt pass,
Or to Ilerda in an oily case.
Osca, Osca.
now called Huesca, a town likewise of Catalonia, Victri^.
in former time surnamed Victrix, where Sertorius kept the sons of the
Grandees of Spain, as pledges of their loyalty, under pretext of learning the
Greek and Latin tongue, which he had there caused to be taught, in form of an
Academy.

In this town his hap was to be slain by Perpenna, Lib. ^.
as Paterculus records the story; Tum M. Perpenna praetorius, e proscriptis,
generis clarioris quam animi, Sertorium inter coenam Aetoscae interemit;
Romanisque certam victoriam, partibus suis excidium, sibi turpissima^ mortem,
pessimo auctoravit facinore; Then M. Perpenna a praetorian, one of the
proscribed party, of a more noble stock then mind, slew Sertorius, at Aetosca
as he was at supper; occasioning by this wicked deed of his certain victory to
the Romans, ruin to his own party, and a shameful death to himself. Which
Aetosca is by all men taken for this Osca.

The inhabitants boast of nothing more at this day, then that S. Laurence was a
Citizen of their town.

Calaguris, Calaguris.
now Calahorra, is seated upon a hill on the banks of Iberus; the people
whereof are famous for their constancy and faithfulness to their Commanders,
and specially to Sertorius: as appears by that of Valerius Maximus; Lib. 7.
cap. 6
Quo perseverantius interempti Sertorii cineribus, obsidionem Cn. Pompeii
frustrantes, fidem praestarent; quia nullum jam aliud in urbe eorum supererat
animal, uxores suas, natosque, ad usum nefariae dapis verterunt: quoque diutius
armata juventus viscera sua visceribus suis aleret, infelices cadaverum
reliquias salire non dubitavit. That they might demonstrate their fidelity to
the ashes of Sertorius, to the very last, by defeating Pompey's siege, in
regard there was no live thing elseleft in the City, they most inhumanely made
their wives and children serve them for food; and that those which were in
arms might so much the longer with their own bowels feed their bowels, they
stuck not to salt up the pitiful remainders of the dead carcases.

Nevertheless Afranius took them in the end by continual siege; amongst whom
that antiquity of Bebricius is very remarkable, which is yet extant near to
Logronno.

DIIS. MANIBUS. Q. SERTORII. ME. BEBRICIUS. CALAGURITANUS. DEVOVI. ARBITRATUS.
RELIGIONEM. ESSE. EO. SUBLATO. QUI. OMNIA. CUM. DIIS. IMMORTALIBUS. COMMUNIA.
HABEBAT. ME. INCOLUMEN. RETINERE. ANIMAM. VALE VIATOR. QUI. HAEC. LEGIS. ET.
MEO. DISCE. EXEMPLO. FIDEM. SERVARE. IPSA. FIDES. ETIAM. MORTUIS. PLACET.
CORPORE. HUMANO. EXUTIS.

In English thus: To the D^j Manes (or divine ghost) of Q. Sertorius, I
Bebricius of Calaguris devote my self; supposing it a business of conscience,
he being gone, who had all things in common with the immortal Gods, for me to
seek to save my own life. Farewell Traveller, who read this, and learn of me
to be faithful. Faithfulness is a thing pleases even the dead, when they have
put off their humane bodies.

In memory of whose fidelity, Suetonius in Augusto.
Augustus Caesar took a band of these people for a guard to his person. Cohors
Calaguritanorum.
In this town was Quintilian the Rhetorician born; and being brought from
thence to Rome, in Nero his time, was the first that taught a public School
for salarie: Ad Euse^il C^ronicon.
as witnesses Saint Hierome; Quintilianus ex Hispania Calaguritanus primus
Romae publicam Scholam tenuit, and salario cohonestatus publico claruit.
Quintilian a Spaniard of Calaguris first taught a public School at Rome, and
had a stipend allowed him.

Celtiberia was the Country lying along the River Iberus, Celtiberia.
inhabited by people coming out of Gallia Celtica: whereupon Lucan says,

-- profugique a gente vetusta
Gallorum Celtae, Lib. 4*
miscentes nomen Iberis.
Some Celtick fugitives from Gallia came,
And with the Iberi made a compound name.
Florus calls them Hispaniae Robur. Lib. 2. c. 17
And Valerius Maximus affirms, Lib. 2. c. 6.
That they were always glad of war, as being to end their life in happiness
and honor; and lamented their ill fortune to die in their beds, as a miserable
and shameful end.

His pugnacecidisse decus, Sil. Ital. Lib. 3.
corpusque cremari
Tale nefas: calo credunt, superisque referri,
Impastus carpat si membra jacentia vultur.
-- To die in fight
They count great honor, know no funeral rite.
Heavens their's they think, and the celestial seats,
Whose scattered limbs the ravenous Vulture eats.
Their Arms and weapons were of singular raritie: for besides the water of
Bilbo, which gave them an invincible temper, they had also a peculiar fashion
of working them, lib. 6. cap. ^
as witnesses Diodorus Siculus; hiding their plates of Iron in the earth,
until the worst and weakest part were eaten out with rust, and of that which
remained, they made very hard swords.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe sudden alterations of war are like the changings of men's minds upon
small accidents; which are so forceable to shake our resolutions, as made a
great Philosopher to describe a man by the property of mutabile Animal, or a
changeable living creature. And it is notably seen in this; That Afranius, in
the compass of a few days, triumphed of Caesar's overthrow, and fled away for
fear of his power. Whence we may note the advantage coming to a party, when
they shake off any eminent distress: for as the extremity thereof threatens
ruin and destruction, so the alteration brings with it an opinion of
victory. And surely, such is the condition of all sorts of Misery, that when
the storm is over, and the bitterness of the affliction alaid, good times come
redoubled upon the Patients; as though the vicissitude of things did enforce
contrary effects. And therefore a Commander, knowing the advantage of such an
opportunity, must endeavor to improve the same, as may best serve to a speedy
end.

CHAP. XXI.
The Enemy sets forward, and is stayed by Caesar.
THe Enemy thereupon thought it expedient for him to make the more haste;
Caesar.
and therefore leaving two Auxiliary cohorts for the safe keeping of Ilerda, he
transported all his forces over the River Sicoris, and encamped himself with
the two legions which formerly he had carried over. There remained nothing for
Caesar to do, but with his Cavalrie to impeach and trouble the enemy in their
march. And forasmuch as it was a great compass about to go by the bridge
(whereby it would come to pass, that the Enemy would get to Iberus a far
nearer way) he passed over his horsemen by the foord. About the third watch, as
Petreius and Afranius had raised their Camp, upon a sudden the Cavalrie showed
themselves in the rere, and swarming about them in great multitudes, began to
stay and hinder their passage. As soon as it began to be daylight, from the
upper ground where Caesar lay encamped, it was perceived, how the rereward of
the enemy was hard laid to by our Cavalrie, and how sometimes they turned head
again, and were nevertheless broken and routed: sometimes their Ensigns stood
suddenly still, and all their foot troops charged our horse, and forced them to
give way; and then turning back, went on their way again. The soldiers walking
up and down the Camp, were grieved that the enemy should so escape their hands,
whereby the matter would consequently be spun out into a long war: and went
unto the Centurions and Tribunes of the soldiers, praying them to beseech
Caesar not to spare them for any danger or labor; for they were ready and
willing to pass the River where the horse went over. Caesar moved through
their desire and importunity, albeit he feared to expose his Army to a river of
that greatness, yet he thought it expedient to put it to trial, and therefore
commanded that the weakest soldiers of all the Centuries should be taken out,
whose courage or strength showed a disabilitie to undertake that service: and
these he left in the Camp, with one legion to defend the same, bringing out the
other legions without carriage or burden: and having set a great number of
horses and cattle both above and below in the river, he transported his Army
over. Some few of the soldiers, being carried away with the stream, were
succored and taken up by the horsemen; insomuch as not one man perished.

The Army carried thus over in safety, he ranged them in order, and marched
forward with a threefold battle. Such was the endeavor of the soldier, that
albeit they had set a circuit of six miles to the foord, Three of the clock in
the afternoon.
and had spent much time in passing the river, yet by the ninth hour they did
overtake the enemy that rose about the third watch of the night.

As Soon as Afranius and Petreius had discovered the legions afar off (being
terrified with the noveltie of that pursuit) they betook themselves to the
upper ground, and there imbattelled their troops. In the mean time Caesar
refreshed his Army in the field, and would not suffer them (being weary) to
give battle: and as the enemy tried again to go on in their march, he followed
after and stayed them; whereby they were forced to incamp sooner then was
purposed: for there were hills a little before them, and for five miles
together, the passages were very difficult and narrow.

By which means (being advanced between the hills) they hoped to be free from
Caesar's Cavalrie, and by keeping the passages, to hinder the Army from
following after; to the end they themselves might without peril or fear, put
their forces over the river Iberus: which by all means was to be effected.
Nevertheless, being wearied with travailing and fighting all day, they put off
the business to the next morning.

Caesar also encamped himself on the next hill; and about midnight, some of
their party being gone out from the Camp, somewhat far off, to fetch water,
were taken by the horsemen. By them Caesar was advertised, that the Enemy with
silence began to remove, and to lead their troops out of their Camp. Whereupon
he commanded the sign of rising to be given, Vasa conclamari.
and the cry (dislodging and trussing up their baggage) to be taken up,
according to the discipline and use of soldiers.

The Enemy hearing the cry, fearing least they should be impeached in the
night, and forced to fight with their burdens on their backs, or to be shut up
in those straight passages by Caesar's horsemen, stayed their journey, and kept
their forces within their Camp.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis passage over Sicoris, Hannibal per^ su^eriora P^di vad^ exercitum
tradu^^s, elephantos in ordinem opposuit ad impetum fluminis fustinendu^.
was in the same manner as he carried his Army over the River Loire, in the
seventh Commentary of the war of Gallia; Vado per Equites invento, pro rei
necessitate opportuno, ut Brachia modo atque Humeri, ad sustinenda arma liberi
ab aqua esse possent, disposito equitatu, qui vim fluminis frangerent,
incolumem exercitum transduxit. The horsemen having found a foord, indifferent
convenient in regard of the necessity they were put to, Livie.
to the end that the soldiery might have their arms and shoulders at liberty,
Ac n^quid S^co^is (...) majoris aquae --
and not be hindered by the water from carrying their weapons, he so disposed
his horse, that he broke the force of the river with them, and so carried his
Army over in safety.

The horse that stood above brake the force of the water, and those that were
below took up such as were overcome with the stream, Lu^an. l. 4.
and withal, gave courage to the soldier to venture with better assurance,
seeing the passage impaled in on each side, to keep them from miscarrying. In
the same (...) E^phrates was divided first by Semiramis, and afterward by
Alexander.
His attempt upon Sicoris, to abate the swelling pride of that River, by
dividing it into many streams, was in imitation of the first Herodot. (...)
Cyrus, who taking displeasure at the River Cyndes, next unto Euphrates the
greatest River of Ass^ria, drew it into three hundred and threescore channels.

Croesus not finding the River Halis passable by a foord, Herod. Just.
and having no means to make a bridge, sunk a great trench behind the Camp,
from the upper part of the River, and so drew all the water behind his Army.

Vegetius has a particular discourse of passing an Army over a River, Lib. 2.
c^p. 7
whether it be by bridge or boat, or by wading or swimming, or any other way:
to which I refer the Reader.

CHAP. XXII.
Asranius seeks to take the Straights between certain Mountains; but is
prevented by Caesar.
THe next day following, Petreius went out secretly with a few horse, to
discover the Country; and for the samepurpose some went likewise out of
Caesar's Camp: L. Decidius Saxa was sent with a small troup to view the site of
the Place. And either party returned with the same report: that for At ol^unt
campo g^minae (...) rupes, Valle (...)
five miles the way was open and champain, and afterward very rough and
mountainous; and whosoever first took those straight, might easily impeach the
enemy from going further. The matter was disputed in the Council of war, by
Petreius and Afranius; the time of their setting forward was debated. Lucan.
lib. 4.
Most of them thought it fit to take their journey in the night; for by that
means they might come to those straights before it were perceived. Others were
of opinion, that it was not possible to steal out in the night; as appeared by
the cry of rising taken up the night before in Caesar's Camp, upon their
removing: and Caesar's horsemen did so range abroad in the night, that all
places and passages were kept and shut up. Neither were they to give occasion
of night fights, but to avoid the same by all the means they could; forasmuch
as in civil dissension, the ordinary soldier would rather suffer himself to
be over mastered by fear, then continue firm in the allegiance which he had
sworn unto: whereas, in the day time, every man has shame and dishonor before
his eyes, together with the presence of the Centurions and Tribunes; with which
respects a soldier is restrained, and kept within the bounds of duty. And
therefore the attempt was by all means to be undertaken in the day time: and
although it ^ell out to some loss, yet nevertheless the body of the Army
might pass in safety, and possess that place which they sought for.

This opinion prevailing in their consultation, they determined by break of day
the next mornning to set forward. Caesar, having diligently viewed the
Country, as soon as day began to appear, drew all his forces out of his Camp,
and marched forward in a great circuit, It^ sine ullo Ordine, (...), rap^umque
^uga conv^^^ite. bellum, Et faciem pugnae, vultusquo in^^rte mi^aces.
keeping no direct way. For the ways which led to Iberus and Octogesa, were
taken up with the Enemies Camp; insomuch as they were to pass over great and
difficult valleys. And in many places, broken Rocks and stones did so hinder
them, that they were necessarily forced to give their weapons from hand to
hand, the soldiers lifting up one another; and so they passed most part of the
way. Howsoever, Lucan. lib. ^
no man thought much of the labor, for that they hoped to give an end to all
their travel, if they could keep the enemy from passing over the River I^erus,
and cut off his ^^^ualls.

At the first, Afranius soldiers ran joyfully out of their Camp to see the
Army, casting out words of derision and reproach, that for want of victual they
fled and returned to Ilerda; for the way they held was quite contrary to that
they intended, whereby they seemed to go back again: and the Commanders
themselves did much approve their own counsel, that they had kept their troops
within the Camp. For that which confirmed them in their opinion was, that they
perceived they were come out without their carriages: whereby they hoped,
necessity would not suffer them to continue long there. But when they saw the
troops by little and little to wind to the right hand, and that they perceived,
how those that were in front had fallen backward beyond their Camp, there was
no man so dull, but thought it expedient presently to march out, and make head
against them, Whereupon they cried to Arm; and all their forces, excepting
some few cohorts which were left to keep the Camp, went out, and marched
directly toward Iberus.

The whole business consisted in speed and celeritie, which of the two should
first take the straights, and possess the hills, Caesar's Army was hindered by
the difficulty of the way: and Afranius party was retarded by Caesar's
Cavalry. The matter was come to that upshot, that if Afranius party did first
get the hills, they might happily qu^^ themselves of danger; but the baggage of
the whole Army, and the cohorts left in the Camp could not be saved: for being
intercepted and s^^luded by Caesar's Army, there was no means to relieve them.

It (...), that Caesar first attained the place; and being come out from among
those great Rocks into a plain champain, put his Army in order of battle
against the enemy.

Afranius seeing the enemy in front, and his rereward hardly charged by
Caesar's Ca^alry, got the advantage of a small hill, and there made his stand:
and from thence sent four cohorts bearing round bucklers unto a Mountain, which
in all men's sight was higher then the rest; commanding them to run as fast as
they could, and possess that hill, intending to follow after with all his
forces, and altering his course, to get along the ridges and tops of the
Mountains to Octogesa.

As the cohorts were advanced forward by an oblique circuit, Caesar's Cavalry
perceiving their intendment, set upon them with such violence, that they were
not able any time to bear their charge, but were surrounded by them, and all
cut in pieces in the fight of both Armies.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION. Nocturna prael^a esse vit^nda, quod perterritus miles
in civili dissensione, timori magis quam religion^ consulere consu^^^^it; at
^u^em multum per se pudorem, omnium oculis (...).

PEtreius and Afranius, in their Council of war, resolved by all means to shun
night encounters, as a thing full of hazard and uncertainty, and apt for
looseness and disobedience: for the night, being neither a discoverer of
errors, nor yet a distinguisher either of actions or persons, but wrapping up
both the virtuous and the faulty in her Mantle of obscurity, does not admit
of directions, to follow an opportunity, or to help a mistaking; but rather
giving way to impunitie and licentious confusion, leaves no hope of what is
wished: Neque in victoria decue, nec in foga flagitium.
Whereas the light is a witness of every man's demeanor, and has both honor
and rebuke to make duty respected.

For which causes, Tacit. Hist. (...)
Curio (as it follows in the next Commentary) in his harangue before that
untimely expedition against king Juba, thus rejected their advice that would
have had him set forward in the night; At etiam ut media nocte proficiscamur
addunt: quo majorem credo licentiam habeant qui peccare conantur: namque
hujusmodi res aut pudore aut metu tenentur, quibus rebus nox maxim: adversaria
est. Further then this, they advise us to set out in the middle of the night:
that so (I think) those men who have a mind to do mischief may take the greater
liberty: for in the daytime they would be restrained either through shame or
fear, to both which the darkness of the night is a great adversary.

And that the danger may appear as well by effect as by discourse, let the
Reader take notice of that battle by night, between Antonius Primus on the
behalf of Vespasian, and the Vitellian legions, near unto Cremona; whereof
Tacitus has this description; 2. Histor*
Praelium tota nocte varium, anceps, atrox; his, rursus illis, exitiabile.
Nihil animus aut manus, n^ oculi quidem provisu juvabant, etc. The fight was
doubtful and bloody the whole night, now this party going to the worse, by and
by that. A stout heart or a valiant hand availed little, neither could the eyes
see before them either advantage or disadvantage. And thus are all night-works
condemned, wherein either order or honor are of any moment.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
I Have already noted, in the former Commentaries, the use of exact and
particular discovery of the Country, where a party is engaged: then which
nothing does more advantage a Commander to expedite the happy issue of a war.
For by that means he is not only able to judge of any motion which the enemy
shall offer, and to give sure directions to frustrate and make void the same;
but also to dispose himself according as shall seem expedient for his safety.
Wherein, if a place of such consequence as is here mentioned shall by design
be aimed at, this history shows how much it imports either party to
obtain it: and therefore Caesar had reason to make his passage through Valleys
and Rocks, rather then to lose victory, for want of laboring in an uneasy
way.

This Lucius Decidius Saxa, or Didius Saxa, employed in this discovery, was
afterward advanced by Caesar to be Tribune of the people; whereat Tullie was so
much offended. Otatio. 1^.
How can I omit (says he) this Decidius Saxa, Philip.
a man brought from the furthest end of the world; whom we see Tribune of the
people, before we ever saw him a Citizen?

CHAP. XXIII.
Caesar refuses to fight upon an advantage offered, contrary to the opinion
and desire ^f all men.
THere was an opportunity then offered of doing something to purpose; Caesar.
neither was Caesar ignorant thereof^ Such an overthrow given before their
faces, did consequently so discourage them, that it was thought they would not
endure a charge; especially, being compassed about with the Cava^ri^, in an
indifferent and open place, where the matter was to be decided by battle.
Which was on all sides instantly desired at Caesar's hands: for the Legates,
Centur^ons, and Tribunes of the soldiers, came jointly unto him, desiring him
to make no doubt of giving battle, for all the soldiers were very ready and
forward thereunto; whereas the contrary party had (...) many arguments of fear
and discouragement. Signs of (...) in the Enemy.
First, in that they did not succor their fellows. Secondly, in as much as they
had not boug^d from the Hill, which they had took for a retreat. Neither had
they withstood the charge and incursion of the Cavalr^e, but had thronged
pell-mell together, and confusedly mingled their Ensigns one with another, no
man either keeping his place or his colors. And if he feared the inequality
and disadvantage of the Place, he might take some other of more indifferency;
for certainly Afranius could not long stay where he was, but must depart from
thence for want of water.

Caesar was in hope to end the matter without either blow or wound of his men;
forasmuch as he had cut off the enemy from victual. And why then should be
lose a man, although it were to gain a victory? Why should he suffer his
valiant and well-deserving soldiers, to be so much as hurt or wounded? Or why
should he put the matter to the hazard of Fortune? especially, when it no less
concerned the honor and reputation of a Commander to vanquish an enemy by
direction and advice, the^ to subdue them by force of Arms? being moved
withal with a tender commiseration of such Citizens of Rome, as were
consequently to be hazarded or slain in the sight; whereas he desired to work
out his own Ends with their safety.

This opinion of Caesar's was disallowed by most men: and the soldiers would
not stick to speak plainly amongst themselves, Forasmuch as such an occasion of
victor^^ was overslipt, that when C^^sar would have them, they would not fight.
He notwithstanding continued firm in his opinion; and fell as little off from
the enemy, to lessen and abate their fear and amazement. Petreius and Afranius,
upon the opportunity given them, withdrew themselves into their Camp. Caesar
having possessed the Hills with garrisons of soldiers, and shut up all the
passages leading to I^erus, encamped himself as near as he could to the enemy.

The Commanders of the adverse party being much afflicted that they had
absolutely lost all means of provision of victual, and of gaining the River
I^erus, consulted together of other courses. There were two ways left open;
the one to return to Ilerda, and the other to Tarracon. And while they were
considering of these things, it was told them, that such as went out for water
were very much pressed by our Cavalrie. Whereupon they placed many courts of
guard, as well of horse, as Auxiliary footmen, interlacing the legionary
Cohorts amongst them; and began also to re^se a rampire from the Camp to the
watering-place, that the soldiers might safely, without fear, fetch water
within the bounds of their fortification. Which work Petreius and Afranius
divided between themselves; and for the perfecting of the same, had occasion to
go far off from the Camp: by means of whose absence the soldiers taking
liberty of free speech one with another, went out; and as any man had an
acquaintance or neighbor in each others Camp, Et qu^mvis nullo (...) sanguin^
miles. Quae (...). Lucan. lib. 4.
they sought him out. And first, they all gave thanks to all our party, that
they had spared them when they were terr^^ied and amazed the day before: in
regard whereof, they acknowledged to hold their lives by their favor: And
afterward, inquired how they might safely yield themselves to their General,
complaining that they had not done it in the beginning, and so have joined
their forces with their ancient friends and kinsmen.

And having proceeded thus far in their communication, they require assurance
for the lives of Afranius and Petreius; least they should seem to conceive
mischief against their Generals, or betray them in seeking their own safety.
Which things being agreed upon, they promised to come with their Ensigns to
Caesar's Camp; and thereupon sent to Caesar some of the Centurions of the first
Orders, as Deputies to treat of peace.

In the mean time, Hospitis ille (...), vocat ill^ pr^pinqui^ Admon^^ hunc
studi^s con^ors (...) Nec Romanus er^t qui n^n^gnovera hostem. Lucan. lib. 4.
they invited their friends on either side into the Camps, insomuch as both
their lodgings seemed but one Camp. Many of the Tribunes of the soldiers, and
Centurions came to Caesar, recommending themselves to his favor: and the like
did the Grandees and chief Princes of Spain, whom they had commanded out, to
take party in this war, and to remain with them as Hostages and Pledges. These
inquired after their old acquaintances and ancient hosts, by whom each man
might have access to Caesar with some commendation. In like manner, Afranius
his son dealt with Caesar, by the mediation of Sulpitius a Legate, touching his
own and his fathers life. All things sounded of joy and mutual congratulation:
of them that had escaped such imminent dangers; and of us, that seemed to have
effected such great matters without bloodshed. Insomuch as Caesar (in all men's
judgment) reaped great fruit of his accustomed clemency and mildness; and his
counsel was generally approved of by all men.

THE OBSERVATION.
THis Chapter contains a passage of that note and eminency, as the like is
not read in any story. For if we search the records of all Nations, (...) e^^m
tibi major i^ ^^vis Aenuthiis fortuna f^it. etc* Lucan.
from the very birth of Bellona, unto times of later memory, it will no where
else appear that a General spared an advantage to purchase a victorious name,
by the bloodshed and ruin of his enemy: especially contrary to the will and
desire of his Army, that had undergone such difficulties and hazzards, to give
an end to that war; contrary to his knowledge, and late experience of the
mutability and change of time and fortune; contrary to the surest rule of war,

-- Dolus an virtus, quis in host requirit?
Valor or Craft, who cares which in a Foe?
and contrary to the use of Arms, which are always bent against an enemy to
subdue him.

This is the fruit of that other part of Military knowledge, which men do
rather admire then attain unto, no less concerning the honor of a Commander,
Non minus est Impe^atoris, co^si^^^ superare, quam gladio.
Consilio superare quam gladio, to overcome by counsel and good direction,
rather then by the sword, and was a main step to raise him to the Empire. For
howsoever the soldier (to prevent further labor) stood hard for blood,
Caesar. Comment. 6. de ^el. Gal.
not respecting that of the Teren^ius in Funu^^^.
Comic, Omnia prius experiri verbis, quam armis sapientem decet, a wise man
should try all fair words before he brings the business to blows: yet if
Caesar had been so injurious to Nature, Naturae (...): and humanitat^^ legem
violat, qui ultra victoriam (...). indulget Ni^^tas.
as to have left them to their own desires, and suffered their fury to have
violated the law of humanity more then was requisite for victory; they would
afterward have loathed themselves, and cursed their swords for such
unseasonable execution; and may be doubted, would have revenged it upon his
head, before the time came to strike the fatal stroke of the eversion of that
State. Caesar esteemed it also a part of divine power, to save men by troops,
according to that of Seneca; (...), Lib. 1. cap. 26.
Haec divina potentia est, gregatim, ac public servare: It is a divine power
that saves men by troops and all at once. And therefore he chose rather to
displease the soldier for the present; Ingens victoriae (...) bellanti. Tacit.
in (...).
then to lose that honor which attends the sparing of homebred blood:
whereof foreign enemies are not altogether so capable.

CHAP. XXIV.
Petreius breaks off the Treaty, and new swears the Soldiers to the Party.
AFranius being advertised of these passages, Caes^r.
left the work which he had begun, and withdrew himself into the Camp; prepared
(as it seemed) to take patiently whatsoever should befall him. But Petreius was
no way disma^ed thereat: for having armed his household family, he went flying
with them, and a Pratorian cohort of Buckler-bearers, together with some few
stipendary horse of the barbarous people, whom he was wont to keep about him,
as a guard to his person, and came suddenly and unlooked for to the Rampire;
Junctos an plexibus (...) Separat, and multo disturb^^ (...) pacem, Luc.
brake off the soldiers treaty; thrust our men off from the Camp, killing such
as he could apprehend. The rest got together, and affrighted at the suddenness
of the danger wrapped their coats about their left arms, and with their sword
drawn, defended themselves from the Buckler-bearers and horsemen: and trusting
to the nearness and propinquity of their Camp, they took courage and got
safely thither, being protected by the Cohorts that had the guard at the Camp
gates.

This being done, Petreius weeping about to the Maniples, calling the
soldiers, and beseeching them not to leave and forsake him, nor yet Pompey
their General, that was absent, nor to deliver them over to the cruelty of
their adversaries. Presently thereupon a great concourse of soldiers was about
the Praetory, requiring that every man might take an oath, not to abandon or
betray the Army or their Generals, nor yet to enter into private consultation
thereof without consent of the rest. He himself first took an oath to this
effect, and caused Afranius to take the same. The Tribunes of the Soldiers and
Centurions followed in order: and after them, the soldiers were brought out
according to their Centuries, and were sworn the same oath.

They caused it also to be proclaimed, (...), Quae m^do complex^ f^verunt
pectora (...) Luc* lib. 4.
that whosoever had any of Caesar's soldiers, should cause them to be brought
out: and being brought forth, they ^lew them publicly before the Praetorian
Pavilion. But most men concealed such as were with them, and in the night time
sent them out over the Rampire. Whereby it came to pass, that the terror
wherewith the Generals had affrighted them, the cruelty they had showed in
punishment, together with the vain religion of the new oath, had taken away all
hope of yielding for the present; and quite changing the soldiers minds, had
reduced the matter to the former course of war.

Caesar for his part, Hoc siquid^m solo civilis crimine belli Dux causae (...).
Luc. lib. 4.
caused diligent inquiry to be made of such soldiers as came into his Camp
during the time of the treaty, and sent them away in safety. But of the
Tribunes of the soldiers and Centurions, many of their voluntary accord
remained with him: whom afterward he held in great honor; and advanced the
Centurions, and such Roman Knights as were of the better rank, to the place and
dignity of Tribunes.

The Afranians were sorely laid unto in their forraging, and watered likewise
with great difficulty. Many of the legionary soldiers had store of Corn, being
commanded to take provision with them from Herda for twenty two days. But the
Buckler-bearers and Auxiliary forces had none at all, having but small means to
provide and furnish themselves, and their bodies not being used to carry
burdens; for which cause, a great number fled daily to Caesar.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THat every man is the maker of his own fortune, is evidently seen in the
several carriages of these two Generals. For Afranius gave way to the
soldiers treaty, and resolved to suffer whatsoever that transaction should
cast upon him. But Petreius, opposing himself to their desires, raised new
troubles, had further designs, and another fortune. Wherein forasmuch as the
event of things rises according as they are first directed, either by weak or
strong resolutions; it better suteth the temper of soldier (howsoever the
success fall out with our desires) rather to be stiff in what he wishes,
then to make his own easiness the ready means of his adversaries happiness.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
Virtue at all times has had this privilege in the difference and degrees of
state and condition, to make a Noble man's word equal to a Common man's oath:
but the integrity of former ages, had a more general prerogative, avouching
every man's promise for the strictness an oath. Anno (...). cond. 538.
Hence it was that the Romans, upon their inrollment for a war, gave but their
promise to the Tribune of the soldiers, to keep such ordinances as their
Militia required: until at length that the corruption of time (falsifying the
simplicity and truth of words) did enforce them to give an Null^m (...) potest.
oath, as the surest bond of faith and obedience: as is noted by Livie at
large; Lib. 22.
The soldiers (says he) which was never before that time practiced, were
sworn by the Tribunes, to appear upon summons from the Consuls, and not to
depart without leave. For until then, there was nothing required of them but a
solemn promise (which the horsemen made by their Decuries, and the foot troops
by their Centuries) not to leave their Colors by flight, or through fear, not
to forsake their rank, unless it were either to assault an enemy, to take up
an offensive weapon, or to save a Citizen; which being at first but the offer
of a free mind, was now by the Tribunes required by obligation of an oath.

The form of this oath was diversely varied, as appears by Aul. Gel. Lib. 16.
cap. 4.
and more specially in the times of the Emperors: for Caligula made this
addition to the soldiers oath, That they should hold neither their lives nor
their children dearer unto them then the Emperor Cai^s and his sisters.
Concerning the respect had of this Military oath, that which Tully reports of
Cato is of excellent note. Lib. 1. o^^^c. M. Popilius.
Popilius having charge of the Province of Macedonia, had (amongst other Roman
youths) Cato's son, a young soldier in his Army; and being occasioned to
dismiss a legion, discharged likewise young Cato, being one of that legion.
But he desirous to bear Arms in that war, continued still in the Army:
whereupon Cato writ from Rome to Popilius, requiring him, that if he suffered
his son to remain in that war, he would by any means swear him again; for being
discharged of his first oath, he could not lawfully fight against the Enemy.

Ever since Constantine the great, the soldiers were sworn by a Christian
oath, Lib. 2. cap. 5.
as Vegetius notes; to obey all things the Emperor should command them, not
to leave their warfare without license, not to shun death for the service of
the Public weal. And at this day, amongst other Nations, an oath is given to
the soldier upon his inrollment, to this effect; Well and lawfully to serve
the King, toward all men, and against all, without exception of persons; and
if they know any thing concerning his service, to reveal the same
incontinently; not to leave their Colors, without leave either of the General
or his Lieutenant.

The ancient Romans did charge their solemn and public oaths with many
ceremonies: as appears by that form which was used in ratifying Treaties and
Transactions; Their Heralds killed a hog, and cried out withal, that the like
would happen to him that first falsified his faith.

Polybius reports, Lib. 3. Histor.
that he that read the oath whereby the Romans and Carthaginians swear their
accord, had the hair of his head tiedup in an extraordinary manner: the parties
invocating their Jupiter, to grant all prosperity to him that without fraud or
deceit did enter into that agreement. But if (said he that took the oath) I
shall either do, or purpose otherwise, all the rest being safe and sound, let
me alone (in the midst of the laws and justice of my Country, in my own
habitation and dwelling, and within my proper Temples and Sepulchers,) perish
most unfortunately, even as this stone flies out of my hand. And (as he spoke
those words) he cast away a stone.

I do not ^ind the use of a Military oath in our Nation. Howbeit, the common
form of our oath is as ceremonious and significative as any other whatsoever:
which may be observed by the 3 parts it contains, as I have seen them
allegorized in some Antiquities. For first, the book being always a part of
holy writ, implies a renunciation of all the promises therein contained.
Secondly, the touching it with our hands, infers the like defiance of our
works, never to be successful or helping unto us. Thirdly, the kissing of the
book imports a vain mispending of our vows and prayers, if we falsify any
thing thereby averred.

CHAP. XXV.
The endeavor which Asranius used to return to Ilerda; but failed in his
design.
FHe matter being in this extremity, Caesar.
of two means which were left unto them, it was thought the readier and more
expedient, to return to Ilerda. For having left there behind them a little
Corn, they hoped to take some good course for the sequel. Tarraco was further
off, and thereby subject to more casualties concerning their passage. In regard
whereof they resolved of the former course, and so dislodged themselves.

Caesar having sent his Cavalry before, to incumber and retard the rere-guard,
followed after himself with the legions. The hindmost troops of their Army were
constrained (without any intermission of time) to fight with our horsemen. And
their manner of fight was thus. Certain expedite Cohorts, free of carriages,
marched in the rere of their Army, and in open and champain places many of
these Cohorts made a stand, to confront our Cavalry. If they were to ascend up
a Hill, the nature of the place did easily repel the danger wherewith they
were threatened; forasmuch as such as went before, might easily from the higher
ground protect them that followed after: but when they came to a valley or
descent, that those that were in the former ranks could not help them in the
rere, the horsemen from the upper ground, did cast their weapons with great
ease and facility upon the Enemy. And then continually they were in great
hazard and danger: and still as they approached near unto such places, they
called to the legions, and willed them to make a stand with their Ensigns, and
so by great force and violence repelled our Cavalry.

Who being retired back, they would suddenly take a running, and get all down
into the valley. And presently again, being to ascend into higher ground they
would there make a stand, for they were so far from having help of their own
Cavalry (whereof they had a great number) that they were glad to take them
between their troops, (being much affrighted with former incounters) and so to
shelter and protect them: of whom if any chanced (upon occasion) to stray aside
out of the rout the Army held, they were presently attached by Caesar's
horsemen.

The fight continuing in this manner, they proceeded slowly on their way,
advancing forward but by little and little; and oftentimes stood still, to
succor and reli^ve their party, as th^^ it fell out. For having gone but four
miles on their way (being very hardly laid to, and much pressed by our Cavalry)
they took to an exceeding high hill; and there putting themselves into one
front of a battle, fortified their Camp, keeping their carriages laden upon
their horses. As Soon as they perceived that Caesar's Camp was set, and that the
ten^s were up, and their horses put to grass; they rose suddenly about
midday, upon hope of some respite, by reason of our horse put out to feeding,
and went on their journey.

Which Caesar perceiving rose and followed after, leaving a few Cohorts to keep
the carriages: and about the tenth hour, commanding the forragers and horsemen
to be called back, and to follow after, instantly the Cavalry returned, and
betook themselves to their accustomed charge.

The fight was very sharp in the rere, insomuch as they were ready to turn
their backs. Many soldiers, and some of the Centurions were slain. Caesar's
troops pr^ssed hard upon them* and threatened the overthrow of their whole Army;
insomuch, as they had neither means to choose a fit place to incamp in, nor to
proceed forward in their march. Whereby they were necessarily enforced to make
a stand, and to p^^h their Camp far from any water, in an unequal and
disadvantageous place. But Caesar forbear to meddle with them, for the same
reasons that have been formerly declared; and for that day, would not suffer
the soldiers to set up their Tents, that they might be the readier to follow
after, at what time soever, by night or by day, they should offer to break away.

The Enemy having observed the defect of our Camp, employed all that night in
advancing their works, and in casting their Camp with an opposite front to our
Army. The like they did all the next day: but so it fell out, that by how much
their Camp was brought farther on, and the fortification grew nearer to
finishing, by so much farther off they were from water: and so remedied one
evil with a worse mischief. The first night, none of them went out of their
Camp to fetch water: and the next day, they led out all their troops together
to water, but sent no man out to forage. Whereby Caesar, finding them
oppressed with many inconveniences, chose rather to force them to a
composition, then to fight with them.

THE OBSERVATION.
IN this troublesome and confused retreat, which these Commanders undertook, to
regain the advantages that formerly they had quitted at Ilerda, we may observe
the difficulties attending a weaker party, when they would free themselves from
the pressures of a strong confronting enemy. For the frailty of humane fortune
is always so yoaked with encumbrances, and has so many lets from the native
weaknesses of its own endeavor; that if the opposition of foreign malice
shall therewithal unhappily concur, to stop the current of our desires,
there is little hope of better success, then that which the ordinary condition
of extremity does afford: which is, to hazard the peril of a wound, in seeking
to avoid the smart of a rod; Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens vitare Charybdim.
and to fall into Scylla, upon a desire we have to shun Charybdis: according as
it befell this party. Wherein let us farther note the advantage which a
Commander has, either to take or leave, when he is able to over-master the
Enemy in Cavalry: for the horsemen serving an Army Royal, by making
discoveries, by forraging, by giving rescue upon a sudden, by doing execution,
and retarding an Enemy in his march, if (overawed by the Cavalry of the Enemy)
they cannot perform these services as is requisite; the contrary party is the
stronger by so many advantages.

CHAP. XXVI.
Caesar goes about to enclose the Enemy, and he to hinder Caesar.
HOwbeit Caesar labored to enclose them about with a ditch and a rampire,
C^sar.
to the end he might with better ease hinder their sudden sallies and
eruptions, to which he thought the Enemy would necessarily betake themselves.

The Enemy being streightened for want of forage, and to the end also they
might be the readier to escape away, caused all their horses of carriage to be
killed: and in these works and consultations were two days spent. The third
day, a great part of Caesar's works being already perfected, the enemy (to
hinder the business intended concerning the fortifications) about two of the
clock in the afternoon made the Alarmes, Hora octava, signo d^to.
brought out the legions, and imbattelled themselves under their Camp. Caesar
calls back the legions from their work; and commanding all his horse to troup
together, puts his Army in battle. For having made such a show of
unwillingnesse to buckle with the enemy, against the will of the soldier and
opinion of all men, he found himself subject thereupon to much inconvenience:
Tela tene jam miles, ait, serrumque ruenti Subtrahe, non ullo constet mihi
sanguine bellum.
howbeit he was resolved (for the reasons already specified) not to strike a
battle; and the rather at this time, for that the space between his Camp and
the enemies was so little, that if he had put them to flight, it could not have
much availed him, for the gaining of a perfect and absolute victory. For their
Camps were not above two thousand foot asunder; Vincitur haud gratis jugulo qui
provocat hostem.
whereof the Armies took up two parts, and the third was left for incursion and
assault. So that if he had given battle in that nearness of the Camp, they
would have found a speedy retreat upon their overthrow. Lucan. l. 4*
For which cause he resolved to stand upon his defense, and not to give the
onset, and charge them first.

Afranius had put his Army in a double battle: the first consisting of five
legions; and the Auxiliary cohorts, which usually served in the wings, were now
placed for succors, and made the second battle.

Casar's Army was ordered in a triple battle: the first was of four cohorts, a
piece of the five legions: the second, of three; and the third again of three
of each legion, following in order. The Archers and Slingers were in the midst,
and the Cavalry on the sides. Being thus both imbattelled, they seemed to
obtain their several ends: Caesar, not to fight unless he were forced to it;
and the Enemy, to hinder Caesar's fortification. But the matter being drawn out
in length, they stood imbattelled until sun-seting: and then returned both
into their Camps.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
COntra opinionem enim militum, famamque omnium, videri praelio diffugisse,
magnum detrimentum afferebat, Having made a show of unwillingnesse to buckle
with the enemy, against the will of the soldier, and the opinion of all men,
he found himself subject to much inconvenience, says the history. Whence we
may observe two points. First, that a Commander in striking a field, must
partly be directed by his Army: for he may neither fight against the liking of
the soldier, nor withhold them from fighting when they are willing to embrace
it, if other circumstances do indifferently concur therewithal. It is hard
catching ha^es with unwilling hounds.
For when men are commanded to do what they would do, the matter is thoroughly
undertaken, and the issue is commonly answerable to the readiness of their
desires: but being restrained in their affections, and put besides their
aptness of their voluntary disposition, there grows such a contrariety
between the Generals order and the soldiers o^edience, as will hardly
sympathize to beget good fortune.

And if a Leader of that same and opinion, and so well known to his Army, as
Caesar was, grew into distaste with his soldiers, upon so good causes which he
had to shun a battle; what hazard that Commander runs into, who seldom or
never gave argument of his resolution in this kind, may be conceived by this
passage. The second thing which I note, is, that a General must learn
especially to disguise his intendments, by making show of that which he means
not. For albeit the more judicious sort of men are not so well satisfied with
pretenses as with deeds: yet forasmuch as the Caeteris mortalibus in constant
consilia quid sibi conducere putent; Principum diversa sors est, quibas
praecipua rerum ad famam dirigenda. Tacit.
condition of Princes, contrary to the manner of Private persons, requires
such a direction of business, as may rather suit with fame and opinion, then
with particular ends; it behooves them to use such glosses, as may take away
all petulant and sinister interpretations, howsoever their courses may aim at
other purposes. And certainly, L' universale de gli huomini si pasc^, cosi di
quello che pay, come di quello che e anzi ^molte volte si muovono piu per ^e
cose c^e paiono, che per quell^ che sono. Lib. 1. Sop. Tit. Live. cap. 25. Omnis
a^r Aquilae penetrabilis.
the generality of people are better paid with appearances then with truth;
according as Machiavill has observed. But concerning Caesar, that which
Ephicrates said of himself, having imbattelled his army to fight, That he
feared nothing more, then that his enemy knew not his valor; may more properly
be said here. For there was nothing abused the Enemy more, or made them take up
so many Bravadoes, or use so much delay before they came to composition, but
that they knew not Caesar. For as the Eagle is able to mount aloft in all
seasons and temperatures of the air; so was his sword steeled to make way
through all resistance.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IN the next place, Their manner of imbattelling.
the manner of their imbattelling comes to be observed: which generally in all
Editions runs this; Acies erat Afraniana duplex, legio V. and III. in
subsidiis locum alariae cohortis obtinebat: Caesaris triplex, sed primam aciem
quaternae cohortes ex V. legione tenebant. Has subsidiariae ternae, and rursus
aliae totidem, suae cujusque legionis, subsequebantur: sagittarii funditoresque
media continebantur acie, equitatus latera cingebat: And needs the help of
some excellent Critic, to make it have answerable sense to the other parts of
this history. For first, how shall we understand those words, Acies Afraniana
duplex, legio V. and III. in subsidiis; Afranius his army was in a double
battle; the fifth legion, and the third for succors? Shall we take the meaning
to be, that the first legion stood in front, and the other stood for succors
behind? Or shall we take it with Faernus; Acies Afraniana duplex: ex legione
prima, and tertia, in subsidiis locum alariae cohortes obtinebant; Afranius
etc. out of the first legion and the third, the cohorts which use to be in the
wings were put in place of the succors? But neither by the one or by the
other, is there found more then two legions: whereas there is express mention
of five, besides the cohorts of the Country. And therefore, as not knowing
other more probable, I have translated it according to Lipsius correction, Lib.
4. de militia Romana.
and made the text thus; Acies erat Afraniana duplex, legionum quinque: and in
subsidiis locum alariae cohortes obtinebant: Afranius had put his army in a
double battle: the first consisting of five legions; and the auxiliary cohorts,
which usually served in the wings, were now placed for succors, and made the
second battle. The first battle consisted of five legions; and the second, of
the Spanish and Auxiliary forces.

The like help must be lent to Caesar: for otherwise, the text does afford him
but few cohorts, standing thus, Primam aciem quaternae cohortes, ex quinta
legione, tenebant. Has ternae, and rursus aliae etc. The first battle was of
four cohorts out of the fifth legion: then followed three, and then as many
others etc. For undoubtedly Caesar had five legions equal to Afranius; but
being far inferior unto him in Auxiliary troops, was driven to a more
artificial division, to help his weakness in that point. And therefore, as the
same Critic has mended it, we are to read, Quaternae cohortes ex quinque
legionibus, four cohorts out of the five legions: which brings forth this
sense; In the first battle were five times four cohorts, in the second, five
times three cohorts, and as many in the third battle. And by the addition of
suae cujusque legionis, of every one of the legions, it appears, that every
legion was so divided into three parts, that it had four cohorts in the first
battle, three in the second, and three in the last.

Concerning the space which their Armies imbattelled, took up, it appears,
that the whole distance between their Camps contained two thousand foot;
whereof either army took up one third, being 666 foot, or a hundred and eleven
pases, a little more then a furlong: but that altered more or less, as place
and occasion required.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Treaty of Peace.
THe next day, Caesar.
Caesar went about to finish and end the fortification which he had begun; and
the Enemy, to try whether they might find a foord in the River Sicoris, and so
get over. Which being perceived Caesar carried over the light-armed Germans,
and part of the Cavalry, and disposed them in guard along the River bank. At
length, being besieged and shut up on all sides, and having kept their horses
without meat four days together, besides their extreme want of water, wood and
corn, they required a parlie, and that (if it might be) in some place out of
the presence of the soldier. Which Caesar denied, unless it were in public.
Whereupon Afrani^s his son was given in hostage to Caesar; and so they
presented themselves in a place of Caesar's appointing.

And in the hearing of both the Armies, Afranius spoke to this effect; That he
was not to be offended, neither with him nor with the soldier, for being
faithful and obedient to the General Cn. Pompeius; but now, having made
sufficient proof of their duty, they had also thoroughly suffered for the same,
having endured the extremity of want in all necessary provisions: Insomuch as
now they were shut up as women, kept from water, kept from going out, oppressed
with a greater weight of grief in body, and of dishonor in their reputation
then they were able to bear; and therefore d^d confess themselves to be
vanquished and overcome: praying and beseeching, that if there were any mercy
left, they might not undergo the extremity of Fortune. At n^nc sola mi^i est
orandae causa salutis*
And this he delivered as humbly and demissively as was possible.

To which Caesar answered; That these terms of complaint and compassion could
be used to no man more unproperly then himself: Dignum donanda, Caesar, (...)
credere vita.
for whereas every man else did his duty; he only, upon fit cond^tions of time
and place, refused to fight with them, to the end all circumstances might
concur to apeace: Albeit his Army had suffered much wrong, in the death and
slaughter of their fellows, yet he had kept and preserved such of their party
as were in his power, and came of their own accord to move apeace; wherein they
thought they went about to procure the safety of all their fellows. So that the
whole course of his proceeding with them consisted of clemency. Howbeit their
Commanders abhorred the name of Peace, and had not kept the laws either of
treaty or truce: for they had caused many simple men to be massacred and slain,
that were deceived by a show of treaty. And therefore it had befallen them, as
it happens for the most part to perverse and arrogant persons, to seek and
earnestly to desire that which a little before they had foolishly contemned.

Neither would he take the advantage of this their submission, or of any other
opportunity of time, either to augment his power, or to strengthen his party:
but he only required, that those Armies might be discharged, which for many
years together had been maintained against him. For neither were those six
Legions for any other cause sent into Spain, nor the seventh enrolled there,
nor so many and so great Navies prepared, nor such experienced and skillful
Commanders selected and appointed, (for none of these needed to keep Spain in
quiet;) nothing hereof was prepared for the use and behoof of the Province,
which (by reason of their long continuance of peace) needed not any such
assistance. All these things were long ago provided in a readiness against
him: New forms of government were made and ordained against him; That one and
the same man, should be resident at the gates of Rome, have the whole
superintendency and direction of the City business; and yet notwithstanding,
hold two warlike Provinces for so many years together, being absent from both
of them.

Against him, and for his ruin, were changed the ancient Rights and Customs of
Magistracy, in sending men at the end of their Pretorship or Consulship, to the
government of Provinces, as was always accustomed; but in lieu of them, were
chosen some that were allowed and authorized by a few. Against him the
prerogative of age did nothing prevail: but whosoever they were that in former
wars had made good proof of their valor, were now called out to command
Armies. To him only was denied that which was granted to all other Generals;
that when they had happily brought things to an end, they might dismiss their
Army, and return home with honor, or at the least, without dishonor.

All which things he notwithstanding both had, and would suffer patiently:
neither did he now go about to take their Army from them, and retain them in
pay for himself, which he might easily do; but that they should not have means
to make head against him. And therefore, as it was said before, they should go
out of the Provinces, and discharge their Army; if they did so, he would hurt
no man: But that was the only and last means of peace.

OBSERVATIONS.
THere is not any one virtue that can challenge a greater measure of honor, or
has more prerogative either amongst friends or enemies, then fidelity. For
which cause it is, that men are more strict in matters committed to their trust
for the behoof of others, Multa, quae nostra causa nunquam faceremus, facimus
caus^ amicorum. Cicero Laeli^s.
then they can well be, if the same things concerned themselves. And yet
nevertheless there is a Quatenus in all endeavors, and seems to be limited
with such apparency, as true affection may make of a good meaning: and was the
ground which Afranius took to move Caesar for a pardon; Non esse aut ipsis aut
militibus succensendum, quod fidem erga Imperatorem Cn. Pompeium conservare
voluerint; sed satis jam fecisse officio, satisque supplicii tulisse, etc. That
he was not to be angry, either with him or the soldiery, for being faithful
to their General Cn. Pompeius; but that now they had sufficiently done their
duty, and as thoroughly smarted for the same, etc. which he delivered in a style
suiting his fortune. For, as Cominaeus has observed, Qui vincuntur victam
habent linguam. Plut.
Men in fear give reverent and humble words; and the tongue is ever conditioned
to be the chiefest witness of our fortune.

On the other side, Caesar produced nothing for his part, but such wrongs as
might seem valuable to make good those courses which he prosecuted. As first,
injuries done by them, and that in the highest degree of blame against his
soldiers, that went but to seek for peace. Injuries done by their General, in
such a fashion, as spared not to evert the fundamental rights of the State, to
bring him to ruin and confusion. Whereby he was moved to endeavor that which
Nature tieth every man unto, Propellere injuriam, to repel an injury from
himself: and having brought it to these terms wherein it now stood, Bellum ita
s^scipiatur, ut nihil aliud nisi pax quaesita videatur. Cic. lib. 1. de offici.
he would give assurance to the world, by the revenge he there took, that he
entered into that war for his only end, that he might live in peace: and so
required no more but that the Army should be dismissed.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The execution of the Articles agreed upon.
THe conditions propounded were most acceptable and pleasing to the soldiers,
C^sar.
as might appear by them: for being in the condition of vanquished persons, and
thereupon expecting a hard measure of Fortune, to be rewarded with liberty and
exemption of Arms, was more then they could expect: insomuch as where there
grew a controversy of the time and place of their dismission, they all
generally standing upon the rampire, signified both by their speeches and by
their hands, that their desire was it might be done instantly; for it could not
be provided by any assurance, that it would continue firm, if it were deferred
until another time. After some dispute on each side, the matter was in the end
brought to this issue; that such as had houses and possessions in Spain, should
be discharged presently, and the rest at the River Varus. Varus fluvius. Hoc
pe^imus, victos ne tecum vincere cogas. Luc.
It was conditioned, that no man should be injuried, that no man should be
forced against his will to be sworn under Caesar's command.

Caesar promised to furnish them with Corn, until they came to the river
Varus: adding withal, that what soever any one had lost in the time of the
war, which should be found with any of his soldiers, should be restored to
such as lost it; and to his soldiers he paid the value thereof in money. If
any controversy afterward grew amongst the soldiers, of their own accord they
brought the matter from time to time before Caesar. As when the Soldiers grew
almost into a mutiny for want of pay, the Commanders affirming the pay-day was
not yet come, Petreius and Afranius required that Caesar might understand the
cause: and both parties were contented with his arbitrament.

A third part of the Army being dismissed in those two days, he commanded two
of his legions to march before their Army, and the rest to follow after, and
continually to incamp themselves not far from them; and appointed Q. Fusius
Calenus, a Legate, to take the charge of that business. This course being
taken, they marched out of Spain to the River Varus, and there dismissed the
rest of their army.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe River Varus divides Gallia Narbonensis from Italy; and was thought an
indifferent place to discharge the Army, whereby there might be an end made of
that war. Wherein if any man desire to see a parallel drawn between Caesar
and the other Leaders for matter of war, it shall suffice to take the issue
for a square of their directions; Rerum ab eventu, facta notanda putes. Lib. 2.
Civil.
being drawn to this head within forty days after Caesar came within sight of
the Enemy, as Curio notes in his speech to the soldiers.

Cato seeing the prosperous success of Caesar against Pompey, said their was a
great uncertainty in the government of their Gods; alluding peradventure to
that of Plato in his Politics, where he says, that there are ages, wherein
the Gods do govern the world in their own persons; and there are other times,
wherein they altogether neglect the same; the world taking a course quite
contrary to that which the Gods directed. But Lucan spoke from a surer ground,
where he says,

Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni.
The conquering cause pleased Jove, the conquered Cato.
And thus ends the first Commentary.
The Second Commentary of the Civil VVarres.
The Argument.
THis Commentary has three special parts. The first contains the siege of
Marseilles: the strange works, and extreme endeavors to take and to keep the
Town. The second expresses the vain labor which Varro, Pompey's Lieutenant,
undertook, after that Afranius and Petreius were defeated, to keep the Province
of Andaluzia out of Caesar's power and command. And the third part consists
of the expedition Curio made into Africa; and ends with his overthrow.

CHAP. I.
The preparations for the siege, as well within as without the Town.
WHilst these things were doing in Spain, C^sar.
C. Trebonius the Legate being left to besiege Marseilles, had begun in two
places to raise Mounts, to make Mantelets and Towers against the Town: One next
unto the Port where the Ships lay; and the other in the way leading from Gallia
and Spain into the town, just upon the creek of the sea, near unto the mouth of
the Rhosne. For three parts of Marseilles are in a manner washed with the sea:
and the fourth is that which gives passage by land; whereof that part which
belongs to the Castle (by reason of the nature of the place, and fortified
with a deep ditch) would require a long and difficult siege. For the perfecting
of those works, Trebonius had commanded out of all the Province, great store of
horses for carriage, and a multitude of men; requiring them to bring rods to
make Hurdles, and other materials for the work: which being prepared and
brought together, he raised a Mount of fourscore foot high.

But such was the provision, which of ancient time they had stored up in the
town, of all equipage and necessaries for the war, with such provision of
munition and engines, that no Hurdles made of rods or Osiers were able to bear
out the force thereof. For out of their great Balistae, they shot beams of
twelve foot long, pointed with Iron, with such force, as they would pierce
through four courses of Hurdles, and stick in the earth. Whereby they were
forced to roof their Porticu^.
Gallery with timber of a foot square, and to bring matter that way by hand to
make the Agger. Testudo.
Mount. A Testudo of sixty foot in length was always carried before, for the
levelling of the ground, made of mighty strong timber, covered and armed with
all things which might defend it from fire and stones, or what else should be
cast upon it. But the greatness of the work, the height of the wall, and
towers, together with the multitude of Engines, did retard and hinder the
proceeding thereof.

Moreover, the Albici did make often sallies out of the town, setting fire to
the mounts and to the turrets; which were kept by our soldiers with great
facility and ease, forcing such as sallied out to return with great loss.

OBSERVATIONS.
HAving described in the former Commentaries these Engines and works here
mentioned, the Reader may please (for his better satisfaction) to review those
places; as also farther to note, Artillery derived from Arcu^ and Telum.
that the word Artillery was brought down to these ages from the use of ancient
Engines, which consisted of those two primitives, Arcus and Telum. And
according as diversity of Art and wit found means to fit these to use and
occasions, so had they several and distinct names; whereof I find chiefly
these, Balistae, Catapultae, Tolenones, Scorpiones, Onagri. Of each of which
there are diverse and several sorts; as first, of the Balistae, some were
called Centenariae, others Talentariae, according to the weight of the bullet
or weapon they shot. Of the rate and proportion whereof Vitruvius, and his
learned interpreter Daniel Barbarus, lib. 10. c. 17.
have made accurate description. Again, some were made to shoot stones; as
appears by that of Tacitus, lib. 3. Hist. Balistae Petrariae.
Magnitudine eximia, quartaedecimae legionis Balista ingentibus saxis hostilem
aciem proruebat; the Balista of the fourteenth legion being an exceeding great
one, beat down the army of the enemy with huge stones: and others, to shoot
darts and piles of timber, headed with Iron; as it is manifested by this place.
Moreover, the manner of bending of these Engines made a difference: some being
drawn up with a wrinch or scrue, and some with a wheel; some having long arms,
and others having short: but the strings were generally either all of sinews,
or of women's hair, as strongest and surest of any other kind. lib. 4. c. 29.
Of these Vegetius prefers the Balistae, and the Onagri, as unresistable
when they were skilfully handled. The word Onagri, as Ammianus Marcellinus
notes, was of a later stamp, and imposed upon those Engines which former time
called Scorpiones; and was taken from the nature of wild Asses, that are said
to cast stones backward with their feet at the Hunters, with such violence,
that oftentimes they dashed out their brains.

In the time of Barbarism, all these Engines were generally called Mangonella:
as appears by Vigin^rius, in his Annotations upon Onosander. Which is
likewise showed by that which Mr. Camden has inserted in the description of
Bedfordshire, concerning the siege of Bedford Castle, in the time of Henry the
third, out of an Author that was present; And of Mangonellum, a batterer or
breaker, comes our English word Mangle.
Ex part orientali fuit una Petraria, and duo Mangonella, quae quotidie turrim
infestabant; and ex part occidentis duo Mangonella, quae turrim veterem
contriverunt; and unum Mangonellum ex part Australi, etc. On the East side was
placed one Engine to cast stones, and two Mangonels, which continually played
upon the tower; and on the West side two Mangonels, which beat down the old
tower; and one Mangonel on the South side, etc. But our powder having blown all
these out of use, it were to no purpose to insist longer upon them.

CHAP. II.
The Marseillians prepare themselves for a Sea Fight.
IN the mean time, Caesar*
L. Nasidius being sent by Cn. Pompeius with a Navy of sixteen ships (amongst
which, some few had their beak-head of Iron) to the succor and supply of L.
Domitius and the Marseillians, he passed the straights of Sicilie, Messin^*
before Curio had intelligence thereof: and putting into Messana, by reason of
the sudden terror of the principal men, and the Senate that took themselves
to flight, he surprised one Ship in the road, and carried her away, and so held
on his course to Marseilles. And having sent a small Bark before, he certified
Domitius and the rest of his coming; exhorting them by all means, that joining
their forces with his supplies, they would once again give fight to Brutus
Navy.

The Marseillians since their former overthrow, had taken the like number of
ships out of their Arcenall, and new rigged and trimmed them, and with great
industry furnished and manned them for that service: for they wanted neither
Oare-men, Mariners, Sailers, nor Pilots, fit for that purpose. To these they
added certain Fisher-boats, and fenced them with coverings, that the Oare-men
might be safe from casting weapons: and these he filled with Archers and
Engines. The Navy being thus furnished and prepared, the Marseillians (incited
and stirred up with the prayers and tears of old men, women and maids, to give
help and defense to their City in time of extreme danger; and to fight with no
less courage and confidence then formerly they had accustomed) went all aboard
with great courage: as it comes to pass through the common fault of Nature,
whereby we put more confidence in things unseen and unknown, or otherwise are
more troubled thereat: according as it then happened. For the coming of
Nasidius had filled the City full of assured hope and courage: and thereupon,
having a good wind, they left the Port, Tholose.
and came and found Nasidius at Taurenta (a Castle belonging to the
Marseillians) and there fitted themselves for a fight; encouraging each other
again to a valiant carriage of that service, and consulting how it might be
best performed.

The right squadron was given to the Marseillians, and the left to Nasidius.
And to the place repaired Brutus, having increased the number of his Ships: for
those six which he took from the Marseillians, he had added unto the other
which Caesar had caused to be made at Arelate, Arles.
and had mended them since the last fight, and fitted them with all necessaries
for men of war. And thereupon exhorting his soldiers to contemn the Enemy, as
a vanquished party, having already foiled and overthrown them when they were
in their strength, they set forward against them with great assurance and
courage.

Out of the Camp of C. Trebonius, and from all those higher places they might
easily perceive and see in the City, how all the youth which remained in the
town, and all the aged, with their wives and children, did from the public
places of guard, and from the town walls, stretch out their hands toward
heaven, or otherwise run to their Churches and Temples, and there prostrating
themselves before their Images, did desire victory of their Gods. Neither was
there any of them all that did not think the event of all their fortunes to
consist in that days service: for the chiefest of all their able men, and the
best of all sorts and degrees, were by name called out, and entreated to go
aboard, to the end that if any disaster or mischance should happen, they might
see nothing further to be endeavored for their safety; and if they overcame,
they might rest in hope to save their City, either by their own valor, or by
foreign help.

OBSERVATIONS.
COmmuni fit vitio naturae, ut invisis, latitantibus, atque incognitis rebus,
magis confidamus, vehementiusque exterreamur, ut tum accidit; It comes to pass
through the common fault of nature, etc. In cases of hazard, things brought
unto us by report do more abuse our judgment, either in conceiving too great
hopes, or yielding too much to distrust, then any matter present can move or
enforce: for these perturbations attending upon our will, are enlarged more
according to the quality of our desires, then as they are directed by
discourse of reason; and so draw men either easily to believe what their wishes
do require, Q^od maxim volun^, id facile credunt.
or otherwise to reject all as utterly lost.

The uncertainty whereof, and the disappointment ensuing those deceivable
apprehensions, has brought the hope of this life into very slight account,
being reckoned but as the dream of him that is awake; and as Piafraus, or a
charitable delusion, to support us through the hard chances of this world, and
to keep man's heart from breaking: for every man's help is hope; which never
affords present relief, but asswageth the bitterness of extremities, by

-- Dabit Deus his quoque finem, Virgil. lib. 2 Aeneid.

God once will put an end to these things too.
CHAP. III.
The fight, and the Marseillians overthrow.
THe fight being begun, Caesar.
the Marseillians were wanting in no point of valor: but bearing in mind such
exhortations as a little before had been given them by their friends, they
fought so resolutely, as though they meant not to fight again; or as if any one
should chance to miscarry in that battle, he should make account that he did
but anticipate, for a small moment of time, the fatal end of his
fellow-Citizens, who (upon taking of the town,) were to undergo the same
fortune of war. Our Ships putting on by little and little, were glad to give
way to the nimbleness and mobility of their shipping, which by the skill of
their Pilots were well managed. And if it happened that our men had found means
to grapple with any of their ships, they presently came on all sides to their
rescue. Neither did the Albici show themselves backward when the matter came to
hands, or were they inferior to our men in courage or valor. Moreover, out of
the lesser Ships were cast infinite numbers of darts, and other weapons,
wherewith our men busied in fight were suddenly wounded.

In this conflict, two of their Triremes having spied Brutus ship (which by her
flag might ^asily be discerned) came violently against him from two contrary
parts: but the danger being foreseen, Brutus did so prevail through the
swiftness of his Ship, that he a little out-stript them; whereby they coming
with their full swinge, did so encounter one another, that they were both very
much shaken with the blow: for the beak-head of one being broken off, the water
was ready to come in on all sides. Which being observed by some of Brutus party
that were near about, they set upon them (being thus distressed) and quickly
sunk them both.

The ships that came with Nasidius were found of no use, and therefore quickly
left the fight; for there was not offered there unto them either the sight of
their Country, or the exhortations and prayers of their kinsfolks and allies,
as motives to hazard their lives in that quarrel: so that of them there was
none wanting. Of the Ships that came out from Marseilles, five were sunk, and
four taken. One escaped with Nasidius fleet, which made toward the hither
Spain. One of them that remained was sent before to Marseilles; who coming as a
messenger before the rest, and approaching near unto the town, all the multitude
ran out to hear the news: which being once known, there was such a general
mourning and desolation, as though the town were instantly to be taken by the
Enemy. Notwithstanding, they left not off to make ready such necessaries as
were requisite for defense of the same.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis was the second fight the Marseillians made, to keep the sea open for the
aid and relief of the Town; being otherwise straightly besieged by land, and
yet that was not so tenderly cared for as their shutting up by sea; the free
passage whereof brought in all their profit in time of peace, and their
succors in times of war: for which regard it was, that they commended to their
gods the success of that enterprise, with as much devotion, as tears, vows
and prayers could expresse^*

The benefit a Town besieged receives from an open inlet by sea, cannot be
better manifested, then by the siege of Ostend; for by that occasion specially,
it endured the most famous siege that was in Christendom these many years.
This L. Nasidius was rather a constant friend to the cause, then a fortunate
Admiral: for afterward, he refused not to take the like overthrow for Pompey
the son, Dio Cassius
at Leucades, as he did now for the father. And surely it falls out (whether
it be through the uncertainty of seafaring matters, Nihil tam capax
fortuitorum quam Mare.
or that men have fairer pretenses at sea, to avoid occasions of hazard, then
are found at land, or that Pauca digna nascuntur in Mari, Tacit. 14, Annal.
few things of value come from the Sea, according to the proverb, or for what
other cause, I know not) that there are few of those which sought honor in
this kind, who have attained the least part of their desires. And yet
nevertheless, some there are of famous memory: as King of Algiers in the time
of Soliman.
Barbarussa, a terror of the Levant seas; Andreas Auria, of Genua, renowned
for his great exploits upon the Turk: together with diverse of our own Nation;
as namely, Sir Francis Drake, who for skill and fortune at sea, is held
matchable with any other whatsoever; besides, Mr. Candish, for voyages to the
South, and Sir Martin Frobisher, for discoveries to the North.

Howbeit, these later times have advantage without comparison of former ages,
through the invention of the Sea-compass with the Needle; which was found out
little more then three hundred years ago, by one Flavus, born in the kingdom
of Naples; without which, no ship can shape a course in the Ocean, and to which
nothing can be added, more then to find a perfect and ready direction for
longitudes.

CHAP. IIII.
The works which the legionary Soldiers made against the Town.
IT was observed by the legionary soldiers, Caesar.
that had the charge of the right part of the work, that it would much
advantage them against the often eruptions and sallies of the Enemy, if they
built a tower of Brick under the town wall, in stead of a Hold or Receptacle:
which at first they made low and little, only for the repelling of sudden
assaults. Thither they usually retreated: and from thence, if they were
overcharged, they made defense, either by beating back, or prosecuting an
Enemy. This tower was thirty foot square, and the walls thereof five foot
thick: but afterward (as use and experience is the master of all things) it
was found by insight and industry of men, that this tower might be of great
use, if it were raised to any height; which was accordingly performed in this
fashion.

When it was raised to the height of a story, they so framed the floor, that
the ends of the ^oysts did not ^itt^e out beyond the sides of the tower; least
any thing might be thrust out, on which the fire which the enemy should cast
might take hold: and then paved that floor, with as much brick as the Mantelets
and Gabions would suffer to be laid. Upon this tarras thus made they laid
cross beams along the sides, as a foundation to an upper story, for the top
and covering of the tower. And upon these beams they raised cross timbers,
thwarting each other for the sides of the tower, and coupled them at the top
with side beams.

These cross timbers were longer, and bare further out then the square of the
tower; that there might be means to fasten coverings and defenses, against the
blows and darts of the Enemy, whilst the workmen were finishing the walls and
sides of that building. The top or upper story of this tower they likewise
paved with brick and clay, that no fire might fasten on it; and laid
Matteresses on the top thereof, to the end the floor might not be broken with
any weapons shot out of Engines, nor the pavement shivered in pieces with
stones cast out of Catapults.

Moreover they made three nettings or mats of Hawsers, equal in length to the
sides of the tower, and four foot in breadth. And upon those three sides which
confronted the Enemy, they fastened them upon poles to hang before the tower:
which kind of defense they had in other places tried to b^ of proof, and not to
be pierced with any weapon or engine. And as one part of the tower came to be
covered, finished, and fortified, against any violence of the enemy, they
carried their Mantelets and defenses to the rest unfinished. The top of which
tower they framed upon the first story, and then raised it up with wrinches or
scrues, as far as the close netting would serve them for a defense. And so
covered with these shelters and safeguards, they built up the sides with brick;
and then again scruing up the top higher, they fitted the place to build the
sides higher: and as they came to the height of a story, they laid the joysts
of the floor in such sort, as the ends thereof were hid and covered with the
wall or sides that were of brick; and so from that story they proceeded to
another, by scruing up the top, and raising their netting. By which means they
built very safely six stories, without any wound or other danger at all; and
left windows and loop-holes in the sides, for the putting out of Engines in
such places as they thought convenient. When by means of that tower, they were
in hope to defend the works near about it, they then made a Musculum or mouse
of sixty foot in length, and of two foot timber square, to conveigh them safely
from this tower of Brick to another of the Enemies, and to the town wall:
whereof this was the form. They cut two side groundsils of equal length, and
made the space between them to contain four foot; upon them they erected little
columns of five foot high, and joined them together, putting braces of an easy
sloping in such distances, as the rafters were to be placed to bear up the
roof: and upon those braces they laid rafters of two foot square, fastening them
both at the ridge, and at the eavings, with plates and bolts of Iron. They
lathed the roof with lath of four fingers broad: and so the building being made
with a gable-ridge handsomely fashioned, the top was laid all over with clay, to
keep the Mouse from burning; and then covered with tiles, which were fenced
with leather, to the end they might not be washed away with pipes or gutters of
water, which might be laid to fall upon them. And least those hides should be
spoiled, either with fire or great stones, they laid Matteresses upon them.

This work being wholly finished near unto the tower, through the help and
means of defensive mantelets and gabions; suddenly before the enemy was aware,
with a ship-engine and rolers put under it, they brought it so near a tower of
the enemies, that it joined to the wall thereof. The townsmen being upon a
sudden appalled thereat, brought the greatest stones they could get, and with
levers tumbled them down from the wall upon the mouse: but the strength of the
work d^d not shrink at the blows, and whatsoever fell upon it, slided down the
sloping of the roof. Which when they perceived, they altered their purpose, and
got pots of Rosin and Pitch, and setting them on fire, threw them d^wn upon the
Mouse; which tumbling down from the roof, were removed away with long hooks and
poles. In the mean time, the soldiers that were within the Mouse, pulled out
the lower stones that were in the foundation of the tower. This Mouse or
Mantelet was defended by our men out of the brick tower, with weapons and
engines: and by means thereof the Enemy was put from the wall and the turrets,
so that they could not well defend the same. Many of the stones being sapped
out of the foundation of the tower, part thereof suddenly fell, and the rest
leaned as though it would not stand long after.

OBSERVATIONS.
FOrasmuch as it requires the labor of an industrious pen to shadow out the
effects of Industry; I will only produce the evidence of these works, to show
the power it has in humane actions, rather then by any maimed or shallow
discourse, weaken the force of so great an Engine. Wherein first it may be
noted, how in ^^ese and the like attempting endeavors, one thing draws on
another, according as practice makes overtu^e to maisteries: For our
understanding growing by degrees, has no intuitive faculty to discern
perfection, Discipulus prioris posterior dies.
but by little and little works out exactness; making every Morrow
Yesterdaies scholar, as reason finds means of discourse from causes to
effects, or from effects to causes.

And so this Tower, Aulus Gellius.
made at first but for a retreat of defense, gave occasion to let them see the
like or better use thereof in the offensive part, if it were raised to a height
convenient for the same: which they performed with as much Art as the wit of
man could use in such a work. For having made the first story, they then made
the roof, for the shelter and safety of the soldier: and scruing it up by
little and little, they built the sides, having fenced the open space with
netting, for avoiding of danger; arming it with brick and clay against fire,
and with Matteresses against stones and weights. And then again they proceeded
to the making of that Mantelet or Musculum, which gave them passage to the
wall; building it with strong, or rather strange timber, of two footsquare,
framed so artificially with braces, and ridging rafters, and those so fitted,
as neither fire, water, weapon, nor weight, could prevail against it. And thus
they labored to gain their own ends, and bought Fortune with immeasurabe
endeavor.

CHAP. V.
The Marseillians get a truce of the Romans, and break it deceitfully.
THe Enemy being then much appalled at the sudden ruin and fall of the tower,
C^sar.
and greatly perplexed at so unexpected a mischief; and withal struck with a
fear of the wrath and indignation of the Gods, and of the sack and spoil of
their City; they came all unarmed, thonging out of the gates, wearing holy
attire upon their heads, I^er^es cum infulis.
and stretching out their s^bmissive hands to the Legates and the Army. Upon
which noveltie, all hostility ceased for the time, and the soldiers
withdrawing themselves from the assault, were carried with a desire of hearing
and understanding what would pass at that time.

When they came to the Legates and to the Army, they cast themselves all down
at their feet, praying and beseeching that things might be suspended until
Casar's arrival. They saw plainly that their town was already taken, their
works were perfected, their own tower demolished; and therefore they desisted
from making any further defense: there could be no let to hinder them from
present spoil and sacking, if upon Caesar's arrival they should refuse to obey
his Mandates. They showed further, that if their tower were absolutely
overthrown, the soldiers could not be kept from entering the town in hope of
pillage, and would thereby bring it to a final destruction.

These and many the like things were uttered by them very movingly (as men
learned and eloquent) with great lamentation and much weeping, whereby the
Legates (moved with commiseration) withdrew the soldiers from the
fortifications, put off the assault, and left a small guard to keep the works.
A kind of truce being through pity and commiseration thus made and concluded,
Caesar's coming was expected; no weapon was cast, either from the town-wall, or
from our side: insomuch as every man left off his care and diligence, as though
all had been ended. For Caesar had by Letters given straight charge to
Trebonius, not to suffer the town to be taken by assault, least the soldiers
(moved through their rebellion and contempt, together with the long travel
they had sustained should put all above fourteen years of age to the sword:
which they threatened to do, and were then hardly kept from breaking into the
town; taking the matter very grievously, that Trebonius seemed to hinder them
from effecting their purposes. But the enemy, being people without faith, did
only watch for time and opportunity, to put in practice their fraud and deceit.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IT is a saying of an ancient Writer, Vestitus, ut t^git corpus, it^ de^^git
animum.
that As our attire does cover the body, so it does uncover the nakedness of
the mind. Whereupon it is, that men have found means to suit themselves upon
occasion, according to the disposition of their inward affections, as they are
either, dilated with joy, or contracted with sorrow, lifted up with weal, or
humbled with affliction. And accordingly these Marseillians, in token of their
humility and submission, came out, wearing an attire here called Infula; 11
Aeneid.
which Servius describes to be a kind of Coife, made after the form of a
Diadem, with two pendants on each side, called Vittae.

Those which the Romans used of this kind, were fashioned like a Pyramid: the
point whereof did signify the The fire and the air.
Elements, ascending upwards in such a pointed fashion; and by the two pendants
or bands, were denoted the Water and the Earth. They were made wholly of wool,
as Festus writes, Infulae sunt filamenta lanea, quibus Sacerdotes, host^ae,
and templa velabantur; Infulae are certain ornaments and tappets made of wool,
wherewith the Priests use to be clad, the Sacrifices to be covered, and the
Temples to be hanged: to show humbleness and simplicity, whereof wool is a
Hieroglyphick; for no kind of beasts have more need of aid and succor then
Sheep: and thereupon it was, that all Supp^^ants were attired with tresses of
wool. Or otherwise, as some will have it, that the habit of the Petitioner
might call to remembrance the flexible disposition, which is well-beseeming
those that have power and means to give help and relief: according to the use
of Heathen ages, Macrob. lib. 1 Saturnal. ca* 8.
wherein their Images of then Idols had their feet tied with cords of wool; to
show the mildness and easiness which upon devote supplications was found in
divine Powers, whereof wool was a Symbolum.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Marseillians being an ancient progeny of the Greeks, notwithstanding the
long descent of time, and alteration of air, did keep a touch of the natural
disposition of that Nation, as well in such strains of eloquence, as were
familiar unto them above other people, as in Graeca side omnia (...).
subtlety and duplicitie of dealing. Which passage of the Mars^illians is
observed by Oration pro ^lacc^.
Tully, as a matter enforcing the due praises of Eloquence, and the use it has
upon all occasions to draw consent, with the sweetness of a well-tuned tongue,
above that which may be attained either by Engines or a strong hand. Wherein,
if we should go about to compare the Aequalis est ut ^^rumque dignit^s, nisi
prae^^ns necessitas unius conditionem nobi^^ rem effi^i^t. Tum enim is
praeferendus, quem ^raesen^i^ magis exigun^, si^^t Valent: and Vale^s
statue^un^ (...) civilious (...) C. de offic. Vicar. Ut in civilibus causis
vicarii comitibus milltum anteserrentur, in militaribus negotiis comites
vicariis.
force of Arms with the power of a grave Discourse, and set a soldier
parallel to an Orator, there might hence be taken diverse probable reasons to
second that saying, which has been thought to savor more of vain-glorie, then
of true judgment,

Cedant armatogae, concedat laurea linguae;
Let arms to gowns, the bay-leaf yield to the tongue.
Or at least, to make a resemblance of Plutarch's two Wrastlers, of whom one
being always cast, did nevertheless persuade the other that he cast him; and
so, howsoever he became foiled, yet left the place with an opinion of victory:
And is always more easily effected, when it is attended with cunning and
deceit, according to that of Valerius Maximus, Efficacissimae vires per fidiae,
mentiri and fallere, The main strength of perfidiousness is lying and
deceiving. But, as it is observed by Philip de Commines, The En los casos raros
un solo exemplo, haze experiencia, A^to. Peers.
example of one sole accident, is sufficient to make many men wise: so this may
serve to teach succeeding times, not to trust to words, whereof there is no
hold; but to ratify such compositions with irrevocable performances.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THirdly, we may note, how far the anger of a Roman Army was extended, upon
such provocations as are here mentioned, viz. Ad interficiendos pucros, to the
slaying of all the males above fourteen years of age: for, from that stage of
life, they accounted all in the rank of men; according to the institution of
Tarquinius Priscus, Macro. lib. 1. S^tur. cap. 6.
who in his triumph of the Sabines, made a special Oration in the praise of
his own son, that had assaulted and struck the Enemy in those wars, being
then but fourteen years of age; and thereupon gave him liberty to wear man's
apparel, which was that Yoga praetexta (edged or faced with P^rple) whereof
their histories make so often mention.

But to define precisely h^reof, were to mistake the fury of the soldier. For
howsoever the rule is certain from the law of Nature, that no finite cause can
be infinite in effect, or that a mortal hate should have a boundless revenge:
yet occasion made it variable, and as irregular as that of Alexander; Quintus
Cur. lib. 5.
who sometimes saved all, and at other times (as at the taking of Tire) saved
none at all, but such as had taken the protection of the Temple. The inhumane
cruelty of the Turks exceeds all former hostility in this kind: for they
never save any out of commiseration, but for private use; and do rather choose
to destroy mankind, then suffer it to live for any other purpose then their own.

CHAP. VI.
The Marseillians taking advantage of the Truce, consu^e with fire all the
Roman works: which are afterward re-edified.
AFter a few days, Caesar.
when our men were grown remiss and careless, suddenly about high noon, as
some were gone one way some another, and others wearied with continual labor
had given themselves to rest, the weapons being cased and laid up; they rushed
out of their gates, and coming with the wind that then blew hard, they set our
works on fire: which was so carried and dispersed with the wind, that the
Mount, the Mantelets, the Testudo, the Tower and the Engines, were all on fire
at once, and were burned down and consumed, before it could be known how it
came.

Our men astonished at so sudden and unthought-of an accident, caught up such
weapons as were next at hand; and others running speedily from the Camp, set
upon the Enemy, but were hindered from following them as they fled, by Engines
and Arrows from the town wall. They, on the other side, being retired under the
protection of the wall, did at their ease burn down the Mouse and the
brick-tower: and so many months labor was, through the perfidiousnesse of the
Enemy, and the force of the tempest, consumed and brought to nothing in a
moment of time. The Marseillians attempted the like the next day after, having
opportunity of the like tempest; and with greater confidence sallied out, and
threw much fire upon the other mount and the tower. But as our men the day
before (expecting nothing less then to be surprised in that sort) had
neglected more then ordinary their usual guards; so being now made wiser by
that which had happened, they had made all things ready for defense: by which
means, having slain a great number, they drove the rest back into the town,
without effecting any thing.

Trebonius began again to re-edifie such works as were ruinated and consumed
with fire, and that with greater ^alacritie of the soldier then before. Est
ita natu^a compara (...), ut (...), sup^a quam di^i possi^, (...), si vide^nt
^^rum eventus virtuti non responde^^.
For when they saw their great labors and endeavors sort to no better
success, and the truce broke by the treachery of the Enemy, it was a great
gall unto them to have their valor thus derided. And forasmuch as there was
nothing left in all the Country for the raising of a Mount, all the trees
being already cut down, and brought far and near to make the first Mount, they
began a Mount of a strange and unheard of fashion, raised with two side-walls
of brick being six foot thick a piece, Paus. in Mess.
and joined together with floors. The walls were of equal distance, to the
latitude of the former Mount, which was all of solid matter: and where the
space between the walls, or the weakness of the work did require it, there
were piles driven between, and beams and planks laid athwart for the
strengthening thereof. The floors, made between those walls, were laid with
Hurdles, and the Hurdles were covered with clay.

The soldiers being thus sheltered on both sides with a wall, and defended in
front by Mantelets and Gab^ons, did safely, without danger, bring whatsoever
was necessary for that building; whereby the work was carried on with great
speed: and the loss of their former continual labor was in a short time
recovered again, through the admirable dexterity and valor of the soldier. To
conclude, they left gates in the walls, in such places as were fittest for
sallies.

When the enemy perceived, that what they hoped could not be repaired again in
a long time, was with a few days labor re-edified and finished, whereby there
was no place left to practice deceit, or to sallie out with advantage, neither
was there any means left by which they could prevail, either by force of Arms
to hurt our soldiers, or by fire to consume our works; and understanding
likewise, that by the same manner of fortification, all that part of the town
which had passage and access from the firm land, might be encompassed with a
wall and with towers, that their soldiers should not be able to stand upon
their works; and perceiving withal, that our Army had raised a counter-mure,
against the wall of their town, and that weapons might be cast by hand unto
them; that the use of their Engines (wherein they much trusted) was by the
nearness of space quite taken away; and lastly, that they were not able to
confront our men (upon equal terms) from their walls, and from their turrets;
they descended to the same Articles of rendry and submission, as were formerly
agreed upon.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
HEnce we may observe, that a General cannot be too secure of an Enemy, that
stands upon terms to render up a place. For the action being but voluntary by
constraint, if happily the constraining force be removed, then that does cease
which is voluntary; and so it comes by consequent to a refusal. As appears
by this passage of the Marseillians; who being brought into hard terms, as well
by their two overthrows at Sea, (whence they expected no further succor,) as
also by the siege laid so close by land, (where they were so violently
assaulted, that their towers of defense made passage for the Romans to enter
upon them;) did nevertheless (upon cessation of those inforcements) alter
their purpose, and entertained new hopes: which makes good that saying;

-- Tim^o Danaos and dona ferentes,
I fear the Greeks, even when they bring their gifts.
THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SEcondly, Volu^tas ad laborem propensa, cuncta vincere and supera^e (...).
we may observe that a will, forward to undergo labor, does never stick at any
difficulty, nor is at all dismayed with the loss of any pains: but is rather
redoubled in courage and industry; especially being edged on with a desire of
revenge. Polyaenus.
Which (if Homer may have credit) does always add a third part to a man's
strength; as appeared by Diomedes, Iliad. 5.
being hurt in the shoulder with one of Pindarus arrows: for revenge whereof,
he exceeded himself in a sesquiterce proportion of valor, and slew more
Trojans by a third part then otherwise he could.

Howsoever, Nihil tam arduum, quod animi fortitudine supera^i non possit.
as there is nothing so hard, but is subject to the endeavor of the mind: so
there is nothing so easy, as to disposses our selves of that intent care which
is requisite in these employments. For these Romans, that through the greatness
of their spirits had made such first and second works, Appi^n. de bello
Hispanico.
as the memory thereof will last with the world, were surprised when they lay
in the Interim, as it were unbent, in as great remisness and neglect (howsoever
drawn unto it by deceit) as if they had been able to do no such matter as is
here reported. And therefore it behooves a Commander, to keep his Army always
seasoned with labor; Vegetius.
forasmuch as Exercitus labor proficit, otio consenescit, An army thrives by
employment, but grows old by idleness.

CHAP. VII.
Varro raises great troops to maintain Pompey's party in Spain, but to no
purpose.
MArcus Varro, Caesar.
in the further Province of Spain, having from the beginning understood how
things had passed in Italy, and distrusting how matters would succeed with
Pompey, did oftentimes give out very friendly speeches of Casar: That Pompey
had by way of prevention gained him to his party, and honored him with a
Lieutenancie, whereby he was obliged in duty to him; howbeit, in his
particular disposition he stood no less affected to Caesar: neither was he
ignorant of the duty of a Legate, to whose trust and fidelity the government of
the Province was left, Qui (...) operam obtinebat.
as in deposito, upon condition to be rendered up at all times and seasons, as
he that commanded in chief should require it: He likewise knew very well what
his own forces were, and what was the affection and disposition of all the
Country toward C^sar.

This was the subject of all his speeches, without any show of inclining either
to the one or to the other. But afterward, when he heard that Caesar was
engaged at Marscilles, that Petreius forces were joined with Afranius Army,
that great aides were come unto them, that every man was in great hope and
expectation of good success, and that all the hither Province had agreed
together to undertake Pompey's cause; as also what had after happened
concerning the want of victuals at Ile^da, (all which things were writ with
advantage unto him by Afranius;) he then upon that alteration changed his mind
according to the times, and levied soldiers in all parts of the Province: and
having raised two complete legions, he added unto them some thirty cohorts of
the Country soldiers, to serve for wings to the Army, and gathered together
great quantity of Corn, as well for the supply of the Mars^illians, as for the
provision of Petreius and Afranius.

Moreover, he commanded them of Gades to build and provide ten Galleys; and
ordered further, that many other should be made at Hispalis. He took all the
money and the ornaments out of Hercules temple, and brought the same into the
town of Gades, and in lieu thereof sent six Cohorts out of the Province to keep
the temple. He made Caius Gallonius (a Roman Knight and a familiar friend of
Domitius, and sent by him thither to recover some matter of inheritance)
Governor of the town. All the Armies (as well private as public) were brought
into Gallonius house. He himself made many bitter invectives against Caesar;
affirming in public that Caesar had been several times worsted, and that a
great number of the soldiers were revolted from him, and were come to
Afranius: which he knew to be true, by certain and approved Messengers.

The Roman Citizens residing in that Province being much perplexed and
affrighted thereat, were thereupon constrained to promise him 190 thousand
Sesterces in ready money, for the service of the Commonweal, besides twenty
thousand weight of silver, together with one hundred and twenty thousand
bushels of Wheat. Upon those Cities and States which favored Caesar's party,
he laid greater impositions: for such as had let fallen speeches, or declared
themselves against the Commonweal, he confiscated all their goods, and put a
Garrison upon them: giving judgment himself upon private persons, and
constraining all the Province to swear allegiance to him and to Pompey.

And being in the end advertised what had happened in the hither Province, he
prepared for war, with a purpose to dispose thereof in this manner: His
resolution was to keep two legions with him at Gades, with all the shipping and
the Corn: for knowing that the whole Province did entirely affect Caesar's
Cause, he thought it best and easiest for him (having made good provision of
shipping and Corn) to keep the Island.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
OBserve first, how dangerous it is for such as stand neutrall between two
parties (bearing no affection but to their own ends) to declare themselves,
upon such apparences as commonly happen in the flux and reflux of a war: for if
their judgment fail, as Varro's did, they are then forced to redeem their
error with more offices of partiality, then can afterward be excused; and so
run into a further degree ofenmitie, then the party for whom they suffer. And
certainly, whether it be that neutrality refuses to take part with the right,
(which in matter of controversy must needs stand on one side,) or whether it
favors of an ill nature, to show no sympathising affections with such as
otherwise have correspondence with them, or for what other cause I know not;
but sure it is, that Neutrals, attending nothing but their own advantage, are
of no better esteem then the bird whereof Leo Africus writes; which when the
King of Birds demanded tribute, would always rank himself amongst the Fish,
and when the King of Fishes required his service, would always be with the
Birds; or then the Weathercock, whereof there is no other use, then indicare
regnantem, to show what wind rules.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Island of Gades, was known to the Romans by the name of Tartesson:

Hic Gades urbs est dicta Tartessus prius. Festus A^nienus.

Here Gades stands, of old Tartessus called.
The Town of Gades was endowed, as Dion witnesses, Lib. xli.
by Julius Caesar, with the liberties and privileges of Rome. To which effect
Pliny writes; Oppidum habet Civium Romanorum, quod appellatur Augusta urbs
Julia Gaditana, This Island has a town of Roman Citizens, which is called
Augusta Julia Gaditana. It was a town of great fame, as appears by that of
Juba king of Mauritania, who made ambitious suit, to have the title of
Duumviri, or Two-men of the town; as Festus notes, in his Description of the
Seacoast.

At vis in illis tanta, vel tantum decus
Aetate prisca, sub fide rerum fuit;
Rex ut superbus, omniumque praepotens
Quos gens habebat forte tum Maurusia,
Octaviano principi acceptissimus,
Et literarum semper in studio, Iuba,
Interfluoque separatus aequore,
Illustriorem semet urbis istius
Duumviratu crederet --
Such was their power, such their grace
Of old, while faith was yet in place;
King Iuba, the most powerful Prince
The Moors had either then or since,
In favor with Octavian,
And every way a learned man,
Divided from this place by S^n,
Thought it would greater glory be
To be Duum-vir of the town.
In this Island stood Hercules Temple; to which as well Romans, as other noble
Adventurers of all Nations, made often repair, to perform their vows upon
achievements of deeds of Arms: which solemnity was not omitted by Hannibal,
before his expedition into Italy.

Amongst other Altars in this Temple, there was one dedicated to Penury and
Art; signifying that Art drives away Penury, as Hercules put to flight and
subdued Monsters. Those of Asia, and the Mediterrane parts, took this Island to
be the furthest end of navigation: for the Atlantic sea admitted no further
passage, for want of a lodestone to direct them in that vastness. And
therefore Pindarus says, that it is not lawful for wise men nor fools to know
what is beyond the straight of Gibraltar, Josephus A* costa has observed, that
the sea has no part above one thousand leagues from the land.
the way in the Ocean being a thousand leagues abroad. In this town of Gades
was born L. Cornelius Balbus, who at his death gave a legacy to the Roman
people, twenty five pence per Pole; together with Junius Brutus Columella, that
writ so excellently De re Rustica.

Et mea quam generat Tartessi littore Gades.
And which my Gades yields on Tartesse shore.
It is now called Cales, and was sacked by our English, An. 1596.

Hispalis, Hispalis.
surnamed Romulensis, from the Roman Colony that was planted there, Sevill.
is seated upon the River Baetis, in a very pleasant and fertile Country, and
especially for oiles. The town is now the Staple for the West Indies, and a
very Nursery of Merchants. Arias Montanus, that great Theologian, was born in
this City.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
COncerning these hundred and ninety thousand Sesterces, the learned cannot
satisfy themselves with any congruent interpretation thereof. For if we take
them in the Neuter, for seven pound ten shillings apiece, it amounts to
1492000 pound, which is thought too much: if in the Masculine, it will rise not
to above 1400 pound, which is deemed too little. And therefore the Critics do
mend the place, and read H-S centies nonagies, a hundred times ninety H-S.
which brings out 142500 pound: and is thought agreeable to the meaning of the
Author.

CHAP. VIII.
The Province and the legions revolt from Varro. Caesar settleth Spain, and
returns to Marseilles.
ALbeit Caesar was called back into Italy, Caesar.
for many great and important causes, yet he was resolved to leave no spark or
appearance of war remaining behind him in Spain; for that he knew Pompey's
deserts to be such, as had gained him many followers and dependants in the
hither Province. And therefore having sent two legions into the further Spain;
under the conduct of Q. Cassius, Tribune of the people, he himself made forward
by great journeys, with six hundred horse; sending an Edict before him, to
summon the Magistrates and chief men of the Cities and Towns, to appear before
him by a day at Corduba. Upon publication of which Edict, there was no City in
all that Province, that sent not some of their Senate by the day appointed to
Corduba: neither was there any Roman Citizen of note, that presented not
himself there at that time.

The Princes and States being assembled, of their own accord they shut the
gates against Varro, set watch and ward upon the walls and in the towers, and
retained with them two cohorts, called by the name of Colonicae (which came
thither by chance) for the safe keeping of the town. At the self-same time, the
Inhabitants of Carmona (which is the strongest town of all the Province) cast
out the three cohorts that were by Varro put into their Cittadell, and shut
them out of their town. Whereby Varro was the rather moved to make haste to
Gades with his legions, lest he should be hindered and cut off, either in the
way, or in his passage over from the Continent: such and so favorable was the
general affection of the whole Province toward Caesar. And being somewhat
advanced on his journey, he received Letters from Gades, That as soon as it was
known there of the Edict which Caesar had published, the chiefest of the
Gaditans agreed with the Tribunes of the soldiers which were in Garrison, to
expel Gallonius out of the town, and to keep the City and the Island for
Caesar. Which being resolved upon, they sent him word to leave the town of his
own accord, while he might do it without danger; and if he refused, they would
then take such further order as they should find expedient. Gallonius moved
with fear dislodged himself, and went out of Gades.

These things being divulged abroad, one of the two legions, known by the name
of Vernacula, took up their Ensigns, went out of Varro's Camp (he himself
standing by and looking on) and retired themselves to Hispalis; and there sat
down in the Marketplace, and in common porches, without hurting any man. Which
the Roman Citizens of that Convent did so well like of, that every man was very
desirous to entertain them in their houses. Whereat Varro being much
astonished, altered his journey toward Ilipa Italica, Ilipa Italica.
as he gave it out; but soon after was advertised by some of his friends, that
the gates were shut against him. Whereupon, being circumvented and fore-closed
from all other addresses, he sent to Caesar, to advertise him that he was ready
to deliver up the legion, to whomsoever he should please to appoint. To which
purpose he sent him Sex. Caesar, commanding the legion to be delivered to him.

Varro having given up his charge, came to Caesar at Corduba, and there gave
him a true account of the carriage of his office. The moneys remaining in his
hands he delivered up, and gave an Inventory of the Corn and shipping which
were in any place provided. Caesar, by a public Oration made at Corduba, gave
thanks generally to all men. As first to the Roman Citizens, for the endeavor
they used to be Masters of the town. Secondly, to the Spaniards, for driving
out the Garrisons. To them of Gades, that they traversed and prevented the
projects of the adversaries, and had restored themselves to liberty. To the
Tribunes of the soldiers, and Centurions, that were come thither to keep the
town, for that by their valor and magnanimity the resolution of the townsmen
was assured and confirmed. He remitted such levies of money, as the Roman
Citizens had promised Varro for the public service. He restored the goods
confiscated of such as had spoken more freely then was pleasing; and gave
diverse rewards, both public and private: the rest he satisfied with hope of
good time for the future. And having stated there two days, he went to Gades:
where he gave order that the moneys and monuments, which were transferred from
Hercules Temple to a private house, should be carried back again to the Temple.
He made Q. Cassius Governor of the Province, and left with him four legions.
He himself in a few days space, with those ships which M. Varro, and those of
Gades (by his commandment) had made, came to Tarraco; for there the
Ambassadors of almost all the hither Province did attend his coming. And
having received them with private and public honor, in the same fashion as
formerly he had used, he left Tarraco, and came by land to Narbone, and from
thence to Marseilles: where he received first advertisement of the law made at
Rome, for creating of a Dictator; and that himself was named thereunto, by M.
Lepidus, Prator.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IT is one of Caesar's peculiars, recorded by Suetonius, that he never left
behind him any spark or suspicion of war, least it might be said he did not
thoroughly conquer where he came. For he that does a business to halves, has
as much more to do before it be done: and the remainder in matter of war,
grows commonly to a greater head then that which first gave occasion of Arms;
like fire, which is smothered for a time, to break out afterward with greater
fury. And therefore that he might not be thought to provoke an Enemy rather
then subdue him, he neglected all occasions how important soever, which might
draw him into Italy; to the end he might settle Spain in a peace, answerable to
an absolute victory. Which he easily effected, having over-mastered the
chiefest of the party, and turned their troops out of the Country, as men
altogether mistaken in the matter. The fame whereof so prevailed with the rest,
that rather then they would stand out, they forsook their Commanders. And
having thus removed all occasions of force, he then proceeded to take away all
doubtfulnesse, which might accompany a new reconcilement, by showing such
respects as well beseemed ancient desert.

For first, he made a public acknowledgement of their general love and
affection toward him: and then taking notice of particular services, engaged
them further with honors and rewards; righted such as were oppressed by the
adverse party; remitted all levies and taxations (to show the difference
between his and the Enemies favor) and filled all men with hope of good times:
as knowing that fair words, accompanied with large promises, are powerful
instruments to work out whatsoever is desired. And so he took a little more
time to settle those Provinces without further trouble; as believing in the
proverb, that What is well done, is twice done.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
M. Varro here mentioned, made more profession of knowledge and Arts, then any
other of his Nation, being thereupon styled by the name of Doctus or Learned;
and yet in the judgment of learned Philosophers, was fitter to persuade then
to teach. Tully being deprived of public offices, handled Philosophy a little
in his own language: Pliny and Seneca, less then Varro or Tully. But what are
these to Aristotle or Plato? Or rather, what has learning to do with a Roman
General? whose knowledge consisted in their Military discipline, and in the
powerful means of victorious endeavor. Wherein Varro was as ignorant, as was
Don Raimundus, the eleventh king of Arragon, in managing of Arms; who taking
his sword in one hand, and his buckler in the other, held the horse bridle in
his teeth. Iamb^^ch. cap. 4.
Howbeit, if Qui minus facit, minus peccat, he that does least, offends least,
were a good excuse, it were fitting to make him blameless, that deserved so
well of learning above all others of that Empire. But forasmuch as his actions
appear so far inferior to that which is conceived of his understanding, let
that be acknowledged which is true, Cicero lib. 1. de officiis.
that Confiderate agere pluris est, quam cogitare prudenter; considerate action
is more worth, then wise thinking.

This Ilipa Italica was the chief town of the Turdetani in Andaluzia; and Ilipa
Italica.
is conjectured by the ruins yet remaining, to stand over against Sevill.
Tarraco. aliter Julia victrix.


Tarraco is that which is now called Tarragon; a Colony of Scipio his planting,
whereof the Province takes appellation; which is extended (as Pliny
witnesses) from Catalonia to Navarre and Castile, Lib. 4. cap. 20.
along the Alps. Bla^se de Vigenere reports, that in the year 516, there was
a Council held at Tarraco by ten Bishops; wherein it was decreed, that Sunday
should always begin presently after Evening prayer (or their Vespers) on the
Saturday. From whence it is, that the Spaniards do not work at all after that
time; and do eat upon Saturdayes at supper, the head, the feet, and the
entralls of such flesh as is killed in the Shambles (together with other pretty
bits which they call Morsillas) without prohibition or scruple of conscience.
In this town of Tarraco was born Paulus Osorius, that noble Orator.

Corduba, Corduba.
otherwise called Colonia Patricia, was held the next of worth and dignity to
Sevill; but for excellent wits to be preferred above all the towns of Spain:
for here first were born the two Senecas, the father, the Rhetorician, and the
son, the Philosopher; together with their kinsman, Annaeus Lucanus, the
divine Poet, of whom Martial writes;

Duosque Senecas, unicumque Lucanum
Facunda loquitur Corduba.
One Lucan and two Senecas
Brave Corduba does show.
Besides of later times, Avenzoar, Avicenna, and Averrois, as excellent a
Philosopher, as the other was a Physician: of whose works

-- Fama loquetur Anus.
-- Fame when she is old will speak.
And from hence come those Cordovan skins, so much in request.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
COncerning the office of a Dictator, whereunto Caesar was named by the Praetor
Lepidus, we are to observe, that the Dictatorship was the greatest place of
dignity in their government, Lib. 3.
as Polybius notes. The Consuls, says he, having each of them but twelve
Lictors apiece, that carried bundles of Rods before them, as ensigns of
Magistracy, the Dictator had always twenty four; to show that the sovereign
power divided between the two Consuls, was then reduced to one sole command.
The occasions of establishing a Dictator were diverse; howbeit, it was commonly
to take order in some great matter of consequence, which fell out to be
extraordinary, and required the command of one man. And as it is in the Fastes
or Records of the Capitol, either Reipub. regend. causa, to govern the
commonwealth, as was this first Dictatorship of Caesar: or otherwise, M. Fabius
Ambustus Dict. seditionis sedandae causa, M. Fab. Amb. was created Dictator to
quiet a sedition; and at another time, Cn. Quintius Varus Dictator, clavi
figendi causa, to strike in the nail; which was one of the superstitions they
used in time of pestilence* and so diverse the like. Of all which there is this
form expressed by Tully; De legibus.
Si quando duellum gravius, discordiaeve Civium crescunt, unus ne amplius sex
menses, nisi senatus decreverit, idem juris quod duo Consules teneto, isque ave
sinistra dictus Magister Populi esto: If at any time either a great quarrel
happen, or discord arise amongst the Citizens, then let one man have the same
power that the two Consuls have, for six months, and no longer, unless the
senate shall otherwise decree; and let this man (in an ill hour) be termed the
Master of the People.

But forasmuch as Magister Populi was a harsh and odious name to the people,
they called him by a more modest name, Dictator: whereof Varro gives this
reason, Dictator quod a Consule dicebatur, cujus dicto audientes omnes essent;
He was called Dictator because he was named to that office by the Consul, whose
orders they were all to be obedient to. And as none could name a Dictator but
the Consul, (for Caesar was named by the Praetor in an extraordinary time;) so
none could be named to that place, but such as were or had been Consuls: Livie.
lib. 2:
Consulares legere ita lex jubebat de Dictatore creando lata; the law for the
creating a Dictator commands to choose consular men only. To which may be added
the circumstance of time, which was always in the night; Nocte deinde silenti,
ut mos est, Papirium Dictatorem dixit, he named Papirius to the Dictatorship
(as the custom is) in the dead of the night. The Dictator had sovereign power,
but limited for time, which was commonly six Months; whereby they are
specially distinguished from Monarchs: and thereupon Cicero adjudgeth Sylla's
Dictatorship to be a mere tyranny, 1. Philip.
and so does Plutarch Caesar's; because both were prorogued beyond the time
prescribed by the law. Caesar held this Dictators place but eleven days, and
then left it off: but afterward had it for his life, and so came to be styled
Dictator perpetuus, perpetual Dictator.

CHAP. IX.
The Marseillians give up the Town.
THe Marseillians being much oppressed, Caesar.
and almost worn out with all sorts of inconveniences, brought to an extreme
exigent of victual, defeated and overthrown in two fights at sea, broken and
cut in pieces oftentimes in their sallies out, afflicted with a grievous
pestilence through long shutting up and alteration of diet (for they lived of
nothing but of old Panick and musty Barley, Vetere Panico.
which was long before laid up in public for this purpose;) their tower being
overthrown, and a great part of their wall down, out of hope of any succors
from the Provinces, or of other Armies, which they knew were come into the
hands and power of Caesar; they seriously determined (without fraud) to give up
the town. But a few days before, L. Domitius understanding their resolution,
having got three ships (whereof two he assigned to his familiar friends, the
third he took himself, and taking the opportunity of a troublesome storm) put
to sea: which being perceived by the ships that by Brutus commandment did
continually guard the mouth of the Haven, they weighed their Anchours, and made
after them. Notwithstanding, that wherein Domitius was held on her course, and
by the help of the foul weather got out of sight. The other two being afraid of
our ships, returned back into the Haven.

The Marscillians, according as was commanded, brought their Arms and Engines
out of the town, drew forth their shipping, both out of their Haven and their
Arcenalls, and delivered up their public treasure. Which things being
accomplished and performed, Caesar willing to save them, rather for the name
and antiquity of the town, then for any merit of theirs, left two legions there
for a Garrison, and sent the rest into Italy. He himself took his way toward
Rome.

OBSERVATIONS.
HEnce we may observe, that when men refuse to be led by reason, as the best
means to guide them to convenient ends, they are commonly constrained by the
commanding warrant of Necessity, Ultimum and durissimum telum, necessitas.
to undergo the same thing upon harder conditions. As it happened to the
Marseillians, who not regarding the Army then present, and ready to take a
strict account of their answers (which with good excuse does command a neutrall
State) chose rather to be shut up with a siege, Omnium maxim miserabile,
claudi obsidione.
that of all miseries is accounted the worst; and therein so carried
themselves, as they left no stone unremoved to make good their refusal: but
for want of better helps, Egesippus.
brought their Fraud to play a part, to their greater disadvantage. And if the
Conqueror had not took all occasions to show his clemency, they might happily
have paid dear for their contempt. But where either desert or other motives
wanted, there nomen and vetustas, their name and antiquity was sufficient to
make Caesar constant to his own ends: which, as near as the course wherein he
was engaged would afford him, were always levelled at the general applause of
his actions; taking that to be no little help to work himself into the
sovereignty of the State: In maxima fort^m, (...) licentia est.
observing it the rather in cases of great and happy success, which are ever
more restrained then lesser fortunes. S^lust.
Howsoever, it cannot be denied but that Clemency is a property of excellent
honor: Servare propri^m est excellentis fortunae.
which Caesar showed in saving the town. Seneca de clement. lib. 1.


CHAP. X.
Curio transporteth two legions into Africa.
ABout the same time, Caesar.
C. Curio set sail from Sicily to pass into Africa: and making no account at
all of Actius Varus forces, he carried with him but two legions of the four
which were delivered him by Caesar, together with five hundred horse. And after
he had been at Sea two days and three nights, he arrived at a place called
Aquilaria, distant twenty two miles from Clupea; where there is a very
commodious Road for ships in Summer, sheltered on each side with two large and
eminent Promontories. L. Caesar, the son, attended his coming at Clupea with
ten Galleys; which being taken from the Pirates in the late wars, and laid
aground at Utica, were repaired and new trimmed by Varus: but being afraid of
the great number of his ships, he forsook the sea, and ran his Gallie on shore;
and leaving her there, fled by land on foot to Adrumetum, a town kept by
Considius Longus, having one legion only in garrison.

The rest of Caesar's Navy, seeing their Admiral fly away, put into
Adrumetum. M. Rufus the Treasurer pursued him with twelve ships, which Curio
had brought with him out of Sicily, to waft the ships of burden; and finding
the Gallie left upon the sand, he towed her off, and returned to Curio with his
Navy. -- qua se Bagrada^ lentus agit siccae sulcator arenae.
Curio sent Marcus before with the ships to Utica; and he himself set forward
thither by land with the Army, and in two days journey came to the River
Bagrada; Luc. lib. 4.
where he left C. Caninius Rebilus, the Legate, with the legions, and went
himself before with the Cavalry, to view a place called Cornelius Camp, which
was held very fit and convenient to incamp in, being a direct ridge of a hill,
shooting out into the Sea, steep and broken on each side, and yet shelving by a
little more gentle descent on that side which was next Utica, being distant
from thence (if the nearest way were taken) a little more then a mile. But in
that shortest cut there rose a spring, in that part which was furthest off from
the sea, and so made a marish or bogge; which whosoever would avoid, must fetch
a compass of six miles to go to the town.

A view being taken of this place, Curio beheld afar off Varus Camp, joining
to the town wall, at the gate called Bellica, marvellously fortified through
the strong situation of the place, having the town on the one side, and a
Theater which stood before the town on the other; and by reason of the great
circuit of building which it contained, made a narrow and difficult passage to
the Camp. He observed further, great store of carriages, which by reason of
this sudden alarm, were brought out of the Country toward the town: for the
intercepting whereof he sent the Cavalry. And at the same instant, Varus
likewise had sent out of the town, 600 Numidian horse, and 400 foot, which King
Juba (a few days before) had sent to Utica, for the strengthening of that
party. This Prince had acquaintance with Pompey, by reason that his father
lodged with him, and bare a spleen to Curio, for the law which he preferred
when he was Tribune of the people, for the confiscation of Juba his kingdom.
The Cavalry on either side met together, and the Numidians were not able to
abide the charge of our men; but about an hundred and twenty being slain, the
rest betook themselves back to the Camp at the town.

In the mean time, upon the arrival of our Galleys, Curio commanded it to be
proclaimed, that such Victuallers and ships of burden as were in the Bay at
Utica (being in number about two hundred) and would not presently come to the
Cornelian Camp, should be held and taken for enemies. At which Proclamation,
upon an instant of time, they all weighed anchour, and came to the place
whether they were commanded: whereby the Army abounded with all necessary
provisions. This being done, he returned to the Camp at Bagrada; and by the
acclamation of the whole Army, was saluted by the name of Imperator.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis Chapter begins with the third part of this book, containing Curio his
passage into Africa: concerning whom it is to be observed, that in the
beginning of these broils, no man was more enemy to Caesar, nor made more
bitter invectives to the people against him, then he did in his Tribuneship;
but afterward he fell off, and was gained by the voluptuous inticements of M.
Antonie, together with a huge mass of money which Caesar sent him. Whereupon he
played the turn-coat, and with might and main afflicted that Party; prevailing
much with the Communaltie, Eleganti oratione, capiunt^r auditores: (...) enim
oration vel lapidem (...) posset. Epict Ar^ian, lib. 3. ^^p. 23.
by his eloquent and persuasive speeches; the lively force whereof is able to
stir up affection in stones. For which cause it is, that Lib. 2.
Velleius Paterculus notes, That no man brought a more burning or dangerous
firebrand to the kindling of those Civil wars, then did Curio; being a man of
an excellent discourse, audacious, prodigal of his own and of other men's,
subtle, ingenious, extreme vicious, and always well-spoken, to the ruin of
the public weal. Which sweetness of words came unto him by inheritance, lib.
7. c. 41.
as Pliny witnesses; Una familia Curionum, in qua tres continua serie
oratores extiterunt; In the one family of the Curiones there were three noted
Orators one after another. lib. 36. c. 15.
Of whose monstrous prodigality the same Author has made a very large
account. Nimis confidens inca^tus est.
And out of these overweening humors it was, that he became so unwarie as to
divide his Army; neglecting the Enemy, Joseph lib. 1 cap. 4. de bello Judaico.
and the variableness of war, which alters as the Moon, and keeps no
constant shape whereby it may be known. Concerning the dismembring of an Army
lightly, and upon heedlesse rashness, Cyrus gives grave advice, in the
beginning of the sixth book of Xenophon. To which (for the present) I refer the
Reader.

Clupea was a town in Africa, named by Pliny, Oppidum liberum, or a free Town,
and sited upon the Promontorie of Mercury, in the territories of old Carthage.
It was so called, because it carried the form of a Target retorted; and for the
same cause it was called Aspis:

In Clypei speciem curvatis turribus Aspis. Sil. Ital.

Aspis with turrets bowing like a shield.
This Promontorie, which Curio chose to incamp in, was famous for three things.
First, it was reputed the place where Antaeus the Giant dwelt, which Hercules
slew, by strangling him in his Arms, that he might not touch the Earth, from
which it is said he received fresh strength. Secondly, P. Cornelius Scipio,
that subdued Africa, made that place his chief Camp of strength: and so it came
to be called Cornelius Camp. And lastly, for this expedition which Curio made,
to lose two legions, and himself withal, as unwilling to see the morrow, after
such a loss; Seneca Trag.
for, Vitae est avidus, quisquis non vult, mundo secum pereunte, mori; He loves
life indeed, that is not willing to die when the world falls.

CHAP. XI.
Curio marches to Vtica. His Cavalry put to flight great troops coming from
king Juba. His Army strangely possessed with an idle fear.
THe next day he brought his Army to Utica, Caesar.
and encamped himself near unto the town. But before the fortification of his
Camp was finished, the horsemen that stood Centinell gave notice of great
forces of horse and foot, coming toward Utica, from king Juba: and at the same
time, a great dust was seen rise in the air, and presently the first troops
began to come in sight. Curio astonished at the novelty of the thing, sent his
horse before, to sustain the first shock, and to stay them: he himself, calling
the legions with all speed from their work, imbattelled his Army. The Cavalry
encountering with the Enemy (before the legions could be well unfolded and put
in order) did put to flight all the Kings forces, that came marching without
fear or order; and slew a great number of the foot troops: but the horse,
making have, got almost all safe into the town, by the way of the seashore.
The next night after, two Centurions of the Nation of the Marsi, fled from
Curio, with twenty two of their soldiers, to Actius Varus.

These Centurions, whether it were to please Varus, or otherwise speaking as
they thought (for what men wish, they easily believe; and what they think, they
hope others do think the same;) did confidently affirm, that the minds of the
whole Army were altogether alienated from Curio; and that it was very expedient
that the Armies should come in sight, and find means to speak together. Varus
being persuaded to that opinion, the next day, early in the morning, drew his
legions out of the Camp: the like did Curio; either of them putting their
forces in order, upon a small Valley which lay between both their Armies.

There was in Varus Army, one Sex. Quintilius Varus, who (as it is formerly
declared) was at Corfinium; and being let go by Caesar, went into Africa. It
fortuned that Curio had carried over those legions, which Caesar had formerly
taken at Corfinium: so that a few Centurions being slain, the Companies and
Maniples remained the same. This occasion being so fitly offered, Quintilius
(going about Curio his Army) began to beseech the soldiers, that they would
not forget the first oath they had taken to Domitius, and to him their
Treasurer; nor bear Arms against them, that had run the same fortune, and
endured the same siege; nor fight for those, who (by way of reproach) had
called them fugitives. To these he added some promises, to put them in hope of
a good recompense, out of his own liberality, if they would follow him and
Actius.

Having delivered this unto them, Curio his Army stood mute, and declared not
themselves by any sign, either one way or other: and so either side drew back
to their Camp. Notwithstanding, Curio his Camp was afterward possessed with a
great fear, and suspicion: which was quickly augmented, by diverse reports
raised upon the same. For every man forged opinions and conceits; and out of
his own fear, added something to that which he had heard of another. Which when
it was spread from one author to many, and one had received it from another,
it seemed there were many authors of the same thing. Nulla ^ides pietasque
viris qui castra sequ^^ur, Venalesqu^ manus: ibi fas, ubi maxima me^ces.
For Civil war is always compounded of such men, as hold it lawful to do and
follow what and whom they please.

Those legions which a little before were in the service of the Enemy, did
willingly embrace what was offered them; for old acquaintance had made them
forget what benefits Caesar had lately bestowed on them: Lucan.
being also of diverse Countries and Nations, and not all of the Marsi or
Peligni, as those the night before, which were their Cabin-mates, and
fellow soldiers: whereupon they took occasion, to publish abroad in worse
terms, that which others had vainly given out; and some things were coined by
those that would seem most diligent in doing their duty.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
OBserve first, from the revolt of these Centurions, that a fellow or two of
rank and fashion falling from a Party, do gain easy credit to their
advertisements, by averring any thing which the Enemy desires. Whence it is,
that forasmuch as fugitives can little otherwise avail, (one man being but as
no man,) they seek favor and reputation with the party they ^ly unto, by their
advise and discovery, and consequently, the remuneration of espiall; which
according to the president made by Fabius to the Spies of Clusine, Livie lib.
12.
is worth a man's labor.

And herein Revolters (specially those of judgment) are very dangerous
instruments; not only in weakening or making frustrate such designs as may be
contrived against an Adversary; but also in discovering the secrets of their
own Party, and disclosing of that which is absolute and well, until it be made
known. For there is no subsisting thing so perfect, but has always some part
or other open, to give an easy passage to destruction: according to that of the
Poet,

Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo.
All humane things hang by a slender thread.
And therefore, it is no small means of preserving each thing in being, to make
show of strength, and conceal weaknesses, Fides ^u^damentum societatis humanae:
perfidia vero ejusdem pestis. Plato, l. 5. de legibus.
as the registers of assured ruin. For which cause it is, that fidelity is
commended, as the foundation of humane society: and perfidious treachery,
divulging the secret imperfections thereof, is the plague and bane of the same.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
AS there is nothing more dangerous in an Army then fear; so there is nothing
sooner bred to disturb a multitude, then this passion, which metamorphoseth a
troup of men into a heard of Deer. For hence it appears, that one Thersites
is able to leaven a whole Army; and an idle conceit bred in the weak thoughts
of some Tresantas, The Spartanes called all cowards Tresantas.
begets oftentimes a main cause of distrust throughout all the Party: which,
as it spreads abroad, is so delivered from one to another, Plutarch.
as the Reporter (not believing what he tells) adds always somewhat to
make the hearer believe what he could not himself. And so weak minds do
multiply the vain apprehension of idle humors, in such a fashion, as there is
more hurt in fearing, Plus in metuendo est mali, quam in illo ipso quod
timetur. Cic. ad Torquatum.
then in the thing which is feared.

Epaminodas was more fortunate then all others in this kind: for Plutarch.
while he led the Thebans as their Commander, they were never taken with any
sudden affrightment, nor possessed with any Panick terror, to bereave them of
their senses, or falsify the truth of their understanding; being all (as it
seemed) of the same mind with the General, who accounted* no death so
honorable as that which came by war. Howbeit such is the frailty of humane
nature, Turbant homines, non res: sed quas de rebus hibent opiniones.
and so strange are the convulsions of the mind, that a Commander must expect
to meet with times, wherein his men will stand in danger of nothing so much as
their own infirmity: being troubled rather with strong apprehensions, Epict.
Enchirid.
then for any danger of the thing feared.

CHAP. XII.
Curio disputes the matter in a Council of war.
FOr which causes a Council of war being called, Caesar.
they began to deliberate what course was to be taken. I here were some
opinions which thought, that it was very expedient to assault and take Varus
Camp for that there was nothing more dangerous then idleness, for the breeding
and increase of such imaginations as the soldiers had conceived. Others said,
It were better to try the fortune of a battle, and to free themselves by
valourous endeavor, rather then to be forsaken and abandoned of their own
party, and left to undergo most grievous and extreme torments. There were
others which thought it fit, to return about the third watch of the night to
Cornelius Camp; that by interposing some respite of time, the soldiers might
be better settled, and confirmed in their opinions; and if any mischance
further happened, they might (by reason of their store of shipping) with more
ease and safety return back to Sicily.

Curio misliking both the one and the other, said, That there wanted as much
good resolution in the one opinion, as abounded in the other: for these entered
into a consideration of a dishonorable and unbeseeming flight; and those were
of an opinion to fight in an unequal and disadvantageous place. For with what
hope (says he) can we assault a Camp so fortified, both by Nature and Art? Or
what have we gained, if with great loss and damage, Tam boni quam mali eventus
causae vulgo in Imperatores referri solent.
we shall go away and give it over? As though things well and happily
achieved, did not get to the Commander great good will from the soldier; and
things ill carried, as much hate. Concerning the removing of our Camp, Dio
Hali^ar. lib. 8.
what does it infer but a shameful retreat, a despair in all men, and an
alienation of the Army? For it is not fit, to give occasion to the prudent and
well-advised, to imagine that they are distrusted; nor on the other side, to
the illdisposed, that they are redoubted or feared: and the rather, because
fear in this kind will give them more liberty to do ill, and abate the
endeavor of good men in well deserving. And if (says he) these things are
well known unto us already, that are spoken of the revolt and alienation of the
Army (which, for mine own part, I think either to be altogether false, or at
least, less then in opinion they are thought to be) is it not better to
dissemble and hide them, then that they should be strengthened and confirmed by
us? Ought we not, as we do hide the wounds of our bodies, to cover the
inconveniences of an Army, least we should minister hope or courage to the
Adversary? But some there are that advise to set forward at midnight; to the
end (as I imagine) that such as are desirous to offend, may perform it with
more scope and licentiousness. For such disorders are repressed and reformed
either with shame or fear; to both which the night is an enemy. And therefore,
as I am not of that courage, to think without hope or means that the Enemies
Camp is to be assaulted; so on the other side, I am not so fearful, as to be
wanting in that which is fitting: but am rather of opinion, that we try all
things before we yield to that; and do assure my self, that for the most part,
we are all of one mind concerning this point.

OBSERVATIONS.
AS in matter of Geometry, Rectum est Index sui and obliqui, a straight line
manifests both it self and a crooked line, being equal to all the parts of
rectitude, and unequal to obliquity: so is it in reason and discourse. For a
direct and well-grounded speech carries such a native equality with all its
parts, as it does not only approve it self to be levelled at that which is most
fitting, but shows also what is indirect and crooked, concerning the same
matter; and is of that consequence in the variety of projects and opinions,
Confilium dare, eorum quae inter homines divinissimum.
and so hardly hit upon, in the lame discourse of common reason, that Plato
thought it a piece of divine power, to direct a path free from the crookedness
of error, which might lead the straight and ready way to happy ends. Omni
orationi oration aequalis opponitur.
And the rather, forasmuch as in matter of debate, there are no words so
weighty, but do seem balanced with others of equal consideration: Se^^.
as here it happened, Philos.
from those that pointing at the cause of this distemperature, Varian^ semper
dan^ otia ment^m. Luc. lib. 4.
convicted Idleness for the Author of their variable and unsettled minds;
and, as Lib. 1 Cyrop.
Xenophon has observed, very hard to be endured in one man, much worse in a
whole family, but no way sufferable in an Army; which the Romans called
Exercitus, ab exercitio from exercise. For remedy whereof, they propounded
labor without hope of gain, and such service as could bring forth nothing but
loss. Others, preferring security before all other courses (as believing with
Livie, Duces nullo loco, nisi quantum necessitas cogit, se committere fortunae
debent. lib. 22.
that Captains should never trust Fortune further then necessity constrained
them) persuaded a retreat to a place of safety, but upon dishonorable terms.
Which unevenness of opinions Curio made straight by an excellent Maxim in
this kind; thinking it convenient to hold such a course, as might neither give
honest men cause of distrust, nor wicked men to think they were feared. For so
he should be sure (in good terms of honor) neither to discourage the better
sort, nor give occasion to the ill-affected to do worse. And thus winding
himself out of the labyrinth of words (as knowing that to be true of Annius the
Praetor, that Ad summam rerum pertinet, cogitare magis quid agendum quam quid
loquendum; facil^ (...), explicatis consiliis, accommod^r^ rebus verba. Live. 3^.
it more imports occasions to do then to say; being an easy matter to fit
words to things unfolded and resolved upon;) he brake up the Council.

CHAP. XIII.
Curio calls a general assembly of the soldiers; and speaks unto them,
concerning their fear and retraction.
THe Council being risen, Caesar*
he gave order for a Convocation of the Army; and there called to remembrance
what they had done for Caesar at Confinium: how by their favor and
furtherance, he had gained the greatest part of Italy to be on his side. For,
by you (says he) and by your endeavor, all the rest of the Municipal towns
were drawn to follow Caesar: and there, fore not without just cause did he at
that time repose great assurance in your affections toward him; and the
adverse party conceived as great indignation and spite against you. For Pompey
was not forced away by any battle; but being prejudiced by your act he quitted
Italy. Caesar has recommended me, whom he held near unto himself, together
with the Provinces of Sicily and Africa (without which he cannot defend the
City and Italy) to your trust and fidelity. There are some which solicit and
persuade you to revolt from my command: for what can they wish or desire more,
then to make it but one work, to bring us both to ruin and overthrow, and to
engage you in a most detestable wickedness? Nemo iis ad mi^us esse potest, a
quibus malum aliquod expectat.
Or what worse opinion can they conceive of you, then that you should betray
those men, that profess themselves wholly yours; and that you might afterward
come into their power, Demost^.
who take themselves to be undone by your means?

Have you not understood what Caesar has done in Spain? two Armies beaten; two
Generals defeated; two Provinces taken; and all within forty days, after he
came in view of the Enemy? Those whose forces were not able to make resistance
when they were whole and entire, how is it possible they should hold out being
beaten and discomfited? You that followed Caesar when the victory stood
doubtful; now Fortune has adjudged the Cause, and determined of the issue of
the War, will you follow the vanquished Party, when you are to receive the
reward of your service? They gave out, that they were forsaken and betrayed by
you, and do remember you of the former oath you took. But did you forsake L.
Domitius, or did he forsake you? Did not he thrust you out, and expose you to
all extremity of fortune? Did he not seek to save himself by flight, without
your knowledge or privity? Were you not preserved and kept alive by Caesar's
clemency, when you were abandoned and betrayed by him?

How could he tie you with the oath of allegiance, when (having cast away his
sheaf of Rods, and laid down his authority) he himself was made a private
person, and became captivated to the command of another man's power? It were a
strange and new religion, that you should neglect that oath, wherein you stand
now engaged; and respect the other, which was taken away by the rendry of your
General, and the Capitis diminutione. Diminutus capite appellatur, qui
civitate mutatus est, aut ex samlia in aliam adoptatus: and qui liber alteri
mancipio datus est: and qui in hostium potestate venit: and cui aqua ignique
inte^dictum. Live. In summo.
loss of your liberty. But I believe you think well of Caesar, and are
offended at me, that am not to preach of my merits toward you; which as yet
are less then my will, and unworthy your expectation: and yet soldiers have
always used to seek reward upon the shutting up of a war; which what event it
will have, make you no doubt. And why should I omit the diligence which I have
already used, and how the business has hitherto proceeded? Does it offend you,
that I transported the Army over in safety, without loss of any one ship? That
at my coming, I beat and dispersed at the first onset the whole fleet of the
Adversaries? That twice, in two days, I overcame them only with the Cavalry?
That I drew two hundred Ships of burden out of the Road and Port of the Enemy?
Imperatore quatuor hae virtutes inesse debe^t: scientia rei militaris, virtu^,
authori^as, felicitas, Cicero pro leg^ Manilia.
and have brought them to that extremity, that they can be supplied by
provision neither by sea nor by land? All this good fortune, and these
Commanders rejected and forsaken, will you rather embrace again the ignominy
you received at Corfinium, or your slight out of Italy, or the rendering up of
Spain, or the prejudicial success of the war of Africa? Truly, for mine own
part, I was desirous and content to be called Caesar's soldier: but you have
styled me with the title of Imperator. Which if it repent you, I do willingly
quit my self of your grace, and return it back unto you: and do you; in like
manner, restore me to my name again, least you should seem to give me honor
which might turn to my reproach.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IN the handling of this accident, the difference comes to be observed between
a Council of war, and a Concio, or convocation of the soldiers. The first was
more particular, consisting of some choice men, and those the most eminent in
the party. Aulus G^ll. lib. 15. c. 27.
Is qui non universum populum, sed partem aliquam adesse jubet, non comitia,
sed concilium edicere debet; he that calls together only a part of the people,
and not the whole, calls a Council, not a general assembly. Their convocation
or preaching was more general, the whole Army being convented together, to be
fitted by persuasion and discourse to follow the resolution taken by a
Council; and was properly called Adlocut^o, Com. 5. bell, Gall.
and sometimes Conventus: Cicero perlectam Epistolam Caesaris in convent^
militum recitat; Cicero read the letter from Caesar in a conventus, or general
meeting of his soldiers. The parties called to a Council, were according as
the General valued the occasion: for sometimes the Legates and Tribunes were
only consulted; and now and then the Centurions of the first Orders, together
with the Captains of horse, were called to their assistance; and oftentimes,
all the Centurions. But howsoever, Curio resolved out of his own judgment, as
great Commanders commonly do; and is specially observed by Pierre Matthieu,
Tom. 2. lib. 4.
of the French King; who ever loves to hear the opinion of his Captains, but
always finds his own the best.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
AMongst other strains of this discourse, it is acknowledged, that Rome could
not stand without Sicilie; and the reason was, for the plenty of Corn which it
brought forth: for Sicily was always reputed as the Granary or Barn of Rome,
and accordingly cared for by the Senate, as a place without which their City
could not continue. The grain of that Island is hard, like horn, and cannot well
be broken or ground into Meal, until it be wet with water, and then dried in
the shade, rather then in the sun: by means whereof it yields so
exceedingly, that it is accounted twenty in the hundred better then any Ponent
Wheat; especially, for that it will keep long in their Vaults and Caves under
the earth, and seldom or never take heat, being of it self so hard and dry.

The gluttonous use of flesh has made men ignorant of the virtue and strength
of Corn, which the Romans better understood; for their legions never sed on
flesh, as long as they could get Corn. Lib. 1. civil. bell.
Pecora, quod secundum poterat esse inopiae subsidium, they fetched in cattle,
as the second way to help their want, says Caesar. And in another place; Lib.
3.
Ut complures dies milites frumento caruerint, Pecore e longinquioribus vicis
adacto extremam famem sustentarent; the soldiers having for many days been
without corn, they were fain to sustain their extreme hunger with cattle which
they had fetched afar off. And in the same place, Quod minor erat frumenti
copia, Pecus imperabat; because there was but little corn, he gave order for
cattle. And again, Non illi hordeum cum daretur, non legumina recusbant. Pecus
vero, cujus rei summa erat in Epiro copia, magno in honor habebant. They
refused neither barley nor pulse when it was offered them; but cattle, whereof
there was good store in Epirus, they prized at an high rate.

By which places it appears, that they never fell to flesh, but when they
wanted Corn. Which is doubtless a firmer nutriment, less excrementall, and of
better strength, then any other food whatsoever; as containing the prime
substance of Meat, and the spirit of Wine: for Aqua vitae is as well made of
Wheat, as of the lees of Wine. Flesh is good to make Wrastlers of a gross and
heavy constitution, as Plutarch notes: but the Roman soldier stood in need of
an effectual and sinewy vigor, able to undergo carriages, Muli Mariani.
fitter for a Mule then a Man, together with such works, as later ages do
rather hear then believe; and was attained by feeding only upon bread.

The Rabbines and Thalmudists do write, that the Giants of the old world first
fell to the eating of flesh, making no difference between a man and a beast;
but grew so execrable, that they made women cast their fruit before their time,
to the end they might eat it with more tenderness and delicacy. Which is also
said to be practiced by the Canniballs, upon the first discovery of the Indies.
Viginere reports, that he knew some great Men in France so friand, that they
caused oftentimes Does ready to foan to be killed, and the young ones took out
alive, to be made meat for monstrous appetites. Sobrietas, quasi sine ebrietate.
But there is no indifferent Parallel to be drawn, between the sobriety of the
ancient Roman soldier, and the gluttony of these times; far exceeding that of
Agamemnon, H^mer.
which Achilles noted with words of high reproach, Iliad. 1.
calling him Hogs-head of Wines, eyes of a Dog, and heart of a Dear.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THirdly, from this elaborate and well-couched speech, we may note, that
Eloquence is a very beautiful ornament to Princes, Eloquentia princi^^bus
maxim ornamento est.
and great Commanders; besides the use it has to lead a multitude to such ends
as is wished: for smooth words prevail where force booteth not. Cic. 4. de
(...).
According to that of Cicero, Lib. 1. famil. ^pist.
Cum populum persuaderi posse diffidimus, cogi fas esse non arbitremur: If the
people will not be persuaded, let us not think it fit to go about to compel
them.

CHAP. XIV.
Curio brings out his troops, and puts Varus Army to flight.
THe soldiers moved with this Oration, Caesar.
did oftentimes interrupt him in his speech; signifying with what grief they
did endure the suspicion of infidelity. And as he departed from the Assembly,
every man exhorted him to be of a good courage, and not to doubt of giving
battle, or to make trial of their fidelity and valor. By which means, the
minds and disposition of all men being changed, Curio resolved (out of a
general consent) as soon as any occasion was offered, to give battle.

The next day, having brought out his forces, he made a stand, and imbattelled
them in the same place where he stood in Arms the day before. And Varus
likewise drew out his troops; whether it were to solicit the soldier, or not
to omit the opportunity of fighting, if it might be afforded in an indifferent
place. There was a valley (as we have formerly declared) between the two
Armies, of no very hard or difficult ascent; and either of them expected who
should first come over it, to the end they might fight in a place of more
advantage: when upon a sudden, all Varus Cavalry that stood in the left Cornet
of the Army, together with the light-armed soldiers that stood mingled amongst
them, were seen descending into the Valley. To them Curio sent his Cavalry,
together with two cohorts of the Marrucini. The Enemies horsemen were not able
to endure the first encounter of our men; but having lost their horses, fled
back to their party. The light-armed men that came out with them, being left
and forsaken, were all slain by our men, in the view and sight of Varus whole
Army. Then Rebilus, Caesar's Legate (whom Curio for his knowledge and
experience in matter of war, had brought with him out of Sicily) said; Curio,
thou see the Enemy affrighted: why make thou doubt to use the opportunity
of time? Curio without making any other answer, then willing the soldiers to
remember what they had assured unto him the day before, commanded them to
follow him, and ran foremost himself. The Valley was so cumber some and
difficult, that in gaining the ascent of the hill, the foremost could hardly get
up, unless they were lifted up by their followers. Howbeit the Enemy was so
possessed with fear, for the flight and slaughter of their fellows, that they
did not so much as think of resisting; for they took themselves all to be
already surprised by the Cavalry: so that before any weapon could be cast, or
that our men could approach near unto them, all Varus Army turned their backs,
and fled into their Camp.

In this flight, Fabius Pelignus (a certain soldier of one of the inferior
Companies of Curio his Army) having overtaken the first troup of them that
fled, sought for Varus, calling after him with a loud voice; as though he had
been one of his own soldiers, and would either advise him, or say something
else to him. And as he, being often called, looked back, and stood still
(inquiring who he was, and what he would) he made at Varus shoulder (which was
unarmed) with his sword, and was very near killing him: howbeit he avoided the
danger, by receiving the blow upon his target. Fabius was instantly enclosed
about by such soldiers as were near at hand, and slain.

In the mean time, the gates of the Camp were pestered and thronged with
multitudes and troops of such as fled away, and the passage was so stopped,
that more died in that place without blow or wound, then perished either in the
battle or in the flight. Neither wanted they much of taking the Camp; for many
left not running until they came to the town. But the nature of the place and
the fortification of the Camp, did hinder their access; and Curio his men
coming out, prepared only for a battle wanted such necessaries as were of use
for the taking of the Camp. And therefore Curio carried back his Army, with the
loss of no one man but Fabius. Of the Adversaries were slain about six
hundred; and many more wounded, who all upon Curio his departure, besides many
other that feigned themselves hurt, left the Camp for fear, and went into the
town. Which Varus perceiving, and knowing also the astonishment of the Army,
leaving a Trumpeter in the Camp, and a few Tents for show, about the third
watch, he carried his Army with silence out of the Camp into the town.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT is a part of wisdom, Loco sapientiae est, alienam stu^titiam operiti.
and oftentimes a main help to victory, to attend the advantage of an Enemies
rashness, and to see if his folly will not make way to his overthrow. Whereof
Curio made good use: for he kept his Army in the upper ground, until the
Cavalry of the Adversary were loosely fallen into the Valley; and then set
upon them, and cut them all in pieces. The sight whereof maskered the whole
Army, and kept Curio in safety, upon the like disadvantage, in the cumbersome
passage of the same Vale: by means whereof he put to flight the whole forces of
the Enemy, and made a great slaughter in the party. Wherein I may not forget
that trick of a Roman spirit, whereby the Author becomes memorable to
posterity, in calling after Varus by name, to make him the sacrifice for both
the Hoasts. Whence we may observe, that when a battle is joined pell-mell, no
man can be assured in his own valor, nor share out his fortune by the length
of his sword; but is oftentimes subject to weaknesses of contempt, and
vanquished by such as cannot be compared unto him but in scorn.

I have heard it reported, that at the battle of Eureux, Maturine (that known
woman in France) took prisoner and disarmed a Cavalero of Spain: who being
brought before the King, and by him demanded whose prisoner he was, or whether
he knew the party that had forced him; answered, no; but that he knew him to
be a gallant man of Arms. Whereat the king smiled: and the Gentleman,
understanding what fortune he had run, was as much dismayed as a man possibly
could be, that considered, Quod ferrum aequat, in bello, robustioribus
imbecilliores, The sword equalleth the weakest to the strongest.

CHAP. XV.
Curio leaves Vtica to meet with King Juba. His Cavalrie overthrows the
forces led by Sabura; which leads him on to his overthrow.
THe next day Curio prepared to besiege Utica, Caesar.
enclosing it about with a ditch and a rampire. There were in the town a
multitude of people unacquainted with war, through the long peace they had
enjoyed: and the inhabitants stood very affectionate to Caesar, for many
benefits they had received from him. The rest of the multitude consisted of
diverse sorts of men, much terrified and affrighted by the former incounters:
whereupon every man spoke plainly of giving up the town, and dealt with Pub.
Actius, that their fortunes and lives might not come in danger, through his
pertinacie and wilfulness.

While these things were a doing, there came messengers from King Juba,
signifying, the King was at hand with great forces, and willed them to keep and
defend the town. Which news did much encourage and confirm the wavering and
affrighted minds of the Enemy. The same was also reported to Curio: whereunto
for a while he gave no credit; such was his confidence in the success of
things. And now withal, came Letters and Messengers into Africa, of that which
Caesar had so fortunately achieved in Spain: so that being absolutely assured
with all these things, he was persuaded the king durst attempt nothing against
him. But when he found by assured discovery, that his forces were within twenty
five miles of Utica, leaving his works already begun, he withdrew himself into
Cornelius Camp; and began there to fortify his Camp, to get Corn and other
provisions, and to furnish it with all necessaries material for a defense: and
sent presently a dispatch into Sicily, that the two legions, and the rest of
the Cavalry might be sent unto him.

The Camp wherein he lay was fitly accommodated to hold out the war, as well by
reason of the nature of the place, as the artificial fortifying thereof, the
nearness of the sea, and the plenty of water and salt; whereof there was great
quantity brought thither, from the Salt Pits near adjoining. No stuff could be
wanting, through the great store of wood which was about the place, nor yet any
Corn, for the plenty that was to be found in the confining fields: and
thereupon, by the advice and approbation of all men, Curio resolved to attend
his other forces, and to draw out the war in length.

These things being thus disposed by the consent and liking of all men, he
heard by some that lately came out of the town, that Juba was called back, by
occasion of a war happened upon the confines, and that by reason of the
controversies and dissentions of the Leptitani, he was detained at home in his
kingdom; but that Sabura his Lieutenant was sent with some competent forces,
and was not far from Utica. To which reports giving too light and easy credit,
he altered his purpose, Callicratides cum Lacedae ^oniorum Dux fuisset b^llo
Peloponnesiaco, mult^que egregi^ fecisset, vertit ad extremum omnia.
Cleombrotus, temere cum Epaminonda co^^^igens, Laced aemoniorum opes ^orrueru^t.
and resolved to put the matter to trial of battle: whereunto his youthful
heat, the greatness of his courage, the success of former time, and his
confidence in the managing of that war, did violently lead him. Being carried
on with these inducements, he sent the first night all the Cavalry to the River
Bagrada, where the Enemy lay encamped under the command of Sabura: but the king
followed after with all his forces, and lay continually within six miles, or
thereabouts.

The horsemen sent before, and making their journey in the night, set upon the
Enemy at unawares, and not thinking of their approach: for the Numidians lodge,
scattered here and there in a barbarous manner, without any government or
order. And surprising them thus oppressed with sleep, and scattered upon the
ground, they slew a great number of them: the rest, in great terror and
amazement, escaped by flight. Which service being thus executed, the Cavalry
returned to Curio, and brought the captives unto him. Curio was gone out about
the fourth watch of the night with all his forces, having left five cohorts for
a garrison to his Camp: and having marched six miles, he met with the Cavalry,
understood what was done, and inquired of the captives, who was General of the
Camp at Bagrada. They answered, Sabura. He omitted for haste of his way to
inform himself of the rest: but turning himself to the next Ensigns, said, You
see, soldiers, that the confession of the captives does agree with that which
was reported by the fugitives. For the king is not come; but has sent some
small forces, which cannot make their party good with a few horsemen: and
therefore hasten to take the spoil with honor and renown, that we may now at
length begin to think of rewarding your merits.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT is observed by Marcellinus, Videmus ipsi quo^idie, manus inji^ientibus
fatis, hebeca^i sensus hominum and obtundi.
that when misfortune comes upon a man, his spirit grows so dull and
benumbed, as his senses seem to be dismissed of their charges. Which appeared
hear in Curio: who having taken a provident and sure course, such as was
approved in every man's judgment, and beseemed well the wisdom of a Commander,
Amm. Marcellin.
did nevertheless, contrary to all sense and discretion, forgo the same, and
cast himself upon the hazard of that which fugitives had vainly reported. Solis
incredulis noxia res incredulitas. Philo de vit. Mos^.
Concerning which, as it is noted, that Incredulity is hurtful only to the
unbeliever; so this passage proves, that for a Commander to be too light of
belief, is a danger to the whole Party, and brings many to ruin, that had
no part in that creed. Caesar, in the relation hereof, notes three special
things in Curio, that carried him headlong to this disaster, and may serve as
marks to avoid the like Syrtes.

The first was, Iuvenilis ardor, his youthful courage and heat: which is
always attended with strong affections, suting the quality and temperature of
the body, being then in the prime height of strength, and accordingly led on
with violent motions; Hebe^iores quam acutiores ut plurimum melius rempub.
admi^istrant.
whereas age goes slowly and coldly forward, and is always surer in
undertaking, then hot-spurre youth. And albeit no man in cold blood could
better advise then Curio, or foresee with better providence; yet his youthful
boldness over-swaied his discourse, Thucydides
and drew all to a mischief, in despite of his wisdom.

The second was, Superioris temporis proventus, the happy issue of former
proceedings: which of all other conditions is to be suspected, Rebus secu^dis
maxim deus implorand^s. lib. 1. Cyropaed.
and needs Gods assistance more then any other fortune; for that no man
sooner erreth, or is more incapable of order, then such as are in prosperity.
And therefore Plato refused to make laws for them of Cyrene; Felicitatis and
moderationis dividuum contubernium.
as a matter of great difficulty, to give ordinances to men that were in
happiness. And doubtless, such is the exorbitancie of our nature, that nothing
better informs it then crosses; Sen.
which are as instructions and warnings, for the preventing of ruining
calamities. -- quem blanda futuris Deceptura malis, belli fortu^a rece^it.
Wherein Curio was not beholding to Fortune at all; that dandled him in her lap
for a while, to cast him out at length headlong to his ruin. It had been much
better, she had exchanged a frown with a favor, rather then to have given him
much good together, Luc. lib. 4.
and reserve an irrecoverable disgrace for the upshot.

The third was, Imprudentium fiducia est, fortunam sibi spondere.
Fiducia rei been gerendae: which savoureth more of folly then any of the
former; it being always an argument of an imprudent man, to assure himself of
good fortune. For Presumption, Seneca de beneficiis.
being ever accompanied with Negligence, is subject to as many casualties, as
those that go unarmed upon extremity of danger. Incauta semper nimia
praesamptio and sui negligens. Eg^sip. lib. 1. de Instit. Cyri.
And these were the three things that miscarried Curio. Out of which we may
observe with Xenophon, that Ingens and arduum opus est recte imperare, it is a
weighty and difficult matter to command well.

CHAP. XVI.
Curio pursues the Enemy, with more haste then good success.
THat which the Cavalry had exploited, Caesar.
was certainly a matter of great service; especially the small number of them,
being compared with the great multitude of the Numidians: and yet
notwithstanding, they spoke of these things with greater ostentation then the
truth would bear; as men are willing to divulge their own praises. Besides,
they showed much spoil which they had taken; Captives and Horses were brought
out; that whatsoever time was omitted, seemed to be a let and hinderance to the
victory: by which means, the desires and endeavors of the Soldiers were no
way short of the hope which Curio had conceived. Who commanding the Cavalry to
follow him, marched forward with as much haste as he could; to the end he might
find the Enemy distracted and astonished, at the flight and overthrow of their
fellows. But the horsemen, having traveled all night, could by no means follow
after. Whereby it happened, that some stayed in one place, some in another: yet
this did not hinder or discourage Curio in his hopes.

Juba being advertised by Sabura of the conflict in the night, sent instantly
two thousand Spanish and French horse, which he kept about him for the safety
of his Person, and such of the foot-troups as he most trusted, to succor and
relieve him: he himself with the rest of the forces, and forty Elephants,
followed softly after. Sabura, suspecting by the horsemen coming before, that
Curio himself was at hand, imbattelled all his forces; commanding them, that
under a pretense of counterfeit fear, they should retreat by little and little;
himself, when occasion served, would give them the sign of battle, with such
other directions as should be expedient.

Curio was strengthened in his former hope, with the opinion of the present
occasion. For supposing the Enemy had fled, he drew his forces from the upper
ground into the Plain; wherein after he had marched a good space (the Army
having travailed sixteen mile) he made a stand. Sabura gave the sign to his
men of beginning the battle, led on his Army, went about his troops, to exhort
and encourage his soldiers. Howbeit, he used his footmen only for a show a
far off, and sent the Cavalry to give the charge. Curio was not wanting to
his men; but wished them to set all their confidence in their valor. The
soldiers, (howsoever harried and wearied,) and the horsemen (although but a
very few, and those spent with travel) yet wanted no courage or desire to
fight. But these being but two hundred in number (for the rest stayed by the
way) what part of the Army soever they charged, they forced the Enemy to give
way: but they could neither follow them far as they fled, nor put their horses
to any round or long career.

At length, the Cavalry of the Enemy began from both the wings to circumvent
our Army, and to mall them down behind: and as our Cohorts issued out from the
battle toward them, the Numidians (through their nimblenesse) did easily
avoid the shock; and again, as they turned back to their ranks, enclosed them
about, and cut them off from the battle: so that it neither seemed safe to
keep their order and place, nor to advance themselves out, and undergo the
hazard of adventure.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe Principles and Maxims of War are always to be held firm, when they are
taken with their due circumstances: for every Rule has a qualified state, and
consists more in cautions and exceptions, then in authority of precept. It is
true, that nothing does more advantage a victory, then the counsel of
Lamachus, the third Duke of the Athenians; which was, Thucyd. lib. 7.
to set upon an Enemy when he is affrighted and distracted: for so there is
nothing to be expected on is behalf but despair and confusion. But either to be
mistaken therein, or otherwise to make such haste to observe this rule of war
(as Curio did) that the best part of the Army shall he by the way, and the rest
that go on shall be so spent with labor, as they are altogether unfit for
service, and yet (to make the matter worse) to bring them into a place of
disadvantage, to encounter a strong and fresh Enemy, is to make the
circumstances oversway the Rule, and by a Maxim of War, to be directed to an
overthrow: neglecting altogether that which is observed by Sextus Aurelius
Victor, Satis celeriter fit, quicquid commode geritur, that which is well done,
is done soon enough.

CHAP. XVII.
Curio defeated and slain. Some few of the Army get passage to S^cily: the rest
yield themselves to Varus.
THe Enemy was oftentimes renforced by succors from the King. Caesar.
our men had spent their strength, and fainted through weariness: such as were
wounded, could neither leave the battle, nor be conveyed into a place of
safety. The whole Army being encompassed about with the Cavalry of the Enemy
(whereby despairing of their safety, as men commonly do, when their life draws
toward an end) they either lamented their own death, or recommended their
friends to good fortune, if it were possible that any might escape out of that
danger: all parts were filled with fear and lamentation.

Curio, when he perceived the soldiers to be so affrighted, that they gave
care neither to his exhortations nor entreaties, he commanded them (as the last
hope they had of safety) that they should all fly unto the next hills, and
thither he commanded the Ensigns to be carried. But the Cavalry sent by Sabura
had also possessed that place before; whereby our men began to fall into utter
despair, and partly were slain as they fled by the horsemen, or fell down
without wounding. Cn. Domitius, General of the horse, standing with a few
horsemen about him, persuaded Curio to save himself by slight, and to get the
Camp; promising not to leave or forsake him. But Curio confidently replied,
that he would never come in Caesar's sight, having lost the Army committed unto
him; and thereupon fighting valiantly was slain.

A few horsemen saved themselves from the fury of the battle; but such of the
Rereward, as stayed by the way to refresh their horses, perceiving a far off
the rout and flight of the whole Army, returned safe into the Camp. The footmen
were all slain to a man. M. Rufus the Treasurer, being left by Curio in the
Camp, exhorted his men not to be discouraged. They prayed and besought him,
they might be transported into Sicily. He promised them they should; and to
that end gave order to the Masters of ships, that the next evening they should
bring all the Skiffes to the shore. But such was the astonishment and terror
of all men, that some gave out, that Juba his forces were already come; others,
that Varus was at hand with the legions, and that they saw the dust of the Army
marching toward them; whereas there was no such matter at all: others
suspected the Enemies Navy would speedily make to them; insomuch as every man
shifted for himself: such as were already on shipboard made haste to be gone.
Their departure gave occasion to the ships of burden to follow after.

A few small Barks were obedient to the command: but the shore being thronged
with soldiers, such was the contention, which of all that multitude should get
aboard, that some of the Barks were sunk with press of people, and the rest,
for fear of the like casualtie, durst not come near them. Whereby it happened,
that a few soldiers, and Masters of families (that through favor or pity
prevailed to be taken in, or could swim unto the ships) were carried back safe
into Sicily. The rest of the forces, sending by night some of the Centurions as
Ambassadors to Varus, rendered themselves unto him.

The next day after, Juba seeing the Cohorts of these soldiers before the
town, cried out presently, that they were part of his booty: and thereupon gave
order that a great number of them should be slain, and selecting a few of the
rest, sent them into his kingdom: Varus complaining in the mean while, that
his faith and promise was violated, and yet durst not resist it. The King rode
into the town, attended with many S^nationns, amongst (...) was Ser. Sulpitius,
and Licinius Damasippus: and remaining there a few days, gave such order for
things as he thought fit, and then returned to his kingdom, with all his
forces.

OBSERVATIONS.
ANd this was the period which Divine power made, -- ^aetis h^nc n^mine rebus
Ciescendi posuere modum -- Lucan.
to the hopeful beginning of Curio's design upon Africa; and happened so
suddenly, as they were lost ere they were aware: Like a tempest at Sea, that
swalloweth up vessels in the same place, Eodem ubi laserunt, navigia forbentur:
Seneca Epist. 4.
where a little before they swam most proudly, and in the like irrecoverable
manner. For war is not capable of a second error; one fault being enough to
ruin an Army, and to disable Curio for ever doing the like: of whom Lucan has
left this memorial; Non est in b^llo bis pecca^e.


Haud alium tanta Civem tulit tudole Roma, Plu^a^ch.

Aut cui plus leges deberent recta sequenti.
Perdita nunc primum nocuerunt secula, postquam
Ambitus, and luxus, and opum metuenda facultas,
Transverso, mentem dubiam torrente tulerunt;
Momentumque fuit mutatus Curio rerum,
Gallorum captus spoliis and Caesaris Auro.
So virtuous Citizen Rome never bred;
Whilst right, the Laws a friend like him never had.
But the bad times first took him from his hold:
Ambition, Riot, and the force of Gold
In a wrong stream soon drew his wavering mind,
Of great concern which way so e're inclined,
Fetched off with Gallick spoils and Caesar's gifts.
His body lay unburied, Nullo contectus Curio busto. Luc.
as a witness of Numidian hate (which is always extreme, like the heat of the
Country) and of Juba's particular revenge, for tendering an Edict to the
people, to confiscate his kingdom.

To conclude this Commentary; The loss either Party sustained unto this stage
of the War, was in these particulars: Pompey was driven out of Italy, lost
Marseilles, and both the Provinces of Spain; Caesar received this loss in
Africa, besides that in the Adriatic sea, where Antonius miscarried, whereof
he makes no mention in these Commentaries. And, Homer.
as when Jupiter weighed the fortune of the Greeks and the Trojans in a pa^re
of Balance, Iliad. 8.
it fell out the Greeks had more ill luck then the Trojans; so the fortune of
these Parties being weighed, by the relation made thereof, it falls plainly
out, that Pompey had the worse.

And thus ends the second Commentary.
The Third Commentary of the Civil VVarres.
The Argument.
THe former Books contain the drifts and designs which these famous Chiefs
attempted and prosecuted, while they were asunder. And now comes their
buckling at hand to be related; together with the judgment which the War
gave of the Cause in question, on Caesar's behalf.

CHAP. I.
Caesar gives order at Rome, for matter of Credit and Usury, and other things.
CAesar the Dictator holding the assembly for election of Magistrates, Caesar.
Julius Caesar and Pub. Servilius were created Consuls: for in that year he was
capable by law to be chosen thereunto. These things being ended, forasmuch as
he found that credit was very scant throughout all Italy, and that money sent
upon trust was not paid; he gave order that Arbitratours should be appointed,
to make an estimation of possessions and goods, according as they were valued
before the war; and that the Creditours should take them at that rate for their
moneys. For this course he thought to be fittest, and expedient, as well for
the taking away of any fear of composition, or new assurances, for the quitting
and abolishing of all debts (which do commonly fall out upon wars and civil
broils,) as also for the keeping and preserving of the Debtors credit.

In like manner, he restored the ancient course of Appeal, made by the Praetors
and Tribunes to the people; as also certain courses used in suing for
Magistracy (which were taken away by a law made in Pompey's time, when he kept
the legions about him in the City;) and likewise reformed such judgments in
suits and trialls of law, as were given in Cases, when the matter in
controversy was heard by one Judge, and the sentence pronounced the same day
by another Judge. Last of all, whereas diverse stood condemned, for offering
their service unto him in the beginning of the Civil war, if he should think
it fit to accept thereof; and holding himself as much obliged unto them, as if
he had used it: he thought it best expedient for them, to be acquitted by the
people, rather then by his commandment and authority; least he should either
seem ungrateful, in not acknowledging their deserts; or arrogant, in assuming
to himself that which belonged to the people.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
CAesar, as he was Dictator, holding the assembly for the choice of
Magistrates, himself with P. Servilius Isauricus were made Consuls, in the year
of Rome 705. which was just ten years after his first Consulship; whereby he
became capable thereof, by the law published by Sylla, wherein it was provided,
That no man should be chosen to an office, within ten years after he had
supplied the same. In this year happened all these things which are contained
in this third Commentary; as Paterculus notes in these words; C. Caesar and
P. Servilius being Consuls, Pompey was miserably maslacred, after three
Consulships, and three Triumphs; and was slain, the day before his birthday,
being aged 58 years. The Choice day was regularly the first of January: and the
Assembly was called Comitium Centuriatum.

Touching the difference of these Assemblies, the parties present thereat, the
manner of the choice, and other circumstances appertaining, the Reader may
receive information at large by Rossius. Lib. 6. de comitiis.
Only it is to be remembered, that Comitia Centuriata were never holden without
consent of the Senate. And forasmuch as the chief part of them were with
Pompey, Lucan takes exception at this Creation.

-- moerentia tecta
Caesar habet, Lib. 5.
vacuasque domos legesque silentes,
Clausaque justitio tristi fora. Curia solos
Illa videt Patres, plena quos urbe fugavit.
Sad roofs and empty houses Caesar found.
The laws were silenced, and the Courts shut up.
No Fathers met in Senate, only they,
Who when the town was full were forced away.
The persons that were suitors for the Consulship, were called Candidati; who
oftentimes used extraordinary means to attain the same. This moved Pompey to
make a law, Anno (...). 701.
That no man should sue for public offices by bribes, or other corrupt
courses; and it was called Lex de Ambitu. which indeed was but renewed: Live.
lib. 7.
for the same was set on foot, Live. lib. 9.
Anno Urb. 395. by Petilius, Tribune of the people; and renewed again by Pub.
Cornelius Cethegus, Anno 572; and within a while after made capital, as far
as banishment concerned the party. Coponius was so condemned, having bought a
voice with an Four gallons and a half. Plin. l. 35. cap. 12.
Amphora of wine. The law which Pompey now made, was very strict, as Lib. 39.
Dio notes: for it was ordained, That upon producing of witnesses, the
Process should end in a day giving the Accuser two hours to lay open the
matter, and the Defender three to make answer; and the Judgment instantly
followed. The rigor of which law Caesar here reformed.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe second thing I observe, is the difficulty of taking up money upon credit,
in time of trouble or wars: which Caesar expresses in these terms; Cum fides
tota Italia esset angustior, in regard credit was very scant throughout all
Italy. The word Fides has ever been taken for a real performance of any
promise or agreement, Lib. 1. offic. Nec enim (...) vehementius rempub. conti^t
quam sides.
which Tully calls the foundation of Justice, and the very prop of a
Commonweal; taking the Etymon to grow, quia siat quod dictum, because that
which was spoken is done. According to that of Nonius Marcellus; Fides nomen
ipsum videtur habere, Lib. 2. offic.
cum sit quod dicitur, Fides seems to have its appellation, when that is done
which was spoken. And for that men commonly are covenant-keepers, not so much
by the perfection of their nature, as out of strictness of law, it falls
out, that where there are no laws, there is no performance; and consequently,
little or no credit either given or kept in time of War, because Silent leges
inter arma, Laws are silenced in time of war.

Caesar to provide for this inconvenience, appointed Commissioners to rate
every man's lands and possessions, In the life of Julius Caesar.
as they were valued before the wars, and to satisfy the Creditours with the
same. Which Plutarch explaineth in this manner; That the Creditours should take
yearly two parts of the revenue of their Debtours, until such time as they had
paid themselves; and that the Debtours should have the other third to live
withal. Whereof it seemed he had some light, by a president in the Consulship
of Valerius Publicola, which is extant in Livie; Novi consules foenebrem quoque
rem levare aggressi, Lib. 7.
solutionem aeris alieni in publicam curam verterant, quinque viris creatis,
quos mensarios, ab dispensatione pecuniae appellarunt: The new Consuls
intending to ease the people in point of Usury, made the payment of debts a
part of the public care, and created five men to that purpose, who were called
Mensarii, from their disposal of those moneys.

This general acquittance for debts, the Romans called Novae Tabulae; in this
respect, as Coelius Rhodiginus has it, Lib. 7.
Quod cum pecuniae creditae obaeratis condonantur, novae mox cooriuntur
Tabulae, quibus nomina continentur nova; in regard that when the debt was
remitted to the debtour, new Tables were made, wherein new names were put; and
is nothing else, but what is ordinary amongst our Bankrupts, compounding for so
much in the pound with their Creditours, upon new assurance, and other
security, which they called Novae Tabulae; agreeing to that of Tully: Tabulae
vero novae quid habent argumenti, 2. Offic.
nisi ut emas mea pecunia fundum, eum tu habeas, ego non habeam pecuniam? What
else mean these new Tables, but that you shall buy a piece of ground with my
money, and keep it to your self, whilst I go without my money?

Concerning matter of Usury, which was the ground of this mischief, Tacitus
notes it, as an old and deadly disease, Vetus urbi foenebre malum, and
seditionum discordiarumque crebe^rima causa.
and the cause of many seditions in that Empire; and is never better likened,
then to the biting of a Serpent, called an Aspick, which, upon the infusion of
her venom, puts the Patient into a heavy slumber; and in a short time,
brings all a man's substance to death and destruction. Annal. 6:
And thereupon it is called Foenus a foetu, from the fertile and ample increase
of money. For, as Basil notes, The Labourer loses the seed, and contenteth
himself with the fruit or increase: but the Usurer will have the fruit, and yet
not loose the seed. Whereby there must needs grow great increase. The law of
the twelve Tables was, Ne quis unciario foenore amplius exerceto, That no man
for the future take upon Use one in the hundred.

The highest rate was Centesima Usura; when the hundredth part of the
principal was paid every month to the Creditour, and was twelve per Cent. The
next was Usura deunx, when the Debtour paid eleven in the hundred for a year.
The third Dextans, which was 10 per Cent. Dodrans 9. Bes 8. Septunx usura, 7.
Semis 6. Quincunx 5. Triens 4. Quadrans 3. Sextans 2. Unciaria, one in the
hundred. Tull 2. offic.
Howbeit, Cato condemned all kind of usury: for, being demanded, Quid maxim in
re familiari expediret? respondit, been pascere: quid secundum? satis been
pascere: quid tertium? been vestire: quid quartum? arare. Et cum ille qui
quaesierat dixisset, Quid foenerari? Quid hominem inquit occidere? what was the
most expedient thing in householdry; answered, good diet: what the second;
enough good diet: what the third; good clothes: what the fourth; ploughing. And
when he that questioned him thus, said, What think you of taking use? Pecuniae
qu^ren^^^ ratio naturae consentanea omnibus est, a fructibus and animalibus. de
repub. lib. 1. cap. 10.
he replied, What is it to kill a man? Allowing (as it seems) no means of
getting money, but those which Aristotle took to be most agreeing to Nature:
which is from the fruits of the earth, and the increase of our cattle; with
such other courses as are answerable thereunto.

CHAP. II.
A particular view of Pompey's forces.
IN the accomplishing of these things, Caesar.
as also celebrating the Latin Holy Days, and holding the Assemblies of the
people, having spent eleven days, he gave over his Dictatorship, left the
City, and came to Brundusium. For he had commanded seven legions, and all his
Cavalry to repair thither. Howbeit, he found no more shipping ready, then would
hardly transport fifteen thousand legionary soldiers, and five hundred horse;
the want of shipping seeming to hinder him from bringing the war to a speedy
end. Moreover, those forces which were shipped, were but weak; in regard that
many of them were lost in the wars of Gallia, and lessened likewise by their
long journey out of Spain: besides that the unwholesome Autumn in Apulia, and
about Brundusium, had made the whole Army ill disposed, being newly come out of
the sweet air of Gallia and Spain.

Pompey having had a years space to provide himself of men and munition, and
neither war nor enemy to trouble him, had got together a great Navy out of
Asia, from the Cyclade Isles, Corcyra, Athens, Pontus, Bithynia, Syria, Cilicia,
Phoenicia, and Egypt; and had caused another as great a fleet to be built in
all places fit for that purpose; had raised great sums of money out of Asia,
and Syria, and of all the Kings, Dynastes, Tetrarchs, and free States of
Achaia; and had likewise compelled the Corporations of those Provinces to
contribute the like sum. He had enrolled nine legions of Roman Citizens: five
which he had transported out of Italy; one old legion out of Sicily, which
being compounded and made of two, he called the ^win; Gen
one out of Creet and Macedonia ^old soldiers, who being discharged by (...)
those Provinces; and (...) of Asia* which Lentulus the Consul had caused to be
enrolled. Besides, he had distributed amongst those legions, under the (...)
supply, a great number of Thessaly, (...), and Epirus.

Amongst these he had mingled Antonie's soldiers: and besides these, he
expected to be brought by Scipio, out of Syria, two legions. Of Archers out of
Crete, Lacedaemon, Pontus. and Syria, and the rest of the Cities, he had 3000;
six cohorts of Slingers, two Mercenary, and 7000 horse. Whereof Deiotarus had
brought 600 Galls; Ariobarzanes 500 out of Cappadocia; Cotus out of Thracia
had sent the like number, under the leading of his son Sadalis. From Macedonia
came 200, commanded by Rascipolis, a Captain of great fame and virtue. From
Alexandria came 500, part Galls, and part Germans; which A. Gabinius had left
there with King Ptolemy, to defend the Town. Pompey the son had brought with
the Navy, 800 of his shepherds and servants. Tarcondarius, Castor, and
Donilaus, had sent three hundred out of Gallograecia; of whom, one came
himself, and the other sent his son. Two hundred were sent out of Syria, by
Comagenus of Antioch, whom Pompey had presented with great gifts: most of which
were Arbalestriers on horseback.

To these were added Dardans, and Bessi, partly for pay and entertainment, and
partly got by command or favor; besides Macedonians, Thessalians, and of
diverse other Nations and Cities: insomuch as he filled up the number formerly
spoken of. He provided great quantity of Corn out of Thessaly, Asia, Crete,
Cyrene, and the rest of those Regions. He determined to winter at Dyrrachium,
Apollonia, and all the maritime towns, to keep Caesar from passing the Sea: and
to that end, he had laid and disposed his Navy all along the Seacoast. Pompey
the son was Admiral of the Egyptian ships; D. Laelius and C. Triarius, of
those that came out of Asia. C. Cassius commanded them of Syria; and C.
Marcellus, with C. Pomponius, the ships of Rhodes. Scribonius Libo and M.
Octavius had charge of the Liburnian and Achaian Navy. Howbeit M. Bibulus
commanded in chief in all sea causes; and to him was left the superintendency
of the Admiralty.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
COncerning these Latinae Feriae, Latinae Feriae.
it is to be noted, that the Romans had two sorts of Feriae, or Holy Days; the
one called Annals, which came always to be kept on a certain day, and
thereupon were called Anniversarii, or, yearly: the other, Conceptivae; which
were arbitrary, and solemnized upon such days, as the Magistrates and Priests
thought most expedient, whereof these Latinae Feriae were chief; and were kept
on Mount Albane, to Jupiter Latiar or Latialis, for the health and preservation
of all the Latin people, in league and confederacy with the people of Rome,
and were solemnized in remembrance of the truce between those two Nations:
during which feast, the Romans held it unlawful to make any war. The sacrifice
was a white Bull, killed and offered by the Consuls, and the flesh distributed
to the inhabitants of Latium; according to an ancient Treaty of alliance
between them, engraven for a perpetual memory, in a Column of brass. The
particulars whereof are expressed at large by Dionysius Halicarnasseus. Lib. 4
de Antiquit. Romans


THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe second thing coming to be noted, is the view taken of Pompey's forces:
which are nine complete legions, besides the supplies here particularly
mentioned, sent from such as bare affection to that Party; and, by indifferent
calculation, might amount in all, to near about threescore thousand men,
together with the favor of the Country, where the trial was to be made by
the stroke of War.

In which Muster were the soldiers of C. Antonius; whose misfortune these
Commentaries have either willingly forgot, or some other chance has wiped it
clean out. Lib. 4. cap. 2
Howbeit Florus has it recorded, that Caesar having sent Dolabella and
Antonius to seize upon the Streights, and entrance of the Adriatic sea, the
one took hold of the coast of Sclavonia, and the other near unto Corfu: when
upon a sudden came Octavius and Libo, Pompey's Lieutenants, and with great
forces (they had aboard their ships) surprised both the one and the other;
whereby Antonius was constrained to yield up fifteen Companies, which were
these soldiers of Antonius hear mentioned.

Rascipolis, or Rascupolis, was a Thracian of great fame, that followed Pompey;
and his brother Rascus betook himself to Caesar, upon an appointment made
between themselves. For finding in the Country where they dwelt, Appian. lib.
4.
two great Factions in opposition, and doubting which Party to take, they
divided themselves, as the best approved part of Neutrality: and held likewise
the same course, in the war between Brutus and Octavius, continuing unto the
battle of Philippi. Upon the issue whereof, Rascus demanded no other reward
for his service, then the life of his brother: which was easily granted.

This Bibulus, Pompey's high Admiral, was fellow-Consul with Caesar, in the
year of Rome 694. but Caesar so out-stript him in the managing of things, that
he much suspected himself, as insufficient for the place: which made him keep
his house all that year. Whereupon came this Distich;

Non Bibulo quicquam nuper, sed Caesare factum:
Nam Bibulo fieri Consule nil memini.
Caesar did all, naught Bibulus did do:
Of Consul Bibulus no act I know.
CHAP. III.
Caesar passes over into Greece, and returns his shipping to Brundusium.
Octavius besieges Salonae.
CAesar upon his arrival at Brundusium, Caesar.
called the soldiers together; and showed them, that forasmuch as they were
almost come to an end of all their labors and dangers, they would now be
content to leave willingly behind them their servants and carriages in Italy,
and go aboard clear of those incumberments, to the end, the greater number of
soldiers might be taken in; and that they should expect the supply of all
these things from victory, and his liberality. Every man cried out, That he
should command what he would, and they would willingly obey it.

The second of the Nones of January, he weighed Anchour, having (as is formerly
showed) shipped seven legions. The next day he came to land at the Promontory
of Ceraunium, having got a quiet road amongst the Rocks and places of danger.
For doubting how he might safely venture upon any of the known Ports of that
Coast, (which he suspected to be kept by the Enemy) he made choice of that
place which is called Pharsalus; and there arriving in safety with all his
ships, he landed his soldiers.

At the same time, Lucretius Vespillo and Minutius Rufus (by order from
Laelius) were at Oricum, with eighteen ships of Asia: and M. Bibulus was
likewise at Corfu, with one hundred and ten ships. But neither durst those come
out of the Port, although Caesar had not in all above twelve ships of war, to
want him over; amongst which, he himself was embarked: neither could Bibulus
come soon enough, his ships being unready, and his Mariners ashore; for that
Caesar was descried near the Continent, before there was any bruit of his
coming in all those Regions. The soldiers being landed, he sent back the same
night the shipping to Brundusium; that the other legions, and the Cavalry might
be brought over.

Fusius Calenus, the Legate, had the charge of this service, and was to use all
celeritie in transporting over the legions: but setting out late, and omitting
the opportunity of the night wind, they failed of their purpose in returning
back. For Bibulus being certified at Corsu of Caesar's arrival, and hoping to
meet with some of the ships of burden, met with the empty ships going back to
Brundusium: and having taken thirty of them, he wreaked his anger (conceived
through grief and omission) and set them all on fire, consuming therein both
the Masters, and the Mariners; hoping by the rigor of that punishment, to
terrify the rest.

This being done, he possessed all the Coast, from Salonae to Oricum, with ships
and men of war; appointing guards with more diligence then formerly had been
used. He himself, in the depth of Winter, kept watch a shipboard, not refusing
any labor or duty, nor expecting any succor, if he happened to meet with
Caesar. But after the departure of the Liburnian Galleys, M. Octavius, with
such ships as he had with him, came from Illyricum to Salonae; and there having
incited the Dalmatians, and other barbarous people, drew Hissa from Caesar's
party. And finding that he could not move them of Salonae, neither with promise
nor threatenings, he resolved to besiege the Town. The place was strong by
nature, through the advantage of a Hill; and the Roman Citizens (there
inhabiting) had made towers of wood to ^ortifie it within: but finding
themselves too weak to make resistance (being wearied out and spent with
wounds) they fell at length to the last refuge of all; which was, to
enfranchize all their bondslaves, above the age of fourteen years; and cutting
their women's hair, they made Engines thereof.

Their resolution being known, Octavius encompassed the town about with five
Camps: and at one instant of time began to force them by siege, and by assault.
They being resolved to undergo all extremities, were much pressed through want
of Corn; and thereupon sending Messengers to Caesar, sought help of him. Other
inconveniences they endured as they might.

And after a long time, when the continuance of the siege had made the
Octavians remiss and negligent (taking the opportunity of the noon time, when
the Enemy was retired aside, and placing their children and women on the wall,
that nothing might seem omitted of that which was usual) they themselves,
together with such as they had lately infranchized, brake into the next Camp
unto the Town. Which being taken, with the same violence they set upon another;
and then upon the third, and so upon the fourth, and in the end, upon the
fifth; driving the Enemy out of all the Camps: and having slain a great number,
they forced Octavius, and the rest remaining, to betake them to their ships;
and so the siege ended. For Octavius despairing to take the Town, the Winter
approaching, and having received such losses, retired to Pompey at Dyrrachium.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IT has been generally conceived, that there is little or no use of women in
times of war, but that they are a burden to such as seek honor by deeds of
Arms; and do better suit the licentio^snesse of peace, then the dangers of
warfare. Whereof Andromache is made an instance; Iliad. 6.
from that which Homer reports of her tears, sighs, and prayers, to withdraw
Hector from those valorous exploits, which he undertook for the defense of
Troy. And therefore they are by Ovid wished to handle the distaffe and the
spindle, and leave the wars, as fitter for men, then the weakness of their
Sex.

-- columque
I cape cum calathis, 12 Metam.
and stamina pollice torque:
Bella relinque viris --
Go take thy basket on thy head,
And at the distaff twist thy thread.
Leave wars to men --
Nevertheless it cannot be denied, that howsoever soever the tenderness of
women does require a passive course of life, under the shelter of a safe roof,
rather then in the bleak storms of active endeavor; yet there have been some
Viragoes, that have over-topped the pride of men in points of war: Just. lib. 1.
amongst whom, Semiramis may lead the rest; Herodot. lib. 2.
together with Tomyris, Cyrus Mistress by conquest. As also Zen^bia, that
subdued the Persians; Trebell. Pol Sigism. Ba^in Musc^^.
and Helena, Queen of the Russes.

Besides other noble spirits, that could answer such as told them news of the
death of their sons in battle, That they had brought them into the world for
that only purpose. Which do prove, as well a real, as a potentiall aptness of
that Sex, to the use and practice of Arms.

And if any man (as unwilling to afford them so much worth) will know wherein
they avail the fortune of a War, Quod Fonestias quam ^xo^i^m levamentum (...)
Tac. l. 3. Annal.
he may take notice, that even in expeditions (wherein they are most subject to
exceptions) they always give acceptable assistances to their Husbands, both in
their provisions, and otherwise; and are such Companions, Vix praesenti
custedia manner illaesa conjugi^, ^odem.
as can hardly be left at home, without danger of greater hazard.

But in places besieged, women do not only afford hair to make ropes, if need
require (as it fell out in this siege) but are able to cast pieces of
Millstones upon the Enemy, Judge. 9.
with better fortune sometimes then any other man: and have thereby slain the
General, to the raising of the siege, and saving of the City.

But to take instances of later times: It is not to be forgotten, that when the
Archduke Matthias (after the death of Count Mansfield commanded the Christian
Army, at the siege of Strigonium; Anno 1595.
while the Turks, within the Castle, were making works for a retreat, the women
(in the mean time) made good the breaches; and there bestowed such store of
Wildfire, that the Italian Squadrons (commanded by Aldobrandine) being joined
poldron to poldron, to press into the breach, seemed all of a fire at once,
and were forced to fall off with great terror and confusion.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
A Town assaulted by a warlike Enemy, is not kept or freed with Charms or
Spells; or as the Inhabitants of Tomby, in the East Indies, drove away the
Portugalls, with Hives of Bees, when they were possessed of the walls: but with
such valor as may overmaster the Enemy, and extend it self to the taking of
five Camps, if need require; which was performed by these Inhabitants of
Salonae.

CHAP. III.
Caesar sends to Pompey, touching a Peace; takes in Oricum, Apollonia, and
other places.
IT is before declared, Caesar.
that Vibullius Rufus (one of Pompey's Lieutenants) was twice taken by Caesar,
and dismissed; once at Corfinum, and a second time in Spain. Him did Caesar
deem (in regard of the favors which he had showed him) to be a sit person, to
be sent with a Message to Pompey; and the rather, for that he understood, that
he was in good account and credit with him.

The sum of his Commission was, Qui sapiunt, bellum absolvunt celeriter; pace
fru^ntur quam possant d^utissime. Appian.
to tell him, That it beseemed them both to give an end to their wilfulness,
to lay down their Arms, and not to tempt Fortune any longer; either side had
been sufficiently afflicted with loss and damages: which might serve for
instruction and example to avoid other inconveniences. He for his part was
driven out of Italy, with the loss of Sicily, Sardinia, and the two Provinces
of Spain, as also of one hundred and thirty cohorts of Roman Citizens in Spain
and Italy. Himself was afflicted with the death of Curio, with the loss of the
African Army, and with the rendry of the soldiers at Corfu. And therefore
they should have regard of themselves, and of the Commonwealth.

They had good experience by their own losses, what Fortune could do in war.
This was the only time to treat of peace, whilst either Party stood confident
in his own strength, and seemed of equal might and power. But if Fortune
should chance to sway to one side, he that thought he had the better end of the
staff, would never hearken to any conditions of peace, nor content himself
with a reasonable part, because his hope would give him all.

Concerning the Articles of Treaty, forasmuch as they could not agree thereof
themselves, they ought to seek them from the Senate and people of Rome. In the
meanwhile, it was fit that the Commonwealth and themselves should rest
satisfied, if (without further delay) both of them did take an oath in the
presence of their Armies, to dismiss their forces within three days next
following; to lay down Arms, and send away their Auxiliary troops, wherein
they so relied; and consequently, to depend upon the judgment and decree of
the people of Rome. For assurance whereof on his behalf, he would presently
discharge as well his forces in the field, as those in garrison.

Vibullius, having received these instructions from Caesar (thinking it no
less requisite to advertise Pompey of Caesar's arrival, that he might consult
of that, before he delivered what he had in charge) posted night and day,
taking at every stage fresh horse; that he might certify Pompey, that Caesar
was at hand with all his forces.

Pompey was at that time in Candavia, and went out of Macedonia to Winter in
Apollonia, and at Dy^rachium. But being troubled at the news, he made toward
Apollonia by great journeys, least Caesar should possess himself of the
maritime Cities.

Caesar having landed his forces, went the next day to Oricum. Upon his
approach, L. Torquatus, who commanded the town under Pompey, and had there a
garrison of Parthians, shutting the gates, went about to defend the place,
commanding the Graecians to take Arms, and make good the walls. But they
refusing to fight against the power and authority of the people of Rome, and
the townsmen endeavoring of their own accord to receive Caesar in; he opened
the gates, despairing of all other succors, gave up both himself and the town
to Caesar, and was entertained by him in safety. Oricum being taken in by
Caesar, without any further delay he went to Apollonia.

His coming being heard of, L. Straberius, the Governor, began to carry water
into the Citadell, to fortify it, and to require pledges of the inhabitants.
They, on the other side, denied to give any, or to shut their gates against the
Consul, or of themselves to take a resolution contrary to that which all Italy
and the people of Rome had thought convenient. Their affections being known, he
secretly conveyed himself away. The Apollonians sent Commissioners to Caesar,
and received him into the town. The Bellidenses followed their example, and the
Amatini, together with the rest of the confining Cities. And to conclude, all
Epirus sent unto Caesar, promising to do what he commanded. But Pompey
understanding of these things, which were done at Oricum and Apollonia, fearing
Dyrrachium, posted thither night and day. Howbeit, upon the report of Caesar's
approach, the Army was so astonished, that for haste on their way, they left
almost all their Ensigns in Epi^us and the confining Regions: and many of them
(casting away their Arms) seemed rather to fly, then to march as soldiers.

As they came near to Dyrrachium, Pompey made a stand, and caused the Camp to
be entrenched; whenas yet the Army was so affrighted, that Labienus stood out
first, and took a solemn oath, Never to forsake Pompey, but to undergo what
chance soever Fortune had allotted him. The same oath took the Legates; being
seconded by the Tribunes of the shouldiers, and Centurions, and by all the
Army, that took the like oath.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
UNum est tempus (says Caesar) de pace agendi, dum uterque sibi confidit, and
pares ambo videntur; The only time to treat of peace is, whilst either party is
confident of his strength, and both seem of equal might and power. Which may
serve for an excellent Rule, to point out the fittest and seasonablest time for
composition between two opposite Parties. For as in quantities, equality
begets equality, and disparity a like unevenness of nature; so in other
things, as namely in Treaties of Agreement, the conditions do commonly rise to
either Party, according as they stand balanced in the scale of Equality; or
otherwise, as the difference of their means shall allot them. For if that be
true in the Extremity, Leges a victoribus (...) a victis. lib. 4.
which Curtius has, That Laws are given by Conquerours, and accepted upon all
conditions, by them that are subdued; it does consequently follow in the Mean,
that men find dealing proportionable to their fortune. (...) in aeq^abi itate,
mot^m in inaequalitate s^mper constit^im^s. In Tim^o.
To which purpose is that of Plato, where he says, That Peace and Quietness
consist in equality; as Trouble and Motion are always in inequality.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IT appears here by the fright and astonishment of Pompey's Army, that the
course he took to abandon Italic, was out of no good advice or direction. For
whereas he might with far more honor, and no less hope of success, have
contested with Caesar, in the place where the war brake out, and kept him to
a task which should have held him from the conquest of Spain, or such other
achievements as he easily wrought in the absence of his Adversaries: it fell
out, that his departure into Greece sorted to no other end, then by time to
abate the edge of the forwardest courages, and to suffer a numerous Army to be
daunted with noise and clamours of continual victories, gotten upon a part of
themselves; and then to give occasion to the Conqueror to come in the (...) of
Fame, and take them disarmed of expectation, to their great amazement.

CHAP. V.
Caesar takes up his lodging for Winter. Bibulus distressed at Sea for want of
provisions, seems desirous of a Treaty: which being carried on the other side
with good caution, breaks off again.
CAesar understanding that his passage to Dyrrachium was thus intercepted,
Caesar.
did forbear his haste, and encamped himself upon the River Apsus, in the
confines of the Apollonians; that by the means of his Guards and Forts, such
Cities as had well deserved of him, might be in safety: and there determined to
winter, in Tents of skin, and to attend the coming of his other legions out of
Italy. The like did Pompey, pitching his Camp on the other side of the River
Apsus; and there assembled all his troops and foreign aids. Calenus having
(according to Caesar's directions) embarked the legions and Cavalry at
Brundusium, and taken in as many as his shipping would contain, he set sail:
but being gone a little out of the Port, he received Letters of advice from
Caesar, that all the Havens and the Seacoast was kept with the Enemies fleet.
Whereupon he made again into the Haven, and called back all the ships: only
one, holding on her course, without regard of the command, carrying no
soldiers, but belonging to private men, arrived at Oricum, and there was taken
by Bibulus; who spared neither bond nor free, of as many as were of age, but
put all to the sword. Whereby it happened, that in a moment of time, by great
chance the whole Army was saved.

Bibulus, as is before declared, lay at Oricum with his Navy. And as he kept
the Sea and the Ports from Caesar; so was he kept from landing in any of those
Countries: for all the Seacoast was kept by Guards and Watches set along the
shore, that he could neither water, get wood, nor bring his ships to land upon
any occasion: Insomuch as he was brought into great straightness and exigence,
for want of all necessaries; and was constrained (besides all other provisions)
to fetch his water and wood from Corfu. And one time amongst the rest it
happened, that the weather being foul, they were forced to relieve themselves
with the dew which in the night time fell upon the skins, that covered the
Decks of the ships. All which extremities they patiently endured; and would by
no means be brought to leave the Ports, or abandon the Seacoast.

But as they were in these difficulties, and that Libo and Bibulus were come
together, they both of them spoke from a-shipboard to M. Acilius and Statius
Murcus, Legates (of whom one was Governor of the Town, and the other had the
charge of such Guards as were along the shore) signifying, that they would
willingly talk with Caesar of matters of great consequence, if they might have
leave. For a better show and assurance whereof, they intimated something
concerning a Composition. In the mean time they earnestly desired there might
be a truce: for the thing they propounded imported matter of great weight,
which they knew Caesar exceedingly affected; and it was thought that Bibulus
was able to work somewhat to that purpose.

Caesar at that time was gone with one legion to take in some towns farther
off, and to set a course for provision of Corn, which was brought sparingly
unto him; and was then at Buthrotum, opposite to Corfu. Being certified there
by Letters from Acilius and Murcus, of that which Libo and Bibulus had
required, he left the legion, and returned himself to Oricum. At his arrival
thither, they were called out to treat. Libo came forth, and excused Bibulus,
for that he was exceeding choleric, and had besides conceived a great anger at
Caesar, about the Aedility and Praetorship: and in regard of that, he did shun
the Conference, lest a matter of that utility and importance should be
disturbed by his intemperate carriage. Pompey, he said, always was desirous
that matters might be accorded, and that Arms might be laid aside: but they of
themselves could do nothing therein; forasmuch as by the general resolution of
a Council, the superintendency of the war, and the disposition of all things
were referred to Pompey. Howbeit, when they understood what Caesar required,
they would send instantly a dispatch unto Pompey, and be a means that he should
accomplish all things with good satisfaction. In the mean time let there be a
truce; and until an answer might be returned from him, let neither Party
offend one another. To this he added somewhat concerning the Cause in question,
the forces and aids. To which Caesar did not think it fit at that time to make
any answer: nor do we think there is cause now to make mention thereof.

Caesar required, that it might be lawful for him to send Ambassadors to
Pompey without danger; and that they would undertake, that such as he sent,
might be well entreated, or take them into their charge, and bring them safely
to Pompey. Concerning the Truce, the course of the war fell out to be so
carried, that they, with their Navy, did keep his ships and succors from
coming unto him; and he, on the other side, did prohibit them from, landing,
or taking in fresh water: and if they would have that granted unto them, let
them cease guarding of the Coast; but if they would continue that, then would
he continue the other. Notwithstanding, he thought the Treaty of accord might
go on, albeit these were not omitted; for he took them to be no impediment
thereunto. They would neither receive Caesar's Ambassadors, nor undertake for
their safety; but referred the whole matter to Pompey: only they instanced, and
very vehemently urged for the Truce. But Caesar perceiving that all this speech
tended only to avoid the present danger, and to supply themselves of such wants
wherewith they were streightened, and that there was no condition of peace to
be expected, he began to think of prosecuting the war.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
AS in contracting with a party, Timendum ne sub pacis nomine involutum bellum.
it is duly to be cared, that War be not shrouded under the fair name of
Peace; so a Truce demanded by an Enemy, is to be handled sparingly and with
suspicion: Cicero, (...). 7.
as a thing never commonly required, but when necesity does move them
thereunto; and not to be granted, but as it may infer the like advantage. But
to yield to a suspension of Arms, advantageous to an Enemy, and no way gainful
to them that consent unto it, is neither allowable by reason, nor Caesar's
example. And if occasion prove it requisite, it must be but for a little time:
for a Prince armed in the field, that shall entertain a Truce for any long
season, shall see his Army consumed both in courage, and in the parts thereof,
which will fall asunder of themselves; and was the means, by which Lewis the
eleventh put by Edward the fourth king of England, from going on with a war
that might have given him the possession of the Crown of France. Whence it is,
that such as seek a Peace, desire no more then a cessation of Arms, for some
reasonable time, as an introduction enforcing the same.

Concerning leagues, we are to note that there are found three differences. The
first is, a league of Peace: Poedus Pacis.
which by the Apostles rule, should extend to all men, Habete pacem cum
omnibus, have peace with all men; and by example of holy Patriarchs (Isaac
with Abimelech, Jacob with Laban) may lawfully be made with Heathen Princes;
being as the golden chain, that tieth all the Nations of the earth in peaceable
community. The second is, a league of Intercourse, Foedus Commercil.
or Commerce; which is likewise by the same Patriarch, sending for Corn into
Egypt, and Solomon's intercourse with Hyram king of Tire, together with diverse
other examples, allowable with Infidels. For Nature being rich in variety of
commodities, does therefore divide her works amongst the kingdoms of the
earth, that there might be a mutual intercourse of exchange between the parts
of the same. The third is, a league of mutual assistance; Foedus mutu^ Aux^lii.
such as Jehosaphat made with Achab: 1. Reg. 22.
and it is hardly safe with any Prince; but no way allowable with Infidels.

Touching the Persons to be offered in a Treaty, it is to be observed from
Bibulus, that no man, whose presence may either give offense, or whose
intemperance may any way interrupt a course sorting to a happy issue, is fit
for any such employment.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THere were in Rome certain officers called Aediles, ab Aedibus, as having the
care of houses and buildings, both public and private, that they might be
built and maintained in such manner as was agreeable to the ordinances of that
State, In Ve^rem.
together with other things whereof they had the charge. Nunc sum designatus
Aedilis (says Cicero) habeo rationem quod a Populo Romano acceperim, mihi
ludos sanctissimos, maxima cum ceremonia, Cereri Liberoque faciendos: mihi
Floram Matrem populo plebique Romanae, ludorum celebritate placandam: mihi
ludos antiquissimos, qui primi Romani sunt nominati, maxima cum dignitate ac
religione, Jovi, Junoni, Minervaeque esse faciendos: mihi sacrarum Aedium
procurationem; mihi totam urbem tuendam esse commissam: ob earum rerum laborem
and solicitudinem fructus illos datos, antiquiorem in senatu sententiae
dicendae locum, togam praetextam, sellam curulem, jus imaginis, admemoriam
posteritatemque prodendam. Now that I am appointed to bear the office of
Aedility, I recon with my self what charge I have received from the people of
Rome: viz. The publication of their se^ul^r Pla^es was cri^d in these words;
Convenice ad Iudos sp^ctand^s, quos n^q^e spectavit quisquam, nec spect^tutus
est. Sue^on. in Claudio.
to see to the solemnizing with highest ceremony of the most holy plays
consecrated to Ceres and Bacchus; to the pacifying of Flora toward the people
with celebration of plays due to her; as likewise to the performing of those
most ancient plays, in honor of Jupiter, Juno, and Pallas, with the greatest
splendor and religion possible: to have a care of sacred houses, and in
general of the whole City, etc. Wherein it is to be noted, that these shows
and Plays, were always made and set forth at the charge and costs of the
Aediles: and thence it was, that the allowing or disallowing of all Play-books
belonged unto them. Moreover, they had the charge of all the public buildings
and works of the City, Nolente^ amicum c^pere difficile.
together with the provision of victual and Corn. And for the missing of this
office, was Bibulus angry with Caesar, and would not be regained upon any
condition. Xenoph. de factis and dict. Socrat.


CHAP. VI.
Bibulus dies. Caesar uses means to procure a Treaty of peace; but prevails
not.
BIbulus being kept from landing many days together, Caesar.
and fallen into a grievous sickness, through cold and extreme labor (and
having no means of help, nor yet willing to forgo his charge) could no longer
withstand the violence of the disease. He being dead, there was none appointed
to take the whole charge, but every man commanded his own fleet. The hurlyburly
being quieted which Caesar's sudden arrival had moved, Vioullius with the
assistance of Libo, together with L. Lucceius and Theophanes, to whom Pompey
was wont to communicate matters of greatest importance, resolved to deliver
what Caesar had recommended unto him: and entering into the relation thereof,
was interrupted by Pompey, forbidding him to speak any farther of that matter.
What use or need have I (says he) either of my life, or of the City, when I
shall be thought to enjoy it by Caesar's favor? neither can the opinion
thereof be removed, until the war be ended; that of my self I return back
into Italy, from whence I am come.

Caesar understood this, from those that were present when he spoke it: and yet
notwithstanding, he endeavored by other means, to procure a Parlce of peace.
For the two Camps of Pompey and Caesar were only separated by the River Apsus,
that ran between them; where the soldiers had often Colloquies, and by
agreement amongst themselves, threw no weapon during the time of their treaty.
Whereupon he sent P. Vatinius, a Legate, to the River bank, to utter such
things as did chiefly concern a Peace; and to ask oftentimes with a loud voice,
whether it were not lawful for Citizens to send to Citizens, touching a treaty
of peace; being a thing permitted to the Thieves of the Pyreneian Mountains: or
at least, to move that Citizens should not in Arms contend with Citizens. And
having spoken much very respectfully, as well concerning his own welfare, as
the safety of all the rest, he was heard with silence by the Soldiers on both
sides.

At length, it was answered from the other Party, that A. Varro did offer
himself for a conference the next day; so that the Commissioners on both sides
might come and go in safety, and deliver freely their opinions: for which a
certain time was then appointed. The next day, great multitudes of either side
presented themselves at the place assigned; and great was the expectation
thereof, every man seeming to incline to peace. Out of which troup stepped forth
T. Labienus, and spoke softly touching the peace: and at last, entered into
altercation with Vatinius. In the middle of their speech were weapons suddenly
cast from all parts: which he avoided, being covered and defended with weapons.
Notwithstanding many were wounded; and amongst others, Cornelius Balbus, M.
Plotius, L. Tiburtius, Centurions, besides many other soldiers. Then said
Labienus, Leave off therefore to speak of any composition; for unless Caesar's
head be brought, there can be no peace.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis small piece of the Story contains diverse notable passages of extremity,
in the carriage of Pompey, and others of his Party. As first (to take them as
they lie) that of wilfulness in Bibulus: whom neither sickness, nor despair
of help could move to intermit the task he had undertaken; but chose rather to
suffer unto death, in approving his zeal to the Cause, then to give himself a
breathing time for the saving of his life: and may serve to admonish any other
Bibulus, to value his life above that which a stiff and wilful opinion may
lead him unto, beyond the measure of honorable endeavor, or what else may any
way be justly expected; least in striving to do much, he happen to do nothing.
For that cannot be understood to be well done in another man's behalf, Frustra
sapit, qui sibi non sapit.
that is not well done in his own.

The second is, Pompey's resolution; being so extreme, as no composition, or
other thing whatsoever, could give him satisfaction, but only a victorious end
of that war. Our proverb says, Better a lean agreement, then a fat remedy.
And the casualties of war may move an experienced Commander, to embrace a
safe and quiet peace; as knowing, that he that goes about to vex another,
shall have his turn of suffering the like miseases: and as war begins when
one party lists, so it ends when the other side pleases.

-- facilis descensus Averni:
Sed revocare gradum, Aeneid. ^.
superasque evadere ad auras,
Hoc opus, hic labor est --
-- The way to hell is easy:
But to come back, and to recover life,
This is a task indeed --
And therefore let no Commander, how great soever, refuse all peace, but that
which is bought by extremity of war; least the event (whereof there can be no
assurance) fall out as it happened to Pompey: but rather with the use, let him
learn the end of Arms; which is, to make straight that which is crooked, and
out of discord and dissension, to draw means of a happy peace.

To which may be added that other of Labienus, as far in extremity as either of
the former; whom nothing would satisfy but Caesar's head. It cannot be denied,
but that he struck at the root; for his head was the head of that war. But to
say it, rather then to do it, was no argument of Labienus worthiness. For as
Polybius notes, Lib. 16.
It is common to most men to magnify themselves, with words full of wind; yea
and more then that, to follow their designs with impetuous violence: but to
direct their undertakings to a successful issue, Successum fortuna,
experientiam laus sequitur. Va^r^, ex Gellio.
and to remove by industry or providence, such hindrances as happen to
traverse their hopes, is granted but to a few; and now denied to Labienus,
notwithstanding this Bravado. And therefore, let such Commanders as are in good
opinion and esteem with their General, be well wary of imbarking their party
in any cause, farther then may beseem the wisdom and experience of judicious
Leaders; as believing in that of Metellus to king Bocchus: Salust.
Omne bellum sumi facile, caeterum acerrime desinere: non in ejusdem potestate
initium ejus and finem esse: incipere cuivis etiam ignavo licere; deponi, cum
victores velint. Every war is easily begun, but hardly so soon ended: the
beginning and the end of it are not in the same man's power: any poorspirited
fellow may begin a war; but it shall end when the Conqueror pleases, and
not before.

CHAP. VII.
Coelius Rufus moves sedition in Italy, and it slain.
AT the same time, M. Coelius Rufus the Praetor at Rome, Caesar.
undertaking the business of debts, in the beginning of his Magistracy, placed
his seat by the chair of C. Trebonius Praetor of the town; promising to be
assisting to any man, that would appeal unto him, concerning valuation and
payment to be performed by Arbitratours, according as Caesar had ordained. But
it came to pass, as well through the equity and indifferency of the Decree, as
through the lenity of Trebonius (who was of opinion, that those times required
an easy and mild execution of justice) that none were found, from whom the
beginning of the Appeal might grow: for to pretend poverty, or to complain of
particular misfortune* and of the calamity of those times, or otherwise to
propound the difficulties of selling their goods by an outrope, was every man's
practice; but for any man to acknowledge himself to be in debt, and yet to keep
his possessions whole and untouched, was held to be a very strange impudency:
so that there was no man found that would require it.

Moreover, Coelius carried a very hard hand to such as should have received
benefit thereby. And having made this entrance (to the end he might not seem to
have undertook a shameful or dishonest cause) he published a law, That there
should be no Interest paid for any Moneys let out upon consideration, for
thirty six days of the time agreed on. But when he perceived that Servilius
the Consul, and the rest of the Magistrates did oppose themselves against him
therein, and finding it not to sort with his expectation (to the end he might
incite and stir up the humors and spirits of men) he abrogated that law, and
instead thereof made two others. The one, which cut off the yearly rents that
Tenants were accustomed to pay their Landlords, for the houses they dwelt in:
and the other, touching new assurances, and the abolishing of old debts.
Whereupon the multitude ran violently upon C. Trebonius, and (having hurt
diverse that stood about him) pulled him out of his Chair.

Of these things Servilius the Consul made relation to the Senate: who
thereupon decreed, that Coelius should be removed from his Praetorship. And by
means of that decree, the Consul interdicted him the Senate, and also drew him
from the Rostra.
Speaking-place, as he went about to make a speech to the people. Coelius moved
with shame and despite, made as though he would go to Caesar; but sent
messengers secretly to Milo, condemned to banishment for killing Clodius. And
having recalled him into Italy, that by great gifts and rewards had gained to
his party the remainder of the Company of Fencers, he joined himself with him:
and then sent him before to Thurin, to excite and stir up the Shepherds to
sedition; he himself going to Cassiline.

At the same instant, his Ensigns and Arms being stayed at Capua, besides his
family suspected at Naples, and their attempt against the town perceived; their
other designs being discovered, and their Partisans shut out of Capua; fearing
some danger, forasmuch as the inhabitants had took Arms, and held him as an
Enemy, he let fall his former determination, and brake off his journey.

In the mean while, Milo, having sent Letters to the Municipall Towns, that
what he did, was by the authority and commandment of Pompey, according as he
received it from Bibulus, he applied himself to, and solicited such as were in
debt: with whom prevailing nothing, he brake up diverse prisons, and began to
assault Cosa in Thurin: and there he was slain by Q. Pedius the Praetor, with a
stone which he cast from the wall.

Coelius going on (as he gave out) toward Caesar, he came to Thury; where when
he had moved diverse of the Inhabitants, and promised money to the French and
Spanish Cavalry, which Caesar had put there for a Garrison, he was in the end
slain by them. And so the beginning of great Matters, which put all Italy in
fear and trouble, by the indirect practices of the Magistrates, and the
iniquity of the times, had a speedy and easy end.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT is to be noted, for the better understanding these Passages, that of those
which were chosen Praetors, the two chiefest remained at Rome. The one, to
administer justice to the Citizens, which was called Praetor Urbanus; who in
the absence of the Consul, had the superintendency of the affairs of the State,
assembled the Senate, received Packets, made Dispatches, and gave order in all
things: which place was now supplied by Trebonius. The other was called Praetor
Peregrtnus; whose office was, to order the causes and suits of foreigners and
strangers: whereunto Coelius was chosen; and being of a turbulent and unquiet
spirit, took occasion upon this rent in the State, to raise new garboils, fit
for his own purposes; Omnia (...) facilias quam (...) De Mechani^is.
as having learned what Aristotle teaches, That all things which are already
stirred are more easily moved, then other natures that are yet in quiet. And
thereupon, having power by his office to decide causes of Controversy, he
removed his Tribunal, and placed it hard by where Trebonius fate, to the end he
might oppose the Decrees he made, for the prizing of goods to satisfy
Creditours, and draw the people to appeal unto him; publishing withal certain
dangerous Edicts, on the behalf of those that were in debt.

This Coelius was Cicero's scholar for Oratory; and in the opinion of
Quintilian, was thought worthy to have lived longer, if he had been of a stayed
and settled carriage: but now must stand for an example of a wilful Magistrate.

Touching Rostra, which I have translated the Speaking-place, it was a part of
their Forum, where the Consuls and other Magistrates spoke unto the people:
wherein was built a Chair or Pulpit, Livie lib. 8.
of the beak-heads of ships, which the Romans took from the Antiatii, and
thereupon took the name of Rostra; memorable amongst other things, for that
Antony set Tullie's head between his two hands, Plutarch.
in the Chair, where he had often spoken most eloquently, and with as many good
words, as were ever found in humane Oratory.

CHAP. VIII.
Libo takes an Island right over against the Haven of Brundusium; and is beaten
off by a stratagem.
LIbo departing from Oricum, Caesar.
with his fleet of fifty ships, came to Brundusium, and took an Island, which
lies over against the Haven, as a place of great importance, by which our Army
must necessarily come forth; thereby shutting in all the Ports, and parts of
that shore: as also surprising by his sudden coming, certain ships of burden,
he set all on fire, saving one laden with Corn, which he took along with him.
Whereby he put our men into a great fear; and landing certain soldiers and
horsemen in the nightime, he dislodged the Cavalry that were there in
Garrison: and so prevailed, through the advantage of the Place, as he writ to
Pompey, that he might draw the other shipping on shore, and new trim them; for
he would undertake, with his fleet alone, to hinder those forces from coming to
Caesar.

Antonius was then at Brundusium; who trusting to the valor of the soldiers,
armed out threescore Skiffs belonging to great Ships, and fencing them with
hurdles and planks, put certain choice soldiers in them, disposing them in
several places along the shore: and further commanded two Triremes (which he
had caused to be made at Brundusium, for the exercise of the soldiers in
rowing) to go out to the mouth of the Haven.

Libo perceiving these to come out somewhat loosely, and hoping to intercept
them, sent out five Quadriremes to attach them: which were no sooner come near
unto our ships, but the old soldiers that were aboard fled back into the Port.

The Enemy, carried on with a desire of taking them, pressed after somewhat:
rashly, and unadvisedly: when at length, upon a signal given, the skiffs came
suddenly out from all parts, set upon them, and at the first shock took one of
the Quadriremes, with all the ^ar-men and soldiers in her; the rest they
compelled to fly away shamefully. To which loss this was farther added, that
they were kept from water, by the Cavalry which Antonius had disposed along the
Coast: through necessity whereof (as also by reason of the ignominy received)
Libo departed from Brundusium, and gave over the siege.

Many months were now past, and the Winter came hardon, and yet neither the
shipping nor the legions came from Brundusium, to Caesar. And some
opportunities seemed to be omitted, for that the wind was good oftentimes;
which Caesar thought they would have taken. And the longer they stayed there,
the streighter was all the Coast guarded and kept, by such as commanded the
fleet; being now in great hope to hinder their passage. Which they did the
rather endeavor, because they were oftentimes reproved by Letters from Pompey,
for that they did not impeach Caesar's coming at first: which he did to make
them the more careful, to hinder those supplies. And in attending so from day
to day an opportunity of passage, it would wax worse and worse, the winds
growing more easy and gentle.

OBSERVATIONS.
BY how much easier it is to keep the outlet of one Port, then to guard the
Coast of a large Country: by so much was Libo more likely to prevail, in
seeking to shut up the Haven of B^undusium, to hinder these supplies from
coming unto Caesar; then the other, that went about to guard all the Maritime
parts of Epirus, to keep them from landing, after they were at Sea.

But such is the uncertainty of enterprises of war, Incertae sunt res bellicae.
that albeit our course be rightly shapen, yet it does often fail of leading us
to that which is desired. Thucyd.
For, howsoever he was possessed of this Island, that lay thwait the mouth of
the Haven, and had thrust out the guard of horsemen, and so became confident of
blocking up the Port: yet there was means found by the adverse Party, to give
him such an affront, as made him quit the place with more dishonor, then could
be recompensed by any thing he got.

CHAP. IX.
Caesar's supplies pass over into Greece, and take landing.
CAesar troubled at these things, Caesar.
writ very sharply to them at Brundusium, not to omit the opportunity of the
next good wind, but to put to Sea, and to shape their course to Oricum, or to
the Coast of Apollonia; because there they might run their ships on ground: and
these places were freest from Guards, by reason they could not ride far from
the Ports.

They, according to their accustomed courage and valor (Marcus Antonius and
Fusius Calenus directing the business, and the Soldiers themselves being
forward thereunto, as refusing no danger for Caesar's sake) having got a South
wind, weighed Anchour, and the next day passed by Apollonia and Dyrrachium: but
being discovered from the Continent, Quintus Coponius, Admiral of the Rhodian
Navy, lying at Dyrrachium, brought his ships out of the Haven. And as he had
almost (upon a slack wind) overtaken our men, the same South wind began at
length to blow stiff, by which means they escaped. Yet did not he desist from
pursuing them; but was in hope, by the labor and industry of the Mariners, to
overweigh the force of the tempest, and followed them, notwithstanding they
were past Dyrrachium, with a large wind. Our men using the favor of Fortune,
were nevertheless afraid of the Enemies Navy, if the wind should chance to
slack: and having got the Port called Nymphaeum, three miles beyond Lissus,
they put in with their ships.

This Port lay sheltered from the South-west wind; but was not safe from a
South wind; howsoever, they accounted an ill road less dangerous then the
Enemies fleet: and yet they were no sooner put in, but the wind (which had
blown southerly for two days together) did now most happily come about to the
South-west.

And here a man may see the sudden alteration of Fortune; for they which of
late stood in fear of a dangerous Road, were now by that occasion, received
into a safe harbor: and those which threatened danger to them, were forced to
bethink themselves of their own safety. So that the time thus changing, the
tempest saved our Party, and sunk theirs. Insomuch as sixteen of the Rhodian
ships were all shaken in pieces, and perished with shipwreck; and of the great
number of oarmen and soldiers, part were dashed against the Rocks and slain,
and part were taken up by our men: all which Caesar sent home in safety. Two of
our ships coming short, and overtaken with the night, and not knowing where the
rest had taken shore, stood at Anchour right over against Lissus. Them did
Ot^cilius Crassus, Governor of Lissus, go about to take with Skiffs, and other
little ships, which he had prepared for that purpose; and withal, treated with
them of yielding themselves, promising life and safety upon that condition.

One of the ships carried two hundred and twenty men, of the legion made of
young soldiers; in the other were less then two hundred old Soldiers. And
here a man may see, what assurance and safety consists in courage and valor
of mind; for the new made soldiers, terrified with the multitude of ships that
came against them, and spent with Sea-sicknesse, upon oath made not to receive
any hurt, did yield themselves to Otacilius: who being brought all unto him,
were contrary to his oath, most cruelly slain in his sight. But the soldiers
of the old Legions (howsoever afflicted with the inconvenience of the tempest,
and noisomnesse of the Pump) did not slack any thing of their ancient valor:
for having drawn out the first part of the night in conditions of treaty, as
though they meant to yield themselves, they compelled the Master to run his
ship ashore; and having got a convenient place, they there spent the rest of
the night.

As soon as it was day, Otacilius sent four hundred horse, which had the guard
of that part of the coast, with others of the garrison, to assault and take
them: but they valiantly defending themselves, slew diverse of them; and so got
to our men in safety. Whereupon, the Roman Citizens residing in Lissus, (which
town Caesar had formerly given them to be kept and guarded) received in
Antonius, and assisted him with all things needful. Otacilius, fearing
himself, fled out of the town, and came to Pompey.

Antonius sent back the greatest part of the ships that had brought over his
troops (which were three legions of old soldiers, one of new soldiers, and
eight hundred horse) to transport the rest of the soldiers and horse, that
remained at Brundusium: leaving the Pontones, which are a kind of French
shipping, at Lissus; to this end, that if happily Pompey, thinking Italy to be
empty and unfurnished, should carry over his Army thither, Caesar might have
means to follow him: and withal sent Messengers speedily to Caesar, to let him
know where the Army was landed, and what men he had brought over.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
DOlus an virtus quis in host requirat, Aeneid. 2.
It is no matter whether the enemy does his business by Valor, or subtilty;
is not so justifiable by the laws of true Virtue, as that of Achilles, Homer 9.
who professed to hate that man more then the gates of hell, Iliad.
that promised one thing, and purposed another. Neither do the Jurists conclude
otherwise; having, for the more apparency of truth, drawn it to a Question, An
perfidia in perfidum uti, Jus sit, whether it be lawful to break faith with a
faith-breaker; (...) lib. 8. de bello Gallico.
alleging Labienus practice against Comius of Arras, together with that which
admits no Answer, that their example stands as a president, to deal with
them as they deal with others. But to falsify religion, as Otacilius did, and
to make an oath the Broaker of unworthy ends, is abhorred by God and Man, and
accordingly succeeds.

The most remarkable instance in this kind, is that (which is to be wished were
forgotten) of Lewis King of Hungaria; Uladislaus.
who having concluded the honourablest peace, that ever Christian Prince had
before that time made with any of the Turkish Sultans, and confirmed the same
by an oath, taken upon the holy Evangelist; did nevertheless, at the
persuasion of Julian, a Cardinal (who took upon him, by power from the Pope,
to disannull the league, and absolve him from the oath) break the peace, and
gave battle to Amurath at Varna (where the Infidel took occasion impiously to
blaspheme, in calling for vengeance on such, as in their deeds had denied the
Godhead of their most sacred and blessed Lord) and was there slain, to the
utter ruin of his kingdom, and the reproach of Christian Name. Neither did the
Cardinal escape the vengeance, which his treachery had drawn upon that royal
Army: but being there wounded unto death, was found lying in the high way, by
Gregory Sanose, ready to give up the ghost; and seemed but to stay to take with
him the bitter curses of such as passed by, flying from the battle, as the due
reward of his perfidious absolution.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IN case of difficulty and hazard (as Caesar notes) there is always great
help in a good courage. Audaces fortuna iuvat. Virtus omnia potest.
For, whether it be that good hap attends a valourous carriage, or that
virtue be able to remove all opposition, Virtute faciendum est, quicquid in
rebus bellicis est gerendum.
or what other cause there is besides; but thus it falls out, that such as
entertain a noble resolution, are ever safest in extremity of peril; and
instead of loss, get honor and renown.

Brasidas found a Mouse amongst dried figs, Plutarch.
which bit him so that he let her go, and thereupon said to those that stood
by, That there was nothing so little, that could not save it self, if it had a
heart to defend it self against such as assaulted it.

And herein we may observe that to be true, which the Poet has delivered; 6
Metam^^.
Seris venit usus ab annis, Time and Practice do much avail to perfect this
courage in the minds of Men of War; as knowing aforehand the weight of such
labors, and having incountered the like dangers, even to the redeeming of
themselves from the jaws of death. Nunquam ita quilquam been subducta ratione
ad vitam fait quin res, aetas, usus, sen (...) aliquid (...)
Whence it is that the Comic says, No man can possibly come so well furnished
to any course of life, but that time and experience do always teach him what
he knew not before: whereas others that go rawly to work, are so daunted with
the unusual looks of war, as they (forgetting the profession of Arms) do run
headlong into the danger they seek to avoid; being able to give no other
account of their service, T^ren.
but that they marched many Bodies, (...) Multi homines, pau^i vi^i.
and but a few Men.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION. Herod. lib. 7.

Plutarch, Valerius Maximus, Appian, Suetonius, and Lucan, do all write, that
Caesar, impatient of the slay of his forces at Brundu sium, embarked himself in
a small Frigate of twelve oars, (...) says, that the Romans (...) the siege of
Ve^ente, being out of humane hope, turned their eyes to Fate, and the hope they
had in Destiny.
disguised in the habit of a slave, and put to sea to fetch his Legions;
notwithstanding all the Coast swarmed with the Enemies shipping: but meeting
with a contrary wind, which would not suffer him to get out of the River Anius,
the Master commanded the Mariners to cast about, and get to shore. Whereupon
Caesar discovering himself, encouraged him to go forward, for that he carried
Caesar and his fortunes.

The Master forgetting all danger, made out again to get to sea; but was by
force of the tempest driven to return, to Caesar's great grief. And albeit
there is no mention made hereof in these Commentaries, yet the authority of so
many grave Authors is not to be contemned.

CHAP. X.
Caesar hastes to meet with Antonius, and preventeth Pompey.
CAesar and Pompey had both intelligence almost at one instant of time, of
Antonius fleet; Caesar.
for they saw them pass by Apollonia and Dyrrachium, and directed their
journeys along the Coast after them: but they understood not for a while where
they were landed. Howbeit having notice thereof, either of them took a contrary
resolution. For Caesar purposed to join with Antonius, as soon as possibly he
might: and Pompey resolved to hinder their meeting, and by ambushments (if he
could) to set upon them at unawares.

The same day, either of them drew their Army out of their standing Camps, upon
the River Apsus: Pompey secretly, and by night; Caesar openly, and by day: but
Caesar had the greater circuit to fetch, and a longer journey to go up the
River, to find a Foord. Pompey having a ready way, and no River to pass, made
toward Antonius by great journeys: and when he understood that he came near
unto him, chose a convenient place, and there bestowed his forces; keeping
every man within the Camp, and forbidding fires to be made, that his coming
might be the more hidden. Whereof Antonius being presently advertised by the
Greeks, he dispatched Messengers to Caesar, and kept himself one day within his
Camp. The next day Caesar came unto him. Upon notice thereof, Pompey left that
place, least he should be intrapped between two Armies, and came with all his
forces to Asparagus (which appertained to them of Dyrrachium) and there, in a
convenient place, pitched his Camp.

OBSERVATIONS.
Where two Armies are in a Country, and one of them has succors coming to
renforce them, each of those Parties are, by the example of these glorious
Commanders (caeteris paribus) to make toward those succors: the one, to cut
them off; and the other, to keep them standing. And to that end, as it suited
Pompey's condition to go secretly; howsoever Caesar notes it, as a touch to
his valor: so on the other side, it stood not only well enough with Caesar's
party to go openly, but also was an argument of his courage and magnanimity,
and might raise him estimation in the opinion of the Greeks. The disadvantage
which Pompey could take thereby, was the danger to be enclosed with Armies;
which he foreseeing, avoided.

CHAP. XI.
Scipio's preparation in Asia, to come into Greece, to assist Pompey.
ABout this time Scipio, Caesar.
having sustained diverse losses near the Mount Amanus, A hill, separating Syria
from Cilicia.
did nevertheless call himself by the name of Imperator; and thereupon
commanded great sums of money to be levied of the Cities and Potentates of
those quarters: taking from the general Receivers of that Province, all the
Moneys that were in their hands for two years past and commanding them to
disburse (by way of loan) the receipt for the year to come; and required
horsemen to be levied throughout all the Province. Having gathered these
together, he left the Parthians, being near enemies unto him (who a little
before had slain M. Crassus, the General, and besieged M. Bibulus) and drew
the legions out of Syria; being sent specially thither to keep and settle that
Province, much amuzed through fear of the Parthian war.

At his departure, some speeches were given out by the soldiers, that if they
were led against an Enemy, they would go; but against a citizen and Consul they
would not bear Arms. The Army being brought to Pergamus, and there garrisoned
for that Winter in diverse rich Cities, he distributed great largesses, and
gifts; and for the better assuring of the soldier unto him, gave them certain
Cities to ri^^e.

In the mean time, he made bitter and heavy exactions of money throughout all
the Province: for he put a tribute upon slaves and freemen by pole, set
impositions upon the pillars and doors of houses, Columnaria Osti^^^.
as also upon grain, oar-men, arms, Engines, and carriages; and whatsoever had
a name, was thought fit to yield money by way of imposition; and that not only
in Cities and Towns, but almost in every Village and Castle: wherein he that
carried himself most cruelly, was held both the worthiest man, and the best
Citizen.

The province was at that time full of Officers and Commandments, pestered
with Overseers and Exactors: who besides the money levied by public authority,
made their particular profit by the like exactions. For they gave out, they
were thrust out of their houses and their Country, and in want of all
necessaries; to the end they might with such pretenses, cover their wicked and
hateful courses. To this was added the hard and heavy Usury, which oftentimes
does accompany war, when all moneys are drawn and exacted to the public;
wherein the forbearance of a day, was accounted a discharge for the whole.
Whereby it happened that in those two years, the whole Province was overgrown
with debts. And yet for all that, they stuck not to levy round sums of money,
not only from the Citizens of Rome, inhabiting in that Province; but also upon
every Corporation, and particular City: which they gave out, was by way of
loan, according to a Decree of Senate; commanding the receivers to advance the
like ^um by way of loan, for the year to come.

Moreover Scipio gav^ order, that the moneys which of old time had been
treasured up in the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, should be taken out, with other
Images of that Goddess. But as he came into the temple (having called unto him
many of the Senators that were there present) he received a Dispatch from
Pompey, That Caesar had passed the Sea with his legions; and that, setting all
things apart, he should hasten to him with his Army. These Letters being
received, he dismissed such as he had called unto him, and began to dispose of
his journey into Macedonia, setting forward within a few days after: by which
accident the Treasure at Ephesus was saved.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT is Seneca his conceit, Propter Aurum and Argentum nunquam pacem facit
Ferrum. lib. 14. Epist. 93.
that Iron, being of that excellent use in things pertaining to Man's life, and
yet so much undervalued to Gold and Silver, will admit of no peace, as often as
there is question of Money; but raises continual garboiles and extremities,
Ferrum omnis artis instrumentum. Aurum and atgentum mortis mancipia.
as a revenge that the World does misvalue^t: and fell out as true in those
better Ages, as it does in these days, that are of baser Metal. For what
greater violences in the State of Rome, then those concerning Tributes and
Impositions? A particular whereof may be made out of this Chapter. Epictetus.
For first, we find a Tribute by pole, without respect of state or condition;
which they called Capitatio. Capitatio.
And then a second, as grievous as that, being a tax laid upon every door in a
house, which they called Ostiaria: Ostiaria.
whereof Tully makes mention, in the eighth Epistle of his third Book. And
lastly, an other upon every pillar in a man's house, which they called
Columnaria: Columnariae. 31 ad Atticum. Epist. 1.
mentioned likewise by cicero, columnarium vide ut nullum debeamus, See that we
own no tax-mony for our pillars. Alciatus understands this to be that we read
in Dionysius Halicarnasseus, That when Treasure failed at the siege of Modena,
they laid an Imposition upon every tile that was found on the Senators houses
in Rome; which gave the Trium-virate occasion, to make the tiles as heavy to
the rest of the Roman Citizens: and this, says he, was called columnaria.

Some Popes, out of their occasions, have gone far in this kind, and found
means to lay Impositions upon all things pertaining to the use of man. In the
Pa^pacy of Sixth. Quin^us.
Insomuch as Pasquill begged leave to dry his shirt in the Sun, before there
were an Imposition laid upon the Light. The rule is diversely given in this
behalf, Fiscus reipub. lien; quod eo c^escente, artus reliqui tabescunt.
That the Fisk does not swell above his proportion. Alexander is commended for
making his Subjects the keepers of his Treasure. And Claudianus gives Honorius
this Elogium; Sext. Aurelius Victor


Nec tua privatis crescunt aeraria damnis.
Thy chests fill not by loss of private men.
Basilius advises that money thus raised, In Parae^et.
be not at any time dipped either in the tears or in the blood of the people.
But Tully draws it to a more certainty, by making Necessity the square of
such commands. 2 de Offic.
Da operam, (says he) ut omnes intelligant, si salvi essent velint,
necessitatie esse parendum; Do your endeavor to let all see, that they must
obey necessity if they mean to be safe. And so the opening of private men's
purses, is but to keep them shut and safe, from such enemies as would consume
all; according as Scipio once answered, Plutarch.
when the Romans blamed him for spending their Treasure. Howsoever, Scipio knew
well what he did, in getting into his hand such store of Treasure; for War
cannot any way be maintained, Bella sustentantu^ pecuni^rum (...) Dion (...). 6.
but with plenty of Money: neither can any State continue, if the revenue which
supporteth the Commonweal be abated; as Tacitus has well observed,
Dissolvitur imperium, si fructus quibus respub. Ann. l. 13.
sustinetur diminuantur.

CHAP. XII.
Caesar sends forces into Thessalia, Aetolia, and Macedonia. Scipio comes
into Greece.
CAesar being joined with Antonius, Caesar.
drew that legion out of Oricum, which he had formerly lodged there to keep the
Seacoast; and thought it expedient to make trial of the Province, and to
advance further into the Country. And whereas Ambassadors came unto him out of
Thessalia and Aetolia, assuring him, that if he would send forces to protect
them, the Cities of those Provinces would readily obey what he commanded: he
sent L. Cassius Longinus, with the legion of young soldiers, called the seven
and twentieth, and two hundred horse, into Thessalia; and C. Calvisius Sabinus,
with five cohorts, and a few horse, into Aetolia; exhorting them specially, to
take a course for provision of Corn in those two provinces, which lay near at
hand.

He sent likewise Cn. Domitius Calvinus with two legions, the eleventh and the
twelfth, and five hundred horse into Macedonia: of which Province (for that
part thereof which is called Frank or Free) Menedemus, Quae libera appellabatur.
a principal man of that Country, being sent as an Ambassador, had professed
exceeding great forwardness on their behalf. Of these, Calvisius upon his
coming was entertained with great affection of the Aetolians: and having cast
the garrison of the enemy out of Caledon and Lep^nto.
Naupactum, became Master of all Aetolia. Cassius arrived with the Legion in
Thessalia; and finding there two Factions, was accordingly received with
contrary affections.

Egesaretus, a man of ancient power and authority, favored Pompey's party: and
Petreius, a man of a most noble house, endeavored by all means to deserve well
of Caesar. At the same time also came Domitius into Macedonia: and as
Ambassadors began to come thick unto him from diverse States of that Province,
it was told him, that Scipio was at hand with the legions, and came with great
fame and opinion of all men: which is oftentimes a forerunner of novelties.
He, making no stay in any part of Macedonia, marched directly with great fury
toward Domitius; and when he came within twenty miles of him, turned his
course suddenly to Cassius Longinus, in Thessalia: which he did so speedily,
that news came together of his coming, and of his arrival. For, to the end he
might march with greater expedition, he left M. Favonius at the River Haliacmon
(which divides Macedonia from Thessalia) with eight cohorts, In Macedonia,
quae velint sibi candida nasci, ad Halia^monem ducere; quae ^ugra and (...), ad
Axium.
to keep the carriages of the legions: where he commanded them to build a Fort.

At the same time, the Cavalry of King Cottus, which was wont to keep in the
Confines of Thessalia, came flying suddenly to Cassius Camp. Whereat he being
astonished (understanding of Scipio's coming, and seeing the horsemen whom he
thought to be his) made toward the hills which enclose Thessalia, and from
thence marched toward Ambracia. And as Scipio made have to follow after,
Letters overtook him, sent from Favonius, that Domitius was at hand with the
legions, and that he could not hold the place wherein he was left, without
Scipio's help.

Upon the receipt of which letters, Scipio altered both his purpose and his
journey; and leaving Cassius, made have to help Favonius: so that continuing
his journey night and day, he came unto him in very good time. For as the dust
of Domitius Army, approaching, was seen to rise, the forerunners of Scipio his
Army were likewise discovered. Whereby it happened, that as Domitius industry
did help Cassius, so did Scipio his speed save Favonius.

OBSERVATIONS.
CAesar being now ready with his forces to proceed against Pompey, the first
thing he did, was to make trial of the provinces of Greece, and to get their
favor and assistance, for his better furtherance in contesting his Adversary.
For as an Army stands firm by two special means, first, in themselves, as
they are able to resist any opposing force; and secondly, through the favor of
the Country, wherein they are engaged: so on the other side, their overthrow
either proceeds from their own weakness; or otherwise, when the Provinces
adjoining do refuse such mutual respects, as may relieve the wants of a
consuming multitude. And therefore, having got all the forces together which he
looked for, or could any way expect, he sent out to try the affection of the
Country, and to alter that in a moment, which Pompey had been settling for a
year together, and then resolved to attack him nearer.

And doubtless, if Scipio had not by chance interrupted their course, upon his
coming out of Asia to aid Pompey, they had as easily got all Thessalia and
Macedonia, as they did Aetolia: and were nevertheless so ordered and disposed,
as they got more honor of Scipio, then he could win of them.

CHAP. XIII.
The Passages between Domitius and Scipio.
SCipio abode two days in his standing Camp, Caesar.
upon the River Haliacmon, which ran between him and Domitius Camp. The third
day, as soon as it began to be light, he passed his Army over the River by a
Foord, and encamped himself. The next day in the morning, he imbattelled his
forces before the front of his Camp. Domitius in like manner, made no
difficulty of bringing out his legions, resolving to fight. And whereas there
lay a field of six miles between both the Camps, he led his troops imbattelled
under Scipio's Camp; who nevertheless refused to move any jot from his
standing: yet for all that, Domitius soldiers were hardly kept from giving
battle; but specially a River, lying under Scipio's Camp, with broken and
uneasy banks, did hinder them at that time.

Scipio, understanding of their alacrity and desire to fight, suspecting it
might happen, that the next day he should be forced to fight against his will,
or with great dishonor keep himself within his Camp, having with great
expectation in the beginning gone on rashly, and unadvisedly, was now
dishonored with a reproachful end. For in the nightime he rose, without any
noise or warning for the trussing up of the baggage, and passing the River,
returned the same way he came: and in an eminent place, near unto the River, he
pitched his Camp.

A few days after, he laid an ambushment of horsemen in a place, where our men
had formerly accustomed to forage. And as Q. Varus, General of the horse in
Domitius Army, came out according to his ordinary use, they set upon him at a
sudden. But our men did valiantly sustain the onset; and every man betaking
himself speedily to his rank, they all together of their own accord charged the
Enemy: and having slain fourscore, they put the rest to flight, with the loss
only of two of their men.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT appears here, that to show a readiness and resolution to fight, upon such
grounds as are justifiable by the rules of War, is no small advantage to the
prosperous carriage of the same. For albeit Scipio was great in his own
strength, and as great in the opinion and expectation of men: yet when he found
such an alacrity in the Enemy, to give and take blows, and a desire to
entertain seriously all occasions of giving battle; he was so far from
prosecuting what he had pretended, as he rather chose the fortune of a safe
retreat, and consequently, to turn the advantage which the world in opinion had
given to his Army, to his own reproach and disadvantage. Whereas on the other
side, to be found for the most part unwilling to hazard the trial of a Field,
or indisposed to fight upon any occasion, does invite an Enemy to attempt that,
which otherwise he would not; and gives them courage to beat him from all his
purposes, as knowing the resolution of their Adversary, and the means they
have, either to take or leave at their pleasure.

CHAP. XIV.
Domitius draws Scipio to a loss, by an Ambushment. Young Pompey's attempt
upon Oricum.
AFter these things, Caesar.
Domitius hoping that Scipio might he drawn to fight, he made as though he were
in great want and scarcity of Corn: and thereupon, rising from the place
wherein he was encamped, with the usual cry of removing, according to the
custom of War, and having marched three miles, he lodged all his Army, with
the Cavalry, in a convenient and secret place.

Scipio being ready to follow after, sent his horsemen and a great part of his
light-armed soldiers, to discover what way Domitius took: who marching
forward, as the first troops came within the Ambushment (suspecting somewhat by
the neighing of the horses) they fell back again. Those that followed after,
seeing the former troops so suddenly to retire, stood still.

Our men finding themselves discovered, and thinking it in vain to attend the
rest, having got two troops of horse within their reach, they contented
themselves with them; amongst whom was M. Opimius, the General of the horse.
The rest of those two troops they either put to the sword, or took alive, and
brought them to Domitius.

Caesar, as is before showed, having withdrawn the Garrisons from along all the
Seacoast, left only three Cohorts at Oricum, for the defense of the Town: and
to them he committed the custodic and safe keeping of the Galleys, which he had
brought out of Italy; whereof Acilius the Legate had the charge, being left
Governor of the town. He, for the better security of the shipping, had drawn
all the fleet into a back angle, behind the town, and there fastened them to
the shore: and in the mouth of the Haven had sunk a great ship, and set another
by her, upon which he built a tower, to keep the entrance of the Port; and
filled the same with soldiers, to defend the Haven from any sudden attempt.

Upon notice whereof, Pompey's son, being Admiral of the Egyptian fleet, came
to Oricum, and with many haulsers and hooks weighed up the sunk ship; and
assaulted the other ship, set by Acilius for the defense of the Haven, with
ships wherein he had made towers, which stood by counterpoize, that he might
sight with advantage of height, supplying continually fresh men; and attempting
also from the Land side, to take the town by scaling Ladders, as by Sea with
his Navy, to the end he might distract and dismember the forces within.

In the end, with extreme labor and multitude of weapons, he overcame our
Party, and took the ship, having cast out such as had the guard; who fled all
away with Skiffs and Boats. At the same time, being likewise seized of a small
height, on the other side of the town, in the nature of a Peninsula, he
conveyed over four small Biremes.
Galleys, with Rollers and Levers, into the inner part of the Harbor, lying
behind the town; insomuch, as setting on each side upon the Galleys tied unto
the shore, empty and unfurnished, he carried four of them away, and burned the
rest.

This being done, he left D. Laelius, whom he had taken from the Egyptian
fleet, to keep the passage, that no victuals, or other provisions, might be
brought into the town, either from Bullis or Amantia: and he himself going to
Lissus, found thirty ships of burden, which Antonius had left within that
Haven, and set them all on fire. And as he went about to take Lissus, the
soldiers which Caesar had put there for a garrison to the Town, together with
the Roman Citizens, and the townsmen thereof, did so well defend the same, that
after he had continued there three days, and lost a few men in the siege, he
left the place, without effecting any thing.

OBSERVATIONS.
AN Ambushment is easily at all times laid: but to do it so that it may not be
suspected, and in such manner that the Enemy may fall into the danger thereof,
is that which is to be armed at therein. And therefore, to give the better
color to such designs, the trick has been to pretend fear (and so slight) or
want of Corn, or somewhat else, to draw the Enemy to follow after with more
boldness and resolution. And so to have it well done, there must be two
deceits to assist each other; as in this of Domitius: to make show of removing,
through scarcity and want; and then to lie in wait for an advantage: According
to that of the Spaniard, (...) hostium discessiones semper suspectas habere.
cap. 5.
A un Traydor, dos Alevosos. For the prevention of such snares of deceit, the
rule is generally given by Onosander, That the departure or falling away of an
Enemy, is always to be suspected.

And for the more security therein, experienced Commanders have been careful
before they stirred their Army, to make exact discovery, even to the place
where they intended to lodge. For as in Physic, it is the greatest part of the
cure, to know the disease: so in matter of war, the danger is almost over, when
it is perceived whence it may grow.

The manner observed in discoveries, has usually been to send the Parties out
in three Companies or troops; The first, consisting of a small number, to beat
the way at ease, and to range about from place to place, as shall be found
convenient: the second Company, being somewhat stronger, to second and relieve
the first, if there be occasion: and the third, able to engage a good number of
the Enemy.

And after this manner Cyrus disposed of his forerunners; 5 Cyropaed.
as appears in Xenophon. But this being subject to the consideration of time
and place, and other circumstances, may vary, as shall seem expedient to the
wisdom of the General.



CHAP. XV.
Caesar marches toward Pompey; offers him battle; and cutteth him off from
Dyrrachium.
AFter Caesar understood that Pompey was at Asparagus he marched thitherward
with his Army: Caesar.
and taking by the way the town of the Parthinians, wherein Pompey had put a
Garrison, the third day he came to Pompey in Macedonia, and lodged himself fast
by him. The next day he drew out his forces; and putting them in order,
presented him battle. But when he found that he would not accept thereof, he
drew back his Army into the Camp, and bethought himself of some other course.
For the next day, taking a difficult and narrow way, he set forward with all
his forces toward Dyrrachium: hoping either to draw Pompey to fight, or to
force the town, or at least ^o cut him off from all Convoys and Munition, which
was there stored up for the whole provision of the war; as afterward it came
to pass. For Pompey being ignorant at first of his purpose, inasmuch as he
took a contrary way, thought he had been driven thence through scarcity and
want of Corn. But being afterward advertised by the discoverers what course he
took, he rose the next day, in hope to meet him a nearer way. Which Caesar
suspecting, exhorted the soldiers to endure a little labor with patience. And
resting a small part of the night, in the morning he came before Dyrrachium,
even as the first troup of Pompey's Army was discovered afar off; and there
encamped himself.

Pompey being cut off from Dyrrachium, when he could not accomplish his
purposes, fell to a second resolution, and fortified his Camp in an eminent
place, (...) Petram. Lucan.
called Petra: from whence there was an indifferent passage to the ships, and
sheltered likewise the Haven from certain winds. Thither he commanded part of
the ships to be brought; together with Corn and provision of victual from
Asia, and such other Countries as were in his obedience.

Caesar, doubting that the war would prove long and tedious, and despairing of
any succor of victuals from the Coast of Italy, for that all the shore was
(with great diligence) kept by Pompey's party, and that the shipping which in
W^nter he had made in Sicilia, Gallia, and Italia, were stayed and came not to
him; he dispatched L. Canuleius a Legate into Epirus, to make provision of Corn.

And forasmuch as those Regions were far off, he appointed storehouses and
Magazines in certain places, and imposed carriage of Corn upon the Country
bordering about them. In like manner, he commanded what grain soever should be
found at Lissus, Parthenia) or any other place, to be brought unto him: which
was very little, forasmuch as the Country thereabout was rough and
mountainous, and afforded no Corn, but that which was brought in from other
places; as also, that Pompey had taken order in that behalf, and a little
before had ransacked the Parthinians, and caused his horsemen to carry away all
the Grain, which was found amongst them.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe first thing that Caesar did, after their approach near one unto another;
was to offer battle; as the best Arbitrator of the Cause in question, and most
fitting the usance of the ancient Romans. Actus activorum in patientis sunt
dispositione. Arist. Metaph.
But, forasmuch as the endeavors of such as are in action, are always ordered
by him that is the Sufferer; and that Pompey refused to accept thereof, knowing
himself to be much stronger in forces, better accommodated, having a far
greater party in the Country, and the Sea wholly at his command (which
advantages were like to end the business, without hazard of a battle;) Caesar
bethought himself of some other project, which might take away the scorn of
that refusal, by undertaking such things as much imported the state of his
Adversary. For in such cases, when an Enemy will not fight, somewhat must be
done to cast dishonor, or greater inconveniences, upon him; or at least, to
make overtures of new opportunities. And therefore he took a course, either to
draw Pompey to fight, or to force the Town wherein all his provisions of war
were stored up, or otherwise to cut him off from the same. The least of which
was a sufficient acquittance of any disgrace, which the neglect of this offer
might seem to infer; having thereby occasion to use that of the Poet, Jam
sumus ergo pares, now we are even.

CHAP. XVI.
Caesar goes about to besiege Pompey.
CAesar being informed of these things, Caesar.
entered into a deliberation, which he first took from the very nature of the
place wherein they were: for whereas Pompey's Camp was enclosed about with many
high and steep Hills, he first took those Hills, and built Forts upon them; and
then, as the condition of each place would bear, he made works of fortification
from one Fort to another, and determined to enclose Pompey about with a Ditch
and a Rampire. And especially upon these considerations; for that he was
greatly straightened through want of Corn, and that Pompey being strong in
horse, he might with less danger supply his Army from all parts with
provision: as also to the end he might keep Pompey from forraging, and so make
his Cavalry unserviceable in that kind: and further, that he might abate and
weaken the exceeding great reputation, which Pompey had attained unto amongst
foreign Nations, when it should be noised throughout the world, that he was
besieged by Caesar, and durst not fight.

Pompey would by no means be drawn to leave the commodity of the Sea, and the
town of Dyrrachium, having there laid up all his provision of war, Arms,
Weapons, Engines of what sort soever; besides Corn, which was brought from
thence to his Army by shipping. Neither could he hinder Caesar's
fortifications, unless he would accept of battle, which for that time he was
resolved not to do. Only it remained, as the last thing he could think of, to
possess himself of as many Hills as he might, and to keep as much of the
Country as he could with good and strong guard; and by that means, to distract,
as much as possibly he might, Caesar's forces: as accordingly it fell out. For
having made twenty four Castles and Forts, he took in twenty five miles of the
Country in circuit, and did forage within that space, and there caused many
things to be set and planted by hand, which in the interim served as food for
horses.

And as our men perceived their fortifications to be carried, and continued
from one Castle to another, without intermission; they began to fear, least
they had left some places to sally out, and so would come upon them behind,
before they were aware.

And the reason they made their works thus perfect, throughout the whole inward
circuit, was, that our men might not enter in upon them, nor circumvent them
behind. But they (abounding in number of Men) exceeded in their works, having
also on the inside a less compass to fortify.

And as Caesar went about to take any place, albeit Pompey was resolved not to
fight, or interrupt him with all his forces: nevertheless he sent out his
Archers and Slingers, of which he had great numbers; by whom many of our men
were wounded, and stood in great fear of the arrows: and almost all the
soldiers made them coats, ex sub^^actis and cen. conibus.
either of quilt or stiffening, or of leather, to keep them from danger.

To conclude, either Party used all force and means to take places, and make
fortifications: Caesar, to shut up and streighten Pompey what he could; and
Pompey, to enlarge himself, and possess as many hills as conveniently he
might; which gave occasion of many skirmishes and encounters.

OBSERVATIONS.
WE may here take notice of the strangest enterprise, that ever was undertaken
by a judicious soldier. For where else may it be read or understood, that a
weaker Party went about to besiege a strong adversary, and to enclose a whole
Country by Castles and Towers, and perpetual fortifications from hill to hill;
to the end he might shut him up, as he lay encamped in the field? But herein
appear the infinite and restless endeavors of a Roman spirit, and the works
they wrought to atchieve their own ends: and yet not besides the limits of
reason. Contemprares est homo, nisi supra humana se ^rexit.
For if that of Seneca have any affinity with truth, That a man is but a
common, or rather contemptible thing, unless he raise himself above ordinary
courses: it is more specially verified in a Soldier; whose honor, depending
upon the superlative degree, must seek out projects beyond all equality: and
the rather, upon such inducements as are here alleged; (...) ratione i(...)
i^^.
which show good reason he had to be so mad.

CHAP. XVII.
A Passage that happened between both Parties, about the taking of a Place.
AMongst these fights and encounters, Caesar.
it happened, as Caesar's ninth Legion had taken a certain Place, and there
began to fortify, Pompey had pos^est himself of the Hill next adjoining
thereunto, and began to hinder our men from their work. And having from one
side an easy access unto it, first with Archers and Slingers, and afterward
with great troops of light-armed men, and engines of Battery he began to
disturb them in their business. Neither were our men able, at one and the same
time, to defend themselves, and go on with their fortifications.

Caesar seeing his soldiers wounded and hurt from all parts, commanded them to
fall off, and leave the Place. But forasmuch as they were to make their retreat
down the Hill, they d^d the more urge and press upon them; and would not
suffer them to fall back, for that they seemed to forsake the Place for fear.
It is reported that Pompey should then, in a vainglory, say to those that were
about him, That he would be content to be taken for a General of no worth^, if
Caesar's men could make any retreat from thence (where they were so rashly
engaged) without great loss.

Caesar fearing the retreat of his soldiers, caused Hurdles to be brought, and
s^t against the Enemy, in the brimme of the Hill; and behind them sunk a trench
of an indifferent latitude, and incumbered the place as much as possibly he
could. He lodged also Slingers in convenient places, to defend his men in their
retreat.

These things being perfected, he caused the legions to be drawn back. But
Pompey's party began with greater boldness and insolency to press our people:
and putting by the Hurdles, which were set there as a Barricado, they passed
over the ditch. Which when Caesar perceived, fearing least they should rather
seem to be beaten off, then be brought back, whereby a greater scandal might
consequently ensue, having almost from the midway encouraged his men by
Antonius, who commanded that legion, he willed that the sign of charging the
Enemy should be given by a T^umpet, and gave order to assault them.

The soldiers of the ninth legion, putting themselves suddenly into order,
threw their P^les: and running furiously from the lower ground, up the steep of
the Hill, drove the Enemy headlong from them; who found the Hurdles, the long
poles, and the ditches, to be a great hinderance unto them in their retreat. It
contented our men to leave the place without loss: so that having slain many
of them, they came away very quietly, with the loss of sive of their fellows.
And having stayed about that place a while, they took other hills, and
perfected the fortifications upon them.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis Chapter shows, that advantage of place, and some such industrious
courses as may be fitted to the occasion, are of great consequence in
extremities of war: but above all, there is nothing more availeable to clear a
danger, then valor. Valor is the Hercules that overcomes so many Monsters:
and verifieth that saying, which cannot be too often repeated, Virtute
faciendum est, qu^cquid in rebus bellicis est gerendum, What a man does in
matter of war, must be done with valor. But of this I have already treated.

CHAP. XVIII.
The scarcity which either Parti^ endured in this siege.
THe carriage of that war was in a strange and unusual manner, Caesar.
as well in respect of the great number of Forts and Castles, containing such a
circuit of ground within one continued fortification, as also in regard of the
whole siege, and of other consequents depending thereupon. For whosoever goes
about to besiege another, does either take occasion from the weakness of the
Enemy, daunted or stricken with fear, or overcome in battle, or otherwise
being moved thereunto by some injury offered; whereas now it happened that
they were far the stronger, both in horse and foot. And generally, the cause of
almost all sieges is, to keep an enemy from provision of Corn: but Caesar,
being then far inferior in number of soldiers, did nevertheless besiege an
Army of entire and untouched forces, especially at a time when they abounded
with all necessary provisions; for every day came great store of shipping from
all parts, bringing plenty of all things needful: neither could there any wind
blow, which was not good from some part or other.

On the other side, Caesar having spent all the Corn he could get, far or near,
was in great want and scarcity: and yet notwithstanding, the soldiers did bear
it with singular patience; for they remembered how they had suffered the like
the year before in Spain, and yet with patience and labor had ended a great
and dangerous war. They remembered likewise the exceeding great want they
endured at Alesia, and much greater at Avaricum: and yet, for all that, they
went away Conquerers of many great Nations. They refused neither Barlie nor
Pease, when it was given them in stead of Wheat. And of Cattle (whereof they
were furnished with great store out of Epirus) they made great account.

There was also a kind of root, found out by them that were with Valerius,
called Chara, which eaten with Milk did much relieve their want; and made
withal a kind of bread, whereof they had plenty. And when Pompey's Party
happened in their Colloquies, to cast in their teeth their scarcity and misery;
they would commonly throw this kind of bread at them, and scatter it in diverse
places, to discourage them in their hopes. And now Corn began to be ripe, and
hope it self did relieve their want, for that they trusted to have plenty
within a short time. And oftentimes the soldiers, in their watches and
conferences, were heard to let fall speeches, that they would rather eat the
bark of trees, then suffer Pompey to escape out of their hands.

Besides, they understood by such as ran away from the Enemy, that their horse
of service could scarce be kept alive, and that the rest of their Cattle were
all dead, and that the soldiers themselves were in no good health, as well
through the narrowness of the place wherein they were pent, as also by means of
the ill savor and multitude of dead bodies, together with continual labor,
being unaccustomed to travel and pains, but especially, through the extreme
want of water; for all the Rivers and Brooks of that quarter, Caesar had either
turned another way, or dammed up with great works. And as the places were
mountainous, with some intermission and distinction of Valleys, in the form and
fashion of a Cave or Den; so he stopped the same with great piles beaten into
the ground, and interlated with fagots and hurdles, and then strengthened with
earth, to keep back the water: insomuch as they were constrained to seek low
grounds, and Marish places, and there to sink Wells. Which labor they were
glad to undertake, besides their daily works, albeit these Wells stood far
distant from their Garrisons, and were quickly dried up with heat.

But Caesar's Army was in exceeding good health, and had plenty of water,
together with all kind of provisions, excepting Wheat; which the season of the
year daily brought on, and gave them hope of store, Harvest being so near at
hand.

In this new course of war, new policies and devices of warfare were invented
and put in practice by either Party. They, perceiving by the fires that our
Cohorts in the night time kept watch at the works, came stealing out, and
discharged all their Arrows upon them, and then presently retreated. Wherewith
our men being warned, found out this remedy; that they made their fires in one
place, and kept their watch in another.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
FOrasmuch as all matter of attempt does much import the fortune of a war, we
may not omit to take notice of the reasons hear expressed by Caesar, which are
the true motives of undertaking a siege. The first is drawn either from the
weakness of an Enemy, or as he is daunted with fear, or overcome in battle.
For having thereupon no confidence in his own power, he rests himself in the
strength of the Place which he holds and possesses: which gives his
adversaries occasion to lay siege unto his Hold; and either to force them, or
shut them up like women.

The second is, when one State has offered injury to another (which always
imports loss) beyond that which stood with the course of respect formerly
held between them. For revenge whereof, the other side lays siege to some of
their Towns, to repair themselves by taking in the same.

And thirdly, the final cause of all sieges is, to keep an Enemy from
victual, and other manner of provisions; and so to take them by the belly,
when they cannot take them by the ears; which is a part so violent, in
requiring that which is due to Nature, as it has made the Father and the Son
fall out for a Mouse: as it happened at Athens, Pl^ta^ch.
besieged by Demetrius.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe second thing worthy our consideration is, the patience and deportment of
Caesar's soldiers, in their so great wants and necessities. As first, in
helping themselves with this root called Chara, Lib. 3. c. 59.
described by Dioscorides, to be a little seed, tasting somewhat like
Anise-seed, good to help digestion, and having such a root as a Caret, which
being boiled, is very good meat; and is the same which our Physicians call
Caraway-seed: Labor militiae assidua fr^ga itatis con^^^tudine factlior est.
wherewith they served their turn with such contentment, as they seemed to have
been trained up in the School of Frugality; a virtue worthy of all regard, and
the only means to make easy the difficulties of war, Justin.
being as necessary for a soldier, Cy^us contented with bread and water.
as the use of Arms; and is that which was aimed at in the answer of Cyrus, to
show the services in a soldiers diet. Forbeing demanded, Xenophon.
what he would have made ready for supper; Bread, says he; for we will sup at
the Fountain.

Neither has it been thought fit, to give way to the natural looseness of the
stomachs appetite, upon any occasion; but to use the like moderation in the
time of plenty. For Zeno took the answer of them, that would excuse their
liberal expenses by their ability of means, for no better pa^ment, then they
themselves would have taken the excuse of their Cooks, for putting too much
salt on their meat, because they had salt enough.

Caesar punished his Baker, for giving him better bread then his soldiers had.
And Scipio cashiered a couple of Romans at the siege of Carthage, for feasting
a friend in their Tent, during an assault. Which austerity of life raised the
Romans to that height of honor, and made them Masters of the world, from the
East to the Western Ocean.

Secondly, as a consequent of this contentment, we may note their resolution to
hold on their course of siege; purposing rather to eat the bark of trees,
Aequalem oportet semper esse Imperatoris animum: m^tari enim pro terum
varie^atibus, mentis instabilis argumentum efficitur. Agap^tus.
then to suffer Pompey to escape their hands. It is an excellent point in a
General, to keep himself from irresolution; being a weakness of ill
consequence, and not unlike the disease of the Staggers, variable, uncertain,
and without bottom or bound: whereas constancy to purposes, produces noble and
worthy ends.

An instance whereof is Fabius Maximus, who notwithstanding the reproach and
scandal cast upon him, Unus homo nobis cunctando restitute Rem. Enn.
continued firm in his determination, to the saving of his Country. And if it
be so well beseeming a Leader, it is of much more regard in the soldier:
especially considering that of Xenophon; Non facile in officio potest miles
contineri ab eo, qui necessaria non subministrat; He cannot easily keep his
soldiers in obedience, which does not provide them necessaries. Lib. 6. de
Cyropaed.
For, as the same Author observes in another place, Nullus est ad^o fortis aut
validus, qui possit adversus famem aut frigus pugnando militare; There is no
man so stout and valorous, that can fight against cold and hunger.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
AMongst all the parts of the Roman discipline, their Watch deserves a
particular description; supplying in the Army, the office of the natural eye
in the body, which is, to give notice of any approaching danger, for the
preventing of the same. Polybius has left it to posterity in this manner; Of
each sort of the Legionary foot, as namely the Hastati, Principes, and Triarii,
and likewise of the horse, there was chosen one out of the tenth and last
Maniple, that was made free from watch and ward. This party, as the Sun began
to decline, came daily to the Tent of the Tribune, and there had given him a
little Tablet, wherein the watchword was writ; which Tablet they called
Tessera: and then returning to his Company, delivered it to the Centurion of
the next Maniple, and that Centurion to the next, and so in order, until it
came to the first and chiefest Company, which was lodged next unto the
Tribunes; and by the Centurion thereof was returned to the Tribune before
Sunsetting.

And if all the Tablets were brought in, then did the Tribune know the word was
given to all. If any wanted, they made inquiry, and by the notes of
inscription finding which was missing, they punished the default as they saw
cause. And this was their watchword, by which their Party was distinguished
from an Enemy; and in likelihood (for Polybius does not affirm so much) was by
the Centurion given to such of his Maniple as were to watch that night.

Their night-watches were thus ordered; A Maniple, or Company, was always
appointed to watch at the Generals Pavilion. The Treasurer had three watches,
and every Legate two. A watch consisted of four men, according to the general
division of their night into four parts: each of those four having his turn
appointed him by lot, for the first, second, third, or fourth watch, and the
rest sitting by. The Velites kept watch without the Camp, and the Decuries of
horse at the gates. Besides, every Maniple had private watch within it self.

Of those that were appointed to watch, a Lieutenant of each Maniple did bring
to the Tribune in the evening, such as were to keep the first watch of the
night: and to them were delivered lesser Tablets, then were given out at first,
called Tesserulae, appropriated to every particular watch; one for himself, and
three other for his fellows.

The trust of giong the Round was committed to the horsemen: for it belonged to
the first Commander of horse in each legion, to give order to his Lieutenant,
to appoint before dinner four young men of his troup, to go the Round the next
night; and in the evening, to acquaint the next Commander to appoint Rounders
for the night following. These horsemen being thus appointed, did cast lots for
the first, second, third, and fourth watch, and then repaired to the Tribune;
of whom they had order what, and how many watches to visit, having received the
watchword before from their Commander: and then all four went to attend at the
Tent of the Primipile, or chiefest Centurion of a Legion, who had the charge of
distinguishing the four watches of the night by a Trumpet.

When time served for him that was to go the Round the first watch, he went out
accompanied with some of his friends, and visited those watches which were
assigned unto him. And if he found the watchman waking, and in good order, he
then took that Tablet from him which he had received of the Tribune, and
departed. But if he found him sleeping, or out of his place, he took witness
thereof, and departed. The same did the rest of the Rounders, as their watches
fell out in course. And as the day began to break, all the Rounders brought in
the Tablets to the Tribunes. And if all were brought in, there was no more to
do: but if any wanted, it was found out by the Character, what watch had
failed; which being known, the Centurion was called, and commanded to bring
those that were faulty. If the offense were in the watchman, the Rounder was
to prove it by witnesses: if not, it fell upon himself; and a Council of war
being presently called, the Tribune gave judgment to kill him with a club. And
in this manner did the Romans keep watch in the Camp.

CHAP. XIX.
A relation of diverse incounters, There is a great part of the history in this
place omitted.
that happened between both Parties.
IN the mean time Pub. Sylla, whom Caesar (at his departure from the Camp) had
left to command the Army, Caesar.
being certified thereof, came with two legions to succor the Cohort: at whose
approach, Pompey's party was easily beaten off, being neither able to endure
the shock nor sight of our men. For the first being put off, the rest gave
back, and left the place: but as our men pursued them, Sylla called them back,
and would not suffer them to follow far after. Howbeit, many men think, that if
he would have pressed hard upon them, the war had ended that day. But in my
opinion, he is not to be blamed; Al^ae sunt Legati par^es, atque Imperatoris
for there is one charge and power peculiar to a Lieutenant, and another to him
that commands in Chief: the one doing nothing but by order and prescription,
and the other disposing every thing as he shall think fit.

Sylla (in Caesar's absence) having freed h^s men, was content therewith, and
would no further engage them in fight (which might happily prove subject to ill
fortune) least he should seem to assume unto himself the place and authority of
a General. There were certain things that made the retreat of Pompey's men
very difficult and hazardous. For having ascended from a bottom to a Hill,
they now found themselves upon the top thereof. And as they were to make their
retreat down again, they stood in fear of our men, pressing on them from the
higher ground; neither was it far from sunne-setting (for hoping to end it
speedily, they drew out the business until it was almost night) whereby Pompey
was forced to take a resolution from the time, and to possess himself of a
Mount, no further from the Fort then out of shot. There he made a stand,
fortified the place, and kept his forces.

At the same time they fought in two other places: for Pompey, to separate and
distract our troops, assaulted diverse forts together, to the end they might not
be succored from the next Garrisons. In one place, Volcatius Tullus with three
Cohorts sustained the assault of a Legion, and made them forsake the place. In
another part, the Germans sallying out of our works, slew many of the Enemy,
and returned back to their fellows in safety. So that in one day there were six
several sights; three at Dyrrachium, and three at the fortifications: of all
which an account being taken, there were found slain of Pompey's Party to the
number of two thousand, with many Centurions, and other special men called out
to that war. ^vocati.
Amongst whom was Valerius Flaccus, the son of Lucius, who being Praetor had
obtained the Province of Asia: besides, there were six Ensigns taken. Our
Party lost not above twenty men in all those fights; howbeit in the fort there
was not one man but was hurt.

Four Centurions of one Cohort lost their eyes; and for argument of their
endeavor and great danger, they made report to Caesar, of thirty thousand
arrows shot into the fort. There was also a Target of one Scaeva, a Centurion,
which was showed unto him, being pierced through in two hundred and thirty
places; whom Caesar (as having well des^rved of him and the Commonwealth)
rewarded with six hundred pound sterling; Millibus ducentis aeris.
and advanced him from the Companies of the e^ghth rank, to be the chiefest
Centurion, Prin^ipilus.
or Prin^ipile of the Legion: for it appeared, that by his means specially the
fort was saved. For the Cohort, he doubled their pay, as well in Money, as in
Corn and Apparel; and rewarded them nobly with ornaments of Military honor.

Pompey having wrought all that night, to fortify his Trenches, the days
following he built towers 15 foot high; which being finished, he added
mantelets to that part of the Camp. And after five days, having got a dark
night (shutting all the Ports of his Camp, and ramming them up) in the
beginning of the third watch, ^e drew out his Army in silence, and betook
himself to his old fortifications.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe breach of the History in this place, is like a blot in a fair Table, or
as a gap in a dance of Nymphs, and does much blemish the beauty of this
Discourse. But, forasmuch as it is a loss which cannot be repaired, we must
rest contented with the use of that which remains.

Out of which we may observe the notice they took of well-deserving; according
to the institution of their discipline, supported especially by Praem^um and
Poena, Reward and Punishment. The recognition whereof (according to the
judgment of the gravest Lawgivers) is the means to raise a State to the
height of perfection. Solon. Plat. ^. de (...) Livi^ lib. 4. Lib. 6.
Eo enim impendi laborem and periculum, unde emolumentum and honos speratur,
Men will then venture and take pains, when they know they shall get themselves
honor and preferment by it. The R^mans, says Polybius, crowned the valor of
their soldiers with eternal honors. Neither did any thing so much excite
them to the achievement of noble Acts, as their Triumphs, Garlands, and other
Ensigns of public ^enown: which Caesar specially observed above the rest. For
besides this which he did to Cassius Scaeva (recorded by all the Writers of
these wars) Plutarch relates, In vita Cae^^is.
that at his being in Britain, he could not contain from embracing a soldiers,
that carried himself valiantly in defense of diverse Centurions. And whereas the
poor man, falling down at his feet, asked nothing but pardon for leaving his
Target behind him; he rewarded him with great gifts, and much honor. Howbeit,
the difference which Salust has made in this kind is too generally observed;
In repub. multo praestat beneficii q^^m ma^^ficii immemorem esse: bonus,
segnior ^it ubi negligas; m^^as improbior.
that It more imports a Commonweal to punish an ill member, then to reward a
good act: for a virtuous desire is by neglect a little abated, but an ill man
becomes unsufferable. And thence it is, that merit is never valued but upon
necessity. It is fit that he will have the honor of wearing a Lions skin,
should first kill the beast, as Hercules did: but to kill a Lion, and not to
have the skin, Sal. Iug^r.
is not so available as a meaner occupation. Anthony (...)gives another rule,
observed in that government, which is the true Idea of Perfection: En la casa
de Dios jamas fuc, nies, ni sera, merito sin premio, ni colpa sin pena; In the
house of God there never was, nor is, nor shall be, desert unrewarded, or fault
unpunished.

CHAP. XX.
Caesar moves Scipio to mediate a Peace.
AEtolia, Caesar.
Acarnania, and Amphilochis being taken by Cassius Longinus, and Calvisius
Sabinus, as is before declared, Caesar thought it expedient to attempt and try
Achaia, and to proceed farther in that course: whereupon he sent thither L.
Calenus, and Q. Sabinus, and to them he added Cassius with his Cohorts. Their
coming being bruited abroad, Rutilius Lupus, to whom Pompey had left the charge
of Achaia, determined to fortify the Isthmus, to keep out Fusius. Calenus in
the mean time, with the favor and assent of the States, took in Delphos,
Thebes, and Orchomenus, besides some other places which he took by force. The
rest of the Cities he labored to draw to Caesar's party, by Embassages sent
about unto them: and therein was Fusius occupied for the present. Caesar every
day following brought out his Army into an equal and indifferent place, to see
if Pompey would accept of battle; insomuch as he led them under Pompey's Camp*
the vauward being within shot of the Rampire. Pompey, to hold the fame and
opinion he had attained, drew out his forces, and so imbattelled them before
his Camp, that their rereward did touch the Rampire; and the whole Army was so
disposed, that every man was under the protection of such weapons as might be
shot from thence.

While these things were doing in Achaia and at Dy^rachium, it was certainly
known that Scipio was come into Macedonia. Caesar not omitting his former
purpose, sent Clodius unto him, a familiar friend to both of them, and one whom
Scipio had formerly so commended to Caesar, that he had taken him in the number
of his nearest favorites. ^o him he gave Letters and Messages, to be delivered
to Scipio; whereof this was the effect. That he had used all means for peace,
and yet had prevailed nothing at all: which he took to be the fault of such as
had the charge of the business, being fearful to treat with Pompey thereof in
an unseasonable time. But Scipio had that credit and respect, that he might not
only deliver freely what he thought fitting, but might also (in some sort)
constrain him, and reform his error. For being Commander in chief over an
Army, besides his credit, he had strength to compel him. Which if he did,
every man would attribute the quiet of Italy, the peace of the Provinces, and
the safety and preservation of the Empire to him only. All these things did
Clodius make known to Scipio: and for the first days was well heard; but
afterward could not be admitted to speech; Favonius reprehending Scipio, for
going so far with him, as afterward we understood upon the ending of the war:
whereby he was forced to return to Caesar, without effecting any thing.

Caesar that he might with greater facility keep in Pompey's Cavalry at
Dyrrachium, and hinder them from forage, fortified and shut up two passages
(which, as we have before declared, were very narrow) with great works, and
there built Castles. Pompey understanding that his horsemen did no good abroad,
within a few days, conveyed them within his fortification by shipping.
Howbeit they were in extreme necessity for want of forage; insomuch as having
beaten off all the leaves of the trees, they fed their horses with young Reeds
bruised, Et mor^u spoliare nemus, lethumq^e minantes, Vellere a^ ignotis dubias
radicibus ^erbas.
and beaten in pieces. For they had spent the Corn which was sowed within the
works, and were forced to bring food for their Cattle from Corcyra and
Aca^ania, by long and tedious navigation; and where it fell short, they made it
up with Barley, and so kept life in their horses. But afterward, whenas not
only their Barley and other food was spent in all places, and the grass and
herbs dried up, but the fruit also wasted and consumed off the trees, their
horses being so lean as they were not able to stand on their legs, Pompey
thought it expedient to think of some course of breaking out.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT may seem a cunning trick of Caesar, and perhaps it was his end, to
endeavor with fair pretenses to engage Scipio so far in contriving a Peace, as
being General of an Army, he might assume unto himself a commanding authority;
and thereupon breed such a jealousy, as would keep Pompey and him asunder.

Nevertheless, it is every way worth a man's labor, to make overtures of peace
howsoever: especially considering, how it changes the relative in the
condition of men, which in war is Homo homini Lupus, One man a Woolf to
another; and in peace, Homo homini Deus, One man a God to another: Si bonam
dederitis, fidam and perpetu^m; (...) diutur^^m.
and, proving good, will doubtless continue; if inconvenient, the sooner
broken, and so the case is but the same it was before.

Secondly, Li^. lib. 8.
we may note, that there is nothing so difficult, (...) est quod non exp^gnet
pert^n^^x opera, and intenta and diligens cura.
but pertinacy and restless labor, directed with diligent and intent care,
will in the end overcome it. For Caesar, that at the first seemed to undertake
impossibilities, going about to besiege a great part of a Country, and to shut
up a huge Army in an open place, did nevertheless (by endeavor) bring them to
such extremity of want, Senec. lib. 6. Epist. 51.
that if, as Democritus said, the body should have put the mind in suit, for
reparation of loss, which her ambition and wilful obstinacy had drawn upon
it, she should never be able to pay damages.

Touching the Isthmus which Rutilius Rufus went about to fortify, it is a neck
of earth, joining an Island unto the Continent. For as the Inlet of the Sea,
between two Lands, is called Porthmus (whereupon the town of Portsmouth in
Hampshire has that appellation, as sited upon the like Inlet) so any small
la^get or neck of earth, lying between two Seas, is called Isthmus. Whereof
this of Achaia is of special note in Greece; being the same that joined
Poloponnesus to the Continent, and was of special fame for the site of Corinth.

These necks of earth, called Isthmi, are of the nature of those things, as
have been often threatened, and yet continue the same. For albeit the ambition
of great Princes has sought to alter the fashion of the earth in that behalf,
yet I know not how their desires have sorted to no end. Plin. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Perfodere nav^gabili alveo has angustias tentavere Demetrius Rex, D^ctator
Caesar, Caius Princeps, and Domitius Nero, infausto, ut omnium patuit ex^tu,
incepto; King Demetrius, Caesar the Dictator, Cai^s the Prince, and Domitius
Nero, all of them attempted to draw through this neck of land with a navigable
channel, without any success, as appears by the issue. In the time of King
S^sostris, and since, in the Empire of the Ottomans, they went about to bring
the Red Sea into Nile; but fearing it would be a means to drown the Land, one
Sea being lower then another, they gave over the enterprise. And it may be upon
like consideration, or otherwise, fearing to correct the works of Nature, they
forbear to make a passage between Nombre ac Dios and Panama, and so to join one
sea to the other, as was said to be intended.

CHAP. XXI.
An accident which fell out by two Brethren of Savoy, in Caesar's Army.
THere were in Caesar's Camp two brethren of Savoy, Caesar.
Roscillus and Aegus, the sons of Adbucillus, who, for many years together, was
accounted the principal and chief man of that State: these were men of
singular worth, and had done Caesar very great service in all the wars of
Gallia; and in that respect, Caesar had advanced them to great and honorable
Charges in their Country, and caused them (extraordinarily) to be taken in the
number of the Senators, and bestowed much of the Enemies lands upon them,
besides great sums of ready money, and of poor had made them rich.

These men were not only well respected by Caesar, but were in good account
throughout all the Army. Howbeit, relying too much on Caesa^'s favor, and
puffed up with foolish and barbarous arrogance, they disdained their own men
deceiving the horsemen of their pay, and averting all pillage from public
distribution to their own particular. The horsemen provoked with these
injuries, came all to Caesar, and complained openly thereof: adding farther,
that their troops were not full, nor answerable to the List or Muster-role, by
which they required payment.

Caesar thinking it no fit time of punishment and withal attributing much to
the worth of the men, put off the whole matter, and chid them privately, for
making a gain of their troops of horse; willing them to expect a supply of all
their wants from his favor, according as their service had well deserved.
Nevertheless, the matter brought them into great scandal and contempt with
all men: which they plainly perceived, both by the speeches of other men, as
also by that they might judge themselves, Poenam semper an^e oculos versari
putent qui peccaverunt. Cic. ^n ^rat. (...) Milone.
their own consciences accusing them. With which reproach and shame they were
so moved (and thinking peradventure that they were not quit thereof, but
deferred until some other time) that they resolved to leave the Army, to seek
new fortunes, and make proof of other acquaintance. And having imparted the
matter to a few of their followers, to whom they durst communicate so great a
disloialty, first they went about to kill C. Volusenus, General of the horse
(as after the war was ended was discovered) that they might come to Pompey upon
some deserved service: but after they found it hard to accomplish, they took up
as much money as they could borrow, as though they meant to have paid their
troops, what they formerly had defrauded them of; and having brought many
horses, they went to Pompey, together with such as were acquainted with their
purposes.

Pompey finding them Gentlemen of sort, liberally brought up, attended with a
great retinue, and many horses, and both of them very valiant, and in good
account with Caesar, and withal, for that it was an unusual and strange
accident, he led them about the works, and showed them all the fortifications:
for before that time, no man, either soldier or horseman, had fled from Caesar
to Pompey; whereas daily they came from Pompey to Caesar, especially such as
were enrolled in Epirus and Aetolia, which countries were at Caesar's devotion.

These two Brethren exactly understanding all things in Caesar's Camp (as well
concerning such works as were perfect, as such others wherein men skillful in
war might find defect, together with the opportunity of time, and distances of
places, as also the diligence of the Guards, with the nature and endeavor of
every man that had a charge) related all particularly to Pompey.

OBSERVATIONS.
WE may here observe the sincerity and direct carriage of inferior Commanders
in the Roman Army by the scandal these two S^vo^ens ran into for making false
Musters, and defrauding the soldiers of their due: A matter so ordinary in
these our times, as custom seems to justify the Abuse. For what more common
in the course of our modern wars, then to make gain of Companies, by mustering
more then they have in pay, and by turning that which is due to the soldier to
their own benefit? The first whereof, if it be duly weighed, is an offense of a
high nature against the State; and the second, such an injury to the soldier,
as can hardly be answered.

It is merrily (as I take it) aid by Columella, That, in foro concessun^
latrocinium, Robbery is lawful in courses at Law. But for those, to whom is
committed the safety of a kingdom, to betray the trust reposed in them, by
raising their means with dead paies, and consequently, steading the Cause with
dead service; as also, by disabling their Companions and fellow soldiers from
doing those duties which are requisite, for want of due entertainment; is a
thing deserving a heavy censure, and will doubtless fall out unto them, as it
did to these two Brethren. The sequel whereof will appear by the story, Lib.
5. Cy^op.
and confirm that of Xenophon; Dii haud impunita relinquunt imp^a and nefaria
hominum facta: The Gods do not suffer the impieties and wickednesses of men to
escape unpunished.

CHAP. XXII.
Pompey attempting to break out, puts Caesar's Party to great loss.
POmpey being informed of these things, Caesar.
and having formerly resolved to break out, as is already declared, gave order
to the soldiers to make them coverings for their Morions of Osiers, and to get
some store of Bavins and Fagots. Which being prepared, he shipped a great
number of the light-armed soldiers and Archers, together with those fagots, in
Skiffs and Galleys. And about midnight he drew threescore Cohorts out of the
greater Camp, and the places of Garrison, and sent them to that part of the
^ortification which was next unto the Sea, and farthest off from Caesar's
greatest Camp. Thither also he sent the ships beforementioned, filled with
light-armed men and fagots, together with as many other Galleys as were at
Dyrrachium; and gave directions how every man should employ himself.

Caesar had left Lentulus Marcellinus, the Treasurer, with the Legion newly
enrolled, to keep that fortification; who for that he was sickly, and of an ill
disposition of body* had substituted Fulvius Posthumus as his coad^utor.

There was in that place a ^rench of fifteen foot deep, and a Rampire against
the Enemy of ten foot in (...), and as much in breadth. And about six hundred
foot from that place was raised another Rampire* with the front the contrary
way, but somewhat lower then the ^ormer. For some few days before, Caesar
(fearing that place, least our men should be circumvented with their ships) had
caused double fortifications to be made in that place; that if (peradventure)
they should be put to their shifts, they might nevertheless make good
resistance. But the greatness of the works, and the continual labor they
daily endured, the fortifications being carried eighteen miles in circuit,
would not suffer them to finish it. Whereby it happened, that he had not as yet
made a Rampire along the Seashore, to join these two fortifications together,
for the defense thereof: which was informed Pompey by these two Savoiens, and
brought great damage and loss to our people. For as the Cohorts of the ninth
Legion kept watch and guard upon the Sea, suddenly, by the break of day, came
Pompey's Army: which seemed very strange unto our men: and instantly thereupon,
the soldiers from a shipboard assaulted with their weapons the inner Rampire,
and the rest began to fill up the Trench.

The legionary soldiers, appointed to keep the inner fortifications, having
planted a great number of Ladders to the Rampire, did amuse the Enemy with
weapons, and Engines of all sorts; and a great number of A^chers were thronged
together on each side. But the coverings of Osiers which they ware on their
head-pieces, did greatly defend them from the blows of stones, which was the
only weapon our men had for that purpose. And as our men were overlaid with all
these things, and did hardly make resistance, they found out the defect of the
fortification, formerly mentioned: and landing their men between the two
Rampires, they charged our people in the rere, and so driving them from both
the fortifications, made them turn their backs.

This Alarm being heard, Marcellinus sent certain Cohorts to succor our men:
who seeing them fly, could neither re-assure them by their coming, nor
withstand the fury of the Enemy themselves: insomuch as what relief soever was
sent, was distracted by the fear and astonishment of them that fled away.
Whereby the terror and the danger was made much the greater, and their retreat
was hindered through the multitude of people.

In that fight, the Eagle-bearer being grievously wounded, and fainting for
want of strength, looking toward the horsemen; This have I, said he, in my
life time carefully and diligently defended for many years together, and now,
dying, with the same fidelity do restore it unto Caesar: suffer not (I pray
you) such a dishonor, the like whereof never happened in Caesar's Army, but
return it unto him in safety. By which accident the Eagle was saved: all the
Centurions of the first Cohort being slain, but the first of the Maniple of the
Principes. And now the Enemy, with great slaughter of our men, approached near
Marcellinus Camp.

The rest of the Cohorts being greatly astonished, M. Antonius holding the next
Garrison to that place, upon notice thereof, was seen to come down from the
upper ground with twelve Cohorts. Upon whose coming Pompey's Party was
repressed and stayed, and our men somewhat re-assured, giving them time to come
again to themselves out of that astonishment. And not long after, Caesar having
knowledge thereof by smoke made out of the Forts, according to the use of
former time, came thither also, bringing with him certain Cohorts out of the
Garrisons.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT is an old saying, Arma alienasse grave ^rim^n est, and ^a poe^a de^ertioni
ex^quatur, utique si tota alien^vit.
that Thieves handsell is always naught. But Traitors handsell is much worse:
as appears by the falling away of these two Savoiens: who were the first that
left Caesar in this war, and the first that brought Pompey good fortune:
themselves standing culpable of as great an offense, Lib. 14.
as if they had alienated the whole Army. de re militari.
In the course whereof we may see plainly that which I have formerly noted;
that it is an excellent thing to be still attempting upon an Enemy, so it be
done upon good grounds and cautions: for while Pompey stood upon the defensive
ward, the honor of the contention fell continually upon Caesar. And
doubtless, he that observes Caesar's proceedings in the carriage of all his
wars, shall find his fortune to have specially grown from his active and
attempting spirit.

In this Eagle-bearer, Vir virtute ex mi^s, aliqu^ndo fortuna, semper^a imo
maximus.
we may see verified that which Paterculus affirms of Mithridates, That a
valiant spirit is sometimes great by the favor of Fortune, but always great
in a good courage.

For these titles of degrees, as Princeps prior, and the rest here mentioned,
having formerly discoursed at large of the parts of a legion, and the
Hierarchy of their discipline, I will rather refer the Reader thereunto, then
bumbast out a volume with distastefull repetitions.

CHAP. XXIII.
Caesar purposes to alter the course of war; and attempteth to cut off one
of Pompey's Legions.
CAesar understanding of the loss, Caesar.
and perceiving that Pompey was got out of the fortifications, and was encamped
upon the Sea, in such sort as he might freely go out to forage, and have no
less access to his shipping then formerly he had; changing his course of
war, which had not succeeded to his expectation, he encamped himself fast by
Pompey. The works being perfected, it was observed by C^sar's Discoverers, that
certain Cohorts, to the number of a Legion, were brought behind a wood into the
old Camp. The site of the Camp was after this manner. The days before,
Caesar's ninth Legion opposing themselves against Pompey's forces, and working
upon the fortifications (as is before declared) had their Camp in that place,
adjoining unto a wood, and not distant from the sea, above four hundred pases.
Afterward, Caesar changing his mind for some certain causes, transferred his
lodging somewhat farther off from that place. A few days after the same Camp
was possessed by Pompey. And forasmuch as he was to lodge more legions in that
place, leaving the inner Rampire standing, he enlarged the fortification, so
that the lesser Camp being included in the greater, served as a Castle or
Cittadell to the same. Besides also, he drew a fortification from the right
angle of the Camp, four hundred pases outright, to a River, to the end the
soldiers might water freely, without danger. And he also changing his mind,
for some causes not requisite to be mentioned, left the place too: so that the
Camp stood empty for many days together, and all the fortifications were as
perfect as at the first.

The Discoverers brought news to Caesar, that they had seen an Ensign of a
Legion carried thither. The same was likewise confirmed; from certain Forts
which stood upon the higher grounds. The place was distant from Pompey's new
Camp about five hundred pases. Caesar hoping to cut off this legion, and
desirous to repair that days loss, left two cohorts at work, to make a show
of fortifying, and he himself (by a contrary way, in as covert a manner as he
could) led the rest of the Cohorts, in number thirty three (amongst whom was
the ninth legion, that had lost many Centurions, and was very weak in
soldiers) toward Pompey's legion, and the lesser camp, in a double battle.
Neither did his opinion deceive him: for he came thither before Pompey could
perceive it.

And albeit the fortifications of the Camp were great, yet assaulting it
speedily with the left Cornet, wherein he himself was, he drove Pompey's
soldiers from the Rampire. There stood a E^itius.
Turn-pike in the Gate, which gave occasion of resistance for a while: and as
our men would have entered, they valiantly defended the Camp; T. Pulcio, by
whose means C. Antonius Army was betrayed, as we have formerly declared,
fighting there most valiantly. Yet nevertheless our men overcame them by
valor; and cutting up the Turn-pike, entered first into the greater Camp, and
afterward into the Castle, and slew many that resisted, of the legion that was
forced thither.

But Fortune, that can do much in all things, and specially in war, does in a
small moment of time bring great alterations; as it then happened. For the
Cohorts of Caesar's right Cornet, ignorant of the place, followed the Rampire
which went along from the Camp to the River, seeking after the Gate, and taking
it to be the Rampire of the Camp: but when they perceived that it joined to the
River, they presently got over it, no man resisting them; and all the cavalry
followed after those cohorts.

OBSERVATIONS.
POmpey having cleared his Army of that siege, it booted not Caesar to
prosecute his purpose any longer: for when the end is missed for which any
course is undertaken, it were folly to seek it by that means. We must rather
choose new ways, that may lead us to the end of our hopes, then follow the old
track, which sorted to no effect. And yet nevertheless, the sufficiency of the
General is no way disabled: for, Sapiens non semper it^ uno gradu, (...).
albeit a wise man does not always keep one pase, yet still he holds one and
the same way.

Secondly, that of Xerxes appears to be true, that great attempts are always
made with great difficulty and danger. Wherein the wisdom of the heathen world
ascribed all to Fortune, Herodot.
as the sole cause of all remarkable events, (...) omnia expensa, omnia
feruntur accep^a^^ and in tota ratiore mortalium, s^la utt^^que paginam facit.
Plin. lib. 2. cap. 7.
and that which filled up both the pages of all the Books, wherein men noted
the course of things. Clades in bello acceptae, non semper ignaviae, sed
aliquando Fortunae temeritati sunt imputandae, Losses received in war, are not
always to be imputed to slothful carriage, but oftentimes to the temerity of
Fortune, says Archidamus; and is that which is aimed at by Caesar.

CHAP. XXIIII.
The ^ight continues, and Caesar loses.
IN the mean while Pompey, Caesar.
after so long a respite of time, having notice thereof, took the first Legion
from their works, and brought them to succor their fellows: and at the same
time his Cavalry did approach near our horsemen, and our men that possessed the
Camp, did discover an Army imbattelled coming against them; and all things were
suddenly changed. For Pompey's legion, assured with a speedy hope of succor,
began to make resistance at the Decumane gate, and voluntarily charged our men.

Caesar's Cavalry being got over the rampire into a narrow passage, fearing how
they might retreat in safety, began to fly away. The right Cornet, secluded and
cut off from the left, perceiving the terror of the horsemen (least they might
be endangered within the fortifications) betook themselves to the other side
from whence they came: and most of them (least they should be surprised in the
straights) cast themselves over works of ten foot high into the ditches: and
such as first got over being trodden under foot by such as followed after, the
rest saved themselves in passing over their bodies.

The soldiers of the left Cornet perceiving from the Rampire that Pompey was
at hand, and that their own side fled away, fearing lest they should be shut up
in those straights, having the Enemy both without and within them, thought it
their best course to return back the same way they came. Whereby there happened
nothing but tumult, fear, and flight: insomuch as when Caesar caught hold with
his hand of the Ensigns of them that sled, and commanded them to stand; some
for fear left their Ensigns behind them, others forsaking their horses, kept on
their course: neither was there any one of them that would stand.
Notwithstanding, in this so great a calamity and mishap these helps fell out to
relieve us, when the whole army was in danger to be cut off; that Pompey
fearing some treachery (for that, as I think, it happened beyond his
expectation, who a little before saw his men fly out of his camp) durst not
for a good while approach near the fortifications; and our men possessing the
narrow passages and the Ports, did hinder the horsemen from following after.
And so a small matter fell out to be of great moment, in the carriage of that
accident, on either side. For the Rampire, which was carried from the Camp to
the River (Pompey's Camp being already taken) was the only hinderance of
Caesar's expedite and easy victory: and the same thing, hindering the speedy
following of their horsemen, was the only safety and help of our men.

In those two fights, there were wanting of Caesar's men nine hundred and
threescore; and horsemen of note, R. Felginas, Tuticanus Gallus, a Senators
son, C. Felginas of Placentia, Agravius of Puteolis, Sacrativirus of Capua,
ten Tribunes of the soldiers, and thirty Centurions. But the greatest part of
these perished in the Trenches, in the fortifications, and on the River banks,
pressed to death with the fear and ^light of their fellows, without any blow or
wound given them. There were lost at that time thirty two military Ensigns.

Pompey, upon that sight, was saluted by the name of Imperator; which title he
then obtained, and so suffered himself to be styled afterward: howbeit he used
it not in any of his Missives, nor yet wore any Laurel in the bundle of Rods
carried before him.

Labienus having begged all the Captives, caused them (for greater ostentation)
to be brought out in public; and to give the more assurance to such as were
fled thither from Caesar's party, calling them by the name of fellow soldiers,
in great derision asked them whether old soldiers were wont to fly; and so
caused them all to be slain.

Pompey's party took such an assurance and spirit upon these things, that they
thought no farther of the course of war, but carried themselves as though they
were already Victors: not respecting (as the cause of all this) the paucity of
our men, nor the disadvantage of the place, and the straightness thereof, the
Camp being possessed, and the doubtful terror both within and without the
works; not yet the Army divided into two parts, in such sort as neither of them
were able to help or succor the other. Neither yet did they add to this, that
the fight was not made by any valiant encounter, or in form of battle; but
that they received more hurt from the narrowness of the place, and from their
own disorder, then from the Enemy.

And to conclude, they did not remember the common chances and casualties of
war: wherein oftentimes very small causes, either of false suspicion, or of
sudden fear, or out of scruple of Religion, do infer great and heavy losses;
as often as either by the negligence of the General, or the fault of a
Tribune, the Army is misordered. But as though they had overcome by true force
of their prowess, and that no alteration of things could after happen, they
magnified that days victory, by Letters and report throughout the whole world.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
SOmetimes we may think to repair a loss, and thereby hazard a greater
misfortune. For albeit the saying be common, that a man must seek his coat
where he lost it, as Dicers do; yet there is always more certainty in seeking,
Humana^um rerum ^^^culus est, qui ro^atus semper ^osdem fortunatos esse non
sinit.
then in finding. For the circle of humane affairs being carried round in a
course, does not suffer happiness to continue with one Party. And thereupon it
was, That Pittacus dedicated a Ladder to the Temple of Mitylene, to put men in
mind of their condition; Herodot. lib. 1.
which is nothing else but going up and down. The life of a soldier is a mere
Hermaphrodite, Habet has vices conditio mortalium, ut adv^rsi ex secundis,
secunda ex adversis nascantur. P^in. in Paneg.
and takes part of either sex of Fortune; and is made by Nature to beget
Happiness of Adversity, and mischances of Good hap: as if the cause of all
causes, by intermixing sweet with sower, would lead us to his Providence, and
consequently to himself, the first Mover of all Motions.

The diversity of these events are so inchained together, as one seems to
have relation to the other. For this task admitted not of veni, vidi, vici, I
only came, and saw, and overcame; nor went on with Alexander, marching over the
Plains of Asia, without rub or counterbuffe: but the business was disposed,
here to receive a blow, and there to gain a victory. And so this loss at
Dyrraechium made the battle at Pharsalia the more glorious, and beautified the
course of this war with variety of chances. The best use of these Disasters,
is that which C^oesus made of his cross fortunes, Mei casus, Herodot. lib. 1.
et si ingrati, mihi tamen extitere disciplina; My mishaps, though they be
unpleasing enough, yet they have still taught me something.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
AS the Mathemat^cks, by reason of their certainty, do admit demonstration, as
well from the conclusion to the principles, as from the principles to the
conclusion: so in the actions of man's life, it is not hard to assign the
precedent causes by the sequel; L^^vento e spesso judice non imperito delle
cose. Guic^. lib. 5.
the event being oftentimes an understanding Judge of things that are past. And
although it do no where appear what was the cause of Labienus leaving Caesar;
yet his insolent carriage toward these Captives, may make at least a probable
conjecture, that his revolt proceeded from his own disposition, rather then
from any cause on Caesar's behalf. For where a man has once done an injury, he
will never cease heaping one wrong after another, and all to justify his first
error: whereas on the other side, a noble spirit, free from all desert, will
demean himself answerable to his first innocence.

CHAP. XXV.
Caesar speaks to the soldiers concerning this mi^hap; and forsakes the
Place.
CAesar being driven from his former purposes, Caesar.
resolved to change the whole course of the war; so that at one and the same
time omitting the siege, and withdrawing the Garrisons, he brought all the Army
into one place, and there spoke unto the soldiers: exhorting them not to think
much at those things that had happened, nor to be amuzed therewith; but to
counterpoise this loss (which was in a mediocrity) with many happy and
fortunate battles they had gained.

Let them thank Fortune, that they had taken Italy without blow or wound; that
they had quieted and put in peace both the Provinces of Spain, full of warlike
men, and directed by skillful and practiced Commanders; that they also had
subdued the fertile bordering Provinces; and likewise, that they should
remember, with what facility they were all transported in safety through the
midst of the Enemies fleets; not only the Havens and Ports, but all the coast
being full of shipping.

If all things fell not out prosperously. The Philosoph^^ C^ator was wont to
say, that (...) occasion of an ill (...)* is a great comfort in any (...) of
adv^^sity. Pla^ in c^ns. Apo.
Fortune was to be helped by their industry. The loss which was received,
might be attributed to any man rather then unto him: for he had given them a
secure place to fight in, had possessed himself of the Enemies Camp, driven them
out, and overcome them in fight. But whether it were their fear, or any other
error, or Fortune herself, that would interrupt a victory already gained every
man was now to labor to repair the damage they had sustained, with their
valor: which if they did endeavor, he would turn their less into advantage,
as it formerly fell out at Gergovia, where such as before were afraid to sight,
did of their own accord offer themselves to battle.

Having ended his speech, (...).
he disgraced and displaced some Ensign bearers. The Army thereupon conceived
such a grief of the blow that was given them, and such a desire they had to
repair their dishonor, that no man needed the command either of a Tribune or
Centurion: every man imposing upon himself as a punishment for his late fault,
greater labors then usual, and withal inflamed with an earnest desire of
fighting: insomuch as many of the higher Orders thought it requisite to
continue in the place, and refer the cause to a battle. But contrariwise,
Caesar was not assured of the terrified soldiers, and thought it expedient
besides, to interpose some time for the settling of their minds; fearing
likewise least he should be straightned through scarcity of Corn, upon the
leaving of his fortifications. And therefore without any farther delay, giving
order for such as were wounded and sick, as soon as it was night, he conveyed
all the carriages secretly out of the Camp, and sent them before toward
Apollonia, forbidding them to rest until they came to their lodging; and sent
one legion withal to convoy them.

That being done, he retained two Legions within the Camp: and the rest, being
led out at diverse ports, about the fourth watch of the night he sent the same
way. And after a little pause (for the observing of Military order, and to the
end his speedy departure might not be discovered) he commanded them to take up
the cry of trussing up their baggage; and presently setting forward, overtook
the former troup, and so went speedily out of the sight of the Camp.

Pompey having notice of his purpose, made no delay to follow after: but aiming
at the same things, either to take them incumbered in their march, or
astonished with fear, brought forth his Army, and sent his horsemen before to
stay the Rereward. But Caesar went with so speedy a march, that he could not
overtake them, until he came to the River Genusus; where, by reason of the
high and uneasy banks, the Cavalry overtook the tail of the Army, and engaged
them in fight. Amongst whom Caesar opposed his horsemen, and intermingled with
them four hundred expedite soldiers, of them that had place before the
Ensigns: who so much prevailed in the encounter, that they drove them all away
before them, slew many of them, and returned themselves in safety to their
troops.

Caesar having made a just days march, according to his first determination,
and brought his Army over the River Genusus, he lodged in his old Camp over
against Asparagus; and kept all the soldiers within the Rampire, commanding
the horse that went out to forage, to be presently taken in by the Decumane
Port.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
ALbeit that of Cato be true, Prae ^orum del^cta (...) non ac^^piunt. Ve^^t.
lib. 1. cap. 14.
that an Error in ^ight is not capable of amendment: yet out o^ that which
happens amiss, may always be somewhat gathered to repair the disadvantage,
and to dispose a Party to better carriage for the future. Accordingly we may
note Caesar's notable temper and demeanor, after so great a loss; recalling
the courage of his soldiers, and settling their minds in a course of good
resolution, with as many valuable reasons as humane wisdom was able to afford
him: without which, all their other advantages, either of valor or experience
and use of Arms, or their assuredness after so many victories, or what other
thing soever that made them excel all other Armies, had been utterly buried in
this overthrow. For his better furtherance wherein, he thought it fit to use
the help of time, before he brought them to the like trial. For that which is
said of grief, Finem dolendi, qui consilio non fecerit, tempore invenit. (...).
Epist. 64.
If reason will not give an end unto it, time will, is to be understood of any
other passion of the mind; which cannot possibly be so great, but time will
consume it.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe second thing which comes to be handled, is the manner of Caesar's
retreat; being as exquisite a pattern in this kind, as is extant in any story:
and is the rather to be considered, forasmuch as it is one of the principal
points of Military Art, and worthiest the knowledge of a General, to be able,
upon all occasions, to make a safe and sure retreat. For those that can do
nothing else, can easily put themselves into a war: but to return them home
again in safety, is that which concerns the honor of a Leader.

Many are the causes that may move a Commander to dislodge himself, and to
leave his Adversary for a time: but the means to do it safety depend specially
upon these two points. The one is, To advance himself onward at first, as far
as possibly he can, to the end he may get the start, before the enemy be ready
to follow him: and is taught by Xenophon; who, after the death of Cyrus, in the
battle against King Artaxerxes, brought back a thousand men into Greece, from
an Army of two hundred thousand horse, that pressed hard upon them, for five
hundred leagues together. Which retreat is exactly storied by the said Author,
in seven books, containing all the difficulties concerning this point: amongst
which, we find this passage.

It much imported us, says he, to go as far at first as possible we could;
Lib. 2.
to the end we might have some advantage of space before the Enemy, that
pressed so near behind. For, if we once got before, and could outstrip them
for a days journey or two, it was not possible for them to overtake us;
forasmuch as they durst not follow us with a small troup, and with great forces
they could never reach us: besides the scarcity and want of victual they fell
into by following us, that consumed all before them.

Thus far goes Xenophon. And according to this rule, Caesar ordered his
retreat: for he got the start of Pompey so far the first day, by that eight
miles he gained in the afternoon, as it follows in the next Chapter, that he
was never able to overtake him.

The second thing for the assuring of a retreat is, So to provide against the
incumberances of an Enemy, that he may not find it easy to attack him that
would be gone. Of all retreats which may any way be taken from example of
Beasts, that of the Wolf is most commended: who never flies, but with his head
turned back upon his adversaries; and shows such teeth, as are not to be
trusted.

After the Wolfs manner marched Caesar: for howsoever the body of his Army
retreated one way, yet they turned so terrible a countenance toward the Enemy,
as was not to be endured. And upon these two hinges, is turned the carriage of
a skillful retreat.

Howbeit, for the better furtherance hereof, it shall not be impertinent to
add hereunto some inventions, practiced by great Commanders, which may serve
to amuse an Enemy, while a General does prepare himself to observe the former
points.

King Philip of Macedon, Livie. 31.
desirous to leave the Roman Army, sent a Herald to the Consul, to demand a
cessation of Arms, while he buried his dead, which he purposed to perform the
next day, with some care and solemnity. Which being obtained, he dislodged
himself secretly that night, and was got far on his way before the Romans
perceived it.

Hanniball, Livie. 27.
to clear his Army from that of the Romans, which was commanded by the Consul
Nero, about midnight made many fires, in that part which stood next the Roman
Camp: and leaving certain Pavillions and Lodgings, with some few Numidians, to
show themselves upon the Rampire, he departed secretly toward Puteolis. As
soon as it was day, the Romans (according to their custom) approaching the
Counterscarp, the Numidians showed themselves; and then suddenly made after
their fellows, as fast as their horses could carry them. The Consul, finding a
great silence in the Camp, sent two Light-horsemen to discover the matter: who
returning, told him of the Enemies departure.

In like manner, Lib. 2. de bello Civili.
Varus (as is formerly related) left a Trumpeter in the Camp near Utica, with
certain Tents; and about midnight, carried his Army secretly into the Town.

Mithridates, Front. lib. 1. cap. 1.
willing to leave Pompey, that cut him off short, the better to cover his
departure, made show of making greater provision of forage then he was
accustomed, appointed conferences the next day, made great store of fires in
his Camp; and then in the night escaped away.

The Persians, in the voyage which Solomon the Turk made against them, in the
year one thousand five hundred fifty four, being driven to a place where the
Ottomans thought to have had a hand upon them, gathered every man a faggot; and
making a great heap thereof, set them all on fire, in the passage of the Turks
Army: which burned so furiously, as the Persian escaped before the Enemy could
pass by the fire.

CHAP. XXVI.
Caesar goes on in his retreat: Pompey cease to follow him.
IN like manner, Caesar.
Pompey having that day marched a full journey, betook himself to his former
lodging at Asparagus. And, for that the soldiers were not troubled with
fortifying their Camp, by reason all the works were whole and entire, many of
them went out far off to get wood, and to seek forage: others, rising hastily,
had left a great part of their luggage behind them; and induced by the nearness
of the last nights lodging, left their Arms, and went back to fetch those
things that were behind. Insomuch as Caesar, seeing them thus scattered (as
before he had conceived how it would fall out) about high noon gave warning to
depart, and so led out his Army; and doubling that days journey, he went from
that place about eight mile: which Pompey could not do, by reason of the
absence of his soldiers.

The next day, Caesar having in like manner sent his carriages before, in the
beginning of the night, set forward himself about the fourth watch; that if
there were any sudden necessity of fighting, he might (at all occasions) be
ready with the whole Army. The like he did the days following. By which it
happened, that in his passage over great Rivers, and by difficult and
cumbersome ways, he received no detriment or loss at all. For Pompey being
stayed the first day, and afterward striving in vain, making great journeys,
and yet not overtaking us, the fourth day gave over following, and betook
himself to another resolution.

Caesar, as well for the accommodating of his wounded men, as also for paying
the Army, reassuring his Allies and Confederates, and leaving Garrisons in the
towns, was necessarily to go to Apollonia: but he gave no longer time for the
dispatch of these things, then could be spared by him that made haste. For
fearing least Domitius should be engaged by Pompey's arrival, he desired to
make toward him with all possible celerity: his whole purpose and resolution
insisting upon these reasons; That if Pompey did follow after him, he should by
that means draw him from the Seaside, and from such provisions of war as he
had stored up at Dyrrachium; and so should compel him to undertake the war
upon equal conditions. If he went over into Italy, having joined his Army with
Domitius, he would go to succor Italy by the way of Illyricum. But if he
should go about to besiege Apollonia, or Oricum, and so exclude him from all
the Seacoast, he would then besiege Scipio, and force Pompey to relieve him.

And therefore having writ and sent to Cn. Domitius, what he would have done
(leaving four Cohorts to keep Apollonia, one at Lissus, and three at Oricum,
and disposing such as were weak through their wounds in Epirus and Acarnania)
he set forward.

OBSERVATIONS.
COnfecto justo itinere ejus dici, having marched a full days march, or gone a
just days journey, says the story. Which gives occasion to inquire, how far
this just days journey extended. Lib. 5. de Milit. To. cap. 14.
Lipsius says, it was twenty four miles, alleging that of Vegetius; Militari
gradu (says he) viginti millia passuum horis quinque duntaxat aestivis
conficienda: Lib. 1. cap. 1
pleno autem gradu qui citatior est, totidem horis viginti quatuor; A soldiers
march did usually rid 20 miles in five summer hours, and if they marched with
speed, 24 miles in the same time: understanding justum iter, a just journey, to
be so much as was measured militari gradu, by a soldiers march. But he that
knows the marching of an Army, shall easily perceive the impossibility of
marching ordinarily twenty four miles a day. Besides, this place does plainly
confute it: for, first, he says that he made a just days journey; and then
again, rising about noon, doubled that days journey, and went eight miles.
Which shows, that their Justum iter was about eight miles: and so suteth the
slow conveiance of an Army, with more probability then that of Lipsius.

CHAP. XXVII.
Pompey hastes to Scipio. Domitius hears of the overthrow.
POmpey also conjecturing at Caesar's purpose, Caesar.
thought it requisite for him to hasten to Scipio, that he might succor him,
if Caesar should chance to intend that way: but if it so fell out, that he
would not depart from the Seashore and Corcyra, as expecting the legions and
Cavalry to come out of Italy, he would then attack Domitius. For these causes
both of them made haste, as well to assist their Parties, as to surprise their
enemies, if occasion were offered. But Caesar had turned out of the way, to go
to Apollonia; whereas Pompey had a ready way into Macedonia by Candavia. To
which there happened another inconvenience: that Domitius, who for many days
together had lodged hard by Scipio's Camp, was now departed from thence, to
make provision of Corn, unto Heraclea Sentica, which is subject to Candavia; as
though Fortune would have thrust him upon Pompey. This Caesar was at that time
ignorant of. Moreover, Pompey had writ to all the States and Provinces, of the
overthrow at Dyrrachium, in far greater terms then the thing it self was: and
had noised it abroad, that Caesar was beaten, had lost all his forces, and fled
away.

Which reports made the wales very hard and dangerous to our men, and drew many
States from Caesar's party: whereby it happened, that many Messengers being
sent, both from Caesar to Domitius, and from Domitius to Caesar, were forced to
turn back again, and could not pass. Howbeit, some of the followers of
Roscillus and Aegus (who, as is before showed, had fled unto Pompey) meeting on
the way with Domitius Discoverers (whether it were out of their old
acquaintance, having lived together in the wars of Gallia, or otherwise out of
vain-glorie) related all what had happened; not omitting Caesar's departure, or
Pompey's coming. Whereof Domitius being informed, and being but scarce four
hours before him, did (by the help of the enemy) avoid a most imminent danger,
and met with Caesar at Aeginium, which is a town situate upon the frontiers of
Thessalia.

OBSERVATIONS.
JOy is an opening and dilating motion, and oftentimes opens the body so
wide, as it lets out the soul, which returns not again. And in like
manner, the causes of all such exsultations do, for the most part, spread
themselves further then is requisite.

Pompey having victory in hope, Human^tum actionum fel^ itas infeli (...) rerum
particulis, quae multae sunt and vary. sed ex eventis judi intu^. Dionys. Hal.
lib. 9.
rather then in hand, boasted as though all were his: not considering, that the
happiness or disaster of humane actions, does not depend upon the particulars
rising in the course thereof, which are variable and diverse, but according as
the event shall censure it. Whereupon the Russes have a saying in such cases,
that he that laughs afterward, laughs then too: as Caesar did.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Caesar sacketh Gomphi in Thessalia.
CAesar having joined both Armies together, Caesar.
came to Gomphi, which is the first town of Thessalia by the way leading out of
Epirus. These people, a few days before, had of their own accord sent
Ambassadors to Caesar, offering all their means and abilities to be disposed
at his pleasure; requiring also a Garrison of soldiers from him. But now they
had heard of the overthrow at Dyrrachiuml; which was made so great, and so
prevailed with them, that Androsthenes, Praetor of Thessalia (choosing rather to
be a partaker of Pompey's victory, then a companion with Caesar in adversity)
had drawn all the multitude of servants and children out of the Country into
the Town; and shutting up the Gates, dispatched Messengers to Scipio and
Pompey, for succor to be sent unto him, in that he was not able to hold out a
long siege. Scipio understanding of the departure of the Armies from
Dyrrachium, had brought the legions to Larissa: and Pompey did not as yet
approach near unto Thessalia.

Caesar having fortified his Camp, commanded Mantelets, Ladders, and Hurdles to
be made ready for a surprise. Which being fitted and prepared, he exhorted the
soldiers, and showed them what need there was (for the relieving of their
wants, and supplying of all necessaries) to possess themselves of an opulent
and full town; as also by their example, to terrify the other Cities: and what
they did, to do speedily, before it could be succored. Whereupon, by the
singular industry of the soldiers, the same day he came thither, giving the
assault after the ninth hour (notwithstanding the exceeding height of the
walls) he took the Town before sunsetting, After three of the clock in the
afternoon.
and gave it to the soldiers to be rifled: and presently removing from thence,
came to Metropolis, in such sort, as he outwent as well Messengers, as news of
taking the Town.

The Metropolitanes, induced with the same respects, at first shut up their
gates, and filled their walls with armed men: but afterward, understanding by
the Captives (whom Caesar caused to be brought forth) what had happened to them
of Gomphi, they presently opened their gates; and by that means were all
preserved in safety. Which happiness of theirs being compared with the
desolation of Gomphi, there was no one State of all Thessalia (excepting them
of Larissa, which were kept in with great forces by Scipio) but yielded
obedience to Caesar, and did what he commanded. Caesar having now got a place
plenteous of Corn, which was now almost ripe, he resolved to attend Pompey's
coming, and there to prosecute the residue of that war.

OBSERVATIONS.
LIvie says, Lib. 5.
that the siege of that Place which we would quickly take, Obsidio ejus urbis
quam cito capere velis, and utgenda and premenda.
must be prosecuted and urged hard. Which rule Caesar observed: for he followed
it so hard, that he took the Town fortified with exceeding high walls, in four
hours space, or thereabouts, after he began to assault it. Which Plutarch
says, was so plentifully stored of all necessary provision, that the soldiers
found there a refection of all the miseries and wants they suffered at
Dyrrachium: insomuch as they seemed to be new made, both in body and courage,
by reason of the wine, victuals, and riches of that place; which were all given
unto them, Lib. 6. de Instit. Cyri.
according to that of Xenophon, Lex inter omnes homines perpetua est, quando
belligerantium urbs capta fuerit, cuncta little esse qui eam ceperint, and
corpora ^orum qui in urbe sunt and bona; Bello lex acquirendi justissima.
Dionys. (...). in exper. legate.
It is a general Law amongst all men, that when an Enemies town is forcibly
taken, all that is found in it, as well bodies as goods, is at their disposal
who have taken it.

Appian says, the Germans were so drunk, that they made all men laugh at them:
and that if Pompey had surprised them in these disorders, they might have paid
dear for their entertainment. He adds moreover (to show the stiffenesse of
the inhabitants against Caesar) that there were found in a Surgeons Hall,
twenty two principal Personages, stiff dead upon the ground, without
appearance of any wound, having their goblets by them: and he that gave the
poison, sitting upright in a Chair, as dead as the rest. Polyb. lib. 8
And as Ph^lip, having taken Acrolisse in the Country of the ^^tirians, drew
all the rest to his obedience, through the fear they conceived of their usage:
so the consideration of the calamity which befell Gomphi, and the good entreaty
which the Metropolitans found by yielding unto Caesar, brought all the other
Cities under his command.

CHAP. XXIX.
Pompey comes into Thessalia: his Army conceives assured hope of victory.
POmpey a few days after came into Thessalia; Caesar.
and there calling all the Army together, first gave great thanks to his own
men; and then exhorted Scipio's soldiers, that the victory being already
obtained, they would be partakers of the booty and of the rewards: and taking
all the legions into one Camp, he made Scipio partaker both of his honor and
authority, commanding the Trumpets to attend his pleasure for matter of
direction, and that he should use a Praetoriall Pavilion.

Pompey having strengthened himself with an addition of another great Army,
every man was confirmed in his former opinion, and their hope of victory was
increased: so that the longer they dela^ed the matter, the more they seemed to
prolong their return into Italy. And albeit Pompey proceeded slowly and
deliberately in the business, yet it was but a days work. But some there were
that said, he was well pleased with authority and command, and to use men both
of Consular dignity, and of the Praetorian order, as his vassals and servants.

And now they began to dispute openly, concerning rewards and dignities of
Priesthood; and pointed out those which from year to year were to be chosen
Consuls. Others begged the houses and goods of such as were with Caesar.
Besides a great controversy that further grew between them in open council,
whether L. Hirrus were not to be regarded at the next election of Praetors,
being absent, and employed by Pompey against the Parthians. And as his friends
urged Pompey with his promise given at his departure, requiring he might not
now be deceived through his greatness and authority; the rest, running a
course of as great danger and labor, saw no reason (by way of contradiction)
why one man should be respected before all others. And now Domitius, Scipio,
and Spinther Lentulus, began to grow to high words in their daily meetings,
concerning Caesar's Priesthood: Lentulus all^aging, by way of ostentation, the
honor that was due to his age and authority; Domitius vaunting of the credit
and favor he had at Rome; and Scipio trusting to Pompey's alliance. Moreover,
Atius Rusus accused L. Afranius to Pompey, for betraying the Army in Spain. L.
Domitius gave out in council, That after the war was ended, all such as were
of the rank of Senators, should be inquired upon by a triple Commission: and
that those which were personally in the war; should be of the Commission to
judge the rest; as well such as were at Rome, as those that did no service in
this war. The first Commission should be, to clear such as had well-deserved,
from all danger. The second, Penal: and the third, Capital. And to conclude,
every man labored, either to have a reward, or to be avenged of his Enemy.
Neither did they think so much of the means how to overcome, as how to use the
victory.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe Tale which the Emperor Frederick related to the Commissioners of Lewis
the eleventh, Comineus.
King of France (concerning the parting between them of the Territories of
Charles Duke of Burgundy) Not to sell the skin before they had killed the
Bear; might well have ^itted these of Pompey's Party, that contended for
offices before they fell, and disposed of the skins e're they had took the
Bears: not sparing out of their impatiency to tax Pompey of spinning out the
war, for the sweetness he found in authority and command; as Agamemnon did at
Troy. Insomuch as Plutarch reports, that one Favonius, imitating Cato's
severity and freeness of speech, went about throughout all the Camp, demanding,
Whether it were not great pity, that the ambitious humor of one man, should
keep them that year from eating the figs and delicate fruit of Tusculum? And
all men generally stood so affected, as Pompey could not withstand their
inforcements. For, as Florus says, Milites otium, socii moram, principes
ambitum Ducis increpabant, The soldiers blamed the sloth, the confederates
found fault with the delay, and the chief commanders with the ambition of their
General. Only Cato thought it not fit to hazard themselves upon a desperate
man, that had neither hope or help, but in Fortune. But, as in most things
besides, so in this he stood alone, and could not prevail against a multitude.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
PLacere sibi ternas tabellas dari, ad indicandum iis, qui erant ordinis
Senatorii, They agreed, that all such as were of the rank of Senators, should
be inquired upon by a triple Commission, says the story. Tabellas, I have
translated Commissions, as best suting our English phrase: but the meaning was
as follows.

It appears by history, that the Roman people, as well in election of
Magistrates, as in causes criminal, did give their voices openly and aloud,
for six hundred years together; until one Gabinius, a Tribune of the People,
perceiving that the Commons, for fear of the great Ones, durst not dispose of
their voices freely, and as they would, published an Edict, that the people
should give their voices by Ballating. In orat. pro Pla^^o.
Which law Tully commends; Grata est tabella quae frontes operit, hominum
mentes tegit, datque came libertatem quod velint faciant; It is an acceptable
Law, which hides the faces and meanings of men, and gives all liberty to do
what they please. And in another place, he calls it Principium justissimae
libertatis, the foundation of most just liberty. Upon an election of
Magistrates, the balls were given according to the number of the Competitours;
that every man might choose as he pleased.

In criminal Causes, every man had three: one marked with A. signifying
Absolution, and another with C. for Condemnation, and another with N. L. for
Non liquet, which they called Ampliatio, desirous to be further informed, which
our Grand Juries do express by an Ignoramus. And in this manner would Domitius
have had his fellow Senators either quitted or condemned. The balls which were
given upon the making of a law, were two: one marked with V. R. which signified
Uti rogas, that it might go on: and the other with A. signifying Antiquo,
rejecting it. For, as Festus notes, Antiquare est in modum pristinum reducere,
to Antiquate, is to make the thing be as it was before.

And in this manner they would have proceeded against Caesar's Par^izans,
Virtus felicitatis mensura, non fo^tuna.
being altogether mistaken in the assurance of their happiness; Dio. H^licarn.
lib. 2.
the continuance whereof depended upon Virtue, and not upon Fortune.

CHAP. XXX.
Caesar finding the Enemy to offer battle in an indifferent Place, prepares
to undertake him.
PRovision of Corn being made, Caesar.
and the soldiers well resolved (to which end he had interposed a sufficient
space of time, after the battle at Dyrrachium) Caesar thought it time now to
try what purpose or will Pompey had to fight. And therefore, drawing the Army
out of the Camp, he imbattelled his troops, first upon the place, and somewhat
removed from Pompey's Camp: but every day following, he went further off his
own trenches, and brought his Army under the hills whereon the Enemy lay
encamped. This made his Army daily the more bold and assured. He kept
continually his former course with his horsemen; who because they were less in
number by many degrees then those of Pompey's party, he commanded certain lusty
young men, chosen out of them that stood before the Ensigns, for their nimble
and swift running, to fight amongst the horsemen; who by reason of their daily
practice, had learned the use of that kind of fight. So that one thousand of
our Cavalry, in open and champain places, would, when need were, undergo the
charge of seven thousand of theirs, and were not much terrified with the
multitude of them. For at that time they made a fortunate encounter, and slew
one of the two Savoiens, that had formerly fled to Pompey, with diverse others.

Pompey having his Camp upon a hill, imbattelled his Army at the lower foot
thereof, to see if he could get Caesar to thrust himself into an unequal and
disadvantageous place. Caesar thinking that Pompey would by no means be drawn
to battle, thought it the fittest course for him to shift his Camp, and to be
always in moving: hoping by often removes from place to place, he should be
better accommodated for provision of Corn; and withal, might upon a march find
some occasion to fight; besides, he should weary Pompey's Army, not accustomed
to travel, with daily and continual journeys. And thereupon he gave the sign
of dislodging.

But as the Tents were taken down, it was a little before observed, that
Pompey's Army was advanced somewhat further from their Trenches, then
ordinarily they were accustomed; so that it seemed they might fight in an
equal and indifferent place. Whereupon Caesar, when his troops were already in
the gates setting out, It behooves us, says he, to put off our removing for
the present, and bethink our selves of fighting, as we have always desired;
for we shall not easily hereafter find the like occasion: and presently drew
out his forces. Pompey also, as it was afterward known, was resolved (at the
instance of all that were about him) to give battle; for he had given out in
council some few days before, that he would everthrow Caesar's Army, before
the troops came to join battle.

And as many that stood by wondered at it; I know, says he, that I promise
almost an incredible matter: but take the ground whereupon I speak it, that you
may undergo the business with more assurance. I have persuaded the Cavalry, and
they have promised to accomplish it, that when they come near to join, Prima
egregiorum ducum sapientia victoriam si^e periculo comparare.
they shall attack Caesar's right Cornet on the open side; and so the Army
being circumvented behind, shall be amused and routed, before our men can cast
a weapon at them: whereby we shall end the war without danger of the Legions,
or almost without any wound received. Polyae. lib. 1 stratag.
Which is not difficult or hard to do, for us that are so strong in horse. And
withal, he gave order that they should be ready against the next day,
forasmuch as the occasion was offered (according as they had often intended)
not to deceive the opinion which other men had of their prowess and valor.

Labienus seconding this speech, as contemning Caesar's forces, extolled
Pompey's resolution to the skies. Do not think, Pompey, says he, that this is
the Army wherewith he conquered Gallia, or Germania: I was present my self at
all those battles, and do not speak rashly what I am ^gnorant of. There is a
very small piece of that Army remaining: a great part of them are dead, as it
cannot otherwise be, in so many battles. The P^stilence (the last Autumn) in
Italy consumed many of them; many are gone home, and many are left in the
Continent. Have ye not heard, that the Cohorts which are now at Brundusium, are
made and raised of such as remained behind there to recover their healths?
These forces that ye see, were the last year gathered of the Musters made in
the hither Gallia; and most of them, of the Colonies beyond the Po: and yet all
the flower and strength of them was taken away in the last two overthrows at
Dyrrachium.

When he had spoken these things, he took a solemn oath, not to return into the
Camp but with victory, exhorting the rest to do the like. Pompey commending
him, took the same oath: neither was there any man that refused it.

These things being thus carried in the council, they rose up and departed,
with great hope and joy of all men; as having already conceived victory in
their minds: and the rather, because they thought that nothing could be spoken
vainly by so skillful a Commander, in so weighty and important a Cause.

OBSERVATIONS.
COncerning the fashion of the Cavalry, in which either Party reposed so much
confidence, we are to note, that the Romans had two sorts of horsemen; the one
completely armed (according to their manner) and incorporated in the body of
their Legions, whose entertainment was thrice as much as the footmen. Aeque
impotens postulatum fuit (says Livie) ut de stipendio equitum (merebant autem
triplex ea tempestate) era demerentur; Lib. 7.
It seemed as unreasonable a motion, that the horsemens pay, which at that time
was triple, should be lessened. And the other were as light-horsemen, which
they called Alarii.

The first sort were thus armed, Lib. 3.
as Josephus witnesses; Excid.
They wore a sword on their right side, somewhat longer then that of the
footmen, and carried a long staff or spear in their hand, a Target at their
horse side, and three or more Darts in a quiver, with broad heads, and not much
less then their staves; having such head pieces and corselets as the footmen
had.

The light-armed men, had either light Darts, or Bow and Arrows. And
doubtless, their chiefest service was with their casting weapons. And
accordingly Tully puts his son in mind, of the praise he had got in Pompey's
Army (where he commanded a wing of horse) Equitando, 2. Offic.
jaculando, omni militari labor tolerando, in riding, casting darts, and
undergoing all military duty.

And as their service consisted in breaking their Staves upon an Enemy, and in
casting their Darts: so we exercise the practice of the former, in our triumphs
at Tilt; and the Spaniards the later, in their Iocuo di cane.

Our modern horsemen are either Lanciers, Petronelliers, or Pistoliers. The
Petronelliers do discharge at distance, making their left hand, that holds the
bridle, their rest: which is uncertain, and to no great effect.

The Pistolier, that will do somewhat to purpose, does come up close to the
other, and discharge his Pistol in his enemies neck, or under the corselet,
about the flank or seat of a man; and commonly misseth not.

I have seen a device to use a Musket on horseback, which if it prove as
serviceable as is by some conceived, will be of great advantage.

CHAP. XXXI.
The manner of imbattelling their Armies.
AS Caesar approached near unto Pompey's Camp, (...)
he observed his Army to be imbattelled in this manner: There were in the left
Cornet two legions, which, in the beginning of these broils, were by order and
decree of Senate taken from Caesar; whereof one was called the first, and the
other the third: and with them stood Pompey. Scipio had the middle squadron,
with the legions he brought out of Syria.

The Legion of Cilicia, joined with the Spanish Cohorts, which Afranius brought
with him, made the right Cornet. These Pompey held to be very strong. The rest
of the troops were interlaced between the middle Squadron and the Cornets. All
made one hundred and ten Cohorts, which amounted to fifty five thousand men:
besides two thousand old soldiers, and men of note, whom he had called out to
that war, and dispersed them over all the Army. The rest of the Cohorts, which
were seven, he had left in the Camp, or disposed about the forts near
adjoining. The right Corn^t was flanked with a River, that had high and
cumbersome banks: and thereupon he put all his Cavalry, together with the
Archers and Slingers, in the left Cornet.

Caesar, observing his former custom, placed the tenth legion in the right
Cornet, and the ninth in the left; albeit they were very much weakened in the
fights at Dyrrachium: but to this he so joined the eighth, that he seemed
almost to make one of two, and commanded them to succor each other. He had in
all about eighty cohorts, which made twenty two thousand men: two cohorts he
left to keep the Camp. He gave the left Cornet to Antonius, the right to Pub.
Sylla, and the middle Squadron to Cn. Domitius, and put him self opposite to
Pompey. And withal having well observed these things (according as I have
formerly declared) fearing least the right Cornet should be enclosed about with
the multitude of the Cavalry, he speedily drew six cohorts out of the third
battle, and of them he made a fourth, to encounter the horsemen, and showed
them what he would have done; admonishing withal, that the victory of that day
consisted in the valor of those cohorts: commanding the third battle, and
likewise the whole Army, not to join battle without order from him; which when
he thought fit, he would give them notice of by an Ensign.

And going about to encourage them to fight, according to the use of war, In
manibus vestris quantus sit Caesar habetis.
he put them in mind of his favors, and his carriage toward them from time to
time; and specially, that they themselves were witnesses, with what labor and
means he had sought for peace, Lucan. lib. 7.
as well by treaty with Vatinius, as also by employing A. Clodius to Scipio:
and likewise how he had endeavored at Oricum with Libo, that Ambassadors
might be sent to treat of these things. Neither was he willing at any time to
misspend the soldiers blood, or to deprive the Commonwealth of either of
those Armies.

This speech being delivered, the soldiers both requiring and longing with an
ardent desire to fight, he commanded the sign of battle to be given by a
Trumpet.

OBSERVATIONS.
COncerning the order used in disposing these Armies, for the trial of this
Cause, it appears by the story, that Pompey set two Legions in his left
Cornet, which are here named the first and the third. Howbeit Lucan says, that
those Legions were the first and the fourth.

-- Cornus tibi cura sinistri,
Lentule, cum prima, quae tum fuit optima bello,
Et quarta legione datur. --
-- The left Cornets care,
Which the first legion, (best in all that war)
And fourth made up, O Lentulus, was thine.
The middle squadron was led by Scipio, with the legions he brought out of
Syria, which were also two; Exspectabat cum Scipione ex Syria legiones duas, he
exspected Scipio out of Syria with two legions, as it is in the second chapter
of this book.

In the right Cornet was the Cilician legion, with the Cohorts that Afranius
brought out of Spain: which amounting to the number of a Legion, made that
Cornet equal to the rest. And so of these six Legions, which were the strength
and sinews of his Army, he fashioned his battle into a middle Squadron, and
two Cornets. His other forces, being young soldiers, he disposed in the
distances, between the Cornets and that middle Squadron.

Frontinus speaking of this point, Lib. 2. cap. 3
says; Legiones secundum virtutem, firm^ssimas in medio, and in cornu locavit;
spacia his interposita tyronibus supplevit: He disposed his legions according
to their goodness and worth: the stoutest he placed in the middle Squadron and
the Cornets; filling up the spaces betwixt these with his young soldiers. His
number of men, by our text, was fifty five thousand; but Plutarch makes them
not above forty five thousand.

Caesar had not hall so many men, and yet made a triple battle; but not so
thick or deep with Legions: for in the right Cornet he put the tenth Legion,
and in the left the ninth and the eighth; being both weak and far spent, by the
former overthrows. Of the other Legions he makes no mention: but it seems
they filled up the distances between the Cornets and the body of the Army; and
were as flesh to those sinews and bones, which out of the prerogative of their
valor, took the place of the Cornets, and the middle bulk of the battle. And
fearing least his right Cornet should be encumvented by the multitude of their
Cavalry, he drew six Cohorts out of his third or last battle, to make a fourth
battle to oppose the Cavalry: which got him the victory. For howsoever the
Text says, Singulas cohortes detraxit: Singulas cohortes detraxit.
yet Plutarch says plainly, that those Cohorts he thus took were six, and
amounted to three thousand men; which rises to the number of so many Cohorts.
And Appian agreeing hereunto, says, that his fourth battle consisted of three
thousand men. Lib. 2. cap. 3.
Frontinus likewise affirms, he took out six Conorts, and tenuit in subsidio,
sed dextro latere conversas in obliquum; and kept them as a reserve, placing
them off obliquely from the right cornet. Whereunto that of Lucan agrees;

-- Tenet obliquas post signa cohortes.
He placed these troops oblique behind the battle.
Which is thus to be understood; that they turned their faces toward the left
Cornet of Pompey's Army, that they might be the readier to receive the Cavalry
coming on to enclose Caesar's right wing; as being sure of the other side,
which was fenced with a River and a Marish.

Touching Caesar's Speech to the soldiers, it seemed like that of Themistocles
at the battle of Salamina: where Xerxes made a long Oration to encourage the
Persians, and lost the day; Themistocles spoke but a few words to the Greeks,
and got the victory. Howsoever, one thing is not to be omitted, that Plutarch,
and such others as have dipped their pens either in the sweat or in the blood
of this battle, do all agree, that Caesar had not above twenty two thousand
men.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Battle begins; and Caesar overcomes.
THere was one Crastinus in Caesar' s Army, Caesar.
called out to this war, who the year before had led the first company of the
tenth Legion, a man of singular valor; who upon the sign of battle given,
Follow me, says he, as many of you as were of my company; and do that
endeavor to your Emperor, which you have always been willing to perform.
This is the only battle remaining unfought: which being ended, he shall be
restored to his dignity, and we to our liberty. And withal, looking toward
Caesar, I will, says he, O Emperor, so carry my self this day, that thou
shall give me thanks, either aliver or dead. And when he had thus spoken, he
was the first that ran out of the right Cornet: and about one hundred and
twenty elected soldiers of the same Centurie followed voluntarily after him.

There was so much space left between both the battles, as might serve either
Army to meet upon the charge. But Pompey had commanded his men to receive
Caesar's assault, and to undergo the shock of his Army, without moving from the
place wherein they stood (and that by the advice of C. Triarius) to the end
that the first running out and violence of the soldiers being broken, and the
battle distended, they that stood perfect in their Orders, might set upon them
that were scattered and dispersed: hoping the piles would not fall so forceably
upon the Army standing still, as when they advanced forward to meet them; and
that it would fall out withal, that Caesar's soldiers, having twice as far to
run, would by that means be out of breath, and spent with weariness.

Which, in my opinion, was against all reason: for there is a certain
incitation and alacrity of spirit naturally planted in every man, which is
inflamed with a desire to fight. Neither should any Commander repress or
restrain the same, but rather increase it, and set it forward.

Nor was it in vain of ancient time ordained, that the Trumpets should every
where sound, and every man take up a shout but that they thought these things
did both terrify the Enemy, and incite their own Party.

But our soldiers, upon the sign of Battle, running out with their Piles
ready to be thrown, and perceiving that Pompey's soldiers did not make out to
meet them (as men taught with long use, and exercised in former fights) stopped
their course of their own accord, and almost in the midway stood still; that
they might not come to blows upon the spending of their strength: and after a
little respite of time, running on again, threw: their piles, and presently
drew their swords, as Caesar had commanded them. Neither were Pompey's
soldiers wanting in this business; for they received the piles which were cast
at them, took the shock of the Legions, kept their ranks, cast their piles, and
betook them to their swords.

At the same time, the Cavalry, according as was commanded them, issued out
from Pompey's left Cornet, and the whole multitude of Archers thrust themselves
out. Whose assault our horsemen were not able to endure, but fell back a little
from the place wherein they stood: whereby Pompey's horsemen began to press
them with more eagerness, and to put themselves in squadrons, to enclose the
Army about. Which Caesar perceiving, gave the sign of advancing forward to the
fourth Battle, which he had made up of six Cohorts; who came with such a (...)
upon Pompey's horsemen, that none of them were able to stand before them, but
turning their backs, did not only give place, but fled all as fast as they
could to the highest Hills: whereby the Archers and Slingers being left naked
without succor, were all put to the sword. And with the same violence, those
Cohorts encompassed about the left Cornet, notwithstanding any resistance that
could be made by Pompey's party, and charged them behind upon their backs.

At the same time Caesar commanded the third Battle, which as yet stood still,
and were not removed, to advance forward: by means of which fresh and sound
men, relieving such as were faint and weary, as also that others did charge
them behind upon their backs, Pompey's party were able no longer to endure it,
but all turned their backs and fled.

Neither was Caesar deceived in his opinion, that the beginning of the victory
would grow from those Cohorts which he placed in the fourth Battle, against
the horsemen: according as he himself had openly spoken, in his encouragement
to the soldiers. For by them first the Cavalry was beaten, by them the Archers
and Slingers were slain, by them Pompey's Battle was circumvented on the left
Cornet, and by their means they began to fly.

As soon as Pompey saw his Cavalry beaten, and perceived the part wherein he
most trusted, to be amused and affrighted, and distrusting the rest, he
forthwith left the Battle, and conveyed himself on horseback into the Camp.
And speaking to the Centurions that had the watch at the Praetorian gate with a
loud voice, as all the soldiers might hear, he said, Keep the Camp, and defend
it diligently, to prevent any hard casualty that may happen. In the mean while,
I will go about to the other Ports, to settle the Guards of the Camp.

And having thus said, he went into the Praetorium, distrusting the main point,
and yet expecting the event.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
POmpey so carried himself in the course of this war, as he rather seemed a
sufferer then a doer: never disposing his Army for any attempt or onset, but
only when he brake out of the place wherein he was besieged at Dyrrachium. And
accordingly he gave order, that in the main action and point of trial, his
soldiers should suffer and sustain the assault, rather then otherwise. But
whether he did well or no, has since been in question. Caesar utterly disliked
it, as a thing contrary to reason. Plutarch.
Est quaedam (says he) animi incitatio atque alacritas, naturaliter innata
omnibus, quae stud^o pugnae incenditur; hanc non reprimere, sed augere
Imperatores debent. There is a certain incitation and alacrity of spirit
naturally planted in every man, which is inflamed with a desire to fight.
Neither should any Commander repress or restrain the same, but rather increase
it, and set it forward.

Agreeable whereunto is that of Cato the Great; that in cases of battle, and
Enemy is to be charged with all violence. And to that purpose it is requisite,
to put the soldiers (at some reasonable distance) into a posture of vaunting
and definance, with menaces and cries of terror; and then to spring forward in
such manner, as may make them fall upon their enemies with greater fury: As
Champions or Wrastlers, before they buckle, stretch out their limbs, and make
their flourishes as may best serve to assure themselves, and discourage their
adversaries; according as we read of Hercules and Antaeus.

Ille Cleonaei projecit terga Leonis, Lucan. lib. 4.

Antaeus Liby^i: persud^t membra liquore
Hospes, Olympiacae servato more Palaestrae.
Ille parum ^idens pedibus contingere matrem,
Auxilium membris, calidas infudit arenas.
The one throws by's Cleoncan Lion's skin,
The other's Libyan; and ere they begin,
The one anoints himself from top to toe,
As the Olympian Gamesters use to do.
Not sure his foe would let his feet touch ground,
Himself with sand Antaeus sprinkles round.
Howbeit, forasmuch as all men are not of one temper, but require several
fashions to tune their minds to the true note of a battle, we shall find
several Nations to have several usances in this point. The Romans (as
appears by this of Caesar) were of ancient time accustomed to sound Trumpets
and Hoboies, in all parts of the Army, and to take up a great clamor and
shout, whereby the soldiers (in their understanding) were encouraged, and the
Enemy affrighted. Homer.
Whereas, contrariwise, the Greeks went always with a close and silent mouth,
Iliad. 3.
as having more to do then to say to their Enemies. And Thucydides, writing of
the Lacedaemonians, (the flower of Greece for matter of Arms) says, that
instead of Trumpets and Cornets to incite them, they used the sweet harmony of
Flutes, to moderate and qualify their passions, least they should be
transported with unbridled impetuesity.

It is reported, that Marshall Biron the Father, seemed to dislike of our
English march (hearing it beaten by the Drums) as too slow, and of no
encouragement: and yet it so fitteth our Nation (as Sir Roger Williams then
answered) as we have diverse times overrun all France with it. Howsoever, the
event of this battle is sufficient to disprove Pompey's error herein, and to
make good what Caesar commanded.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THese six Cohorts, which made the fourth battle, did so encounter Pompey's
Cavalry, that they were not able to withstand them. It is said, that Caesar
gave them order not to sling their Piles, as commonly they did, but to hold
them in their hands like a Pike or a Javelin, and make only at the faces of
those Gallants, and men at Arms on horseback. For the holding of them in their
hands, I do not understand it, and cannot conceive how they could reach more
then the next ranks unto them in that manner. But for making at the faces of
the Cavalry, Lib. 4. cap. 2.
Florus says that Caesar, as he galloped up and down the ranks, was heard to
let fall bloody and bitter words, but very patheticall, and effectual for a
victory: as thus, Soldier, cast right at the face: whereas Pompey called to
his men, to spare their fellow-Citizens.

Eutropius, in his Epitome of Suetonius, affirms the same thing, both of the
one and of the other: and Lucan seems to aver the same, concerning that of
Caesar;

Adversosque jubetferro contundere vultus. Lib. 7.

He bids them strike just at the Enemies face.
Frontinus has it thus; Lib. 4. cap. 7.
C. Caesar, cum in partibus Pompeianis magna equitum Romanorum esset manus,
eaque armorum scientia milites conficeret, ora oculosque eorum gladiis peti
jussit, and sic adversam faciem cedere coegit: Pompey having in his army a
great company of Roman Knights, who being well-skill'd at their weapons made an
end of their enemies; Caesar commanded his men to make at their faces and eyes:
and thereby compelled them to turn away their faces.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
AMongst these memorialls Crastinus may not be forgotten, being the first man
that began the battle; In the life of Pompey.
whom Plutarch calls C. Crassinius, and says, that Caesar seeing him in the
morning as he came out of his Tent, asked him what he thought of the success
of the battle. Crastinus, stretching out his right hand unto him, cried out
aloud, O Caesar, thine is the victory; and this day shall thou commend me
either alive or dead. And accordingly, he brake afterward out of the ranks;
and running amongst the midst of his Enemies, with many that followed him, made
a great slaughter. At last one ran him into the mouth, that the swords point
came out at his neck, and so slew him.

By him, and others of like courage and worth, was Caesar raised from the
extremity of his wants, and the disgrace of his former losses, to the chiefest
height of earthly glory: and herein might well assume unto himself, that which
was formerly said of the people, Magna populi Romani fortuna, sed semper in
malis major resurrexit; Great is the fortune of the people of Rome; but it
still grows greater and increases by troubles: together with that of
Plutarch, Florus.
Res invicta Romanorum arma, The Roman Arms are things invincible. Lucan
speaking of Scaeva formerly mentioned, Lib. 4.
says, Infelix* quanta Dominum virtute para^^^
He showed a great deal of valor to get Rome a Lord. But upon Crastinus he
lays a heavy doom.

D^i tibi non mortem, quae cunctis poena paratur,
Sed sensum post fata tuae dent, Crastine, morti,
Cujus torta manu commisit lancea bellum,
Primaque Thessaliam Romano sanguine tinxit.
May thou not only die, which all men do;
But die, and have thy senses after too.
A lance thrown by thy hand the fight began.
When with brave Roman blood Thessalia ran.


SABINVS AND COTTA

CHAP. XXXIII.
Caesar presses hard after the Enemy, and takes the Camp.
POmpey's soldiers being thus forced to fly into their Camp, Caesar.
Caesar thinking it expedient to give them no time of respite, exhorted the
Army to use the benefit of Fortune, and to assault the Camp: who
notwithstanding the extreme heat (for the business was drawn out until it was
high noon) were willing to undergo any labor, and to yield obedience to his
commandments. The Camp was industriously defended by the Cohorts that had the
guard thereof; but much more stoutly by the Thracians, and other succors of
Barbarous people. For such soldiers as were fled thither out of the battle,
were so terrified in mind and spent with weariness, that most of them (having
laid aside their Arms and Military Ensigns) did rather think how they might
best escape, then to defend the Camp. Neither could they which stood upon the
Rampter any longer endure the multitude of weapons; but fainting with wounds,
forsook the place, and presently fled into the high Mountains adjoining unto
the Camp, being led thither by the Centurions and Tribunes of the soldiers.

In the Camp were found tables ready laid and prepared with linen, together
with cupbords of plate furnished and set out, and their Tents strewed with
fresh herbs and rushes; and that of Lentulus and diverse others with Ivy, and
many other superfluities, discovering their extreme luxury and assurance of
victory. Whereby it was easily to be conceived, that they nothing feared the
event of that day, being so careful of such unnecessary delights. And yet for
all this, they upbraided Caesar's patient and miserable Army, with riot and
excess: to whom there were always wanting such requisites as were expedient
for their necessary uses.

Pompey, whenas our men were come within the Camp, having got a horse, and cast
away all Ensigns of Imperial authority got out at the Decumane gate, and made
toward Larissa as fast as his horse could carry him. Neither did he stay
there; but with the same speed (having got a few followers that escaped by
flight) posting night and day, came at length to the Sea side with a troup of
thirty horse, and there went aboard a ship of burden: complaining that his
opinion only deceived him; being as it were betrayed by such as began first to
fly, from whom he hoped chiefly to have had the victory.

OBSERVATIONS.
Whereas it is said, Utilis and tuta res dilato. Dionys. Halicar. lib. 8.
That a dilatory course is very profitable and safe; we are to understand it as
a chief and main point in the duty of an Ambassador, to temporize in things
which are pressed hard upon him: Non commitruntur reg^^is trire^es, aut loca,
aut legiones, aut arces; sed verba and tempora.
as being accountable for words and time; but no way charged with expeditions
of war; wherein Protraction is oftentimes the interrupter of absolute victory,
and the only supplanter of that which is desired. Vincere scis Hannibal, sed
victoria uti nescis, Thou know well enough how to get the victory, Demost.
de falsa legatione.
Hannibal, but thou know not how to use it; was a common byword, and
happened then well for the State of Rome. But now it fell out otherwise; having
met with one that knew how to conquer, and how to follow victory to purpose.

For notwithstanding the battle he had fought, and the advantage he had thereby
got, might have seemed sufficient for one days labor; 1. Labor in n^gotio, 2.
fortitudo in periculo, 3. indu^tria in agendo, 4. celeritas in consiciendo,
were Caesar's properties.
yet he would not let occasion pass, without taking the benefit that was then
offered: and never ceased until he had forced the Camp, and overtaken those
that escaped the battle: and so made victory sure unto him, by driving the nail
home to the head. In regard whereof, he did not un^itly use for his word or
Motto, (as they call it) (...), BY DEFERRING NOTHING.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Caesar besieges those that were escaped into the Hills.
CAesar having got the Camp, Caesar.
instantly required the soldiers not to look after pillage and booty, and let
slip the means of ending the rest of their business. Which after he had
obtained, he began to enclose the Hill about with works of fortification. They
of Pompey's party, distrusting the place, for that the Hill had no water, left
it at an instant. And all those that were partakers of that fortune, made
toward Larissa. Which Caesar observing, divided his forces, and commanded part
of the Legions to remain in Pompey's Camp, and part he sent back into his own:
and leading four Legions along with him, he took a nearer way to meet with
them; and having gone six miles, he imbattelled his forces. Which they
perceiving, betook themselves unto a high Hill, under which ran a River.

Caesar persuaded the soldiers, albeit they were spent with continual labor
all that day, and that night was now at hand, yet they would not think it much
to cut off the River from the Hill by a fortification, to keep them from
watering in the night. Which work being perfected, they began by Commissioners
to treat of conditions of yielding themselves. Some few of the Senators
escaped in the nightime away by flight.

Caesar, as soon as it was day, caused them all to come down from the Hill into
the Plain, and there to cast away their Arms: which they performed without
refusal; and casting themselves upon the earth, their hands spread abroad, with
shedding of many tears, desired mercy. Caesar comforting them, commanded they
should stand up: and having spoken somewhat touching his clemency, a little to
case them of their fear, he gave them all their lives with safety; commanding
the soldiers not to hurt any of them, nor that they should want any thing that
was theirs.

These things being thus achieved with diligence, he caused other Legions to
meet him from the Camp, sending those he had with him to rest themselves; and
the same day came to Larissa. In that battle he lost not above two hundred
soldiers; but of Centurions, valiant men, he lost thirty. And Crastinus
fighting valiantly was slain (of whom we formerly made mention) with a sword
thrust into the face. Neither was that fals-which he said as he went to the
battle: for Caesar was persuaded, that Cras^inus behaved himself admirably in
that fight, and did deserve as well of him as a man possibly could.

There were slain of Pompey's Army about fifteen thousand: Interd^^ majores
copiae sternuntur a minoribus. (...) lib. 8.
howbeit there were of them that yielded themselves above twenty four thousand.
For such Cohorts as were in the Forts, did likewise yield themselves to Sylla:
and many fled into the next Towns and Cities. Of military Ensigns there were
brought out of the battle to Caesar one hundred and fourscore, with nine
Eagles. L. Domitius flying out of the Camp into the Mount, sainting for want of
strength, was slain by the horsemen.

OBSERVATIONS.
ANd thus we see the issue of that battle, and the victory which Caesar
obtained at as cheap a rate as could be imagined: for there were slain twenty
three thousand of the enemy, and as many taken, by rendering themselves, with
the loss of two hundred soldiers, and thirty Centurions; amongst whom was
Crastinus: whose death obliged Caesar to make this honorable mention of his
valor. But as it is observed by Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Lib. 8.
Non Deus quispiam se ducibus, pro salute omnium qui certamen ineunt, sponsorem
sistit: nec ea condidione imperium accepimus, ut omnes homines devincamus,
nullo ex nostris amisso. No God can promise a General the safety of all his
men: neither do we take commands upon that condition, to conquer all our
enemies without the loss of a man.

CHAP. XXXV.
Laelius attempteth to block in the Haven at Brundusium: and Cassius fireth
Caesar's ships at Messina.
ABout the same time D. Laelius came with his Navy to Brundusium; Caesar.
and according as Libo formerly did, took the Island in the mouth of the Port.
And in like manner Vatinius, Governor of Brundusium, having furnished and sent
out certain Skiffs, enticed out Laelius ships, and of them took a Galley, with
two lesser ships, that were further shot out into the straights of the Port:
and also had disposed his Cavalry along the shore, to keep the Mariners from
fetching water. But Laelius having the time of the year more favorable and
fitter for sailing, supplied his Army with water from Corfu and Dyrrachium:
neither could he be beaten off his design, nor be driven out of the Port, or
from the Island, either with the dishonor of the ships he lost, or with
scarcity and want of all necessaries, until he heard of the battle in
Thessalia.

About the same time also Cassius came into Sicilia, with the Navy of Syria,
Phoenicia and Cilicia. And whereas Caesar's ships were divided into two parts;
Pub-Sulpitius, Praetor, being Admiral of the one half, and lying at Vibone in
the Straights, and M. Pomponius Admiral of the other half at Messana; Cassius
came first to Messana, and was arrived before Pomponius heard of his coming: by
which means he surprised him, distracted, and much amused, without any order or
guards. And finding a CICERO BESIEGED

strong and favorable wind, filled the ships of burden with Rosin, Pitch and
^ow, and like matter of firing; and sending them out to Pomponius Navy, he
burned all the ships, being in number thirty five, amongst which there were
twenty that had decks. Constratae.
By means whereof they conceived such a terror, that albeit there was a legion
in Garrison at Messana, yet the Town was hardly kept. And, but that certain
Messengers coming post, brought news at the same instant of Caesar's victory,
most men thought the Town would have been lost: but the news coming so
opportunely, the town was kept.

Cassius departed from thence, and went to Sulpitius fleet at Vibone; where our
ships being brought to shore for fear of the like danger, he there did as he
did before; for finding the wind good, he sent in forty ships of burden,
furnished with matter to burn the Navy. The fire having taken hold of both
Cornets of the fleet, five of them were burned down to the water. And as the
flame began to be further carried with the wind, the soldiers of the old
legions which were left for the defense of the shipping, and were of the number
of them that were sick, did not endure the dishonor: but getting aboard of
their own accord, put the ships from the shore; and setting upon Cassius fleet,
took two Galleys, in one of the which was Cassius himself: but he being taken
out with a Skiff, fled away. And furthermore, they took two Triremes. Not long
after certain news came of the battle in Thessalia, so that Pompey's party
believed it: for before that time, it was thought to be but a thing given out
by Caesar's Legates, and other of his friends. Whereupon Cassius departed with
his Navy, and left those places.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe branches of a Tree do receive life from the stock, and the stock is
maintained by the root, which being once cut asunder, there remains no life
for stock or bough, leaf or branch. Accordingly it happened with this
large-spred Party; the root whereof was then in Thessalia: and being broken
asunder by the violence of Caesar's forces, it booted not what Laelius did at
Brundusium, or Cassius either at Messana, or Vibone. For all the parts were
overthrown with the body: and the fortune of the battle over-swaid other petty
losses whatsoever; being so powerful in the opinion of the world, Ut quo se
fortuna, eodem etiam favor hominum inclinat, Pompeius Trogus. lib. 6.
that what way soever fortune goes, the same way goes the favor of the people:
Or, as Lucan says, Lib. 8.


-- Rapimur, quo cuncha feruntur,
We Are snatched that way that things are carried.
CHAP. XXXVI.
Caesar pursues Pompey: who is slain in Egypt.
CAesar setting all other things apart, Caesar.
thought it expedient for him to pursue Pompey into what parts soever he should
betake himself, least he should raise new forces, and renew the war again: and
thereupon made forward every day, as far as his Cavalry was able to go;
commanding one Legion to follow after by lesser journeys. There was a
publication made in Pompey's name at Amphipolis, that all the youth of that
Province, as well Greeks as Citizens of Rome, should come to be enrolled for
the war. But it is not possible to discover, whether Pompey did it to take away
all cause of suspicion, that he might the longer hide his purpose of flying
away; or whether he went about by new levies to keep Macedonia, if no man
pressed hard after him.

Howsoever, he himself lay at Anchour there one night. And calling unto him his
ancient Hosts and Friends, he took so much money of them as would defray his
necessary charges: and understanding of Caesar's coming, within a few days he
hoised sail and departed thence, arriving at Mitylene, where he was kept two
days with foul weather; and there renforcing his fleet with some Galleys he
took to him, he went into Cilicia, and from thence to Cyprus. There he
understood, that by the general consent of the Antiochians, and such Citizens
of Rome as were there residing, the Citadell was already taken to keep him out:
and that Messengers were sent about, to those that were fled from his Party
into the bordering Cities, forbidding them to come to Antioch; for if they did,
they should hazard it with the danger of their heads. The like happened to L.
Lentulus, who the year before was Consul, and to Pub. Lentulus, of Consular
dignity, and to some other at Rhodes. For as many as fled thither after Pompey,
and came unto the Island, were neither received into the Town nor into the
Haven; but were commanded by Messengers sent unto them, to depart from thence,
and forced to weigh anchour against their will. And now the fame of Caesar's
coming was spread abroad throughout all the Cities.

Whereupon Pompey, leaving off his purpose of going into Syria, having taken
what money he found in Bank, besides what he could borrow of his private
friends, and putting abroad great store of Brass for the use of war; with two
thousand Armed men (which he had raised partly out of the towns, and partly had
forced up amongst the Merchants, and such others of his followers whom he
thought fit for this business, he came to Pelusium. There by chance was king
Ptolemy, a child within years, with great forces making war against his sister
Cleopatra; whom a few Months before, by means of his Allies and Friends he had
thrust out of his kingdom: And Cleopatra's Camp was not far distant from his.

Pompey sent unto him, that in regard of ancient hospitality, and the amity he
had with his Father, he might be received into Alexandria: and that he would
aid and support him with his wealth and means, being now fallen into misery and
calamity. But they that were sent, having done their message, began to speak
liberally to the Kings sould^ers, and to exhort them, that they would stand to
Pompey, not despising the low ebb of fortune he was brought to. Amongst them
were many that had been Pompey's soldiers, which Gabinius had received out of
his army in Syria, and had brought them to Alexandria; and upon the ending of
the war, had left them with Ptolemy, the father of this child. These things
being known, such as had the procuration of the kingdom in the minority of the
Boy, whether they were induced through fear of gaining the Army, (as afterward
they confessed) whereby Pompey might easily seize upon Alexandria and Egypt; or
whether despising his fortune (as for the most part, in time of misery a man's
friends do become his enemies;) did give a good answer publicly to such as
were sent, and willed him to come unto the King: but secretly plotting amongst
themselves, sent Achillas, a chief Commander, and a man of singular audacity,
together with L. Septimius, Tribune of the soldiers, to kill Pompey. They
giving him good words, and he himself also knowing Septimius to have led a
Company under him in the war against the P^rats, went aboard a little Bark with
a few of his soldiers: and there was slain by Achillas and Septimius. In like
manner L. Lentulus was apprehended by commandment from the King, and killed in
prison.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IF it be now demanded, Where was Caesar's desire of Peace? and, Why pursued he
not a treaty of Composition, at this time, when as his tale would have been
heard with gladness, and any conditions of atonement very acceptable to the
vanquished? the answer is already made in the beginning of this? Commentary;
That there was but one time of making peace: and that was when both Parties
were equal; which was now past, and Caesar too far gone, to look back upon any
thing that might work a reconcilement. The one was crept so high, and the other
cast down so low, that they seemed not compatible in any Medium, although it
were to the saving of the Empire. Howbeit, it is not denied but that Pompey
gave great occasion of these wars. Pomp^ius (...) esse non po^et, risi
beneficio servitutis. 5. de (...) 16, 5. Polit.
For Seneca says; He had brought the Commonwealth to that pass, that it could
not longer stand, but by the benefit of servitude. And he that will look into
the reasons of this confusion, shall find all those Causae corrumpentes, or
ruining causes, which are noted by Aristotle to threaten the welfare of a
State, in the excess of Pompey's exorbitancy. Nil nimium cupito, was writ in
golden letters at Delphos.
For, having nothing in a Mean, he held all his fortunes by the tenure of
Nimium; and was overgrown, first, with too much honor, secondly, with too much
wealth, thirdly, with too much power; whereby he exceeded the proportion of his
fellow-Citizens, and soblemished the beauty of that State, whose chiefest
graces were in a suting equality. Justum bellum esse iis, quibus nisi in armis
spes nulla est. Machiav.
And adding to these the convulsions of fear, he made no difficulty to engage
Rome in a bloody war; as having no other hope, but in the confusion of Arms.

It is said that at his arrival at Mitylene, he had much conference with
Cratippus, whom Tully mentions in his Offices: wherein, amongst other
remonstrances, the Philosopher made it plain, that his course of government had
brought a necessity of changing that State from the liberty of a Commonwealth,
to the condition of a just Monarchy. Nusquana g^ntium r^peritur, qui possit
penibus approbart.
And such it sell to Caesar's fortune, if there were any errous committed in the
seizure, he may take the benefit of the general pardon, exemplified by
Trebellius Pollio, That no Nation can show a Man that is altogether blameless.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COncerning the State of Egypt, we are to note, that Alexander the Great being
cut off by death, his Captains laid hold upon such Provinces and kingdoms as
were under their commands: amongst whom one Ptolemeus the son of Lagus, a
Macedonian, seized upon Egypt, where he reigned 40 years; and of him were all
his successors called by the name of Ptolemy. This first Ptolemy possessed
himself of Egypt about the year of the world 3640: which was 275 years before
Pompey's overthrow. His son that succeeded by the name of Ptolemy Philadelphus,
caused the Bible to be translated out of Hebrew into Greek by 70 Interpreters,
which are called the Septuagint; and made the famous Library which was burned
in these wars.

The Father of this young Ptolemy, was the ninth in succession from the first,
and at his death, made the people of Rome Tutors to his children. His eldest
son and Cleopatra his daughter reigned together six years; but in the end fell
to strife and wars, and were deeply engaged therein when Pompey arrived. But
shortly after Caesar so ordered the differences, that he set the Crown upon
Cleopatra's head; who held it peaceably, until she came to play that tragical
part with Antony: which being ended, the kingdom was then reduced to a
Province, under the obedience of the Roman Empire.

Concerning this miserable end of Pompey, it is truly said of Seneca, Mors
omnium par est per quae venit diversi sunt, id in quod defini^unam est. Epist
67.
that Death is alike to all: for although the ways are diverse by which it
happens, yet they all meet in the same end. And forasmuch as Plutarch has
described particularly the manner of this Catastrophe, it shall not be
impertinent to insert his relation thereof.

When Pompey heard news that king Ptolemy was in the City of Pelusium with his
Army, Homines sicut pomi, a^t matura cadu^t aut (...). Plut. in vi^a Rompeii.
making war against his sister, he went thither, and sent a Messenger before
unto the king, to advertise him of his arrival, and to entreat him to receive
him. King Ptolemy was then but a young man, insomuch that one Photinus governed
all the whole Realm under him. He assembled a Council of the chiefest and
wisest men of the Court, who had such credit and authority as it pleased him to
give them. They being assembled, he commanded every man in the Kings name to
say his mind, touching the receiving of Pompey, whether the king should receive
him or not. It was a miserable thing to see Photinus, an Eunuch of the Kings,
and Theodotus of Chio, an hired Schoolmaster to teach the young king Rhetoric,
and Achillas an Egyptian, to consult among themselves what they should do with
Pompey the Great. These were the chiefest Councillors of all his Eunuchs, and
of those that had brought him up.

Now did Pompey ride at anchour upon the shore side, expecting the resolution
of this Council: in the which the opinions were diverse; for some would not
have him received, others consented that he should be received. But the
Rhetorician Theodotus, to show his eloquence, persuaded them that neither the
one nor the other was to be accepted. For, quoth he, if we receive him, we
shall have Caesar our enemy, and Pompey our Lord; and if we do deny him on the
other side, Pompey will blame us for refusing him, and Caesar for not keeping
of him: therefore this would be the best resolution, he told them, to send to
kill him, for thereby they should win the good will of the one, and not fear
the displeasure of the other. And some say moreover that he added this mock
withal, A dead man bites not. They being determined of this among themselves,
gave Achillas commission to do it. He taking with him Septimius (who had charge
aforetime under Pompey) and Salvius, another Centurion also, with three or four
soldiers besides, they made toward Pompey's Galleys, about whom were at that
time the chiefest of his train, to see what would become of this matter. But
when they saw the likelihood of their entertainment, and that it was not in
Princely show nor manner, nor nothing answerable to the hope which Theophanes
had put them in, seeing so few men come to them in a fisher-boat; they began
then to mistrust the small account that was made of them, and counseled Pompey
to return back, and to launch again into the sea, being out of the danger of
the hurling of a Dart.

In the mean time the fisher-boat drew near, and Septimius rose, and saluted
Pompey in the Roman tongue, by the name of Imperator, as much as sovereign
Captain: and Achillas also spoke to him in the Greek tongue, and bade him come
into his boat; because that by the shore side there was a great deal of mud and
sand banks, so that his Galley should have no water to bring him in. At the
very same time they saw afar off diverse of the Kings Galleys, which were arming
with all speed possible, and all the shore besides full of soldiers. Thus,
though Pompey and his company would have altered their minds, they could not
have told how to have escaped: and furthermore, showing that they had
mistrusted them, then they had given the murderer occasion to have executed his
cruelty. So taking his leave of his wife Cornelia, who lamented his death
before his end, he commanded two Centurions to go down before him into the
Egyptians boat, and Philip, one of his slaves infranchised, with another
slaves, called Scynes. When Achillas reached out his hand to receive him into
his boat, he turned him to his wife and son, and said these verses of Sophocles
unto them; The man that into Court comes free,
Must there in state of bondage be.
These were the last words he spoke unto his people, when he left his own Gally
and went into the Egyptians boat, the land being a great way off from his
Gally. When he saw never a man in the boat speak friendly unto him, beholding
Septimius, he said unto him; Me thinks, my friend, I should know thee, for that
thou have served with me heretofore. The other nodded with his head; that it
was true, but gave him no answer, nor showed him any courtesy.

Pompey seeing that no man spoke to him, took a little book he had in his hand,
in which he had written an Oration that he meant to make unto King Ptolemy, and
began to read it. When they came near to the shore, Cornelia with her servants
and friends about her, stood up in her ship, in great fear, to see what should
become of Pompey. So she hoped well, when she saw many of the Kings people on
the shore, coming toward Pompey at his landing, as it were to receive and
honor him. But even as Pompey took Philip his hand to arise more easily,
Septimius came first behind him, and thrust him through with his sword: next
unto him also Salvius and Achillas drew out their swords in like manner. Pompey
then did no more but took up his gown with his hands, and hid his face, and
manly abode the wounds they gave him, only sighing a little. Thus, being 59
years old, he ended his life the next day after the day of his birth.

They that rode at anchour in their ships, when they saw him murdered, gave
such a fearful cry, that it was heard to the shore: then weighing up their
anchours with speed, they hoised sail and departed their way, having wind at
will that blew a lusty gale. As soon as they had gotten the main Sea, the
Egyptians which prepared to row after them, when they saw they were past their
reach, and unpossible to be overtaken, they let them go. Then having stricken
off Pompey's head, they threw his body overboard, for a miserable spectacle to
all those that were desirous to see him.

Philip, his enfranchised bondman, remained ever by it, until such time as
the Egyptians had seen it their bellies full. Then, having washed his body
with salt water, and wrapped it up in an old shirt of his, because he had no
other shift to lay it in, he sought upon the sands, and found at length a piece
of an old fishers boat, enough to serve to burn his naked body with, but not
all fully out. As he was busy gathering the broken pieces of this boat
together, thither came unto him an old Roman, who in his youth had served under
Pompey, and said unto him; O friend, what art thou that preparest the funerals
of Pompey the Great? Philip answered that he was a bondsman of his,
infranchised. Well, said he, thou shall not have all this honor alone: I pray
thee yet let me accompany thee in so devout a deed, that I may not altogether
repent me to have dwelt so long in a strange Country, where I have abidden such
misery and trouble; but that to recompense me withal, I may have this good
hap, with mine own hands to touch Pompey's body, and to help to bury the only
and most famous Captain of the Romans.

The next day after, Lucius Lentulus (not knowing what had passed) coming out
of Cyprus, sailed by the shore side, and perceived a fire made for funerals,
and Philip standing by it; whom he knew not at the first. So he asked him, What
is he that is dead, and buried there? But straight fetching a great sigh, Alas,
said he, perhaps it is Pompey the Great. Then he landed a little, and was
straight taken and slain. This was the end of Pompey the Great. Not long after
Caesar also came into Egypt, that was in great wars; where Pompey's head was
presented unto him: but he turned his head aside and would not see it, and
abhorred him that brought it as a detestable murderer. Then taking his Ring
wherewith he sealed his Letters, whereupon was graven a Lion holding a sword,
he burst out a weeping. Achillas and Photinus he put to death. King Ptolemy
himself also being overthrown in battle by the River of Nilus, vanished away,
and was never heard of after. Theodotus the Rhetorician escaped Caesar's hands,
and wandered up and down Egypt in great misery, despised of every man.
Afterward Marcus Brutus (who slew Caesar) conquering Asia, met with him by
chance, and putting him to all the torments he could possibly devise, at the
length slew him. The ashes of Pompey's body were afterward brought unto his
wife Cornelia; who buried them in a town of hers, by the City of Alba.

And having in this manner paid the tribute which the law of Nature does exact,
Mors Naturae lex est.
the law of the Twelve Tables did free his Sepulcher from any further
disturbance; Mors tribu^um officiumque mortalium.
Ubi corpus demortui hominis condas, sacer esto, Let that place be sacred,
Sene^^ natural. quaest. ^.
where the body of a dead man is buried. Only this may be added; Fabius dictus
Maximus, Scipio magnus. Polyaenus, lib. 8. Epist. 100.
That as Fabius was called Maximus, Scipio Magnus, and Pompey Magnus, which
titles they carried as marks of special Nobleness, to raise them above the
common worth of men: so their ends made them even with the lowest of the State.
According to that of Seneca; Intervallis distinguimur; exitu aquamur: Here we
are distinguished by distances, but death makes us all equal.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Prodigious Accidents happening upon the Battle in Pharsalia. Caesar comes
into Egypt.
CAesar coming into Asia, This tha^^ f^lloweth, seems of another style.
found T. Ampius going about to take the money out of the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus: and for that cause to have called together all the Senators that were
in the Province, that he might use them as witnesses in the matter. But being
interrupted by Caesar's arrival, he fled away. So that two several times, the
money was saved at Ephesus by Caesar's means. It was further found very
certain, that in the Temple of Minerva at Elis (a just calculation of the time
being taken) the same day that Caesar overthrew Pompey, the Image of Victory,
which stood before Minerva, and looked toward her pourtraiture, did turn it
self toward the Portall and the Temple-gate. And the same day likewise there
was such a noise of an Army twice heard at Antioch in Syria, and such sounding
of Trumpets, that the City ran in Arms to keep the walls. The like happened at
Ptolemais. And likewise at Pergamus, in the remote and hidden places of the
Temple, which are called (...), into which it is not lawful for any man to
enter but the Priests, were bells heard to ring. Besides at Tralles, in the
Temple of Victory (where they had set up a Statue to Caesar) there was showed a
Palm Tree, which in those days was grown from between the joints of the
stones, out of the pavement.

Caesar staying a few days in Asia, hearing that Pompey was seen at Cyprus,
and conjecturing he went into Egypt, for the amity and correspondency he had
with that Kingdom, besides other opportunities of the place; he came to
Alexandria with two legions, one that he commanded to follow him out of
Thessaly, and another which he had called out of Achaia, from Fusius a Legate,
together with eight hundred horse, ten Galleys of Rhodes, and a few ships of
Asia. In these Legions were not above three thousand two hundred men; the rest
were either wounded in the sights, or spent with travel, and the length of the
journey. But Caesar trusting to the fame of his great exploits, did not doubt
to go with these weak forces, thinking every place would entertain him with
safety.

At Alexandria he understood of Pompey's death: The Prie^ts of Egypt said, That
whenever the Axe and the bundle of Rods came into Alexandria, the power of
their Kings should presently* case: according as it was written in a Column of
gold, at Memphis.
and as he was going out of the ship, he heard a clamor of the sould^ers,
which the King had left to keep the town, and saw a concourse of people
gathered about him, because the bundle of Rods was carried before him; all the
multitude crying out, that the Kings authority was diminished. This tumult
being appeased, there were often uproares and commotions of the people for
every day after; and many soldiers were slain in diverse parts of the City.
Whereupon Caesar gave order for other Legions to be brought him out of Asia,
which he raised and enrolled of Pompey's soldiers. He himself was sta^ed by
the winds called Etesiae, which are against them that sail from Alexandria.

In the mean time, forasmuch as he conceived that if the controversy between
the King and his sister did appertain to the people of Rome, then consequently
to him, as Consul; and so much the rather it concerned his office, for that in
his former Consulship, there was a league made by the decree of Senate with
Ptolemey the Father: in regard hereof he signified that his pleasure was, that
both the king and his sister Cleopatra should dismiss their Armies, and rather
plead their Cause before him, then to decide it by Arms.

There was at that time one Photinus an Eunuch, that had the administration of
the kingdom during the minority of the Child. He first began to complain among
his friends, and to take it in scorn, that the King should be called out to
plead his Cause: and afterward having gotten some assistance of the Kings
friends, he drew the Army secretly from Pelusium to Alexandria, and made
Achillas (formerly mentioned) General of all the forces; inciting him forward
as well by his own promises, as from the King, and instructing him by Letters
and Messengers what he would have done.

Ptolemey the Father, by his last W^ll and Testament, had left for heirs the
eldest of two sons, and likewise the eldest of two daughters: and for the
confirmation thereof, had in the same Will charged and required the people of
Rome by all the gods, and by the league he made at Rome, to see this
accomplished. For which purpose he sent a copy of his Will to Rome, to be kept
in the Treasury; which by reason of the public occasions, that admitted no
such business for the present, were left with Pompey: and the Original, signed
and sealed up, was brought to Alexandria.

While Caesar was handling these things, being very desirous to end these
controversies by arbitrament, it was told him on a sudden, that the Kings Army
and all the Cavalry were come to Alexandria. Caesar's forces were not such that
he durst trust upon them, to hazard battle without the town; only it
remained, that he kept himself in such places as were most fit and convenient
for him within the town* and to learn what Achillas intended. Howsoever, he
commanded all the soldiers to arm; and exhorted the King, that of those which
were nearest unto him, and of greatest authority, he would send some to
Achillas, to know his meaning.

Dioscorides and Serapion being deputed thereunto, having been both
Ambassadors at Rome, and in great place about Ptolemey the Father, they came
to Achillas: whom as soon as they were come into his presence, and before he
would hear or understand what they would have, he commanded to be taken away
and slain. Of whom, one having received a wound, was carried away by his own
people for dead: the other was slain outright. Whereupon Caesar wrought to get
the King into his own hands; thinking that his Name and Title would prevail
much amongst his people: as also to make it appear, that this war was rather
moved by the private practice of some seditious thieves, then by order and
commandment from the King.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe multiplicity of occasions and troubles which happen to such as have the
ordering of any businesses of import, does make that of Pliny often remembered;
Lib. 2. Ep. 8.
Veteribus negot^^s nova accr^scunt, nec tamen priora peraguntur; tot nexibus,
tot quasi catenis, majus indies occupationum agmen extenditur: New businesses
come in the neck of old, and yet the first are not dispatched: with so many
ties and chains as it were, is the troup of businesses every day made longer
and longer. For albeit Pompey had now spent his malice, and was no more to
appear in Arms against Caesar: yet his hap was by slying, to draw him (as it
were by way of revenge) into a place, where he was necessarily to be entangled
in a dangerous war.

To th^se prodigies here mentioned, may be added that of Aulus Gellius, Lib.
15. cap. 18.
that The same day the battle happened, there fell out a strange wonder at
(...): where a certain Priest called Cornelius, of Noble race and Holy life,
suddenly fell into an ecstasy, and said, he saw a great battle afar^e off,
Darts and Piles she thick in the air, some slying, and some pursuing, great
slaughter, accompanied with many lamentable groans and cries: and in the end
cried out, that Caesar had got the victory. For which he was m^^ked for the
present, but afterward held in great admiration.

Pliny makes the small increase of Nilus to be a fore-teller of Pompey's
death; Lib. 5. cap. 9.
Minimumque Pharsalico bello: veluti necem Magni, prod^g^^ quodam, slumine
aversante: The least increase of Nilus was at the time of the Pharsalia^^
battle: the very river prodigiously showing (as it were) a detestation of the
murder of the Great Pompey.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Caesar landeth his forces, takes Pharus, and causes Photinus to be slain.
THe forces that were with Achillas were neither for their number, or fashion
of men, or use and experience in war, to be contemned. For he had twenty two
thousand men in Arms. These troops consisted of the Gabinian soldiers: which
were now grown into a custom of life and liberty of the Egyptians; and having
forgot the name and discipline of the people of Rome, had there married wives,
and most of them had children. To these were added such as were gathered from
the thieves and robbers of Syria, the Province of Cilicia, and other finitimate
Regions: besides many banished men, and others condemned to die, that fled
thither. And for all our fugitives, there was ever a sure and certain receipt
at Alexandria, and a certain condition of life: for upon giving up of his name,
he was presently enrolled a soldier. And if one chanced to be taken and
apprehended by his Master, he was presently rescued by the concourse of
soldiers; who being all in the same condition, did strive for him as for
themselves. These required the Kings friends to be slain; these were accustomed
to rob rich men of their goods to better their pay, to besiege the Kings house,
to expel some out of the kingdom, and to send for others home, according to
an old custom and privilege of the Alexandrian Army.

There were besides two thousand horse, that had been of ancient continuance in
many of the wars held at Alexandria, and had brought back Ptolemy the father,
and restored him to his kingdom; had slain Bibulus two sons, and had made war
with the Egyptians: and this use and knowledge they had of war. Achillas
trusting to these forces, and contemning the small number of Caesar's troops,
did take and possess Alexandria; and further, assaulting that part of the town
which Caesar held with his men, did first of all endeavor to break into his
house. But Caesar having disposed the cohorts in the streets and ways, did
bear out the assault. At the same time they sought likewise at the Port, and it
came at length to a very forcible encounter: for having drawn out their troops,
the fight began to be ^ot in diverse streets and lanes; and the Enemy (in great
troops) went about to possess themselves of the Galleys, of which there were
50. found there, that were sent to serve Pompey, and returned home again after
the battle in Thessalia. These were all Triremes and Quinqueremes, rigged, and
ready to go to sea.

Besides these, there were twenty two, which were always accustomed to be the
best, for the defense of Alexandria, and were all furnished with decks: which
if they had taken, together with Caesar's shipping, they would have had the
Haven and the Sea at their command; and by that means, hindered Caesar from
succors and provision of victual. In regard whereof they fought hard on both
sides; Achillas expecting victory, and our men for their safety. But Caesar
obtained his purpose: and because he was not able to keep so many several
things with so small forces, he set them all on fire, together with those that
were in the Road, and presently landed some soldiers at Pharus; which is a
tower in an Island, of a great height, and built with strange workmanship,
taking that name from the Island. This Island lies over against Alexandria, and
so makes it a Haven. But former Kings had enlarged it nine hundred paces in
length, by raising great mounts in the Sea: and by that means had brought it so
near to the town, that they joined them both together with a bridge.

In this Island dwelt diverse Egyptians, and made a Village of the bigness of a
Town: and what ships soever had fallen off their course, either by tempest or
error, were there robbed by those Egyptians. For by reason of the narrow
entrance, no ships can come into the Haven, but by the favor and leave of them
that hold Pharus. Caesar being afraid of this, while the Enemy was busy in
fight, landed his soldiers, took the place, and there put a garrison. Whereby
he brought it to pass, that both corn and succors might safely come by sea to
supply him: for he had sent to all the confining Regions for aid. In other
places of the town they so fought, that they gave over at length upon equal
conditions: (which happened by reason of the narrowness of the passages) and a
few of each side being slain, Caesar took in such places as were most
convenient for him, and fortified them in the night. In this quarter of the
Town was contained a little part of the Kings house (wherein he himself, at his
first arrival, was appointed to lodge) and a Theater joined to the house,
which was in stead of a Castle, and had a passage to the Port, and to other
parts of Road. The days following he increased these fortifications, to the
end he might have them as a wall against the enemy, and thereby need not fight
against his will.

In the mean time, the younger daughter of King Ptolemey hoping to obtain the
Crown now in question, found means to conveigh herself out of the Kings house
to Achillas; and both jointly together undertook the managing of that war. But
presently there grew a controversy between them, who should command in Chief;
which was the cause of great largess and rewards to the soldiers, either of
them being at great charges and expenses to gain their good wills.

While the Enemy was busied in these things, Photinus, the Governor of the
young King, and Superintendent of the kingdom on Caesar's party, sent
Messengers to Achillas, exhorting him not to desist in the business, or to be
discouraged. Upon the discovering and apprehension of which Messengers, Caesar
caused him to be slain. And these were the beginnings of the Alexandrian war.

OBSERVATIONS.
PHarus is a little Island in the Sea over against Alexandria; in the midst
whereof, Ptolemy Philadelph built a tower of an exceeding height, all of white
Marble. It contained many Stages, and had in the top many great Lanterns, to
keep light in the night, for a mark to such as were at Sea. The Architector
ingraved thereupon this inscription; Sostrates G^^idius, the son of Dexiphanes,
to the Gods Conservatours, for the safety of Navigatours.

It was reckoned for one of the seven Wonders of the world. The first whereof
was the Temple of Diana at Ephesus. The second was the Sepulcher which
Artemisia, Queen of Caria, made for her Husband Mausolus, whose ashes she
drank. The third was the Colossus of the Sun at Rhodes. The fourth was the
Walls of Babylon. The fifth was the Pyramides of Egypt. The sixth was the
Image of Jupiter Olympius at Elis, which was made by Phidias, and contained
threescore cubits in height; and was all of Ivory, and pure Gold. And the
seventh was this Pharus.

FINIS.
A CONTINUATION of the VVARRES in GALLIA, Beginning where Caesar left, and
deducing the History to the time of the CIVIL WARS. Written by A. HIRTIUS
PANSA.

With some short Observations thereupon.

Together with The MANNER of our MODERN TRAINING, or TACTICK PRACTICE.

LONDON, Printed by ROGER DANIEL: 1655.

THE EIGHTH COMMENTARY OF THE VVARRES IN GALLIA, Written by AULUS HIRTIUS.
CHAP. I.
The Galls raise new troubles in diverse places. Caesar scatters and wastes
the Bituriges, and after that the Carnutes.
AFter that all Gallia was subdued, forasmuch as Caesar had rested no part of
the former Summer from war, he was desirous to refiesh his Soldiers after so
great pains taken, the rest of the winter season; when news was brought him
that many States at the selfsame time, did lay their heads together again about
war, and make conspiracies. Whereof there was reported a very likely cause;
in that it was known to all the Galls, that there could not any power so great
be assembled into one place, as should be able to withstand the Romans: neither
if many States at once made war in diverse places at one instant, could the army
of the people of Rome have sufficient, either of aid, or of time, or of men of
war to pursue all at once: and there ought not any State to refuse the lot of
their misfortune, if by the respite thereof, the rest might set themselves at
liberty.

The which opinion to the intent it should not settle in the minds of the
Galls, Caesar leaving M. Antonius the Quaestor with charge of his winter
garrisons, went with a strong company of horsemen the last day of December from
Bibracte to his twelfth Legion, which he had placed not far from the borders
of the Hedui, in the country of the Bituriges, and takes thereunto the
eleventh Legion which was next unto it. Leaving two Cohorts to defend his stuff
and carriages, he led the rest of his army into the most plentiful fields of
the Bituriges: the which being a large country and full of towns, could not be
kept in aw with the garrisoning of one Legion amongst them, but that they
prepared for war and made conspiracies.

By the sudden coming of Caesar, it came to pass (which must needs happen to
such as are unprovided and scattered abroad) that such as were tilling the
ground without fear, were surprised in the fields by our horsemen, before they
could get them into the Towns. For at that time, the common token of invasion
which is wont to be perceived by burning of houses, was by Caesar's commandment
forborne, lest they should either want forage and corn if they were minded to
make any further rode into the country, or else, that their enemies for fear
of the fires, should convey themselves out of the way.

After that many thousands of men had been taken, the Bituriges being sore
afraid, such of them as could escape out of the Romans hands at their first
coming, upon confidence either of the old acquaintance and familiarity that had
been privately between them, by reason of resorting as guests one to another,
or of their mutual agreement and partaking in the same devices, fled into the
next cities: but all was in vain. For Caesar by great journeys came so suddenly
upon all places, that he gave not any city leisure, to think of the safeguard
of other folks rather then of themselves. Through the which speed, he both kept
his friends faithful unto him, and put the wavering sort in such fear, that he
compelled them to be glad to receive peace.

The matter standing in this case, when the Bituriges saw that through Caesar's
gentleness there was yet a way for them to return into his favor again, and
that the next States had delivered him hostages, and were thereupon received to
mercy, without further punishment: they themselves did in like wise. Caesar,
because his men had patiently endured so great travel in the winter days,
through most cumbersome ways, in intolerable cold weather, and continued most
resolutely in the same to the uttermost, promised to give to his soldiers two
hundred sesterces apiece, and to the Captains 2000 apiece, in the name of a
prey: and so sending his Legions again into their wintering places, he himself
returned to Bibracte the fourtieth day after his setting forth. There as he was
ministering of Justice, the Bituriges sent messengers unto him, desiring help
against the Carnutes, whom they complained to make war upon them.

Upon the receipt of this news, when he had not lain in garrison past eighteen
days, he draws the fourteenth and sixteenth Legions out of garrison from the
river Arar, where he had placed them for the speedy purveiance of corn and
victual, as was showed you in the last book: and with those two Legions went
to prosecute the Carnutes.

When our enemies heard of the coming of our army, the Carnutes moved with the
calamity of others, left their towns and villages that they dwelt in, which
they had made upon the sudden with little cottages for necessities sake to keep
off the winter; (for since they were conquered of late, they had lo^^ many of
their walled towns:) and fled scattering abroad. Caesar, forasmuch as he would
not put his soldiers to the abiding of the unseasonable sharp storms which
chiefly at that time fell, encamped himself within Genabum, a town of the
Carnutes, and housed his soldiers partly in the buildings of the Galls, and
partly in such buildings as being unfinished they thatched in haste with the
straw that was brought in to cover their tents and cabines. Nevertheless he
sends abroad his horsemen and auxiliary footmen into all parts whither he
heard his enemies resorted: and that was not in vain; for commonly our men
returned ever with a great booty.

The Carnutes being put to it with the hardness of the winter, and the terror
of the danger, being driven out of house and home, and not daring to stay any
where any long time, the woods being not able to defend them from the
bitterness of the storms, were scattered abroad, and with the loss of a great
part of them, dispersed into the next cities.

CHAP. II.
The Bellovaci and other States under the leading of Corbeus and Comius invade
the Suessiones: Caesar marches against them.
CAesar at that hard time of the year, thinking it enough to disperse the
powers that were assembling, to the intent no beginning of war might spring
up, and weighing how much it concerned him, to prevent any open war from
breaking out the beginning of the next summer; he placed G. Trebonius in
garrison at Genabum with those two Legions that he had there about him: and
forasmuch as he was by often messages certified from the men of Rhemes, that
the Bellovaci (who excelled all Galls and the Belgae also in military fame)
and the States adjoining unto them, under the conduct of Corbeus of Beanvoys
and Comius of Arras, levied men of war, and assembled them into one place, to
the intent with their whole power to invade the borders of the Suessiones,
which were appertaining to the men of Rhemes; thinking it stood not only upon
his honor, but also tended to his own security for the future, to save his
allies, which had deserved well of the Commonweal, from displeasure and damage,
he called the eleventh legion again out of garrison. Moreover he wrote to C.
Fabius to bring the two legions that he had, into the confines of the
Suessiones; and sent for one of those two legions that were with T. Labienus.
So according as his garrisons lay for the purpose, and as the slate of the
war required, to his own continual trouble, he put sometimes one of his
legions and sometimes another, to march from their quarters.

With this power that he had assembled he went against the Bellovaci: and
encamping himself in their country, sent abroad his horsemen into all quarters
to glean up some of them, by whose means he might learn what his enemies
purposed to do. His horsemen doing their duty, brought word how few were found
in the houses, and those not such as had stayed behind to till the ground, (for
they were purposely removed out of all places) but such as had been sent back
again to spy. Of whom Caesar enquiring in what place the forces of the
Bellovaci were, and what was their intent; found that all the Bellovaci were
gathered together into one place: and that the Ambiani, Aulerci, Caletes,
Velocasses, and Attrebates had chosen a very high ground to encamp in, enclosed
with a troublesome marish, and had conveyed all their stuff into woods that
were farther off: Of the which war there were many Noblemen that were
ringleaders, but the multitude obeyed Corbeus chiefly, because they understood
that he hated most the name of the people of Rome: And that Comius of Arras was
a few days before gone to fetch aid of the Germans, who were their next
neighbors, and swarmed in multitude of people. He learned moreover at their
hands, that the Bellovaci by the consent of all the Noblemen, at the earnest
instance of the Commons, were determined, if Caesar came (as it was said he
would) but with three legions, to offer him battle, lest afterward to more
disadvantage and hinderance they should be compelled to encounter with his
whole host: And if he brought a greater power with him, then to keep themselves
still in the same ground that they had chosen, and by ambushes to keep the
Romans from forage (which by reason of the time of the year was scarce, and
also lay scattering) and from corn, and other victuals and things necessary for
their army.

The which things when Caesar understood by the concurring report of many,
considering how still of wisdom this project was, and how far from the
rashness that the barbarous people are wont to use, he determined to make the
best advantage of all things, to the intent his enemies disdaining his small
company, should make the more haste to come into the field. For he had three
old practiced legions, the seventh, eighth, and ninth, of singular valor and
prowess; and the eleventh, which was of chosen young men of great hope and
towardness, which having at that time received eight years wages, was
notwithstanding looked upon as not comparable to the other three either for
standing, or for valor and courage.

Wherefore summoning an assembly, and there declaring all things that had been
reported unto him, he confirmed the hearts of the common soldiers, if
peradventure with the number of three legions he might draw out his enemies to
fight with him in the field. He set his battle in this order: the seventh,
eighth, and ninth legions went before the carriages, and the eleventh closed in
the rere thereof; the which notwithstanding was but small, as it is wont to be
in such expeditions: and this he did, lest the enemies should find a greater
number then they expected. By this means, in a square battle almost, he brought
his host in sight of his enemies sooner then they looked for him.

When the Galls beheld these legions, so suddenly set in order, marching
toward them apace, as it had been in a pitched field (whereas it was reported
to Caesar that they intended to carry on their business with confident
boldness,) whether it were for the peril of the encounter, or the suddenness
of our coming, or that they looked to see what we intended to do, they set
themselves in order of battle before their camp, and would not descend from the
higher ground. Albeit that Caesar was desirous to have fought with them, yet
wondering at the great number of his enemies, he pitched his camp directly over
against theirs, on the other side of a valley, which was more in deepnesse
downward, then in wideness any way at the bottom. This camp he commanded to be
fortified with a rampire of twelve foot, and an open gallery to be builded upon
it according to the measure of the same height, and a double ditch to be made
of fifteen foot apiece, with sides plumme down, and many turrets to be reared
of three stories high, and to be joined together with draw-Bridges to let down
at pleasure, the fronts whereof were fenced with grates of wicker; to the
intent the enemy might be repulsed with double rows of defendants: of which the
one from the Bridges, the more out of danger they were by reason of the height,
so much the boldlier and the farther off might they send their darts; the other
the nearer they were placed to their enemy upon the Rampire, so much the better
should they be covered from the artillery that might fall down upon them: and
over the gates he made high towers. This kind of fortification was to two good
purposes: for by the greatness of his works and his pretense of fear, he hoped
to put the barbarous Galls into a great confidence; and whenever he should
have occasion to send out far for forage or victuals, he saw that the camp
might be defended with a small power, the strength of the fortifications was so
great. In the mean while, parties on both sides would several times go out and
skirmish in the marish that was between our two camps: the which oftentimes
either the Galls and Germans that were of our host would pass, and eagerly
pursue their enemies; or else in like manner our enemies passing over it, did
send our men farther off.

It happened in our daily forraging (as there was no other shift, forasmuch as
we were fain to fetch forage at houses that stood scattering far a sunder)
that our forrages being dissevered in disadvantageous places, were entrapped.
The which thing as it was some loss to us of our beasts of carriage, and
slaves, so it heightened the foolish courages of the barbarous Galls: and that
so much the more, because Comius of Arras (who we said before was gone to fetch
aid of the Germans) was returned with some horse; of whom although there was
not above the number of five hundred, yet the Galls were puffed up at the
coming of the Germans.

CHAP. III.
Caesar strengthens himself with more forces. The men of Rhemes worsted by the
Enemy, and they again by the Germans on Caesar's party.
WHen Caesar perceived how his enemies kept themselves many days together
within their camp, which was fortified both with a marish and also with
advantage of the ground, and that he could neither assault them without
manifest peril, nor enclose the place where they were with any fortifications,
without a greater army; he directed his letters to Trebonius, that he should
with all haste possible send for the thirteenth legion which wintered amongst
the Bituriges, under T. Sextius the Legate, and so with three legions make long
marches to come to him. In the mean season he sent out by turns the horsemen of
Rhemes and of the Lingones and other States, of whom he had called forth a
great number, to safe conduct the forragers, and to withstand the sudden
assaults of the enemy.

This being done day by day, and our men taking now less heed, because it was
an ordinary matter with them, (which thing for the most part comes to pass by
daily custom) the Bellovaci with a band of chosen footmen, knowing the places
where our horsemen daily kept their standings, laid ambushes in woody places:
and the next day they sent thither their horsemen, first to draw cut our men
into the danger of their ambushments, and then to assail them as they were
enclosed. The lot of this ill luck lighted upon the men of Rhemes, whose turn
it was to perform the duty that day. For they, when they had espied the
horsemen of their enemies upon the sudden, despising them because they
werelesse in number, followed them over-greedily, and were enclosed by the
footmen. Whereby being disordered, they retired more hastily then horsemen are
accustomed to do in battle, with the loss of Vertisco the Prince of their
State, and Captain of their horsemen. Who being scarce able to sit upon a horse
by reason of his age, would notwithstanding (according to the custom of the
Galls) neither seek to disburden himself of the Captainship by excuse of his
age, nor suffer the encounter to be fought without him. With this lucky
battle, wherein they slew the Prince and Captain of the men of Rhemes, the
courages of our enemies were heightened and raised: and our men were taught by
their own harm, to search the places better where they should keep their
standings, and to follow their enemy more advisedly when he fled. In the mean
while ceased not the daily skirmishes in the sight of both our Camps, which
were made at the foords and passages of the marish.

In this kind of exercise, whenas the Germans (whom Caesar had for the same
purpose fetched over the Rhene, that they should fight intermingled with his
horsemen in the battle,) had all boldly passed the marish, and slaying a few
that made resistance, followed eagerly upon the rest of the multitude; not only
they that were overthrown at hand or wounded aloof, but also they that were
wont to succor afar off, were so stricken with fear, that they ran away
shamefully; and never left flying from higher ground to higher, which they
oftentimes lost, before they either recovered into their Camp, or (as some did
for very shame) fled farther off. With whose danger the rest of the host was so
troubled, that it can scarcely be judged, whether good success (were it never
so small) would make them more arrogant, or a misfortune (were it never so
mean) would make them more cowed and fearful.

CHAP. IIII.
The Galls discamp, and are pursued by Caesar. The routing of part of them,
and the death of Corbeus.
AFter they had linked many days in the same Camp, when the Captains of the
Bellovaci understood that C. Trebonius, one of Caesar's Legates, was at hand
with mo Legions, fearing the like siege as was at Alexia, they sent away in the
night all such as by reason of years or otherwise wanted strength, and all
such as wanted armor among them, and with them they sent away also their
carriages. While they were setting forth this troubled and confused company,
(for the Galls even when they go lightest, are wont to have a great multitude
of Carts following them) daylight came upon them; and therefore they set their
men in battelarray in their camp, lest the Romans should pursue, before the
company of their carriages could get any thing forward. But Caesar thought it
not good to assail them that were ready to defend themselves, having so high a
hill to climb up unto them; and yet he thought to come so near them with his
host, as that they might not depart out of the place where they were without
danger, our men being hard at hand ready to fall upon them. Therefore whereas
he perceived that the troublesome marish parted Camp from Camp, (the difficult
passage whereof might hinder the speedy pursuit of our enemies) and that the
same ridge of the hill which went from the farther side of the marish almost to
the camp of the enemies, was parted from their said camp with a small valley:
he made bridges over the marish, and passing over his army, got quickly into
the plain of the said ridge, the which on two sides was fortified with a steep
descent. There embattelling his men, he came to the farthest end of the ridge:
and ordered his battles in such a place, from whence with an engine artillery
might be shot amongst the thickest of the enemies.

The Galls trusting to the advantage of the place, when they would neither
have refused the encounter, if perchance the Romans should have adventured up
the hill against them, nor yet durst by little and little diminish their battle
by severing themselves, lest when they had been out of array, they might hap to
have been set upon, kept themselves in order of battle. Whose wilfulness
Caesar perceiving, kept twenty Cohorts in a readiness, and pitching his tents
in the same place, commanded his camp should be fortified. As soon as the works
were finished, he set his Legions in array before the Rampire, and appointed
the horsemen to their standings with their horses ready bridled.

When the Bellovaci saw the Romans in a readiness to pursue them, and that
themselves could not without peril either lodge that night, or continue any
longer in the same place where they were, they devised this shift to recover
themselves. In the place where they were set together, (for it is declared in
Caesar's former Commentaries, how the Galls are wont to sit down in the
battle) they received from hand to hand one of another bundles of straw and
fagots, whereof there was great store in their camp, and cast it all on a heap
before their battle, and in the later end of the day, at a watchword that was
given, they set it on fire all at one instant: by means whereof the continual
flame suddenly took away the sight of all their army from the Romans: and
therewithal the savage Galls fled away as fast as their legs could bear them.

Albeit that Caesar could not perceive the departing of his enemies, by reason
of the flame that was betwixt them; yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as he
suspected it to be a deceit practiced by them, that they might the safelier fly
away; he marched his footmen forward, and sent his ^orsemen to pursue them.
Howbeit for fear of treachery in the business, least perhaps his enemies
should abide still in the same place, and only draw us forth into a ground of
disadvantage, he went the slower pace. His horsemen fearing to venture into the
smoke and thick flame (and if any were so resolute as to enter it, they could
scarce see the fore-parts of their own horses) lest they should be intrapped,
gave the Bellovaci free liberty to recover themselves whither they would. Thus
our enemies by their flight, which was mixed with fear and subtilty, escaping
without any loss, went but ten miles off, and encamped themselves in a very
advantageous ground. From whence by laying ambushes both of horse and foot in
diverse places, they did the Romans great displeasure as they went a forraging.

After this had happened many and sundry times, Caesar learned of a captive,
that Corbeus, Captain of the Bellovaci, had chosen out of his whole host, six
thousand of the valiantest footmen, and a thousand horsemen, which he had laid
in ambush in the same place whether (for the plenty of provision and corn that
was there) he judged the Romans would send to forage.

This being known, Caesar brings forth more legions then usual, and sends
his horsemen before as he was wont to do, to safe conduct his forragers. Among
them he mingleth for their assistance many light-armed footmen, and himself
with his legions follows as near as possibly he might. The enemies that were
laid in ambush, having chosen a field for their purpose, not above a mile over
every way, environed round about, either with cumbersome woods, or else a very
deep river, beset it with their ambushment, as it had been with a toil.

Our men, forasmuch as they were privy to the design of their enemies
beforehand, being ready both with heart and hand to fight, seeing their legions
followed hard after them, would refuse no encounters but went rank by rank down
into the said place. At whose coming, Corbeus thinking an occasion of doing
some good to be fallen into his hands, first discovers himself with a small
number, and gives charge upon the next troops. Our men stoutly withstand the
brunt, and flock not many into one place at once; which in skirmishes of horse
is wont commonly to happen through fear, and their clustering together turns
to their own loss. They being thus engaged in small parties, and having a care
still that their fellows should not be circumvented, the rest brake out of the
woods while Corbeus was fighting. Then was the encounter hot and doubtful.
After it had continued indifferent a good space, by little and little came
their footmen in array out of the woods, which compelled our horsemen to give
back. But they were quickly relieved again by the light-armed footmen, which as
was said were sent before our legions, who being intermixed among the horsemen
fought stoutly.

The encounter continued a good while doubtful. But as the course of war
requires, they that had withstood the first brunt of them that lay in ambush
for them, had thus much the advantage, that they received not unawares any foil
at their hands. In the mean while our legions drew nearer, and diverse
messengers brought word both to our men and to our enemies at one and the same
time, that the General was at hand with his army in battle array. Which thing
being known, our horsemen trusting to the help of the Cohorts, lay about them
very eagerly, lest if they should have delayed the matter, they might have
given the footmen part of the honor of the victory. Upon this our enemies
hearts began to fail; and they sought to fly by several ways: but all was in
vain. For by the disadvantage of the same places in which they would have
enclosed the Romans, were they themselves taken tardy and could not get out.
Notwithstanding, being vanquished and altogether out of heart, when they had
lost the greatest part of their company, like men amazed they betook themselves
to ^light; and some made toward the woods, others toward the river, where being
overtaken by our men that followed eagerly after them, they were all slain. In
the mean time Corbeus, whose heart could by no misfortune be daunted or
overcome, never departed out of the battle, nor made toward the woods, neither
could by the entreaty of our men be persuaded ^o yield himself: but fighting
most valiantly, and hurting many of our men, he so far exasperated the
victours, that they could not forbear to throw their darts at him, and dispatch
him.

CHAP. V.
The remainder of the Galls submit themselves to Caesar. Comius in danger to
be slain by treachery.
THe matter being brought to this pass, Caesar pursuing his newly-got victory,
forasmuch as he thought that his enemies being discouraged with so great a
misfortune, would immediately upon the news thereof, forsake the place where
they were encamped, which was said to be not above eight miles from the place
where the slaughter was made; although he saw it would be some trouble to him
to pass the river, yet passed he his army, and marched toward them. But the
Bellovaci and the other States, upon the return of a few of their men, and
those wounded, out of the chase, which had escaped the mischance by means of
the woods, understanding by them their own great misfortune and misery by the
death of Corbeus, the loss of their horsemen, and the ^laughter of their
stoutest footmen, and mistrusting that the Romans would out of hand come upon
them; immediately called an assembly by the sound of a trumpet, and cried all
with one voice, to send ambassadors and hostages to Caesar.

When Comius of Arras perceived that this motion would be entertained, he fled
to those Germans of whom he had borrowed assistance to the war. The rest sent
ambassadors presently unto Caesar, desiring him to content himself with that
punishment of his enemies, which if he might have laid upon them without battle
in their chief prosperity, they were well assured that of his clemency and
courtesy he would not have done it. The Bellovaci said that their power was
weakened by the loss of their horsemen, many thousands of their choicest
footmen were cut off, scarce any escaping to bring tidings of the slaughter:
yet notwithstanding their great misfortune, they had by that battle received
this happiness, that Corbeus, the author of the war and raiser of the
multitud^, was slain. For as long as he was alive, the Senate could never bear
so great sway in the city, as the rude and unskilful commonalty.

As the ambassadors were speaking these things, Caesar put them in mind, that
about the same time the last year, the Bellovaci and other States of Gallia
raised war, and that they above all others stood most stiffly in their
opinion, and would not be reduced to obedience by the submission of the rest.
He told them, he knew and understood it was an easy matter to lay the fault of
their offense upon him that was dead. But he was sure that there was no man of
so great power, that against the noblemens wills, the Senate resisting him, and
all good men withstanding him, could with a weak handful of the commonalty,
raise a war, and go through with it. Nevertheless he was satisfied with the
punishment which they had brought upon themselves.

The night following, the ambassadors returned this answer to those that sent
them, and forthwith they gave hostages. Then also the ambassadors of other
States, which waited to see what success the Bellovaci would have, came to
Caesar, giving hostages, and performing his commands; only Comius stood off,
who durst* not for fear trust his life into any man's hands. For the year before
Titus Lab^enus perceiving how while Caesar was ministering justice in the hither
Gallia, Comius stirred up the States and made confederacies against Caesar,
thought he might without being accounted a faith^breaker, revenge his
treacherous carriage. And thereupon, because be thought he would not at his
sending for come into the camp, lest he should by such a message make him more
cautious, he sent C. Volusenus Quadratus to murder him, under pretense of
communing with him: and for the performance of the matter, he sent with him
certain selected Centurions for the purpose. When they came to conference, and
that Volusenus (as it was agreed upon) had caught Comius by the right hand, one
of the Centurions, as if he had been moved at the strangeness of the matter,
gave Comius a shrewd blow on the head with his sword; howbeit he could not
dispatch him, because his friends stepped in and saved him. By and by was drawing
of swords on both sides, and yet none of both parties were minded to fight, but
to fly away: our men, because they believed that Comius had had his deaths
wound; the Galls, because perceiving the treachery, they feared there had been
more behind then they saw. Upon which business it is reported, that Comius
vowed he would never come in the fight of any Roman.

CHAP. VI.
Caesar disposes his forces into several parts of Gallia, and himself wastes
the country of Ambiorix.
WHen Caesar had subdued the Nations that were most warlike, perceiving there
was now no City that prepared war, to stand against him, but that many to
eschew the present yoke of the Roman Empire, left their towns and fled out of
the fields, he determined to send his army abroad into diverse quarters. M.
A^tonius the Quaestor with the eleventh legion he took to himself. C. Fabius
the Legate with twenty five cohorts he sends into the farthest part of all
Gallia, because he heard say that certain States were there in arms, and that
he thought C. Caninius Reb^lus the Legate had not a sufficient strength of
those two legions that were with him already. T. Labienus he called unto him
from the place where he was: and the twelfth legion which wintered under him,
he sent into Gallia Togatu, to defend the towns that the Romans had there
peopled with their own Citizens, lest any such harm should happen to them by
invasion of the barbarous people, as had happened the summer before to the
Tergestini, who were surprised and spoiled of their goods by their sudden
invasions.

He himself set forward to waste and spoil the borders of Ambi^rix; who flying
before him for fear from place to place, when he saw there was no hope to get
him into his hands, he thought it was most for his honor, so to despoil his
country of people, buildings and cattle, that his countrymen might so hate
him (if fortune reserved any countrymen for him) that for the calamities he
had brought upon his country, he might never have access thither again.

After he had sent abroad his host into all parts of Ambior^x his country, and
wasted all places with slaughter, bu^ning and rapi^e; having slain and taken
prisoners a great number of men, he sent Labienus with two legions among the
Tr^viri: whose country, by reason of the nearness thereof unto Germany* being
daily inured to the wars, is not much unlike to the Germans in rudeness and
savagenesse of life; neither did they obey the commandments of Caesar at any
time longer then we had an army in their country to compel them.

CHAP. VII.
A new wa^ raised in the territories of the Pictones. C. Fabius puts to
flight the forces of Dumnacus: subdueth the Carnutes and Are^orici.
IN the mean season C. Caninius the Legate, understanding by the messengers and
letters of Duracius, (who had continued always firm to the friendship of the
people of Rome,) that a great number of enemies were assembled in the borders
of the Pictones; forasmuch as a part of that City had renounced their
obedience, went to the town of Lemovicum. When he came near the town, and
understood by his prisoners, ^ow that Dumnacus Captain of the Andes; with many
thousands of men had enclosed Duracius* and that Lemovicum was besieged; he
durst not with his weak legions adventure upon his enemies, but pitched his
Camp in an advantageous ground. Dumnacus hearing of the approach of Caninius,
turned all his power against the Roman legions, determining to set upon them in
their Camp. After he had spent many days in the assault, and had lost many of
his men, and yet could not break down any part of their fortifications, he
returned again to besiege Le^ovicum.

At the same time, C. Fabius receives many Cities by composition, and assures
them with hostages; and is advertised by Caninius letters, of those things that
were done among the Pictones. Upon the knowledge whereof, he sets forth to
rescue Duracius.

But Dumnacus understanding of Fabius coming* forasmuch as he thought he should
hazard the losing all* if at once he should be compelled both to abide the
Romans his enemies without, and also to have an eye to and stand in fear of the
town* retired suddenly with all his forces from the place, and could not think
himself to be sufficiently in safety, before he had passed his army over the
river Loire, which by reason of the greatness thereof, was to be passed by a
bridge, and not otherwise.

Although Fabius was not yet come within fight of his enemies, not had joined
with Caninius, yet forasmuch as he was thoroughly informed by such as knew the
coast of the country, he suspected that his enemies would take that way which
they did. Therefore he marches with his army to the said bridge where his
enemies had passed, and commanded his horsemen to go no farther before the
footmen, then that they might upon occasion re^i^e into the same Camp without
tiring their horses. Our horse, a^ was commanded them, overtook the host of
Dumnacus and set upon them; and assaulting them flying and amazed, as they
marched with their luggage at their backs, slew a great number and took a great
prey: and so with good success retired into their camp.

The night following Fabius sent his horsemen before, so provided, that they
might encounter the enemy, and stay all the whole army until he should
overtake them. Q. Atius Varus the commander of the horse, a man of sinlar
courage and wisdom, having encouraged his men and overtaken the body of his
enemies, disposed certain of his troops in places convenient, and with the rest
of his horsemen gave charge upon his enemies. The cavalry of the enemy fought
so much the more boldly, because their foot were ready to assist them, who
being mingled through the whole army, as often as occasion was, did succor
them against our men. The encounter was very sharp. For our men despising them
whom they had vanquished the day before, and remembering that the legions
followed at their heels, ashamed to give ground, and desirous to get the day
before their coming, fought very valiantly against the footmen. On the other
side, our enemies believing that no greater forces of ours were behind,
according as they had seen the day before, thought a fair opportunity offered
them to destroy our cavalry utterly.

When they had fought a good while very eagerly, Dumnacus made a battle to
relieve his Cavalry, when occasion should be. But on the sudden our enemies
espied our legions coming up close together: at the sight of whom their horse
were stricken into such a fear, and the foot so amazed, that breaking through
their carriages, with great clamor and confusion they betook themselves every
where to flight. Then our Cavalry, who a little before had their hands full,
being heartened with joy of the victory, raised a great shout on all sides, and
casting themselves amongst them as they fled, made slaughter of them as far
as their horses breaths would serve to pursue them, and their arms were able to
strike them. Insomuch that having slain above twelve thousand men, armed, and
such as for fear had cast away their arms, they took all their carriages, none
escaping.

Out of the which chase forasmuch as it was certainly known, that Drapes the
Senon was escaped (who when Gallia first began to rebel, gathering to him men
of desperate fortunes out of all places, setting bondmen at liberty,
entertaining outlawes of all countries, and receiving highway thieves, had cut
off the carriages and victuals of the Romans) was going toward the Province
with five thousand men at the most, which he had rallied after the chase; and
that Luterius of Cahors joined himself with him, who in the former Commentary
is said to have attempted an invasion of the Province at the first insurrection
of Gallia; Caninius the Legate with two legions pursued after them, lest some
great dishonor might be received by those loose fellows terrifying and
harrasing the Province.

C. Fabius with the rest of the army went against the Carnutes and the other
States, whose power he knew to be crushed in the battle that was fought against
Dumnacus. For he doubted not, but he should find them more tractable to deal
with, by reason of the late overthrow: whereas if he should give them time of
respite, by the instigation of the said Dumnacus, they might be raised again.
Fabius with mavelous good luck and speed brought those States to submission.
For the Carnutes, who had been oftentimes before ill-handled by us, yet would
never listen to peace, now gave hostages, and came into subjection. And the
rest of the States situate in the farthest parts of Gallia, bordering upon the
sea, which are called Armoricae, following the example of the Carnutes, at the
coming of Fabius with his legions amongst them, performed his commandments
without delay.

Dumnacus thus driven out of his own country, wandering and lurking in corners
alone, was compelled to betake himself to the uttermost countries of all Gallia.

CHAP. VIII.
Drapes and Luterius seize upon Vxellodunum. Caninius pursues them,
overthrows their forces, takes Drapes prisoner, and with Fabius besieges
Vxellodunum.
BUt Drapes and Luterius, when they understood that Caninius approached with
his army, perceiving they could not without manifest peril enter the bounds of
the Province, considering how the army pursued them, nor yet range abroad on
thieving at their pleasure, stayed together in the country of the Cadurci.
There Luterius (who in times past while he was in prosperity, was able to sway
greatly with his countrymen, and had gotten great estimation among the rude
people, as one that was ever a beginner of new designs) took with his own and
Drapes his forces, a town called Uxellodunum, which had been formerly in his
tuition, a place excellently well fortified by the natural situation thereof,
and caused the townsmen to join with him.

To this town Caninius forthwith came; and perceiving that all parts of the
same were fortified with craggy cliffes, insomuch that though no man were there
to defend it, yet were it a hand matter for men in their armor to get up;
knowing also that the movables of the townsmen were great, which if they
should go about to carry privily away, they could not escape either our
horsemen or footmen: he divided his Cohorts into three parts, and made three
Camps upon a very high ground; from which by degrees, as his army was able, he
determined to draw a Rampire and trench round about the town.

The townsmen perceiving that, and remembering the miserable condition of
Alexia, feared the like siege. Luterius especially, who had tasted the smart of
that misfortune, advised them to lay for corn beforehand: whereupon they
determined by general consent, that leaving a part of the army for the defense
of the town, Luterius and Drapes with the best-provided, should go forth to
fetch in corn. This counsel being approved of, the next night Drapes and
Luterius, leaving two thousand armed men behind them, drew the rest out of the
town. After a few days being abroad, they brought in a great quantity of grain
out of the country of the Cadurci, who partly were willing to help them
therewith, and partly durst not withstand their taking it, as not being able to
make their part good against them. Oftentimes also they would fly out in the
night, and assault the castles of our camp. Upon which consideration C.
Caninius stayed the making of fortifications round about the town, lest he
should not be able to defend the circumvallation when it was finished, or else
should be forced to set but weak watches in so many places at once.

When they had gotten together a great quantity of grain, Drapes and Luterius
took up their standings not above ten miles from the town, the better at times
to convey it in; and they parted the charge between them. Drapes tarried behind
with part of the army to keep the Camp: Luterius drove the beasts with their
carriages toward the town: and setting guards there for his defense, about ten
of the clock in the night purposed by narrow ways through the woods, to convey
the corn into the town. The watchmen of our Camp hearing the noise of their
feet, and the scouts which were sent out reporting what was a doing, Caninius
caused his Cohorts to arm themselves quickly, and about break of day made
attempt out of the next castles upon the forragers. Who being frighted with the
suddenness of the mischief, fled to their guards. Which as soon as our men
perceived* they flew more fiercely upon them, and suffered none to be taken
alive. Luterius fled from thence with a few, but returned not to his Camp.

After this good success, Caninius understood by his prisoners, that part of
the army was behind in the Camp with Drapes, not above twelve miles off. Which
when he had learned by many to be truth, believing that one of the Generals
already put to flight, the remnant of the army being terrified, might easily be
overthrown; he thought it a great piece of happiness, that none escaped from
the slaughter into the Camp, to carry tidings of the mishap to Drapes. And
forasmuch as he saw there was no danger in putting the matter to trial, he
sent all his horsemen and the German footmen, swift and nimble fellows, before,
to the Camp of his enemies. One of his legions he left in his Camp, and the
other eased of all carriages, he took with him.

When he came near his enemies, his scouts that he had sent before, brought
word that (as the custom of the barbarous nations commonly is) they had
abandoned the higher ground, and encamped themselves by the River side; and
that our horse and the Germans had flown upon them suddenly ere they were
aware, and charged them. Upon the receipt of this news, he hasted forward with
his legion well armed and well appointed: and so the sign being given suddenly
on all sides, the higher places were taken by our men. At the doing whereof,
the Germans and our Cavalry seeing the Ensigns of our Legion, fought very
stoutly: and by and by all our Cohorts charged upon them round; so that in the
conclusion, they were all either slain, or prisoners, and a great booty taken.
Drapes himself was also taken in the same conflict.

Caninius having done his work successfully* without almost any hurt at all to
his soldiers* returned to besiege the town: and having now destroyed his enemy
without, for fear of whom he could not before divide his garrisons, nor environ
the town with fortifications; he commands the works to be carried on round
about the town. The next day came thither C. Fabius with his forces, and took
another part of the town to besiege.

CHAP. IX.
Caesar having punished Guturvatus for the revolt of the Carnutes, joyneth with
Caninius and Fabius before Vxellodunum. Upon his depriving them of water the
town yields. Caesar cutteth off their right hands.
IN the mean time, Caesar left M. Antonius the Quaestor with fifteen Cohorts
among the Bellovaci, to prevent any new confederacies among them for the
future: and he himself visited the other States, charging them with mo
hostages, and with comfortable words raising the fearful hearts of them all.

When he came amongst the Carnutes, in whose country (as Caesar has declared
in his former Commentary) the war first of all began, inasmuch as he
perceived them to be chiefly afraid, as being conscious to themselves of their
fault, to the intent he might the more speedily deliver the rest of the State
from fear, he demanded Guturvatus, the ringleader of that mischief, and raiser
of the rebellion, to be delivered unto him to be punished: who albeit he
trusted not himself with his own countrymen, yet all men made so diligent
search for him, that he was soon found out and brought to the Camp. Caesar,
contrary to his own nature, was compelled to punish him whether he would or no,
by the importunity of his soldiers, who imputed all the dangers and losses
that they had sustained by this war, unto Guturvatus: insomuch that his body
after it was in a manner whipped to death, was beheaded.

While Caesar ^arried here, he was advertised by several letters from
Caninius, what was done to Drapes and Luterius, and how the townsmen persevered
in their resolution: the small number of whom although he despised, yet he
deemed their wilfulness worthy of severe punishment; lest they might give
occasion to all Gallia, to think that they wanted not strength, but constancy
and resolution to withstand the Romans; or le^^ by their example, other cities
of Gallia trusting to the advantage and strength of places, should attempt to
recover their liberty: especially seeing he was sure that all the Galls knew
his commission lasted but one summer longer, which if they could hold out, they
should need to fear no danger after. And therefore leaving Q. Calenus the
Legate behind with two legions to follow leasurely after him by easy marches,
he himself with all his Cavalry made haste to Caninius.

When Caesar, contrary to all men's expectation, was come to Uxellodunum, and
saw the town environed with fortifications, perceiving that it was not for him
to break up his siege on any condition, and learning moreover by runawayes that
the town had great abundance of victuals: he assaied to cut of the water from
his enemies.

There was a river that ran through the bottom of the valley, which environed
well-near all the hill whereon the town stood, from whence the descent was
rough and steep on all sides. The nature of the place would not suffer this
stream to be turned any other way. For it ran in such sort at the very foot of
the hill, that there could be no ditch cut low enough to drain it. The townsmen
had hard and very steep coming down to it, insomuch that if our men withstood
them, they could not without wounds or danger of their lives, either come down
to the river, or get up the steep hill again. Which distress of theirs Caesar
well knowing, placed archers and slingers, and other artillery also, against
such places where the easiest coming down was, to keep the townsmen from the
water of the river: who afterward came for water all to one place. For under
the very walls of the town there gushed out a great spring of water, on that
side where there was a space almost of three hundred foot not encompassed with
the river.

Now whilst all the rest wished, and only Caesar perceived, that this spring
might be taken from the town, though not, without great damage; he began to
raise Vines directly against it toward the hill, and to make mounts, with great
labor and continual fighting. For the townsmen came running down from the
higher ground, and fought with our men at a distance without danger, wounding
many of them that pressed up too forwardly. Notwithstanding our men were
nothing deterred from bringing forward their Vines, endeavoring to overcome
the crabbednesse of the place, with their labor and works. At the same time
they drew privy mines to the head of the spring, which kind of work they might
do without any danger or mistrust of their enemies. A mount was cast up six
foot high, and thereupon was raised a tower of ten stories; not such a one as
might equal the height of the walls, (for that was not possible to be done
any way) but such a one as might exceed the top of the spring. From which
conveying darts with engines to the brim of the spring, so that the townsmen
could not fetch water without danger, not only all sorts of cattle, but also a
great number of men died for thirst.

The townsmen greatly astonished hereat, filled barrels with grease, pitch, and
shingles, and setting them on fire rolled them down upon our works, and at the
same time also fought very desperately, with the peril of fighting to keep the
Romans from quenching the fire. Suddenly there was a great flame in our works.
For whatsoever was thrown down from that steep place, the same staying against
the Vines and rampire, took hold upon the things that stayed them. On the other
side, our Soldiers, albeit they were hindered both with the dangerousnesse of
the encounter, and with the disadvantage of the place, yet they bare out all
things with a stout courage. For the thing was done both in an eminent place,
and also in the sight of our army: and a great cry was raised on both sides. So
that every man as far as he could, especially the most daring, (to the intent
his valor might the better be known and testified) ventured himself upon the
fire, and the weapons of his enemies.

Caesar when he saw many of his men wounded, commanded his Cohorts to climb up
the hill on all sides of the town, and to raise a shout as if they purposed to
scale the walls. Wherewith the townsmen being frighted, forasmuch as they knew
not what was doing in other places, called back their men from assaulting our
works, and placed them upon the walls. So our men having respite from fighting,
did quickly either quench the works that were on fire, or else cut them off
from the rest.

The townsmen stubbornly standing out, though they had lost a great part of
their men by thirst, and continuing still unanimously resolved, at length the
veins of the spring were cut off within the ground by mines, and turned another
way: by means whereof the fountain of running water was presently dried up.
Which so daunted the hearts of the defendants, who believed it could not be
done by the wit of man, but came to pass by the will of the gods; that when
they saw there was no other remedy, they yielded themselves.

Caesar being assured that his clemency was sufficiently known to all people,
and therefore he needed not to fear that it would be imputed to the cruelty of
his nature, if he dealt something harshly with them; and besides that,
considering with himself, that it might well be thought he little regarded the
good success of his counsels and undertakings, if by suffering such things
unpunished, others should be encouraged to rebel in diverse places: he thought
it requisite to hold the rest in aw by the punishment of these. And therefore
he cut off the hands of as many of them as were able to bear arms, and let them
live still, that the punishment of such wicked men might be more manifest to
the world.

CHAP. X.
Drapes dies, Luterius brought to Caesar. Labienus good success against the
Treviri. Caesar after his expedition into Aquitania, puts his army into
winter quarters.
DRapes, whom I declared to have been taken by Caninius, whether it were for
vexation and grief that he was in bands, or for fear of more heavy punishment,
fasted a few days from meat, and so starved.

At the same time Luterius, that escaped by flight from the battle (as I showed
before) fell into the hands of Epasnactus the Arvernian. For in often shifting
from place to place, he was fain to venture himself upon the courtesy and
civility of many, because he thought he could never continue any long time in
one place without danger, his heart misgiving him how much he had deserved to
have Caesar his enemy. Epasnactus the Arvernian being a faithful friend to the
people of Rome, as soon as he had gotten him into his hands, brought him
without further delay bound unto Caesar.

In the mean time Labienus warreth prosperously against the Treviri: and having
slain many both of the Treviri and also of the Germans, who were ready to
assist any man against the Romans, got the chief of them alive into his hands;
among whom was Surus the Heduan, a man of great valor and noble birth, who
alone of the Heduans had unto that day continued in arms against the people of
Rome.

Caesar knowing thereof, and forasmuch as he saw his affairs went well forward
in all parts of Gallia, weighing with himself how all Celtica and Belgica were
the former Summers conquered and subdued, and that he had never all this while
visited Aquitania, only he had made a kind of entrance into it by certain
victories gotten by P. Crassus: he marched thither with two legions, with
intent to bestow the later part of the summer there. Which thing (as he had
done all others before) he dispatched quickly and luckily. For all the States
of Aquitania sent ambassadors unto him, and gave him hostages.

After the accomplishment of these things, he went to Narbone with his guard of
horsemen, and sent his foot into their wintering-places by his Legates. Four
legions he placed in Belgium under M. Antonius, C. Trebonius, P. Vatinius, and
Q. Tullius, Legates. Two he quartered amongst the Heduans, whom he knew to be
of greatest authority in all Gallia. Two more he placed amongst the Treviri, in
the borders of the Carnutes, to be a stay to all the country that lay upon the
seacoast. The other two he placed in the borders of the Lemovici, not far
from the Arverni: that so there might not be any part of Gallia without an army.

After he had tarried a few days in the Province, and there speedily taken
cognizance of all their courts, sitting upon public controversies, and
rewarded such as had deserved well, (for he had a great desire to understand
how every man had carried himself toward the commonweal during the general
rebellion of all Gallia, which he had born out through the faithfulness and
assistance of the said Province) as soon as he had dispatched these things, he
returned to his legions into Belgium, and wintered at Nemetocenna.

CHAP. XI.
Comius of Arras overthrown in a battle of hrose by C. Volusenus, submits to
M. Antonius, and receives pardon.
WHile he was there, he understood that Comius of Arras had encountered with his
Cavalry. For Antonius being come into his winter quarters, and the city of
Arras concontinuing firmly loyal, Comius, who after his wound that we spoke of
before, was wont still to be ready at hand to his countrymen at every stir,
to the intent that if they would begin any new rising, they should not want a
head and a captain for the war; as long as the city continued obedient to the
Romans, he with his horsemen maintained himself and his followers by thieving,
for laying the ways, he cut off many convoyes that were going with provision
to the Roman garrisons. C. Volusenus Quadratus, the general of the horse, was
appointed to winter in the same place with Antonius: him did Antonius send to
pursue the horse of his enemies. Volusenus, beside the singular valor that was
in him, did also bear a great hatred toward Comius, and for that cause was the
more willing to execute the thing that was commanded him. Wherefore placing
diverse ambushes, he oftentimes set upon Comius horsemen, and put them to the
worse.

At last, when the contention grew more vehement, and that Volusenus, desirous
to cut off Comius himself, followed him somewhat more eagerly with a small
party, and Comius on the other side fled the faster away, thereby to draw him
farther from his company; at length espying his advantage, Comius suddenly
cried out to all his men, that as they were true unto him they should stand to
him, and not suffer the wound that was given him basely under color of
friendship, to be unrevenged: and therewithal turning his horse, he runs
from the rest of his company upon Volusenus. All his horse followed, and
because there were but a few of our men, they made them retreat, and pursued
them. Comius putting spurs to his horse, encountered the horse of Quadratus,
and with his spear thrust Volusenus by great violence through the thigh.

When our horse saw that their Captain was wounded, they bestirred themselves,
and turning again upon the enemy, put them back. Many of the enemies by the
violent charge of our men were beaten off and wounded: of whom some were
overthrown in the chase, and some were taken prisoners. As Comius escaped any
farther mishap by the swiftness of his horse: so our General being by him in
this battle sore wounded, was carried into the Camp in such a case, that it was
not likely he should have lived. And Comius, whether it were that he thought
himself sufficiently revenged, or because he had lost a great part of his men,
sent messengers to Antonius, giving hostages, and assuring him that he would
continue where it should please him to appoint, and do whatsoever he should
command him. Only one request he made, wherein he besought him to bear with his
fearfulness, that he might not be forced to come in the sight of any Roman.
Which request Antonius judging to proceed out of a real fear, and not without
good cause, he pardoned him according to his desire, and received his hostages.

CHAP. XII.
While Caesar is busy in quieting and ordering things in Gallia, and visiting
some municipall towns in Italy, his enemies conspire against him at Rome.
DUring the time that Caesar wintered ^in Belgium, his chief purpose was, to
keep the States in amity, and to take away all hope and occasion of war: for
he intended nothing less, then the carriage of his business so, as he should
be constrained to have war at the time of his departure: lest when he should
withdraw his army, he should leave any troubles behind, which all Gallia could
willingly engage in, so that it might be without present danger. And therefore
by entreating the cities honorably, by rewarding the noblemen highly, by
burdening the country with no new impositions, he easily kept all Gallia,
which now was tired out with so many unfortunate battles, in quiet and
obedience.

Winter being over, Caesar, contrary to his custom, hastes into Italy with as
much expedition as might be, to treat with the municipall towns and colonies,
and to commend unto them the suit of his Quaestor M. Antonius for the
Priesthood. For he made all the friends for him he could, both because the same
Antonius was his very dear friend, whom he had sent before to sue for that
promotion, as also to oppose the factions and unreasonable proceedings of a few
men, who by putting Antonius beside his purpose, sought to disparage Caesar now
going out of his command.

Albeit he had tidings by the way before he came near Italy, that Antony was
made Augur, yet he thought he had as good reason as before, to visit the
municipall towns and colonies, both to give them thanks for appearing in the
business, and for their civility showed in the behalf of Antony; as also to
commend unto them his own case, touching the honor which he purposed to sue
for the next year: and that the rather, because his adversaries proudly made
their brag, that L. Lentulus and C. Marcellus were created Consuls, to deprive
Caesar of all honor and authority; and that the Consulship was wrested from
Sergius Galba, though he had more voices on his side, because he was a familiar
friend of Caesar's, and had been engaged unto him as his Legate.

Caesar at his coming among the municipall towns, was entertained with
extraordinary affection and respect: that being his first coming from the
wars in Gallia. Nothing was omitted that could be devised for the decking and
adorning of their gates, ways, and places where Caesar should pass. All the
people came forth with their children to meet him by the way; sacrifices were
every where offered; the temples and marketplaces were hanged with clothes of
tapestrie: so that a man would have thought by the expressions of joy, there
had been some great triumph expected and provided for. So great costlinesse was
among the richer sort, and such hearty expression among the meaner sort.

When Caesar had lightly passed through all the countries of Gallia Togata, he
returned with all speed to his army at Nemetocenna, and calling all his legions
out of their winter quarters into the country of the Treviri, he went thither,
and there mustered them. T. Labienus he made governor of Gallia Togata,
thereby to get himself the more favor and furtherance in his suit for the
Consulship. He himself removed from one place to another, according as he found
it necessary for health. And albeit he heard oftentimes that Labienus was
solicited strongly by his enemies, and was also advertised how it was carried
on by a small faction at Rome, to take away part of his army from him by a
decree of the Senate: yet notwithstanding he neither gave credit to any thing
that was reported of Labienus, nor would be drawn to do any thing contrary to
the authority of the Senate. For he believed that if the Senators might give
their voices freely, he should easily obtain his purpose.

For C. Curio Tribune of the people, who had taken upon him the defense of
Caesar's cause and dignity, had oftentimes propounded to the Senate, that if
the fear of Caesar's army prejudiced any man, and seeing that the authority and
power of Pompey did not a little keep the Courts in aw; that both of them might
lay down their arms and dismiss their armies: and so should the City be at
liberty to use her own right as she pleased. This he not only propounded, but
began to divide the Senate about it: which the Consuls and the friends of Pompey
commanded should not be done: and so ruling the matter as they listed, they
departed. This was a great testimony of the whole Senate, and agreeable to
their former act.

For Marcellus the year before, opposing Caesar's dignity, contrary to the law
of Pompey and Crassus, and having put up a bill to the Senate for the discharge
of Caesar before the time of his commission was expired; when they had given
their voices, Marcellus, who sought all his honor by working spite against
Caesar, departed aside, and the Senate fell all of them quite upon other
matters.

This did not at all daunt the spirits of Caesar's enemies, but rather stirred
them up to strengthen their party, and thereby to compel the Senate to approve
of that which they had determined. Hereupon a decree was made, that Cneius
Pompeius should send one legion, and Caesar another, to the war against the
Parthians. But it was easily discerned that both these legions were taken from
Caesar. For the first legion, which Cneius Pompeius had sent unto Caesar levied
in the Province, he gave unto Caesar as one of his own number. Nevertheless,
albeit that no man need doubt but that Caesar was spoiled at the pleasure of
his enemies, yet he sent Pompey his legion again: and of his own forces, he
ordered the fifteenth legion which he had in the hither Gallia, to be delivered
to him according to the decree of the Senate. In the room whereof he sent the
thirteenth legion into Italy, to ly in garrison in the same place from whence
the fifteenth was drawn.

Then he distributed his army into winter quarters. C. Trebonius with four
legions he placed in Belgium: C. Fabius with as many amongst the Hedui. For
this he thought would be the best way to keep Gallia in most safety and quiet,
if the Belgae, who were the most valourous, and the Hedui, who were of most
authority, had forces quartered among them to keep them in obedience. This
done, he took his journey into Italy.

When he came thither, he understood that the two legions which he had
dismissed, which by the decree of the Senate should have been employed in the
Parthian war, were by C. Marcellus the Consul delivered to Pompey, and kept
still in Italy. Although by this dealing it was evident to all the world, what
was intended against Caesar, yet Caesar determined to take all things
patiently, as long as he had any hope left to decide the controversy rather by
the law then by the sword.

OBSERVATIONS UPON THE EIGHTH COMMENTARY OF THE VVARRES IN GALLIA.
SOme attribute the so frequent revolts of the Galls to their changeable and
impatient humor, which cannot endure to be lorded over by strangers: and
others, to the too great clemency of Caesar. I grant that clemency apt to
pardon emboldens to revolt; for that we easily forget all benefits which do not
entirely establish our liberty: but if cruelty causes them less frequent, yet
it renders them more dangerous; for that when despair drives men thereunto,
and that the hope of safety rests only in voctory, the revolted become all
valiant, obstinate, constant, and faithful to the end; which never falls out
where there is hope of the enemies clemency. We have here plentiful examples
thereof. Caesar in the greater part of the revolts of the Galls has often
found great facilities to reduce them to his obedience, by reason of his
clemency; which has been a powerful means for him to make divisions amongst
themselves, and to prevent obstinacy in their revolts: and if sometimes it has
so happened that he has used severity, it has been occasioned by fowl and
unworthy acts; as when the Veneti under public faith imprisoned the Roman
officers, which came to them to buy corn for the sustenance of the army. But I
cannot excuse that of Uxellodunum. On the contrary, the cruelties of the King
of Spain executed by the Duke of Alva, drove poor fishermen so into despair,
that they have shaken off his insupportable yoke; and with an admirable
constancy have maintained and enriched themselves, and are grown so potent, as
that they are able to resist him by land, and by sea take from him his treasure
in the Indies.

Caesar shows us also by his care and industry to get intelligence of the
enemies proceedings, (whether by taking prisoners in the field, or by having
good spies) the advantage which may be made thereof; many of his successful
designs having been founded thereupon, there being great advantage in the
attempting them; for that he which ass^ileth has more courage then he which is
assailed, and always believes the assailant to be the stronger, not knowing
what part he will assail, and ever jealous that he has some secret
intelligence. Briefly, all that a well-exercised and well-disciplined army is
able to do in such a case, is to defend it self; but where are new-levied
soldiers, fall out great disorders: which was the reason he took so much care
to fortify his camp very strongly, to the end he might defend it and all his
baggage with a few men, and might without danger execute many brave designs,
being always assured of his retreat. Let us farther take view of the siege of
Uxellodunum: which Caesar judging to be impregnable by ^orce, and knowing it to
be well provided of corn, undertaketh by a great and dangerous labor to keep
them from water, which was from a fountain without the town, from whence they
were only supplied: which the besieged perceiving, having set fire on Caesar's
works, by a sally they hindered him from quenching it. Caesar not being able to
repulse them by reason of the advantage of the place, resolves to make an
assault upon the town; which apprehension caused them to retreat.

THE MANNER OF OUR MODERN TRAINING, Or TACTICK PRACTICE. By CLEMENT EDMONDS,
Remembrancer of the City of LONDON.
FOrasmuch as my purpose was to make this task of Observations as a parallel to
our modern Discipline, I did not think it fit to mingle the Tactick Practice of
these times with the use of foregoing ages, but rather to shut up these
Discourses therewith, as the second line of this warlike parallel, which is
thus drawn in the best fashion of modern Art.

In the knowledge of marshalling an Army, there is nothing more especially to
be regarded, then that from a confused company of men, having chosen the
fittest for the wars, we should so place and digest a convenient number of
them, that in marches, in incamping, in battles we may be able with a few well
ordered to encounter a far greater army in confusion, and to overthrow them.
From hence Aeneas did define the Art of war, to be the knowledge of warlike
motions.

Before this unexpert army shall be able to be moved in such fashion, it shall
not be amiss to acquaint it with the most usual terms, wherewith they shall
be often commanded into diverse postures, as occasion shall be offered. For as
in the art of Fencing, no man shall be able to turn and wind his body for his
best advantage to offend his enemy, or defend himself, unless first his master
shall instruct him in the several parts and postures thereof: so every
soldier, or the whole troup as one body, or one soldier, shall never be
readily instructed to transform or turn it self by diverse motions into
different forms, unless they first understand what is meant by Fronts and
Flanks, by Files and Ranks, what by Leaders and Followers, by Middlemen and
Bringers up. By this means each soldier understanding what the term does
signify, shall readily both apprehend and execute such commandments as the
Captain or Officer shall direct him.

A File is a certain number of men following singly one Leader unto the depth
of 8 or 10, A File.
as they shall be commanded. The ancients have called this File Seriem,
ordinationem, or decuriam. It consists of Leaders and Followers, placed
according to their worth and valor: and especially there ought to be regarded,
the Leader or Decurio, the fifth, sixth, or Middlemen, and the tenth and last
called the Bringer* up or Tergiductor.

First therefore, every soldier being aptly fitted unto his several arms
according to his worth, The Leader.
age and stature, they are to be disposed into several files, wherein every
one is especially to acknowledge his leader or foremost man to be the author
of all his motions: and therefore duly attending what directions shall be
commanded, each follower shall according to the motions of his leader or
foremost man, order his own; and is to be excused, if he attend the motions of
his leader before he move himself.

When many files are thus disposed together, all the leaders making one and the
same front, and their followers observing likewise one and the same proportion
of distance before, and after, and on each side; these Files thus joined make
one Battallion, Battallion.
the front whereof is called a Rank, and so likewise the second and third in
depth, A Rank or Front.
according to the number of men in each file. The first, second and third,
Sidemen.
and so forward in each file, are called Sidemen, in respect of the same
numbers in the next file. Neither must every soldier only regard the motions
of his Leader, but he must also diligently respect his sidemen, and such as
shall be placed on his right and left hand, called his ranks: so that both in
files and ranks he may always be found in the same distance wherein he is
commanded.

It should be impertinent to the purpose to prescribe a certain number of
soldiers unto these Battallions, The number of soldiers in a Battallion
un^^rtain.
only thus much for the proportion: that it ought never to exceed so much, but
that it may easily upon any occasion be changed into such a form or fashion to
fight, as may be thought fittest for the present.

The length of this Battallion is diversely termed amongst the Latins, The
length.
as Frons, Fac^^s, Adstructio Jugum, etc. but in our modern practice, most
familiarly the Front or Rank.

The breadth of the Battallion, Breadth o^ depth.
which is from the leader to the bringer-up, with the distance between all the
followers, is said to be the length or depth of one file or flank.

In the disposing of soldiers into files and ranks, besides their observing a
right line in their places and standing, Dignities in places to be observed.
we must likewise especially respect the different worth and quality of the
soldiers; that every one according to his worth may be suited unto his proper
place, and accordingly receive advancement, as the death of his Leaders, and
true value of his desert by his Commander shall give occasion.

First therefore there must be especial choice made of the leaders of each
file, The first rank.
or first front or ranks of the Battallion, of the most expert, ablest, and
best-armed men: because that as from them the rest are to receive directions of
their after-motions; so in them the greatest hope of the day does consist.

Next unto the first it must be provided, that the bringers up or last rank,
called Tergiductores, The bringers up or Tergiductores or* last rank.
be little inferior, well experienced, wise and valiant, that they may both
know when to reprehend their former Ranks, and urge them forward, if they see
them declining or yielding upon false occasions; as also to be able upon any
sudden alarm given in the rere, to turn faces about and make themselves a Front
for the best resistance.

Neither must it be neglected concerning the second and ninth ranks, The second
and ninth ranks.
that they also may be furnished with the next most sufficient men; both
because of their nearness unto danger, as also that if their leaders or
bringers up shall either be slain, or disabled by wounds, they may presently
succeed in their places and make them good.

There is also a good decorum to be observed in the middlemen, The fifth and
sixth ranks.
or fifth and sixth ranks, both for the men themselves and their arms: that in
our marches, when the middlemen or sixth ranks shall be called up to front with
their leaders, they may in some sort and proportion answer their places; as
also when we double our front, by calling up middlemen to fight in a greater
breadth, they may not be unsuitable: but especially in marches, that they may be
able to make the best resistance, when they shall become the flanks of the
Battallions.

As these respects ought to be observed in ranks, so the files also are not
without their different degrees of dignity. Files.
As the leader of the right hand file is accounted to have the first place of
honor in the Battallion: The right hand file.
for he does not only lead the rest in his own file, but he is the author and
beginner of the motions of the whole Battallion.

The leader of the left hand file has the next place, The left hand file.
because that he with the leader of the right hand file do always in their
marching and imbattelling rectify or rank the whole front of the battallion:
and so consequently all the next of their files as they stand in order, even
until the middle, who are accounted the last in dignity.

The Battallion being thus disposed into files and ranks, Distances between
files and ranks.
and each file and rank according to his worth and experience rightly advanced:
it follows that there should be a just distance proportioned between either,
that at all times upon all occasions, they might be found ready, and in
comeliest fashion, either to offend their enemy, or defend themselves. These
distances which every follower must observe in respect of his leader, and every
leader and follower in respect of the sidemen, may be reduced unto three
several Orders, as follows.

The first is called open Order; Open order.
the distance whereof is twelve foot between every follower and his leader, or
between every rank; and six foot between them and the sidemen, or between every
file. This order is commonly used upon marches when the enemy is known to be
far off, as also in private exercising of soldiers for their several
managing of their arms. It differs somewhat from the Ordinatus Miles amongst
the Romans, who always observed but four cubits in files and ranks.

The second distance is called Order, Order.
when we contract the battallion both in length and breadth, and gather the
soldiers within a nearer scantling both in files and ranks, that is, by
observing six feet in their files between the follower and leader, and three
feet between the ranks or sidemen. This distance is used when we march toward
an enemy near at hand, or in marches by reason of the opportunity of the place
suspiciously dangerous. This is also near unto Densatus ordo, but only that
that was but two cubits in both files and ranks.

The third and last order, Close orde^, pouldron to pouldron.
is when either we attend the enemy his present assault, or that we intend to
charge him upon our securest and best distance; when every follower stands
three feet, or his rapier length behind his leader, and a foot and a half from
the sidemen or files; or when every soldier occupies but one foot and a half
for his own station, joining pouldron to pouldron, or target to target. This
differs from Constipatus ordo, because that allows but one cubit for files
and ranks, and this close order allows one cubit in the file, but two in the
ranks.

This distance does agree also best with the length of our piles of 15 or 16
feet long. The manner of c^arging with five ranks.
For it is thought fit oftentimes that the battallion consisting of ten ranks,
there should not charge more at one time then the 5 foremost, so that the pikes
of the fifth rank might be three foot over the foremost shoulder; and the other
five ranks should in this close order, or nearer if it be possible, follow the
other charging, with their pikes advanced, until some occasion should require
their charge. In the mean time they should perform their duty, in keeping the
five foremost ranks from retiring, and besides add strength unto the charge or
shock.

The manner of exercising of composed Battallions, with their different motions.
THe files and ranks being thus understood, disposed and ordered, and all parts
and members of the battallion being joined in their just proportion and
distance, able and fit to be altered upon any sudden occasion (as if it were
but one entire body) into several and diverse postures, and to make resistance
unto what forces soever shall oppugn the same: it might be thought needless
to have made the disposition of the members so exact, unless by continual
practice and exercise they might be made nimble and ready, not only to defend
themselves and their whole body on all sides, but also to be able to offend
whenever they shall epsy the least occasion of advantage.

The terms of direction or command, which are commonly used in this modern
discipline of martial exercise, as they are not many, only answering to the
different postures which are required in the Battallion; so they are and must
be short and perspicuously plain, that by this means being suddenly uttered,
easily apprehended and understood, they may as speedily be put in execution by
those which shall be commanded.

First therefore, that the Battallion may be commanded into some one fashion or
posture, Stand in front.
from whence it shall be fit to convert it self into all other, the Captain or
Officer shall bid them stand in front. In arrectostate.
When every particular soldier composing himself after his foremost leader,
stands comely in file and rank, fronting unto some certain place, or to the
Captain, as shall be thought best for the present.

In this and all other directions whatsoever, it shall be especially observed,
that every follower attending what is commanded, mark his next leader, and
accordingly move himself, as he shall see him move first.

The Battallion therefore thus fronting, Faces to the right or left hand.
if the enemy should suddenly either assault the right or left flank, Declinate
in hastam vel in scutum.
it shall be commanded to turn faces to the right or left hand; when every
soldier observing his leader shall turn his face, and make his flank his front
according to the direction.

There is also a doubled motion or declination to the right or left hand, Faces
about to the right or left hand Duplicat^ declinatio or mutatio.
when every soldier observing his leader shall turn their bodies twice to the
right or left hand, and by that means become turned with their faces where
their backs were, as if they expected an enemy in the rere, or being to perform
some other motion that may be offered: beginning this alteration from the right
or left hand as shall be commanded.

As every particular soldier in the troup is thus commanded at sometimes to
turn his face to the right or left hand, or about, the Battallion standing in
order, Wheel to the right or left hand.
that is, according to the distance before named; so the whole Battallion being
reduced into their close order, is commanded to turn as one body to the right
or left hand. Conversio in hastam vel scutum.
It is performed thus: Imagine the Battallion stand first in order, it shall be
commanded that they close their files to the right hand; when the right file
standing still, the rest turning their faces to the right hand, march into
their close order and return as they were: next that they close their ranks
from behind, when every follower marches forward to his leader unto his
rapiers point as is said before. This done, (the leader of the right file
standing immovable) all the rest (as the body of a ship or a great gate) turn
about that leader, as about the hinge or center, every one keeping the same
distance and order wherein they were first placed, as if they were but one
entire body.

When the same Battallion is to be restored into the same station wherein it
was first, As you were.
it is commanded; Revolutio.
Faces about to the left hand, and march into your order from whence you were
closed. Reversio.
Then let your leaders or first ranks stand still, and the rest turning faces
about, march ranks in order as before: then turn as you were, and you are
restored.

When the whole Battallion being in their close order should turn about and
make the Rere the Front, Wheel about.
it is done by a double turning or declination, Inflexio militum.
and commanded to wheel about, which is answerable to the former faces about or
mutation.

There is also another wheeling in this sort, Reflex^o.
when the front changes the aspect thrice; for as wheeling about makes the
Front the Rere, so this wheeleth from the right hand to the left, or
contrariwise: which fashion is so seldom used, that we scarce afford it a name.

In all such motions and alterations, it is most fit that all men perform their
directions with their pikes advanced, being in that sort most easy to be
commanded, as also less troublesome to their followers and leaders.

Countermarching Files and Ranks.
THere is also another means to prevent the enemy his assaulting us in the rere
or flank, lest he should find our worst men least able to make resistance; and
this is performed by countermarching both files and ranks three diverse ways
apiece.

The first was used by the Macedonians, Files.
after this fashion: First the leader turns his face about toward the right
or left hand, From the rere (...).
and so the next follower marching behind his leader turns also, ^volutio
Macedonica
and so the third and fourth, until the bringer up have carried himself out
into a new place in the rere further from the enemy, as he was before next unto
him. But this neither was nor is accounted safe or secure, because it does
somewhat resemble a flying or running away from the enemy, which might give him
no small encouragement, and therefore it is not much in practice.

Only at some times, the bringers up marching throughout beyond the leaders,
until they possess the same space before them which they did behind them, all
turning their faces about, make their leaders to affront the enemy, who were
before farthest from them.

The Lacedamonians used the contrary, From the front through.
as it were pursuing the enemy: the bringer up first being turned face about,
and so the next marching before him, and so the third, Laconica evolutio.
until the leader himself became also turned, and in the foremost front unto
the enemy. Which with us is somewhat otherwise, but yet both affronting, and as
it were pursuing the enemy: because our leaders first begin this motion, and so
countermarching through on the right or left hand, become in the front in a new
space of ground, who were before in the rere.

The third and last was invented by the Persians, whom when the place or near
approach of the enemy would not suffer to change their ground, From the front
and stand.
they were wont to countermarch the front to the right or left hand: and being
come unto the depth of the bringers up, to stand still until the other half
file had likewise marched forth, and fallen upon their leaders in every file.
In all these it is especially commanded, Cho^ica evolutio.
to march still in the same distance, and by whole ranks, to prevent confusion,
which (especially the enemy at hand) must needs be most dangerous, and
therefore carefully to be avoided.

In like sort the ranks may countermarch, when either the right wing would be
strengthened by the left, Countermarching of ranks.
or the left by the right, always marching by whole files toward the right or
left hand, according as they shall have the direction, either changing the
ground, or upon the same ground, as in the former countermarches.

There is used also another kind of strengthening both the front and flank when
occasion shall be offered, viz: by doubling either files or ranks. And this,
either by doubling the number of soldiers in the same files or ranks, keeping
still the same breadth and depth of ground; The doubling of files to the right
or left hand.
or else by doubling the ground, keeping the same number of soldiers. The
files are doubled, when the second file shall insert it self into the first,
the leader thereof putting himself a follower unto the leader of the first, By
men.
and the next follower follower to the next in the first file, and so forwards.
And likewise the fourth file inserting it self into the third, and the sixth
into the fifth. And this is to be performed when the Battallion stands in his
order.

To double the place or depth, Duplicare altitudinem.
is when the same number of men shall put themselves out of their order into
their open order, By ground.
either by advancing forward, or by falling backwards, as they shall be
commanded.

The ranks are doubled two manner of ways: Doubling of ranks by inserting, or
adding new troops.
either by inserting the second into the first to the right or left hand, as
before in the files; or else (the enemy being at hand) by joining whole troops
together to the right or left wing, according as occasion shall be offered:
Duplicare longitudinem.
and this is held to be the safest when the enemy is near, to avoid confusion.
It is performed either in the same ground, or by doubling the ground, when
either we desire to exceed the front of our enemy his battallion, or to prevent
lest we our selves be included. The terms to both are; Double your files or
ranks to the right or left hand: and when you would have them return again into
their proper places, it is commanded; As you were.

The ordinary directions which are especially given in these martial exercises
are, first that no man in the time of exercising or marshalling shall be louder
then his Officer: Silence to be kept.
but every one attending to his place, when he is commanded, shall diligently
hearken to such directions as shall be given. The Captain in the front shall
speak, and the Sergeants in each flank shall give the word unto the Lieutenant
or Ensign in the rere: who as in his proper place, sees all things executed
accordingly as the Captain shall command. It shall be unpossible to perform
any thing herein, unless first every one do exactly observe his leader and his
sideman: and to this purpose it is often commanded, Keep your files, Keep your
ranks.

Of Marches.
IN champains there needs no great labor to marshall particular troops for
their after-marches: In a champain.
because they may march either by whole divisions, observing only their course
of indifferency, that every division may every third day have the vantgard; or
else in such form and fashion as the General has proposed for a day of
battle, according as the danger of an expected enemy shall give occasion. But
because all countries will not afford a champain for the marching of an army,
and therefore not possible to march far with many troops in front, nor many
files of any one troup or division, by reason of often straights, and passages
betwixt hills, woods, or waters; It is provided, though by long induction, the
whole army shall be extended into a thin length and few files, In streights or
narrow passages.
yet the soldiers well disposed shall be as readily able to defend themselves
and offend the enemy on their flanks (from whence only in such streights the
danger is imminent) as if they were to affront an enemy with an entire
battallion in a champain country.

First therefore a division or Battallion being ordered and drawn before the
Quarter, How to (...) a division for such a ma^ch.
into one even front of just files, ten in depth; the musketeers equally
divided on the right and left slanks of the pikes, all standing in their order,
that is to ^ay, six feet distant in files and ranks; the Captain carefully
provideth, that the first, fifth, sixth and tenth ranks be always well filled
and furnished with his most able and best-armed soldiers. Which done, he
commands first the middlemen or half files to come a front with their
leaders; so that the division becomes but five in depth. Next he commands to
turn faces to the right or left hand, as direction shall be to march from that
quarter: and so the whole division rests ready in his fashion to march five
in front, the one half of the musketeers in the vantguard and the other in the
rere, the pikes in the battle, and both flanks well furnished with the ablest
and best men to offend or defend, as there shall be occasion: that is to say,
the right flanks with the first and fifth ranks, and the left with the sixth
and tenth ranks. If occasion afterward shall be given of a halt in a champain
or before the quartering, To reduce them (...) in into the^r first front.
the Captain commands first unto all, (they being first closed into their
order) Faces as you were; next unto the half files; Faces about, and march out,
and fall again upon your files. By which means the division becomes again
reduced into the same front and fashion from whence it was first transformed,
ready to encounter an enemy, or to be drawn into the Quarter.

When pikes are to charge pikes in a champain, The manner of cha^ging pikes
with pikes.
it uses to be performed two several ways. First the whole division being
commanded into their close order, the five first ranks charging their pikes,
every follower over his leaders shoulder directs his pike as equally as he
can, Five ranks only.
and the first rank shall have three feet of his pike over the foremost
shoulder. The other five ranks with their pikes advanced follow close up in the
rere, either ready to second the foremost, or to be employed in the rere as
occasion shall be offered. By the whole depth.
Otherwise and most usual, when the whole depth of the files throughout the
division shall charge together, all fast locked and united together, and
therefore most able to make the strongest shock offensive or defensive:
provided always that none mingle their pikes in others files, but the whole
file one in another shoulder.

In charging with musketeers, it is observed no way convenient that there
should be too many in a rank, To charge with musketeers.
or that the ranks should be too long. For the first rank is commanded to
advance ten paces before the second, and then to discharge, and wheeling either
to the right or left hand, falls into the rere; and so the second advancing
to the same distance, discharges and wheeleth as before; and likewise the
third, and so forward as long as the Officer shall be commanded. Which shall
not so well be performed the ranks being extraordinary long, There must not be
too many in a rank.
because it will require so long a time to wheel from the front, that the
second may succeed, unless by direction the rank may divide it self, the one
half to the right hand and the other to the left in wheeling to the rere.

In the retreat the whole ranks having turned their faces about, are to march
three or four paces forward: In the retreat.
their chief officer coming in the rere, first commands the last rank to make
ready, and then to turn faces about and discharge, and wheel about to the head
or front of the division: and being clearly passed, the next rank to perform as
much: and so the rest in order.

Where the passages are narrow, The manner of charging by ^iles in narrow
passages.
and the division cannot come to charge in front, as between two waters or
woods, the manner of charging is different: for there being five or ten files
led in the induction, that file which flanketh the enemy discharges first
only, and the rest marching continually forwards, it stands firm until the
last rank be passed, and then sleeveth it self on the left flank and makes
ready; and so the second file and the third, so long as the enemy shall
continue, there being a continual discharging by files as before by ranks. In
the pases of Ireland.
Unless it be in the pases of Ireland, meeting with an irregular enemy, where
they use to intermingle their files of shot with pikes, that the one may be a
defense for the other, when the enemy shall come up to the sword, as they use
there very often.

How directions are delivered in the wars.
ALl directions in the wars have ever been delivered either by signs subject
to the eye, by word of mouth, or the sound of a drum, or some such warlike
instrument. By signs.
Concerning those visible signs displayed unto the soldiers, the falling of
mists, the raising of dust, showers of rain and snow, the beams of the Sun,
hilly, uneven and crooked passages, by long experience have found them to be
most doubtful and uncertain; as also because, as it was a matter of great
difficulty to invent different signs upon all sudden occasions; so it is
almost an impossibility, that the common soldier (who oftentimes is found
scarce capable of the understanding of plain words distinctly pronounced)
should both apprehend and understand suddenly, and execute directly the true
sense and meaning of his Commanders signs.

The Drum and Trumpet are yet used. By drum or trumpet.
But because many different sounds are not easily distinguished in soldiers
understanding, without some danger of confusion, we only command by the
inarticulate sounds, to arm, to march, to troup, to charge, and to retreat:
with all which several notes the soldier is so familiarly to be acquainted,
that so soon as he hears them beaten, he may be ready suddenly to put them in
execution, as if he heard his Captain pronouncing as much.

The directions by word of mouth are infinite, By word of mouth.
according to the different occasions which shall be offered; yet always with
this caveat, that they be short, yet perspicuous, without all ambiguity, and
plainly pronounced, first by the Captain, then derived by the Sergeants through
the division or Battallion. Though infinite, yet the most usual are these: To
your arms: Keep your files, keep your ranks: The most usual* directing terms
in exercising a ba^^allion or division.
Follow your leader: Leaders look to your files: Keep your distance: Faces to
your right hand: Faces to your left hand: Close your files: Close your ranks:
Stand as you are: As you were: Faces about to the right hand: Wheel about to
the right or left hand: Double your ranks: Double your files: Leaders
countermarch through to the right or left hand: Leaders countermarch to the
right or left hand and stand: Middlemen come forth and fall upon your leaders.
Besides many fit terms commanded in managing particular arms, as pikes and
muskets, which are omitted.

And thus much touching the Tactick practice of our modern wars: which I have
the rather added, in regard that diverse soldiers, as unacquainted both with
the manner and the value thereof, do think a heap of people unmartialled, to be
as available for a great design, as any other number distinguished in files
and parts, and disposed for facile and easy motions, according to the
powerful circumstances of time and place. Wherein, howsoever the practice of
the Turk and the Hungarian may seem to give warrant to that opinion, yet the
use of Arms amongst the Graecians and the Romans, whose conquering armies are
pregnant witnesses of the excellency of their military discipline, shall speak
sufficiently for order and Tactick motion, as most necessary parts in a
wellordered war.

FINIS.

