His Majesty's ANSWER TO THE PETITION OF The LORDS and COMMONS in PARLIAMENT
Assembled.

Presented to His Majesty at YORK, June 17. 1642.

TOGETHER, With a Catalogue of the Names of the Lords that subscribed to Levy
Horse to assist His Majesty, in defense of his Royal person, the two Houses
of Parliament, and the Protestant Religion.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. for Robert Wood. 1642.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT Assembled.
YO(...) most (...) faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons assem(...) great
number of the Gentry, Freeholders, (...)sembled there by Your Majesty's
Command the (...) are unto Us, That having taken a resolution to address
themselves (...)tie in the humble way of a Petition, for the redress of those
Grievances which they now lie under, they were violently interrupted and
affronted therein by the Earl of Linsey, the Lord Savill, and others, and
notwithstanding all the means they could use to present their just desires to
Your Majesty, yet they could not prevail with Your Majeste to accept of their
Petition; The Copy whereof they have sent to us, with an humble Desire, That
we would take such course therein as may tend to the Preservation of their
Liberties, and the Peace of the Kingdom; And that we would address our selves
to Your Majesty in their behalf that by our means their desires may find
better acceptance with Your Majesty; Whereupon, having seriously weighed, and
considered the particulars of those their Complaints and Desires, as they are
laid down in their Petition, and finding that the Grievances they complain of
are the increase of the miseries formerly sustained by that County, (which has
well-nigh for three years last past been the Tragical stage for Armies and
War) by reason of Your Majesty's distance in Residence, and difference in
Counsels from Your great Council the Parliament, begetting great distempers
and distractions thorowout the Kingdom, and especially in that County; The
drawing to those Parts great numbers of discontented Persons that may too
justly be feared do affect the public ruin for their own private advantage;
The drawing together of many Companies of the Trained Bands and others both of
Horse and Foot of that County, and retaining multitudes of Commanders and
Cavaliers from other parts; The daily resort of Recusants to Your Majesty's
Court at York. The great preparations of Arms and other warlike provisions, to
the great terror and amazement of Your Majesty's peaceable Subjects, and
causing a great decay of Trade and Commerce amongst them. All and every of
which Particulars are against the Law, which Your Majesty has made so many
and so frequent professions to uphold and maintain. And the Lords and Commons
finding on the other side their humble desires to be, That your Majesty would
hearken to Your Parliament, and declining all other Counsels wharsoever, unite
Your confidence to Your Parliament, and that your Majesty would not divide
Your Subjects joint duty to Your Majesty, the Parliament and Kingdom, not
destroy the Essence of Your great Council and highest Court, by subjecting the
Determinations and Counsels thereof to the Counsels and Opinions of any private
persons whatsoever; That Your Majesty having passed an Act, That this
Parliament shall not be dissolved, but by Act of Parliament, Your Majesty would
not do any thing tending thereunto, by commanding away the Lords and great
Officers, whose attendance is necessary thereunto; That Your Majesty having
expressed Your confidence in the affections of that County, You would please to
dismiss Your extraordinary Guards, and the Cavaliers and others of that
quality, who seem to have little interest or affection to the public good,
their language and behavior speaking nothing but Division and War, and their
advantage consisting in that which is most destructive to others. And lastly,
that in such Consultations and Propositions as Your Majesty makes to that
County, such may not be thrust upon them as men of that County, that neither
by their fortune or residence are any part of it.

All which their humble and most just desires being according to Law, which
your Majesty has so often declared should be the measure and Rule of your
Government and Actions; And we your Majesty's most faithful Subjects the Lords
and Commons fully concurring with the Gentlemen and others of the County of
York, in their Assurance that those desires of theirs will abundantly redound
to the glory of God, the honor and safety of your Majesty, the good of your
Posterity, and the peace and prosperity of this Kingdom; we humbly bescech
your Majesty graciously to hearken unto them, and to grant them; and that you
would join with your Parliament in a speedy and effectual course for the
preservation of their liberties, and the peace of the Kingdom, which duty as we
are now called upon by that County to discharge, so do we stand engaged to God
and man for the petformance thereof by the trust reposed in us, and by our
solemn Vow and Protestation; And your Majesty, together with us, stands
engaged by the like Obligation of trust, and of Oath, besides the many and
earnest professions and protestations, which your Majesty has made to this
purpose to your whole Kingdom in general, and to that County in particular;
the peace and quiet of the Kingdom (as is well observed by the Gentlemen and
Freeholders of Yorkshire in their Petition) being the only visible means
under God, wherein consists the preservation of the Protestant Religion, the
Redemption of our Brethren in Ireland, and the happiness and prosperity of
your Majesty and all your Dominions.

His MAJESTY'S Answer to the Petition of the Lords and and Commons in
Parliament assembled, presented to His MAJESTY at York the 17. of June. 1642.
HIs Majesty having carefully weighed the matter of this Petition presented to
him at York on Friday the 17. of June, by the Lord Howard, Sir Hugh Cholmley,
Sir Philip Stapleton; Though He might refer the Petitioners to His two last
Declarations, wherein most of the particulars in this Petition are fully
answered, or might refuse to give any Answer at all, till He had received
satisfaction in those high Indignities He has so often complained of, and
demanded Justice for, Yet that all the world may see how desirous His Majesty
is to leave no Act which seems to carry the Reputation of both His Houses of
Parliament, and in the least degree to reflect upon His Majesty's Justice and
Honor, unanswered; Is graciously pleased to return this Answer:

(...) mentioned to be presented to both Houses of Parliament had bill annexed
is this now delivered to him, His Majesty might have discerned the (...) and
quality of the Petitioners, which His Majesty has great reason to believe, was
not in truth so considerable as is pretended: For his Majesty assures you, That
He has never refused any Petition so attested as that would be thought to be;
But His Majesty well remembers, that on the third of June, when there was upon
his Majesty's summons the greatest, and most cheerful concourse of people
that over was beheld of one County, appearing before Him at York, a Gentleman
(one Sir Thomas Fayrfax.) offered in that great Confluence a Petition to His
Majesty, which His Majesty seeing to be avowed by no man but himself, and the
general and universal Acclamations of the people seeming to disclaim it, did
not receive; conceiving it not to be of so Public a nature, as to be fit to be
presented or received in that place: And H^s Majesty is most confident, (and in
that must appeal to those were then present) that what ever the substance of
that Petition was, it was not consented to b^ any considerable number of
Gentry, or Freeholders of this County; by a few, mean, inconsiderable persons,
and disliked, and visibly discountenanced by the great Body of the known
Gentry, Clergy, and Inhabitants of this whole County: And if the matter of that
Petition was such as is suggested in this, His Majesty has great reason to
believe it was framed and contrived (as many others of such nature have been)
in London, not in Yorkshire: For sure no Gentleman of quality and understanding
of this County would talk of His great preparations of Arms, and other
Warlike Provisions, to the great terror and amazement of His peaceable
Subjects, when they are witnesses of the violent taking His Arms from Him, and
stopping all ways for bringing more to Him: And if there were no greater
terror and amazement of His Majesty's peaceable Subjects in other places by
such Preparations and provisions, there would be no more cause to complain of
a great decay of Trade and Commerce there, then is in this place: But his
Majesty has so great an assurance of the Fidelity and general affections of
his good Subjects of this County, which He hopes will prove exemplar over His
whole Kingdom) that He has great cause to believe; That they do rather
complain of his Majesty's Confidence, and of his slownesse, that whilst there
is such endeavor abroad to raise Horse, and to provide Arms against his
Majesty, and that endeavor put in execution, His Majesty trusts so much to the
Justice of his cause, and the affections of his people, and neglects to provide
strength to assist that Justice, and to protect those Affections.

For any affronts offered by the Earl of Lindsey, or the Lord Savill, to those
who intended to petition his Majesty: His Majesty wishes that both his Houses
of Parliament would have examined that information, and the credit of the
informers, with that gravity and deliberation, as in Cases which concern the
Innocence and honor of Persons of such quality has been accustomed, before
they had proscribed two Peers of the Realm, and exposed them (as much as in
them lay) to the rage and fury of the people, under the Character of being
Enemies to the Commonwealth, a Brand newly found out (and of no Legal
signification) to incense the people by, and with which the simplicity of
formed (...)mes (...) And then his Majesty has some reason to believe they
would have found themselves as much abused in the report concerning those
Lords, as he is sure they are in those which tell them of the resort of great
numhers and discontented persons to him, and of the other particulars mentioned
to to be in that Petition: Whereas they who observe what resort is here to his
Majesty, well know it to be of the prime Gentlemen of all the Counties in
England, whom nothing but the love of Religion, the care of the Laws, and
liberties of the Kingdom, besides their affection to his person, could engage
into great journeys, trouble and expense, men of as precious Reputation, and as
exemplary lives, as this Nation has any, whose assistance his Majesty knows
he must not expect, if he should have the least Design against honor and
Justice: and such witnesses his majesty desires to have all his actions.

For the declining other Counsels and the Uniting his confidence to his
Parliament, his majesty desires both his Houses of parliament seriously and
sadly to consider, that it is not the name of a great or little Council that
makes the Results of that Counsel just or unjust: neither can the imputation
upon his majesty of not being advised by his Parliament (especially sines all
their actions and all their Orders are exposed to the public view) long
mislead his good Subjects, except in truth they see some particular sound
advice necessary to the peace and happiness of the Commonwealth dis-osteemed
by his Majesty, and such an influence he is most assured neither can nor shall
be given, and that they will think it merit in his Majesty from the
Commonwealth to rejoin such a Counsel as would persuade him to make himself
none of tho three Estates by giving up his negative voice to allow them a power
superior to that which the Law has given him, whenever it pleases the
major part present of both Houses to say that he does not discharge his trust
as he ought, and to subject his and his Subjects unquestionable Right and
Propriety to their Uotes, without and against Law, upon the mere pretense of
necessity. And his Majesty must appeal to all the World, who it is that
endeavors to divide the joint duty of his Subjects, his Majesty who requires
nothing but what their own duty, guided by the infallible Rule of the Law,
leads them to do, or they who by Orders and Uotes (opposite and contradictory
to Law, Custom, president and reason) so confound the affections and
understandings of his good Subjects, that they know not how to behave
themselves with honesty and safety, whilst their Conscience will not suffer
them to submit to the one, nor their security to apply themselves to the other.
It is not the bare saying that his majesty's actions are against the Law (with
which he is reproached in this Petition, as if he departed from his often
Protestations to that purpose) must conclude him, there being no one such
particular in that petition alleged, of which his majesty is in the least
degree guilty: whether the same Reverence and esteem be paid by you to the Law
(except your own Uotes be judge) needs no other Evidence, then those many,
very many Orders published in print, both concerning the Church and State,
those long imprisonment of several persons without hearing them upon general
information, and the great and unlimited Fees to your Office (...), worse then
the Imprisonment, and the Arbitrary consure upon them when they are admitted to
be heard: Let the Law be judge by whom it is violater.

For that part of the Petition which seems to accuse his Majesty of a purpose
to dissolve this Parliament (contrary to the Act for the continuance (...) ^ing
away the Lords and grea^t officers, whose attendance is necessary, which his
Majesty well know to be a new Calumny, by which the Grand Confrivers of ruin
for the State hope to seduce the minds of the people from their affection to,
or into jealousy of his Majesty, as if he meant this way to bring this
Parliament (which may be the case of all Parliaments) to nothing; it is not
possible for His Majesty more to exeresse his affection to, and his Resolution
for the Freedom, liberty, and frequency of Parliaments, then he has done; And
whosoover considers how visible it must be to his Majesty, that it is
impossible for him to subsist without the affections of his people, and that
those affections cannot possibly be preserved or made use of but by
Parliaments, cannot give the least credit, or have the least suspicion, that
his Majesty would choose any other way to the happiness he desires for himself
and his posterity, but by Parliaments: But for his calling the Lords hither, or
any others absenting themselves, who have not bin called, who ever considers
the tumults, which no votes or Declaration can make to be no tumults, by which
His Majesty was driven away, and many Members of either House in danger of
their lives, the demanding the names of those Lords who would not consent to
their Propositions by Message from the house of Commons delivered at the bar by
M. Hollis, with that most tumultuous petition in the name of many thousands,
among many other of the same kind, directed to the House of Commons, and sent
up by them to the House of Lords, taking notice of the prevalence of a
malignant faction, which made abortive all their good motions, which tended to
the peace and tranquillity of the Kingdom, desiring that those nobleworthies of
the house of Peers; who concurred with them in their happy Uotes, might be
earnestly desired to ioyn with that honorable house, and to sit and vote as
one entire body, professing that some speedy remedy were taken for the removal
of all such obstructions as hindered the happy progress of their great
endeavors, their Petitioners should not rest in quietness, but should be
enforced to lay hold on the next remedy which was at hand to remove the
disturbers of their Peace, and want and necessity breaking the bounds of
modesty, not to leave any means unassayed for their relief adding that the
(...) of the poor and needy was, That such persons who were the Obstacles of
their peace, and hinderers of the happy Proceedings of Parliament might be
forthwith publicly declared, whose removal they conceived would put a period
to these distractions: upon which a great number of Lords departing, the Uote
in order to the Ordinance concerning the Militia was immediately past, though it
had bin twice before put to the question, and rejected by the Uotes of much the
major part of that house. And whosoever considers the strange Orders, Uotes,
and Declarations, which have since passed, to which whosoever would not
consent, that is, with Freedom and liberty of language, and reason profess
against, was in danger of Censure and Imprisonment, will not blame our care in
sending for them, or theirs in coming, or absenting themselves from being
involved in such conclusions. Neither will it be any objection, that they
stayed there long after any fumults were, and therefore that the tumults drove
them not away; If every day produced Orders and Resolutions as illegal as, and
indeed but the effects of the tumults, there was no cause to doubt the same
power would be ready to prevent any Opposition to those Orders after they were
made* which had made way and preparation for the Propositions of them, and so
whosoever conceived himself in danger of future Tumults, against which there is
not the least provision, was driven away by those which were past And his
Majesty has more reason to wonder at those who stay behind, after all big
Legal Power is ^oted from him, and all the people told, That he might be with
modesty and duty enough deposed, then any man has at those who have bin
willing to withdraw themselves from the place where such desperate and
dangerous positions are avowed: which his Majesty does not mention with the
least thought of lessening the power or validity of an Act, to which he has
given his Assent this Parliament: All and every of which he shall as inviolably
observe, as he looks to have his own Rights preserved, but to show by what
means so many strange Orders have of late bin made: And to show how earnestly
his Majesty desires to be present at, and to receive advice from both houses of
parliament, against whom it shall be never in the power of a malignant party to
incense His Majesty, his majesty again offers his consent, that both houses may
be adjorned to (...) place, which may be thought convenient, where his majesty
will be (...) the members of either House will make a full appea(...)mission
which must attend such an Adjournment may not be the (...) of recovering that
temper, which is necessary for such De(...)

And this his Majesty conceives to be so very necessary, that if the minds and
inclinations of every member of either House were equally composed, the License
is so great, that the mean people about London and the Suburbs have taken, that
both for the Liberty and Dignity of Parliament that Convention for a time
should be in another place. And (...)e how much soever the safety and security
of this Kingdom depends on Parliaments, it will never be thought that those
Parliaments must of Necessity be at Westminster.

His Majesty's confidence is no less then he has expressed (and has great
cause to express) in the affections of this County, an instance of which
affections all men know his guard (which is not extraordinary) to be, and
wonders that such a legal Guard at his own charge for his person (within 20.
miles of a Rebellion, and of an Army in pay against him should be objected by
those, who for so many months, and in a place of known and confessed security,
have without and against Law kept a Guard for themselves at the charge of the
Commonwealth, and upon that stock of money which was given for the Relief of
the miserable and bleeding condition of Ireland, or the payment of the great
debt due to our Kingdom of Scotland.

For the resort of Papists to the Court, his Majesty's great care for the
prevention thereof is notoriously known, that when he was informed 2. or 3. of
his intended Guard were of that Religion he gave especial direction, with
expressions of His displeasure, that they should be immediately discharged, and
provided that no person should attend on him under that Relation, but such as
took the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy; that he commanded the Sheriff to
proceed with all severity according to the Law against all papists that should
come within five miles of the Court, and if notwithstanding this, there be any
papists near the Court, (which his Majesty assures you he knows not, nor has
heard but by this Petition) He does hereby command them to depart, and declares
to all Officers and Ministers of Justice, that they shall proceed strictly
against them according to the Law, and as they will answer the contrary at
their perils.

For the language and behavior of the Cavaleers (a word by what mistake soever
it seems much in disfavour) there has not bin the least complaint here and
therefore it is probable the fault was not found in this County. Neither can his
Majesty imagine what is meant by the mention of any men thrust upon them in
such Consultations and propositions as his Majesty makes to this County, who
are neither by their Fortune or Re(...)dence any part of it, and therefore can
make no answer to it.

To conclude, his Majesty assures you he has never cefused to receive any
Petition, whether you have or no, your selves best know, and will consider what
Reputation it will be to you of Justice or Ingenuity to receive all Petitions
how senseless and scandalous soever of one kind* under pretense of
understanding the good peoples minds and affections, and not only refuse the
Petition, but punish the Petitioners of another kind, under color that it is
not a crime that they are not satisfied with your sense, as if you were only
trusted by the people of one opinion: To take all pains to publish and print
Petitions which agree with your wishes, though they were never presented, and
to use the same industry and Authorlty to keep those that indeed were presented
and avowed from being published (though by our own authority) because the
Argument is not pleasant to you, To pretend impartiality and infallibility, and
to express the greatest passion and affection in the Order of your proceeding,
and no less error and misunderstanding in your Judgments and Resolutions, He
does remember well the Obligation of his Trust, and of his Oath* and desires
that you will do so too, and your own solemn Now and protestation, and then you
will not only think it convenient, but necessary to give his Majesty a full
Reparation for all the scandals laid upon him, and all the scandalous positions
made against him, and that it is less dishonor to retract errors, then by
avowing to confess the malice of them, and will see this to be the surest way
for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, the Redemption of our Brethren
in Ireland, the happiness and prosperity of your selves and of all our
Dominions, and of the Dignity and Freedom of Parliament.

A Catalogue of the Names of the Lords that subscribed to levy Horse, to
assist His Majesty in the defense of, etc.
THe Prince 200 The Duke of York 120 Lord Keeper 40 Duke of Richmond. 100 L
Marquess Hartford 60 L. Great Chamberlain 30 E. of Cumberland 50 E. of
Huntington 20 E. of Bath 50 E. of Southampton 60 E. of Dorset 60 E. of
Northampton 40 E. of Devonshire 60 E. of Dover 25 E. of Cambridge 60 E. of
Bristol 60 E, of Westmerland 20 E. of Barkshire and L. Andover. 30 E. of
Monmouth 30 E. Rivers 30 E. of Carnarvan 20 E. of Newport 50 L. Mowbray 50 L.
Willoughby 30 L. Gray of Ruthin 10 L. Lovelace 40 L. Paget 30 L. Faulconbridge
to come. L. Rich 30 L. Paulet 40 L. Newarks 30 L. Montague 30 L. Coventry 100
L. Savill 50 L. Mohun 20 L. Dunsmore 40 L. Seymor 20 L. Capell 100 L. Faulkland
20 Mr. Comptroller 20 M. Secret. Nicholas 20 L. Chapter Justice Banks 20 The L.
Thanet is not here, but one has undertaken for 100. for him. Sum. total,
1659*

