THE KINGS ANSWER TO the Propositions for Peace, as was pretended in the
Club-mens petition to his Majesty.

With the copy of a Letter from Sir LEWIS DIVES, and another from Colonel
Butler Governor of Wareham sent to them, and read in their Quatrers.

Also a copy of Articles and Directions, and diverse other passages of their
proceedings and intentions, and a List of their chief Leaders names, and which
of them are taken, and who not.

With other papers brought by our Scouts from the Army.

Commanded to be printed, and is published according to Order.

royal blazon or coat of arms

Imprinted at London by R. A. and I. C. 1645.

CAROLUS REX:
HIs Majesty being himself so deeply afflicted with the miseries and
calamities brought upon all his poor Subjects in general by this unnatural
war, does not at all wonder, that the grievous and more particular sufferings
of the Inhabitants of the County of Dorset should urge them to seek ease and
relief, though by ways less regular; and being entirely persuaded, that
their intentions in their late assembly, and in their present address to his
Majesty, are full of duty and loyalty to his person and government, is so
far from reprehending them, that he is very glad to find so many of his
loyal Subjects united in a joint and hearty sense of the public. And that by
this particular application of themselves to his Majesty, they have afforded
him the means to inform them more particularly of the Justice of his cause,
and his sincere and constant desires and endeavors for peace, than appears by
their professed neutralitie they have hitherto been: which that he might the
better do, and that there may thereby be wrought a perfect union and
conjunction between his Majesty, and those who profess to be so sincerely
affected with the same pious desires of the public good, his Majesty will
very speedily send unto the Petitionees, or unto such as they shall depute
within the said County, persons fully instructed in the course of all his
Majesty's former proceedings, and of his present resolutions. And in the mean
time, as an instance of his gracious intentions toward the Petitioners, he is
pleased to give these particular answers to their several desires.

To the first, that whenever propositions of peace shall be made unto his
Majesty by those at Westminster, his ears shall be always open unto them and
not only ready to receive them, but even to seek and solicit for them, when
ever he can probably judge that they will not reject his overture, whereof the
Petitioners need make no doubt, his Majesty having neglected no occasion to
invite them to a treaty of peace, the blessing thereof was never more to be
implored of Almighty God, nor to be more industriously endeavored by all good
men, than at this time, when without it (as the Petitioners well observe) this
Kingdom is likely to be made the prey of a foreign Nation, the Scots being at
this present advanced with an Army so far into the heart of the Kingdom, as
already even to threaten the Western parts. And his Majesty does further
promise in the word of a King, that if a Treaty may be procured, he will seek
no other conditions of peace, than those mentioned by the Petitioners, viz The
glory of God, in the maintenance of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, the
just and inseparable right of the Crown, the just power and privileges of
Parliament, and the lawful rights and liberties of the Subject, and all these
under none of these ambiguous terms whereby the contaarie party have deluded
and misled so many of his good Subjects, pretending they fight for the same,
making the known Laws of the Land (which cannot deceive) the measure of each
particular.

To the second his Majesty does promise, that if a Treaty may be procured, he
will earnestly desire a cessation of Arms, as he did in the last at Vxbridge,
though to his great grief not consented unto by the other party, to the end
that a Treaty tending to peace may not proceed blood: And his Majesty's desire
is, that the book of the said Treaty at Vxbridge to be read to the Petitioners
for their satisfaction in this point, and manifestation of his desire of peace.

To the third, that in case for the sins of the Nation, the obstinacy of the
other party cannot be overcome; but that his Majesty and his People must yet
be further scourged by Gods afflicting hand of war, that his Majesty is so
deeply sensible of his Supplicants, and all his other good Subjects sufferings,
by contributions, taxes, free quarter and plunder, that whatsoever can be done
on his Majesty's part in the three first, by all the moderation that can
possibly be used, unto the latter by the severest justice shall be carefully
and effectually endeavored: As for the point of trusting in the Petitioners
hands such of his Forts and Garrisons as shall be thought necessary to be
continued, his Majesty makes no doubt, but if peace may not be procured, it
shall so evidently appear unto the Petitioners, who have been the Authors,
and are the Contrivers of their miseries, that they will prove the heartiest
Champions of their Kings, their own, and Gods cause; and consequently, be as
fit persons as any his Majesty can choose, with what near best concerns his
safety, and their protection: but for this particular, as after for the future
maintaining of the said Garrisons, his Majesty will by those whom he shall
employ unto the Petitioners, advise with them of the time, and manner how his
service may be done, must be their satisfaction.

To the last, that a chief calamity of war, is the silencing of the Laws,
and if it were possible to uphold their due and current execution, the Sword
could no longer: but as far forth as it is possible, that military affairs
can be governed by legal inflictions on offenders, his Majesty is very
desirous to give the Petitioners all imaginable satisfaction; but being a
matter of such intricacie, the particular ways and method of it must be
ripened by further debate.

As for the point of leave for His Majesty's misled Subjects, to lay down
arms, and to return to their habitations, there to live unquestioned and
unmolested, it is that whereunto his Majesty has already many times given
more then a permission, that is a special invitation by several gracious
Proclamations, which for the Petitioners satisfaction, he shall very willingly
renew; as for the other part which concerns those at present engaged in His
Majesty's service, and those under restraint, His Majesty is too confident of
the Petitioners affection to him and his Kingdoms safety, to believe while his
enemies are so strong, and daily forcing every man to take up Arms against
him, and whilst a Foreign Nation is in the bowels of this Kingdom ready to
devour it, that they would wish him one man less in his Army, or one man more
at liberty to join with them; as for all such persons as are absent from
their home, and not engaged, in His Majesty's service, it shall be very
accomptable to His Majesty, that they return to their homes to tend the
service and quiet of their Country, according to the Petitioners desires, and
for all Acts of Parliament, and Laws unrepealed, in what concerns the Civil
Government in particular, for Assizes, Sessions, and the like, the Petitioners
undertaken the protection of His Majesty's Ministers of Justice, His Majesty
will i^^ue his Commands unto them all respectively, to perform their constant
duties to the established Laws.

At the Court at Ragland Castle the 8.th day of July, 1645. By His Majesty's
special direction and Command. George Digby.

The Declaration concerning the Petition of the Club-men, and the Kings answer
thereunto.
Whereas His Majesty seems to be deeply afflicted with the miserable
calamities of his people, and knows how to remedy it; What is the sum of that
expression? An unnatural war it is indeed, but fair words will not hide an
ill cause; Are not these ways irregular, when Jesuits, Popish Priests,
Papists, and out-lawd persons are protected from justice? all good men are very
sensible of the public calamity herein.

1. You may take notice that in this Answer, there is no notice taken of the
Lords and Commons at Westminster, to be a Parliament, though the King by
Letters sent by Rupert to them gives them that appellation.

2. For these things seemingly vowed to be sought for, how unlike is it, to
what is indeed labored for? Is Gods glory sought, in throwing down the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ? and making war against his Members? Is the true
Protestant Religion sought? by advancing Papists, Jesuits, and Popish Priests?
and we hope none will deny but that if the Crown of any Prince, shall stand in
opposition to the Crown and Power of Jesus Christ, we are to follow the lamb
wheresoever he goes, though persecuted; where is the Privileges of Parliament
if not so much as acknowledged, but hunted after, reviled, and with force of
arms withstood? and Delinquents, Jesuits, and breakers of the Laws protected
from their power, and where is the Liberties of the Subject, if tyrannized
over, persecuted and plundered, as daily they are under the Kings Forces?

3. Which party have misled his Majesty's Subjects, may easily appear with
the well-affected in all parts of England, and Scotland, Ireland are very
sensible of, notwithstanding any pretenses of the Papists and their juggling
party whatsoever.

There is much difference ^etween one party of the Club-men, and another; but
the first grounds of raising them is from a Jesuitical plot of the enemy,
under a pretense of petitioning for peace (which all men desire) to be raised
in a violent way to rise as one man against the Parliament, the great ones
amongst them that carried on the business, let not the people know what their
design was; who intended before Taunton was relieved, to have risen on the
Rear of our Army, (but blessed be God) they were hindered; and now at last they
had order from the King, to ly still till Sir Thomas Fairfax was marched to
Exeter, and then to rise, Rnpert being promised to come with some thousands of
horse from Banbury to join with them to raise the siege at Sherborn, and
relieve those parts; and then to fall in Sir Th. Fairfaxe's Rear.

For this purpose diverse of them sat in council in Shaftsbury, who were taken
and brought prisoners to Sherborne.

A List of the Countrey-Gentlemen called the Leaders of the Club-men for Wilts,
Dorset, and Sommerset, brought Prisoners to Sherborne on the Lords day August
3. 1645. taken at Shaftsbury,
Mr. Hollis a younger brother out of means, who is one of the Commanders in
chief, a kind of General unto them. Mr. Joliffe of Blackmore another younger
brother, who is Lievtenant-Generall to them, a notable great stlckler for them.
Mr. Young, Advocate to them, whose habitation was at Manson in Blackmore, and
was of old a Star Chamber Clerk. Captain John Carew, the great Grand Jury man
that lived at Everith. Captain Edward Davis of Lamhead. Capt. Thomas Bennet of
Pithouse. Capt. William Blunt, a notable Cavalier. Capt. Richard Craddock, the
malignant Merchant of Blanford. John Saintlo, a Gentleman of Wilt-shire, a
notable Agent for the King. Richard Burbidge, son to Burbidge the Attorney in
Sturminster. William Smith, sometimes Vnder-Sheriffe for Wilt-shire. Thomas
Jervis, the same that was wont to go up and down to sell cloth from place to
place. John Lovell of Sommerset-shire, a notable stickler against godly men.
John Eastwood of Dunhead in Wilt-shire. Francis Craddock of Blackmore. John
Pope of Marnhill, a man of a very good estate, but a notable Malignant. Thomas
Rose of Chisgrave, a man also of a fair estate, but malignant. John Bennet,
brother to Captain Bennet of Pithouse. Nicholas Bingham of Hensridge; it is
pity any of that family are Malignants. Francis Abbot, son to Jeremy Abbot of
Horsington. Robert Hollis of Dorset-shire. William Filloll, a Gentleman of a
good estate, that lived in Marvel, but averie violent Malignant. Charles
Studley of Langhton by Blanford. John May of Melbury, a notable Rogue. John
Phill of Lidlinch a Grasier, who rise in hope to recruit his grounds by
plunder. Laurence Hide a malignant Priest, Mr. Hides son of Hatch. Sarnuel
Forman, the Curate of Gillingham. William Laning, a young malignant Priest that
lived at Cerne. Mr. Rock, a desperate malignant Person, that was borne at
Buttle, and Chaplain to Banfield at Chafield. Mr. Willams a malignant Priest.
Mr. Henry Hayward, Henry Gouge, John Every, Edward Boon, Thomas Roes, Robert
Squier, Thomas Marvel, Richard Alborne, Charles Simms, Robert Sapist, Thomas
Brook, John King, Edmond Clerk, Martin Marble, Thomas Bunce, William Sanders,
John Corbet, Robert Fry, William Ford, Matthew Martin, and Henry Goodwin. All
which are notoriously known to be dangerous Malignants, besides diverse others
which were taken next day by Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, in an old Roman Work
on Hambleton-Hill, where he routed 2500. of them that were gathered in a Body,
and killed some 12. ann took almost 300. prisoners, and almost all their Arms
and Colors, the rest fled home.

Besides these, there is remaining still amongst the Clum-men diverse great
Malignants.

Capt. George Moore of Winborn. Capt. William Whiting of Spetsbury. Capt. Henry
Burley of Beer Regis. George Sexton of Beer Regis, a man of a great estate but
a desperate rogue and violent against the Parliament and good men. Robert
Arnall of Cheslebourn another desperate Agent. Raughly Radford of Divelish, and
more divelish Malignant.
The great ones that were the Ringleaders that are taken, are to be brought up
to London, and may be made examples.

But there are many silly people have been misled by them, that will now (it
is hoped) be laid, and in diverse parts the Club-men are firm for the
Porliament, and laugh at the folly of the rest.

Now for further satisfaction, here follows the copy of two Letters, one
finn Sir Lewis Dives of the King party, and the other from Colonel Butler the
Governor of Warcham, of the Parliaments party, both to the Club-men.

A Copy of Sir Lewis Dives Letters to the Club men.
Gentlemen and Friends,
THat I have not hitherto required any accounts of former Assemblies; the
reason is, because I deemed your professed desires and resolutions tending to
the preservation of the true reformed Protestant Religion established by law,
and of your selves from Plunder, and such like unlawful violence; no way
derogatory to His Majesty's service, wherein I am throughout this County
entrusted: but rather such as the same trust bi^^des me, and you shall ever
find me most ready to assist you in. But perceiving of late a backwardness
in some of your parts of the County, and a denial from others in the payments
of Contribution after the late moderate proportion; which in consideration of
the present poverty of the Country has been by me required of them; and by
withholding whereof, His Majesty's service must necessarily fail, it being
the only means His Majesty has left him to supply his Forces here, and by the
Gentlemen and Freeholders agreed and promised to be paid unto him, and never
promised or agreed to be paid to those that are in Rebel on against him, His
Majesty's one Revenues, Customs and Rents being for the most part seized, and
against all the rules of Law taken and disposed of by the Rebels, for payment
of those that serve them in this un-naturall War. I am therefore forced to
put you to the question, whether it be your general resolution over and above
your published resolutions to deny His Majesty these necessary supplies, to
the end I may consider what course to steer; and withal, out of my care of
your safety and preservation, which may otherways be endangered, to admonish
you that you be not seduced to must or rely on those who have brought this Even
and destruction on you; remember by what degrees they have effected it, how
they first Fortified several Towns in this County, then dis-armed you; then
sent out Tickets and Papers, requiring upon pain of Plundering great sums of
Money, to the full yearly value of your Estates, from all Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and Yeomen of any ability, and forced the payment thereof by
Imprisonment of their persons, and Plundering of there goods, they not only
required, but where they have power, have enforced the twentieth part of your
Estates, and the 5th part of your yearly Revenue, besides the Contribution, and
yet not contented herewith; have fired the houses of diverse Gentlemen of this
County, where no Garrison or force did oppose them* Remember how they have
banished your Orthodox, and loyal Clergy; consider how they have Plundered
almost all men of quality in this County, from some 2000 sheap at a time,
from others more, from others 1500, from some 1000, 40 for Oxen from another,
to the undoing of many, both Gentlemen and Farmours; the particulars whereof
are so infinite and many, and the parties who have suffered these losses so
well known to your selves, that I forbear to make any farther mention thereof.
Also that after all these sufferings, how they set an Excise upon your Bread
and Meat you eat, in all places where they have power; and which is worst of
all, they have abused our Churches by making flables thereof, and by robbing
and defacing the same, and now abolished the Common Prayer and Litturgie of the
Church so long publicly used amongst us, and confirmed by Law; and instead
thereof, have introduced so many religions as men shall fancy of themselves.
Remember how we and our Ancestors have happy lived under the government of
many godly and pious kings and Queens, and see where we have not suffered more
in 3 years under them. And lastly, think upon it seriously, whither ever you
can or probably may expect such happy days again, if you join not with the
King and His Forces, to advance His Throne and Regal Dignity, who has so
often sought and desired your peace and safety, I remain

Tyranny of these men who now usurp Regal Authority unto themselves, then
one 200 years before, under the Government of those Religious Kings and
Queens. Gent. your very affectionate friend Jews Dives.


In answer to this Letter, there shall need to be said no more, only to
refer the Reader to Colonel Butlers Letter following, which is the true Copy
of that which he sent to the Club-men.

Gentlemen and Neighbors,
YOu have had many meetings, but few salutations from me, not that I love you
less than other Governors: but that I knew not how to shape a discourse to
you, till I saw which way you did incline. I have seen some of your Articles,
and find you pretend chiefly to stand up in your own defense, and the
preservation of that little which is left to maintain and preserve you and
yours. If that only be your intent, I know not how, or why it should be
withstood by any one that loves his Country; but then I would wish you would
manifest it, by your yielding no assistance to the adverse party, and we will
endeavor to require none from you; otherwise we must look on you as not what
you profess your own friend only, but our professed enmie. Put us in a way
by your assistance to get the Kings party to quit their holds, and we I assure
you, will speedily relinquish our land Garrisons. If your intentions are
according to your expressions, then I desire you would manifest it; First, by
your prohibiting Papists, and such as are notorious enemies to the Parliament.
Secondly, by warily declining the counsel and the wily practices of some
eminent men now in Arms against us, who plott and contrive to abuse and seduce
your honest and innocent intentions. Thirdly, we entreat you likewise not to
suffer scandalous nor drunken ministers to have any great power with you, nor
influence upon you, because we know such are our professed enmies; for they
know the Parliament intends to call them to a stric^^ account. Fourthly, we
shall desire that you may give us no (...) cause of exception, that no man that
is known to have been our enemies, may be neither a Clerk or Reader, or any
other kind of officer among you. Fifthly, that our Letters be read, and our
messengers safely returned as well as any others. Sixthly, that our Soldiers
and Troopers may have free egresse and regresse amongst you, that if they
behave themselves amiss, and fall into your hands, you would acquaint us with
their offenses that we might punish them. These things if you will perform,
we shall wish you well, and that you may be prosperous to the end you pretend
to undertake it for* otherwise whatsoever your pretenses are, we know that you
are abused by those that are our enemies, and that would make you so too; and
we desire to know, how can you be Parliaments enemies? Is it because they
endeavor with the hazard of their lives to preserve your Liberties* when the
tyranny and oppression of the Court was at highest: or is it because they Vow
and Covenant to extirpate Popery, Schism(...) Errors, and Superstition. Why
will you plead for Baal, will you^o to keep up that which God has promised,
and he will have down; or is it because you fear we will take away the
Kings Crown and Dignity. Look upon the Parliaments Declarations to the
contrary, sent to all Princes and States. Look upon our solemn Vow and
Covenant to the contrary, and do not think us a people greedy of perjury,
and of hatred and infamy from all posterity; or is it because we endeavor for
Reformation in Church and State. I desire you to consider, whether it be not
(...)e to endeavor to be better, when God is punishing us because we are so
bad. Whether the Reformation aimed at, will not make us walk more pleasing
before God, and make us more conformable to all other reformed Protestant
Churches, who have long looked and prayed for such a Reformation amongst us;
whither this be not to thwart and oppose what God will have brought to pass.
If you cannot apprehend the great necessities of it, yet I advise you at least
to stand still, and not to lift up your hand against it; for if it be of God,
it will stand, if it be not of him, it will fall of it self to the ground.
Take heed then good Neighbors and fellow Protestants, of joining and
associating your (...) with bloody Papists and Irish Rebbels, lest you partake
of their (...)ments, for God will shortly bring them to an account of all the
innocent blood shed here and in Ireland. Take heed of setting your selves
against them, that earnestly pray and endeavor for the true good of your
souls, bodies, and estates; and the Lord give you a right understauding in all
things, and guide you into those ways and counsels which will most conduce to
his glory, and your true good. Pardon me for being so tedious, I have not
troubled you often, I should be glad to hear from you what your resolutions
are, and shall rest

Warham June 30. 1645. Your truly wel-wishing friend and Neighbor Robert
Butler.


4. For His Majesty's promise of a Cessation of Arms, and nomination of a
Treaty, the late printed Letters between the King and Queen, it is hoped have
given full satisfaction to every rational man; and yet (such is the
Parliaments desire of Peace, if it may be, that) the Lords and Commons have
both agreed to send Propositions to the King for Peace, and that without any
Treaty; but forthwith by Bill to require a positive answer: to which if it
shall please His Majesty to give his Royal Assent, an end will be of the
Wars, and the kingdom settled in peace, and he received with joy, and honored
with the love and loyalty of all his Subjects.

5. The reading of the malignant book printed at Oxford about the Treaty, has
giv^n little satisfaction to reasonable men, who will without doubt be fully
satisfied in the Declartion, which the Parliament are putting out concerning
the same.

6. What faithful Protestant can be so blinded, as not to understand, and in
his conscience confess, that the sins of the Kings Army are exceeding great,
both in drinking, swearying, whoring, robbing, plundering, killing, and
idolatry, and all manner of wickedness and barbarous cruelties daily exercised
in all parts where they come. And what redress is here promised for the
relief of His Majesty's Subjects herein. To the third, you may see the answer
is, that Taxes and Free Quarter shall be done with moderation, and severe
justice is promised for plunder; but should that be fulfilled, the King would
soon hang up all his soldiers.

7. For the trusting of any to keep the Garrisons for the King, it is
notoriously known, that the Queen must approve of them, and none but Papists
must be entrusted there with; is it not so in all parts of the kings quarters.

8. For the want of Justice, the kingdom is very sensible, that that very
thing has been a great cause of these Wars; which Papists, Jesuits, and
Delinquents were the fomenters of, to be a Protection for them from the power
of the Parliament.

Now because the very Club-men themselves are sufficiently sensible how they
have suffered under the kings forces, therefore they have framed directions for
the security of their estates, the Copies whereof follow.

The desires and Resolutions of the Inhabitants of Dorset.
WE the miserable Jnhabitants of the said County, being too too deeply touched
with the apprehension and sense of our past and present sufferings (occasioned
only by these Civil and vnaturall wars within this Kingdom.) and finding by
sad experience, that by means thereof the true worship of almighty God and our
religion are almost forgotten, and that our ancient Laws and liberties, are
altogether swallowed up in the arbitrarie power of the sword; and foreseeing
that famine and utter Desolation will imediatly fall upon us, our wives and
children, (unless God of his in finit mercy shall look upon our true
humilation be graciously pleased, spedily to put a period to these sad
distractions, are unanimously resolved to join in Petitioning His Majesty and
the two Houses of Parliament for a happy peace and accommodatin of the present
differences, without future effusion of Christian blood; without which
accommodation we cannot expect the enjoyment either of our Religion, Liberties,
or proprieties: mean while, that we whose names are under written, Resolve,
and do here Declare.

1. To defend and maintain with our lives and fortunes the true reformed
Protestant Religion.

2. To join with and assist one another in the mutual defense of our Laws,
liberties, and properties, against all plunderers, and all other unlawful
violence whatsoever.

3. We do faithfully promise each to other, that the damage or loss which in
the execution hereof shall happen to any one, be accounted as the loss of the
generality, and that reparation be made to such party or parties by the whole
County; and in case of loss of life, provision be made for his wife and
children, by the County.

4. To declare all such unworthy of the general assistance, as shall refuse,
or delay to join with us in the prosecution of these our just intentions.

Some directions for present behavior made and agreed on at a meeting of the
Inhabitants of the Counties of Dorset and Wilts, at Gorhead corner, the 28th of
May, 1645.
Whereas by the Articles of our Association, we challenge unto our selves no
other freedom for the present from the burden of the Wars, then to preserve
our selves from plder, and all other unlawful violence. It is therefore
advised by the generality, that until such time as we receive answer to our
petitions from his Majesty and the two Houses of parliament.

1. Every Town, Tything-parish, great Hamlet, make present choice of three or
more or the ablest men for Wisdom, Valor, and estate, Inhabitants in the
same, unto whom at all times they may repair for assistance and direction.

2. That the Constable, Tything-man, or other officer of the Tawne,
Tything-parish, or liberty, in pursuance of the Statute in that case provided,
set a constant watch of two at the least every night, and they well Armed, and
if need so require, by day also; and the number of the watchmen to be
increased, according to the discreation of the said chosen able men, and the
said officers.

3. That the watchmen be charged not to stop, (...), or examine any Soldier
on his march, nor any other passenger that passes peaceably; but if they be
friendly spoken unto by the passenger, to return a friendly answer, to
encourage him in his peaceable behavior.

4. That the watchmen keep walking in their precincts, in as much secrecy as
conveniently they may, in avoid a hidden surprisall; and as soon as they or
either of them descry any Vlolence to any person, house, or goods, if they are
not of sufficient strength themselves to suppress or stop the said Violence;
then one of them presently repayring unto one or more of the said chosen able
men, by his or their advice, to raise the parish, tything town, or Hamlet into
arms, to assist the distressed, and the other watchman withal speed to
repair to the next neighboring watch, or watches, if need so requires; and
there in like manner raising the men into armos, to bring presently with him to
relieve the distressed half of the men there armed, the other half to remain
ready armed in their own precincts to protect the same, and to apprehend the
plunderers in their Retreat.

5. That all such as pretend themselves to be Soldiers, and are taken
plundering, or doing any other unlawful Violence, be presently disarmed, and
after examination, having confessed unto which Army they do belong, to be safely
Guarded, together, with sufficient witness to prove the offense; from Tything
Tything, until they be brought to the next Garrison belonging unto the said
Army, and there to be delivered unto the commander in chief, with tender of
the witnesses to prove the crime; but in case they say they belong to an Army
that does quarter near the place where the offense was committed, then in like
manner to convey them to the commander in chief of the said Army.

6. That they avoid false Alarums, no men rise into Arms but such as are so
nominated by the watchmen, unless they see apparent Violence; or in case the
watch be defective or surprised, they be called by a very probable out cry.

7. That all men furnish themselves with as much, and good Arms, Weapons, and
Ammunition as they can procure; and the Rich out of a good conscience to
relieve the poor herein, as also in their labors of watching and other
assistance in some proportionable measure.

8. That the contribution money, and all provision and necessary maintenance
for the Armies, if it be demanded by a lawful warrant directed to the Officer
of the place; be not denied, but every man as he is able in some reasonable
proportion forthwith to contribute; and for those that are truly unable,
certificate of their inability to be made by the said officer, with the advice
of the said chosen able men of the place, unto their commander in chief, from
whom the warrant issued, with petition for respite and mittigation of the
proportion by the said warrant required, until they shall be better enabled.

9. If quarter be demanded according to order martial, the soldier to be
friendly entertained, behaving himself fairly in his quarters; but if they
plunder or offer any other violence, then to be restrained and delivered up
unto his commander in chief to be by him corrected.

If any inconvenience shall be found to ensue on the observation of these
directions, it is desired to be made known at the next general meeting that
it may be amended.
FINIS.

