A DECLARATION BY THE KINGS MAJESTY Concerning His Majesty's going away from
Hampton Court: Written by His own hand, and left upon the Table in His Majesty's
Bedchamber. Dated at Hampton Court, Novem. 11. 1647.

Presented to the Parliament, by the Lord Mountague, and read in both Houses of
Parl: Friday Nov. 12. 1647.

WITH His Majesty's Propositions for satisfying of the Presbyterians and
Independents, the Army, and all his Majesty's Subjects of England and Scotland.

FOr the Speaker of the Lords pro tempore, to be communicated to the Lords and
Commons in the Parliament of England, at Westminster, and the Commissioners of
the Parliament of Scotland, and to all my other Subjects of what degree or
calling whatsoever.

Charles REX.

CR
DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms

London, Printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, 1647.

A DECLARATION BY THE KINGS MAJESTY. Concerning His going away from Hampton
Court.
Hampton Court the 11 of November. 1647.
LIberty being that which in all times has been, but especially now, is the
common Theme, and desire of all men. Common reason shows that Kings less
then any should endure captivity, and yet I call God and the world to witness,
with what patience I have endured a tedious restraint, which so long as I had
any hopes that this sort of my sufferings might conduce to the Peace of my
Kingdom, or the hindering of more effusion of blood; I did willingly undergo:
But now finding by too certain proofs, that this my continued patience would
not only turn to my personal ruin, but likewise be of much more prejudice
than furtherance to the public good:

I thought I was bound, as well by natural as political obligations to seek
my safety; by retiring my self for some time from the public view, both of
my friends and enemies. And I appeal to all indifferent men, to judge if I
have not just cause to free my self from the hands of those who change their
principles with their condition; and who are not ashamed openly to intend the
destruction of the Nobility, by taking away their negative voice, and with whom
the levellers doctrine is rather countenanced then punished.

And as for their intentions to my person, their changing and putting more
strict guards upon me, with the dischaging most of all those servants of mine,
who formerly they willingly admitted to wait upon me, does sufficiently
declare: Nor would I have this my retirement mis-interpreted, for I shall
earnestly and incessantly endeavor the settling of a safe and well-grounded
peace, where ever I am, or shall be; And that (as much as may be) without the
effusion of more Christian blood, for which how many times have I desired,
pressed to be heard, and yet no ear given to me.

And can any reasonable men think that (according to the ordinary course of
affairs) there can be a settled peace without it; or that God will bless
those who refuse to hear their own King, surely not?

Nay I must further add, That (besides what concerns my self) unless all
other chief interests have not only an hearing, but likewise just satisfaction
given unto them, (to wit the Presbyterians, Independents, Army, those who have
adhered to me, even the Scots) I say there cannot (I speak not of miracles, it
being of my opinion, a sinful presumption, in such cases to expect or trust to
them) be a safe or lasting peace

Now as I cannot deny but that my personal security is the urgent cause of
this my retirement, so I take God to witness that the public peace is no
less before mine eyes; And I can find no better way to express this my
profession (I know not what a wiser man may do) then by desiring and urging,
that all chief interests may be heard, to the end each may have just
satisfaction, As for example; The Army: for the rest (though necessary yet I
suppose are not difficult to content) ought (in my judgment) to enjoy the
liberty of their Consciences have an Act of Oblivion, or Indemnity (which
should extend to all the rest of my Subjects) And that al their arreares should
be speedily and duly paid, which I will undertake to do, so I may be heard,
And that I be not hindered from using such lawful and honest means, as I
shall choose.

To conclude, let me be heard with freedom, honor, and safety, and I shall
(instantly) break through this cloud of retirement, and show my self really
to be Pater Patriae.

CHARLES REX.

For the Speaker of the Lords, pro tempore, to be communicated to the Lords and
Commons in the Parliament of England at Westminster, and the Commissioners of
the Parliament of Scotland: And to all my other Subjects of what degree or
calling whatsoever.

CHARLES REX.
Dated at Hampton Court, the 11. of Novem. 1647.
FINIS.
November. 12. 1647. Imprimatur G. M.


