His Majesty's Declaration, for the Relief of the poor Miners, within the
County of Derby.
CHARLES R.

Whereas We are well informed, by such as We have expressly employed, That the
Miners and Workmen of Our Mines in Our County of Derby are falling into great
wants, and likely to be deprived of the means of sustaining themselves and
families by their labors, by occasion of several oppressions, and the
stoppage of the Vessels employed in the carriage of Lead (the commodity upon
which, by their labors, they subsist) by the illegal and hostile Courses used
by Sir John Hotham at Hull. We therefore, tendering the relief of Our said poor
Miners, out of Our Princely care, have thought good hereby to declare: That all
such of Our said Subjects who are willing, and able in body, and shall
voluntarily repair to Nottingham, to Our present Army, without sound of Drum,
shall forthwith receive five shillings a piece for their charges in coming
thither, and be afterward entertained, and duly receive their pay of six
shilings by the week, during their Service in Our present wars. And, upon the
disbanding of Our Army, all such of the Miners aforesaid, as have faithfully
served Us, shall be, during their lives, freed and exempted from payment of
Lot, Cope, and Custom for all such Dare as they shall dig in Our said Mines;
and if it shall happen, any of them to dye in Our said Service, the Widow of
the deceased shall have liberty to employ a Servant, and enjoy such benefits,
anb privileges, during their lives, as their Husbands should have had, in case
they had survived.

And to the end, that this Our Declaration, and pious Intention may be made
known to Our said Subjects, We do hereby require such Parsons, Vicars, and
Curats in Our said County, to whom these presents shall come, forthwith to
publish the same in their Parish Churches: And for so doing this shall be, as
well unto them, as unto all others whom it may concern, a sufficient Warrant
and Discharge.

Given at Our Court at York, this 15 of August. 1642.
Imprinted at York by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN Bill. 1642.


