HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER TO THE DECLARATION OF BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT.
Concerning the Commission of ARRAY.

Of the 1. of July. 1642.

Printed at York, and reprinted at Oxford by His Majesty's special command.
Anno Dom. 1642.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER, to the DECLARATION of both Houses of Parliament,
concerning the Commission of ARRAY.
HAving first received, by the published Votes and Declarations of both Our
Houses of Parliament several informations of evident and imminent danger unto
Our Kingdom, from enemies abroad, and at home, and finding that Our
Commissions of Lieutenancie (although We did since the beginning of this
Parliament grant the like for the County of York, to the now Earl of Essex,
with the privitie of both Our Houses of Parliament, and without exception from
either; and that the same was the means for defense of this Kingdom used in
the happy times of that good Queen Elizabeth, and Our blessed Father, and
confirmed as well by the opinions of Judges and Lawyers, as the universal
obedience of the Subjects) were all of them,without hearing any of Our Council
learned, voted illegal, and by Our House of Peers called in to be cancelled;
And that thereupon Our Kingdom lay open and exposed to all dangerous attempts
without other provision then of a late pretended Ordinance of both Our said
Houses; which (being made without Us, and contrary to Our express will
declared, and after it had been twice refused in Our House of Peers, and
after the departure of a major part of the Peers) was so far from being a
means to prevent danger, that if it should have been admitted, it would in
all probability, have been the ready way to confusion, and ruin, as being
made in an unparliamentary, unpresidented, and unjustifiable way, and therefore
of a most dangerous consequence, both to Us and Our people, as well in that
particular, as in the Example.

We did therefore for the avoiding of the peril of delays, and expense of
time in disputes, issue forth such Our several Commissions of Array into Our
several Counties, as upon great advice, We conceive were not only secured
for, but also might well be most satisfactory unto both Our Houses, as being
beyond all just exception in the point of Legality, Danger, or Inconvenience,
the same having been heretofore most deliberately agreed upon, and settled (as
We shall herein show) in, and by the care and wisdom of the Parliament, held
in the fifth year of King Henry the fourth.

And We expected for this Our so Princely care of Our People, and observance
of Our Laws, rather the dutiful thanks of both Our Houses, then the return
of such an Answer or Declaration as causelessly imputes to this Our so well
intended and justifiable an act, not only (upon mis-construction and
mis-application of several Acts and Declarations in Parliament) the tax of
illegality, but also marketh it (upon the mis-representation of diverse powers,
and omission of diverse Limitations in Our Commission) with the brand of extreme
danger, and inconvenience thereby to Our people, and of an heavier yoke of
Bondage then either that of the late Ship money, or any other charge taken away
this Parliament.

In all which, for the better and further satisfaction of Our well-affected
people, and to save them (if possible) from incurring any danger either by
obeying that Ordinance, or disobeying Our Commissions, (in both which We are
resolved to require a strict examination and account) We have taken the pains
to examine the said Declaration, and the Objections therein against Our
Commissions.

And for the better understanding of the several particular doubts which are
now raised thereupon, We hold it necessary in the first place, to set forth the
true end of these Commissions, with the several Powers and Limitations
thereof, which by this Declaration are drawn into question, together with the
several mis-representations thereof in this Declaration.

The Subjects being of three sorts; Some having good estates, and able bodies;
Others, being of good estates, but impotent; Others, able of body, but not in
estate: And the service required, being for the necessary defense of our
Kingdom in general, in the time of danger.

The Commissioners are to cause those of the first sort, to Arm themselves
according to their degree and estate, (and serving in Person, they are not
bound by this Commission to find Arms for any others.)

Those who (having estates) are not able to serve in Person, are to be
assessed, and may be distrained to find Arms for others, according to the
quantity of their Lands and Goods; But with this Limitation, prout
rationabiliter portare poterunt, and salvo statu suo; that is, That they be
charged but moderately, and so as they may live still, according to their
former condition.

As for those of the third sort, who are not able to Arm themselves, by this
Commission, as it was altered by common consent in 5. H. 4. (for it was
otherwise before that time) they are not (as to this matter of Arming) meddled
withal.

And therefore this part of the Commission is misrepresented in the
Declaration. Which supposes a Power given by this Commission, to charge all
men without distinction, with Arms, at the discretion of the Commissioners,
without Limitation; and those that are able, to find Arms; and such as are
impotent, to find men at Arms, according to the quantity of their Lands and
Goods; And also wholly omits the manner of the charging them, which is to be
moderately, and so as they may still live, according to their former condition

The Commission having thus, with equality, and indifferency, charged Our
Subjects with provision of Arms, it further provides for their calling
together, training, and exercising, not (as it is in the Declaration) generally
at the pleasure of the Commissioners, without restraint either of time or
place:) But that they shall be called together, ad certos dies and loca quos
videritis magis competentes and expedientes, and pro populo nostro minus
damnosos; At such times and places as the Commissioners shall think to be most
fitting and expedient, and least hurtful unto the people.

And having thus provided, for the Arming and preparing Our Subjects for
defense of the Kingdom; In the new place, the Commission gives power to the
Commissioners, to lead them to the Seacoast, or elsewhere; but not at the
pleasure of the Commissioners, (as may be inferred out of the Declaration) nor
without Limitation, (though omitted also in the Declaration) But the Commission
provides, That they are to be led to the Seacoast, or elsewhere, ubi ac
quoties necesse fuerit ad inimicos nostros expellend. debelland. and destruend.
cum periculum immineat; At such times and places as it shall be necessary for
the expulsion, vanquishing, and destruction of Our Enemies, when there shall be
imminent danger. And it further provides, in another part of the Commission,
That they shall be conducted; cum periculum imminuerit in defensione Regni and
Patriae tam ad Costerum Maris, quam alia loca ubi magis necesse fuerit, In case
of imminent danger, for defense of the Kingdom and Country from time to time,
as well to the Seacoast, as other places where it shall be most necessary.

And although notwithstanding all these limitations and cautions, it be true,
That in this charging of Arms, as also for the times and places of calling
together Our Subjects, and of conducting or leading them, and the dangers upon
which they are to be so conducted and led, much is left to the discretion of
the Commissioners (as it must of necessity in all Commissions, where the
places, times, and occasions of execution of them depend upon future accidents
and circumstances, and cannot be certainly known, or described at the time of
the issuing of the Commissions.) Yet nevertheless it cannot be inferred
thereupon, That therefore Our Commissioners have a mere absolute arbitrary
Liberty of Will to do what they please. But that if they shall wilfully and
unjustly grieve any of Our good Subjects, in exceeding or not observing Our
Limitations or Directions, they are, by Law, clearly punishable by Indictment
for the same: Nor are, or shall any of Our Subjects so grieved, be without
remedy or relief.

And to the end that every County, so far as in Us lies, should have cause
to rest the more assured against any evil usage and abuse; By this Commission
We have appointed for Commissioners, such as have estates in the several
Counties, and are Persons of Honor and Reputation, who are not only engaged
to all fairness out of their own interest, but also in the concernment of
their Posterity, Kindred, Alliance, Friends, and Tenants, and the good
affection of their Country, which to Persons of such Condition as they are, is
of a consideration beyond their Fortunes; So that We hope their forwardness
in undertaking this trouble for the public defense, will occasion in Our good
Subjects, rather a willing obedience unto Us, then the least distrust or
jealousy of any of them.

Having thus stated the substance of Our Commission, and prevented that
misunderstanding, which this Declaration might have else begotten thereupon;
We (in the necessary justification thereof, and vindication of Our own
Honor, against those expressions in that Declaration, which so nearely do
concern Us (under the Common name of Evil Counselors) as if We had violated
Our Laws, even those so lately made; broken Our often Protestations of
governing according to Law, and done that which would bring Our people into a
slavery) shall now join issue with Our two Houses, in every material part of
their Declaration, both in the consideration of the pretended Danger,
Inconveniency, and Illegality.

And herein, first, for the pretended Danger, and Inconveniency so much urged;
We do deny.

That this Commission is full of Danger, or Inconveniency to Our Subjects, or
will bring an heavier Yoke of Bondage then the Ship Money, or any other
illegal charge, taken away this Parliament; or indeed, any Danger or
Inconvenience at all.

And therein We appeal to each good man's conscience and reasonable
understanding: In a Kingdom (as this is) which in its fundamental policy (as
well for its own assurance, against the danger of Foreign Aids, as the bad
use that might be made of great constant Forces (whether foreign or native)
must necessarily be defended by it self: What other way of defense can be
imagined but by the Subject? What more reasonable proportion of charging them
can be found? Wherein can the Limitation of the (otherwise Arbitrary)
Discretion be bettered? Or how, in any one particular, can a more equal and
fitting way be taken for the avoiding the grieving Our good Subjects in their
own particulars? Yet withal providing for the defense of our Kingdom in the
general, then is by this Commission?

And We cannot but profess Our Wonder, That since (as We shall show) this
very Commission was with so much care, both in respect of the Commissioners,
and the powers of execution thereof, over the persons to be commanded, allowed,
and settled in all points, to the very desires of the people (and that in
Parliament) in the fifth year of King H. 4 how such Danger, Inconvenience, and
Bondage, can be by Our two Houses imagined in this Act of Ours, without
violating that rule, so often urged by them (though not so properly applied to
them without Us) That a dishonorable thing ought not to be imagined of the
Parliament. And it is as strange to Us, that all this should happen by this
Commission, and yet that Our Subjects should, for so many years past, have
enjoyed so many happy days in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and Our Father,
both of blessed memory, under the provision of Lieutenancy, which is agreed by
this Declaration to be little differing from those of the Commissions of Array
in the Powers.

And lastly, We demand, Whether the persons appointed over the Militia by Our
Houses of Parliament, have not, by their pretended Ordinance or Orders, most of
those powers; nay, some greater over the Subject, in this matter of the
Militia, then are in this Commission? and how they themselves can imagine these
powers to be of a better nature by their authority, then they are by Ours?

And as to this tax of danger and inconvenience, as in the general it did
require no answer at all, (though for the satisfaction of Our people, We have
therein thus enlarged Our selves) so for that particular of the Yoke of Bondage
thereby, in making it heavier then that of Ship Money, since they have not
showed in what particulars, We shall say no more but this: That by this
Commission no money at all comes to Us, or to Our dispose; nor is any money
appointed to be raised, but only Arms provided: And the Arms which Our
Subjects are charged to bear or find, are to be their own proper goods
(which Sir Richard Hutton, in his Argument in print against the Ship Money,
well observed, and thereby differenced the providing of Arms, and payment of
Ship-mony) and are provided once for all, and not yearly to be renewed, as
taxes for money might be, and remain in their own custody, and for their
own defense as well as Ours.

We shall now proceed unto the next general issue, touching the pretended
illegality of Our Commission of Array, and shall justify the legality thereof
by Common Law, and by the practice of former Ages conform to it; and by
Statutes in the very point against all the several pretenses mentioned in the
Declaration, whereunto We shall give particular Answers.

And We shall first begin with the Common Law, whereunto the Declaration
says, this Commission is contrary; and therein affirm,

That this Our Commission is warranted by the very fundamentals of Our
Government, and (as We said in Our late Proclamation) the right of issuing
thereof is inherent in Our Crown.

For since (as We hope none will deny) the Kingdom must of necessity be ever
in readiness (in time of danger at least) by power of Arms to prevent or
suppress Rebellion at home, and Invasion from abroad; and to that end the
Subject must be armed and prepared before hand, and conducted after, as there
shall be occasion: And that this cannot be done without a Command or
Government, We desire much to know in whom, out of Parliament, (for
Parliaments are not always, nor can be called at all times, or meet on the
sudden) this power can be but in Us as the Supreme Governor; (as it is in
all other States, be the persons of the Governors one or more, according to
the form of each State) And can the Supreme Governor, according to his duty,
and Our Self more particularly, according to Our Oath, otherwise afford Our
people that protection which is due unto them, in maintaining to them the Laws
in the matter of Property and Liberty against private injury or oppression, As
well as Our Self, and them, and whatsoever is dear unto any of Us, against
Enemies or Rebels, especially the just Rights and Prerogatives of Our Crown,
wherewith God has trusted Us, (according to the fundamental and
well-established policy of Our State) as well for the peoples good as Our own
honor, both which must be preserved; And will any man say, that by calling of
Our Parliament, (which is but a meeting of Us and Our Subjects, (and such they
continue as well collectively in the two Houses, as they were before singly)
and a meeting in its own nature dissolvable at Our pleasure; and though now
enlarged by Us in time, yet not in power) We are grown less, or departed
with any thing to them either by way of abdication, or communication of Our
Royal Power? This upon the common principles of Reason and Government is so
obvious to every man, that We shall for the present proceed no further
therein, either by quotations of Acts of Parliament, or other legal
authorities, (some whereof We have recited in Our late Proclamations) till Our
two Houses shall give Us some justifiable instance of some good time to the
contrary.

We come next to the continual practice by Us alleged (being alone
sufficient to declare an original fundamental Law of Our Kingdom, or at
least by a tacit consent to introduce a Law) and to this purpose We shall
show that the power of granting Commissions for the defense of the Kingdom in
the general, whereunto only We applied and do apply the opinions of Sir
Richard Hutton and Sir George Crook (not meaning therein, See the printed
Arguments, fol. 25. 64, etc.
as neither in Our Proclamation (as is clearly mistaken) the present form
settled by 5. H. 4. (which We Our selves declared, was made upon alteration)
though for the substance thereof We might have said so much, and made it good,
See 14. H. 3. in the printed Argument of Sir George Crook: a Commission to the
Bishop of Rochester and others, and to the Sheriff of Kent, to cause all men
at Arms in that County to be sworn, and to assesse them what Arms they shall
find. And diverse other presidents there of Arrays in the times of several
Kings. And see Cl. 14. H. 3. m. 15. Dors. the like to other Counties. And 36 H.
3. ( as appears in the History of Matthew. Paris, who lived at that time, Fol.
864.) Rex constituit and generaliter per Angliam voce praeconia fecit acclamari
missis super hoc brevibus ad singulos Comitatus, ut secundum pristinam
Consuetudinem, arma civibus competenter assignarentur, and monstrarentur, and
censerentur, ut essent sufficiontia and competentia secundum cujuslibet
facultates. The King caused Proclamations to be made (for in such cases
Proclamations declaratory were not conceived in those times to be illegal) and
sent Writs into all Counties of England, That (according to ancient custom)
Arms should be competently assessed (or appointed) for the people: And that
they should be (mustred) or showed, and enrolled, that they might be sufficient
and competent, according to every man's estate. And see Pat. 48. H. 3. m. 3.
Dors. and m. 7. Dors. Cl. 23. E. 1. m. 5. Cl. 25. E. 1. m. 17. Dors. in scedul.
pendent. Pat. 31. E. 1. m. 20. Cl. 16. E. 2. part. 1. m. 13. Dors. Pat. 18. E.
2. m. 32. and Rot. Vascon. 18. E. 2. m. 4. 10. 27. Cl. 7. E. 3.part. 1. m. 25.
Rot. Scot, 10. E. 3. m. 8. Franc. 26. E. 3. m. 5. Cl. 44. E. 3. m. 22. Scot. 7.
R. 2. m. 9. Franc. 10. R. 2. m. 24. Pat. 4. H. 4. part. 2. m. 10. Dors. And
after the Parl. of 5. H. 4. See Pat. 7. H. 4. part. 2. m. 31. Dors. 11. H. 4.
part. 2 m. 24. Dors. Pat. 5. H. 5. part. 2. m. 37. Dors. Pat.8. H. 5. m. 17.
Dors. Pat. 34. H. 6. m. 8. Dorse. Pat. 9. E. 4. part. 1. m. 1. Dors. Pat. 12.
E. 4. part. 1. m. 13. Dors. And very many more Commissions of Array in the
several reigns of these Princes. See Lamb. fol. 135. A Law of King Edward the
Confessor. Debent enim universi liberi homines, etc. secundum feodum suum, and
secundum tenementa sua arma habere, and illa semper prompta conservare ad
tuitionem Regni, and servitium Dominorum suorum juxta praeceptum Domini Regis
explendum and per agendum. And Libr. Rubr. Scaccarii, fol 162. the Conquerous
Law in these words, Statuimus and firmiter praecipimus, quod omnes Comites, and
Barons, and Milites, and Servientes, and universi liberi homines totius Regni
nostri pred. habeant, and teneant se semper in armis and equis, ut decet and
oportet, etc. Upon both which it appears, that every man, as well as the Kings
Tenants, ought to have Arms according to his Lands, for defense of the
Kingdom, at the Kings command. And Hoveden, Page 614. in Anno 27. H. 2. Deinde
Henricus Rex Angliae focit hanc assisam de habendis armis in Angl. etc. King
Henry the second made an assise of Arms for defense of the Kingdom, according
to the difference of men's abilities, far differing from that in 13. E. 1. And
see Matthew. Paris, fol. 224. A Writ of King John to summon Omnes liberos homines
and servientes, vel quicunque sint, and de quocunque teneant, qui arma habere
debeant, vel arma habere possint; quod sicut, etc. sint apud Doveram, ad
defendendum caput nostrum, etc. sub poena Culvertagii.
as it appears by the Marginall Quotations) is warranted by the presidents in
former Ages.

And this practice, the Penner of this Declaration does indeed not deny; for
having before confessed the often issuing of Commissions of Array, after 5. H.
4 in the times of H. 4. H. 5. and H. 6. (and he might have brought it to later
times, if he had so pleased) he does afterward confess, that diverse
Commissions of Array issued in diverse Kings Reigns before 5. H. 4. But as to
this point of practice before 5. H. 4. he says by way of answer, That for the
most part they were warranted by particular Acts of Parliament. And yet amongst
so many presidents of several Commissions, he gives instances only of two
years in 13. and 14. E. 3. of Commissions of Array then issued, warranted by
Act of Parliament. Rot. Par. 13. E. 3. P. 2. N. 39. Rot. Parl. 14. E. 3. P. 1.
N. 53.
Which, if true, does no more disprove the legality of other Commissions of
Array, constantly issued without a Parliament, then it does of Commissions of
Oyer and Terminer (which at the same time in 14. E. 3. together with the
Commissions of Array, were appointed to issue to the same persons) or of any
other Act, which the King does by the advice of his Parliament, though he may
do it without them: rather it implies the legality, and the former usage of
such Commissions of Array, in that it appoints such Commissions to issue, but
limits not at all the particular Clauses or Powers to be inserted therein, as a
thing known and usual to be done.

But the truth is, both the presidents do concern the drawing of men out of
the Kingdom to a foreign War; and so are nothing to the purpose We have in
hand. And that of 13. E. 3. is not at all a Commission of Array, but of another
nature, giving power to the Lord Wake, and others to provide moneys, and to
cause certain persons there named, who had particularly undertaken the service
of the Scottish Wars, Leur arraier and appareiller d'aller verse, Newcastle:
To array and prepare themselves to go to Newcastle: (whither they were to be
brought at the charge of the Counties) and to be there at a time appointed.

Having thus set forth the continual practice of issuing forth Commissions of
Array in former ages (whereunto We never found, till now, any exception, as
for home-defence) and the absolute necessity thereof, We doubt not but every
indifferent Judgment will easily conceive, That this power is a right Us by by
the Common Law. And the rather, when they shall consider, That a Commission of
Array having been issued by the King in 5. H. 4. The Commons in Parliament,
that year did not except to any part thereof as illegally, no, not to the
Clauses, which seemed heavy over the Commissioners; nor did except at all to
any the powers of execution thereof over the persons to be commanded, but did
acknowledge the Royal assent, for the amendment, and alteration of that
Commission into the now present form, to be an Act of great grace.

And herein We cannot but admire, that the Penner of this Declaration should
urge it as a reason why the Commons in that Parliament of 5. H. 4. complained
not for relief against the Commission in the powers of execution over the
persons to be commanded, because (as he supposes) they knew that they were so
clearly against the late Statute of 4. H. 4. Whereas (if it had been so) they
should the rather have complained, because they issued against so late a
Statute, so clear in the point, (unless the policy and temper of the times be
since much altered) for in a matter of so high a nature as the powers of this
Commission, which (as this Declaration confesses) did surely most concern
them and the Kingdom, They were bound, as well in duty as discretion, to have
sought remedy against so great a violation of the Law and Liberty; and the
rather at this time, when they thought fit to petition against part of the
Commission, since an exception but to a part, especially by him, who ought to
complain against the whole, is a violent presumption of his allowance of the
residue.

We come now more particularly, to the examination of this Our Commission, as
it stands by Statute Law, and herein (as in the matter principally insisted
upon in the Declaration to be disproved) We do affirm, as formerly in Our
Proclamation:

That this Our Commission is warranted by Parliament, in 5. H. 4.

And to this purpose, We do observe; that this Declaration does confess, That
the Record in the Parliament of 5. H. 4. concerning the Commission of Array, is
an Act of Parliament; And that the Question is now only about the meaning
thereof, Whether the Parliament meant thereby, only to take away some penal
clauses touching the Commissioners; (as the Declaration affirms, to which
purpose only it allows it for an Act) or else to settle also the powers of
execution thereof, over the persons to be commanded, as We affirm.

And therein (as We do agree) that at the first, the Complaint of the Commons,
was only in respect of some Clauses and words therein, which were Grievous,
and Dangerous to the Commissioners: So it cannot be denied, but that afterward
the Copy of the Commission so complained of, was delivered by the King to the
Commons, with an express General Liberty (without any restraint) to correct
it according to their own minds, and thereupon the Commons did make use of
that further Liberty, and corrected the Copy, in diverse material Clauses, and
Words which concerned the powers of Execution, as well as those, which
concerned the Commissioners (though the contrary be strangely affirmed by the
Penner of this Declaration) as may appear more particularly by the clauses
following, wholly omitted by him.

1. First, the Copy gives power, Ad armari faciend. omnes illos qui de corpore
sunt potentes and habiles ad armand. tam illos qui de suo proprio habent unde
seipsos armare poterunt, quam illos qui non habent unde seipsos armare
poterunt; To cause to be armed, all those who have of their own thereby to arm
themselves, as well as those, who have not wherewith of their own to arm
themselves. Which last Clause, concerning the Arming of those, who are able of
Body, but not in Estate (being such as are by Us before reckoned amongst the
third sort of Our Subjects) is wholly omitted in this Commission, as it now
stands corrected in 5. H. 4.

2. The Copy, as concerning the assessing, and distraining of all those who
are able in their Estates, but not in their Bodies, goes therein thus; Ad
inveniend. juxta quantitatem terrarum and bonorum suorum, and prout
rationabiliter portare poterunt, salvo statu suo, armaturas hominibus ad arma,
and hominibus armatis, and arous, and sagittas sagittariis sic arraiatis and
triatis, qui non habent armaturas arcus and sagittas de suo proprio, nec unde
armaturas, arcus, and sagittas emere and providere poterunt, and ad
contribuend. expensis omnium illorum qui sic laborabunt pro defensione dicti
Regni nostri, tam infra dictum Com. nostrum quam extra, quandocunque
indiguerit; Ita quod illi qui morabuntur, etc. For the finding of Arms,
according to the quantity of their Lands and goods, and as they may reasonably
bear, saving their degree, for men at Arms, and men Armed; and Bows and
Arrows for Archers so arrayed, and trained, which have not Arms, Bows and
Arrows of their own, nor have wherewith they can buy and provide Arms, Bows,
and Arrows; and to contribute to the expenses of all those which shall so
labor for the defense of Our said Kingdom, as well within that Our County as
without, whenever there shall be need. All which, as may appear upon the
comparing, is much beyond that Commission of 5. H. 4. as it was entered after
the correction.

Upon these proceedings in 5. H. 4. the corrected Copy being presented to the
King, with a Prayer by the Commons; That from thenceforth forward, no
Commission of Array should issue otherwise, nor in other Words, then was
contained in the Copy so corrected, etc. An Act was thereupon made by the
Kings Royal assent thereunto, by the advice of the Lords.

And thus upon the whole Record it is clear, That in the litterall Sense the
Commission is fully enacted in the whole; and We do not observe that to be
denied in the Declaration. And the Art of the Penner seems to be spent only
concerning the intent of the Parliament, in laboring to prove, That the
Commons meant nothing in the Act, but the taking away the penal clauses and
words concerning the Commissioners. And the Argument is drawn only from the
end of the Statute, which the Declaration says was only for the security of
the Commissioners: And this the Penner goes about to prove: First, from the
Complaint, as being no more. Secondly, from their amendment of the Copy, as
being only concerning the Commissioners. Thirdly, from the Prayer, being to
the same purpose. Fourthly, out of the occasion, as supposing the Act necessary
on the part of the Commissioners, not on the, part of the persons to be
commanded. Lastly, out of the subsequent practice of issuing Commissions, that
there never went out one agreeable with the Copy so corrected.

And herein, to justify this Our sense on this Act of Parliament of 5. H. 4.
and withal, to show the errors and mistakes of the Declaration in frame of
the Argument to the contrary; the state of the Case stands thus briefly.

The Commons complained but against the Penal Clauses upon the Commissioners
(which We agree) at first; but afterward, the King left them at liberty to
correct the whole, as they pleased. And now they alter their mind, and do not
rest in correction of those Penal Clauses upon the Commissioners, according to
their first desire, but (as it is plain upon the compare of the Copy, as it
was corrected, with the Commission formerly issued, the not observing whereof
was the great mistake, that doutblesse now misled Our two Houses) the Commons
likewise (as wise men) who would not wave the advantage of a proffered favor
from the King, did correct the Commission also in the powers of execution over
the persons to be commanded: And thereupon the corrected Copy being presented,
and the Commons expecting, that even presently (for there was then occasion)
and often afterward Commissions of Array would (as they did in truth) issue
forth, did pray not only for the indemnity of the Commissioners, which had bin
indeed but answerable to the first complaint; But in the first place, they made
their Prayer in these Words; That from thenceforth forward, no Commission of
Array should issue otherwise, nor in other words then is contained in the said
Copy (so corrected)

This now being apparently the true state of the whole case (cleared from all
mistakes) we think it so plain, that it requires no further Argument to
manifest, That the intention of the Parliament, was both to settle the Clauses
concerning the Powers of execution, and the Clauses concerning the
Commissioners. Thus then We pass over to the Answer of the Objections.

First then, for the first pretense, That the complaint was solely on the
behalf of the Commissioners, We agree it to be true, and perhaps the Commons
had no further thought at the beginning, nor till after an occasion given by the
offer of the Liberty for a total reformation: But then they might desire an
alteration accordingly.

For the second pretense, (which destroyed, makes an end of the question) That
the Commons made no amendment in the Powers of execution over the persons to be
commanded; It is apparently mistaken, as appears by the particular instances
before mentioned.

For the third pretense of the Prayer, (which came not till after the
Commission was in all points so as before corrected) That the Commons did not
desire any amendment or Declaration concerning the Powers of execution, that is
also mistaken; For having made those several amendments, in the very first
place (before any particular desired on the behalf of the Commisisioners)
their prayer is as general, as their amendments, That from thenceforth
forward, No Commission should issue otherwise, nor in other words, then is
contained in the said Copy.

For the fourth pretense, That it was unnecessary to take care of the persons
to be commanded, because that the Powers of execution over them were against 1.
E. 3. cap. 5. 25. E. 3. cap. 8. and 4. H. 4. cap. 13. and that the Commissions
of that kind were then so lately damned in 4. H. 4. We Answer, That if it were
so, there was the more necessity for them to complain, as We have showed
before. But in this also, though it be needless, We shall herein further
clear Our Commission from those Statutes.

As for the occasion of relief for the Commissioners more then for the persons
to be commanded, We say, the Commons could not but know that there was no more
occasion for the one, then for the other: For the same Law of 4. H. 4. if it
had (as is pretended by the Declaration,) expressly damned the Commission as
unlawful in the Powers, that (without more) had apparently, to every common
Judgment, sufficiently secured the Commissioners against all refusalls; And in
truth, the persons to be commanded, being most of them of the lower sort, had
more reason to fear the Commissioners, then the, Commissioners, being men of
Power, had to fear any trouble by Fine or Imprisonment, or otherwise, from any
of the Courts above, especially in a time when Parliaments were so frequent.

For the last pretense of contrary practice, Our Answer is: First, We deny this
(which the Declaration affirms) That though many Commissions of Array did
issue out after 5. H. 4. yet none of them did agree with it in words and
matter: For We say, That diverse Commissions were the very same, See Pat. 7. H.
4. part. 2. m. 31. Dors. Pat. 11. H. 4. part. 2. m. 24. Dors.
saving in those things which were necessarily, and as of course, to be
changed, as (amongst others) may be seen in the after times of King Henry the
fourth.

And as unto the pretended contrary practice, We agree that it is true, Diverse
Commissions of Array did issue out, which do vary from this Statute of 5. H. 4.
yet We deny that they must be therefore contrary to it; For (however upon the
Commission of 5 H. 4 as it was corrected in the several Clauses in such manner
as before) it is enacted that from thenceforth forward no Commission should
issue out otherwise then is contained in that copy; yet it is most evident
notwithstanding, that the meaning of the Law could never be to tie the King to
the very words of that copy; For then at all times the Commissions must have
begun with Rex, etc. and not Carolus, or Regina, and ended with the same Test
for time and place, and just the same preamble of danger, be it true or false
(whatsoever other occasion had been) must have been meant to be expressed; All
which are absurd. And in this, as in all Acts of Parliament, as well as in
Wills, the intent clearly and necessarily appearing out of the Act it self, is
the Law, which in this case was not so much to tie to the very identicall
words, as, That the King should not issue out any Commissions of Array which
should exceed this which was so settled by any further penalty on the
Commissioners; nor in the powers of execution upon the Persons to be commanded;
which sense appears in this, that in such a case it could never have been
meant, That the Powers of execution of the Commission, being several, as to
Array, Assesse, Arm, Train, Muster, and Conduct, and all these not necessary
on all occasions, nor all always equally fit to be entrusted to the same
persons, That the King should be bound at all times unnecessarily to command
the execution of them all, and equally to entrust the same persons with them
all, as he must have done in case the Act had been literally to be expounded
in each title.

The truth is, many Commissions did vary, yet still were warranted, as not
exceeding that of 5. H. 4. in the powers. As sometimes granting but part of
them, when there was no cause to use all; as also, some varyed on the occasion,
as sometimes providing against an invasion, in this or that part only,
sometimes more general throughout the Kingdom: And lastly, it is true that
some were upon occasion of rebellion, for which there is as much cause as
against a foreign enemy, for those Commissions are not against 5. H. 4. which
was a president, only for the power of execution of Commissions of Array
(whatsoever might be the necessary occasion to issue them) And as this
particular Commission sent forth in 5. H. 4. and thus after corrected, was on
the occasion of the fear of the French, and therefore was upon that accident
made only as against an Enemy; so if according to former practice the like had
then issued in case of Rebellion (in which case perhaps Rebellion had been
mentioned as the cause) then the suppression of Rebellion might have been
inserted in this president, and then the Argument might have been at this day
used as well against the warrantablenesse of this Commission in case of
Invasion.

And as to the president of the Commission of Array in 6. H. 4. cited in the
Declaration as not agreeing with that of 5. H. 4. neither in words or matter,
We conceive it is in substance warranted by it: For there the King (upon
occasion of the French being in Piccardy, ready to besiege some of his Forts
there, and hearing that they intended to come to aid the Welsh, being then in
Rebellion) sends out his Commissions into Kent, Somerset, and other Counties,
to Array, Train, and Arm the Inhabitants there, to the end they may be ready,
as well at the Seacoast, as else where; where, and as often as there shall be
necessity for the expelling, vanquishing, and destroying of those enemies when
there shall be imminent Danger, as in such case had been accustomed. But he
thinks not fit to give to them the power of conducting them (which is the
Commission of 5. H. 4.)

But shortly after, upon information of an intention of the Welsh to enter
into England, a Commission issues to Sir Thomas Barkley touching some of these
Counties and others, not, to Array and Arm the inhabitants, for that was done
before, but ad supervidendum, to see that they were sufficiently arrayed,
according to their estates; and to lead them as often as it should be needful
for resistance of the Rebels.

So that as We conceive, the powers which were put together in 5. H. 4. are
here severed; but there is nothing in either Commission which exceeds or
crosses the powers settled by the Commission of 5. H. 4. Though if it did, it
might prove the illegalitie of those; but nothing against the legality of Our
Commissions.

And if other particular Commissions had been produced, and the differences
particularly observed, We should have been the better able to have applied
Our answer thereunto; And in the mean time, We look upon all such
Commissions, as regulated, and warranted by this Act of 5. H. 4. and in
pursuance thereof.

Notwithstanding, if some Commissions can be produced, which are not warranted
by 5. H. 4. Yet that will be no sufficient Argument to prove, That this of 5.
H. 4 never meant to settle the Powers of Execution, for there is no doubt, but
in so long a process of time, as since 5. H. 4 there may have been some
deviation contrary unto the Act, the same having not at all times been
remembered, as perhaps also may be in the Clauses concerning the Commissioners,
which yet We are sure Our two Houses will not allow as an Argument against the
force of 5. H. 4. as allowing it to be an Act concerning them.

We might further add the opinion of Sir Edward Cook, (whose great learning
and affection to the Rights and Liberty of the Subject are not unknown) who in
his Treatise of the Jurisdiction of Courts (being one of those Books since this
Parliament desired, or directed by the House of Commons to be published)
expressly declares, That this Act, touching a Commission for arraying and
mustering of men, is at this day of force.

But if any man be yet unsatisfied with so clear Reasons on Our part, and in
Our answers, We shall conclude upon him with the authority of the whole
Parliament of 7. H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 36. within two years after this Our
Commission was settled, when probably many of the same persons were members of
both the Parliaments, Whereby it appears that this Act of 5 H. 4. is so
binding as unto all the Powers of execution over the persons to be commanded,
that the Clergy (who in former times had used to be arrayed amongst themselves
by Writ or Commission to the Bishop or Archbishop) were bound, as within the
body of that Commission so settled by Parliament. And they thereupon, in that
very Parliament of 7. H. 4. are excepted out of this very Commission of 5. H.
4. which is therein mentioned; and it was then enacted, That from thenceforth
the Clergy be not any ways charged amongst the Laity for the making of any
such Array, nor for any contribution amongst the Laity for the same.

Having thus clearly settled this Record of 5. H. 4. as a full Act of
Parliaments, well concerning the powers of execution over the Persons to be
commanded, as the taking away of the penal Clauses over the Commissioners,
There is no further necessity, as to the matter in question, to consider
whether or no that this Commission in all or any part thereof be contrary to
any of the former Acts of 13. E. 1. 1. E. 3. cap. 5. 25. E. 3. cap. 8.and 4. H.
4. cap. 13. so much insisted upon in the Declaration. For that in such case,
the Act of 5. H. 4. being the latter had been a Repeal of them for so much.

Nevertheless, for the further satisfaction of Our people (as being desirous
to omit nothing which may be done on Our part for the clearing of the justice
of our actions) We shall also examine those Statutes so far as they are made
use of in this Declaration.

And therein We profess the difficulty has been more to find out, then to
answer the inference made upon these Statutes. For the Declaration recites the
Statute of 13. E. 1. to be a particular Assize (or Assessement) of Arms, both
in respect of the Kind of Arms to be found, and the proportion of the estate
of every man, after which they are to be found, downwards from 15 pounds in
Lands, and 40 Marks in Goods: And recites the Statute of 1. E. 3. That no man
from thenceforth shall be charged to arm himself otherwise then he was wont
in the time of the Kings Progenitors; and that no man be compelled to go out
of his Shire, but where necessity requires, and sudden coming of strange
enemies into the Realm. (Whereupon it is taken for granted, That the Statute
of 13. E. 1. was a provision of Arms for defense extraordinary, and that this
Statute of 1. E. 3. was meant with reference thereunto) And also recites the
Statute of the 25 year of E. 3. (as to be to the same effect with the former)
against the constraining men to find men of Arms, Hoblers, or Archers,
without consent and grant made in Parliament. And lastly, recites the Statute
of 4. H. 4. (which confirms those two Statutes of 1. E. 3. and 25. E. 3.) And
immediately thereupon makes this conclusion which follows; That by these Acts
(not distinctly applying the several matters to the several Statutes) it
clearly appears, That the King could not, by the Law, give power to impose
Arms upon the Subject, (which the Declaration calls sometimes finding of
Arms, sometimes finding men at Arms, all of different senses) or to compel
them to be drawn out of their Counties: Which afterward, in stating the Case,
is expressed thus, That the Subject was not compellable to find any other Arms
then was declared by those Statutes, or to go out of their County, but in case
of Actual invasion by Foreign Enemies. Against which this Commission is said
to be.

But for Our clearer passage in this business, We shall single out the
several Statutes, with the Objections (as We conceive) intended upon each of
them.

For the better understanding whereof We shall distinguish of the principal
Terms in this question used in the Commission, and several Acts of Parliament.

First then, as for the words of Arming a man's self used in the Commission (as
also in the Act of 1. E. 3.) they are literally to be taken for the providing
of Arms for a man's own person, wherewith he is to serve as a Soldier,
either Horseman or Footman, of what kind soever; And the finding of Arms
for others in the Commission, is but the finding the bare Arms, without
providing the men, and are so to be taken here, (in whatsoever sense they may
be taken elsewhere,) as may clearly appear upon the very reading. And as for
the words ( finding of men of Arms, etc.) which are the words used in the
Statute of 25. E. 3. they are usually and properly enough taken for the setting
forth of Soldiers, the paying of their wages, or contributing toward either
of them

This then being the sense of the words, We now proceed to the Statutes, and
apply them to the two Objections; the one against imposing of Arms, the other
against carrying out of the County: And first concerning the Statute of 13. E.
1.

Thereupon the Objection against the power of imposing of Arms is this.

This Statute appoints a particular Assize for the kinds of Arms and
Proportions, as before. But Our Commission does give power to assesse for the
kinds ( any Arms) and for the proportions, according to each man's ability;
(which the Declaration terms to be without limitation and at pleasure) and so
is contrary to this Statute.

To this We answer; That that Statute of 13. E. 1. (besides that it is but an
affirmative Statute,) was made only for the ordinary defense of the Kingdom,
for the preservation of the peace at ordinary times; and was not intended as a
provision of Arms for defense extraordinary: but that for the public defense
in time of Danger, the King might, and must charge other Arms, and other
proportions, according to the exigency of the occasion.

Both which appear together, if We consider that the provision in that
Statute mentioned (which might be of use for the Peace) is very insufficient
for the Service of War: For We cannot but observe the pettinesse of the Arms,
even according to the use of that time; for he that was rated highest by that
Act, was to find but a Hawberge, (which in that place signifies a Gorget) a
Breast Plate of Iron, a Sword, a Knife, and a Horse: and others but Gisarms
(which were Pike-staves) Knives, and other less weapons. And yet at that time
there were men at Arms, which were Horsemen of complete Armor, Hoblers,
which were Light Horse, and there were Pikes, Lances, Pole-axes, and other
weapons commonly used for War.

And no less considerable is it to this purpose, That for the charge of this
defense no man of what estate soever, is by this Act charged above the rate of
15 Pounds in Lands, or 40 Marks in Goods, and he that has 15 Pounds in Land,
or 40 Marks in Goods, is charged as high as the greatest: which is not to be
imagined in case of provision for defense extraordinary.

And to clear this further out of this, and other Acts; it is plain, that this
very Act expresses it self in these words, That every man have in his house
Harness to keep the peace: and appoints those who are thereby assessed, to
pursue Hues and Cries after Thieves and Robbers, (which went in those times
with great strength, and in multitudes) with their Horses and Armor. And the
old Articles of inquiry upon that Statute, being made in the same Kings reign
(and to be seen in the Statute-books) tend only to inquiry touching the
keeping the peace: as whether all men betwixt the age of fifteen and sixty be
sworn to keep the peace, and whether they have weapons in their houses
according to the quantity of their Lands and Goods, for conservation of the
peace, according to the Statute. And the Statute of 2. E. 3. cap. 6. renewes
this Statute of 13. E. 1. in these words: Item, As to the keeping of the peace
in time to come, it is ordained and enacted, That the Statutes made in time
past, with the Statute of Winchester, shall be observed and kept in every
point. And strange it were to imagine, that the wisdom of a Parliament, in the
matter of arming of the Subject, made no greater or better provision against an
Enemy, then against a Thief, or a Rogue. And it is not so proper to charge the
Subject at all times in the same manner and proportions as in times of danger.

And lastly, for further clearing this Our exposition of that Statute of 13. E
1. We say, That although (as We have already showed) the Commissions of
Arrayes did, from the time of making the Statute of 13. E. 1. frequently issue
both before and since the Statute of 5. H. 4. yet none of those Commissions
were regulated by the Statute of 13. E. 1. but either they were (as commonly)
for arming them according to men's degrees and abilities, without mentioning the
Statute of 13. E. 1. Or, where any did express the quality and proportion of
Arms to be found, They varyed from the Statute of 13. E. 1. and appointed
other kind of Arms, and differenced and proportioned the estates of those who
were to find Arms, otherwise then is mentioned in that Statute: And sometimes
with an express Declaration, that the Statute of 13. E. 1. was made for the
conservation of the peace in a time of peace, when there was no danger of a
foreign enemy. And though some use might be made of those arms appointed by
that Statute in time of danger, as well as any other weapon: yet the same was
not that kind of armor, which was principally intended as fitting for such
defense; as may appear by the presidents above cited. And the constant
practice in all after ages for defense extraordinary has ever been with other
arms, and after other Proportions, as We believe will not be denied by any
man.

We come now to the Statute of 1. E. 3. whereupon the objection stands thus:

That the Statute of 13. E. 1. having made such particular assize of Arms (as
before) for the kinds and proportions, this Statute does ordain, That no man
from thenceforth shall be charged to arm himself otherwise then he was wont
in the time of the Kings Progenitors: Meaning (as the Declaration takes it for
granted) according to that former Statute of 13. E. 1.

To this We shall give this answer: That (as We have proved before) 13. E. 1.
was never meant as of a provision for defense extraordinary: and much less
that the Statute of 1. E. 3. could intend any such thing.

And as the Penner of that Declaration cannot therein show any express
reference to that Statute of 13. E. 1. and can, at the most, but barely
conjecture it; so on the other side, We shall out of the penning and otherwise
upon surer grounds conclude the contrary. For first, in this case, regularly,
if not necessarily, (where a later Statute in the substance and meaning thereof
wholly depends upon a former, and must have reference thereunto) the Parliament
of 1. E. 3. would have made mention of this Statute of 13. E. 1. (as they did
thereof) the next year following, when it was renewed, but for keeping of the
peace. Next, in wisdom it was fitting (if so be that they had intended a
further reestablishment of the particularities of the kinds and proportions of
arms mentioned in 13. E. 1.) that when they had a former Statute so punctual
therein, they should not have thus left us for a true understanding of their
meaning, to a general inquiry of the particular assize used for arms in
former times.

But on the contrary, the Statute referring to the former usage, in the times
of the Kings Progenitors (which being indefinitely spoken, We conceive, must
be understood of all Kings times, as well before as after 13. E. 1.) the usage
therein meant is but Consuetudo Angliae, the Common Law: and the Parliament
could not, in all probability, in the mention of so ancient an usage, intend so
late a Statute as this of 13. E. 1. which was but new in the particularity of
the Assize, though ancient in the Rule of charging, according to the quantities
of every man's Lands and Goods, the former Assizes having been also different:
Nor (considering that of Necessity, the several kinds and proportions of
Arms ever did, and must vary with the times) could they intend, that there
ever was, for the times past, or could be for time to come, any such constant
rule of any such particular assize concerning Arms, whereunto they could
refer, as constantly used for the times past, or that might constantly endure
for time to come: neither ever was, or can there be any other constant rule,
then that general rule of the Common Law (which can never fail) for the
assessing Arms from time to rhyme, for the kinds, according to the present
use; and for proportions, according to men's abilities.

And it were very strange, that the Parliament of 1.E.3. could conceive, That
(for the defense extraordinary) the particular kinds of Arms in 13. E. 1.
especially such petty provisions, could be proper and sufficient at this time
in 1. E. 3. and would so continue afterward.

And now that We have cleared this first part of the Statute of 1. E. 3. ( as
concerning the Arming a man's self) that it is not thereby intended, That the
Subject should not be charged with Arms, otherwise then according to the
Statute of 13. E. 1. We shall deliver what Our selves conceive of the meaning
thereof; And it is thus.

Toward the end of the Reign of E. 2. several Commissions of Array, issued
into several Counties; in execution whereof the Commissioners had much grieved
and oppressed the Subjects: Insomuch, that upon complaint, special Commissions
of Oyer and Terminer (usual in those times) were sent forth for the enquiry
after those grievances and oppressions. Cl. 19. E. 2. n. 17. Dors.
And although it do not appear what those were, yet since the Complaint was
not against the Commissions themselves, as illegal, We cannot conceive
otherwise, but that it was against the wilful excess of the Commissioners, in
their surcharging the Subjects with Arms beyond their abilities of estate to
bear, (as charging a man as a Horseman, where it had been sufficient for for
his estate to have borne Arms as a Foot man, and the like) contrary to the
Tenor of the Commission.

But this course producing indeed little effect, in the time of King E. 2.
partly out of the favor, which it is likely the Commissioners did find, and
partly by reason of the short remainder of His Reign, there was just occasion,
both for Complaint and Relief in this next Parliament of 1. E. 3. And though
the Particulars of the Petition in 1. E. 3. and the Answer out of which
(according to the manner of those times) the Printed Act was made, do not
appear, for the want of the Roll of that Parliament, yet We may well judge
thereof upon this occasion, happening within the compass of about one year
before, and thereupon conclude, (as for the true meaning of that Act) That the
provision intended to be made, was only against the excess of the
Commissioners; which rather justifies, then any way disproves the Lawfulness
of such Commission. And so the sense of the Act, applyable to the Complaint,
will be, That whereas the Commissioners had over-highly taxed the Subjects, the
Act provided, That they should not be otherwise charged, then as they had been
in the times of former Kings; and (according to Our Commission) moderately, and
so as they might live still according to their former condition: as in like
case of other Statutes against outrageous Distresses and Amerciaments.

And although We take this to be the sense of that Statute, yet if any man
shall think this part of the Statute of 1. E. 3. Concerning arming a man's
self, to be the same with the words of the Statute of 25. E. 3. against
constraining any man to find men of Arms, etc. (which is the sense of this
Declaration, which makes both Statutes to be to the same effect, and makes the
inference against Our power of imposing Arms upon them both) We shall not
contradict him therein, being confident to make it evident, that this
Commission is no way contrary to the words or meaning of that Statute of 25. E.
3.

But before We come to that Statute, We shall make one Observation upon those
Statutes of 13. E. 1. and 1. E. 3. both together: and thereupon show, that in
the judgment of the whole Parliament of 4. H. 4. (whose authority is chiefly
insisted upon in this Declaration) Our Commission is no way opposed by either
of those Statutes: And it is this:

It appears, That the late issuing of the Commissioners, complained of in 4.
H. 4. (which the Declaration supposes were of the same nature with Our
Commission, but We deny it) was the occasion of the Petition of the Commons in
that Parliament.

In which petition, they intending to show the illegality of those Commissions,
and to obtain (as they thereupon did) a confirmation of former Acts to the
contrary, do recite the Statute of 25. E. 3. 18. E. 3 c. 8. and that part of
the Statute of 1. E. 3. which is against carrying of men out of their Counties;
and yet nevertheless they wholly omit this Statute of 13. E. 1. and this first
part of the Statute of 1. E. 3. concerning the Arming. Whereas it is to be
presumed, they would have also recited this Statute of 13. E. 1. if they had
conceived the same to be (as this Declaration sets it forth) the certain
Assize for arms, and such a Statute whereto all the rest had reference, or any
way material against part of these Commissions. But howsoever making use of
the later part of the Act of 1. E. 3. against carrying of the Subject out of
the County, they would have made use also of this part of 1. E. 3. concerning
the arming, and desired a confirmation thereof, as well as of the residue; and
not thus purposely rejected it, if so be they had not, upon consideration,
first resolved, that that part of 1. E. 3. was no ways against the Commission.

And now We come to the Statute of 25. E. 3. whereupon the Objection stands
thus:

By the Statute of 25. E. 3. the Subject is not to be constrained to find men
at Arms, etc. if it be not by common consent and grant made in Parliament. But
by this Commission the Commissioners have power, without consent or grant in
Parliament, to command those who are able of body and estate to arm
themselves: and those who are impotent, but able in estate, to find Arms for
others: (which the Declaration in some places calls finding Arms, and in some
places finding men at Arms) and is therefore against that Statute.

For this objection We need do no more then refer Our selves to Our former
observation of the different sense of the several words of Arming a man's
self, and finding Arms for some other, which are the only words used in the
commands of this Commission, and the words, finding of a man of Arms, or other
complete Soldier, used in this Statute, and intended to be thereby prohibited:
whereby it will be apparent, that arming a man's self, or finding bare arms
for others, is not within the letter of this Statute.

Nevertheless for a more particular Answer; 1. as to the first of these powers
in Our Commission concerning Arming a man's self, We say, That this Act being
against finding of men at Arms, or other soldiers, does not any ways intend
to prohibit the compelling of men to arm themselves, (that is, their own
persons.)

For that had been not only against the Common Law, whereof that Act is but
declarative, but also against those Statutes of 13. E. 1. (admitting it
provided, as the Declaration supposes, for defense extraordinary) and against
1. E. 3. by both which Statutes it does clearly appear, that the Subject is in
some manner compellable to arm himself: And the Act of 25. E. 3. is in
general against all finding of men armed at any time. So that in that sense
whatsoever the occasion is (though it be upon an actual invasion of an enemy)
he cannot be compelled to find arms. And that exposition of the Statute would
wholly take away all compulsory means of defense.

Nor will it be sufficient to answer this, That the arming according to those
Statutes is assented unto in Parliament, and so is within the exception of the
Statute of 25. E. 3. For the consent in Parliament (intended by this exception)
must be understood of future consent in Parliament, as well as the constraining
men to find Soldiers prohibited by the Act is meant of a future finding
Soldiers. And in the exception of the Statute of 25. E. 3. There is not only
to be a consent, but also a grant in Parliament, for so the words are ( if it
be not by common consent and grant in Parliament) but in those Acts of 13. E.
1. and 1. E. 3. there is no color of a grant made at all. And this Statute
being declaratory of the Common Law, as appears by the reason of the Act
delivered in the Petition of the Commons in these words, Car cet est encountre
le droit del Realm. For it is against the right of the Realm, (which is as
much as against the fundamental liberty of the Subject) this Statute of 25. E.
3. must be construed as of the Common Law; and before any Statute

And secondly, as for the other part of Our Commission, which is concerning the
charging those who are impotent in body, but able in estate, to find Arms for
others: If such finding of bare Arms had been within the letter of that
Statute, or the finding of a complete Soldier by such a man, had been within
Our Commission; yet it would have been a harsh construction, (and doubtless
contrary to the intention of the makers) by general words, which were meant
only for provision in the general Case, thus to have spared him in this
special and particular Case of impotency, from contributing to the defense of
the Kingdom, dome, by finding another, as in his place; whilst he is as much,
or more concerned then others, who must undergo as much charge, and must also
adventure their own persons.

And by the Common Law, whereof (as We have said) this Statute is but
declarative, those who were not fit to bear Arms, were notwithstanding
chargeable otherwise toward home-defence, as appears by the Presidents
already cited, and many more.

And now We shall give the true sense of this Statute of 25. E. 3. And this
will best appear upon the end and occasion of the making; which were these.

King E. 3. having had his Treasure exhausted by the French Wars, V. 18. E.
3. Rot. Parl. n. 11. 20. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 12. and others of that time.
was upon that occasion enforced to many hard pressures upon his Subjects; So
that they had several times bin charged, with providing and setting forth of
Soldiers; and sometimes with maintaining or paying of them: and this in so
excessive a manner, as that it cost a County sometimes at once a thousand
pound; And all this was done with relation only to a foreign War, wherein
the Title of the King to France was only in question: and nothing which
directly concerned the Kingdom of England: against these there was just cause,
to make provision by some Law; especially now when the Wars were renewing: And
accordingly this Statute was made against imposing such charges upon the
Subjects.

And what resemblance there is between those cases, and Our case, of charging
the Subjects only to find Arms for themselves, or (in case of impotency) for
another (as in their stead) and all but for home defense, We refer to every
man's Judgment.

And thus We leave these three Statutes of 13. E. 1. 1. E. 3. and 25. E. 3.
with this observation, that if it be true, (which the Declaration takes for
granted) that they are all to the same effect, that then Our Answer to any of
these three, is an Answer to the rest.

We are now come to 4. H. 4. being the last of these Statutes, which (in the
matter of Arming) are objected against Our Commission, as it stood at Common
Law, before 5. H. 4.

And herein We agree, that the Parliament Roll, whereupon the Statute is
framed, is truly set forth in the Declaration: yet We conceive that, in
Substance, there is no more upon the Roll, then in the Print; though some
passages may give some light for the exposition of these other Statutes of 1.
E. 3. and 25. E. 3. therein confirmed.

So as this Statute of 4. H. 4. being, in truth, but an Act of bare
confirmation, without any additionall explanation, is already answered.

But because the Declaration does import, That the Commissions (which issued
lately before 4. H. 4. and were the occasion of that Statute, and are damned
thereby, as contrary to the Acts of 1. E 3. 18. E. 3. and 25. E. 3.) were of
the nature of Our Commission, (which yet is not endeavored to be proved) We
shall also give a particular answer touching those Commissions.

And herein We say, that first it does not appear, nor is there any reason to
presume that any of those Commissions were of the Tenor of Ours; And in case
those Commissions did, amongst other Powers, contain also the Powers of Our
Commission, touching the imposing Arms upon the Subject, it does not appear
that those Commissions were particularly in those very powers held unlawful.
Both which must (but neither will) be proved, otherwise there can be no
application.

But the truth is apparently to be inferred out of the Roll, That upon those
Commissions the Subjects were enforced to go, or to find others to go at
their own charges, not only out of their proper Counties, but also (upon
occasion of some insurrections) into Wales, which at that time, and (until
the Act of Union 27. H. 8.) was to some purposes, at least commonly reputed a
distinct Dominion; as appears even by this Parliament Roll, in these words, 9.
H. 4. R. Parl. n. 17. 6. H. 4. R. Parl. n. 9. 1. H. 5. R. Parl. n. 17. 2. H. 4.
C. 10. Stat. 2. H. 4. cap. 20.
That none of the said Commons be distrained to go into Wales, or elsewhere
out of the Realm, and otherwise: (the usual phrase in several Acts of
Parliament, being also to this day, the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales.) And such a Commission We may well admit to be against all those three
Statutes, without impeachment of Ours.

We shall say no more as to this Statute single, but that (as We have observed
before) both in the Parliament Roll, and Printed Act, the first Clause of 1. E.
3. concerning arming, being purposely omitted, it shows that the mere matter
of causing the Subject to be armed, was not the grievance then complained of,
or meant to be redressed.

Having thus far proceeded in Our particular Answers unto the several
Statutes of 13. E. 1. 1. E. 3. 25. E. 3. and 4. H. 4. as they were appliable to
the first Objection made upon them, against Our imposing of Arms upon the
Subject. We shall, in the next place, proceed to the Answer of the other
Objection made against Our Commission, upon the Statute of 1. E. 3. and 4. H.
4. of Confirmation: (For as to the other Statutes of 13. E. 1. and 25. E. 3. We
do not conceive, that they are, or can be meant unto this purpose.) Hereupon
the Objection is this:

That by the Statute of 1. E. 3 and 4. H. 4. the Subject is not compellable to
go out of His County; but in case of the sudden coming of an Enemy, which the
Declaration interprets of an actual Invasion: But this Commission gives Power,
not only to compel the Subject to go out of his County before an actual
Invasion (as the case is put in the stating of it) but (as it is expressed in
other parts of the Declaration) without Limitation, and at pleasure.

To this Objection Our Answer is, That both the sense of the Statutes, and of
the Powers of Our Commission are mistaken. For first, (as We have before
stated it) Our Commission gives that Power of conducting out of the County,
only against an Enemy, and for defense of the Country, in case of imminent
danger, and but when and where it shall be most needful; (And so not without
limitation, and at pleasure.)

And secondly, as to the sense of the Statutes, We do deny, that the Subject is
not compellable to go out of his County, unless in case of an actual
Invasion, by a foreign Enemy.

And herein, though We have not upon this Commission necessary occasion to
dispute it; yet We cannot but observe, That the Declaration allows of no
necessity of compelling the Subject out of the proper County, in case of
actual rebellion, and only against a foreign Enemy; the ground whereof is a
mistake (in recital of the Statute of 1. E. 3. by the Act of confirmation of
4. H. 4. of the word, And between the two words, necessity and sudden
coming; The Act of 1. E. 3. going thus, That no man be distrained to go out
of his County but where necessity requires, and sudden coming of strange
enemies into the Realm. And the Act of 4. H. 4. (which as We have before
observed, recites not the whole Statute of 1. E. 3. but so much thereof, as
upon occasion of the late foreign service did then concern the present
complaint) being in these words, That none shall be distrained to go out of
their County, but only for the cause of necessity ( Of) sudden coming of
strange enemies into the Realm.

Whereas, if in this recital the word ( And) had been put in place of the
word, Of, or before it, both had agreed, and so the sense of the Statute, as to
this matter of going out of the County, had been upon 4. H. 4. as it is upon 1.
E. 3. That no man be compelled to go out of the County, but in case of necesity
or coming of enemies: the word ( And) in exposition of Statutes being most
frequently taken for ( Or) according to the Subject matter, and so the Statute
had excepted two cases necessity arising from within (by actual rebellion) and
necessity arising from abroad (by sudden coming of strange enemies:) this
exception in both being absolutely necessary for defense of the Realm and
according to the Common Law (of which the Statute is but declarative) and the
practice both before and since. And indeed it could be no otherwise in property
of speech, for there cannot be a cause of necessity of the sudden coming of
enemies, but there is a necessity of defense against their coming.

And in this case We are to be guided by the Statute 1. Ed. 3. as it was
Originally, as it is also truly set forth in the Declaration, and agrees with
all printed Statutes both in English and French, and ancient Manuscripts, all
of them derived from the Original Statute Roll which was lost before 4. H. 4.
(that which now remains being but a Transcript of a Transcript.)

Thus then, without more, We shall apply Our selves to the Objection as it is
made upon the words of 1. E. 3. both in the Original and the Recital. And We
say That the Subject is compellable to go out of his County for defense of the
Kingdom, as necessity shall require, before the Landing or other Entry of the
Enemy, to prevent his Landing or Entry.

And for this We shall but recite the words again; And they are these, That no
man be compelled to go out of his County, but where necessity requires and
sudden coming of strange enemies into the Realm.

Wherein it seems to Us most plain, that these words require no such Actual
Landing, or Entry of an Enemy into the Kingdom, before the Subject is
Compellable out of his County. For the words of the Act are not (as to this
point) when the Enemy is come, but upon the coming, not within the Realm, but
into the Realm. And all men know, that in ordinary Speech, a man may be said to
be coming into a place when he is upon a remove to a place; but most properly,
when he is on his way, especially when he approaches, with an intention to
enter thereinto, and in such sense these words of coming into the Realm must be
taken in this Statute.

But in case the words ( of the enemies coming into the Realm) might bear a
doubtful interpretation, that sense must be taken, which agrees with the
Common Law before practiced, Whereof this Act is but Declarative, and the
constant practice of all ages since that is, That the Subjects have ever been
commanded, and gone out of the County against the Enemy before any Landing or
Entry.

And to give this Statute of 1. E. 3. any other sense were against all Common
reason, and the rules of government and defense; which is, not to let the Enemy
first come in, if it be possible to keep him out: and it may be much more ease
to prevent the coming into the Land, (especially by Sea in opposing the
Landing) then afterward to expel him: And it cannot be expected, that the
Forces of one County alone, should be able to resist the entry of a powerful
Enemy.

And lastly, as for those Commissions, which were damned in 4. H. 4. those had
no resemblance to our Case, nor are warrented by the Exception of 1. E. 3. For
that (as appears before) the Subject was then carried out of the County not
for defense of the Kingdom, as the Exception of this Statute requires, but for
suppression of an Insurrection in Wales, which was not then taken as part of
the Realm: and the Prayer of the Commons in 4. H. 4. made upon that Occasion,
and therein grounded upon 1. E. 3. was not merely because they were carried out
of the Counties, but because they were carried out of the Realm in a Service,
which was not for the necessary defense thereof.

We have thus far, upon this last head of Our discourse, only Answered the
Objections made upon these Statutes of 13. E. 1. 1. E. 3. 25. E. 3. and 4* H.
4. We shall now conclude this part of Our Answer* with a return of all those
Statutes against the Declaration, and in justification of Our Commission.

First, as concerning 13. E. 1. since that (as We have before observed) the
Statute was made only with relation to the keeping of the peace, it implies,
that there is another rule in the matter of imposing of Arms for defense
extraordinary.

Secondly, as for 1. E. 3. (besides Our former observation, That in all
probability, the Act was made but upon Complaint against the excess of
Charging by the Commissioners, and not against the powers of that Commission,
which had lately before issued, which rather justifies the Commission then
otherwise.) We further say, That if We should admit, that the Statute of 1. E.
3. That no man should be charged to arm himself, otherwise then he was wont in
the time of the Kings Progenitors, has any relation unto 13. E. 1. and that so
the sense thereof were, That none should be compelled to find Arms, otherwise
then according to that Statute of 13. E. 1. Yet then that Statute of 1. E. 3.
(as it is plain) must be meant only as concerning ordinary defense; and that as
the Subject is in cafe of necessity to be carried out of the County, So in that
case he may be compelled to be Armed otherwise then at ordinary times.

To this purpose We note, that in the Statute there are two distinct
propositions joined together, one against the Arming of the Subject, the other
against going out of the County; And the clause which is next subjoyned is an
exception Sinon pour cause de necessite, etc. Unless it be for necessity, and
the sudden coming of strange enemies. Which exception, upon such admittance, is
not only appliable to that last clause before, concerning the going out of the
County, but as to the Arming: The sense thereupon also being thus; That though
in case of ordinary defense, the Subject be not compellable to bear other Arms
then according to 13. E. 1. as neither to go out of the proper County; yet for
the extraordinary defense of the kingdom, in case of necessity (wherein more
must be done then ordinarily) both, Arms are to be imposed by other rules then
in 13. E. 1. and also the Subjects are to go out of the County; For so it
follows in the next words of the Act; which are these, And then it shall be
done, as bath been used in times past, for the defense of the Realm. And this
sense, upon this admittance, clearly appears out of the course of former
times in such cases, to which the Statute does refer.

As for 25. E. 3. (besides that the Declaration faith it is to the same effect
with 1. E. 3. and was made with relation to a foreign war, as We have
observed,) if (as the Declaration must admit) that the exception of finding men
at Arms etc. by Common consent, and grant in Parliament, be intended as well of
Acts of Parliament past as to come, then Our Commission, in the power of
imposing Arms, being warranted by 1. E. 3. is also warranted by that Act of 25.
E. 3.

And for 4. H. 4. (besides what We have before observed, upon the omission
therein of the first part of 1. E. 3. concerning imposing of Arms, and that it
applies 25. E. 3. but to a foreign war) the general sense, and Judgment of
that Parliament, excepting then only against other Commissions, seems to allow
of this; for that otherwise, it is not to be imagined, that immediately in the
same year, there should issue out a Commission of Array, and in the next year,
there should issue out that other which was corrected in 5. H. 4. both of the
same form, and the latter bearing Test the day of the Summons of the
Parliament of 5. H. 4. 4. H. 4. rot. Parl. part. 2. m. 10.
And that at that Parliament, though some amendments were made in it, yet no
exception should be taken to the legality of the powers: whilst (as the
Declaration observes) it is probable, That many of the House of Commons, and it
is certain that most of the House of Lords, were members of the Parliament of
4. H. 4. and knew the meaning thereof.

And thus we have answered to the full satisfaction (as We hope) of all
indifferent Judgments, the several Objections made against the legality of
Our Commission of Array as it stood before, and at the making of the Act of 5.
H. 4. and thereby proved, That Our Commission was warranted by the Common Law*
That the powers thereof remain untouched by the Statutes of 1. E. 3. 25. E. 3.
or 4. H. 4. And that it was afterward allowed and settled (as a rule or
pattern, whereby Commissions should issue in after ages) by the Act of
Parliament of 5. H. 4.

We have yet some other Objections in Our way, which admitting the legality of
Our Commission as it stood in 5. H. 4. are made against it upon some latter
Acts.

The first in time is upon the Statute of 4. and 5. P. and M.c. 4. which
settles an assize and proportion of Men, Horses, and Arms, which every man was
to find; which the Declaration says was without Question, a repeal of this
Statute of 5. H. 4. And accordingly, We shall take that first into
consideration, For though upon the repeal of that Statute by I. Jac. c. 25. the
Declaration agrees, That Our Commission, if once settled by 5. H. 4. is now
again in force, Yet an inference is made from thence, That the Parliament of 1.
Iac. would never have repealed that Statute of 4. and 5. P. and M. if they had
thought that any such power of imposing Arms, as is in the Commission, would
have been thereupon revived.

The words of the Statute of 4. and 5. P. and M. cap. 2. are these. Be it
enacted, etc. That as much of all and every Act and Statute concerning only
the keeping or finding of Horse, Horses, or Armor, or any of them heretofore
made and provided, and all and every forfeiture or penalty concerning only the
same, shall be from henceforth utterly void, repealed, and of none effect.

To this We say, first, that 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar. does not repeal 5. H. 4.
either by the words or meaning.

As to the words, They extend only to a repeal of such Acts which do appoint
particular Assizes (or Assessements) of Arms: all which upon that Statute of 4.
and 5. Ph. and M. (which appoints a new Assize for kind of Arms and
proportions) would be either contrary or altogether useless. And to that
purpose the Statute speaks of repealing of Acts concerning keeping or finding
of Horse, Horses, or Armor, which, as it must be meant of Acts concerning
keeping or finding of Horses in particular for kind or number; So as concerning
( armor) in general, it must, by the constant Rules of construction of
Statutes, be meant of Acts of the like nature as the former, that is, Acts
concerning the appointment of some particular armours, as a Gorget, a
Breast Plate, and the like, such as were the Statute of 13. E. 1. and 33. H. 8.

But this Statute of 5. H. 4. is nothing concerning the appointment of any
particulars, either for the kind of Arms or proportions: but does only enact a
Commission issuable, without commanding that it shall issue, which is referred
to the Kings pleasure (upon a lawful occasion) Nor does the Commission it self
mention (as is apparent) any particularity of Arms or proportions.

And if the Statute of 4. and 5. Ph.and M. were meant of such Statutes, as
speak of finding Arms in general, it had as well repealed the Statutes of 1.
E. 3. 25. E. 3. and 4. H. 4. as this Act of 5. H. 4. which no man will say was
ever intended.

But in truth, this Commission being in general, does no ways contrary this
Statute of Ph. and M. but that the particulars of the Assessement by that Act,
both for the several Kinds of Arms and proportions, might have been very well
put in Execution by this Commission.

For the Commission gives Power to assesse every man juxta statum and
facultates, According to his degree and Ability. And this Parliament of 4. and
5. Ph. and Ma. appointing Arms sitting for defense of the Kingdom in those
times, and proportions fitting (in their Judgments) for the several degrees
and abilities of every man; That Act did not thereby take away the power of the
Commissioners wholly, but did only give particular rules for the kind of Arms
and proportions, which the Commissioners were to observe in the execution of
their power, thereby only regulating, but not destroying their powers.

And if this Statute of 4. and 5. P. and M. had taken away the first Powers of
the Commissioners concerning arming, yet had it not taken away the other
several and independent Powers of Arraying, Training, Mustring, or Conducting
those men so furnished according to that Statute, but that they had remained to
have been executed (at least by a distinct Commission which might have been
issued at pleasure for that purpose.)

And this also appears by the Statute of the same Parliament of 4. and 5. P.
and M. cap. 3. (which is in force at this day) which being concerning
mustering, has occasion to mention, and does express the old power still
remaining to issue Commissions of that nature; in these words, That if any
person that shall be commanded at any time hereafter generally or especially to
muster before any such who shall have authority or commandment for the same, by,
or from the King or Queens Majesty, or the heirs or successors of the Queens
Majesty, or by any Lieutenant, etc. do absent himself, or at his appearance do
not bring his best furniture of Array and Arms as he shall then have for his
person in readiness, shall be imprisoned, etc.

But neither by that nor the other Statute of P. and M. cap. 2. is there any
new authority given to the King to grant Commissions for Musters, but the same
is admitted to continue as not repealed. And as to that point of appearing at
Musters, We made use of that Statute of 4. and 5. P. and M. cap. 3 in Our
Proclamation: And do wonder how the Penner of that Declaration could imagine,
We meant any such further use therein upon that Statute, as the Declaration
sets forth.

And here by the way We observe a mention in this Statute, of 4. and 5. P. and
M. cap. 3. of a power of mustering in Lievtenants, to whom other Powers
contained in Our Commission were also granted, and might have been also
mentioned in this Statute, if there had been occasion.

And secondly, as to this Statute of 4. and 5. P. and M.c. 2. We say, That in
case that Act of 5. H. 4. had been repealed by 4. and 5. P. and M. yet this
Commission had still continued in force notwithstanding any bare repeal; for
that (as we have proved) this commission was (before that Statute) warranted by
the Common Law, which did still remain in force so far as it was not expressly
contrary to the further particulars of that Act.

And how We come to the Objection principally* intended against this Commission
upon the alteration of the Law at this day since 5. H. 4. wherein the case is
this.

The Statute of 13. E. 1 made an assize of Arms for the several kinds and
proportions according to men's several estates. Then 5. H. 4. enacts this
Commission with power to assesse men according to their abilities. Afterward
13. E. 1. is repealed by 21. Iac.

The argument hereupon in the Declaration is made thus:

That the Commission, as to the finding of Arms Iuxta statum and facultates, is
so grounded upon that Statute of 13 E. 1. (which was then in force, and did
enact the finding of Arms juxta statum and facultates, in manner as is therein
expressed) that that Statute of 13. E. 1. being since repealed, that Commission
is likewise repealed, and become unwarrantable at this day.

For answer whereunto, in the first place, We do deny that this Commission is
any ways grounded upon 13. E. 1. First, for that (as We have proved) 13. E. 1.
originally was not meant, as a provision of Arms for defense extraordinary,
much less so intended here.

Secondly, if it were for defense extraordinary, yet neither this Act of 5. H.
4. nor the Commission thereby settled, have any relation thereunto in words,
much less in meaning.

For the words, There is no mention of 13. E. 1. either in the Act or
Commission, but the words of the Commission are general, for imposing Arms
secundum statum and facultates; According to every man's degree and ability,
without limitation, of the kind of Arms, or particular several proportions of
estates.

And for the meaning, We cannot conceive it to be less, then according to the
full extent of the words, For there is less reason to imagine that the
Parliament of 5. H. 4. did any ways intend the assize of Arms established by
13. E. 1. then there was to imagine the like upon the Act of 1. E. 3. for that
between 1. E. 3. and 5. H. 4. all kind of Arms were more altered then betwixt
13. E. 1. and 1. E. 3. and in this space of time, Guns were come into use in
England, which were both necessary to be commanded and provided against by
other arms.

And to avoid Repetitions, We further refer Our self, in these two
particulars, to what We before observed upon the Statute of 1. E. 3.

And as for any restraint of those general words of Our Commission, by any
construction of Law to the particular assize of 13. E. 1. We say, That though a
subsequent particular Act may restrain the general words of a Commission (as
We have said before; upon the Statute of 4. and 5. Ph. and M.) because the
subsequent act, as it may take away, so it may limit any Power given either by
Common Law or Statute, yet a precedent particular Act (upon the same reason,
because it has no such power) does not regularly restrain the general words
of a subsequent Statute, which has Power to control the former; and (as in
Our case) where the meaning appears to be as large as the words cannot possibly
restrain them.

But in this We need not labor, For though the Declaration in making way for
this Objection, admits the Commission, to have some color to be legal, as
grounded upon 13. E. 1. as to that part of finding Arms juxta statum and
facultates: Yet it is the main and throughout ground of the Declaration, That
this Commission, because it is general, is against the Statute of 13. E. 1.
and the other Statutes, and so void; whereas, if the Commission had been
restrained to 13. E. 1. then it could not have been void as contrary thereunto.

But, admitting that this Commission was, by construction of Law, necessarily
to be regulated according to 13. E. 1. whilst that Statute was in force, Our
answer is, that nevertheless this Commission did not fall by the repeal of
that Statute.

Wherein We shall admit (which the Declaration supposes, though by Us it is
disproved) That this Commission was not warranted at the Common Law before the
Statute of 5. H. 4. and then the Case is but this.

The Statute of 13. E. 1. does appoint a particular Assize of Arms for kinds
and proportions, according to this necessary rule, the arms for the kind shall
be fit for defense; and for the proportion, shall be according to men's
abilities (for such is the Act.) Afterward 5. Hen. 4. does establish this
Commission, wherein there is no particular reference unto this Statute of 13.
E. 1. but the rule is general to charge Arms, for the kinds, according to the
use of the time (for that is necessarily implied) and for the proportions,
according to men's degrees and abilities: which are equal rules fit ever to
continue, though the kinds and proportions, may and must alter.

In this case We do agree, That if the Commission had expressly referred to
charge according to that Statute of 13. E. 1. then that Commission could have
been no longer of force then the Statute had continued. For then it had been no
more in substance, then if the powers had been but particular, to charge
certain Arms, and in certain proportions according to that Statute. And in this
sense We must agree with the Declaration, That a Commission being so grounded
upon a Statute, upon the Repeal of the Statute, both fall together.

But in this case, (thus admitted) where the Commission is general, and if 13.
E. 1. had never been, must have had its full operation, according to the words,
both for the kind of Arms and proportions, and was regulated but by a bare
construction of Law, both for Arms and Proportions by 13. E. 1. which the
Parliament might think fit to be a rule for that time; it seems strongly to
follow, that when 13. E. 1. (which was the only impediment why it did not work
according to the extent of the words) is repealed, the operation of the Law
upon this Commission, by force of that statute, must likewise cease: and the
Commission must be construed according to the words, the rather for avoiding of
this mischief, that otherwise the Kingdom should be without all necessary means
to put it into a posture of defense, which that Act did intend principally
(...), perpetually to provide for.

But more fully to take off this Objection, We must here remember (what we have
proved before) that the Powers of this Commission in the latitude of the words
thereof for imposing Arms, secundum statum and facultates, according to men's
degrees and abilities, was warranted at the Common Law before any Statute, and
was to be executed without the direction of any particular Assize for kinds and
proportions: As at this day several like powers for assessing men both by
Statute and Common Law according to their abilities, as for high ways, poor of
the Parish, and the like are to be executed.

These then being the Powers at Common Law, As it is clear they are not taken
away by any affirmative Statute, (such as 13. E. 1. seems to be:) So if We
shall admit (as strongest against Our self) that there were any negative words
in this Statute or any other Statute grounded thereupon, that the Subject
should not be compellable to be armed otherwise, (which other Statutes
(according to the ground rightly taken in the Declaration) must necessarily
fall by the repeal of 13. (...) 1. Then that Statute being repealed, the
Commission thus freed of those Statutes, remains in full force as it was at the
Common Law.

And now that we have passed over the Acts of Our Predecessors as well before
as after the Act of 5. H. 4. We are encountered with Our own Acts, the Petition
of Right, and a Recital in an Act this present Parliament, as being both
against Our Commission.

Whereunto We need to say but this. That it appears out of themselves, that
neither of them were ever meant to introduce a new Law: So as if (as We have
proved) Our Commission be not against the Law, as it stood formerly, they were
not Intended nor justly ought to be extended against it. But to give yet more
particular and full answers thereunto; We say, First, for the Petition of
Right, it no ways extends to our Commissions of Array.

The Objection made upon it stands thus. The Petition of Right sets forth, That
by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the Subjects have inherited this
Freedom, That they should not be compelled to contribute to any Tax, Tallage,
Aid, or other like charge, not set by common consent in Parliament. And after
complains, That diverse charges have been laid and levied upon the People by
Lords Lievtenants, Deputy Lievtenants, Commissioners for Musters, Justices of
Peace, and others, by command or direction from Us, or Our Privy Council,
against the Laws and free Customs of the Realm, which the Declaration
alleges to be the breach of those Laws.

Then the words of the Petition are thus applied, That here is a Tax or Charge
imposed upon the people, by Compelling them to find Arms by command and
direction from Us, under Our great Seal, without consent in Parliament.

And the meaning of the Petition is thus enforced, That it is very well known,
and does sufficiently appear, that the charges there mentioned to be laid by
Lords Lievtenants, and Deputy Lievtenants, were the charging of the Subjects
with Arms against Law, by color of their Commission from Us, and consequently
this Commission is against the Petition of Right.

For Our cleerer answer, We shall set down the sum of the Petition, for so
much as concerns the unlawful charging of the Subject. And it is this.

First, the Petition recites several Statutes, as made against the compelling
the Subject to the making or yielding any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Taxes, Aids,
or such like Charges without Common consent in Parliament; and next sets
forth a violation of those Statutes, by the Commissions of Loans, and Execution
of them; and that diverse other Charges had been laid and levied by Lords
Lievtenants, and others (as is aforesaid) and lastly the Prayer is
substantively of it self, without any relative words, yet extends to all that
was before complained of, and contains the substance of all those former
Statutes in these words, That no man be compelled, to make or yield any Gift,
Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or such like Charge without common consent by Act of
Parliament. And Our answer to that part of the Prayer, amongst the rest, is,
Let right be done as it desired.

And Our answer to the Objection stands thus.

First, that whatsoever sense any words of the Preamble may seem to import, yet
without question, there is no more in this Preamble then is after contained in
the Prayer: So if Our Commission be not against the Prayer, there can be no
Argument against it drawn out of the Preamble, or if in truth there were more
in the Preamble then in the Prayer, (whereunto only the Royal assent extends,)
yet nothing could bindingly be concluded thereupon (as We shall further show
upon occasion.)

This then only rests to be considered upon this Objection; Whether the
powers, in Our Commission, to compel the Subjects, able of body and estate to
Arm themselves, and in case of impotency to find Arms for others, for the
necessary defense of the Kingdom, can be said to be a compelling of the
subject, to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or other like
Charge, contrary to the Prayer of the Petition.

Upon the Case thus truly stated, it is clear, That here is no yielding or
making of Gift, Benevolence, or Loan; And as for making or yielding any Tax or
other like charge, though it be true, That this arming a man's self, or finding
Arms for another, cannot be done without Charge: Yet We appeal to every man's
understanding, whether Our Subjects can, upon this Commission, be said to make
or yield (for so are the words) any Tax or other Charge against the Petition,
any more, then if We command a City to repair their Walls, or a Level (putting
the Case before any statute, to take away all color of evasion) to repair the
Sea-banks, when they were in decay, being no particular advantage to Us, but
for the Common good of themselves.

The truth is, That albeit the imposing of diverse charges, and commanding
diverse Acts drawing charges upon the Subject, though possibly for their
advantage, are void in Law: notwithstanding it does not follow that they are
void as against this Petition. For the Petition of Right, as against the
charges therein mentioned, is only to be intended of Money, or other thing
valuable, and to be parted with to or for Us, or Our advantage: such as are all
the charges more specially mentioned in the preamble and Prayer, as that of
Gift, Loan, and Benevolences, And such as were those Charges intended in the
Preamble under the general expression of diverse other Charges imposed by Lord
Lievtenants, etc. which We think is very well known to most Counties, to have
been mere Pecuniary Payments, and which We ought to have born. And for the
other charges, that is, of Taxes, Tallages, Aids likewise mentioned, which as
to this purpose are but Synonoma, and of one signification, they are meant of
money or other things valuable, and for the King; and so used in the old
Statutes, and had been in former times imposed upon the people, without Act of
Parliament; and accordingly all of them are so to be expounded in the Preamble.
And the Prayer of the Petition says nothing expressly against the Commanding
the Subject to do a thing which may be necessarily of expense or Charge,
(wherein the Act is only intended, and the Charge but a necessary Incident)
but the Prayer is only against the compelling of the Subject to yield, or make
those kinds of charges: So as the clear sense of the Petition, both according
to the occasion of complaint therein mentioned, and the Laws whereupon it is
framed, as well as the propriety of the words, is only against drawing from the
Subject, either money or moneyworth, by any of those particular charges therein
mentioned, or any other charge of like nature (under what specious title
soever) for the Kings advantage, which the more plainly appears, for that the
charge must be yielded or made, as upon Gift, Loan, etc. which must necessarily
be intended unto some person, and no other person can be here colourably
intended but the King.

And if the Petition, by any construction, may extend against the commanding of
any Acts, which in the execution may induce charges, yet such charges must
(according to the very words of the Petition) be such like Charges, that is for
Us or Our advantage, as the particular Charges therein mentioned, of Gift,
Loan, etc. But this charging of the Subject with Arms for the necessary defense
of the Kingdom cannot be said for Our particular advantage, all Our Subjects
having therein a common interest.

As for the meaning of the Petition enforced in the Objection from the Charges
by Lord Lievtenants, and others complained against in the Preamble, sure We are
that those must be such in the particular, as are after contained in the
general words of the Prayer, to which We have answered before; And though it
be to this purpose said in the Declaration, That those Charges by Lord
Lievtenants and others, were meant of charging of the Subject with Arms,
certainly no such thing can appear in the Petition, which speaks but only of
diverse charges, but names none in particular; nor can there be any other
assurance that the Houses did intend any such thing, but by Votes, wherein they
only speak: and if any such Votes had been, We doubt not but We should have
found them inserted in this Declaration: And a particular complaint of so great
a grievance (as Our Commission is made to be) would have been expressed in the
Preamble of the Petition, with the Quotations of Statutes to the contrary, as
was done concerning other grievances. But in truth it is well known, That about
that time, upon occasion of Our wars, there were diverse other charges imposed
by Our Lievtenants, and others, of a far differing nature, most of which were
by direction from Us or Our Privy Council, according to the exigency of the
time and some former practice.

And We do believe, that there was at that time neither complaint or occasion
of complaint against the imposing of Arms for home defense of the Kingdom.
Howsoever We are sure that no such complaint was particularly represented unto
Us, or Our Answer intended thereunto.

And now to clear this sense of the Petition (...) of the judgment of both Our
Houses this (...) Parliament, We demand this Question: If so be the imposing
Arms for defense be a charge upon the Subject within the meaning of this
Petition, how the two Houses will justify their Ordinance, which We are sure
they will not call an Act of Parliament; for without an Act of Parliament, no
charge thereby provided against, can be imposed upon the Subject, the words
being plain, That no man shall be compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan,
Benevolence, Tax, or other such like charge, without common consent by Act of
Parliament.

And now, since this Declaration has given Us such occasion to examine Our
Commission upon the Petition of Right, We shall conclude, out of that Petition,
That that Parliament did conceive the powers of this Commission warrantable in
every point.

For it is plainly to be observed, that the Commons did then take into
consideration the general grievances of the Kingdom, more particularly,
concerning Military affairs, and therein the actions of Lord Lievtenants, and
Deputy-Lievtenants with their Commissions and powers, and their exceeding of
their power, as expressly the billeting of Soldiers, and the payment of
Billet-money, Muster-masters fees, and others of that nature, were then in
dispute. And although the two Houses could not but take notice of the imposing
of Arms upon the Subject by Our Commission, of Lievtenancy, and their powers to
Levy, call together, Arm, Array, Train, and Muster Our Subjects inhabiting in
Our several Counties, and to conduct and lead them against all Our Enemies,
and all Rebels and Traitors, from time to time, as need should require, (in
which particulars they contained the powers of Our Commission of Array:) Yet
the Complaint was not made against them, for what they did by virtue of their
Commission (no more then against the Justices of Peace, though complained of,
together with the Lievtenants) but for matters wherein they did exceed their
Commission, upon the Command, or direction from Us, or Our Council; the
Petition throughout distinguishing betwixt such Commands, or directions, and
Our Commissions.

So that We conclude, here was not only an admission, but an approbation of
those powers, by that Parliament.

We come now to the recital in the Preamble of the late Statute made this
Parliament. The words are these.

For as much as great Commotions, and Rebellions have been lately raised and
stirred up in His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, by the wicked plots and
conspiracies, of diverse of His Majesty's Subjects there (being traitorously
affected) to the great endangering, not only of the said Kingdom, but also of
this Kingdom of England, unless a speedy course be taken for the proventing
hereof And for the raising and pressing of men for those Services. And whereas,
by the Laws of this Realm, none of His Majesty's Subjects ought to be
impressed, or compelled to go out of His County, to serve as a Soldier in the
Wars, except in case of necessity of the sudden coming in of strange Enemies
into the Kingdom, or except they be otherwise bound by the Tenure of their
Lands or possessions etc. (upon which Preamble, there is, in that Statute, some
provision made for a time for raising and impressing men for those Services.)

And upon this Preamble, the conclusion is made in these words, That this,
Commission is directly contrary to this Declaration is so evident, that it
requires no application.

To this Objection, We say, We might make Our Answer as short as the inference
is, by affirming, That it is evident, that this Commission is not contrary to
this recital; And surely We think that what We have already opened, being
applied to this Objection, would warrant that Answer.

But that We may leave nothing undone, that may tend toward the full
satisfaction of Our good people, We shall also give this a particular answer.

First, We say, That if this recital had been an Act, yet there were nothing
in Our Commission contrary to the letter of it, for that by this Commision, no
man is compellable by any special words to go out of his County.

And the general words, (giving power to the Commissioners, for leading them
to the Seacoast or elsewhere (as We have often repeated) are with these
limitations: They are to lead them, but when there is imminent Danger of
enemies, for defense of the Kingdom; and then only they are to be led to such
places, as shall be necessary for the expulsion, vanquishing, and destruction
of the said enemies, And this is a case of necessity both within the words of
this recital, and according to the sense of the same words, in the Statute of
1. E. 3. and 4. H. 4. (therein meant) as We have before showed.

And thus we might leave this Objection, but that it implies a matter of a
greater consequence then plainly appears. That recitalls of the Law, in
Preambles of Statutes are binding; For in this Objection, this recital is
called a Declaration of the Law and Our Commission sard to be contrary to that
Statute, and it further implies, That even in the greatest and most horrid
Rebellion, the Subject cannot be compelled out of the County, for the
suppression thereof. But to this We answor, That the difference is apparent,
between an Act of Parliament declarative, and a recital in a Preamble: For
such an Act (in any matter though mistaken) being assented unto by Us, and Our
two Houses, is equally binding (as having equal authority) with an Act
introductive of a new Law, But the recital in a Preamble, is no part of the
Act (the Royal assent being only to that, which is expressly or tacitly
prayed to be enacted:) Nor can it any ways so much as imply Our opinion: For
otherwise, Kings must be enforced oftentimes to deny a good Law, for an ill
Preamble; The consequence whereof is great in such an Act as requires
expedition, where a Bill once denied, is not regularly to be offered again in
that Session of Parliament.

And if it were needful, diverse mistakes, of the Law in Preambles might be
produced by which We would be loath to bind our Subjects.

Nevertheless, though Preambles be not in themselves sufficient to declare
Laws, yet We deny not they are of good use, though not convincing Arguments to
expound them.

And for Our power in the matter of Rebellion, besides what has been said, We
might also add (if it were material to this Commission,) Preambles, Recitals,
and other necessary Inferences out of other Statutes (made since those intended
in this Recital) which would prove, that in case of Rebellion all Our Subjects
ought to assist Us, and to attend Our Person, See 11. H. 7 in the Preamble,
That the Subjects, by the duty of their Allegiance, are bound to serve their
Prince in his Wars, for the defense of Him and the Land, against every
Rebellion, Power, and Might, reared against Him. And 11. H. 7. c. 18. Whereas
every Subject, by the duty of his Allegiance, is bound to assist the King at
all seasons when need shall require; and most especially such as have by him
promotion or advancement, as Grants, and Gifts of Offices, Fees, and Annuities,
which are, and verily be bound by reason to give their attendance upon his
Royal Person, to defend the same, when He shall fortune to go in his Person
in wars for defense of the Realm, or against his Rebels and enemies. And 5. El.
cap. 5. Be it enacted infavour of Fishermen, and Mariners, That none of them
shall hereafter at any time be compelled against his or their will, to serve as
a Soldier upon the Land or Sea, otherwise then as a Mariner, except it shall
be to serve under any Captain of some Ship or Vessel for landing, to do some
especial exploit, which Mariners have used to do, or under any other person,
having authority to withstand any Invasion of Enemies, or to subdue any
Rebellion within the Realm. And see 19. H. 7. cap. 1, 2, and 3. E. 6. c. 2. And
4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. c. 3.
upon Our command, for the defense thereof, whenever We should require it.

And the truth is, the occasion of this Act, now urged against Us, appears to
be for the service of Ireland, and the intention of it (for so much as is the
enacting part) was to take away all question concerning the pressing of the
Subjects of England for the suppression of the Rebellion in Ireland. And so
concerned foreign service, and not home defense, either against Invasion of
Enemies or Rebels.

And thus far the work of the Declaration has been to overthrow Our Commission
by Statutes alleged to be directly against it. There remains yet some other
Objections drawn from the opinion of former Parliaments, and the practice of
Our selves and Our Predecessors, and those not directly, but by inferences. But
these, as we shall show, are so far from concluding against Our Commission,
that they rather prove the contrary.

The first of these Objections is upon the Statutes of 1. Jac. c. 25. and 21.
Iac. c. 28. of Repeals: And is thus, That the Statute of 4 and 5. Ph. and M.
cap. 2. having repealed this Commission (for so the Declaration supposes) They
had showed little care of their own and the Subjects liberty, in the Parliament
of ^. Iac. to repeal that Statute thereby to revive the power of this
Commission, which would have subjected the people to far greater bondage: and
from thence infers, That it is not probable that the Parliament of 1. Jac.
would have repealed,. 4 and 5 Ph. and M. As lik^wise from the Statute of 21.
Iac. (which repealed the Statutes of 13. E. 1. and 33. H. 8.) That it is not
probable, that the Parliament of 21. Jac. would have repealed those Statutes
(which in a moderate manner proportioned the Arms every man was to find in
certainty:) And suffer an Act (meaning this of 5. H. 4.) to continue, which
established a power in the King without limitation, not only to impose Arms,
but to command the persons of the Subjects at pleasure.

To this We say, that both the grounds of this Objection are mistaken. For (as
We have already showed) neither is this Commission repealed by the Act of 4 and
5 P. and M. Nor is there any such unlimited Power given, or Bondage by it, as
is pretended. And therefore Our Answer is, That it is no wonder that those
Parliaments might repeal 4 and 5 P. and M. as too hard; and 13. E. 1. and 33 H.
8. as of no use: and put the Militia of this Kingdom again wholly under the
powers of this Commission, (being so indifferent between both the other:) And
indeed the Militia did after continue under Lievtenants, who had in effect the
powers given by this Commission.

And now We shall return this Objection thus:

That those Parliaments of 1. Jac. and 21. Iac. would have showed little care
of the safety and defense of the Kingdom to have repealed those Statutes which
made provision for Arms, if they had thought there were no Law or Power left in
the King to charge men with Arms for defense of the Kingdom, (as the
Declaration affirms the Law now to be.)

But whosoever considers that at that time, and long before, the power of
imposing arms, was put in execution by Lievtenants, and Deputy-Lievtenants, by
authority of their Commissions (which to this purpose are the same with Our
Commissions of Array) and that this power was not complained of in those
Parliaments, must conclude it more then probable, that those Parliaments did
then conceive there was a sufficient power remaining in the King to impose Arms.

The next Objection, is from the opinion of the Parliament of 4. and 5. Philip
and Mary, c. 3 That if Our Commission had been authorized by Act of Parliament,
that Statute of Ph. and Mar. had been to little purpose, whereby the penalty of
Imprisonment for ten days, or forty shillings is imposed upon such, as do not
appear at Musters, being Summoned thereunto by the Kings Commissioners
authorized for that purpose: Intimating, as that the Act of Phil and Mar. would
never have been made, if they had then conceived, that We had power to grant
such Commissions.

To this We answer, That the particular Arms and proportions of Arms, were then
before appointed by the Statute of 4. and 5. Ph. and Mar. Cap. 2. under certain
penalties upon those who should be defective, and so a great part of the care
of the Commissioners of Array was supplied by the provision of that Statute;
and the Commissions of Array being not so proper, but in time of Danger, and of
a larger extent, then the power of mustering, a Commission of Muster (which is
part of the power of a Commission of Array) would then serve the ordinary turn:
and for every ordinary default, but at a Muster, in a time of no Danger, the
punishment by 4. and 5. Ph. and Mar. cap. 3. was great enough.

And for return of this Objection, We say, (as We observed before) That this
Statute gives no new power, to grant Commissions for Musters, but admits the
power to grant such Commissions to have been in the King before that time. And
whereas the Statute of 13. E. 1. appoints no other Officers but the Constables
for view of arms, it appears by these Statutes of Phil. and Mar. that the King
might appoint His Commissioners: which he could not, if this power of Arms had
been wholly grounded upon that Statute.

The Last Objection of this nature, is grounded upon the Common opinion or
practice; And is this.

That the Commissions of Lievtenancy, so grievous to the people, and declared
illegal in Parliament, had not been so often issued, and so much pressed upon
them, if the Commission of Array, not much differing from it in power, and not
at all less grievous to the Subject, might, by the warrant and authority of
the Laws of this Realm, have supplied their room.

To this Our Answer is, That it stands upon two grounds: First, That the
Commissions of Lievtenancy were grievous. Secondly, That they were illegal:
both which so far forth at least as to the powers wherein they did not exceed
the power of this Commission (for the other powers are not now in question) are
clearly mistaken.

For, as for the grievousnesse, we say these Commissions were such as had been
long used in the happiest times of Our Predecessors, and continued to Our Time:
And such grievances, as did, or might arise in the execution of these
Commissions, not warranted by them, are no cause to quarrel at the Commissions
themselves, more then at the Commissions of Peace, because some Justices of
Peace have exceeded or abused their authority. And howsoever, Those powers
wherein they exceeded not Our Commission of Array could not be grievous, as we
have already showed.

And as for the illegality of those powers, We shall not, nor will Our people
be satisfied by bare Votes, that they are illegal, The same being done without
hearing of Our Council, and without advising with the Judges and demanding
their opinions, (a course which was formerly used in Parliaments, as appears
even by this Record of 5. H. 4. amongst many others, but in matters of Law
which have of late risen in Our Houses of Parliament, has (for what cause We
know not) been laid aside.) But We again say, these powers in Our Commissions
of Lievtenancies are legal, and if there be any clauses in such Comissio^s
which are illegal, those clauses could not at all make the Commissions void
for so much as was legal, much less take away Our power of granting new
Commissions, omitting such clauses.

But if We should, for this time, admit the grounds of this Objection, That Our
Commissions of Lievtenancy had been such as this Declaration would have them,
yet it is but a very inconsequent Argument, That those Commissions would not
have issued, so often, and been so much pressed, if the Commissions of Array
had been Legal.

For the Commissions of Lievtenancy contained not only most of the powers of
the Commission of Array, but in many things exceeded them, and were issuable in
times of Peace, whereas Commissions of Array commonly issued in times of Danger
only; and so there was occasion for the one Commission, when there was none for
the other.

But on the contrary, (that we may retort this Objection also,) since that the
Commissions of Lievtenancy, not much differing from the Commissions of Array in
Power, (as the Declaration says) and in many things exceeding them, have so
often issued in the reigns of several of Our Predecessors, and were allowed
by the Judges of those times, obeyed without dispute, and not questioned in the
Parliament of 1. Iac. or 21. Iac. nor were these powers wherein they agreed
with the Commission of Array complained of by the Petition of Right, but rather
admitted and allowed, as We have already showed. It may very well be inferred
that both the Commissions of Lievtenancy and of Array, (as to those powers at
least wherein they agreed) were Legal and far from being any grievance to the
Subject.

Thus far we have proceeded in the Examination, and clearing of the Objections
made against Our Commissions of Array. Upon all which Objections, we shall
further observe That although the Declaration denies Our power at this day of
commanding to Train or Exercise; yet none of those objections touch any thing
upon those Powers. So that if all were true which is objected, yet we should
still have power (at least by a distinct Commission) to command Our Subjects to
be Disciplined, Mustered, Trained and Exercised, with such Arms as they had in
a readiness; for that (as we have showed before) these are distinct from the
power of Imposing of Arms, and may be severally granted or executed.

And now upon the whole matter, the state of Our case is this. It is Voted by
Our Houses of Parliament, That Our Kingdom is in imminent danger of destruction
from enemies abroad, and a discontented Party at home; and that there is a
necessity to put Our people into a posture of Defense.

In this case, for defense of Our selves and Our Kingdom, We have awarded Our
Commissions of Array, thereby giving power to the Commissioners (persons, We
hope, beyond exception) to cause Our Subjects to arm themselves, or, if
impotent in body, to find arms for others, according to their abilities, in a
reasonable and moderate proportion, and to muster and train them at convenient
times and places, and afterward, upon occasion to lead them, where there is a
necessity for the defense of the Kingdom, and the Expulsion, vanquishing, and
Destruction of Enemies.

And We have showed, That the Powers of these Commissions, are grounded upon
the very principles of government, and that without them, We could not defend
and protect Our Subjects, (as We are bound by Our oath at Our Coronation) That
they are warranted by the Ancient Common Law, allowed by the constant practice
of former ages established by the Parliament of 5. H. 4. (which caused a Copy
of these Commissions to be entered upon the Roll, as a Rule or President for
after times) and are not repealed, or altered by any Statutes now in force.

And yet, though this Danger, and the necessity of putting the Kingdom into a
Posture of Defense, is thus agreed by both Houses; nevertheless, this
Commission, and all others of like nature, are by their Declaration said to be
illegal; And it is thereby denied, That We have, at any time, Power to charge
Our Subjects with any manner of Arms (though for the absolute necessary defense
of the Kingdom) or that We can command them to be trained or exercised, much
less to be led out of the County, though an Enemy be ready to enter, or though
Rebels be actually up in Arms.

How far this opinion is consistent with Law, Reason, or Regal Power, the
safety of Our Selves and Our Subjects, (upon all this which We have said) We
leave to all Our good people to consider.

And since Our two Houses (denying Us this Power) without Us, and against Our
consent, have made Orders (which they call Ordinances) for compelling Our
Subjects to be Armed, Trained, Exercised, Mustered, and conducted, and send for
Our Subjects as Delinquents, and imprison them, for refusing to obey such
Orders; It is apparent, That what this Declaration says against Our
Commission, without just ground, is true indeed of those Orders, that is, That
they are contrary to the Law and Customs of the Realm, destructive to the
Liberty, and Property of the Subjects, and contrary to the Petition of Right
(as it is expounded in this Declaration,) as also against other Statutes.

FINIS.

