A COLLECTION OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST GRACIOUS MESSAGES FOR PEACE,

Sent to the Two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, since the 5. of December*
1645.

With His MAjESTI^^ last Message Jan. 15. and the Answer of (...) ^ses to His
two former Messages of the (...) of December.

CHARLES. R.

Our Pleasure and Command is, That these Messages with their Answers, be
forthwith published in all Churches and Chappells within Our Dominions.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1645.

A COLLECTION OF His Majesty's most Gracious Messages for Peace, sent to the
two Houses of Parliament at Westminster since the 5. of December. 1645.
CHARLES R.

HIS Majesty being deeply ^^^ble of the Continuation of this bloody (...)
natural War, cannot think Himself discharged of the Duty He owes to God, or
the affection and regard He has to the preservation of His People, without
the constant application of His ^^^est endeavou^^ to find some expedient for
the speedy ending of these unhappy Distractions, if that may be, does (...)
desire, That a safe Conduct may be forthwith sear* (...) Duke of Richmond, the
Earl of Southampton, (...) and Jeffery Palmer Esquires, and their (...) to,
with Coaches, Horses, and other Accommodations for their Journey to
Westminster, during their stay there, and require when they shall think fit.
Whom His Majesty intends to send to the Lords and Commons Assembled in the
Parliament of England at Westminster, and the Co^^issioners of the Parliament
of Scotland, furnished with ^uch Propositions, as His Majesty is confident will
(...) the Foundation of a happy and well grounded Peace.

Given at the Court at Oxford the fifth of December, 1645. For the Speaker of
the House of Peers pro tempore.

This Gracious Message came to Westminster, December the sixth, where he that
brought it was detained five days, and at last sent back without any Answer at
all to His MAJESTY; only these few words were written to Sir Thomas Glemham
Governor of Oxford.

SIR,
WE have received your Letter of the 5th of this instant December, with His
Majesty's enclosed, and have sent back your Trumpet by Command of both Houses,
who will with all convenient speed return an answer to His Majesty, and rest

Your loving Friends Gray of Wark Speaker of the House of Peers Pro Tempore.
William Lenthall Speaker of the House of Commons,

For Sir Thomas Glemham Governor of Oxford.

This was all, after so many days expectation; which is indeed neither Answer
nor Excuse, being only a Concession of nothing at present, and an intimation
that for f^^^^ (when themselves judged it convenient) they would grant or deny.
Notwithstanding all manner of difficulties and pretenses. His MAJESTY'S (to
testify His unwearied desires for Peace) presently sent (...) Message.

CHARLES R.

HIS Majesty cannot but extremely wonder, that after so many expressions on
your part of a deep and seeming sense of the miseries of this afflicted
Kingdom, and of the dangers incident to His Person during the continuance of
this unnatural War, your many great and so often repeated Protestations, that
the raising of these Arms has been only for the necessary defense of Gods
true Religion, His Majesty's Honor, Safety and Prosperity, the Peace, comfort
and security of His People, you should delay a safe Conduct to the persons
mentioned in His Majesty's Message of the fifth of this instant December, which
are to be sent unto you with Propositions for a well grounded Peace: A thing so
far from having been denied at any time by His Majesty, whenever you have
desired the same, that he beleives it has been seldom (if ever) practiced
among the most avowed and professed enemies, much less from Subjects to their
King. But His Majesty is resolved, that no discouragements whatsoever shall
make Him fail of His part in doing His uttermost endeavors to put an end to
these Calamities, which if not in time prevented, must prove the ruin of this
unhappy Nation; And therefore does once again desire, that a safe conduct may
be forthwith sent for those persons expressed in His former Message, and does
therefore Co^ you, as you will answer to Almighty God in that day when he shall
make inquisition for all the Blood that has and may yet be spilt in this
unnatural War, as you tender the preservation and establishment of the true
Religion; by all the Bonds of Duty and Allegiance to your King, or compassion
to your bleeding and unhappy Country, and of Charity to your selves, that you
dispose your hearts to a true sense, and ^ploy all your faculties in a more
seriou^ endeavor together with His Majesty, to set a speedy and to these
^sting Divisions, and then He shall not doubt, but that God (...) give the
blessing of Peace to this distr^ (...).

Given at the Court at Oxford the 15. of December 1645. For the Speaker of the
House of Peers ^^^o tempore.

Above Twenty days passed (which was more then they allowed for the whole
Treaty at Vxbridge) and yet no Answer came to either of these former Messages.
His MAJESTY observing such strange delays against any whomsoever He should
send with Propositions (though Persons of most unblemished Honor and
Integrity) Resolved to remove all Clouds and Excuses by repairing Personally to
London, and therefore sent this following Message.

CHARLES R.

NOtwithstanding the strange and unexpected delays (which can be precedented
by no former times) to His Majesty's two former Messages, His Majesty will lay
aside all Expostulations, as rather serving to loose time, then to contribute
any remedy to the evils, which (for the present) do afflict this distracted
Kingdom; Therefore without farther Preamble, His Majesty thinks it most
necessary to send these Propositions this way, which He intended to do by the
Persons mentioned in His former Messages, though He well knows the great
disadvantage, which Overtures of this kind have, by the want of being
accompanied by well instructed Messengers.

His Majesty conceiving that the former Treaties have hitherto proved
ineffectuall, chiefly for want of Power in those Persons that Treated, as
likewise because those from whom their Power was derived (not possibly having
the particular informations of every several debate) could not give so clear
a Judgment as was requisite in so important a business; If therefore His
Majesty may have the engagement of the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster,
the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, the Major, Aldermen,
Common Council, and Militia of London, at the chief Commanders in Sir Thomas
Fairfax's Army, as also of those in the Scots Army, for His Majesty's free and
safe Coming to, and abode in London or Westminster, (with such of His Servants
now attending Him, and their Followers, not exceeding in all the number of 300)
for the space of forty days, and after the said time for His free and safe
repair to any of His Garrisons of Oxford, Worcester, or Newarke, (which His
Majesty shall nominate at any time before His going from London or
Westminster,) His Majesty propounds to have a Personal Treaty with the two
Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of
Scotland, upon all matters which may conduce to the restoring of Peace and
happiness to these miserably distracted Kingdoms; And to begin with the three
Heads which were Treated on at Vxbridge. And for the better clearing of His
Majesty's earnest and sincere Intentions of putting an end to these unnatural
Distractions, (knowing that point of security may prove the greatest obstacle
to this most blessed Work) His Majesty therefore Declares, That He is willing
to commit the great Trust of the Militia of this Kingdom, for such time, and
with such Powers, as are expressed in the Paper delivered by His Majesty's
Commissioners at Vxbridge, the 6th of February last, to these Persons
following, viz. The Lord Privy Seal, the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of
Hertford, the Marquess of Dorchester, the Earl of D^rs^t Lord Chamberlain,
the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Essex, Earl of Southampton, Earl of
Pembroke, Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Manchester, Earl of Warwick, Earl of
Denbigh, Earl of Chichester, Lord Say, Lord Seymour, Lord Lucas, Lord
Lexington, M. Denzill Ho^is, M. Pierrepoint, M. Henry Bellasis, M. Richard
Spencer, Sir Thomas Fairfax, M. John Ashburnham, Sir Gervas Clifton, Sir Henry
Vane junior, M. Rober^ Wallop, M. Thomas Chichely, M. Oliver Cromwell, and M.
Philip Skippon, supposing that these are Persons against whom there can be no
just exception: But if this does not satisfy, then His Majesty offers to name
the (...)* and leave the other to the election of the two (...) or at
Westminster, with the Powers and Lim^^^ (...) before mentioned.

Thus His Majesty calls God (...) the World to witness, of His sincere
Intentions and (...) Endeavors, for the composing and settling of these ^^^^ble
Distractions, which He doubts not, but by the blessing of God, will soon be put
to a happy ^onclusion, if this His Majesty's offer be accepted; Otherwise He
leaves all the World to Judge, who are the Continuers of this unnatural War.
And therefore He once more Conjures you, by all the Bonds of Duty you owe to
God and your King, to have so great a Compassion on the bleeding and miserable
Estate of your Country, That you join your most serious and hearty Endeavors
with His Majesty, to put a happy and speedy end to these present Miseries.

Given at the Court at OXFORD the 26 of December, 1645. For the Speaker of the
House of Peers pro tempore, To be Communicated to the two Houses of Parliament
at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland.

The day after His MAJESTY had sent this Third Message, Sir Peter Kill^grew
brought an Answer to His MAJESTY'S two former of the 5 and 15 of December,
whoever hears this Answer, will believe it might have been afforded sooner.

May it please your Majesty,
THE Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England at Westminster,
have received your Letters of the 5th and 15th of this instant December, and
having, together with the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, taken
the same into their serious consideration, do humbly return this Answer.

They have in all their Actions manifested to Your Majesty and the World, their
sincere and earnest desires, that a safe and well grounded Peace might be
set^ed in Your three Kingdoms, and for the obtain^ (...) ^essing, shall ever
pray to God, and use their utmost (...), and beseech Your Majesty to believe,
that their not sending a more speedy Ans^ has not proceeded from any intention
to retard the meane^ (...) putting an end to these present Calamities by a
happy Peace, (...) been occasioned by the Considerations and Debates necessary
in a business of so great importance, wherein both Kingdoms are so much
concerned.

As to Your Majesty's desire of a safe Conduct for the coming hither of the
Duke of Richmond, the Earl of Southampton, John Ashburnham and leffery Palmer
Esquires, with Propositions to be the foundation of a happy and well grounded
Peace, They finding that former Treaties have been made use of for other ends
under the pretense of Peace, and have proved delatory, and unsuccessefull,
cannot give way to a safe Conduct according to Your Majesty's desire; But both
Houses of the Parliament of England, having now under their Consideration
Propositions and Bills for the settling of a safe and well grounded Peace, which
are speedily to be communicated to the Commissioners of the Kingdom of
Scotland, do resolve after mutual agreement of both Kingdoms to present them
with all speed to Your Majesty.

Westminster the 25. December. 1645. Gray of Warke Speake^ of the House of Peers
pro (...). William Lenthall Speaker of the House of Commons.



This Denial (to say no worse) was brought to His MAJESTY December 27. and
within two days Sir Peter Killegrew was dismissed with this Gracious Answer.

CHARLES R.

ALthough the Message sent by (...) Peter Killegrew, may justly require (...)
expost^^^^ (...) His Majesty lays that ^^^le, as no^ so (...) Endeavors;
leaving (...) World ^o judge* (...) Proposition for a Personal ^^^^^ty, o^ the
(...) of a safe Conduct for Persons to be^^ (...) ^^^ly, (...) of a real
Intention to Peace; (...) all (...) upon His former Message of the 26 (...)
December. (...) upon His repair to Westmin^^er (...) ^oubts not but so to
join His Endeavors with His two Houses of Parliament, as to give just
satisfaction, not only concerning the business of Ireland, but also for the
settling of a way for the payment of the Public Debts, as well to the Scots,
and to the City of London, as others. And as already He has shown a fair way
for the settling of the Militia, so He shall carefully Endeavor in all other
Particulars, that none shall have cause to complain for want of security,
whereby just Iealousies may arise to hinder the continuance of the desired
Peace. And certainly this Proposition of a Personal Treaty could never have
entered into His Majesty's Thoughts, if He had not resolved to make apparent to
all the world, that the Public good and Peace of this Kingdom, is far
dearer to Him then the respect of any particular Interest. Wherefore none can
oppose this Motion, without a manifest demonstration, that he particularly
envies His Majesty should be the chief (...) in so blessed a Work, besides
the declaring him (...) opposer of the happy Peace of these Nations. To
con^^^ide, whosoever will not be ashamed, that His fair and specious
Protestations should be brought to a true and public Test; and those who have
a real sense, and do truly commiserate the miseries of their bleeding
Country: let them speedily and cheerfully embrace His Majesty's Proposition
for His Personal Treaty at Westminster, which, by the blessing of God will
undoubtedly to these now distracted Kingdoms, ^estor^ the happiness of a long
wished for, and lasting Peace.

Gi^^n at the Court at Oxford, the 19th day of December, 1645. For the Speaker
of the House of P^^res pro tempore, to (...) C^ted to the two Houses of (...)
Westminster, and the (...) of the Parliament of Scot^^^d.

But neither this, nor the former Message of December 26. (...) ^ouchsafed the
least notice for full three weeks, though. Theirs ha^ (...) Answer in less
then three doyes. All good men wondering at so strange detention of the
Messenger at London, His MAJESTY sent another with this His fifth Message.

CHARLES R.

BUt that these are times, wherein nothing is strange; it were a thing much to
be marvailed at, what should cause this unparalleled long detention of His
Majesty's Trumpet, sent with His Gracious Message of the 26th of December last;
Peace being the only Subject of it, and His Majesty's Personal Treaty, the
means proposed for it. And it were almost as great a wonder, that His M^^^^
^^^uld be so long from inquiring after it, if that the ^^^^ely expectation
thereof, had not, in some measure ^^^^^fied His Impatience: But least His
Majesty, by ^is long silence, should condemn himself of Carelessness in that,
which so ^^ich concerns the good of all His People, He thinks it high time to
inquire after His said Trumpeter, For since all men, who pretend any goodness,
must desire Peace, and that all men know T^^^^ies, to be the best and most
Christian way to procure it, and the^e being as little question, that His
Majesty's (...) it; is the likeliest way to bring it to (...) He Judges there
must be some strang^^ (...) Accidents, which ^^^^eth this most (...) Wherefore
His M^^^^ ^^arnestly, (...) to have a speedy Account of Hi^ ^^mer Message
^^^^ubject whereof is Peace, (...) means His Personal Presence at
Westminster, where the Government of the Church being settled, as it was in the
times of the happy and glorious Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James,
with full Liberty for the ease of their Consciences, who will not communicate
in that Service established by Law, and likewise for the free and public use
of the Directory (prescribed, and by Command of the two Houses of Parliament,
now practiced in some parts of the City of London) to such as shall desire to
use the same, and all Forces being agreed to be Disbanded, His Majesty will
then forthwith (as He has in His Message of the 29th of December last, already
offered) join with His two Houses of Parliament, in settling some way for the
payment of the Public Debts to His Scots Subjects, the City of London, and
others: And His Majesty having proposed a fair way, for the settling of the
Militia, which now by this long delay, seems not to be thought sufficient
Security: His Majesty (to show how really He will employ Himself at His
Coming to Westminster, for making this a lasting Peace, and taking away all
Jealousies, (how groundless soever) will endeavor, upon debate with His two
Houses, so to dispose of it (as likewise of the Business of Ireland) as may
give to them and both Kingdoms just satisfaction; Not doubting also, but to
give good Contentment to His two Houses of Parliament in the choice of the Lord
Admiral, the Officers of State and others, if His (...) by their ready
Inclinations to Peace shall (...) encouragement thereunto. Thus His Majesty,
^ng taken occasion by His just Impatience so to explain His Intentions, that
no Man can doubt of a happy Issue to this succeeding Treaty: If now, there
shall be so much as a delay of the same, He calls God and the World to
witness, who they are, that not only hinder, but Reject this Kingdoms future
happiness, It being so much the stranger, that His Majesty's coming to
Westminster, (which was first the greatest pretense for taking up Arms) should
be so much as delayed, much less not accepted or refused; But His Majesty
hopes, that God will no longer suffer the malice of Wicked men to hinder the
Peace of this too much afflicted Kingdom.

Given at the Court at Oxford, the 15th of January, 1645. For the Speaker of
the House of Peers pro tempore, To be Communicated to the two Houses of
Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland.

After this sent, and on its way to Westminster; As (...) returned His
Majesty's former Trumpet with an Answer to His Messages of the 26th and 29th of
December* (...) long expected; but it seems 'twill ask time to fra^^ ^^^ch an
Answer as never had Precedent, (and till now) came ^ot from Subjects to any
King in the World.

May it please Your Majesty*
W^^^E Your (...) Lo^all Subjects of both ^ingdomes, (...) ^^^ectived Your
Letters of (...) the 26 and 29 of December last; unto which ^^^^mbly return
this Answer.

That there has been no delay on our parts, but what was necessary in a
business of so great consequence, as is expressed in our former Letter to Your
Majesty.

Concerning the Personal Treaty desired by Your Majesty, There having been so
much innocent Blood of Your good Subjects shed in this War, by Your Majesty's
Commands and Commissions, Irish Rebels brought over into both Kingdoms, and
endeavors to bring over more into both of them, as also Forces from Foreign
parts; Your Majesty being in Arms in these parts, and the Prince in the head
of an Army in the West, diverse Towns made Garrisons, and kept in hostility by
Your Majesty against the Parliament of England: There being also For^^^^
Scotland against that Parliament and Kingdom by Your Majesty's Commission: The
War in Ireland fomented and prolonged by Your Majesty, whereby the three
Kingdoms are brought near to utter ruin and destruction. We conceive, That
until Satisfaction and security be first given to both Your Kingdoms, Your
Majesty's coming hither cannot be convenient, nor by (...) assented unto.
Neither can we apprehend it a means conducing to Peace, That Your Majesty
should come to Your Parliament for a few days, with any thoughts of leaving
it* especially with intentions of returning to hostility against it. And are
do observe, That Your Majesty desire (...) ^^gagement, not only of the
Parliaments, but of the Lord (...) Aldermen, Common Council, and Mili^^^ (...)
of London, the chief Commanders of Sir Thom^^ (...) his Army, and those of the
Scots Army, which (...) against the Privile^^^s and honor of the Parliaments,
those being joined with them* who are subject and subordinate to their
authority.

That which Your Majesty, against the freedom of the Parliaments inforces in
both Your Letters with many earnest expressions, as if in no other way then
that propounded by Your Majesty, the Peace of Your Kingdoms could be
established; Your Majesty may please to remember, That in our last Letter, we
did Declare, That Propositions from both Kingdoms were speedily to be sent to
Your Majesty, which We conceive to be the only way for the attaining a happy
and well grounded Peace; and Your Majesty's Assent unto those Propositions,
will be an effectual means for giving satisfaction, and security to Your
Kingdoms: will assure a firm Union between the two Kingdoms, as much desired
by each for other as for themselves; And settle Religion and secure th^^ (...)
the Kingdom of Scotland, whereof neither is so much as mentioned in Your
Majesty's Letters.

And in proceeding according to these just and necessary grounds for the
putting an end to the bleeding Calamities of these Nations, Your Majesty may
have the Glory to be a Principal Instrument in so happy a Work; and we
(however misinterpreted) shall approve our selves to God and the world to be
real and sincere in s^^king a safe and well grounded Peace.

Westminster, 13. Jan. 1645. (...) the name and (...) ^^^rant of the Com^^^
(...) to for the Par^^^ment of Scotland. BALMERINOTH. Gray of Warke, Speaker of
the House of Peers, pro tempore* William Lenthall, Speaker of the H^^^^ of
Commons.

For Your MAjESTY.

This, and no more, is all they Answered to His Majesty's Five Messages, and
six weeks Expectation. Such as are not drencht so deep in blood, as to abhor
all Peace, would cheerfully embrace His Majesty's Proposition for a Personal
Treaty: It Is the very expedient Themselves proposed in all their Messages,
Declarations and Speeches. But now they renounce it, forasmuch as they find His
MAjESTY in hostility, and Prince CHARLES in the Head of an Army in the West, (a
strange consequence, That because it is now War, therefore it shall never be
Peace;) Though it is as notorious who was first in Arms, as who first began to
Plunder. What they here intend by demanding of His Majesty Satisfaction for
(...), no modest Christian but trembles to understand. And it is as strange,
that His Majesty in desiring the joint Engagement of the City of London for His
Security at Westminster, should violate the Privileges of Parliament, Remember
what forced His Majesty from White Hall; those Tumults They pretended received
no influence from any Vote of Theirs; And for like assurance from Sir Thomas
Fairfax's Army, His Majesty aske^ no more then Him^ offered to the Earl of
Essex in Cornwall, in a Letter signed by all the chief Officer^ of His
Majesty's Army; (...) sure they will grant as much at His Majesty's command as
(...) Thomas Fairfax's Officers or the Citizens of London can (...) This is
manifest that His Majesty has (...) in the World to heal His bleeding (...)
Westminster they will not grant so much as a (...) should either Send Peace, or
(...) spend forty days in sending two Denyalls.

FINIS.

