His Majesty's DECLARATION AND PROPOSITIONS Propounded to his Excellence the
the Earl of ESSEX; Concerning a Treaty of Peace* and a Cessation of A^mes, by
both Armies.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, December. 19. 1642.

Also The Earls Answer to the said Propositions.

Likewise a True Discovery of the practizes of the Lord Shandoice, to betray
the City of Gloucester, to the Cavaliers.

Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that these Particulars be
forthwith Printed and published.

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parliamentorum.



December. 22. Printed for I. H. and William Anderton, 1642.

His Majesty's Declaration and Propositions, to his Excellency the Earl OF
ESSEX.
CHARLES REX
TRusty and well-beloved Councellor WE greet you well,
Where as of late days WE have considered of the present distractions of this
Land, and out of our second and mature thoughts arising out of Our Royal
Breast, We thought meet to declare Our will and pleasure unto you, that you
would forbear to proceed any further in this destructive War, and, We
promise on the word of a King, to give you a free pardon for all former Acts,
and will no more remember any former passages, even from the first beginning of
this disscention betwixt Us and Our Parliament, to the end that a further
effusion of blood may be prevented and matters settled, whereby the Kingdom
may flourish as it formerly has done; We likewise desire that certain grave
substantial persons, may be chosen to reconcile those differences between Us,
and Our two houses of Parliament; WE are likewise resolved to appoint some of
equal fidellity and understanding to consult with them about the great
affairs, and insupportable pressures and grievances of this Kingdom, and what
they shall agree upon WE are willing to ratify, and make good, by consenting
to all their Acts, consultatons, and determinations, that so this civil War
which has bred so great a disturbance in this Our Kingdom, may proceed no
further, a pacification being made on both sides, to the general content of
Our Person and Posterity, and all Our loving Subjects.

And We do declare this to be Our earnest desire, it being the most ready way
to procure the Peace and happiness of this Our Kingdom, desiring that all
grudges may be removed, and all matters well ordered for the good of the
Commonwealth, whereupon will follow a clear understanding between Us and Our
People, being combined together in a mutual League of dearest affection.

Given at Our Court at OXFORD, the nineteenth of December, 1642.
The Earls answer to the said propositions.
MOst grattious Soveveraigne, J humbly tender my service at your Royal feet,
being willing to hazard my Life and fortunes in the defense of your Majesty,
where as you have been pleased to declare your resolution concerning a Treaty
of Peace, so has it been my desire ever since the beginning of these
differences to embrace the same.

But having such a great trust reposed in me and committed to my charge by both
Houses of Parliament, and I cannot conceive but that I am bound in conscience
according to the Law of God, to discharge that trust which is reposed in me, by
your great and Honorable Council, being for the defense of your Majesty's
Person, Gods true Religion, the Privileges of Parliament, the liberty of the
Subject, and the good of the Commonwealth, and if it be the pleasure of that
great Council that has reposed in me, to take the same charge from me again,
and to confer it upon some other honorable Person, J shall willingly
surrender up my Commission, and be ready to hazard my life and fortunes in your
Majesty's Service against any foreign Enemy.

Your Majesty's most loyal Subject, ESSSEX.

Happy News from the City of Gloucester
WOrthy Sir,
J am bold to present you with some remarkable passages, being very
observable, which hapened near Gloucester, on the eighteenth and nineteenth of
this instant month, the Lord Shandoice, and diverse other Cavaliers, having
received information of the proceedings of this our County, and that they had
diverse friends therein, which would be ready to assist them, if they made their
approach thereunto, whereupon the aforementioned persons having gathered
together a great and mighty strength in other Counties, they advanced near to
the said City, where they labored with all the force and strength they could,
to possess themselves of the said County, but he was valliantly opposed, by
the Jnhabitants of the said County, who having notice of his coming, set the
men in a fair Battalia, and at his first approach they gave them such a
desperate charge, that the Cavaliers soon retreate^ but they pursued him very
close. by which means they took him, and caused him to deliver up his
Commission, and to subscribe under his hand, that he would never by his own
power or procurement of others, disturb the Peace of that County, but that he
would oppose and hinder it to his power, and that he would maintain the
Privileges of Parliament, the Law and Liberty of the Subject, with his life
and fortune, all which the said Lord promised to perform.

Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that these Particulars be printed
and published.

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl.



FINIS.

