The Kings Majesty's DECLARATION sent to the Speaker of the House of Peers,
Protempore, To be communicated to both Houses of Parliament, and His Majesty's
Subjects.

Showing the causes of His Majesty's Retirement from Hampton Court.

Dated 11. November 1647.

By His Majesty's especial Command.

London, Printed for John Giles, to prevent false Copies. 1647.

Hampton Court, the 11. of November 1647.
LIberty being that, which in all times has been, but especially now is, the
common theme and desire of all men. Common reason shows that Kings less then
any should endure Captivity, and yet I call God and the world to witness, with
what patience I have endured a tedious restraint; which so long as I had any
hopes, that this part of my sufferings might conduce to the Peace of my
Kingdoms, or the hindering of more effusion of blood, I did willingly undergo.
But now, finding, by too certain proofs, that this my continued Patience,
would not only turn to my Personal ruin, but likewise be of much more
prejudice, then furtherance to the Public good, I thought I was bound, as
well by natural, as political obligations to seek safety, by retiring my
self for some time, from the public view both of my friends and enemies; and
I appeal to all indifferent men to judge, if I have not just cause to free my
self from the hands of those, who change their Principles with their
Condition, and who are not ashamed openly to intend the destruction of the
Nobility, by taking away their Negative Voice, and with whom the Levellers
Doctrine is rather countenanced then punished. And as for their intentions to
my Person, their changing and putting more strict Guards upon me, with the
discharging most of those Servants of mine, whom formerly they willingly
admitted to wait upon me, does sufficiently declare.

Nor would I have this my retirement misinterpreted, for I shall earnestly, and
uncessantly endeavor the settling of a safe and well grounded Peace, where
ever I am, or shallbe; and that (as much as may be) without the effusion of
more Christian blood; for which, how many times have I desired, and pressed to
be heard, and yet no ear given to u^e? And can any reasonable man think, that
(according to the ordinary course of affairs) there can be a settled Peace
without it? Or that God will bless those who refuse to hear their own King?
Surely no: Nay, I must further add, that (besides what concerns my self)
unless all other chief interests have not only a hearing, but likewise just
satisfaction given unto them (to wit the Presbyterians, Independents Army,
those who have adhered to me, and even the Scots) I say there cannot, (I speak
not of Miracles, it being in my opinion a sinful presumption in such cases to
expect or trust to them) be a safe or lasting Peace: Now as I cannot deny, but
my Personal security is the urgent cause of this my retirement; so I take God
to witness, that the Public Peace is no less before my eyes, and I can
find no better way to express this my profession (I know not what a wiser man
may do) then by desiring and urging that all chief interests may be heard, to
the end each may have a just satisfaction; as for example the Army (for the
rest though necessary, yet I suppose are not difficult to content) ought (in my
judgment) to enjoy the liberty of their Consciences, have an Act of Oblivion
or Indemnity (which should extend to all the rest of my Subjects;) And that
all their Arrears should be speedily, and duly paid; which I will undertake to
do, so I may be heard, and that I be not hindered from using such lawful, and
honest means as I shall choose.

To conclude, let me be heard with freedom, honor and safety, and I shall
instantly break through this cloud of retirement, and show my self really to
be Pater Patriae.

CHARLES REX.
For the Speaker of the Lords pro Tempore, to be Communicated unto the Lords
and Commons in the Parliament of England, at Westminster, and the Commissioners
of the Parliament of Scotland, and to all my other Subjects, of what degree,
condition, or calling, whatsoever.



FINIS.

