EVIDENCE FOR HEAVEN: CONTAINING Infallible Signs and real Demonstrations of
our Union with Christ and Assurance of Salvation.

With an Appendix of laying down certain Rules to be observed for preserving
our Assurance once Obtained.

Published by Ed. Calamy B. D. and Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury London.

PHIL. 2.12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.

2 PET. 1.10. Give Diligence to make your calling and election sure.

2 COR. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own
selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller at the Sta^ in Paul's Churchyard toward the
West end 1657.

AN EPISTLE, TO THE READER.
THere are two things which ought to be the chief aim of all those who desire
to live holily, and dye happily. The one is, to get an interest in Christ, the
other, to get an assurance of their interest in him. The first of these is
absolutely necessary to Salvation. The second, is absolutely necessary, though
not to our Salvation, yet to our Consolation. Without the first, we cannot dye
happily. Without the second, we cannot dye comfortably. It must not be denied,
but that a man may have true Grace, and yet want the Assurance of it, he may be
a Child of Light in darkness, Is. 50.^0. Job 13.15.
he may have the direct act of Faith, and yet want the reflect act, he may have
the Sanctifying work of the Spirit, and yet want the witnessing work. (Though
no man can have the witnessing work, who has not the Sanctifying, yet a man
may have the sanctifying, and yet want the witnessing work of the Spirit)
Joseph may be alive and yet his Father Jacob may think him dead, true grace may
be in us, and yet we may not only not know it, but believe the contrary.

This condition though it be sad, yet it is not damnable. For as a wicked man
is never the nearer Heaven, because he presumptuously conceits he is in the way
to Heaven, no more is a Child of God the nearer Hell, because he thinks he is
in the way to Hell. Christ was not therefore a Gardener, because Mary thought
so, neither was Joseph therefore dead, because Jacob imagined him to be dead.
He that believes shall be saved, whether he knows it or knows it not; he that
walks in Heavens way shall certainly at last come to Heaven, though he thinks
himself out of the way.

Notwithstanding all this, though the Grace of Assurance be not simply, and
absolutely necessary, yet it is a most precious jewel, without which we can
neither ^e comforted while we live, nor willing to part with life. It is a
Heaven upon earth, a Heaven before we come to Heaven. The Prelibation and
Pregustation of Heaven. It is the hidden Manna, Abraham's bosom, the joy of
the Lord, and the peace of God which passes all understanding. It is to be
labored after with all labor. And therefore the Apostle perswads us, to give
diligence to make our calling and election sure. 2 Pet. 1.10.


The subject of this ensuing Treatise, is to direct and teach us how to get an
infallible assurance of salvation: Here are several Marks and Characters
propounded of a man in Christ, the work is very weighty, and of great
concernment, for whosoever undertakes to lay down marks of a Child of God, must
be careful of two things.

1. That he does not propound evidences of Grace, which are proper only to
eminent Christians, as belonging to all true Christians, least herein he makes
sad the hearts of those whom God would not have made sad.

2. That he does not mention such Characters of a true Child of God, which may
be found in an Hypocrite, least he makes glad the hearts of those whom God
would not have made glad.

The Author of this book has brought very many marks of a true justifying
faith, of a distinguishing Love of God, of of repentance unto life and of a new
Creature, etc. Now though thou can not apply all of them as thy portion; yet
if thou can apply many of them, and sincerely labourest to be capable of
applying the rest, thou art in a happy condition.

There are two ways by which a man may come to know his interest in Christ.
The one is by the witness of his own spirit. The other by the witness of Gods
Spirit. There are some who say, there is but one witness, the witness of Gods
Spirit; This I grant is the chief witness; but I conceive, that the Scripture
does also hold forth, the witness of a man's own spirit as well as of Gods
Spirit, Romans 8.16. It is not said, the Spirit witnesses to our spirits, but
with our spirits, that we are the Sons of God. Wherenote, that a man's own
spirit is a co-witnesse. This witness of a man's own spirit is nothing else,
but the testimony of an illightened andrenewed conscience reflecting upon its
grace and assuring the soul that it is in Christ, etc. Of this way of
assurance, the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 John 2.3. 1 John 3.21. Heb.
13.18. Act. 24.16. When a man's conscience bears him witness upon Scripture
grounds, that he does believe and repent, and that he is a new Creature, this
is instead of a thousand witnesses, and it is a continual feast, in the worst
of times.

But now because the voice of conscience is sometimes so low a voice, Laetitia
bonae c^nscientiae est Paradisus animarum, gaudium Angelorum, Hortus delicia
rum ^ger benedictionis, Templum Solo monis, Aula ^ei, Habitaculum Spiritus
Sancti. Bernard.
as that the spirit of a man cannot hear it, especially when it is disturbed,
and distracted with the voice of sin accusing, and condemning him, and because
the voice of conscience is sometimes uncertain, so as the soul knows not what
the verdict of it is. And because also the eye of conscience is sometimes
blind, (through ignorance,) and cannot see the garces it has, and is ready to
bear false witness against it self, and to say, it is not justified, when it
is. Or if not blind, yet it is many times dim, and cannot see the happy
condition it is in. And sometimes it is infested with melancholy, which makes
it look upon its own condition with black spectacles. And because the graces of
Gods Spirit in his Children are sometimes so small and little, or at least so
blotted and blurred, that conscience cannot read the graces God has given it.
Hence it is, that God out of his great goodness has afforded us another
witness, besides the testimony of conscience, which is the witness of his own
Spirit, witnessing with our spirits that we are the Sons of God. This indeed is
the great, and the infallible witness, therefore it is compared to a Seal,
whereby we are sealed to the day of Redemption, and to an earnest, Ephesians. 4.30.
Ephesians. 1.14. Ioh. 16.7. Romans 8.16.
and it is called the comforter, and the Spirit of adoption, by which we are
enabled to cry, Abba father. Of both these witnesses this Treatise speaks to
very good purpose.

One thing more I must add, which will unto many seem very wonderful and
almost incredible. The Author of this Book is a Gentlewoman, belonging to the
Congregation of Alderman-bury; And one who for these Thirty years, by reason of
an affliction lying upon her, has been in a great measure, deprived of those
public spiritual helps which others enjoy, and also of those private helps,
which good Christians do, or might partake of by the Communion of Saints. This
makes good that Text of Scripture. Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings
thou have perfected praise. And that other, Mat. 21.1.
2 Cor. 12.9.
That the strength of God is made perfect in weakness. Socratis Historia. li.
1 ca 16.
Church History tells us of a Captive Woman, whom God made isntrumental to
convert the whole Nation of the Iberians, Act 18.24.26.
to the Christian Faith. And the Book of God tells us of Priscilla, who was made
able by grace to expound the way of God more perfectly unto Apollo himself, an
eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures. And that she and her Husband Aquila
were helpers in Christ Jesus unto Saint Paul, and that for his life, they laid
down their necks. Rom 16.23.
Much is spoken by the same Apostle, in commendation of diverse Women. I hope no
man will contemn this Book, because written by a Woman, Phi. 4.2, 3 Romans 16.1,
6, 12.
but rather admire the goodness, love, and power of God, who is able to do
such great things, by such weak instruments. No man will refuse pearls, or
precious stones, though handed to him by the Female Sex. It is her great desire
that her Name may be concealed. All that I will say of her is; That she is a
precious Jewel, though in a contemptible Box, and a very great ornament to the
Congregation of which she is a Member. If any reap any spiritual advantage by
reading of this Book, she has obtained the hight of her ambition; only she
craves their Prayers, that God would bless her and hers, that the less help
she has from men, the more she may have from God, and the incomes of his holy
Spirit, that though she wants an outward ear, to hear the voice of Gods
Ministers speaking to her outward man, yet she may have an inward ear to hear
God speaking to her soul words of everlasting consolation. And this is also the
Prayer of

Thy Servant in the work of the Ministry, Edmund Calamy.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader.
ASsurance, well-grounded assurance of the Love of God, and a man's own
salvation, is a thing much to be desired and labored for, by all that have
immortal souls; But a thing industriously sought after by few, and attained by
fewer. The most people in the world trouble their heads little about it, and
their hearts less; know not what it is, nor how to go to work to attain it,
some think it is impossible to attain it; others seek not after it, some desire
it, but cannot acquire it, others enjoy it, but do not impart it, hence it
comes to pass, that few reap the comfort of it, I think it not amiss
therefore, to speak somewhat of it, seeing it is a thing without which, we can
neither live, nor di^ with sound comfort in our souls, much l^sse tr^umph over
death, the King of terrors: I shall here in the first place premise three
things, or lay dow^ three conclusions and for brevity sake, I will only name
them; the first is this.

The first. That there are some, that are chosen to salvation, predestinate,
Con 1.
elect. o^dained to eternal life, beloved with an everlasting love, vessels of
mercy prepared unto glory, before the world began, and kept by the mighty power
of God unto salvation; and all these, shall be certainly saved and glorified.

Con. 2.
The Second. That it is possible for a Child of God in this life, to attain some
good assurance, and true evidence, that he is of this number.

The third. That it is the duty of every Christian to labor for assurance of
the Love of God, Con. 3.
and his own salvation.

But here the great question will be, How shall I do this? Quest.
How shall I go to work to attain this precious jewel of assurance which you
speak of?

Answ:
This question, the ensuing discourse tends to the resolution of, therefore I
will here only, lay down some rules to be followed, by every one that desires
to attain some good assurance, or Evidence for Heaven, while he is here.

First. He that would obtain this precious jewel and invaluable treasure of
good assurance, Rule. 1*
must ask it, he must ask it of him, who has said, ask and ye shall receive,
that your joy may be full. Joh. 16.2^
He that purchased Heaven for us, purchased the Evidences of Heaven also, but
he does not always commit them to the heirs custody: Christ does not always
deliver the Evidence, and the ^nowledg of it, with the right and title to
Heaven: Nay, he does many times withhold the Evidence of Heaven from those, to
whom he gives rig^t and title to Heaven, for special reasons: therefore for
this, Christ must be sought unto, injuired of, as the Scripture speaks. A plain
Jacob by much wrestling with God, may obtain some good evidence of his favor,
as well as an eloquent Orator, or a learned Clark: Therefore if thou would
obtain some good Evidence for Heaven, and a happy eternity, then go to God with
the Language of Abraham, Genesis 15.8. when God had told Abraham, he would give
the land of Canaan to his posterity, Abraham believed God, he believed Gods
promise should be made good, yet desires to be further confirmed in this, and
therefore says, Lord, God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it? So
say thou to the Lord, respecting that land above, of which Canaan was a type,
Lord, God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it? Say to God, as Tamar
said to Judah, Give me a pledge of thy promise, until thou performest it, say
to God, as Rahab said to the spies, Give me a true token; give me the earnest
of the Spirit, Josh. 2.12.
give me some grace that may assurs me of glory, and open my eyes to see this
grace bestowed on me, give me the blessing of Joseph, who was able to say, I
fear God; give me the blessing of Paul, who was able to say, I know whom I
have believed. and put th^se promises in suit, Isai. 32.17. Joh. 14.20.

Secondly, The second Rule.
He that would get this precious jewel of assurance, must seek it, he must seek
it, where it is to be found, and as it is to be sough^ after.

1. He must seek it, where it is to be found, seek it in Jesus Christ, and
Union with him, and seek Jesus Christ, and the demonstrations of Union with
him* in the Word of God, in all the Ordinance of God, and duties of a
Christian, and in the Work of God, in, and upon himself. He that will conclude
according to truth about his spiritual and eternal estate, must diligently
try himself, and his graces by the truth (to wit) the Word of God, which is the
only true touchstone we have to try our selves by, The heart is deceitful
above all things, Jer. 17.9.
and despeperately wicked, Who can know it? There is nothing in the world that
sooner deceives us, or so much abuses us, as our own hearts, they are not to be
consulted with nor trusted to, without the Word, but tried by it; therefore
search the Scriptures, and search thy self.

If we go to the Creatu^e for assurance, and go from Creature to Creature for
it, as the Be goes from flower to flower, the Creatures may all reply in the
language of Job* and say, it is not in me, Job 28.14, 15.
neither is it to be found in me, it cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall
silver be weighed for the price thereof. Honor may say it is not in me,
neither is it to be found in me; and riches may say, it is not in me, neither
is it to be found in me; gifts may say, it is not in me; and learning may say,
it is not in me, neither is it to be found in me; and thus may all the
Creatures reply. But where then is assurance to be found? and where is the
place thereof, seeing it is hid from the eyes ^f the most, and kept close from
many of Gods Jewels? The world says, we have heard of the fame thereof, but
know not what it is; Gods People say, we thirst after it, but know not where to
find it; Thou that thus complainest, go to the word, and it will tell thee in
the Word, and in the wilderness, assurance is usually found, go thou to the
Word to seek it, Cant. 1.8.
follow the counsel of Christ, thou that long^st after assurance, but know
not where to find it. Go thy ways forth by the footsteps of the flock, and
feed thy kids, beside the sheepherds tents; Frequent the Word preached, read
the Word Printed; Seek for Evidenc^ in grace, and not in gifts, in renewing
grace, not in moral grace, seek it in the nar^ow way; These are the paths
wherein the flock of Christ have gone before us, and which they have trodden
out unto us; follow their foot steps, if thou would attain assurance, go not
in untroden paths to seek it, it is a pearl that is not to be found in every
place, seek it therefore where it is to be found: This is the first branch of
the second Rule.

2. The second is this, He that would get assurance must seek it as it is to be
sought after; In the use of all means.
He must seek it according to the Scripture directory, that is, diligently,
orderly, humbly, perseveringly.

First, He must seek it diligently, Give diligence to make your calling and
election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
says the Text: He that would get assurance must seek it diligently and
industriously, he must seek it, as Solomon teaches us to seek wisdoms and
understanding; seek for it, as for silver, and search for it, as for hid
treasure; It is treasure, which lies hid, and lies deep in the Bowels is the
Scripture, and he that will obtain it must dive deep for it, and dive with his
eyes open, as the Indians are said to do for pearl, he must labor for it
industriously, as laborers do in silver-mines.

Secondly, He must seek it orderly, he must follow the vein; He must not begin
where God begins, but where God ends; he must not begin at the root to fi^d the
branch, but by the branch discry the root, my meaning is, he must not begin
with Gods decree in predestination, which is the root of salvation; But with
regeneration and justification, which are branches issuing out of this root,
other ways he may destroy the tree ere he is aware, I mean himself, and all
hope of Heaven and salvation, as I have known some do, and fall into utter
desperation; The truth is, he that will not believe, until he read God's
decree in Heaven, must never look for any assurance of Heaven here, nor
fruition of it hereafter; If you will not believe, you shall not be
established, Isa. 7.9.
says the Text; He that will reach to Heaven by Jacobs Ladder, must begin at
the lowest step; this is the Scripture way to get assurance; Christ's directory
prescribes it, when Jesus Christ would instruct Nicodemus about his spiritual
and eternal estate, he did not send him to Heaven, to read the records of the
celestial court, but sent him to read himself over, to search his own heart
and life, to consider whether he were regenerate and born again, John 3.
whether he were ingrafted into Christ, and made a new Creature, yea, or nay;
Christ directs him to the effect to find out the cause, not to the cause to
find out the effect, which teaches us, that he that would get some good
Evidence of the Love of God and his own salvation, must begin at home with the
workings of God, in and upon himself, he must consider what work the Spirit of
God has done in him, what sight of sin, what sense of sin, what sorrow for
sin, what l^athing and forsaking of sin, he has wrought in him, what grace
or desire of grace, or prizing of grace, the Spirit of God has wrought in him;
The Father himself Loves you, says Christ. But how shall that appear? Why
the next words tell us, Ioh. 16.27.29.
Ye have loved me, and believed, etc. The Father himself loved you, because ye
have loved m^, and believed that I came out from God: It is as if Christ had
said, your faith to me, working by love to me, demonstrates it; for Christ does
not here make our Faith, or our love the cause of Gods love to us, but the
discoverer of it: And the Apostle tells us, That whom God did foreknow he also
did predestinate, to be conformed to the Image of his Son, and ver. 30.
says, Romans 8.
that whom he did predestinate, them he also called (to wit) inwardly and
effectually, according to his purpose, by giving them saving grace; and whom he
thus calls, them he also justifies* and whom he justifies, them he also
glorifieth; And here the Apostle follows the example of his Lord and Master,
leading us to the cause by the effects, and to the end by the means, hence it
is evident, That he that would get assurance of his Election, must seek it in
the workings of God, in, and upon himself; he must consider, how his
justification i^ evidenced by his sanctification, and his election by both.
Sanctification is Gods work in us, justification is Gods work upon us, both
together are certain pledges of his good will toward us

In the third place, He that would seek assurance, as it is to be sought after,
must seek it humbly, with fear and trembling, the Scripture calls upon us so
to do, Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.1^
a seeker of assurance, must seek humbly upon his knees, and he must seek
tremblingly, with a holy fear and jealousy, least he should mistake and
miscarry; for though it be possible for a Child of God to know his estate, yet
it is very difficult.

Fourthly, He must seek perseveringly, he must never give over asking until he
receive, never give over seeking until he find what he seeks; He must follow
the example of the Spouse seeking her Beloved, inquire of the watchmen, the
Ministers of the Gospel, where, and how to find, what he seeks; and follows
Christ by earnest prayer, as the woman of Canaan did, until he obtain his
suit, and he must not rest satisfied with the beginnings thereof but still
labor for increase. The Scripture speaks of assurance and full assurance of
hope Heb. 6.11.
of assurance and sull assuranc^ of faith Heb. 10.22.
of the riches of full assurance* of understanding Col. 2.2.
and of great boldness in the faith, 1 Timothy 3.13.
to be attained in this life; and this the Apostle prayed for* for the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.18.
and labored to beget in the Colossians, as appears by the forecited place,
and this the Scripture exhorts all Christians to labor for, 2 Pet. 1.10.11.
and says, That he that does these things shall never fall, but an entrance
shall be ministered unto him abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which one would think were argument enough to persuade any
Immortal soul to seek after it. Thus of the second rule propounded for the
getting of assurance*

Rule 3.
The third is this, He that would get assurance of the Love of God, must work by
the help of the Spirit of God, who searches all things, yea, the deep things
of God as the Scripture says, 1 Cor. 2.10.
And bears witness with our Spirits that we are the Children of God; Ro^ 8.16.
the Word cannot without the Spirit; the Spirit will not* without the Word
assure us o^ eternal happiness; therefore he that would get assurance must
work by the help of the Spirit, he must try himself and his graces by the Word,
through the help of the Spirit.

In the fourth place, Rule 4.
He that would get assurance must carefully avoid all the hindrances thereof,
in the general he must shun and avoid all sin, more especially these sins.
Ignorance, Atheism, Prophannesse and Hypocrisy, Unbelief and Impenitency,
Erroneous Opinions, Presumption and Desperation, neglect of the means of
Grace, formal Use of them, and Rebellion against them, strangeness with God,
and Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, He that would get assurance, Rule 5.
must labor for all those qualifications and graces which may render him
capable ^f it, and which God usually imparts this blessing to; First, he must
become a new Bottle, I mean a new Creature, for assurance is new wine, and
Christ will not put it into an old Bottle, for it would burst the Bottle,
Labor therefore for grace, trush of grace, every renewing grace; But more
especially these graces, Knowledge, Faith, Sincerity, Heart-humility,
Contritition accompanied with Convertion and new Obedience: A true believer
only is capable of assurance.
Assurance will not dwell in an Ignorant, Unbelieving, Hypocritical Heart,
therefore he that would attain it must labor for those graces which are
contrary to these vices; God dwells as a reviver in the heart of the humble and
contrite sinner, He revives the spirit of the humble, Isa. 57.15.66, 2.
and the heart of the contrite ones; Jesus Christ puts the strongest wine in
broken Bottles, I do not say into old, but into broken Bottles, he binds up the
broken hearted; He therefore that would get assurance, must labor for an
humble and broken heart A wise father will not assure a prodigal and
disobedient Child of his inheritance, while he continues such, no more will
our Heavenly Father; He therefore that would get assurance of inheritance with
the Saints in light, must come home to his Heavenly Father with a submissive
and obedient heart, Labor to do thy duty.
with a heart obedient unto all his Heavenly Fathers Will. It is not every one
that has truth of grace, that attains assurance, but he that hat^ truth of
grace and strength of grace, true faith and strong faith: Therefore in the
second place, labor for strength of grace, strength of faith and every other
grace; It is not every one that has truth of grace and strength of grace, that
attains to assurance, but he that has grace and knows that he has it:
Therefore if thou would attain assurance, labor to know the grace of God in
thee. In the third place; Labor to know that thou ha^^ grace, that thou have a
true justifying faith, that thou have sincerity, etc. Grace in Gods Children,
is many times hidden from themselves, and that is the reason why they reap so
little comfort of it, so little evidence by i^; they do not know that they have
received an earnest penny of God; they do not know Gods engagements of himself
unto them; Therefore if thou would get assurance, try and prove all thy
graces, whether they be true and real, Evangelical and renewing, yea, or nay,
especially these graces, Faith, Lov^* Repentance, Obedience, Poverty of Spirit,
Sincerity, etc. that thou may know thou have truth of saving grace, such
grace as is crowned with glory, and pray to God for sens^ of grace, Fourthly,
Get Righteousness, Evangelicall Righteousness, Righteousness of
Justification, and Righteousness of Sanctification; Assurance is an effect of
Righteousness, though not an inseparable concomitant of it. The work of
Righteousness shall be peace, Isa. 32.17.
and the effect of Rrighteousnesse quietness and assurance for ever; Labor
therefore to get Christ's Merit for thy Justification, and Christ's Spirit for
thy Sanctification. Fifthly, Labor to believe, as if there were no law to
condemn thee, and to live, as if there were no Christ to save the^; Labor to
believe steadfastly, and walk exactly with God and Man; When Stephen beheld the
glory of God* The Text says, Act. 7.55.
He looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and it is certain, that though a weak
faith may bring a man to Heaven and glory, yet it will not bring a man to
behold the glory of God, whilst he is here below, it will not bring him to the
riches of full assurance; therefore if thou would attain this, labor for a
strong and steadfast Faith, Hab. 12.14.
joined with a holy life. Mat. 5.8.
These qualifications he must labor for that desires assurance.

Sixthly, he that would get assurance, Rule. 6.
must deny himself in point of finne, and in point of righteousness; First, he
must deny himself in point of sin, he must not spare a right hand, nor a
right eye, but if it offend, cut it off, pluck it out, as Christ speaks; he
must deny himself in his darling finne, he must not allow himself in any one
known finne, nor in the omission of any one known duty toward God or toward
man; want in this, is that which Satan usually makes his great battering Ingen
to overthrow, (if it were possible,) the Faith and Hope of Gods Elect, and that
whereby he hinders them from getting or keeping this rich jewel of Evidence.
Allowance of sin and assurance cannot stand together, they are as contrary as
fire and water, the one will out the other: Therefore he that would get
assurance, must deny himself in point of sin.

Secondly, He must deny himself in point of righteousness, he must renounce
all his own righteousness, in point of justification before God, and count
them all loss, and dross, and dung, and build upon a sure Foundation, viz.
the Rock Christ. He that would attain to the assurance that Paul had, must
renounce himself, and rely on Christ, as Paul did, he must refer God wholly to
Christ for satisfaction, and himself wholly to Christ for righteousness.

Rule 7.
Again, he that would get assurance, must live for it; He must apply himself to
do the Will of God in every thing, he must act and exercise all his graces, and
labor to grow and increase in grace still; 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.3.18.
he must add grace to grace, and one degree of grace to another, as the
Scripture exhorts and commands us to do; single grace is not assuring grace,
neither is not growing grace, assuring grace; that grace which is assuring, is
consociate and growing, and some ways acting. Therefore let thy knowledge run
down in practice, this is the way to get assurance; this is to lay a good
foundation against the time of need; Luke 6.47, 48.
this is to be a wise builder for eternity, as Christ says; this is the way to
get assurance for ever, to get assurance, which no rain of temptation, nor
floods of affliction, nor winds of misapplyed Scripture, shall ever be able to
overthrow.

In the next plac^, He that would get assurance of his safe and happy
condition, Rule 8.
must labor to grow into familiarity, and intimate acquaintance with Jesus
Christ, who was in the bosom of his Father, when his Decree concerning
el^ction was made, and was an agent in it, that so by him, as by a bosom
friend, he may be made acquainted with the privy-counsells of Heaven, and
bosome-secrets of God: Jesus Christ who is wisdom it self, will not impart
himself and the secrets of God and Heaven to strangers, but reserves himself in
such matters for intimate friends, therefore if thou would know and be
assured, that thy name is written in Heaven, be much with Christ, be intimate
with Christ, 1 Can. 13.
lodge him all night between thy breasts, as the Spouse speaks, and he will be a
bundle of mirthe unto thee, he will be unto thee, as Jonathan was unto David, a
discoveror of his Fathers intentions; If thou desire assurance, delight thy
self in Christ, and he will give it thee in due time, and he will further say
unto thee, as Jonathan did to David. Whatsoever thy soul desires, I will even
do it for thee: All things that I have heard of my Father, I will make known
unto thee, and ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in
you.

Finally, He that would get assurance of the Love of God and his own salvation,
must p^ay earnestly for the witnessing Spirit, and pray for the witness of the
Spirit; pray that the Spirit of God may bear witness with his spirit that he
is beloved of God, and chosen to salvation through Jesus Christ: This, and
nothing less then this, will satisfy conscience in point of assurance; when
no voice without thee can do it, this voice within thee will do it.

Thus (...) for the rules to be followed, for the getting of assurance, I would
now add some Motives to persuade the Reader to seek after it, but I fear I
should be too tedious, only let me tell thee, That assurance is a thing of
incomparable worth, a thing which no man knows, but he that has is, a thing
that no man prizeth so much, as he that wants it; in a word, it is a thing of
such incomparabl^ worth, that a man cannot buy it at too dear a rate: Could a
man but know its goodness, and taste its sweetness, he would think no labor
too much to attain it, no sin too sweet to part with for it, no sufferings
too much to preserve it, no care and industry too much to increase it; for it
is (indeed) next grace, the most precious and delectable love token, that we
can possible receive from Jesus Christ the Bridegroom of our souls, in his
bodily absen^e. And if this will not persuade thee, Reader, to seek after it, I
leave thee to him to persuade, who persuaded Japhet to dwell in the tents of
Shem; what God has bin pleased to impart unto ^e on this Subject, I have
committed to writing, more than this, I dare not do, for going out of my sphere,
and less then this, I could not do, least I should be blamed of my H^avenly
Father, for hiding my Talent in a napkin, and burying divine love in a
dunghill; if ever this little draught of Evidence, which I penned for my own
use, and hope to leave to my Children for theirs, should by any providence come
abroad to public view, my desire and hope is. That this little draught of
Evidence may (through Gods Blessing) be helpful to some of Christ's Lambs, to
some poor souls, which thirst after assurance on Scriptures-grounds, and in^ite
others of profounder judgments, and greater abilities, to search the
Scriptures, by them to make discovery of the way to get this precious and
invaluable Jewel of sound assurance. If thou find any thing of God in the
ensuing Evidence, or gettest any good by (...) bless God for it, give him the
glory of it: This is the desire of

Thy Friend that wishes the Blessing of assurance to all that are in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

EVIDENCE FOR HEAVEN.
Union with Christ, Evidence for Heaven.
Question.

HOw may I come to be truly, Quest.
and infallibly assured of my salvation?

By examining thy self touching thy Union with Christ, Answ.
if thou have Union with Christ, thou shall certainly be saved, for the
Scripture says, He that is in Christ, chosen in him before the foundation of
the World, Ephesians. 1.4.
there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Rom 8.1. If ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to Promise, Gal. 3.29.
He that has the Son, has Life, to wit, Life Eternal, 1 John 5.12. By all
which it is evident, That whosoever has a true and real interest in Christ,
shall certainly e saved.

The Major part of this Assumption, is clear from these Scriptures, to wit,
Object.
that he that has Union, shall certainly be faved: But how shall the Minor
appear. viz, that I have Union with Christ, how shall I be ascertained of this?

To get assurance of this, thou must diligently examine thy self, Answ.
whether thou have the Spirit of Christ, or not? He that has not received the
Spirit of Christ, has no Union with Chrift, if any man has not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9.

He that has received the Spirit of Christ, has undoubtedly Union with
Christ: For the Apostle makes this a sure argument of our Union with Christ,
hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3.24. Thereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has
given us of his Spirit, 1 John 4.13.

Again, Paul delivers this as a positive truth, viz that he that has the
Spirit of God dwelling i^ him, is not in an estate of Condemnation, but in a
state of Salvation. Romans 8.9. ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit; if so
be that the Spirit of God dwell in you; But without Christ, without Union with
Christ, there is no Salvation sor Man: therefore it follows by necessary
consequence, That he that has the Spirit of Christ dwelling in him, according
to the meaning of the Apostle in this text, has undoubtedly Union with Christ.

Note. Thi^ Union is (...) b^t Mystical.
Here note, That the first and radical Union between Christ and his Members, is
by conjunction; This Union by Conjunction is a true and real uniting of our
persons, bodies and souls, to the Person of Christ, God and Man: To the Person
of Christ, as our Mediator; And it is then effected, when the Lord is joined to
the Soul, and the Soul to the Lord, so as they are made truly one.

This Union between Christ and his Members is made by the Spirit of God, whose
office it is to join Christ and his Members together, it is the Spirit
immediately on Christ's part, but the Spirit mediately on our part, that makes
this Union.

Christ by an actual habitation of his Spirit in his Elect, really joins
himself unto them and becoms truly one with them.

Christ by his Spirit works unfeigned faith, in the hearts of his elect, by
which they habitually abide in him, join themselves unto him, and become truly
one with him: Christ and his Members thus joined together, are one by
Conjunction.

To get assurance of thy Union with Christ then, thou must of necessity begin
here, viz. with a diligent search, whether thou art endued with the Spirit of
Christ, yea, or nay; and in searching after this take notice,

That the Spirit of God is said to be given,

Secondly, Note that the Spirit of God is and dwelling of the Spirit, which the
Scripture makes an Argument of ou^ Union with Christ, is not that common
efficacy, and dwelling of the Spirit, whereby he is a restrainer and qualifier
only; But that special Efficacy and Virtue of the holy Spirit of God, whereby
he becomes a renewer, and sanctifier of us.



The Spirit of God as a sanctifier, the world cannot receive, as the Language
of Christ intimates, As an inward sanct^fier. Renewing grace is the earnest of
the Spirit.
Ioh 14.17. Sanctifying or renewing grace, Christ bestows upon his Spouse
only, it is his love-token to her, in her military life, though Christ be
liberal in bestowing gifts upon all sorts of people, yet he keeps these Jewels
for his Spouse, and bestows them on her only, on whom he bestows himself: well
may they therefore serve to demonstrate our Union with Christ, and the
habitation of his spirit in us, after a special manner, wheresoever they are
bestowed; hence it is, that this grace, and glory are coupled together, Psalm.
84 11.

Amongst those special graces, which demonstr^^^ the holy Spirits saving
habitation in ^s, the first which I will here speak of, is Faith, The donation
or ^^mmunication of this grace by the Spirit of God is the inward and
effectual call of God, which demonstrates our election.
to wi^, justifying Faith. We having the ^ame Spirit of Faith, we also believe,
says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.13. Hence it is evident that whosoever is endued
with the holy Spirit of God, savingly beleives, he beleives with a justifying
faith, For as much as the Spirit works this true justifying faith in all those
in whom he dwells savingly.

Therefore if thou would get a true testimony of the holy Spirits dwelling
in thee after a special and saving manner, thou must diligently try and
examine thy self, whether thou have this grace of faith, true justifying faith
wrought in thee or not.

If thou have this grace of justifying faith, thou have that which is an
infallible Character, and a real testimony of the holy Spirits saving
habitation and operation in thee, of thy Union with Christ, and eternal
salvation by him, as the Apostle intimates, 1 John 5.10. where he says, he
that believes in the Son of God, has the witness in himself: The truth of
this assertion will more clearly and fully appear, by that which follows.

This faith is a special work of the Spirit of God in man, as appears by the
language of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. Where the Apostle speaks of it, By this
Faith Christ dwells in our hearts. Christ is become the end of the law for
righteousness to every true believer, Romans 10.4.
as a work of Gods Almighty Power; No less then that which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in
Glory. And in that it accompanies predestination, and is a grace proper and
peculiar unto the elect, as appears by, 2 These. 2.13. compared with, Tit. 1.1.

He that with this says beleiveth in Christ, eats the Flesh of Christ and
drinks his Blood; and Christ says, He that eats my Flesh and drinks my
Blood, dwells in me and I in him, All that believe aright, are justified from
all sin, Act. 13.39. Romans 3.26.
John 6.56. And has he not then Union with Christ? surely yes; for he lives in
Christ, and Christ in him, Really, Spiritually; he is one with Christ, and
Christ with him.

Of this faith Christ affirms, that it is accompanied with salvation, John
3.36. He that believes on the Son, has Everlasting life, and John 6.54.
Believers do eater in^o rest, Heb. 4.3.
He says, wheso eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood has Eternal Life: He
that believ^th on me, has Everlasting Life, Joh. 6.47.

This faith is called an evidence, Heb. 11.1. the evidence of things not seen.
And true it is, that this faith always is an evidence, though it do not
always give evidence to the subject in which it is, believe and be saved, are
coupled together, Luke 8.12.

Finally, unto this faith is annexed in Scripture, many special and absolute
promises of salvation, the Scripture faith, that whosoever beleiveth in Christ
shall not be ashamed, Romans 10.11. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved, Act. 1^.31. Christ says, He that believes in me, though he
were dead, yet shall he live, Joh. 11.25. He that lives and believes in me
shall never die, ver. 26. (He shall never dye eternally,) He that eats me
shall live by me: He that eats of this bread shall live for ever, Joh. 6.57,
58. Verily, verily I say unto you, He that hears my word, and beleiveth in
him that sent me, shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death
unto life, Joh. 5.24. By all which it is evident, that justifying faith, for of
that these texts speak, is a sure earnest of our inheritance with the Saints in
light, in joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. Although a reprobate may have
Faith and diverse kinds of Faith yet he never has this Faith.
Whosoever has the one here, shall certainly have the other hereafter.

On this ground the Apostle exhorts all Christians that would make sure for
Heaven, and get a good evidence of their own Salvation, to examine themselves,
whether they be in, the faith, yea or nay, and prove themselves, 2 Cor. 13.5.
It is, as if the Apostle had said, Make sure of this, that your faith is right,
and make sure of all; if you have this grace, you shall have Glory also.

Faith is the grace, and the only grace, whereby we are justified before God,
by it we eat of the Tree of Life, (Jesus Christ) and live for ever: It is
therefore the fittest grace of all, to satisfy Conscience in this weighty
matter, and to make up conclusions from, about our eternal estate. This Satan
knows full well, and therefore when he would flatter a man to Hell, he
persuades him, that his faith is right good, when indeed there is no such
matter; and when he would overthrow all hope of Heaven in a man, and drag him
into despair, he persuades him, that his faith, though never so good, is but a
feigned and counterfeit thing, and the poor soul, is ready to say, Amen.

It mainly concerns all persons therefore, that would here get a good Evidence
for Heaven, thoroughly to try their faith, whether it be a shield of Gold, or
but a shield of B^asle; whether it be an unfeigned, or but a feigned faith;
whether it be a justifying, or but a temporary faith; whether it be a faith
that justifies before God, or but only before men?

Note.
In the searching of thy Soul, for this grace of faith, or any other renewing
grace, thou art to have respect to the truth of it, more than to the measure
and strength of it: Christ has so, he absolutely requires truth of belief, but
not strength of belief: Nay he so esteems truth of belief, that wheresoever he
finds it, in the least measure, he will accept it and reward it, with Eternal
Life; he will not quench the smoking flax; He will not suffer that soul that
has but the least grain of true faith to miscary.

Quest.
But you will say. What is this faith you speak of, and how may it be discerned
from a Temporary faith?

Sol.
I will first describe it, and then descry it, as God shall enable me.

Justifying Faith described.
Justifying faith is a special work of the Spirit of God upon the Soul, causing
a man to lay hold on the special promises of Mercy, and Salvation by Christ,
and all other promises, which are, in him, yea, and in him, Amen, and rest upon
him that has promised, for the accomplishment of his word.

I judge it not necessary, nor meet for me to take this description asunder, or
speak of the several terms of it, and therefore pass it by. In a word or two
only, I will briefly declare, why I call this faith a work of the Spirit, and
why a special work of the Spirit.

1. I call this faith a work of the Spirit of God, because it is not natural;
were it natural, it would be common, but all men have not faith, as the
Scripture says, 2 These. 3.2.

2. Few have this faith, as the parable of the seed shows, Mar. 4.2. to 9. it
is a work supernatural and divine.

3. I call this Faith, a special work of the Spirit, to distinguish it from
that common work of the Spirit, which is in unregenerate persons.

Having thus briefly described this Faith, I am in the next place to descry it,
and distinguish it from all other; this I shall do for brevity sake positively.

This Faith then, as I humbly conceive, may be discerned and differenced from
all other kinds of faith, by these concurrent and essential properties of it,
which here follow.

This Faith is bred, fed, and nourished, ordinarily, by the word preached,
Property, 1.
as appears by Romans 10.14, 17.

Secondly, this Faith as it is begotten by the

It gives firm, absolute, and unlimited assent Romans 7. ver. 16, 12. Believing
all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets, Act. 24.14. But the
more special object of it is the promises of the Gospel.

This Faith is seated in the heart, the heart is With the heart man believes
unto righteousness, says the Scripture, Romans 10.10. Justifying Faith is not
barely notionall, but real; it is not a bare head-assenting, But a
heart-consenting, what the understanding says is true, the will says is good,
and embraces it.

Tim. 1.5. and 2 Timothy 1.5. An Hypocrites faith is but feigned faith, but
justifying faith, is unfeigned, how weak soever it be, it is true and real, it
carries the whole heart to God in obedience, as well as the whole outward man.

My Lord and my God, says believing Thomas, of Christ, and it is the property
of justifying Faith, thus to embrace Christ, They gave themselves unto the
Lord, (says the Apostle) of some true believers, 2 Cor. 8.5. And this is
universally true of all that are true believers, they give themselves unto the
Lord (as aforesaid,) and that freely and voluntarily.

To you which believe he is precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. He is the chiefest of ten
thousand, Cant. 5.10.
Fairer then all the Childrenof men, Ps. 45.2.
He is altogether lovely. Cant. 5.16.
As the Apple Tree amongst the Trees of the Forest: So is my Beloved among the
sons, Cant. 2.3.
His mouth is most sweet, Cant. 5.16.
His Love is better then Wine, Cant. 1.2.
Thy loving kindness is better than Life, says the believing Soul to Christ,
Ps. 63.3.
Whom have I in Heaven, but thee; and there is none that I desire upon Earth,
in comparison of thee, Psalm. 73.25.
What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ; yea, doubtless,
and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found
in him, says a believing Soul, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
By all these places it is evident, That it is the property of a true faith,
highly to prize Jesus Christ; a true believer prizeth Christ in all things,
places, persons, and conditions, above all things, and beyond all time,

In the eighth place; This Faith relyeth wholly Act. 4.12. and Phil. 3.3, 9.
And have no confidence in the flesh. Not having mine own righteousness, which
is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ. Where is boasting
then? it is excluded. By what Law? of works? Nay; but by the Law of Faith, Romans
3.27.

This Faith opposes the Mercy of God in The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son,
cleanses us from all sin, says a believer, speaking of believers, 1 John
1.7. Because God has said, He shall Redeem Israel from all his iniquities,
Psalm. 130.8. All manner of sins and Blasphemies shall be forgiven unto the sons
of men, but the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, Mat. 12.31.

Lord, I have hoped in thy word, and done thy Commandments, says a true
believer, Ps. 119.166. thereby intimating; That it is the property of a true
faith, thus to rest on Gods promises; A true believer applies Christ unto
himself, and himself unto Christ, the promises to himself, and himself unto the
promises, unto the conditions of them.

Behold (says Job) I go forward, but he is not there; Job 23.8, 9.
and backward, but I cannot perceive him, on the left hand, where he does work,
but I cannot behold him. He hides himself on the right hand, that I cannot see
him. He writes bitter things against me, Job 13.^6, 27. ver. 15.
and makes me possess the iniquities of my youth; He puts my feet in the
stocks, etc. But concludes. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. When
God hid his face from Job, and he could neither apprehend his love, in his
Providence, nor in his Promises, yet he adhered to him still. This the
Scripture calls for, Isa. 50.10. Therefore it follows, that this a true believer
in some measure does: It is the property of a true believer to adhere to Christ
as Asahel adhered to Abner, 2 Samuel 2. 2 Kin. 2.4.
and Elisha to Elijah; Asahel would not turn aside from Abner, though he dyed
by his hand: Elisha would not leave Elijah what ever became of him, As the Lord
lives, and as thy Soul lives, I will not leave thee, said Elisha to Elijah;
and so says a true believer to Christ; Take from me what thou will; do with me
what thou will, I will not leave thee, I will cleave unto thee still; though I
cannot see thee, I will trust in thee, I will dye in thine arms.

In the Twelfth place, this Faith is a working Iam. 2. ver. 20.14. Faith
without works is dead and cannot save; living Faith, is working Faith,
justifying Faith, though it do not justify (by working) yet is still working.
It purifieth and cleanses, and that not the outward man only, but the heart
also, Act. 15.9. It Sanctifies, Act. 26.18. (to wit) sincerely, The Holy Ghost
originally as the Author, Faith instrumentally as the means sanctifies.
universally, soul and body, and the spirit of our mind, as the Scripture
speaks; It spurreth on to Obedience, Active and Passive, sincere, universal,
and constant, as appears at large, Heb. 11. Where all those worthies there
spoken of, are said to have done and suffered all those admirable things there
mentioned by Faith.

This Faith makes a man patiently wait on God, for the accomplishment of all
that good which he has promised in his Word, in a conscionable use of all
those means, which he has ordained, warranted, sanctified, and affords for
the serving of his Providence, and accomplishing of his Promises. The former
part of this assumption, is evident by the Language of the Prophet, Isai.
28.16. He that believes makes not haste; And by that which is spoken of
believers, Heb. 6.12. The latter is as evident by the practice of the Saints.
David believing the Word of the Lord concerning his Son Solomon, and his
building of the Temple, was very instant with the Lord to make good his Word,
and what he had Promised; very careful and conscionable in instructing his
Son, to walk with God in uprightness of heart, according unto all the
Commandments of the Lord, and in providing materials for the Work of the Lords
House and encouraging his Son to the Work, as appears by the 2 Samuel 7. compared
with 1 Chronicles. 28. and 29. Chapters.

Daniel believing the Word of the Lord concerning the return of the Captivity
of Judah, was very instant with the Lord, by fasting and prayer to accomplish
what he had promised, as appears, Dan. 9.2, 3.

Hezekiah believing the Word of the Lord concerning his recovery out of a
dangerous sickness, diligently used the means that the Prophet directed him
unto, 2 Kings 20.7.

And Paul, to instance in no more, beleiving that grand promise, That the seed
of the Woman, should break the Serpents head. And that the God of Peace would
Bruise Satan under his feet, and that sin should not have dominion over him.
When buffeted by Satan, Prayed frequently, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
and Prayed fervently, he besought the Lord thrice: when the Law of his Members
rebelled against the Law of his mind, and led him Captive to the Law of sin. He
groaned under this burden, bewailed his condition, sought the Lord by Prayer
for help, exercised Faith on Christ; And beat down his body and kept it under,
as appears, Romans 7.23, 24. compared with 1 Cor. 9.27.

The same Apostle believing the Word of the Lord, concerning the preservation
of himself, and his companions, in a dangerous voyage at Sea, diligently
exhorted them to use all good means tending unto their preservation, sounded
the depth, cast Anchors, abode in the ship, etc. Act. 27.

All these means these Worthies used to serve the divine Providence; and these
examples plainly evidence, That it is the property of true faith thus to depend
on God, for the accomplishment of his Word.

This Faith makes a man open-hearted, and open-handed toward his Brethren in
misery and want merciful according to the Divine Rule; ready out of a
fellow-feeling of others misery, bountifully, cheerfully, and constantly, to
do good unto all in misery, according to ability, but specially to the Godly;
not for his own glory, but Gods, for the honor of Christ and the Gospel, as
appears by the Language of the Apostle, Iam. 2.15, 16. Compared with the 1
chap. 27. and that which is spoken of believers in the primitive Church, Act.
2.44, 45.4.34.

This Faith makes a man very industrious, Good Faith is full of good Works
in laboring to keep a good conscience in all things, and to walk
inoffensively toward God, and toward man in all things, as appears in the
Apostle Paul. Paul having made a confession of faith, and hope toward God,
Act. 24.14, 15. in the 16. ver. of the same chap. he declares, how his faith
did operate. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience
void of offense toward God and toward Man. And this Language of his does
plainly evidence, That it is the property of a true faith thus to operate.

All these are real testimonies, that true justifying Faith, is no Idle Faith,
but operative and working.

It works by love. This the Scripture a^firmeth, 13. Property.
Gal. 5.6. Neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but
faith which works by love: thence it is evident, that true faith works by
love. And this is indeed the great distinguishing Character of it, it works
by love to God, and the things of God, and by love to man for Gods sake. A true
believer works all his works in love to God and Christ; His whole labor in
point of obedience, is a labor of love* he sees an unfathomed depth of Divine
love, declared toward him by God in Christ, and this constrains him to love God
in Christ again; and out of love unto him that dyed for him, to give up himself
unto him* and lay out himself for him. The love of Christ constrains me,
says a true believer, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. He is holy and blameless before him in
love, Ephesians 1.4. My soul has kept thy Commandments, and I love them
exceedingly, says a true believer, Ps. 119.167.

This Faith is always accompanied with true repentance; He that truly
believes unfaignedly repents; This is evident by the language of the Prophet,
Zach. 12.10.

This Faith is always accompanied with new

This Faith is a holy Faith, it is so called, Iud* v.

This Faith is a World-contemning, and Faith ove^cometh not at once, but by
degrees, it is still overcoming, and at length overcomes.
as appears in Moses, Heb. 11.24. to 28. I^ overcomes the world, as says the
Scripture. This is the victory that overcomes the world, even your faith Who
is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes, etc. 1 John. 5.4, 5. I
may add to this, and say, It is a flesh-over-coming, and a Devill-overcoming
faith: for howsoever a true believer be many times put to the worse for a time,
and foiled by one or other of these enemies, yet in the end he overcomes them
all, and is more then a Conqueror through Christ that strengthens him, and
overcomes for him.

This Faith is a heart humbling Faith; it is John 5.44. intimates How can ye
believe (says he) which seek honor one of a another? A true believer eyes God
in all gifts, and in all blessings, Spiritual and Temporal, and ascribes all
unto free grace; He, and he only labors for and learnes of Christ,
heart-humility, and groans under the sense of the want of it, and hence it is
evident that true Justifying Faith is heart-humbling Faith.

This Faith is a God-glorifying Faith, it makes above all things, respecting
not himself, willing to deny himself unto the death, to advance the honor of
God, and humbly to submit to the Will of the Lord in every thing; as appears in
Abraham, Job, Eli, David, Paul, and many other true believers. Abraham was by
this faith transported so far above himself, that he willingly offered up his
dear Isaac, to advance the honor of God, when he tried him. Job was by this
faith brought humbly and patiently to submit to the Will of the Lord in every
thing, as one desirous to advance his Name. Ely was by this faith brought
sweetly and humbly to submit to the good pleasure of the Lord: When Samuel told
him, what evil the Lord would bring upon him, and his house, he meekly
replies, as one d^sierous to advance God in all, 1 S^m. 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. It is, as if he had said,
let him do with me or to me what he will, so he may have glory by it, I am
content. David did the like, 2 Samuel* 15.26. But above all, the Apostle Paul is a
notable example of this, who was by this faith carried so far above himself,
that he cared not what betided ^im, sink or swim, so Christ might be magnified
thereby, bonds, and afflictions, and death were nothing to him to undergo, so
Christ might have honor thereby: Nay he would rather lose his eternal Crown,
then eclyps the honor of Christ, as his Language, Act. 20.23, 24.21, 13. does
plainly evidence his resolution, That Christ should be magnified in him,
whatever he underw^nt, Phil. 1.20. Romans 9.3.

It is the property of a true faith to prefer God above all, Note.
but an evidence of a strong faith thus to prefer God above all.

This Faith is a growing Faith. True Faith how weak soever or how strong
soever, is always Lord increase our Faith, Luke 17.5.
said the Disciples to Christ; Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief, says
another believer: Mark. 9.24.
I count not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are
before, I press toward the mark, says a third, Phil. 3.13, 14. By all which it
is evident, That true Faith is growing Faith: A true believer never thinks he
has Faith enough, but still prays for and labors after increase.

This Faith is a supporting Faith; It is a Faith which a Christian may and must
live by in all H^b. 2.4. The just shall live by his Faith. He that has this
Faith we speak of, shall live by it, in prosperity and in adversity, in life
and in death.

Finally, this Faith is permanent and persevering, These all died in the Faith,
Heb. 11.13. And true it is, That a true believer always dies in the Faith, in
the Faith of adherence, if not of evidence; this is vigor fit and but fit to
give the denomination of a true believer, we are made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end, says
the text, Heb. 3.14. These words plainly evidence, Ioh. 8.31. Matt. 24.13.
that justifying faith is persevering faith, it holds out unto the death and
ends in fruition, it can never be totally nor finally lost; Col. 1.23.
and this indeed is it is distinguishing property, and it is the property of
every renewing grace; every renewing grace holds out unto the end; that grace
which wears the the Crown of Glory is persevereing, Revel. 2.10.

It is not always so in appearance, but in truth; Note.
A true believer may at sometimes, and in some cases, seem both to himself and
to others, to have loft his faith, and his other graces as many examples in
Scripture show; but yet as Ieb speaks, The root of the matter is within him
still; Job 19.28.
Truth of grace in the inward parts* and it abides there. However a true
believer may and sometimes does, for a time lose the comfort of his grace, and
the fight of his grace, and the power of acting of his grace, yet he has this
privilege above all formalists, he never totally loses the habit of any
renewing grace: these gifts of God are without repentance.

Would thou then know, whether thy faith be sound and saving, and such as
consequently demonstrates the holy Spirits saving habitation in thy soul; try
and examine thy says, by these properties and Scripture-Characters of a true
jus^ifying faith, and if it hold correspondency with them, know for thy
comfort, that it is such as really demonstrates the holy Spirits saving
habitation, and special operat^on in t^y soul, thy Union with Christ, and
e^ernal salvation by him, whatsoever Satan or thine own conscience abused by
Satan, may at any time hereafter say to the contrary, and give the Lord the
praise. The end of thy faith shall be the salvation of thy Soul, as the
Scripture speaks, 1 Pet. 1.9.

LOVE.
ANother grace demonstrating the holy Spirits saving habitation in us, is Love,
to wit, sincere Love. God is Love, and where God dwells by his Spirit, he
works Love, to wit, sincere Love to God, and sincere love to man for Gods
sake. And this Love is a special work and fruit of the holy Spirit of God in
man, as appears by the language of the Apostle, My little Children, let us not
love in word or in tongue, but in deed and in truth; 1 John 3.8, 19.
And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts
before him: and Gal* 5.^2. it is said, The fruit of the Spirit is Love.

More particularly, That sincere Love to God is a special work of the Spirit of
God, and such as accompanies salvation, is evident by the great good that this
grace is attended with, both here, and hereafter; here all things, how bad
soever in themselves, work together for good unto them that love God, Romans
8.28. And many promises of temporal and eternal good, Psalm. 145.20.
are made unto this grace, Psalm. 91.14, 15, 16. A Crown of Life is promised
unto it, Iam* 1.12.25. Much good attends this grace here, but as it is
written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart
of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9*
Such is the happiness, joy, and glory which God has prepared for them that
love him, that it cannot enter into us, till we shall enter into it: It must
therefore needs be a special work of the Spirit of God in us, and a sure pledge
of salvation.

He that sincerely loves God, has that in him, which is a sure argument that
he is greatly beloved of God, Prove. ^.17.
I love them that love me* says Christ, 1 Ioh. 4 19.
We love him because he first loved us, says the Apostle. And must not that
needs be a special work of the Spirit of G^d in man, which strongly argues the
special Love of God toward man? surely, yes. But sincere Love to God, strongly
argu^s special Love in God toward him that has it, therefore sincere Love to
God must needs be a special work of the Spirit of God in whomsoever it is.

That sincere Love to man, for Gods sake, is a special work of the Spirit of
God in man, is evident by that which follows:

Sincere love to man, for Gods sake, in whomsoever it is, is a real testimony
of his Union with Christ, Regeneration and New Birth, and that he is indeed a
true Disciple of Jesus Christ, as these Scriptures following plainly evidence,

1 Ioh. 3.23, 24.
This is his Commandment, that we believe in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ,
and love one another, as he gave us Commandment, and he that keeps his
Commandment (dwells in him, and he in him) 1 Ioh. ^.16.
He that dwells in love, dwellth in God, Ibid. v. 12.
and God in him. If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his Love is
perfected in us, etc.

These Texts clearly demonstrate, this Love to be a real testimony of Union
with Christ, Love is of God, and every one that loves, 1 Ioh. 4.7.
is born of God. 1 Ioh. 3.14.
We know that we are passed from death unto life, because we love the Brethren,
says the Apostle. And these Texts plainly evidence, this love to be a true
testimony of our Regeneration and New birth.

Love one another, says Christ, as I have loved you, meaning for the kind of
Love, Ioh. 13.34, 35.
By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if you have love one
toward another. These Texts plainly demonstrate this Love, we speak of, to be
a true Character of a true Disciple of Jesus Christ: And must not that needs be
a special work of the Spirit of God in man, and a true testimony of his saving
habitation in us, which is a real testimony of our Union with Christ, and
Renovation by him, and dependence on him? Surely yes. But sincere Love to man,
for Gods sake, is eminently all this; therefore this Love must needs be a
special work of the Spirit of God, and a sure testimony of his saving
habitation in whomsoever it is.

Sincere Love is a grace, without which all profession of Religion is but
gilded Hypocrisy; where Love is, God dwells, but where it is not, the Devil
dwells; the more Love, the more like to God; the less of it, the more like the
Devil. Woeful experience shows, That those men which have great parts and
gifts, and little or no Love, show more of the Devils nature, then of Gods, and
act more like the Devil, then God, where they have power.

Love is the sweetest flower in all the garden of God, but it is a flower which
the Devil cannot endure the smell of, because he is not capable of it, and
knows that where Love dwells, he must vanish; and therefore it is his main
design to destroy Love, if possible, in all sorts and sects, and to root it up
and banish it from the hearts of all men; The Devil is well content, that men
should pray, preach, read, hear Sermons, and make a fair show outwardly,
provided this spring not from Love, nor tends not to the increase of Love, to
God nor man; but if he see Love be the root and fruit of men's services, then he
goes cunningly, and Serpent-like to work, to make breaches in this wall, that
he may get in and destroy this flower, he devises ways to divide men's
judgments, to the end he may destroy this affection of Love out of their
hearts; if he prevail not this way then he will raise up jealousies to destroy
Love and Charity, yea sometimes render the best of graces, the worst of vices;
and as in tempting a Carnal man, he sometimes styles lust, Love, so in tempting
a spiritual man, he sometimes styles sincere Love, lust; and by these wiles
makes a breach on Charity, to the end he may get into the garden of God, and
root up this sweet grace of Love.

Seeing then that this grace of sincere Love to God and man, is a special work
of the holy Spirit of God, and a grace that he works in all those in whom he
dwells savingly, to get a true testimony of the holy Spirits saving habitation
in thee, thou must diligently examine thy self, touching thy Love to God, and
touching thy Love to man: 1. Examine thy Love to God, see whether that be sound
and sincere, yea or nay, 2. Examine thy Love to Man, and see whether that be
such as the Scripture makes a note of the holy Spirits saving habitation in us,
yea or nay.

But how shall I know, Quest.
whether my Love to God be sound and sincere, yea or nay.

By Considering, Answ.
1. What sincere Love to God is; And, 2. what the properties and effects of it
are.

Sincere Love to God, is a spiritual affection, causing a man to prize God
more, Sincere Love to God, What.
and obey him rather then any thing in the world besides.

The properties and effects of sincere Love to God are these*

1. Sincere Love to God is seated in the heart, in the midst of the heart, and
it carries the whole heart and soul to God in obedience, as well as the whole
outward man.

That sincere love to God is seated in the heart, in the midst of the heart,
and carries the whole heart to God, will appear thus; That which God in his
Word requires, and commands, that true grace does in its measure, and in a
Gospel way give unto him: But God in his Word requires that we should Love him
with the heart, with the whole heart, and soul; and, Mat. 22.37.
Therefore this Command does sufficiently intimate this truth, to wit, That
sincere Love to God is seated in the heart, and carries the whole heart to God,
etc.

Here note, 1* By the whole heart is meant, every faculty of the soul, the
whole inner man, the heart wholly, sincerely, so as it is not divided between
God and the world, between God and sin, between God and Satan, as the hearts
of all Hypocrites are, but is downright and wholly for God.

2. My whole heart may then be said to be carried to God, when I cleave to him
in affection, more then to any thing besides; account him my chiefest
happiness, from a due consideration of his perfection; rejoice in him above all
things; fear his displeasure more then all persons or things; depend upon him
for all things, and aim at his glory principally in all things.

Secondly sincere Love to God, is fastened upon God principally, Prop. 2.
for that Divine excellency and spiritual beauty which is in him, He that
loves God aright, loves him for himself.
and which he does communicate unto his People, Because of the savor of thy
good Ointments, thy name is as Ointment poured forth, therefore the Virgins
love thee, says the Text, Cant. 1.3. Spirituals and not temporals, as this
Text shows, are the principal attractives of a sincere and virgin-Love to
Christ.

3. Sincere Love to God, is not guided by sense, but by faith, as the language
of the Apostle 1 Pet. 1.3.
intimates; therefore says the Apostle, Whom having not seen, we Love, whom
having not seen with Corporal eye nor invisible favors, you still cleave to
in affection. This is further evidenced in holy Job, who continued to love God,
and obey him, even when he could not see one glimpse of his countenance,
neither within him, nor without him, as appears by Job 23.8, 9, 10, 11. verses.
And this plainly shows, That his Love was guided by faith, and not by sense, as
it is the property of sincere Love to be.

4. Sincere Love to God, is a very strong Love, Love is strong as death, Cant.
8.6. Sincere Love to God will make a man to resolve, ^^augre all opposition, to
obey unto the death; it will constrain a man to do or suffer any thing, that
God shall see good to impose upon him for tryall-sake, without repining in
tongue or in heart against God; it will make a man serve God with all his might,
therefore says the Apostle, ^ Cor. 5.14.
The Love of Christ constrains us: It bears all things, it endures all
^^ings.

5. Sincere Love to God, is an indearing affection, it indears Christ unto a
man above all things in the world besides, so as he will willingly part with
all things else, rather then Christ; Christ in his Merit, Christ in his Spirit,
Christ in his Ordinances, and in his Ministers and People, is dear unto a
sincere lover of Christ above all things here below; This is lively set forth
unto us in the Parable of the merchant man, Mat. 13.44, 45, 46. He left all for
the Pearl, the Pearl was dear unto him, and he was in Love with it; hence it
was that he slighted all in comparison of it. That Love is an indearing
affection, is further evident by the language of the Spouse in Love with
Christ, Cant. 5.10. He is the chiefest of ten thousand, says she, meaning of
all; and likewise by the practice of the Saints, which have sincerely loved
Christ, they have willingly parted with their fine clothing for his sake, and
worn sheepskins and goats-skins, they have parted with fine dwellings, and
lain in dens, and caves, they have parted with all, even to their precious
lives, Nay these also they have willingly laid down for his sake, in the
cruellest way, that bloody persecutors could invent, refusing base deliverance,
to advance the honor of Christ, when he called them forth to suffer, as
appears Heb. 11. their Love to Christ did indeare Christ to them above all
things.

Here Note, 1. That sincere Love to Christ is strong in all, but not in all
according unto the same equal degrees; it indears Christ unto all that have it,
above all things, But makes not all to declare it with the like forwardness and
courage, nor to declare it at all times alike, as many instances in Scripture
show; According to the measure of our faith, so is our Love; if a man believe
only as a bruised reed, as a weakling in Christ, his Love will only smoke as
flax toward Christ, but if he be strong in faith, his Love will flame, it will
declare it self with much zeal and fervor of spirit.

2. That, that Love to Christ, which preferrs any one thing whatsoever before
Christ, or subjoyns any one thing in the world coequal with Christ, is no sound
sincere Love, neither is it worth any thing in Christ 's account, as his own
language shews', He that Loves Father, or Mother more then me, is not worthy
of me: and he that loves Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me,
Matthew. 10.37.

3. That Love to Christ which falls off from Christ, when trials, tribulations
and persecutions come, and will not bear the Cross for Christ's sake, when he
calls thereunto, is no sincere Love, but an Hypocritical, as Christ shows, Mat.
10.38. He that takes not up hi^ Cross, and follows after me, is not worthy
of me: And further illustrates in the Parable of the ftony ground, Mat. 13.20,
21.

That Love to Christ which makes not a man to account all things but loss, and
dross, and dung for Christ, and to set such a price on Chrift, and his hopes by
him, that he resolves through the help of Christ, to part with any thing which
may hinder him from doing Christ faithful service, how near or dear soever it
be, or ought to be, yea with life it self, or whatsoever contentments may
indeare it unto him, when Christ calls him to it, is no sound nor available
Love, as Christ shows when he says, If any man come to me, and hate not his
Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and
his life also, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.26.

Hence it is evident, in the next place, That It makes a man tender of
offending God.
as it will not suffer a man to go in any way, though never so pleasing to
flesh and blood, that he knows displeases the Lord, nor transgress the least
of Gods Commandments with knowledge, without grief of heart, as appears in the
example of Joseph and David. Joseph sincerely loved his God, Genesis 39.8, 9.
and this Love constrained him to contemn the carnal Love of his miftress, and
the carnal pleasure proffered him by her, for fear of displeasing God. David
sincerely Loved his God; and hence it was that his heart smote him, 1 Samuel
24.4, 5, 6.
for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment; a small matter one would think, yet
(says David) He is the Lords anointed. I have therefore transgressed his
Commandment in laying violent hands on him, and was therefore grieved; his
Love constrained him to grieve.

Hence it appears, in the next place, That How shall I do this wickedness and
sin against my God, says the soul that sincerely Loves God, when tempted to
sin by the world, the flesh, or the Devil: God hates all iniquity, and he
that fincerely Loves God, hates what he hates, Ps. 97.10.
therefore (says the Psalmist) you that Love the Lord, hate evil, to wit,
because God hates it.

I love thy Command^m^nts, says David, above gold, yea, above fine gold: I
esteem all thy pr^cepts, concerning all things to be right, Psalm. 119.127, 128.
and hate every false way. This Language of David shows, That he loved the
whole will of God, even that which did cross and condemn that sin, which his
nature was most prone to; and it is the nature of sincere Love to God, to make
a man thus to love the Will of God.

A sincere Lover of God, loves not the Word of God the less, Note.
but ^^e more for discovering his darling sin, and so consequently he loves
not, nor esteems not the faithful Ministers of the Word the less, but the
more for their faithfulness, in discovering and opposing sin, predominate
sin whether personal or national.

Sincere Love to God is an obediential Love, Ioh. 14.23.
If a man love me, (says Christ, to wit, sincerely) he will keep my words. He
that has my Commandments, and keeps them, He it is that loves me, ibid. v.
21. And by the Language of his beloved Disciple, 2 Ioh. 6. 1 Ioh. 2.5.1, 5, 3.
This is Love, that we walk after his Commandments. The great Character of
sincere Love to God, set by Christ and his beloved Disciple, is obedience, to
wit, Cordial obedience to all the revealed will of God; and hence it is
evident* That sincere Love to God is an obedientiall Love.

That this Love leads a man to obey God Dan. 3.12, 18.
being commanded of men to do what they were forbidden of God, chose rather to
obey God then man. Peter and John, Act. 4.19.
being forbidden of men, to do what they were commanded of God, reply, Whether
it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you, rather then unto God,
judge ye, and chose rather to obey God then man, as the words following show:
And thus it is with other sincere Lovers of God, if God and man, God and sin,
God and Satan, come in competition, or opposition, all craving obedience: If
sincere Love to God be in the heart, it will soon end the controversy, and
cause a man to obey from the heart, God before all; sincere Love to Christ will
make a man think Christ's yoke easy, 1 Ioh. 5.3.
and his burden light, his Commandments not grievous; it will make a man obey
actively and passively, and resist unto blood, striving against sin, as the
Scripture speaks.

If any man Love the world the love of the father, (to wit, the sincere Love of
the Father) is not in him, 1 John 2.15. This language of John, intimates thus
much unto us, (to wit) That where the sincere Love of God dwells, it mortifieth
the Love of the world, to wit, those things in the world, which are properly
said to be of the world, and enemies unto God, as all unchaste Loves,
Diabolical Love, and inordinate Love of Carnal things, The lusts of the
flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life; all which are enemies unto
God, and his grace in us, and cannot subsist with the Love of God, being
contrary unto it.

Ionathans Love to David, made him very sensible of the dishonor his Father
did him, and grieve at it; so sincere Love to God makes a man very sensible of
the dishonor done to God, and grieve at it, it makes him sensible of the
dishonor done to God by others, but most sensible of the dishonor done to God
by himself, and grieve at it; This appears in David, David sincerely loved God,
and this made him grieve at the dishonor other men did to God, Psalm. 119 158
but most of all at the dishonor which himself had done to God, Psalm. 51.4.
Psalm. 38.
the consideration of this made his heart pant, and his strength fail, and made
him go mourning all the day long.

Sincere Love to God makes a man Lord, Psalm. 4.6, 7.
Lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me, this puts gladness into
my heart, more then corn and wine. Cant. 1.2.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his lips, for his love is better then wine.
This is the language of sincere lovers of God and Christ, and a clear evidence
it is of the truth asserted, and lively demonstrates the judgment and
affection of a sincere lover of God and Christ.

Sincere Love to God makes a man Psalm. 4^.2.
My soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear
before him, Psalm. 63.1, 2.
Oh God! thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee,
my flesh longs for thee, etc. Phil. 1.23.
I have a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is best of all Rev.
22.20.
Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly

Note.
This longing desire to depart and to be with Christ, and to have Christ come to
consummate the mystical marriage, though it be a fruit of love, yet it is not
an inseparable property of sincere love, neither is it in all, that sincerely
love God, nor in all in whom it is, is it at all times alike, but in those only
which apprehend the love of God in Christ toward them, and at such time, as
they apprehend it; and this is not every sincere lovers portion here, therefore
a Christian ought not to judge his love to God unsound, only because he wants
this longing desire to be with Christ, and to have Christ come to consummate
this mystical marriage, but to have recourse to the foresaid properties of
sincere love, for the trial of his love, when this fails, and to such as
follow.

1 Ioh 4.16
he dwells in love, and of this love, 1 Cor. 13.8.
It never fails.

A man that sincerely loves God continues to love him, when he hides his face
from him, and he cannot see him, nor one glimpse of his favor, neither within
him, nor without him; yea, when he frowns upon him* and shows himself
marvelous unto him, as Job speaks, and the Arrows of the Almighty stick fast in
his soul, And Satan, and his own Conscience deluded by Satan, tells him, He
shall never see the face of God with comfort; And however God carries himself
toward him, yet he dares not from thence take leave to vary his carriage
toward God, but loves him still, for better, for worse, and obeys him to the
utmost of his power: which shows in the next place,

That he that sincerely loves God, loves He that fears God aright, feats him
for naught, (...) the lan^^^ge of ^^can concern^ng (...) ^^^^mates, Io^ 1.9. so
he that loves God aright, loves him for naught.
That man may be said to love God for naught, who loves him principally for
himself, and not for his, who loves him, because he is of all things most
lovely, who had rather have God without all, then all without God, for his
portion; Who had rather have a houseless Christ, a harbourles^ Christ, a hated
and a persecuted Christ, th^^ all the honors, pleasures, and riches of the
world without Christ; Who had rather have grace without glory, then glory
without grace; Who had rather have the Gospel, and Gospel Ordinances in power
and purity, with poverty and trouble, then peace and plenty without them; Who
had rather Christ should reign, then himself; Who desires Christ may increase,
though he himself decrease; and truth live, though he die; Who preferrs the
interest of God and Christ before his own interest* or any interest whatsoever;
Who labors more to get, and to keep a good conscience, then a good estate in
the world; In a word, he that loves God, more then these earthly contentments,
he, and he only, may be said to love God for naught, and to love him sincerely,
as Christ's language to Peter intimates, Love thou me, more then these? as if
he had said, If thy love be not more to me then to these earthly things, it is
worth nothing in my account; if it be ^ore to me, then to ^hese* if it adhere
to me with the loss of these that shows it is not for these, but for naught
that thou love me, and this argues thy love sincere.

I Phil. ^.12.
follow after, says the Apostle. My soul follows hard Psalm. 63* 8. and v. 1.
after thee, says another sincere lover of God. Early will I seek thee, etc.
and the Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 3.1, 2.
sought night and day after her beloved: Mary Magdalen Joh. 20.1.
and other lovers of Christ, Mat* 28.1.
were very industrious in seeking after him: All which evidently demonstrates
the truth asserted (to wit) That sincere love is very industrious.

Ubi amor, ibi oculus.
as every ones experience can te^^ him; the soul that sincerely loves God does
no less: See an instance of this in the Spouse in the Canticles, she thinks of
her Beloved, and speaks of her Beloved, Cant. 5.10. to the end.
as one unsatisfied with the thoughts and praises of him, as one resolved to
win (if it were possible) all the world, to love what she loved; and this
lively demonstrates the sincerity of her love, and the nature of sincere love.

Sincere Love to God is a soul-warming affection, many waters cannot quench it,
nor floods drown the fire, which it kindles within: Cant. 8.7.
This is evident by the zeal of those, which have sincerely loved God in all
ag^s, we may take all the Saints for an example of this, but I will instance
only in Moses, and P^ul; Moses, Exodus 32.19, 20.
who was the meekest man upon the earth, had his spirit so warmed with the love
of God in his heart, tha^ the fire of zeal brake forth in an unquenchable flame
in him, when he saw God dishonored, and an Idol magnified by the people of
God. And Paul's spirit was hereby so stirred within ^im, Act. 17.16. etc.
when he saw the people given to Idola^ry, that he could not forbear to reprove
it, whatever he underwent for it; All these had their hearts so warmed with the
love of G^d, that neither water nor blood, could quench the flame that love had
kindled; which evidently demonstrates this love to be a heart-warming Affection.

Though sincere Love to God do warm the hearts of all, in whom it is, Note.
with a zeal of God, yet does it not warm the hearts of all alike, according to
the measure and degree of love in the heart, such is the zeal that issues out
of it.

Sincere Love to God is a soul-humbling affection, enough for God, and thence
it is, that it does not glory in any doing or suffering, it comes still short of
what it should do, and what it would do, and therefore is not puffed up with
what it does, but rather humbled by its failings; Knowledge puffs up, but
love casts down the soul.

Sincere Love to God is a heart-softening affection, Nathan toward David, when
the Lord sent Nathan to awaken David, 2 Samuel 12
and call him to repentance; What did Nathan, but labor to set an edge on
David's love, by setting the loving kindness of the Lord before him, as one
knowing, that if any thing melted his heart, this would do it, and this we see
did it, which plainly shows, That love is a heart-softening affection. This is
yet farther evident in other of the Saints, Josiah loved his God, and hence it
was that his heart melted, when he considered, how he and his people had
offended God by walking contrary to his statutes; Mary Magdalen sincerely loved
Christ, and hence it was that her heart was so mollified and melted, for the
sin she had committed.

No^e.
Love softeneth the heart in which it is; nothing more, nothing so mollifying as
love; love delated, and love apprehended mollifyeth the heart, as oil does the
hand.

The way to increase sorrow for sin, is to increase love to God; grief is but
an effect of love, love is the leading affection to grief, anger, hatred, and
desire; grief springs not so naturally from any thing, as it does from love,
there is no grief so kindly, none so pier^ing, none so lasting and wasting, as
that the (...) springs from pure love.

Object. But this property of love makes me to question the truth of my love,
for I find my heart is hard, I cannot grieve for sin, as I should, or as I
would.

Answ. Softness of heart has other appearances, besides grief, it shows it
self in yielding to walk in the statutes of the Lord, and keep his ordinances,
and do them, inflexibility and readiness to obey the known will of the Lord,
without standing out against any part of it, and to these a child of God should
have recourse in such case.

Sincere Love to God is a sinne-abating affection; Mat. 24.12.
concerning these times, Because iniquity shall abound, Therefore Joshua and
Jude exhort us to look to our love, Josh. 23.11, 12.
the love of many shall wax cold; hence it is evident, That the abounding of
iniquity, springs from the total want or decay of love; if love did abound,
iniquity could not abound, it would abate the force of it; love is therefore
called a breast plate.

The abating of iniquity, Jude v. 21
is according to the abounding of love; Note.
in what measure love abounds, in that measure sin abateth; As we thri^e in
love, so we th^ive in all grace that iss^es out of love.
but as love decays, abates, and cools, iniquity abounds.

While the Church of Ephesus continued in her first and fervent love, we read
of no complaints of her, but when her love abated, her in^quity abounded.

Sincere Love to God will abate sin in a

Sincere Love to God, is an establ^shing affection; This I ga^her from the
language of the Apostle, 2 These. 2.10, 11. Because they received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved, for this cause God shall send them
strong delusions to believe lies, etc. Hence it is evident, That had these (of
whom the Apostle speaks) received the love of the truth, had they sincerely
loved the God of truth, they had continued in the truth, in the knowledge of
it, in the belief of it, in the obedience of it, and neither totally nor
finally apostatized from the truth; which strongly argues, love is an
establishing affection.

The knowledge of the truth, without love of the truth (to wit) sincere love,
Note.
is utterly unavaileable unto salvation; The knowledge of the truth without
love of the truth, is unvaled to uphold in the profession, and obedience of the
truth.

He whose judgment is unsound, is in danger to be corrupt by flatteries, as
the Prophet Daniel speaks; but he whose love is unsound, is in more danger to
be corrupt by flatteries.

He whose love is sound, may through frailty fall, and through fear of some
corporal evil, become guilty of partial apostasy; but he shall never fall
away totally nor finally from the God of truth, This was Peter's c^se.
nor from the truth of God: By all which it appears, that love is an
establishing affection.

more, as his knowledge does abound more and more; This is sufficiently
intimated by the language of the Apostle, Phil. 1.9.

He whose light does not increase, Note.
but rather decrease his love, has cause to question his love, and his light
too.

Finally, Sincere Love to God, always If any man say, I love God, and hate his
brother, he is a liar; for he that loves not his brother, 1 John 4.20.
whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? As if the
Apostle had said, It is impossible for that man to love God sincerely, which
loves not his brother; if a man love God, this love will constrain him to love
his brother, it will produce love to man for Gods sake; This is farther
intimated, ver. 21.

By these few Proper^ies, Effects, and Appearances of a sincere love to God, I
conceive a Christian may judge aright of his love to God, and so consequently
of his condition.

Quest. But how shall I know, whether my love to man be sound, and such as
demonstrates the holy Spirits saving habitation in me, or not?

Answ. By considering, 1, What sincere love to man is: And, 2, What the
Appearances of it are.

Sincere Love to man, Sincere love to man, what.
demonstrating the holy Spirits saving habitation in the soul, is a free
affection of the soul, delated on man for God, and according to the rules of
God given in the holy Scriptures.

And it is manifest thus, it issues out of the love of God, and is carried to
man for God, for Gods sake, 1 Ioh. 5.2.
as the Apostle plainly shows, By this we know we love the children of God,
when we love God and keep his Commandments, etc. As if he had said, By this we
know, that our love toward man is sound, and such as demonstrates the holy
Spirits saving habitation in us, even by this, that it issues out of the love
of God, as the spring and fountain of it, and is delated on man, for Gods sake,
for so much that phrase [ keep his Commandments,] implies.

God commands us to love one another, and to aim principally at his glory
herein; Note.
now when a man does this, when he makes Gods Commandment, the efficient cause
of his love toward his brother, and Gods glory the final cause of it, then
does he love him for God, for Gods sake.

A man's love to his brother, then issues out of the love of God, and the
Commandment of God is the efficient cause of it, when he loves him, because
God commands him so to do, and out of love to God commanding.

A man then makes the glory of God the final cause of his love toward his
brother, when he therefore delates his love upon him, that he may acquire and
gain honor to God and his Gospel, which he has called him to the profession
of thereby, and makes this his utmost scope, and ultimate end in loving him.



That love which is squared by, and congruous to the rule of God, is an
universal love, a love which extends it self to all Col. 1.4.
the Saints, yea to all 1 These. 3.12.
men, good and bad, yea to very Mat. 5.44.
enemies, because God requires this at our hands, that we should love our
enemies; and in this respect I may call it a singular love.

It works no Romans 13.10.
ill to any, Devises not Prove. 3.29.
evil against any, no, thinks no 1 Cor. 13.5.
evil to any; but good Luke 6.30
to all, But is more abundant, more tender and strong toward the godly then
toward any other; He that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten of him, says the Apostle 1 Ioh. 5.1
. The words imply a special love, or love after a special manner, it is as if
the Apostle had said, He that loves God in sincerity, loves the children of God
after a special manner; Love the Brotherhood, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.17.
meaning after a special manner, and this he does, that loves God sincerely,
his love in reference to them, is a love of large extent; it extends even
unto loss of life, in some cases; As in case the honor of God may be advanced
thereby, or a public good procured unto the brethren* the Church of God
thereby; This I think is the Apostles meaning, in the 1 Ioh. 3.16. If sincere
love to God and man, be in the heart of a man, it will constrain him, in such
cases as these, to deny himself unto the death, to advance the honor of God,
and the Churches good; it will make him prefer the Churches good before his
own, witness Romans 16.3, 4.
Aquila and Priscilla, whose love to God and the Church, constrained them to
yield their own lives, to preserve Paul's: The like exm^ples we have in Moses
and Paul, whose love to God and the Church, caused them to slight life, and
deny themselves to the death, and beyond it too, for the advancing of Gods
glory, and the Churches good.

Then again, That love to man which is congruous to the rule of God, is a love
paralleling the love of Christ toward us, for the kind of it; Christ commands
us, To love one another, as he has loved us, Joh. 13 34
And he whose love is congruous to this rule, does this for kind, though not
for measure. Mat. 10.8.


That love which is congruous to the rule of God and the love of Christ, is a
free-love. Luke 6.35.
He that loves his brother according to Christ's rule, and Christ's example,
loves him freely.

It is a condescending love, Romans 12.16.
it will make a man condescend to men of low estate, condescend to his brother
that cannot come up to him, by reason of his mean place, education, parts or
gifts.

It is an establishing love; a grace without which the heart of a man can never
be established in grace, as I gather from the language of the Apostle, 1 These.
3.12, 13. 1 John 2.10.
to the Thessalonians.

It is a real love, a love not terminated in 1 John 3.17, 18. Jam. ^.15, 16.
words, but manifested in deeds, according to Luk 3.11.
ability.

It is a uniting love, it knits the hearts of Christians together, as appears
by the language of the Apostle, Col. 2.2.
Makes them of one heart and of one soul, Act. 4.32.
witness the Saints in the primitive Church.

It is a growing love, and increases still, 1 These. 3.12.

It is a covering grace, it covers all infirmities in the godly, so far
forth, as the glory of God may not be any way prejudiced, but advanced thereby,
and forgiveth all trespasses done by the ungodly, so far forth likewise, as
may be gathered from the language of Solomon: Love (says he) covers all
sin; and the language of Peter, Prove. 10.12.
Charity shall cover the multitude of sins. 1 Pet. 4.8.


In reference to the godly, it is a love in the truth, and for the truths sake;
as appears by the language of S^ John concerning the elect Lady, 2 John 1.2.

I then love my brother in the truth, when the bond that links me and him
together, in a Christian conjunction, is the true and constant profession of
the truth.

I may then be said to love my brother for the truths sake, when that grace and
truth which is in him, is the principal attractive of my love; for that love
which is delated on the godly by a godly heart, has grace for the principal
attractive of it, and not base by-respects, It is an everlasting love.
and therefore continues as long as grace lasts, though other motives to
love fail, and such occurrences fall out, as usually extinguish a love led by
by-respects, therefore says the Apostle of this love, It never fails, 1 Cor.
13.8.
it is still growing and increasing in a state of imperfection, and at length
perfected in Heaven, it never fails.

It is a love that suffers long, is kind, envieth not, vaunteth not it self,
is not puffed up; does not behave And is thereby distinguished from a carnal
love, which oftentimes does.
it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, it rejoices
not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth, it bears all things; believes
all things, loves all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7.

It is a heart-softening affection, a heart-mollifying love; This is intimated
by the language of the Apostle, Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily, Christian
love and carnal love herein differ.
while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened, through the
deceitfullness of sin. Hence it is evident, That if our love one toward
another were such, as it should be, and did operate as it should do, it would
soften and mollify our hearts: Congruous love is mollifying.

Here note two or three things; Christians frequently complain of hardness of
heart in these days, Note.
and not without cause, but few I believe take notice, that want in love is the
cause of it; Strangeness weakens, cools and abates love, nothing more, this it
does in man toward God, and in man toward man, and as love abates, and
strangeness grows, the heart contracts hardness more and more, Probatum est.

Whilst the Galatians love toward Paul continued, they were pliable within
and without, they would have parted with any thing to have done him good, but
when once their love abated, their hearts were hardened toward him, and his
message too.

Love and intimate converse melts the heart, nothing more; strangeness hardens
it, nothing the like; intimate converse with God, increases love to God, and
melts the heart; intimate converse with the godly-wise, does the like.

Our great hardness of heart, and unprofitableness under the great means of
grace in public, I may truly say, has in great part sprung from the gross
neglect of the duties of Christian love; and the great strangeness that is
grown amongst Christians, in these times, where we meet, but in complement
usually.

But when God shall give his people one heart, and one way, to serve him, with
one consent; when their love shall abound, one toward another, and operate
without these obstructions of division, in judgment, and affection [ they
shall then have hearts of flesh, and not of stone: This me thinks is very
observable.
] as appears by Ier. 32.39. and Zeph. 3.9. compared with Ezekiel. 36.26. which
places have reference to one and the same time.

It is said of Leviathan, Job 41. That the flakes of his flesh are joined
together: they are firm in themselves, they cannot be moved. His scales are
one so near another, that no Air can come between them. They are joined one to
another, they stick together, that they cannot be sunder^d. The Lord Jesus
Christ is the great Leviathan of Heaven and Earth, and his people are his
scales, and the flakes of his flesh; and were they so joined together in
Christian love and society, that no Air of temptation could come between them,
they would be firm in themselves; and so stick together, that they could not be
sundered, yea, in their neck would strength remain, and sorrow would be turned
into joy before them.

I wish all the Saints to whose view this may come, may take these things into
consideration.

Great is the latitude of Christian love, of love congruous to the rule of God;
for they whose love is congruous to the rule of God. Grudge not a one against
^^e other; Speak not evil Jam. 4.11.
one of another: Do not bite Gal. 5.15.
and devour one another; Devi^e ^ot evil one against another; Prove. 3.29.
; Do not oppress, overreach, or defraud 1 These. 4.^.
one another, i^ any matter; Render not evil 1 These. 5.15.
for evil unto any man; Say not I will do Prove. 24 29.
so to him, as he has done to me, I will ^ender unto the man according to his
deeds; They bear not false Exodus 20.16.
witness against their Neighbor, nor bear witness, without Prove. 24 28.
cause against their Neighbor, nor deceive with their lips; Lay not wait
against the dwelling of Prove. 24 15.
the righteous; Spoil not his resting place; Add not affliction Prove. 22.22.
to the afflicted; Rejoice not in their Prove. 24 17.
enemies fell, much less in their brothers; Hate not their brother in Levit.
19.17.
heart; Stand not against the blood verse 16. 1 John 3.12.
of their Neighbors, out of desire of revenge, nor upon a political account;
Are not as Cain Gain was wicked, and slew his brother, yet was he not so
impudent as to give God thanks for it, when he had done, much less did he call
out Adam thereunto.
who slew his Brother; Obadiah ver. 12, 13 14.
They judge not their Romans 14.13, 10, 21.
Brother, nor set at naught their Brother; Give no offense 1 Cor. 10.32.
willingly to any, but endeavor, as much as lawfully they may, to live
peaceably Romans 12.18.
with all men; They put away all Ephesians. 4.31.
bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and ^lamour, and evil speaking, with all
malice; Love one another as 1 John 3.23
God gave us Commandment; Love one another, as Christ has loved Ioh. 15.12.
us; Love as 1 Pet. 3.8.
Brethren; Love without Romans 12.9.
dissimulation, cordially, 1 Pet. ^.22.
unfeignedly, out of a pure heart, fervently; Love not in word 1 Ioh. 3.18.
and in tongue only, but in deed and in truth; They walk Ephesians. 5.2.
in love; abound 1 These. 3.12.
in Love, grow 2 Pet. ^.18.
in Love, speak the truth Ephesians. 4.15.
in Love, serve one another Gal. 5.13.
in Love, continue Heb. 13.1.
in Love, are kindly affectionated one toward another R^m. 12.10.
with brotherly Love; Rejoice with them ver. 15.
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep; In honor prefer Romans 12 10.
one another, have compassion 1 Pet. 3.8.
one of another, are pitiful, are courteous Ibid.
one toward another, tender Ephesians. 4.32.
hearted; if rich, they are rich in good works 1 Timothy 6.18.
ready to distribute, willing to communicate, show mercy Romans 12.8.
with cheerfullness, they bear one another Gal. 6.2.
burdens. If strong, bear the infirmities Romans 15.1.
of the weak, support Act. 20.35.
the weak, bear one with another, and forbear one Col. ^.13.
another; Forsake not the Heb. 10.25.
assembling of themselves together, but exhort one another daily, edify one
another 1 These. 5.11.
and comfort one another, with the Word of the Lord; Col. 3.16.
Teach and admonish one another, consider one another to provoke Heb. 10.24.
unto Love, and to good works, confess their faults one James 5.16.
to another; This (I think) is meant, at least chiefly, of faults committed one
against another, and pray one for another; Pray for 1 Timothy ^. 1.
all men, even enemies; Matthew. 5.4^.
Do good unto all, Gal. 6.10.
but especially unto the household of Faith, they are not overcome of evil, but
Romans 1^.^^*
labor to overcome evil with goodness; they do as they would Luke (...) 1.
Matthew. 7.12.
be done by in all things; they esteem 1 Thessalonians. 5. ^^, 13.
very highly in Love, for their works sake, their lawful and faithful
Ministers, especially those in whom they have propriety; They receive Romans ^ 5.
1 T^^ss. 5.13.
one another, as Christ received us to the glory of God; and be at peace among
themselves.

Then again. He whose Love to his brother is congruous to the Rule of God, goes
not up and down as a talebearer, Lev. 19.16.
He seeks not his own, 1 Cor. 10.24.
but his brothers good; labors to avoid whatsoever may offend Romans 14.21.
or weaken his brother, or be a stumbling block unto him; labors to please
Romans 15.2.
his brother for his good, to Edification; He loves his Neighbor as himself;
Lev. 19.18. Mat. 22.39.
does good freely, Lu 6.35.
looking for nothing again; He says not as Cain, Am I my brothers keeper? but
watches over his brother for his good, and reproves Lev. 19.17.
his brother in Love, according to Christ's Rule Mat. 18.15, 6.
privately and publicly, if need be; informs against his brother Ib. v. 17.
in such place and case, as Christ commands him, and with-draws from his
brother in case of 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 These. 3.6, 14. Mat. 18.17. or in case of
Heresy, 1 Timothy 6. v. 3, 5.
scandal or contempt of the Churches lawful constitutions and censures; or in
case he cause divisions Romans 16.17.
or offenses in the Church, contrary to the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures;
mourns 1 Cor. 5.2.
for his brother, and prays for Ia. 5.16.
him in such cases. Labors to restore Gal. 6.1.
his brother in the spirit of meekness, when overtaken in any fault, and
returns to him Phi. v. 12.
when he turns to the Lord. Forgives 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.
him and comforts him, and confirms his Love toward him; He forgives his
brother his trespasses from his Mat. 18.35.
heart, as often as he Luke 17.4. Mat 18.2^.22.
offends, and repents, freely, as Col ^.13. and Ephesians. 4.32.
Christ forgave us; For Christ's sake, and as God has forgiven us.

All these qualifications the Scripture calls for, in my Love toward my
Brother, as these quotations in the Margin do manifest; Therefore that Love
toward man, which is congruous to the holy Scripture, must needs have these
qualifications in it, ergo.

But here the soul conscious to its own wants and failings, will be ready to
reply, Object.
as the Disciples did to Christ, when he told them, how hard a matter it was
for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; who then can be saved, said
the Disciples? so the soul will be ready to say here, if all this be in that
Love which is congruous to the rule of God, who then can say his Love is
congruous to the rule of God? surely none, for in much of this we fail all.

He that truly wills, desires, Answ.
and endeavors to do all this, This, and no less then this, is vigor fit to
give the appearance of a sincere Love.
that Christ may have the honor of it, does it in a Gospel-sense, and in Gods
acceptance, who accepts the will for the deed: where ability is wanting, this
must be granted, otherwise no Child of Adam could conclude on the affirmative.

Now for other appearances of Love, they are these; What a man Loves, he prizes
accordingly; What a man loves, he delights in accordingly; What a man Loves, he
desires to enjoy; what a man loves, he cannot hear reproached, reviled, and
spoken against, but with grief of heart: This needs no proving, every ones
experience, will testify the truth of it.

Would thou know, whether thy Love to God and thy Love to man be sound, and
such as demonstrates the holy Spirits saving habitation in thy soul or not?
then go through what has been said in this little Epitomie, touching Love to
God, and Love to man; and consider, whether thy Love be truly such, yea or nay;
and if thou find it truly such, though but weakly, conclude thou may
safely to thy comfort, that thy Love is such, as really demonstrates thou art
beloved of God and endued with the holy Spirit of God savingly: For Love indeed
and in truth, argues that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts
before him, as the Apostle affirms, 1 Ioh. 3.18, 19. Therefore if thou upon a
true trial, find by this that has been said, that thou have any truth of
Love to God and thy Brother, argue not against thy self, or thy Love, but bless
God for that Love thou have, and labor to grow and increase in Love to God and
man daily.

REPENTANCE.
ANother grace of the holy Spirit of God, demonstrating his saving habitation
in the ^oul, is Repentance (to ^^t) true Gospel-Repentance.

I (s^ith the Lord) will pour upon the house of David, the Spirit of grace and
supplications; And they shall look upon him, whom they have pr^^^ed, and they
shall mourn for him, etc. Zach. 12 10.

This Text plainly points out unto us two things* 1. That wheresoever the holy
Spirit of God dwells savingly, in what soul soever he resideth, as a
sanctifier, there he works true faith and Repentance.

2. That in whomsoever these graces are wrought, they are a true and real
testimony of the holy Spirits saving habitation in that soul, ^or as much as it
is proper and peculiar unto the Spirit of God alone, to work these in the heart
of man.

Here Note, three or four things, 1. That the grace of Repentance, though it
be a distinct grace from faith, yet is it an inseparable concomitant of
justifying faith, coupled with it in infusion, and he that totally wants
either, has neither.

Secondly Note; That faith, and love, and Repentance, and every other renewing
grace habitually considered, are coequal, the habit of every grace being
infused together: So that where there is one grace in truth, there is every
grace in truth, in the habit of it, in some measure.

And thirdly, That although every grace of the Spirit, habitually considered,
be coequal, yet these actually considered, and according to their manner of
working, and appearing in us precede each other; faith precedes love, and faith
and love precedes Repentance, Repentance being a fruit of faith and love.

Fourthly, That grace (to wit) renewing grace, and glory, are inseparably
linked together: He that has the one shall certainly have the other, for this
grace is the earnest of our inheritance.

Lastly N^te, That this grace of repentance, is a renewing grace, The Gospel
joines Repentance and remission of sins together, Luke 2^.47. Act. 5.31.
a special work of the Spirit of God in man, and a grace that he works in
all that truly believe and love.

That Repentance is a renewing grace, a special work of the Spirit of God in
man, is evident by those special promises, which are made unto it in holy
Scripture, of spiritual and eternal blessedness. He that confesses, and
forsakes his finne* shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13, If my People, which are
called by my Name shall humble themselves, and pray and turn from their evil
ways, then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sin, etc. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. And the Red^emer shall come to Sion, and to them that turn from
transgression in Jacob, says the Lord, Isa. 59.20. Again, When, I say unto the
wicked, thou shall surely dye, if he turn from his sin, and do that which is
lawful and right, He shall surely live, he shall not die, none of his sins
that he has committed, shall be mentioned unto him; he has done that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live, Ezekiel. 33.14, 15, 16.

All sins (all manner of sins,) and Blasphemies shall be forgiven unto him.
Mark 3.28. Matthew. 12.31. compared, Though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall
be made as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as
Wool, Repentance unto salvation,
Isai. 1.18. and Act. 11.18. True Repentance is called, Repentance unto life.
By all which it is evident, That it is a renewing grace, 2 Cor. 7.10.
a special work of the Spirit of God in man.

Note.
Repentance being a special work of the Spirit of God in man, and an inseparable
concomitant of a Justifying faith, is therefore a true touchstone, to try our
selves and our spiritual estate* by, and such an one as all must try themselves
by, that will gather to themselves, a true testimony of their eternal happiness
by Christ, and make their Calling and Election sure in the subject.

Quest.
But what is this grace of Repentance? How may it be defined?

Repentance is a Divine quality wrought by the Spirit of God in the soul,
whereby a sinner, Sol.
is so much touched in heart for his sins that he truly turns from them all
unto the Lord.

I think it not necessary, nor meet for me, Note.
to discuss the terms or genus of this description: But here No^e, 1. That
repentance unto salvation, is an Evangelical grace, a Gospel Grace; The Law
knows no Repentance, calls for none, nor works none; it is the Gospel and the
Gospel only, that knows Repentance, calls for it, and works it: Moses calls not
for Repentance, but Christ does, Mar. 1.15.

That this Repentance consists of two Essential parts, This is evident by
the words in the proclamation of the King of Nineve Ion. 3.8.
(to wit) contrition and conversion, humiliation and reformation; therefore he
that would make a true trial of his Repentance, must have recourse unto both of
these.

That it is Evangelical contrition, and not legal, that is the first Essential
part of Repentance, unto life; it is cordial reformation, and not feigned, that
is the second Essential part of Repentance unto life.

But what is this Evangelicall contrition? Quest.
and how may I discern, whether I have it or no?

Evangelical contrition, Answ.
is a godly sorrow of soul for all sin, It is for inward fins, as well as
outward.
arising from the apprehension of a gracious God displeased by sin, and thou
may discern it by this which here follows.

1. Evangelical sorrow springs out of the Love of God, and hatred of sin, and
increases the Love of God, and hatred of sin in the soul; the Love of Christ
constrains the soul to hate sin, and to mourn and grieve for sin; and the
bitterness of this sorrow and grief for sin, sweeteneth the Love of God in
Christ unto the soul, and inbittereth sin: And hence it comes to pass, that
the soul loves Christ more, and hates sin more after it has once felt this
sorrow and been soked in it, then ever it did before.

2. Evangelicall sorrow is mixed with faith; The Evangelical mourner, bewailes
his sin, and rests on the mercy of God in Christ, and the promises which are
in him, yea, and in him, Amen, for the pardon of his sin, and the
mortification of his corruptions, and grace to amend.

Note.
Faith of adherence, is an inseparable concomitant of Evangelical sorrow,
although faith of evidence be not so. He that sorrows for his sin and rests
not on Christ for the pardon of his sin, his sorrow is legal, and not
Evangelical, desperation and not contrition.

3. Evangelical sorrow is mixed with hope; The Evangelical mourner, mourns not
without hope, he has hope of obtaining mercy, even in the deepest of his
sorrow for sin, as appears by his carriage in his mourning; He despaires not,
but seeks to God for mercy; his sorrow drives him to God, and not from God; as
is evident by the example of the Prodigal, Luke 1.
in his deepest distress, he despaires not, but goes to his father for mercy;
but had he not had hope of obtaining mercy, he would have despaired, had he not
had hope of obtaining mercy, he would never have gone to his father to seek it.

4. Evangelical sorrow is mixed with Joy, being mixed with Faith and Hope; the
Evangelical mourner looks upon his sorrow as a sacrifice, with which God is
well-pleased, and therefore Joys that he can sorrow, that he can offer this
Sacrifice to God, The Sacrifices of God are a broken and a contrite heart, and
spirit: A broken, and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise, says the
Scripture, Psalm. 51.17. And this the contrite heart believes, and therefore
Joys, when it can sorrow.

5. Hence it comes to pass, that the Evangelical mourner, is an agent, as well
as a patient, in the action of mourning. He strives to provoke and quicken his
dull heart, and soul, to mourn, and thinks no labor too much to bestow, to
bring his soul to a godly manner of mourning; He desires nothing more then to
turn his Carnal mirth into Godly mourning, Be afslicted, and mourn, and weep,
says the Scripture, Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy
into heaviness, Jam. 4.9. This, this soul labors wonderfully to do, and
nothing grieves him more, than that he cannot more grieve for sin: He labors
to make his carnal mirth the matter of his spiritual mourning, and wishes, O
that mine eyes were a fountain of tears, that I could weep day and night, for
the sin of my nature, and the sin of my life, and the iniquity of my People.

6. Evangelical sorrow, is a heart-mollifying sorrow, it softeneth the heart,
and makes it very tender and pliab^e, sensible of the least sin, and the
least displeasure of God for sin: Hearts broken with evangelicall sorrow, are
like broken bones, very sensible of every touch. Hearts broken with Evangelical
sorrow are very pliable to the will of the Lord above all other, Lord, what
will thou have me to do? says a contrite soul, Act. 9.6. as if he had said,
declare thy will, Lord, and I am ready to obey it, to the utmost of my power,
whatever it be.

Note.
Such as the measure of this sorrow is, such usually is the softness of the
heart, and the pliability of the will; the more of this sorrow the soul has,
the more tender is the heart made thereby, and the more pliable is the will;
the less of this sorrow the soul has, the less softening has the heart, and
the less yielding is there in the will, to the Will of the Lord.

7. Evangelical sorrow is a heart meekening sorrow; it meekeneth the heart, and
makes it humbly stoop to the yoke of Christ, and patiently bear the Chastising
hand of Christ, during the good pleasure of Christ. I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my
cause, and execute judgment for me, says the contrite soul, Mich. 7.9. It
moderateth anger and makes all calm within and without. It makes the soul to
justify God in all his dealings, as appears by, Neh. 9.33.


8. Evangelical sorrow is a heart-humbling sorrow, it makes the heart humble
and lowly; The more of this sorrow there is in the heart, the more humble it
is, and the less of this there is in the heart, the prouder it is, the more
fearless and careless it is of sin; I am no more worthy to be called a Son,
make me as a Servant, Lam. 1.18.
(or any thing, the meanest employment) in my fathers house, Luke 23.41.
is too good for me, says the contrite soul. I am but a walking-dunghill, Luke
15.19.
and fitter to be set on a dunghill, then on a Throne, says the contrite soul.

9. And hence it is, that the soul evangelically contrite, admires free grace,
in every favor that it receives, spiritual or temporal, and is the
thankfullest soul of all others, for mercies received; What shall I render unto
the Lord, for all his mercies toward me, says a contrite soul? This soul
speaks to it self in the language of the Lord to Jerusalem, I was polluted in
my blood, Ezekiel. 16.
and cast out to the loathing of my person, and no eye pitied me, to do any
office of love unto me: And then the Lord had compassion on me, and washed me
with water, yea, with blood, with the blood of his Son he thoroughly washed
away my filth, and anointed me with oil, endued me with his Spirit, and his
grace, etc. I had forfeited all right to Heaven and earth into the Lords hand,
and he has given me all back again freely, and put me in a better condition,
than I was in before. O the deepnesse of the riches of the Justice and Mercy of
God!

10. In the tenth place, Evangelical sorrow, is a sorrow that keeps the soul in
a sweet heavenly frame, for all holy and heavenly duties; it sweetly fits the
soul for all holy performances.

Sorrow that flows from the apprehension of Love in God, is fresh and lively,
Note.
and full of spirits; so that a man never performs any holy duty better, then
when his heart is filled with this sorrow: Set a soul filled with this sorrow,
to pray, and he will pray sweetly, and heavenly, fervently, and effectually (to
wit) in faith, and so prevail much with God; Set him to hear, and he will hear
humbly, and the whole Word of the Lord will be sweet unto him, every precept
and every threatening of the Lord, every bitter thing will be sweet unto him,
every crum that falls from his Table will he gather up, as precious food: Set a
soul filled with this sorrow to Divine Meditation, and he will do it with
great, delight and freedom: set him to receive the Sacrament of the Supper of
the Lord, and he will do this action in its beauty, He will look upon him,
whom he has pierced and mourn, for his sin that has pierced him, and every
other holy duty will he perform, with a more heavenly mind, than others, which
have not felt this sorrow, or not in that measure, which he has done.

11. The soul Evangelically contrite, sorrows not so much for suffering, as for
sinning; not so much for being displeased, as for displeasing, and dishonouring
God by sin, it is grieved for its sin, because the holy Spirit of God is
grieved by its sin, and broken with its whorish heart, Eze. 6.9.
as the Prophet speaks, and is melted by the consideration of the incomparable
goodness of God, and his kindness, and love in Christ toward its self, abused
by its self, rather then broken with horror, threatenings, punishments, or
slavish fear; Against thee, Ps. 51.4.
thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, says the contrite
soul, and this is that which pierces his soul.

12. The soul Evangelically contrite, longs after freedom from sin, more
than freedom from suffering; Hos. 14 2. Ps. 25.18. Psa. 39 8. Psa 51.2, 9.
it says with the Church, Lord, take away all mine iniquity, not with Phara^h,
the plague; Lord, look upon my affliction and my pain, says the contrite soul,
and ease me of that, if it be thy blessed Will, but however forgive all my
sins, deliver me from all my transgressions. Wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin: hide thy face from my sins, and blot
out all mine iniquities. O wretched man that I am, Who shall deliver me (and
when shall I be delivered) from the body of this death? This is the language of
contrite souls.

The soul Evangelically contrite, counts sin the worst Evil, and Christ the
best Good; Note.
the guilt of sin, the power of sin, and the being of sin, is of all
burdens the heaviest unto a contrite soul, and that which of all other it longs
to be freed from.

13. The soul Evangelically contrite, priseth Christ as the chiefest Good, as
the only true Good; it is not satisfied with any thing without Christ, it is
not fully satisfied with any thing but Christ, Christ in his Blood, Christ in
his Spirit, Christ in his Ordinances, Christ in his Ministers, Christ in
whomsoever his Image is stamped is precious, above all earthly things, unto the
contrite soul; Thou art my beloved and my desire is toward thee, says the
Contrite heart to Christ.

To the soul Evangelically Contrite, Note.
the light of Gods Countenance, and the sense of his love in Christ, is more
worth than all the treasures, and pleasures in the world, Lord, lift thou up
the Light of thy Countenance upon me; thy love is better than wine, Psalm. 4.6.
Cant. 1.2. Psalm. 4.7.
(better then Corn and Wine,) it strengthens more, it comforts more, it puts
gladness in my heart, more then Corn and Wine, more than the choicest Creatures
in the world, says the Contrite soul. When once this contrition had ceazed on
David's heart, Psa. 63.1. Psa 42.1.
his soul did thirst for God, as the thirsty land for rain, and as the chased
Heart for the waterbrooks. And not after God only in his immediate
dispensations, but in his mediate also, after God in his Ordinances, in his
Sanctuary, as appears, Psalm. 63.2. and 84.10. and 27.4. and thus did Mary
Magdalen, and Paul, and other Saints, under the New Testament, when once this
contrition had ceazed on their hearts, they were very industrious seekers of
God in his Ordinances; By which it is eminently evident, that it is the nature
of Evangelical Contrition, of hearts Evangelically contrite, to prize highly
communion with God, in his Ordinances.

As it was with David, and Mary, and the other Saints here, so it is with every
soul Evangelically Contrite, he has the same judgment of and affection
toward Gods Ordinances, in truth, though not in the same degree.

Such as the measure of contrition wrought in the soul is, such usually is the
measure of his affection to, and thirst after these Divine excellencies
forementioned.

14. The soul Evangelically Contrite, disclaims all righteousness of its own,
and rests wholly on the merit of Christ, for justification before God, We are
all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, says
the Contrite Church, Isai. 64.6. What things were gain to me, those I counted
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord, and do judge
them, but dung, that I may win Christ, says the Apostle, Phil. 3.8, 9.

When once this Evangelical contrition h^d ceazed on the heart of Paul, he
renounced all his own righteousness, all before conversion and all after
conversion, (his old man and his new) in matter of justification, and rested
wholly upon the merit of Christ, which plainly demonstrates the truth asserted.

15. Evangelical sorrow is a lasting sorrow, and a wasting sorrow; When once it
has ceazed upon the heart of a Christian, it does not pass away, as the
morning cloud, and early dew, or a land-flood, but continues and rises up, as
a spring, and is never exhaust, till sin, the cause of it, be wholly taken
away, and not only the guilt, and punishment of sin, but the very being of
sin, till total deliverance from this body of death be granted. This is
evident in the Apostle Paul, Paul mourned for his sin after he was justified
from his sin.
when once this sorrow had ceazed on his heart, he did not cease to bewail his
proness to sin, till his being in this world ceased, as appears, Romans 7. ver.
14.24. And as it is a lasting sorrow, so it is a wasting sorrow, it consumes
the body of death, it brings a consumption on sin, it weakeneth the power of
natural corruption, and warreth succesfully against the most Giant-like
corruption, it comes from the heart of a sinner, and it goes to the heart of
sin.

16. Finally Evangelical sorrow, This is fruit fit, and but fit for real
Repen^ance.
is a reforming sorrow, it makes a man truly turn from sin, from all sin,
unto the Lord, and this is indeed the great distinguishing Character of it, and
that which demonstrates the truth of it, contrition without conversion is not
Repentance unto life; He that sorrows for his sin, and turns not from his
finne, unto the Lord, his sorrow is but a sorry one: Humiliation without
Reformation, (says one) is but a foundation without a building, and
reformation without humiliation, is but a building without a foundation, a
building which will not stand. Humiliation and Reformation God has coupled
together, Pro. 28.13.
2 Chronicles. 7.14.
in his Gospel-Promises, wherein Repentance is fully described; Therefore
Repentance unto life, Isai. 1.16, 17.
must needs consist of both these: Evangelical Contrition and true Conversion
are so coupled together, Act. 3.19.
that they cannot be sundered; wheresoever sorrow for sin is found, it is
attended with true turning from sin, unto the Lord. And this is the second
essential part of true Repentance. And this the Scripture calls conversion.
Repent and be converted, says the Apostle in the forecited place, Act. 3.19.
it is, as if he had said, mourn for sin, and turn from sin, if ever you
would have your sins to be done away.

He that truly turns from sin, turns from all sin; Ezekiel. 14.6.18.30.
He that turns not from all sin, does not truly turn from any sin; God
requires a sinner, to turn from all his transgressions, and he that truly turns
from sin, does this; He turns from all sin in affection, in purpose and
resolution he allows not himself in any known sin, he loathes all sin, and
conscionably endeavors to forsake all sin, and get every corruption
mortified, therefore says the Apostle, Godly sorrow works Repentance unto
salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10.
his meaning is, it produces Reformation (to wit) a true turning from all sin
unto the Lord.

He that truly turns to the Lord, Ier. 24.7. 1 Kin. 8.48.
does it not feignedly, as Hypocrites do, but unfeignedly, cordially, with his
whole heart, as the Prophet speaks, with full purpose of heart, to walk in all
the ways of God; This the Apostle calls, Repentance unto Salvation, and this is
attended with carfulness, and circumspection for time to come, clearing of
our selves, or apology for our selves of our detestation of our fact;
indignation or exceeding anger with our selves for our offenses; Fear, (to
wit) fear of relapsing into our former sins again; vehement desire (to wit)
after strength and assistance from Christ, for the present, and future time;
Zeal (to wit) in the performing of all good duties, contrary to our former
special sins; Revenge (to wit) a holy revenge on our selves, subduing of the
body, and keeping it under, lest it should hereafter be an instrument of sin,
as it has formerly been. All this is evident by the language of the Apostle,
in the forecited place, 2 Corinthians. 7.11.

Would thou then know, whether thy Repentance be Repentance unto Life, or
no? whether it be such as truly demonstrates the holy Spirits saving habitation
in thy soul, and the truth of thy faith, yea, or nay? thou must then have
recourse to both the parts of true Repentance forementioned (to wit)
contrition and conversion; and if by what has been said, it appears to be
truly such, know that it is a sure argument of thy eternal happiness, bless
God for it and labor to grow in it.

OBEDIENCE.
ANother work of the holy Spirit of God on man, demonstrating his saving
habitation in man, and a man's eternal salvation by Christ, is Obedience (to
wit) sincere, and Cordial, Evangelical Obedience, to the revealed Will of God.

This Obedience, and this only, God requires and accepts of his Elect, in and
through Jesus Christ.

That this Obedience is a work of the Spirit of God in man, appears both by
Argument and by Scripture; 1. By Argument thus; Naturally the heart of man is
obstinate, stubborn and disobedient to the Will of the Lord; deceitful above
all things, and Hypocritical in all its ways, doting on Legal, and never
minding Evangelical Obedience; and nothing can make such a change in the heart
and soul of a man, as of stubborn and disobedient, of Hypocritical and
deceitful, to become sincere and Cordial in Obedience, and of a doter on
Legal, to become an Evangelical obeyer of the Will of the Lord: But the
Almighty Spirit of God, whose proper office it is, to renew the Image of God in
fallen man; Therefore this Obedience must needs be the work of the Spirit of
God, in whomsoever it is.

By Scripture this is evident likewise, I will put my Spirit within you (says
the Lord) and cause you to walk in my statutes, and keep my Judgments, and do
them, Ezekiel. 36.27. Hence it is evident, That it is the Spirit of God, which
works the heart of man to Obedience.

That this Obedience is a work of the Spirit of God in man, demonstrating his
saving habitation, and sanctifying operation in man, is evident by the language
of the Apostles, We are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the Holy
Ghost, whom God has given (to wit) savingly, to them that obey him, (to wit)
Cordially and Evangelically, Act. 5.32. And by that of Peter, We are Elect
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of
the Spirit unto Obedience, 1 Pet. 1.2.

That this Obedience is such a work of the Spirit of God in man, as
demonstrates his eternal salvation by Christ, is farther evident by these
Scriptures following: Christ being made perfect became the Author of eternal
salvation, unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. Obey my voice (says the
Lord) and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, Jer. 7.23. If ye will
obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar
treasure unto me, above all people, and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of
Priests, and an holy Nation, Exodus 19.5, 6. Not every one that says unto me,
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will
of my Father, which is in Heaven, Mat. 7.21. He that does the Will of God
abides for ever, 1 John 2.17.

By these Texts it is evident, That th^s Obedience is such a work of the Spirit
of God in man, as lively demonstrates his eternal happiness.

Quest. But what is this Obedience you speak of? How may it be defined?

Sol. It is a special work of the Spirit of God in man, whereby he is enabled
to apply Christ unto himself, according unto all his promises, and himself unto
Christ, according unto all his Precepts.

Under these two general heads, the whole work of Obedience is comprehended, as
is evident from the words of the new Covenant; I says the Lord will be your
God, and ye shall be my People, Jer. 31.33. What does the Lord require herein
on our part? but to take him for our God, and yield up our selves unto him, as
his People, to apply Christ unto our selves, and our selves unto Christ, as
aforesaid. This is the Obedience of faith, this is Evangelical Obedience, the
Obedience which the Gospel calls for, and which it only accepts. What shall we
do, that we might work the Works of God? said some to Christ, Ioh. 6.28. Christ
replies, ver. 29. This is the work of God, that ye believe on him, whom he has
sent. In these few words, is comprehended the whole work of Obedience, the
whole work assigned us by God, This is the Work of God, etc. It is, as if
Christ had said, you naturally seek Heaven by works, but altogether mistake
that work of works, which is only acceptable, and effectual to attain its end,
Believe on him whom he has sent; Believe on him, who has fulfilled the Law
for us, and will fulfill the Law in us; This is the work of God assigned to us,
and a work which God works in us, and this is unto flesh and blood, of all
works the hardest. Here note these Corollaries.

Corol. 1. That the Obedience of Faith is of all works the most difficult unto
flesh and blood; this requires a man to deny himself totally, which flesh and
blood will rather deny God himself, then do. We rejoice in Christ Jesus and
have no confidence in the flesh, etc.

2. Our Souls naturally had rather dye, and put off their immortality and
everlasting being, then put on the Lord Jesus Christ. They will not come to me.

3. We all naturally dote upon works, and say, as the young man in the Gospel,
that came to Christ, What shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? But the
work of works, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, we are of all other the
farthest from, till the Spirit of God work in us. These from our Saviors
mouth, I have deducted, This is the Work of God, that ye believe in him whom he
has sent.

4. Man naturally is so proud, That he will not seek after God, says the
Psalmist, that is, (God in Christ) for no otherwise can God be approached unto;
He thinks himself rich, and to need nothing, and knows not that he is poor, and
blind, and miserable, wretched and naked, and therefore scorns to seek to God
in Christ for wealth. He will rather make a covering of Figg-Leaves than of
Christ's righteousness, rather cover himself with rotten rags, than be
beholding to Christ for his robe.

5. Man regenerated, so far forth as carnal, is very unwilling to be beholding
to Christ wholly, for all the good he stands in need of; hence it is, that many
regenerate persons will rest on promises no further, than they can find
themselves to obey precepts, weary themselves out with laboring to fulfill the
Law, and never study the Obedience of Faith, which is to renounce all that we
can do, To put no confidence in the flesh, but rest only on what Christ has
done, and suffered for us, believing that every promise shall be made good to
us, so far forth as may be good for us (for Christ's sake.) This is to apply
Christ unto our selves.

And our selves unto Christ] According unto all his precepts: This is the
latter clause in the description of Evangelicall Obedience: A Christian by the
Obedience of faith, Opens the everlasting doors to the King of Glory, to come
in, and take possession and rule all in his heart and in his life: He resigns
up all to be ordered by him, who so loved him, that he gave himself for him, so
that not he, but Christ lives, Gal. 2.20.
rules, and orders all: Every thought is yielded up unto the Obedience of
Christ, with desire that he will bring it into subjection, 2 Cor. 10.5.

Faith does both receive and give; it is faith that applies Christ to the man,
and the man to Christ, as appears by Ioh. 1.12. compared with 2 Cor. 8.5. Faith
makes him ours, who makes all happiness ours; Faith makes him ours, in whom we
are complete, and generates Love in our souls to him that has loved us, and
given himself for us, and this love constrains us to live, not unto our selves,
but unto him which dyed for us, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. and this is
that Obedience, which the Gospel calls for, and which only it accepts; and this,
if fincere and cordial, is very acceptable with God, though many ways
deficient.

It is the Gospel, and the Gospel only, that calls for this Obedience; the Law
does not require us to apply our selves unto Christ, no more than it does
require us to apply Christ unto our selves, but barely says, Do this, and
live, Transgrefse this and dye,

The Gospel does not barely call for this Obedience of Faith, but promises to
give it, and works the heart unto it, yea freely gives it us as a gift, They
shall look on him, whom they have pierced, etc. Zach. 12.10. I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, says the Lord, etc.
Ezekiel. 36.27. To you it is given in the behalf of Christ; not only to believe on
him, but also to suffer for his sake, says the Apostle, Phil. 1.29. These
things premised, I proceed to the trial of Obedience; and for the more
perspicuity, propound this Question.

Quest. How may I discern, whether my Obedience be sincere and cordial
Obedience, yea, or nay?

Answ. Thou may discern it, by the efficient cause, by the final cause and
by the properties of cordial Obedience: The efficient cause of cordial
Obedience, is the Love of God; Love the Lord thy God, and walk ever in his
ways, are joined together, Deu. 19.9.
the final cause thereof, is the Glory of God.

1. The efficient cause of cordial Obedience, is the Love of God; cordial
Obedience springs out of Love to God, and he that cordially obeys the Will of
God, obeys it in Love to God, not slavish fear, nor self love, nor vain glory;
But Love to God, is that which leads him to obey the Will of God: Therefore
says the Apostle, The Love of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. 5.14.

Here note these two things, 1. That whatsoever a man does in way of Obedience
to the Will of God, Note.
be the action never so good, or glorious in it self, is no ways acceptable
unto God, except it spring from Love; a pregnant proof of this we have, 1 Cor.
13.1, 2, 3. where the Apostle shows at large, That all Obedience without Love,
comes to just nothing; all parts and gifts, all Faith and Obedience, though it
be to the death, and the cruellest death, that possibly may be, without faith
working by Love, without Obedience springing from Love, comes to just nothing
at length, It profits me nothing, says the Apostle.

On the other hand, though we can do but little for God, if that little we do,
issue out of Love to God, it is very pleasing to, and acceptable with God, who
looks more on our affection, than our action; Thou have ravished my heart, my
Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, etc. How
fair is thy Love, my Sister, my Spouse? how much better is thy Love, then
Wine? etc. Cant. 4.9, 10. I conclude this therefore, with the saying of a
worthy man, A Christians affection is his perfection in this frail condition.

The final cause of cordial Obedience, is the Glory of God: He that cordially
obeys the Will of God, propounds the pleasing of God, and the glory of his
Name, for his direct, chief, and ultimate end, in all that he does, in way of
Obedience, according to the direction of the Holy Ghost by the Apostle, 1 Cor.
10.31. And these two, the efficient, and the end, denominate the action.

1. The properties of cordial Obedience, are these; Cordial Obedience is free
and willing Obedience, voluntary, and not forced. To whom ye yield your selves
servants to obey, his servants ye are, says the Apostle, Romans 6.16. It is
willingness in Obedience, that is the beauty of Obedience, and that which God
chiefly looks to in Obedience, If you be willing and Obedient, or willingly
obedient, then so and so, ye shall eat the good of the Land, Isai. 1.19. If
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted, according to that which a man
has, not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. If I do this thing
willingly, I have a reward, 1 Cor. 9.17. By all these places it is evident,
That cordial Obedience, is willing Obedience: This was that which rendered
Abraham's Obedience so lovely in the eye of God, he rose early to go about the
offering up of Isaac, which shows, he did it willingly.

He whose Obedience springs from Love to God, has his heart first warmed with
the sense of Gods Love to him; and he that aims principally at the glory of
God, in his Obedience, has his heart humbled, when he has done the best that
he can, for that he cannot bring more glory to God, and hence it comes to pass,
that he is willing, and ready to obey; He consents to obey, and that without
grudging or repining, even when he comes short of doing, what he desires to do.
What I would, that do I not, says a cordial server of Christ.

2. Cordial Obedience, is universal Obedience, and that both in respect of the
Subject, and in respect of the Object, it is yielded of the whole man to the
whole Will of God; the soul, according to all the powers and faculties thereof,
is only, and wholly for Christ, in its scope and bent, the understanding, the
will and the affections, are in their scope and bent, only and wholly for
Christ, therefore says the Apostle, of such as were cordial servers of Christ,
Ye have obeyed from the heart, etc. Romans 6.17. The body and all its members,
are yielded up wholly, and only to Christ, to the service of Christ, for the
magnifying of Christ, shall I take the members of Christ, and make them the
members of an Harlot, says the cordial server of Christ? God forbid, 1 Cor.
6.15.

Deuteronomy. 30.2.
God requires the whole man, soul and body, to be wholly yielded up unto him,
unto his use and service, in Obedience, Ye are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods, says the Text,
1 Cor. 6.20.

God requires soul and body (to wit) the whole man to be (wholly) yielded up
unto him, unto his use and service in Obedience, in obeying (all his revealed
will) touching, believing, doing, and suffering, Take diligent heed, to do the
Commandment and the Law, which Moses the Servant of the Lord commanded you, to
Love the Lord your God, and walk in all his ways, and to keep his
Commandments, and to cleave unto him, and serve him with all your heart, and
with all your soul, Josh. 22.5. And again, Exo* 23. ver. 20, and 22. Behold I
send an Angel before thee, if thou shall indeed obey his voice, in all that I
speak, then I will be an enemy unto thy enemies, etc. says the Lord. Go ye and
teach all Nations, says Christ to his Apostles, What should they teach them?
Why, teach them to observe (all things) whatsoever I have (commanded you) Mat.
28.19, 20. Act. 3.22.
The Apostle uses the like phrase, 2 Cor. 2.9. where he calls for Obedience in
all things: Here is universal Obedience unto the whole Will of God, required in
the whole man, and he that cordially obeys the Will of God, obeys according to
this Rule of God (to wit) universally. He yields up his whole man, to the
Obedience of the whole Will of the Lord, Thus did Zacharias and Elizabeth obey
God, Luke 1.6.
without picking and choosing in the ways of God, without reservation, or
exception, or desire of dispensation. However he fails in his Obedience, and
comes short of what he ought to do, and desires to do, yet he determines not to
reserve any part of himself from Christ, nor to stand out against any part of
his holy Will, but has his heart and mind ready pressed, to obey every of his
Commandments, which he knows, as well as any, the least as well as the
greatest, and the greatest, as well as the least; He thinks not tithing of Mint
and Comin too small a precept to make conscience of, nor a right hand, nor a
right eye, nor an only Isaac, nor Life it self, or whatsoever may indeare it
unto him, too much to sacrifice, when Christ shall call for it at his hands; He
resolves to obey those precepts, which cross his corrupt nature most, and the
sin of his constitution, as well as those which it can better brook; He
resolves to obey both Law and Gospel, in every precept, Negative and Positive,
to his utmost power; his Obedience is of as great a latitude as the whole Will
of God; He has respect unto all Gods Commandments, as the Psalmist speaks.

Psalm. 119.6.
3. Cordial Obedience is conscionable Obedience: He that cordially obeys the
Will of God, obeys not out of by respects, but for conscience sake: Conscience
of duty leads him to the performance of duty, so that he, as of sincerity, as
of God, in the sight of God, obeys the will of God, as the Apostles phrase is,
2 Cor. 2.17.

He that obeys the Will of God, out of love to God, and conscience of duty,
esteems all Gods precepts, concerning all things, to be right, and hates every
false way, one as well as another, even vain thoughts; he consents to the whole
will of God; that it is good, and delights in the whole Will of God, after the
inward man, and with the mind serves the Law of God, even when the flesh is
captivated by the Law of sin: His heart inclines to perform the Statutes of
the Lord always, even unto the end, and he wishes, that his ways were so
directed, that he might keep all the Statutes of his God. The Will of his God
is dear unto him above all things, Above Ps. 119.72.
Silver and Gold; Above Job. 23.12.
necessary food; Above Act. 20.23, 24.
Life, and all the comforts of it. And he is tender of it, as of the Apple of
his Eye, according to that of Solomon, Prove. 7.2. To him, The yoke of Christ is
easy, and his burden light; His Commandments are not grievous, for he
delights to do his Will.

4. Cordial Obedience, is constant and persevering, it holds out in all times
and seasons, and variety of conditions, as Moses and Christ intimate. Deuteronomy.
19.9.
And true it is, That he which cordially obeys Christ, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
continues to obey him, in prosperity and adversity, in time of peril, as well
as in time of praise, when multitudes disobey and oppose the Will of Christ,
John 8.31.
as well as when they seem to stand for the Will of Christ, when all formal
servers of Christ forsake him, and cry, Crucify him, as well as when they
followed him, and magnified him, with Hosanna: He resolves with Peter to follow
Christ, though it be alone, and labors to follow Christ, as Ruth followed
Ruth. 1.16.
Naomi, as Elisha 2 King. 2.
followed Elijah, and Asahel 2 Samuel 2. ver. 19. to the 24.
followed Abner, and does it, as is evident by many ^^^mples in holy Writ,
Noah, Joshua, and Elija^ (...) Mary Magdalen, and other Women (...) followed
Christ, were notable exam^^^ (...), in their time.

Here note these four things, 1. That opposition does not take off, Note.
but rather spur on a cordial server of Jesus Christ.

2. That he that cordially obeys the Will of Christ, is conformable unto Christ
in Obedience: He obeys the Will of Christ, as Christ obeyed the Will of his
Father, for kind, though not for measure, and degree, (to wit) freely,
universally, constantly, even unto the death: In all which respects, cordial
Obedience, may be styled singular Obedience.

3. And thirdly note, That notwit^standing all this, one that cordially serves
and obeys Christ, may, and sometimes does desist for a time, through strong
Temptations, and humane weakness, according to outward appearance. This was
Peter's case, when he denied his Master, yet his heart still moved toward his
Master, his affections still yerned toward Christ, even whilst his tongue
denied him, as appears by the consequence.

4. Lastly note, That he that cordially desires, and really endeavors, to obey
the Will of the Lord, if it were possible, exactly and perfectly, from right
grounds, and for right ends, does this in Gods account, God who will accept the
will for the deed, 2 Cor. 8.12.
accepts this desire and endeavor (in and for Christ) as Obedience; He that
consents to obey, does obey in Gods account.

To get a sure testimony to thy self then, of the holy Spirits saving
habitation in thy soul, and of thy eternal salvation by Christ, examine thy
Obedience (...) these rules of trial, and if it be correspond^^^ with them,
know that it is such as (...) ^^^onstrates the holy Spirits saving operat^^^
(...) thee, and thy eternal salvation by Christ, and give him the glory of all,
and humbly, and beleevingly seek to him, to better thy Obedience daily, that
God may have glory by it.

Poverty of Spirit.
Matthew. 5.3. Blessed are the Poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven.


THis is Jesus Christ's own position, therefore it needs no proof, but calls for
belief. Christ in these words bequeathes the Kingdom of Heaven, not (...) only,
but by deed of gift (if I may so (...) to the Poor in Spirit, Blessed are the
Poor in spirit, for theirs (is) the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.

By the Kingdom of Heaven in Scripture, is sometimes meant, the Kingdom of
Grace, and sometimes the Kingdom of Glory; Both these, as Christ here affirms,
belong to them that are poor in Spirit; Blessed are the Poor in spirit for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.

The Poor in spirit,] are a generation, mean and base in their own eyes, and in
the eyes of the world too, but a generation very precious in the eye of Jesus
Christ, a generation very blessed, and highly honored by Christ himself; a
Kingdom of Grace, and a Kingdom of Glory is here by Christ assigned to them;
Blessed are the Poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

For the better understanding of these words, note, That a man may be two ways
poor in spirit; He may be gracelesly poor, or graciously poor in spirit;
gracelesly poor are all the posterity of Adam, as they come into the world; but
this is not a blessed, but a cursed poverty of spirit.

Graciously poor in spirit, are all those, in some measure, in which Christ is
formed; graceless poverty of spirit, is natural; but gracious poverty of spirit
is supernatural, Evangelical and Divine; Natural poverty, or graceless poverty
of spirit, is cursed, but gracious and Divin poverty of spirit is blessed,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, fortheirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

It is a gracious poverty of spirit, and not graceless poverty of spirit, to
which Christ assigns the Kingdom of Heaven.

The frame of his spirit, which is gracelesly poor, is lively pictured, Job
11.12. Man is born like a wild asses-colt. Job. 39.7, 8. He scarneth the
multitude of the City, He regards not the crying of his driver, the range of
the mountains is his pasture, and he searches after every green thing. A
proud, impudent, silly, vain Creature. These words declare man gracelesly poor
in spirit to be. Thou say thou art rich, and have need of nothing, and
know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked, Rev. 3.17. This is Gods description of man graciously poor in spirit,
but this is not that poverty of spirit, which I am seeking after, not that on
which Christ pronounces* [ Blessed,] not that on which the Kingdom of Heaven is
intailed, therefore I pass by it.

Quest. But what is that poverty of spirit, which Christ pronounces blessed,
and on which he entailes the kingdom of Heaven? How may it be described?

Answ. It is a special work of the sanctifying Spirit in the soul, whereby a
man is brought to see and feel his own emptiness of grace, and Christ's fullness;
and is truly humbled, in regard of the one, and in some measure comforted, in
regard of the other, as one that hopes to receive of his fullness, grace for
grace.

This is that gracious poverty of spirit, which Christ pronounces blessed, and
on which he intailes the kingdom of Heaven; and the appearances of it are
these which follow.

1. A man graciously poor in spirit, abhors himself, and loathes himself,
because of all his abominations; he is worse in his own eyes, than he can be in
any man's else; he sees a fullness of sin in his nature, and a fullness of
sin in his conversation, and yet not such a fullness as he would see, Job
13.23. He is in his own account, the chief of sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15.

2. A man graciously poor in spirit, sees in himself a great emptiness of
grace; he sees that he is not sufficient of himself to think a good thought; He
is in his own account, Ephesians. 3.8.
the poorest man, in the best things of all, that look after them, Less than
the le^st of all Saints; he disclaimes all his own righteousnesses, and
accounts them as rotten rags, and abominable things, in reference to
Justification before God; He forgets all that is behind; if he cast up his
parts, his gifts, and his graces, he concludes, Circumcision is nothing, nor
Uncircumcision is nothing; his faith, his love, his repentance, his obedience,
all put together, nothing; he brings in the total sum in mere ciphers; I am
nothing, yea worse then nothing, says this soul; Can a man be profitable unto
his Maker? I am unprofitable to God and man: When saw I thee a stranger, and
took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? etc. Wherefore is there a price in
the hand of a fool? says this soul.

3. A man graciously poor, or blessedly poor in spirit, He tremble^h at the
Word, when it is rightly applied, yea sometimes when it is wrongfully applied
by Satan, Conscience, or M^n.
is a man of a contrite spirit, a man that trembles at the Word of the Lord;
To him will I look, says the Lord, that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my Word, Isa. 66.2* In this Text, poverty of spirit, contrition,
and the effect of it, tr^mbling at the Word of the Lord, are joined together as
linkes of a Chain; so as he that has one of them, has all of them, in some
measure. As for contrition, it has been already spoken of from ( Page 56. to
Page 64.) to which I refer the Reader.

4. A man graciously poor in spirit, as he sees a fullness of sin, and an
emptiness of grace in himself, and bewailes it; so he sees a fullness of grace
in Christ, a fullness of mercy with God in Christ to pardon him, and heal him,
to justify him, and sanctify him, and fill him with all grace; and this is
attended with some hopes, to be made a partaker of it; The truth of this is
evident in the poor Publican, He saw a fullness of sin in himself, and an
emptiness of grace; and he saw a fullness of mercy in God; and merit in Christ,
to take away his sin and garnish his soul with all grace, and had some hopes
to attain this, otherwise he would never have gone to God for mercy. A man
graciously or evangelically poor in spirit, has some hope of obtaining mercy.

5. And this makes him very industriously to seek after the Lord, in a
conscionable use of all those means, which he has appointed; I will arise, and
go to my Father, etc. says the poor Prodigal. When once this poverty of Spirit
had seized on his spirit, he thought no labor too much to attain what he
sought; Draw me, we will run after thee, says the Spouse, graciously poor in
spirit, Cant. 1.4.

6. A man graciously poor in spirit, esteems spiritual riches the best riches;
and for them, he will with the Merchant-man, give the best price; for them he
will part with all carnal things, and count them but dung; he does hunger and
thirst after righteousness, more than after riches; after the riches of grace,
more than after the riches of the world.

7. A man graciously poor in spirit, is a man of a humble spirit; if God
dispense his gifts liberally unto him, or make greater discoveries of himself,
his mind, and will unto him, than he does to others, he will humbly, and
thankfully, and really ascribe all the glory thereof unto the Lord, and his
free grace, and say as Daniel, As for me, D^n. 2.10 He thinks not the better of
himself for what he does or for what G^d does by him.
this is not conferred upon me, for any Wisdom, or goodness, that I have more
than other, but of free grace, for Christ's sake, bestowed upon me, therefore to
him be all the glory: Who am I, or what is there in me, that God should show
such favor unto me, above what he does unto other This is vigor fit, and ^^t
fit, to give the denomination of a man graciously poor in spirit.

8. A man graciously poor in spirit, is the contentedst man with his condition
of all others; Ruth 1.21.
I went out full, but the Lord brought me home empty, says a soul graciously
poor in spirit, and yet she was contented with her condition. Shall we receive
good at the hand of God? and shall we not receive evil? Shall the thing
formed, say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? It is the Lord,
let him do with we, as seems good to him. This is the lan^uage of souls
graciously poor in spirit: Such a soul looks upon every thing, as a mercy,
that is on this side Hell, and how bad soev^r his condition be, thinks it too
good for him.

9. A man graciously poor in spirit, justif^es God in all his deali^gs, even
under his sadest providence, and dispensations of Justice; The Lord is
righteous in all his Ways, Lam. 1.13.
(says this soul,) I am justly under this condemnation, Luk 23, 40, 41.
for I receive the due reward of my deeds, for I have rebelled against his
Commandmen^s, etc.

10. The soul gracio^sly poor in spirit, gr^anes under that privy pride, which
he finds in himself, as that which is the great burd^n on his spirit, and that
which he longs to be delivered from; Oh wretched man that I ^m, who shall
deliver me? and when shall I be delive^ed from* this corrupt nature of mine,
which exalts it self against God, and hinders the influence of his grace in me?

These Appearances of gracious poverty of spirit, may serve to dis^ry a soul
graciously and blessedly poor in spirit; Try thy spirit by them, and if by what
has been said, thou find this Qualification in thy self, in any measure,
bless God for it, labor to grow in it, and remember the words of our Lord Jesu
Christ, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.

Death to Sin.
Romans 8.10. If Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin; But the
Spirit is Life, because of righteousness.


IN these words, the Apostle lays down two great Characters of our Union with
Christ, or Christ resident in us; The first this, The body is dead, because of
sin; The second this, The Spirit is Life, because of righteousness; Christ is
in you (says the Apostle) except ye be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5. If Christ be
in you, it will appear thus, The body is dead, because of sin.

The Body, here spoken of, is not a body of flesh, not a body Celestial, nor a
body Terrestiall, but a body Diabolical, a body of sin, as the members,
mentioned Col. 3.5. demonstrate; and likewise the language of the Apostle, Romans
7.24. where he calls corrupt nature the body; and more plainly, Romans 6.6.
styles it, The body of sin, Ephesians. 4.22. The old man; This is the body here
meant.

The body of sin, is the depravedness and corruption of our whole nature, by
reason of which we are naturally averse to all good, and prone to evil
continually, and so liable to all misery, and therefore the Apostle calls it, A
body of death. Romans 7.24.


The body is alive in all those, in whom Christ lives not; but where Christ
lives, this body dies. If Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin,
etc.

Death to sin is double; There is a death to the guilt of sin; And a death
to the power, reign, and dominion of sin.

Death to the guilt of sin, is a perfect fredome from all sin, by the death
of Christ for our sin; thus all in whom Christ lives, are dead to sin
totally.

We are dead to the guilt of sin, by the body of Christ, who died for us:
Heb. 10.14.
The death of our dear Savior has purchased, and perfected this death for us:
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin; 1 John 1.7. From all
sin past, present, and to come; He that is thus dead, is freed from sin, as
the Apostle speaks, Romans 6.7. Redeemed from all iniq^ity, Tit. 2.14. And this
is the great priveledge of all those in whom Christ lives, of all the true
member^ of Jesus Christ: Christ undertakes for them, as Judah did for Benjamin,
I will be s^rety for him; of my hand shale thou require him: if I bring him not
unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever, said
Judah to his father, Genesis 43.9. Thus Christ undertakes for all his members, for
all his elect, so as they may, and ought, to turn all charges brought against
them, over to Christ; all inditements from God, or Satan, or conscience abused
by Satan over to Christ their surety. (...).
Who shall lay any thing, to the charge of Gods elect? (says the Apostle) it
is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? etc. So may he that is thus
dead to the guilt of sin, say, What sin is it that can condemn me, that
can b^ing in an in^ictment against me? it is Christ that died, it is Christ
that died for me, and by his death, perfected this death for me, I am now
complete in him; in this resp^ct, who is it, or wh^t is it then, that can lay
any thing unto my change, that can separate me from the love of God in Christ
Jesus? Sin, my worst enemy cannot do it, for I am totally dead to the guilt of
it, by virtue of my Union with Christ; Is Christ be in y^u, the bo^y is dead,
because of sin perfectly ^ead to the guilt of sin.

Though Just^fication acquits a sinner from all sin, (...).
in Gods determination, yet is not his p^r^^n formally granted, nor actually;
put in ex^^u^i^n un^^ll sued out, and the tr^bute of ac^u^ll Repentance, for
k^own sin is said, (...)
(except in some cases) viz. in case of the want of the use of (...) as in
children, and dis^^^cted persons, in whom conscience cannot do its ^^ffice,
be^^us^ of debility in the under^^anding: Thi^ (with submission to a better
ju^gement) I humbly conceive to be according to truth, and no^e it, to
vindicate my s^l^, and cau^ion the Reader concerning that Antinomi^^ Tenet,
about Justification, so common in these days.

Thus is a true believer perfectly dead to the guilt of sin, by the death of
Christ for his sin, But to the power, dominion, and being of sin, no child
of Adam is totally dead in this life, no not the best of the children of God,
but dying daily; therefore (says the Apostle,) I die daily, etc. If any man
thinks himself freed from sin, or perfectly dead to sin in this sense, He
deceives himself, and the truth is not in him, 1 John 1.8.

For totally dead to sin, in this sense, was never any son of man, in this
life, but he that was the Son of God (to wit) Jesus Christ.

Totally dead to the power, and being of sin is not he, that is totally dead
to the guilt of sin, until this earthly house be quite pulled down, and
death that last debt, and wages of sin to the godly paid, then, and never
till then, is he, in whom Christ lives, totally freed from the power and being
of sin.

By the mercy of God, death, which was to man the wages and punishment of
sin, is made unto all true believers, the end of sin; the worker of death
(to wit, sin) does perish, by its own works sin is slain, and abolished by
death.

Total death, to the power, and being of finne, is one great part of the
privative gain, which death brings to all that are in Christ, to all that die
in the Lord: death the devorcer of soul and body, brings perfect death to the
power and being of sin, the enemy and burden of soul and body.

Perfectly dead to the power and being of sin, is no man here, this death
belongs to that other world; But truly dead to the power and reign of sin,
are all those here, in whom Christ lives; and this is that death which this
Text points at, When sin is sentenced to death and dying, then is it dead in
Gods account, and in Scripture phrase.
If Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin, etc.

All in the state of nature, are dead in sin; All in a state of grace, are
dead to sin, according to the meaning of this Text, dead to sin, in a
Gospel sense.

Death to the power and reign of finne, is one part of the renovation of our
natures, consisting in that which the Scripture calls mortification, by virtue
of which, the love of sin, and delight in sin, which is indeed, the life of
sin, is destroyed; At this death the Apostle points, Romans 6 2. How shall we
that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? As if he had said, How shall
we that are dead to the guilt of sin, take pleasure in the filth of sin, or
wallow in any sin with delight? It is impossible; for death to the guilt of
sin, always produces death to the power and dominion of sin; If Christ be
in you, the body is dead, because of sin. Is Christ be in you, as a
Iustifier, he is in you, as a Sanctifier also, The body is dead, because of
sin.

Note.
Christ and sin, may dwell in the same subject at the same time; yea Christ
may live, where sin does dwell; Christ lives in me; sin dwells in me,
Gal. 2.20. Romans 7.17.
says the Apostle; but Christ and sin cannot both live, and reign together,
in the same subject at the same time. Caesar and Pompey might better have lived
and reigned togeher, than Christ and sin; where either of these lives, it
reigns, and both cannot reign together; If Christ be in you, the body is dead,
because of sin.

This body (to wit) sin, whilst alive rules and reigns, as a Husband, as a
Lord and Master, and is obeyed freely and willingly, (with the consent of the
whole will,) so much that phrase of the Apostle, Romans 6.16.
To whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, does imply. But when Christ
once espouseth a soul unto himself, he divests this Lord of his power, He puts
this Husband to death, and assumes all the rule and domination to himself: And
the soul thus espoused, yields to obey him, as her sovereign Lord and sole
Commander; We have no king but Caesar, said the Jews; So says the soul dead to
sin. I have no King but Christ, I yield my self willingly to no other;
Therefore says the Apostle, If Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of
sin, That is the desire, and bent of the soul, which is naturally to sin, and
for sin, is turned from sin, and against sin; so that the body of sin
cannot without much reluctance and opposition bear sway, where Christ dwells.

1. The body of sin, whilst alive, makes a willing sinner, but when dead, a
nilling sinner; I do that, which I would not, says the soul dead to sin;
Romans 7.16. The evil which I would not, v. 19.
The soul alive to sin, in sinning, does the evil which it would do; but the
soul dead to sin in sinning, does the evil which it would not do.

2. The soul alive to sin, allows it self in sin; in some sin or other,
every soul in whom this body is alive allows it self; But the soul dead to
sin, allows not it self in any known sin; What I do, I allow not, says a
soul dead to sin, Romans 7.15. I do this, and I do that, which I should not,
through humane frailty, and the violence of temptation, from without and from
within, or true necessity; but I allow not what I do, I do not resolve in cold
blood, that thus and thus I will do, but the quite contrary. The soul that is
truly dead to sin, allows not it self in any one known sin.

The soul that is alive to sin, is in league with finne, it makes leagues
with sin, as the Israelites did with the inhabitants of Canaan; there is no
unregenerate person, but he is in league with some sin or other, and though
he lay some tribute upon his sin, or upon himself for his sin, yet he
continues his league with sin still, and intends not the ruin of sin, nor
the utter extirpation of sin: But the soul that is dead to sin, does not
make a league with any one sin, but his design is to ruin sin, all sin;
he will not covenant to sin, as Judas and the chief-Priests did, but covenant
against sin, as Job did, Job. 3 1.^. This is the second Character of a foul
dead to sin.

Note.
As Saul should have dealt with Amalek, so does the soul dead to sin, deal
with sin; it spa^es none, it wars against the whole body of death, against
every sin.

3. The soul alive to sin, in sinning, does the evil which he loves; but the
soul dead to sin, in sinning, does the evil which he hates; What I hate,
that do I, says a soul dead to sin, Rom 7.15. The soul alive to sin,
though he refrain from sin, yet he loves it still; But the soul dead to
sin, though he fall into sin, and be many times overpowred by sin, yet he
does not love sin, but hates it, so far forth as regenerate.

Object. But conscience may here reply in some soul, and say; I cannot by this
conclude that I am one dead to sin, but rather, that I am one alive to sin,
for I find much inclination in my will to sin, and much adhering in
affections to sin.

Answ. 1. If this alone were sufficient to give the denomination of a soul
alive to sin, then no soul living in a body of flesh, could conclude, that he
were truly dead to sin, for their is no soul inhabiting this earthly house,
no not the best alive, but has cause thus ^o complain.

2. But secondly, Every soul, dead to sin; does bear the image of a double
person, he bears the image of the first Adam, and the image of the second
Adam: he is partly flesh, and partly spirit, and he is thus in every faculty of
his soul; there is flesh in every faculty of his soul, sin dwelling in every
faculty; this therefore does not render the soul alive to sin.

3. Then thirdly, Thou speak in this, as one seeking after a perfect death,
to the power and being of sin in thy self; But the Apostle, in this Text,
points only at a true death to sin; and truly dead to sin, he may be, and
is, to whom sin is a burden. So much for ^^swet to this Objection.

4. In the fourth place, The body of sin, i^ truly dead, wastes and decays;
there is a decaying in this body, and a wasting away, as in the natural body,
when once dead; therefore says the Apostle, I die daily, thereby implying,
that where there is a true death to sin, there is a true decaying of sin.

Object. But conscience in some may here reply again, and say, I cannot hence
conclude, that I am one truly dead to sin; but rather see cause to conclude
on the contrary, for I do not find that corruption does decay and wast away in
me, but rather that it grows stronger and stronger.

Answ. Strong apprehensions of corruption, are no argument of the strength of
corruption, at least, if they be accompanied with loathing of them, and warring
against them, in the strength of Christ; but rather symptoms of a new Life;
This therefore should not cause any to conclude, That there is no death to
sin in him, but rather excite him to cleave closer to Christ, who has begun
this death in him, and will at the length perfect it.

5. In the fifth place, The soul that is truly dead to sin, is universally
dead to sin; he is dead to every sin, and he is dead to sin in every
faculty of his soul, though but in part, yet in every part of soul and body;
This, and no less then this, will serve to demonstrate a man truly dead to
sin, in a Gospel-sence.

6. Finally, The soul that is truly dead to sin, is alive to righteousness;
the soul that is dead in sin* is alive to sin, and the soul that is dead to
sin, is alive to righteousness; If Christ be in you, the body is dead,
because of sin, But the Spirit is Life, because of righteousness.

This is the next thing to be spoken of, and it is the second Character, laid
down by the Apostle, to demonstrate Christ resident in us, The Spirit is Life,
because of righteousness.

By Spirit in this Text, is meant (as I conceive) the regenerate part of man,
and nothing else (to wit) that which is born of the-Spirit: in this sense, I
take the word Spirit here, because it is set in opposition to the forementioned
body; which body (as is evident) is the unregenerate part, or old man; So this
word Spirit is used by the Apostle unto the Galathians, The flesh lusts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; The regenerate part
lusts against the unregenerate; So Christ uses the word Spirit, Joh. 3.6.
That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit, but the Spirit is Life, because of
righteousness: It is, as if the Apostle had said, If Christ be in you, it will
appear by this, the Spirit is Life, because of righteousness. that is, the
regenerate man is alive because of righteousness; he is alive because of a
double righteousness, or because of righteousness in a double sense.

1. He is alive, because of the righteousness of Justification, And, 2. Because
of the righteousness of Sanctification.

That man is truly and perfectly alive, because of the righteousness of
Justification, which has Christ's righteousness imputed unto him for
righteousness.

A man thus alive to righteousness, lives either the life of hope, the life of
faith, or the life of sense; and this life Satan does labor much to deprive
him of.

Where the soul is thus alive, because of the righteousness of Justification,
that soul is alive indeed, because of the righteousness of Sanctification; and
this is that life which this Text points at, If Christ be in you, etc. the
Spirit is Life, because of righteousness; If Christ be in you as a justifier,
He is in you as a sanctifier; If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of
sin, but the Spirit is Life, because of Righteousness.

The truth of this assertion, does further appear thus; Whom he justisieth,
them he also glorifieth, says the Text, Romans 8.30. But without holiness no
man shall see the Lord, therefore it follows by necessary consequence, That he
that is justified has this qualification in him, to wit, sanctification,
otherwise he could not see the Lord or be glorified.

To whom Christ is made righteousness, he is made sanctification also, 1 Cor.
1.30. This may suffice for the confirmation of this Truth.

That man is alive, because of the righteousness of sanctification, which has
the righteousness of the quickening spirit imparted unto him, for the
inlivening and regulating of his whole man.

A Christian, in this world, is alive, because of the righteousness of
sanctification truly, but imperfectly, his spirit is alive, because of
righteousness, that is, his understanding, will, and affections, etc. all the
members of his body, his whole nature, so far forth as regenerate, is alive,
because of the righteousness of sanctification (I say) so far forth alive,
(that is) so far forth, he approves of righteousness, imbraceth
righteousness, and lives in the practice of righteousness, out of Love to the
God of righteoufnesse.

This is evident in the Apostle Paul, as soon as Christ had taken up his
dwelling in Paul, and he was once alive to righteousness, his whole man so
far forth as regenerate, was turned about to another point, he had another
judgment of the things of God than he had before and accordingly embraced, what
he before refused; his heart was warmed with a love to the will and ways of
God, and desire to walk therein; Lord, What will thou have me to do? (says he)
command what thou will, I am ready pressed to obey thy will. And his great care
was, to have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward man,
as himself affirms, Act. 24.16. And thus it is with every man alive to
righteousness, he has the same frame of spirit that Paul had, the same grace
that he had, as a man alive to righteousness, though not in the same measure.

Every man in whom Christ lives, is alive because of righteousness, Note.
but every one is not alike alive, every one in which Christ lives, is truly
alive, because of righteousness, but every one is not strongly alive to
righteousness, some are more vigorously alive then others.

As Christ is more or less in a man, so is he more or less alive to
righteousness.

A man truly alive to righteousness, has these appearances; 1. He is of all
other men the most sensible of his own unrighteousness, he sees more
unrighteousness, then righteousness in his best actions, more flesh then
spirit in himself, as appears in Paul, Romans 7.

2. The body of sin, which is dead, stinks in the nostrils of him which is
truly alive to righteousness, as the dead Corpse of a man does in the nostrils
of him that is alive, in a natural sense.

3. Lastly, a man truly alive to righteousness, is a new Creature, of whom I
shall speak in the next place.

Would thou then know whether Christ be resident in thee, yea or nay;
Consider seriously what the holy Ghost does in this Text affirm; If Christ be
in you* the body is dead, because of sie^ but the spirit is life, because of
righteousness^; and go through what has been here said, on this ^ubject, and
if it hereby appear, that thou are one truly dead to sin, and alive to
righteousness, conclu^e thou may safely, That the Lord is thy portion, that
Christ is resident in any soul, who having once taken possession there, will
not be ^uted; Christ in thee, the hope of glory, will assuredly bring the soul
and b^dy, to live with him in glory; If we be dead with him, we shall also live
with him, says the Text* 2 Timothy 2.11 therefore i^ we be dead with Christ, and
risen again with him, we shall assuredly live together with him in glory.

A New Creature.
2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature.


EVery one that is out of Christ, is ou^ of the root of life, out of the stock
of grace, out of the way, the only true way unto eternal happiness, and thus
are all the posterity of Adam by nature.

It mainly concerns every one therefore, to consider seriously, what he bottoms
upon, the old Adam or the new, one of these two all flesh stands on: How we
shall come to the knowledge of this, this Text tells us, If any man be in Christ,
he is a new Creature.

These words, as they are in themselves an entire sentence, contain in them a
true and lively description of a man in Christ; in them the Apostle lays down
posit^vely, one great Character of a soul resident in Christ, He is a new
Creature.

This he lays down indefinitely [ if any man, etc.] as if he had said, If any
man, of what Nation, station, quality, rank or condition soever [ be in Christ]
it will appear thus, He is a new Creature.

Quest. But what is it to be in Christ?

Answ. To be in Christ, according to the meaning of this Text, is to be truly
and really united unto Christ, or ingrafted into Christ, as a sience is into
the stock, incorporate into it, and made truly one with it, and every one that
is thus in Christ, is a new Creature.

Quest. But what is that (may some say) what is a new Creature?

Answ. A ^ew Creature, according to his formality, is a Creature wholly new (I
say) a Creature wholly new, so says the Apostle in this Text, Old things are
past away, all things are become new.

Caution. A Creature universally wed.
By a Creature wholly new, I do not mean a Creature void of humane frail^y, nor
a Creature totally freed from the being or power of corrupt Nature, not a
Creature exempt from the exercise of temptations, but a Creature renewed in
every part, though but in part, and freed from the evil of temptations.

The app^arances of a new Crea^ure.
His appearances are many, for a new Creature, according to the meaning of this
Text, is one that is born again, born of the Spirit, as Christ speaks; He is
one in whom Christ is formed, one in whom Christ lives; He is one that is
sanctifi^d throughou^, in soul and body, and spirit of his mind as the (...)
one holy (...) and (...) He is (...) from the (...) old things (...) new, as
this Text speaks; He is one whose heart and spirit, principles and practices
are all new and holy; He is one, who having received a new life from Christ,
desires and endeavors to live, as a new Creature unto Christ only: one that in
every condition, labors to live for the honor of Christ, and so as he may
truly say, To me to live is Christ; to me, thus and thus to live, is for the
honor of Christ: he is one in whom the name of Christ is glorified, and the
Gospel held forth: one, who in all things whatsoever he does, in word or deed,
labors to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the glory of God by
him: one, who desires and endeavors to have his whole conversation, such as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, and to have every thought brought in subjection
to the Obedience of Christ. He is one, who though he have fleshly lusts in him,
does not make provision to fulfill them, he does not habitually design, and
take thought, how to fulfill them, but how to mortify them: he is one, A new
Creature does not allow himself in any one known sin, nor in omit^ing any known
duty. He is one that does not follow after sin^, but after grace.
who though he walk in the flesh, does not war after the flesh, but against
the flesh; He makes not his liberty an occasion to the flesh: He is one, who
though he cannot live without sin, does not allow himself in any known sin,
but hates every false way, and groans under the remainder of the old man in
him, as his greatest burden; He is one, that carries a holy jelousie over
h^mself, and all his ways, and thence labors to keep a spiritual watch
within, and without; He is one, that worships God in the Spirit, and puts no
confidence in the flesh: one that servs God in newness of Spirit, not in the
oldness of the letter; one that labors to be filled with the Spirit: He is
one, whose conversation is in Heaven, whilst he is on Earth; one that delights
in the Law of God after his inward man, he delights to do the will of God. He
is one of another Spirit, then the world has; one that walks by another rule
then the world does, to wit, the Word of God. He is a growing Crea^ure, he
grows in grace; He forgets what is behind, and reaches forth to that which is
before: He aims at perfection, and presses toward this neark. He is one, that
lives in Christ, as a branch in the Vine and brings forth fruit in him: He is
one in whose Nostrils the whole body of death, and every part and member of it
stinks: one that labors to abstain from all appearance of evil, To cleanse
himself from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit.
and to be holy and blameless before God, out of Love to God: He is one that
minds the things of the Spirit, is led by the Spirit, and walks after the
Spirit: He is a world-contemning, and a world-overcoming Creature: He is one
that labors to deny himself, and take up his cross and follow Christ, 1 Ioh.
5.4.
as Caleb Numb. 14.24.
did (to wit) fully* and as David did, of whom God says, 1 King* 14 8.
He followed me with all his heart, to do that only which was right in mine
eyes; And as Ruth, Ruth 1.16.
followed Naomi, as Elisha followed 2 Kin^ 2.
Elijah, and Asaebel 2 Samuel 2. ve^. 19, to the 24.
followed Abner, he would not leave Abner, though he died by his hand. A new
Creature is one, that counts himself a stranger and a pilgrim in this world,
and lives like a stranger a and pilgrim in this world: one, whose Conversation
here, declares that he minds, desires, and seeks after a better Country, then
this world affords (to wit) an Heavenly. He is one, that makes it his chiefest
work to glorify God, and save his soul: one to whom the Talent of time is very
precious: one, that labors to use every Talent, wherewith he is in^rusted,
according to the will of his Lord, and for the honor and glory of his Lord:
one that labors so to walk before God here, that whether present or absent, he
may be accepted of him: one that labors to Honor God by using lawful things
lawfully, as well as by shunning things unlawful in themselves: He is one that
labors so to keep his account here, that he may give it up with joy, when the
day of account comes: He is one, that does not commit sin: one that seeks not
his own, but Christ's, and his Brothers good: one whose affections are set on
things above, more then on the things below. He is one, to whom the Preaching
of the Cross of Christ, to wit, the Gospel, is the wisdom of God, and the Power
of God: one, who being born again, as a new born Babe, desires the sincere and
nourishing milk of the word, that he may grow thereby: one that hears the voice
of Christ, speaking in his word, by his Ministers, knows it, and obeys it, and
declines the voice of a stranger: He is one, to whom the whole Word and Will of
God is sweet, every bitter thing in it sweet: He accounts no truth gall and
wormwood, as some phrase it: He is one, to whom all Gospel Ordinances are sweet
and delectable: He is one that deserts not old truth to follow new light, but
makes it his sun to discover the verity of it: He is one, that receives the
Ambassadors of Christ, (to wit) the lawful and faithful Ministers of the
Gospel, as Christ himself, and esteems them very highly in love, for their work
sake: He is one that delights in the Law of God after his inward man: one that
labors to live by says, in every condition, prosperity and adversity: one to
whom the yoke of Christ is easy, and his burden light: one to whom none of
Christ's Commandments are grievous; He is one that continu^th in the word of
Christ, in the love of it, in the belief of it, in the obedience of it; He is
one faithful unto the death; He is one, which how high soever he be in place,
in parts, in gifts or grace, is low in his own eyes, little in his own fight,
his heart is lowly still; hence it comes to pass, that when he has done his
best to follow the rule of righteousness, he abh^rs himself for his
unrighteousness, and accounts himself a wretched man: Finally, he is one that
is joined to the Lord Jesus Christ, and one spirit with him.

All this, and much more then this, the Scriptures affirm to be in a new
Creature, as all that are acquainted wit^ the holy Scriptures know: Who so
desires to be better informed, touching a new Creature, may consult learned Dr
Preston on a new Creature; but a prefect enumeration of all the qualifications
of a new Creature, is no where to be found, but in the holy Scriptures, which
indeed do picture him to the life, and to them I refer the Reader, for full
satisfaction herein: and for the benefit of those which are unacquainted with
the Scriptures, or want time, or ability, to collect a clear and sound
evidence of a new Creature from the Scriptures, I will reduce this long
description of a new Creature to seven particulars, and speak of them
particularly, what God has been pleased to impart unto me, that if ever God in
his providence should any ways bring this Manuscript to public view, it may
be helpful to some poor souls this way.

First, A new Creature is one, Jesus Christ formed in thee the first
demonstration of thy new Creation.
in whom Jesus Christ, the new man is formed, (to wit) truly formed; the truth
of this is evident, by the language of the Apostle, Gal. 4.19. My little
Children (says he) of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ he formed
in you, etc. which words do clearly and strongly prove, That when Christ is
formed in the Creature, the Creature is then new and not before, it is then a
new Creature, and not till then, it is then born again, born of God, and new
indeed. Regeneration may well be called a forming of Christ in us, for it
forms Christ in the understanding, in the will, in the affections, in the
conscience, in all the faculties of the soul, in all the parts and members of
the body, in the whole man, in the whole life and conversation.

Here note two or three things; First, That God forms Christ in the whole man,
where he forms him truly; God forms Christ in the whole man, by conforming the
whole man to Christ.

2. When every faculty of the soul, is in its scope and bent for Christ, then
is Christ formed in the soul, when every faculty of the soul and member of the
body is bent for Christ, then is Christ formed in the whole man.

3. When a man's will, desire, aim and endeavor, is to square his whole life by
the Word of God, as his rule, then is Christ formed in his Conversation, then
is he a new Creature in Gods account, who measures man more by his will and
affection, then his action, as appears by 2 Cor. 8.12. compared with Prove.
23.26.

Would thou then know, whether thou art a new Creature, yea, or nay;
consider then, whether Christ be formed in thee (^o wit) truly formed, yea or
nay; ask thy soul the question that Saul asked the wi^ch? What form is he of
(said he) What saw ^hou? so do thou ask thy soul, 1 Samuel 28.14. and 13.
What form art thou of, O my soul? Whose image do thou bear, Christ's or
Satan's? If Christ's, truly though weakly, this argues thy state good, thy
Creation ^tw, this demonstrates thee a Creature new, a new Creature.

Then again, say as he, What see thou? What see thou O my soul in thy self?
What light? what darkness? if nothing but darkness? what darkness is it?
affected darkness or afflicting darkness? if afflicting darkness, this
speaks the Creature new.

The new man is renewed in knowledge Col. 3.10.
If thou descriest light in thy understanding, Consider then, how it operates,
how it regulates, how it transforms.

1. Consider, how that light which thou have, be it more or less, does
operate, whether it puffs up or casts down thy soul, Renewing light
ishumble, and humbling.
whether it lifts up thy soul, in praise or in pride, whether it give glory
to God or self; renewing light is humbling. God glorifying; the more Job saw of
God, the more he abhorred himself; Job 24.5, 6.
the more a new Creature knows God and himself, the more he loathes himself, and
admires his God, and desires to advance him.

Consider, what affection suitable to its notion that light which thou have
produces in thee; what love to God, and the things of God; what love to man
for God; what hatred of sin, what joy in the Lord, what desire to enjoy the
Lord in all, and above all things; what comfortable hope of increase of grace
and glory; what trust in God, and desire to do for God, and be with God, it
generates in thee.

Consider, what power of godliness thy light produces in thee, what
self-discovery, what self-denial it has begotten in thee, especially touching
thy predominate sin; what contempt of the world in the good and evil of it,
what conscience of sin, of duty, and the manner of it, what conjunction of
duties of the second Table with the duties of the first Table; what
contentation with thy state, what watchfulness over thy heart, and all the
outgoings of it; what willingness to take Christ with the Cross; what desire
and endeavor to help others; what hunger and thirst after all those means,
which God has appointed for the increase of it, and all grace in us; what
fruitfullness in righteousness, etc. 1 Col. 1.6.
Saving illumination produces fruitfulness.

Secondly, Persons savingly enlightened, walk as Children of light. Ephesians. 5.8.
Consider how that light which thou have, does regulate and reform thee,
consider how it regulates thy judgment, thy will and affections; how it reforms
thy life and all thy actions, and conforms them to the Word and Will of Christ:
Consider, what death to sin, what life to righteousness it produces in
thee, what through reformation it has begotten in thee; renewing light is
reforming light; universally reforming, inwardly reforming, and perseveringly
reforming.

2 Cor. 3.18.
Thirdly, Consider how that light which thou have, transforms thee. Consider,
what transformation it makes in thee. Renewing light is transforming light;
Light from the sanctifying Spirit of Christ, transforms into the Image of
Christ; Christ truly formed in the understanding speaks the man transformed, by
the renewing of his mind, as is evident by the Language of the Apostle, Romans
12.2. Be you transformed by the renewing of your mind, etc. Consider, how that
light which thou have, elevateth and raises thy soul from Earth to Heaven; and
if thou find that the light that is in thy understanding do thus operate,
thus regulate, and thus transform, truly though weakly, be it more or less,
know, it lively demonstrates Christ formed in thy understanding, thy light
renewing light, and thee a Creature new.

Of Christ formed in the other faculties of the soul, (to wit) Will and
Affection, and in life and conversation, more shall be spoken in due place: For
the present, Note.
note this.

As Christ the new Man, is more or less formed in the Creature, so the
Creature is more or less new.

When Christ shall be perfectly formed in the Crea^ure, then, and never till
then, the Creature shall be perfectly new, according to degrees.

Thus far of the first appearance of a new Creature, he is one in whose
understanding Christ is formed:

2. The second appearance of a new Creature, which I mean to insist on, is
this: He is one that has a new heart, this conclusion I deduct from the
Language of the Lord, Ezekiel. 36.26. where the Lord speaking of making the
Creature new, begins at the heart: A new heart the second demonstration of a
new Creature.
A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, says the
Lord, etc.

Satan does his best works without, but God and Nature do their first works
within.

Nature begins its work within, Note.
as Philosophers and Anatomists conceive; In natural generation, the heart,
lives, and brain, parts which have in them, the beginning of motion, are the
first in being, though not the first in appearing, nor the first perfected, say
they.

So in spiritual generation (to wit,) regeneration, where it is true and real,
the work is begun within, in the heart and spirit, that is made new first,
although perfect^d last, words and actions, which are but the effects of these
causes, appear before them, and give demonstration of them, but these, as the
cause, must needs preceed the effect.

A man by a common work of the Spirit of God on him, Note.
may be made another man then formerly he was, and yet not be a new Creature;
He may have another heart then formerly he had, and yet not have a new heart;
He may be qualified with moral grace in a high degree, and enabled to do much
for God, and yet not be a new Creature, as appears in Saul and Judas; when God
brought Saul to the Kingdom of Israel, according to Samuels prop^esie, The
Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and ^e became another man, and the Text
says, God gave him another heart, 1 Samuel 10. ver. 6, 9. A he^rt other ways
qualified then formerly. And Saul was valiant and prosperous in his enterprises
against the Philistines, and gifted for ruling, yet Saul never was a new
Creature, he never had a new heart: Judas when called to the Apostleship by
Christ, was by the Spirit of Chrift gifted for the work whereunto Christ called
him, he was made another man then he was before, yet was he not made a new
Creature, he never had a new heart; He was gifted for the Church, but not for
his own salvation.

There is a vast difference, between being made another man, The newness of the
heart, consists not in the substance of it, but in the quality of it; when
the heart is made new, the substance is not altered, but the quality isaltered:
A renewed heart, is in Scripture called a new heart. Job 19.28.
and being made a new man, as these instances declare; Neither Saul nor Judas
ever were new Creatures, nor ever had a new heart, nor any renewing grace
wrought by the Spirit of God in them.

A new heart is proper and peculiar to a new Creature, fit, and but fit, to
give the appearance of a new Creature.

The Creature therefore is to be accounted new, only as it can derive newnes
from within, newnes from the heart and spirit; all without may be new, all the
apparel new, and yet the person old that wears it; so all without may be new
in appearance, profession, words and actions, all new, and yet the Creature old
still; the newness of the Creature consists chiefly in the renovation of the
inward man; I say (chiefly) not only.

A new Creature is one all glorious within, one that has the root of the
matter within him, as Job speaks (to wit) integrity in his inward parts, a new
heart and spirit.

He therefore that will judge aright of his own spiritual estate, Such as the
heart is, such is the man.
must needs begin where God begins, at the heart and spirit, he must confider,
whether he have a new heart or not.

Quest. But you will say, What is a new heart? And, how may I discern whether I
have a new heart, yea, or nay?

Ans. A new heart, A new heart, is in Scripture called by diverse names, and set
forth by diverse properties, some of which I will here speak of, as God shall
enable me.
considered according to its formality, is a heart wherein Christ is formed, a
heart endued with renewing grace, and acted by it, a heart made one with the
Lord, a heart wherein Christ is resident and president; And it may be discerned
by diverse appearances.

Take this description of a new heart, in which expression you like best, it
comes all to one, it is not my work, nor purpose to speak of the terms of this
description, therefore I pass from it, to the appearances of a new heart.

1. A new heart is a heart washed from wickedness, this is intimated by the
Language of the Lord to Jerusalem, Jer. 4* 14. O Jerusalem wash thy heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved, etc.

Quest. But you will say, How shall I know, whether my heart be washed from
wickedness, or not?

Ans. I will mention only one Character of a heart washed from wickedness,
which is this; In a heart washed from wickedness, vain thoughts do not lodge as
welcome guests, and if not vain thoughts, then much less wicked thoughts: this
is plainly hinted in this Text, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may
be saved; how long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee, it is as if the Lord
had said? Thy willing lodging of vain thoughts within thee, plainly
demonstrates thy heart is not washed from wickedness, for were thy heart
washed from wickedness, vain thoughts would not, nay they could not lodge
within thee, as welcome guests.

Vain thoughts may, and oftentimes do, arise in the best and most holy man or
woman alive, Note.
but they do not lodge with such a person as welcome guests.

Object. But may some say, I cannot from this conclude, that my heart is washed
from wickedness, but rather that it is not washed from wickedness, for I find
that vain thoughts do not only arise in me, but lodge with me, abide with me
long, and many times with delight, I do not only think vain thoughts, but many
times bid them welcome.

Ans. This know, that every one whose heart is washed from wickedness, bears
the Image of a double person; he bears the Image of a person washed, and of a
person unwashed, of the old man, and of the new; and so far forth as he is
washed and cleansed, he does decline and hate vain thoughts, but so far forth
as unwashed and unregenerate, they are welcome and pleasing to him; The heart
that is washed from wickedness is not perfectly but imperctfely washed: hence
it comes to pass, that there is in it both a detesting of, and a delighting in
(the same thing,) at the same time; vain thoughts lodge not with the regenerate
part of the man, as welcome guests, whatever they may do with the unregenerate
part.

Vain thoughts, as Satan's soldiers, may quarter upon a man, Note.
whose heart is washed from wickedness, will he, nill he, but they are not
welcome guests, but wearysome guests to him, so far forth as washed.

Whosoever therefore can find, that he does truly hate and decline vain
thoughts, ought not hence to conclude, that his heart is not washed from
wickedness, nor that he has not a new heart, but rather to conclude with the
Apostle, Romans 7.17. It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me;
it is no more I, as washed and sanctified, that welcome these guests, but it is
sin that dwells in me that does it.

2. Secondly, Another appearance of a new heart is, purity: a new heart is a
pure and simple heart: That which is in Ezekiel called, a new heart, is by
Christ called, a pure heart, Mat. 5.8. and a blessed heart; which plainly
declares, that a new heart is a pure heart.

A pure heart is of all other the most sensible of its impurity, it still finds
more impurity, then purity in its self, and therefore goes to Christ for more
cleansing stills, to the Blood of Christ, to the Spirit of Christ, to the
Ordinances of Christ, with the desire and language of David, Create in me a
clean heart, O Lord, and puts that promise in suit, Ezekiel. 36.25.

A pure heart will not mix with any impure thing, but is still purging it out,
it is like a pure fountain, still purging it self, it makes a man very
industrious tokeep a pure conscience. To keep himself pure from the
pollutionsthat are in the world through lust, pure in thought, in word* and in
deed: a pure heart desires to have all pure within and without.

A pure heart loves the pure word of God, for the purity of it, not for the
novelty of it; Thy Word is very pure, therefore ^h^ Servant loves it, says a
pure heart, Psalm. 119.140.

A pure heart makes the pure Word of God its rule to walk by in all things, and
labors to order its conversation by this, both toward God and toward Man in
all things.

The purity of the heart in the state of grace, consists in the simplicity and
sincerity of holiness, Note.
not in the perfection of it; its purity is Evangelical.

The purity of sincere holiness, is fit, and but fit to give the appearance of
a new heart.

3. A new heart is an upright heart: Uprightness is another expression,
whereby a new heart is deciphred in Scripture; in diverse places, when the heart
is made new, it is made upright; uprightness therefore is fit, and but fit to
give the appearance of a new heart; uprightness of heart being that which
makes the great difference between a true Child of God and an Hypocrite.

Note.
An upright heart, by the grace of regeneration, A heart wherein there is no
guile reigning. Prove. 16.17.
is not a heart totally void of Hypocrisy, but a heart endued with sincerity,
which is contrary to, and warreth against Hypocrisy, such a heart Christ calls,
an honest and good heart, Luke 8.15.

The appearances of uprightness of heart are very many, Psalm. 19.12, 13.
but for brevity sake, I will mention only some few, which an upright heart
cannot well be without.

An upright heart, An uprightheart goes not after any known s^n, but p^^ys and
fights against all sin. Ps. 101.3.
is a heart set against all sin; original, as well as actual; secret, as well
as open sin, applauded, as well as down cr^ed sins: Sin and uprightness,
by the grace of regeneration, are direct Antipodes, flat contraries, and the
heart fo far forth as upright, is set against all sin, but most against
that sin, which is more its own then other (to wit) its predominate sin, as
the language of an upright man declares, Psalm. 119. ver. 101. and 104. compared
with 2 Samuel 22.24.

An upright heart* Conscienciousin private duties, as well as exact in public
duties. An upright heart makes a man studious and careful to walk uprightly.
is a heart careful of all duty, and desirous to correspond all circumstances
in duty; Integrity and uprightness, shows it self by yielding universal
Obedience to all Gods revealed Will, 1 King 9 4. It makes a man studious and
careful to approve himself upright toward God, and toward man in all things,
Act. 24.16. It makes a man very desirous to know, what God would have done, and
how he would have it done: The upright heart says as Paul, Lord, What will thou have me to do? And with Manoah, entreats the Lord to show him, how he
would have him to do it, Let the Angel come again and teach us, what we shall
do unto the child that shall be born, said Manoah to the Lord, when his wife
told him, what tidings the Angel of the Lord had brought her a of son; and
not only fo, but inquires farther, how he should do it, How shall we order the
C^ild, and how shall we do unto him? said he, Judge. 13. ver. 8, 12. And it is
the property of an upright heart, to desire to know Gods Will, and to do Gods
Will, as he would have it done, Psa. 29.^. Psa. 63.1. Ps. 53.^6.
and so as it may be accepted of him; I will worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness, says an upright heart, I will seek the Lord, and I will do it
early, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will observe what
becomes of it, says an upright man.

An upright heart, is an humble heart, the heart that is lifted up is not
upright; so much pride, so much Hypocrisy there is in the heart; so much
integrity and uprightness, so much humility is there in the heart: Christ
formed in the heart, and the heart, must needs resemble him in humility, for he
was meek and lowly in heart; an upright heart is a levelled heart.

Hab 2.4.
An upright heart, is a heart in love with Christ, The upright love thee, says
the Spouse to Christ, Cant. 1.4. An upright heart, is a heart espoused to
Christ and faithful to him; a heart entire to Christ, whether present or
absent, a heart which desires that all its approaches to Christ might be in
marriage-dresse, Psalm. 45.14.

Ps. 125.4.
An upright heart, earnestly and cordially desires that all were like it self,
sincere and upright, witness the language of an upright man, Act. 26.29. and
wishes well to all that are such.

An upright heart, delights to walk by an upright rule and in an upright way, I
delight to do thy Will, O God, says an upright heart, Psalm. 40.8. I will
behave my self wisely in a perfect way, I will walk within my house with a
perfect heart, Psalm. 101.2.

An upright heart begins the work of Reformation at home, as the Language of
Christ, Mat. 7.5. intimates. Thou Hypocrite first cast out the beam out of
thine own Eye, etc. Thereby intimating, That it is the nature and property of
sincerity and uprightness to begin at home, to labor for self-reformation in
the first place, and then reformation of all under its charge, Psalm. 101.78.
Integrity and uprightness is no patron of tolleration, it cannot tolerate
sin, where it has power to suppress it or restrain it.

An upright heart delights in uprightness in whomsoever it finds it, This it
does, because God delightsin uprightness, more then in any other qualification.
more then in any other qualification whatsoever, it knows that all parts put
together without this, will not make a good whole, and therefore esteems
uprightness, more then any other qualification whatsoever, Psalm. 101.6.

An upright heart, is a faithful heart, it is so called, Neh. 9.8. where it is
said of Abraham, who had an upright heart, that God found his heart faithful
before him: an upright heart is a heart faithful to God, and faithful to man;
it is faithful to God absolutely, and first, it is faithful to man,
relatively and conditionally, with reference to God and the conditions between
it and others.

An upright heart is not satisfied with a bare form of Godliness, but labors
for the power of Godliness; it is not satisfied without works, but labors to
have all glorious within; it labors to do all duties after a spiritual manner,
and so as they may be accepted of God, and it labors conscionably to practice
what it does profess and teach others, do and teach.

An upright heart is a heart steadfast with God, steadfast in his Covenant, as it
is easy to be gathered, from that which is spoken of the Israelites, Psalm.
78.37. Their heart was not right with God, that is, their hearts were not
sincere and upright: but how does that appear? why the next words tell us,
They were not steadfast in his Covenant; had their hearts been sincere and
upright, they had been steadfast in his Covenant they would wilfully have broken
it, and cast it behind their backs.

An upright heart longs and desires still to be more upright, it groans under
the guile that it finds remaining in it self, and wars against it, and longs
to be delivered from it.

An upright heart is a heart perpendicularly, directly and chiefly for God, in
all its aims and ends; it exalts God in all things, and above all things,
because he only is to be exalted: Uprightness exceedingly desires, and
endeavors to improve every price in its hand to the glory of God the giver,
Ioh. 7.18.

Job 13.23.
An upright heart is not satisfied with its own trial, but desires God should
try it, and goes to God to do it; Thus did upright David, Psa. 26.2. and
139.23*24. And upright Job. Let me be weighed in an even Balance, says he, Job
31.6.

An upright heart can comfor^ably appeal to God in its worst condition, except
in some cases ( viz.) in case of ignorance of its own integrity, or in case of
some guilt charged upon it by God, conscience, or Satan, or in case of some
Temptation, wherein Satan by his sophistery mis-represents him to himself, and
fantacy joining with Satan, gives a false Idea and representation of things to
the understanding, whereby it comes to pass, that conscience does accuse, when
it should excuse; in such cases, an upright heart cannot, nor dares not to own
its own integrity, nor appeal to God, but if it be not hindered by the
interposition of some one of these, or the like, it can comfortably appeal to
God in its worst condition, as is evident by diverse examples, as in Hezekiah, 2
King. 20.3. and in Job, Job 16.19.
Job 23. ver. 10, 11, 12 Chap. 16.17. and in Jeremiah, Jer. 12.3. David, 1
Chro. 29.17. Paul, Job 13.6.
1 These. 2.10.

An upright heart is a soil, wherein the immortal seed of the word takes
kindly rooting, springs up, and brings forth fruit, in some measure, more or
less, as Christ affirms in that Parable, Mark 4.8.

Integrity or uprightness is a growing and spreading plant, it is a plant
which how small soever it be at its beginning, if once planted, grows greater
and greater, it is always greater at last, then at the first; This Bildad
hinted to Job, Job 8.7. and this Christ plainly affirms in the Parable of the
mustard seed, Mat 13.31, 32. Uprightness is a plant that will thrive, though
in a barren soil.

Finally, Integrity or uprightness is an abiding plant; Uprightness if once
in the heart will never out.
It is a plant that will live under a torrid or a friged Zone, a plant that
will bide the hottest Summer and the coldest Winter; my meaning is, it will
hold out in the hottest persecution, and in the greatest defection; An upright
heart abides in the truth, Job 27.10.
and the truth abids in it: The upright do hold on his way, Job 17.9. An
Hypocrite may profess the truth, Job 15.33.
and go far in the profession of it for a time, but he will not always abide
in it, Job 18.16.
sooner or later he will fall off quite, as is evident by those Texts quoted in
the Margin; Mat. 13.5, 6.
but an upright heart will hold on its way, and hold out upright in crooked
times, it will hold fast its integrity whatever it part with else, as God and
an upright man affirms, Job 2.3. and 27.5, 6.

Job 23.11, 12.
As an Hypocrite will not abide in the truth, no more will the truth abide in
him: Truth may be in an Hypocrite for a time, but it will not abide in him; God
does sooner or later take it quite from him; but truth in an upright heart, it
abides there, so says the Apostle, The anointing which ye have received of
God abides in you, 1 John 2.27. Truth in an upright heart is in its proper
element, and therefore abides there.

These appearances of an upright heart, which I have collected from the bare
Word, I thought not amiss here to insert, and for brevity sake, I will
multiply no more, but proceed to the fourth appearance of a new heart.

4. A new heart is a self loathing heart, as appears by Ezekiel. 36.26. compared
with ver. 31. A new heart will I give you, says the Lord, and what follows?
Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not
good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight, etc. Thence it is evident,
that a new heart is a self-loathing heart, it loathes it self for all its
iniquities, and for all its abominations, for all its guilt of sin, and for
all the filth of sin that it sees in its self, for its inward corruptions as
well as its outward transgressions.

5. A new heart is an obedient heart, a heart made pliable to the Will of God,
as appears by the forecited place, Ezekiel. 36. A new heart will I give you,
says the Lord, v. 26. And cause you to walk in my Statutes, and keep my
judgments, and do them, ver. 27. Hence it is evident, That a new heart is a
heart pliable to all the revealed Will of God, a heart on which the Word of
God, and the Works ofGod make impression, and it is therefore called a heart of
flesh, Ibid v. 26.

6. A new heart is a heart new principled; it has in it principles above
nature, above morality (to wit) Divine principles, principles of grace, by
which the whole new man is acted.

7. Another appearance of a new heart, is this, A new heart is always
accompanied with a new spirit, A new heart will I give you, Hence it is that
the Scripture calls for renovation in Spirit in professors of religion. Ephesians.
4.23.
and a new spirit will I put within you, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new
heart and a new spirit are here coupled in infusion by the Lord, which shows,
they are twins born together, they always go together, live everlastingly
together; this David pointed at, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a right spirit within me, etc. David knew that where God gave a
new heart, he gave a new frame of spirit also, and therefore he puts both into
his bill, when he put this promise in suit; When God makes the heart new, he
makes the spirit new also, he frames it of another fashion, points it toward
another course, raises it from Earth to Heaven, meekeneth it, and makes it
more easy to be entreated.

8. The principles then being new and the spirit new, where the heart is made
new, it must needs follow in the next place, by necessary consequence, That the
life and conversation is new also, for these being made new, cannot but produce
newness of life; therefore I conclude this thus, A new heart always produces
a new life; if the heart be new, the life will be new also; Christ if truly
formed in the Creature, is formed in every part of the Creature, in the whole
man, in the whole life and conversation of the man, from his convertion, and
new birth; This is the last, but not the least demonstrator of a new heart, of
a new Creature, and such, as without which, no man can ever safely conclude,
that his heart is new or his Creation new; He has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the World, that we should be holy and blameless before him in
love, Ephesians. 1.4. This therefore is vigor fit, and but fit to give the appearance
of a new heart, of a new Creature. Thus much of the second appearance of a new
Creature, he is one that has a new heart.

The third demonstration of a new Creature is living in Christ and bringing
forth fruit in him.
3. In the third place, A new Creature is one that lives in Christ, the new
ftock, as a branch in the vine; And brings forth fruit in him.

That a new Creature is one that lives in Christ the new stock, is evident by
the Language of the Apostle in this Text, If any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature; hence it is evident, that he is in Christ, or else he is not a new
Creature, first in Christ and then a new Creature; as Dr Preston does well
observe. A new Creature is one that has his abiding in Christ, one that lives
in Christ, as his stock; If you ask him the question, that the two Disciples
asked Christ, Master, where dwell thou? He may say, in Christ.

That a new Creature is one that lives in Christ, and has his abiding in him,
as his stock, is evident by the language of Christ, Ioh. 15.6. If any man abide
not in me, he is cast forth, as a branch withered etc.

That he brings forth fruit, is evident by the Language of Christ in the 5,
and 6. verses of that Chapter, He that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings fo^th much fruit; And not only bears fruit, but bears fruit in
Christ, as a branch in the vine, as the Language of Christ in the 2 v. of that
Chap. implies, Every branch that bears not fruit [in me] he takes away;
Hence it is evident, That a new Creature, is one that bears fruit in Christ,
as a branch in Christ, the true vine; and this is that which distinguishes him
from a mere moral Creature, both may be fruitful in righteousness, and bring
forth much fruit, as appears in the Scribes and Pharisees, who were a
generation fruitful in righteousness, and brought forth much fruit, and so do
many others which have but moral grace, as appears, Mat. 7.22, 23. But herein
lies the difference, as to this point, between a mere morallist, and a new
Creature.

A mere morallist brings forth fruit in himself, that is, from his own
principles, by a common assistance from Christ, he being but self, and in the
state of nature still, and he brings forth fruit to himself, as Ephraim did, to
his own honor, and praise, and glory; self is his utmost end in all he does;
but a new Creature brings forth fruit in Christ, he is fruitful in
righteousness, as a branch in Christ the true vine; his fruitfulness issues
out from supernatural and Divine principles, from a special work of the Spirit
of Christ in him.

Quest. But how may I discern, whether my fruitfulness in righteousness issue
from a common assistance of the Spirit of Christ, to wit, natural and moral
principles only, or whether I be fruitful in righteousness as a branch in
Christ the true vine?

Sol. 1. Fruitfulness in righteousness issuing from natural and moral
principles only, Col. 1.10.
is not universal but partial, but he that is fruitful in righteousness as a
branch in the vine, is fruitful in every good work, at least in his aim and
endeavor.

2. Fruitfulness in righteousness, issuing from moral principles, is usually
more exemplary in circumstantials, then in substantials, more in mint and
annise, then in judgment and mercy; but he that is fruitful in righteousness,
as a branch in the vine, sunders not what God has coupled together, but places
substantials in the vant-gard, in the first place.

3. Fruitfulness in righteousness, issuing from moral principles is usually
more in the eyes of men, than in the eye of God: Such as are fruitful in
righteousness from their own principles, are more studious to make all things
seem good and glorious in the eyes of men, than they are to approve the
righteousness of their hearts or ways to God; but he that is fruitful in
righteousness as a branch in the vine, is more studious and careful to
approve the uprightness of his heart and actions to God in all things, than to
make things seem good in the sight of men; He is more desirous to be fruitful
then to seem fruitful.

4. Fruitfulness in righteousness, proceeding from natural and moral
principles, is usually attended with much pride inwardly in heart, if not
outwardly in expression; and the more fruitful this man is, This he finds by
experience.
the more proud he is: contrariwise fruitful in righteousness as a branch in
the vine, is attended with much humility; a man that is fruitful in
righteousness, as a branch in the vine, sees that he has no sap, but what he
has from the stock, into which he is ingrafted; no sufficiency in himself to
any good; he sees that his good motions, affections and actions, flow all from
Christ, and therefore he humbly ascribes all to Christ; The glory of all his
fruitfulness, he lays on Christ's shoulders, he shall bear the glory, says
this soul, he dares take none to himself, though tempted thereunto by Satan,
but says of Christ, as Mephibosheth did of Ziba, Let him take all, who is all
in all, Who am I? and what am I, that I should offer, after this manner. Thus
his being filled with the fruits of righteousness, redounds to the Glory of
Christ, who is his righteousness: The more fruitful a branch in the vine is,
the lower he is.

That fruitfulness in righteousness, proceeding from natural and moral
principles only, is attended with these forementioned effects, is evident in
the Scribes and Pharisees, who were men very fruitful in righteousness from
their own principles, yet did pick and choose in the ways of God; Tithe mint
and annise, and omit the weightier matters of the Law, and of the Gospel too;
strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel, as Christ tells them, Mat. 23. were very
industrious to make all they did, feem good and glorious in the eyes of men,
but cared not how rotten their hearts were; the more fruitful they were, the
more proud they were; all this Christ taxes them with, Mat. 23. and thereupon
calls them, not new Creatures, not fruitful branches in the v^nt, but whited
Sepulchers, graves, fools, blind, Hypocrites, etc.

That fruitfulness in righteousness, proceeding from Divine principles, from
a Christian, as a branch in the vine, does produce effects contrary to these
forementioned, is evident in David and Paul, and other fruitful branche^ of
the true vine. They were not partial in the ways of God, but had respect unto
all Gods Will, Psalm. 119.128 their great care was to approve their hearts and
their ways to God, as appears, Psalm. 139.23. and 119.80. compared with the 2
Cor. 5.9. Their fruitfulneffe did not produce pride, but humility, as appears
by the language of as fruitful a branch, as ever was, Ephesians. 3.8. Less than the
least, etc.

as a branch in the vine, as a branch truly and really in the vine, rests not
in any works done by him, but renounces all, in matter of justification; he
sees more unrighteousnefse then righteousness in his best actions; All our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags, said the fruitful branches, Isai. 64.6.
All as dross and dung, says another fruitful branch, Phil. 3.8. We are
unprofitable servants, and have done nothing, that is worth any thing. Lord,
when saw we thee an hungered? or athirst? or a stranger? or naked? or sick? or
in prison? and did minister unto thee? say the fruitful branches, Matthew.
25.37, 38, 39. which language evidently declares, that their repose and trust
was not in their actions.

In the fixth place, Fruitfulness in righteousness, what he should do to be
saved? He was very fruitful in righteousness from his own principles, as
appears by his own language, yet very scrupulous, how it would go with him at
the last; which shows, That the effect of his fruitfulness was not quietness,
but unquietness; not confidence, but diffidence: But on the other side,
fruitfulness, as a branch in the vine, brings sweet peace and rest to the
mind, and conscience of a man, as appears, Isai. 32.17, There the Lord promises
his People, That the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. The more fruitful in
righteousness a man is, as a branch in the vine, the more contentment and rest
shall he have within himself.

Object. But do we not see the contrary, may some say, Are not many fruitful
branches in the vine very unquiet, and restless, and unsatisfied in conscience
about their Eternal estate?

Answ. This, if granted, does not null the truth asserted; For, First, This
unquietness does not spring from their fruitfulness, but rather from that
unfruitfulnesse, which they see in themselves: Secondly, The Text does not say,
That it always is quietness, but it shall be peace and quietness, it shall
yield him peace and quietness at the last, it shall end in peace and
quietness, and assurance for ever, that shall be the issue of it, with this
David concurreth, Psalm. 37.37.

1 Samuel 13.8.
this is evident in Saul, seven days he would stay for Samuel, but no longer,
if Samuel come not then, he will offer sacrifice himself; this man's
fruitfulness does not increase, but decrease: But fruitfulness in
righteousness, proceeding from a branch in the vine, is a thriving and a
growing fruitfulnesfe, a branch in the vine proposes no other period to
himself in piety, then perfection, and this he labors to the utmost of his
ability, through the help of his heavenly husbandman to attain, and goes on
daily by degrees toward, so that he brings forth most fruit in age, as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm 92.14.

fruitful in righteousness, as branches in the vine, as is evident in the
Scribes and Pharisees, who whre men very fruitful in righteousness from their
own principles, they prayed, and fasted, and gave alms, tythed mint, and anice,
and cummin, and yet were very malicious against Christ and his Disciples, none
more malicious than they were: But fruitfulness in righteousness, proceeding
from a branch in the vine, is not attended with malice to any but with love to
all, even to very enemies.

Ninthly, A man fruitful in righteousness as a branch in the vine, brings
forth fruit out of the good treasure of his heart, as Christ affirms, Luke
6.45. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good
things, or, that which is good. A branch in the vine, out of an ho^est and good
heart brings forth fruit, so says Christ, Luk 8.15.

Here nore one main difference that is between an evil man and a good, Note.
or a mere formalist and a branch truly in the vine; in an evil man, or a mere
formalist, Luke 6.45.
his heart is the treasury of all the evil, which he brings forth, but not
of the good; but a good man, or a branch truly in the vine, his heatt is the
treasury of the good fruit which he brings forth: in the heart of an evil
man (to wit) a man out of Christ, dwells no good thing, nothing that is truly
and spiritually good, therefore (out of it) can come no such fruit: But in the
heart of a good man (to wit) a branch truly in the vine, dwells a principle
of faith and love, from which his fruitfulness springs; these constrain him,
or lead him along, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.14. And herein lies the
great and main difference, that is between the fruitfulness of a man in
Christ, and a man out of Christ, between a branch in the vine, and a mere
motalist, both bring forth fruit, good fruit; but the one brings it forth out
of the treasure of an honest and good heart, and the other does not so; this
Christ confirms in that forecited place, Luke 6.45.

Job 15.33. He shall shake off his unripe fruit, as the vine, and cast off his
flower, as the Olive, Mat. 13.6. And when the Sun was up, they were scorched,
and because they had not root, they withered away, And bring no fruit to
perfection, Luke 8.14. Here we have the period of the fruitfulness of the best
mere moralist, set down by the holy Ghost, all his fruit comes to just nothing
at last: But contrariwise, he that is fruitful in righteousness, as a branch
in the vine, his fruit remains and ^indly ripeneth, as appears by Ioh. 15.16.
I have chosen you, and ordained you, says Christ of the living branches of the
vine, that ye should bring forth fruit, and that your frui^ should remain: And
it is said of such an one in Ier. 17.8. That he shall not cease from yielding
fruit: and Luke 8.15. He brings forth fruit with patience: and Psalm. 1.3. He
brings forth his fruit in his season; By all which it is evident, That a
branch truly in the vine, has this privilege and Character, beyond the best
mere moralist or formalist whatsoever, how little soever his fruit of
righteousness seems to be, either in his own eyes or the eyes of other men,
yet his fruit remains and kindly ripeneth, it comes to perfection at the
length.

Eleventhly, A man fruitful in righteousness Israel did, Israel is an empty
vin^, he brings forth fruit to himself, Hos. 10.1. Israel was a fruitbearing
vine, yet but an empty vine; how comes this to pass? why the next words tell
us, he brings forth fruit to himself. Thus it is with a man, whose
fruitfulness springs from natural and moral principles only, he brings forth
fruit to himself, to his own base ends, his own honor, profit, and the like;
but he that is fruitful in righteousness, as a branch in the vine, brings
forth fruit unto God, to the glory of God, as the Scripture speaks, Romans 7.4.
His fruitfulness springs from, and depends upon Christ's conjunction with his
soul, and tends chiefly to the advancing God in Christ, God is both the
efficient and fina^^ cause of his fruitfulness.

Lastly, A fruitful branch in the vine, is usually Joseph was a fruitful
branch in the vine, even a fruitful bough by a well, whose branch runs over
the wall, yet the Text tells us, That the Archers sorely grieved him, they shot
at him, and hated him, Genesis 49.22, 23. As it was with Joseph, so it is usually
with other fruitful branches in the vine, Satan and men stirred up by Satan,
do impugn, molest and trouble them more than they do mere moralists, this
Jesus Christ hinted to his Disciples, when he told them, In the world ye shall
have tribulation.

Lay all these together, and make a touchstone of them to try thy
fruitfulness by, and according as thou find it, agree or disagree with
them, make up the conclusion.

new Cre^ture, A new Creature is ^ne that does not commit sin. This is his
four^h demonstration.
is this, he is one that sins not, one that does not commit sin, so says
the Text, 1 Ioh. 3.6. Whosoever abides in him sins not; and ver. 9.
Whosoever is born of God* does not commit sin; This assertion is a
touchstone of the holy Ghosts making, therefore it must needs be both
necessary and safe for a Christian to try himself by, and this I think is such,
as (if rightly understood) may afford much comfort, to a poor Child of God,
when many other appearances of his new birth are hidden from him, though in the
letter (I confess) it seems one of the unlikeliest Texts in Scripture so to do.

Whosoever abides in him, sins not, says the ^ext; what shall I hence
conclude, That a branch in Christ, a true believer, a new Creature, is totally
freed from the power, act, and being of sin, so that he does not nor cannot
sin actually? (God forbid) this were to give the Scripture the lie, which
says, That in many things we sin all, even [ we] that are born again.

And if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us, 1 Ioh. 1.8. And Romans 7.23. a new Creature says, I see a Law in my
members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the
Law of sin, which is in my members. He does not say (I saw) as one speaking
of the time past, before conversion, but [ I see] as one speaking in the
(present Tence) and of the time after conversion; he does not say, bringing me
into captivity to the Law of sin (which was) in my members, but (unto the law
of sin which is in my members;) by all which it is evident, That this Text
means no such thing as immunity and freedom from the motions, act, or being of
sin: He therefore that shall hence conclude, That he is totally freed from
the power and being of sin, so that he does not nor cannot sin no more than
the glorified Saints, or Christ himself, does make of a touch stone, a
millstone to grind him to powder.

Object. But if this be not the meaning of this Scripture, what then is the
meaning of it?

Answ. The meaning of it (^s I humbly conceive) is this, That a true believer,
one that lives in Christ, and Christ in him, one that (...) again, and made a
new Creature, sinne^ ^ot as an u^regenerate person does, he give^ not himself
over to the commission of any known sin, neither allows himself in the
omission of any known duty; He is not a willing slave to any sin; He sins not
knowingly, without damping and quenching, in some measure, for some time the
actings of grace, and the Spirit of God in him, He does not commit sin; He does
commit sin in the Apostles sense (as I conceive) which does sin of purpose,
Therefore an unregenerate person is said to be the servant of sin.
and with the consent of the whole will, and with the whole sway of his
affections, this every one in the state of nature does, he sins with the
consent of the whole will, and with the whole sway of his affections, and must
needs do so, because he has no principle fastened on those faculties to cross
him, therefore in sinning, he does the evil which he would do, the evil which
he loves.

But it is quite other ways with a Child of God, who is born again, and made a
new Creature, put in a state of grace; He does not (so sin,) neither indeed can
he, because his feed (to wit) the grace of the Spirit remains in him; though
he sin, and sin in many things, yet does he not sin with the consent of
his whole will, nor with the whole sway of his affections in any thing. ( The
evil which I would not that do I) says a new Creature, What I hate that do I.

A regenerate person is not a servant of sin but a captive to the law of sin.
The will, as all other faculties of the soul, is but in part renewed; Christ is
formed in it imperfectly, it has in it (at the best estate here) a regenerate
part, and an unregenerate part, and so far forth as it is renewed, it does nill
the evil which the unregenerate part does choose; therefore a regenerate man
says, It is no more I that do it, and so the Apostle here, He that is born of
God, does not commit sin, because he does it not as regenerate, but as
unregenerate.

So for the affections; a renewed man cannot sin with the whole sway of his
affections, because the renewed part of them does decline, and oppose what the
unrenewed part of them does embrace and cleave to.

This contradiction, in the same faculty of the soul, is proper and peculiar to
a Child of God, in his state of imperfection, and may therefore well serve to
decipher him out, and distinguish between a new Creature and a mere naturalist.

For although there may be, and oftentimes is, a contradiction and combat in
an unregenerate person, between several and distinct faculties of the soul,
the appetite against reason, the will or affections against conscience, yet
there never is a contradiction in the same faculty of the soul, in an
unregenerate person, neither indeed can there be, for there is nothing in it to
oppose; This combat is peculiar to a new Creature, where there is flesh and
spirit in the same faculty, and what the one chooses, the other refuses, it
may therefore well be a Christians touchstone to try himself by.

There is yet another way, whereby a man may be said to commit sin, which is
far more dangerous than the former, yea, remediless, and that is, when a man
does wilfully and obstinately oppose that which the Word of God, and the Spirit
of God does thoroughly convince his conscience is the Truth, and ought to be
followed, out of mere malice, scorn and contempt, and this is that which (I
think) this Text points at chiefly; but (thus) a Child of God, a member of
Christ, a new Creature cannot commit sin, He that is born of God does not
commit that sin unto death, the sin against the Holy Ghost. This body of death
is worse to a new Creature, and this is his fifth demonstration.
because his seed remains in him, as the Apostle here speaks, He that thus
commiteth sin is of the Devil, and sealed by him to Hels eternity, 1 Ioh. 3.8.
chapter 5.16. Mat. 12.32.

In the fifth place; a new Creature, is one that groans under the remainder of
the old man in him (to wit) the natural propensity which he finds in himself
to all evil; the enticing tempter of corrupt nature, which makes him a verse
to all good, and prone to all evil, as that which spoils all his good duties,
as that which is his greatest burden, bewailes it as that alone which makes his
condition wretched and miserable, longs earnestly for a total deliverance from
this burden of corrupt nature, prays earnestly for strength against all the
inticings thereof, Job 3 21.
and rests of Christ by Faith, in the use of all lawful means by him
appointed, for a total deliverance at length, and strength against all the
inticings thereof, until total delivera^ce be granted, all which is evident in
Paul, Romans 7.

And truly I never yet found any burden like this burden, though I have born
many; this burden alone had not Christ borne the heavior end of it, had sunk my
soul in despair, or driven it upon desperate attempts; the time has been,
when to have been freed from the power of natural corruption, My soul has
chosen death, rather than life, and longed for death, more then for hid
treasures, as Job speaks; yea, when it would have joyed in that which nature
abhors, an untimely death by the hand of man, would have infinitely more joyed
me, than the acquiring of the whole earth with all it affords, only for the
freeing of my soul from the power of corrupt nature, which was so potent, that
my unbeleeving heart did often conclude, That I should one time or other fall
by it, and by it be undone to all eternity; yet the Lord was my stay, and
prevented what I much feared, and out of this deep the Lord at length delivered
me, to the glory of Christ my keeper and deliverer, and the encouragement of
others in the like case; I speak this, much more I could speak on this subject
experimentally, but I forbear.

In the sixth place, a new Creature is one, A new Creature minds the things of
the Spirit, and is led by the Spirit, this is his sixth Demonstration.
that minds the things of the Spirit, is led by the Spirit, and walks after the
Spirit; These expressions tend all to one and the same end, namely, to
denominate a new Creature, therefore I put them together.

A new Creature, is one that minds the things of the Spirit, so says the text,
Romans 8.5. They that are after the sl^sh, do mind the things of the flesh, but
they that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit; As carnal hearts
mind carnal things, so spiritual hearts, mind spiritual things; a new
Creature minds the things of the Spirit, after the rule of the Spirit, the Word
of God; He minds the things of the Spirit in the first place, he minds them
savourly, chiefly and principally, more than the things of the flesh, and
declares it by following after them industriously; The apprehension of the love
and favor of God, Psalm. 4.6. Ps. 63.3 Cant. 1.2.
and that which leads thereunto (to wit) the pure Ordinances of God, are the
only jewels which he esteems and follows after, and for the acquiring and
retaining of these, he will part with all the good of the world, and count it
but dung, as is evident in the parable of the merchant-man, who sold all to
buy the pearl: A new Creature, his great care, desire, and endeavor is, to be
more new: O that I were more dead to sin, more alive to righteousness! that
I were less in the flesh, more in the spirit! less in my self, more in
Christ! says a new Creature; And these are the things which he minds and
follows after.

He is led by the Spirit of God, so says the Apostle, Romans 8.14. As many as
are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. This language plainly
shows who are the Adopted Sons of God, and so consequently, who are new
Creatures; for to be such a Son of God, as this Text speaks of, and to be a
new Creature, is all one in effect, and he that is such, is led by the Spirit
of God; That is his mark, set by the holy Ghost, by the hand of the Apostle.

The Spirit of God may be said to lead man two manner of ways; Note.
more generally, or, more specially; as a qualifier only, or as a sanctifier;
and that leading of the Spirit which denominates our son ship, or the Creature
new, is not the more general, but the more special leading of the Spirit (to
wit) the Spirit leading, as a sanctifier, as an inward sanctifier, as well as
an outward.

When a man may be said to be led by the Spirit.
A man may then be faid to be led by the Spirit of God, according to the meaning
of this Text, (as I humbly conceive) when h^, by a special work of the Spirit
of God upon his soul is enabled voluntarily, and cordially to resign up
himself, in all things to be guided by the Spirit of God, and cordially and
courageously to decline all other leaders (contrary unto this.)

1. He that is thus led by the Spirit of God, is not under the Law, says the
Apostle, Gal. 5.18. If ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law: by [
Law] in this Text, some Divines take to be meant the moral Law, and so taking
it, conclude, That he that is led by the Spirit, is freed from the curse of the
moral Law, which is very true; of this mind was Mr Perkins: others by Law here,
understand the domineering power of corrupt nature, that which the Apostle
calls, The Law of sin, Romans 7 25. of this mind was Luther: [ Law] thus taken,
the conclusion is, That he that is led by the Spirit of God, is not under the
domineering, reigning power of sin; He is no servant of sin, he does not
voluntarily yield himself to obey any sin in the lusts thereof, as an
unregenerate person does, with free consent; [ Law] taken in this latter sense,
is that which (I think) this Text points at, by the scope of this Chapter, and
all the passages of it; and taken in this sense, I am sure it is most for my
purpose, therefore I pitch upon it; He that is led by the Spirit of God, as a
sanctifier, is in great measure freed from this Law of sin.

When this Law, (to wit) lust, leads, Note.
as commander in chief, the person is soon led away with a spirit of error and
inticers thereunto, as the Apostle shows, ^ Tim. 3.6.

2. But he whom the Spirit of God leads, as commander in chief, believes not
every spirit, but tries the spirits whether they are of God, as the Apostle
exhorts all Christians to do, 1 Ioh. 4.1. He makes the written Word his
touchstone to try them by; He knows that whatsoever is revealed contrary to the
Word of God, is not of the Spirit, for the Spirit of God does not dispense
things contrary unto, but agreeable with the Word of God, as Christ affirms,
Ioh. 16.13, 14, 15. The Spirit (says Christ) shall not speak of himself, but
he shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and show it unto you; He
shall take of mine, and show it unto you; which language plainly shows, That
the Spirit of God does make use of the Word of God, and reveals the meaning
of it, but never contrad^cts it: Note this, all you that boast of the Spirit,
and yet slight and contemn the Word.

3. He whom the Spirit of God leads after a special manner, he leads into all
truth, as Christ affirms, Ioh. 16.13. He shall guide you into all truth, that
is, into all truth necessary for you, in such a sphere and condition, as God
has assigned you unto, truth in judgment, in heart, in practice.

Note.
But here note, That although the Spirit of God does lead into all Truth, yet
the Spirit does not this all at once; neither does the Spirit this ordinarily,
without the reading and preaching of the Word, but by it, specially where it
may be had.

4. He whom the Spirit of God thus leads, he fits and inables to walk with God,
under Ordinances, as appears by Ezekiel. 36.27. where God gives his Spirit, he
gives him for a leader, and whom the Spirit of God leads, it inables to walk
with God, in the use of his Ordinances, as that Text plainly shows, (even in
the most glorious times of the Gospel, for of these the Prophet here speaks.)
Note this, all you that boast of the Spirit, and think you are led by the
Spirit, and yet cry down Ordinances.

5. He whom the Spirit of God thus leads, he quickens in some measure, Romans
8.11. where the Spirit of God dwells as a leader, he dwells as a quickener, he
quickens our souls even while they dwell in houses of clay, in mortal bodies,
he quickens them in every faculty, and to every holy duty, though not all in
like measure, nor to all duties at the same time. Note this, all you that not
being under a Temptation to distrust, Nor at all times alike.
think you are led by the Spirit of God, and yet find no quickening at all by
the Spirit, neither desire any, nor feel want of it.

6. He that is thus led by the Spirit of God, worships God in spirit and in
truth, he does serve God in newness of spirit, as the Apostle affirms, Phil.
3.3. he does inwardly, and sincerely, worship and serve God as well as
outwardly and formally: He knows his leader is not pleased with any outward
performances, severed from the service of the spirit (to wit) the inward man,
and therefore he strives with all his might, to exercise all the powers of his
soul, and act, and improve all his graces in, and by the service of God, being
exceedingly desirous to serve his leader acceptably. Note this, all formal and
persunctary servers of God, that think you are led by the Spirit of God, and
all Gods People, that think you are not led by the Spirit of God, and yet
exceedingly desire and labor thus to do.

7. He whom the Spirit of God thus leads, he helps his infirmities, The
Spirit (says the Apostle) helps our infi^mities, meaning theirs to whom he
is a leader; But how does the Spirit that? Why, by discovering our infirmities
unto us, and supplying what is wanting in us, out of Christ's fullness, which he
holds up and applies to us. The Text does not say, That the Spirit perfectly
cures our infirmities, [ but he helps our infirmities,] He helps them, by
doing that for us, which we cannot do our selves, Romans 8.26. this each man's
experience, which is thus led by the Spirit will tell him.

8. He that is thus led by the Spirit, finds so much sweetness in his leader,
that he still desires to be more led by him, to be filled with the Spirit, as
the Scripture speaks; He never thinks he has enough of the Spirit, but still
desires more, and his soul follows hard after the Lord in Prayer, and in the
use of all means by him appointed, for the attaining a greater measure of the
Spirit than he yet has.

9. He that is thus led by the Spirit of God, is led by the written Word of
God, the revealed Will of God, which is the instrument, rule, and demonstrator
of the Spirit of God, in reference to man; and he that has the Word of God, or
might have, and will not be led by it, has no ground to conclude, that he is
led by the Spirit of God, as it is evident by Isai. 8.20. These leaders (to
wit) (the Word and the Spirit,) are never opposite one to another.

10. He that is thus led by the Spirit of God, is chary of the sword of the
Spirit (the Word of God) and fights with it against all his spiritual enemies,
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; this is evident in the natural Son of
God, Jesus Christ, Mat. 4.4, 7, 10. and in many of the adopted Children of God,
of whom we read in Scripture. Note this, all you that slight the Wor^ of God
and fight not with it, but against it, and yet make your boast, that you are
led by the Spirit.

11. He that is thus led by the Spirit of God does walk in the Spirit, and he
does walk after the Spirit; But what is it to walk ^n the Spirit, or to walk
after the Spirit? These expressions (I think) differ not much. To walk in the
Spirit (says Luther) is to wrestle in spirit against the flesh, and to follow
spiritual motions. Walking in the Spirit (says Mr Perkins) is to order our
lives according to the direction and motion of the Spirit. A man may then be
said to walk after the Spirit (says Ios. Ex^n.) when in respect of the trade
and course of his life, he walks not according to the guidance, and motion of
his corrupt nature, but of the holy Spirit. Hence (I conceive) a man may then
be said to walk [ in and after the Spirit] when he walks not after the flesh,
as the Apostle speaks; but after the rules of the Spirit, given in the Word of
God, and according to the motions, dictates, and guidance of the Spirit (which
are never contrary unto, but agreeable with the Word of God) when he does not
voluntarily, and approvedly obey the dictates of corrupt nature, but the Word
and Spirit of God, when he does walk according to the rule of the written Word
(at lest, in his aim desire and endeavor.

Note.
Here note two or three things; He that is thus led by the Spirit of God, walks
after the Spirit, more strongly, or more weakly, as he is more or less new.

He walks after the Spirit, more swiftly, or more slowly, And according as the
burdens which he goes under, beheavior or lighter.
as Christ by his Spirit draws him more strongly or more weakly; some Christ by
his Spirit draws more strongly and they run after him, as the Church speaks,
Cant. 1.4. They follow their leader vigorously, unweariedly, wit^ delight;
others he draws more weakly, (...) they walk more slowly after him, according
to the different dispensations of the Spirit of God; so does man move more
strongly or more weakly, more swiftly or more slowly, in the ways of God.

Then again note this, Man at his best estate here follows his leader, walks
after the Spirit, but as a blind, lame impotent Creature, if at one time he
runs after his leader, and follows him vigorously, at another time he is weary
and walks slowly; now he stumbles, and anon falls, and were it not that his
leader, is very able, wise, and watchful, he would give over quite and fall
irrecoverably.

12. In the next place, A man that is thus led by the Spirit of God, is a
curagious and resolute opposer of all leaders, contrary unto this leader; if
the World tempt and strive to be his leader, he opposes that; if the flesh
tempt, and strive to be his leader, he opposes that; if the Devil tempt, and
strive to be his leader, he resists him; and all this he does in the strength
of the Spirit of God, whom he has chosen for his leader; all this is evident
in Paul, a man led by the Spirit of God, after a special manner; his courage
and resolution was such, that he maintained a constant war with these three
enemies, on this ground, that they would have been his leader, they had led him
before, and would have led him again, but this he had rather dye then yield to,
when once led by the Spirit, as his own testimony, in diverse places proves.

He that thus does, may be, and sometimes is led captive, Note.
by some one or other of these enemies; This the Apostle Paul sadly complains
of, as an experimented truth, Romans 7.23.

13. Finally he whom the Spirit of God thus leads, he leads so long as he
needs leading; He will lead us over death, unto glory, Psalm. 48.14. compared
with Psalm. 73.24. He whom the Spirit of God once leads as a sanctifier, he
never totally nor finally gives over leading, but leads him through grace unto
glory.

Lay all these things together, and consider, whether it be thus with thy
self, yea, or nay; and if upon a true trial thou find it thus with thee;
conclude thou may safely, That thou art one led by the Spirit of God after a
special manner, and so consequently a son of God by Adoption, an heir of
Heaven, a new Creature.

The seventh and last appearance of a new Creature, which I will mention here,
is thi^; he is one that is joined to the Lord Jesus Chr^i^, and one spirit with
him.

That he is one joined to the Lord Jesus Christ, A new Creature is one joined
to the Lord Jes^s Christ, and one Spirit with him* This is his seven^h
demonstration.
is evident from the words of this Text, If any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature; Here it is granted, That a new Creature is in Christ; E^go, it must
needs then be granted, That he is joined to Christ; for to be in a thing, is
more then to be joined to it, and the greater does necessarily comprehend the
lesser; but according to the meaning of the Apostle here, these expressions of
being in Christ, and being joined to Christ, I conceive comes all to one.

That he that is thus united to Christ, is one Spirit with Christ, is evident
by the Language of the Apostle, A rege^ative and sensitive s^ul, is
comprehended under a rational, so is a joining to Christ under a being in
Christ.
1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit; In these few words
we have a complete description of a new Creature, in his conjunction with
Christ, and in his conformity to Christ; in his Union with Christ and Communion
with him; of this Union with Christ, what it is, and how effected the Reader
may see more in Page 2, 3. this only I will add here, and so proceed; That the
joining to the Lord, here spoken of, is not a bare joining in nature only, by
Christ's participation of our humane nature, neither is it a joining in glory;
but it is a joining to the Lord in grace. A new Creature is one then, that is
joined to the Lord in grace; And he that is thus joined to the Lord is one
Spirit, that is, he is one Spirit with the Lord Jesus Christ, he is one with
Christ in every thing, one with Christ, in affection; one with him, in action;
one with him, in function; one with him, in life and conversation; Christ is
formed in him in all these, and he thereby made one spirit with Christ.

1. He is one with Christ in affection; Christ is formed there, he loves what
Christ loves, and hates what Christ hates; Christ loves righteousness, and
hates iniquity; all iniquity, Heb. 1.9. and so does he that is joined, united
and married to the Lord, and so become a new Creature, He loves righteousness
and hates iniquity, as truly, though not so strongly, as Christ does, as the
Language of such an one declares, Psalm 119. verse 127, 128.

2. He is one with Christ in action; Christ is formed there* he walks by the
same Rule, he obeys the same Law that Christ does (to wit) the Will of the
Father; the rule of Christ's action was the Will of his Father. I (says he)
came down from Heaven, not to do mine own Will, but the Will of him that sent
me, Joh. 6.38. I seek not mine own Will, but the Will of the Father which has
sent me. Joh. 5.30. My meat is to do the Will of him that sent me, and finish
his Work Joh. 4.34. Not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. 26.39.

Christ and a new Creature, walk by one and the same rule; the head does not
walk one way, and the members another; the head does not walk ^y one rule, and
the members by another, but both by one and the same rule, to one and the same
end (to wit) the glory of the same God; Christ's Rule was the Will of the
Father, Christ's ultimate end of all his actions, was the glory of the Father,
and he that is joined to the Lord Jesus Christ* is one with him in this; Christ
and a new Creature are one in their ends and aims; Lord, What will thou have
me to do? says a new Creature, I desire thy Will should be the rule of my
action; I desire Christ may be magnified, in my body, whether it be by life or
by death; This is the language of one joined to the Lord Jesus Christ, and one
Spirit with him; He that seeks the glory of him that sent him, Ioh. 7.18.
the same is true (says Christ) and he that seeks the glory of Christ,
according to the rule and examp^e of Christ, the same is [new] say I.

3. Thirdly, Christ and a new Creature, are one in function; Christ is a
Prophet, and he that is joined unto him, is one with him in this; Christ is a
Prophet to teach his members, and his members are one Prophet with him, to
exhort and build up themselves and one another in their m^st holy faith; but
with these differences.

Christ has the Spirit of Prophecy, as a fountain, and without measure, in
all fullness; but h^s members as streams issuing from that fountain, by gift,
and of his ^ulnesse*

Christ is an universal Prophet to teach all his People, without limitation of
persons or place; but all his members are not so, they are limited Prophe^s,
and may not go beyond the bounds of their proper sp^ere, not beyond the bounds
set by this great Prophet, in his Word.

Christ is a Priest, and he that is joined to him, is one with him in thi^;
Christ has made all ^is Members Priests to God, Spi^i^uall P^i^st^
Rev. 1.6. to offer up spiritual Sacrifice to God; Christ has offered up
himself to God, he dyed and s^crificed himself to God; And he that is j^^ned
unto him is made conformable unto his death, he has sacri^iced all to Christ,
his whole self, his own reason, will, righteousness and wickedness; all
within him and without him; he is become dead to sin, dead to his own
righteousness, dead to the World, dead to all by the body of Christ; They that
are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, says the
Apostle, Gal. 5.24.

Christ is a King, to rule over his People, and over his enemies, and he that
is joined unto the Lord Christ, is one with him in his Kingly Function; He has
made us Kings, says the Text, Rev. 1.6. Kings in a spiritual sense, to rule
over our thoughts, affections, words, and actions, over all our lusts, so as
sin does not rule, nor reign in us, within nor without, as an approved Lord,

Christ and a new Creature are one in Life and conversation; A new Creature, is
one dead with Christ, and risen again with him, Col. 2.12.
to newn^sse of Life; he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, Christ is
formed in his Life and Conversation, by transforming him, in hi^ Life and
Conversation, and conforming him in his Lise and Conversation, to the Image,
and Example of Christ; so as he may truly say with the Apostle, It is no more I
that live, but Christ that dwells in me.

Christ was holy and harmless in his Nature, Life and Conversation, Heb. 7.26.
He was inwardly holy, as well as outwardly holy; holy in his Thoughts, in his
Affections, in his Words, and in his Actions; Holy in all mann^r of
Conversation, in all places, in all company, in all times, and variety of
conditions: holy in Life, and holy in Death, and he that is joined to the Lord
Jesus Christ, is holy as he is holy; but with this difference.

Note.
Christ our head was holy by nature, but we his members, are holy by grace only.

Christ our head was holy with a perfect holiness, but we his Members have
only a sincere holiness in this Life, our conformity unto Christ is in kind,
not in degree.

Christ our head had a derivative holiness; he could derive holiness into his
Members, and infuse it into them which had none; but this is proper and
peculiar unto him; this cannot the best of his Members do.

He that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit; one holy Spirit dwells in
the head, and in the Members; in the head without measure, in the members, as
it seems good unto the Head to infuse it.

Christ and his have one heart, and they have chosen one way; one way of
holiness, leading to a place of perfect holiness and happiness; they speak
one language, mind one thing, aim at one end; one they are in the state of
grace, and one they shall be for ever in glory; He that is joined to the Lord,
is one Spirit.

A new Creature, a true Member of Jesus Christ, Note.
is better known by his Spirit, then his outward man; Job 19.28.
for the root of the matter, (as Job speaks) is within him, his Circumcision is
inward, in his heart and spirit; he is one Spirit with the Lord Jesus Christ.

Ye know not what Spirit ye are of, said Christ to his Disciples, Luke 9.55.
But this Text shows what Spirit a new Creature, a true Member of Christ is of,
he is one Spirit with Christ; He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit.

A new Creature, one joined to the Lord in grace, is very watchful over his
outward man, over his words and deeds, but especially over his heart and
spirit, to keep them steadfast with God: Thus was Christ, and he that is joined
to the Lord, is one Spirit.

Quest. But what Spirit was the Lord Jesus Christ of?

Answ. 1. The Spirit of Christ was a Spirit of Truth, it is so called, Ioh.
14.17, and 16.13. We read of a lying spirit in the 2 Chro. 18.21, 22. and this
is powered out in these days, wherein so many lies and slanders are daily
broached to the dishonor of God, and the Truth; but this Spirit is not one
with Christ's Spirit, but with Antichrists; Christ's Spirit is the Spirit of
Truth, but Antichrists Spirit is the Spirit of falsehood, error and all
deceiveableness, as appears by the 2 These. 2.10.

2. Christ was of a humble, meek, and lowly Spirit, as himself affirms, Matthew.
11.29. And the Prophet Zechariah of him, Zech. 9.9. Of this Christ gave many
real testimonies when here on Earth; He was not only humble, meek, and lowly
in his carriage, and in show, but in Heart and Spirit; He was really such, as
his Birth, Life and Death did testify.

3. Christ was of a just and righteous Spirit; His government is spiritual, yet
external and internal.
so says the Prophet Zech 9.9. He is just; Christ was not only morally just;
but he was Divinely just, as is evident by his Government; the revealed Will of
God is the Cannon by which he rules, they which walk contrary unto it, sooner
or later he punishes; and they which walk according to it, he sooner or latter
rewards; He does judge with righteousness, and reprove with equity, (says the
Prophet) Isai. 11.4.

4. Christ was of a merciful, tender, and compassionate Spirit; Mat. 26.41.
he had compassion on the souls of his enemies, as that Text, Ezekiel. 16. ver. 4,
5, 6. with many others show; Mark. 6.34.
He had compassion on soul and body, Mat. 9.36.
when he beheld Jerusalem, and thought on her sin and sufferings, Mat. 15.32.
he pitied her, prayed for her, admonished her, Mat. 14.14.27.
and wept over her, Luke 19.41, 42. All which were real testimonies of his
compassionate Spirit, Isai. 42.3. Luke 23.34.
and the Texts in the Magin illustrate this.

5. Christ was of a holy and Heavenly Spirit: He was holy, says the Author to
the Hebrews; his Spirit is called, a holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. Christ's Spirit was
Heavenly, he was all for the things of the other World; his thoughts, words and
works all steered their course thither-wards, which evidently declared his
Heavenly Spirit.

6. Christ was of a public and industrious Spirit, He sought not his own, but
our good; when on Earth, Act. 10.38.
he was still doing good to soul or body, Mat. 4.23. He minded not himself, his
own ends, or ease, but his Fathers business, and that he followed
industriously, as appears by Luke 2.46, 49. compared with Ioh. 4.34. which
plainly shows, he had a public and industrious Spirit.

7. Christ was of a soft and flexible Spirit, he had a Spirit pliable to all
his Fathers Will, a Spirit easy to be entreated, a sympathizing Spirit, In all
their afflictions he was afflicted (says the Prophet) Isai. 63.9. he had a
broken and a contrite Spirit, a Spirit broken with sorrow for our sins, all
which were real testimonies of his soft and flexible Spirit.

8. Christ was of a lively Spirit, and of a descerning Spirit, he had a Spirit
directly opposite to that Spirit spoken of Isai. 29.10. he had a spirit,
spiritually alive; hence it was, that he was of quick understanding in the
fear of the Lord, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 11.3.

9. Christ was of a patient Spirit, he had a Spirit slow to anger, and long
suffering, he took all patiently, from God and Man, without repining in heart
or tongue; He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth,
says the Prophet, etc. Isa. 53.7. When he was reviled, he reviled not again;
when he suffered, he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2.23. These were real testimonies
of his patient Spirit.

10. Christ was of a loving Spirit, even toward his very enemies, he prayed
for his enemies, Luke 23.34. died for his enemies, Romans 5.10. and all this out
of love to them, which was a real testimony of his loving Spirit.

11. Christ was of a Praying Spirit, Heb. 5.7. Luke 22.44.
he spent much time in Prayer, as the Evangelists show, with much delight and
industry, as appears by Mar. 1.35. Mat. 14.23. Luke 6.12. Ioh. 17. chap. which
shows he was of a praying Spirit.

12. Christ was of an obeying Spirit, of a self-denying Spirit; he denied his
own Will (as man) to do his Fathers Will, as appears by Luke 12.14. compared
with Ioh. 5.30. The last words, Matthew. 26.39. Phil. 2.8. By all which it is
evident, That Christ was of an obeying Spirit.

13. Christ was of a thankful Spirit, that which was matter of joy to him, he
made matter of praise and thanksgiving to his Father, as appears by Matthew.
11.25. Mar. 6.41. Christ had a Spirit thankful to God, and thankful to man;
whatever kindness was showed unto him, returned upon the head of the doer with
abundant recompense, and this lively domonstrates his thankful Spirit.

14. Christ had a Spirit delighted in the exercise of all Gods Ordinances, and
all holy duties, as his frequent exercise therein, and exhortation thereunto,
do fully evince; he was still ready to take every opportunity to instruct the
people, as appears by Mat. 5.1. Mar. 2.2. and 6.34. Luke 5.1, 3. and he
exhorted his Disciples to duty, Mat. 9. ult. By which it is evident, that his
Spirit was delighted therewith.

15. Christ was of a world contemning Spirit, as his Birth, Life, and Death,
did fully declare and evince, for in all these he showed his contempt of the
World, both in the good and evil of it.

16. Christ was not of a time-serving, but of a God-glorifying Spirit; He
sought not his own, but his Fathers glory, in all times and things, as his own
Language, Ioh. 12.28. and 17.4. shows, Christ sought his Fathers glory in all
things, and above all things; which evidently declares, he had a God-glorifying
Spirit.

17. Christ was of a faithful Spirit; he was faithful to God in all things;
He was faithful to him that appointed him, says the Author to the Hebrews,
Heb. 3.2. He was a faithful High Priest, He is called, Faithful and true,
Rev. 19.11. The faithful and true witness, Rev. 3.14. By all which is
evident, that Christ was of a faithful Spirit.

18. Christ had an elivated Spirit, his Spirit was raised above the World, and
the things of the World; his Spirit did sore aloft and solace it self, in the
things of the other world; it did solace it self in God, Prove. 8.30.
in what he did enjoy in God, before he left the bosom of his Father, and what
he should enjoy with him again, when he had finished the work, which his Father
gave him to do. This is evident by the Language of Christ, Ioh. 17.5. and by
that which is spoken of him, Heb. 12.2.

19. Christ was of a stable Spirit; he did not stagger in Spirit, or reel up
and down from one opinion to another, but his Spirit was steadfast with God, and
unmovable, in calmes and in storms; He was yesterday, and to day, and the same
for ever: How variable soever the world was in their opinion of him, yet he was
still the same, as appears, Heb. 13.8. Which evidently demonstrates, his Spirit
was steadfast with God.

20. In fine, Christ had a Spirit full of all Divine excellency and beauty, he
had a Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, a Spirit of Counsel and Might, a
Spirit of Knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, a Spirit endued with all
Divine excellency, as the Prophet shows, Isa. 11.2,

All these qualifications were in the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ; and he
that is joined unto the Lord, he that is ingrafted into Christ, and made new by
him, is one Spirit with him; He that is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit,
says this Text.

Note.
Here note, That this Text does not say, that he that is joined unto the Lord is
equal with him, but that he that is joined unto the Lord [ is one] with him, He
that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit; Christ, and he that is joined unto
him, are one in spirit.

The particulars forementioned, show what Spirit the Lord Jesus Christ was of,
and this Text tells us, what spirit he that is one with Christ is of, what
spirit a new Creature is of; He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit, he
is one spirit with the Lord.

As face answers face in water, so does the heart of man to man, says Solomon;
As a Picture answers to the Life, so does the Spirit of a new Creature, answer
to the Spirit of Christ, says the Text, He that is joined to the Lord is one
spirit.

Would thou then know thy self, and thy condition truly, I know no rule in
Scripture more infallible, than this in this Text, He that is joined to the
Lord is one spirit; Consider what has been said on this Text; Consider what
Spirit Christ was of, and then examine thy self whether thou art one Spirit
with him; Consider whether the spirit that is in thee, do truly answer to the
Life, to the Spirit of Christ; if so, know that it argues thy state good, thy
Creation new, Christ and thee truly one.

Object. But I find so much Hypocrisy, so much pride, so much hardness of
heart, and unholinesse in my self, may a poor soul say here, that I cannot
hence conclude, that I am one joined to the Lord, and one Spirit with him; but
rather that I am joined to the Devil, and one Spirit with him: I cannot hence
conclude, that I am a new Creature, but rather that I am in the state of nature
still.

Answ. This Text does not say, that he that is joined to the Lord is totally
freed from these corruptions, but that He is one Spirit, he is one Spirit with
the Lord Jesus Christ, he is one with him in Spirit: And this a man may be said
to be, when he has these Divine qualifications of spirit forementioned, truly
wrought in him, though weakly and imperfectly, and much flesh, much corruption
remaining in him; This must be granted, otherwise no man in this life could be
said to be joined to the Lord, and one Spirit with him.

2. But secondly, A true sense of these corruptions, accompanied with a
loathing of them, and warring against them in faith, is so far from rendering
thee such as the Objection speaks of, that it strongly argues the clean
contrary (to wit) That thou art indeed joined to the Lord, and one Spirit with
him; that thou art incorporate into Christ, and made new by him; For it is from
Christ, and that new quality of grace, which he has infused into thy soul,
that this sense of corruption and antipathy springs; hence it is that corrupt
nature becomes a burden on the spirit, naturally it is not so.

The Apostle Paul, when joined to the Lord* and one Spirit with him, when
ingrafted into Christ, and made new by ^im; then, and never till then, did he
groan under this burden; then, and not before, did he complain of this body of
death, and the motions of lusts that war in our members.

Would thou then know from Scripture-grounds, what thy condition is; Whether
Christ be in thee and thou in Christ, go through what has been said on these
two Texts; If Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin, etc. and
this we are now upon; If any man be in Christ he is a new Creature. Consider
whether thou art become dead to sin, alive to righteousness, a new Creature:
Consider whether Christ be formed in thee, whether thou have a new heart,
whether thou live in Christ, as a branch in the vine, and bring forth
fruit in him: whether thou art one that does not commit sin, in a Scripture
sense: Whether thou art one that groans under the remainder of the old man in
thee, as thy greatest burden: Whether thou art one that minds the things of the
Spirit, that art led by the Spirit, and walks after the Spirit. Finally,
whether thou art one Spirit with the Lord Jesus Christ: and if upon a true
trial of thy self, thou find by what has been said, that it is thus with
thy self, conclude thou may safely (as I conceive) to thy comfort, with the
Church in the Canticles, My well-beloved is mine, and I am his; That thy estate
is good, thy interest in Christ true and real, and thy Title to Heaven, such as
no enemy whatsoever, no not Satan, nor sin, shall be able to deprive thee of
it, whatever Satan or thy own conscience, abused by Satan, may say to the^
contrary.

Fatherly Chastisements.
Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom
he receives.


IN these words, the Apostle fetches an argument of Divine and Fatherly Love,
from a Rod, and concludes sonneship, by adoption, from Chastisement, Whom the
Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives

The Position of the Apostle, is confirmed by a plurality of witnesses, both
Solomon and Christ concur with Paul herein; Whom the Lord loves he
corrects, even as a father the son in whom he delights, says Solomon,
Prove. 3.12. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, says Christ, Rev. 3.19.
The truth of this position has been experimented by a cloud of witnesses, by
all the Sons and Daughters of God, that have gone before us unto Glory, and
will be by all that shall follow after us, and therefore needs not much
proving. The Apostle tells us, That through many afflictions, we must enter
into the Kingdom of God. And in ver. 8. of this Chap. says, that if ye be
without Chastisement (whereof all are partakers) then are ye Bastards, and not
Sons.

Immunity from correction, is rather a Character of a Bastard, than of an
Adopted Son of God; it is rather a note of an Ismael, than of an Isaac; it is
rather the mark of a Goat, than of a Sheep; it is rather a demonstrator of a
child of this world, than of a Disciple of Christ: for the Cross is a
reculicen which all Christ's Disciples must wear, as he himself tells us: In a
word, it is rather a badge of an heir of Hell, than of an heir of Heaven; of
a reprobate, rather than an elect, and adopted Child of God, for Chastisement
is the universal lot of all Gods Children, as this Text tells us, Whom the Lord
loves he Chastises, yea, scourges.

The most people in the world, fetch their evidence of Gods Love, from Gods
liberal dispensations of his gifts, either natural or supernatural, eternal or
internal, transient gifts: I have this gift liberally dispensed to me of God,
says one, and I have that gift liberally dispensed to me of God, says
another. I have health (says one) and I have wealth, says another; I have no
changes, but constant prosperity, through my policy in winding with the times:
I have esteem in the world, and success in every thing I go about ortake in
hand; therefore doubtless God loves me; Thus from providence.
Ergo. Another looks higher than this, and says, I have natural parts, and
supernatural gifts liberally dispensed to me of God, above what many others
have: I have wit and understanding, etc. more than many others: I have
knowledge, and I have utterance, and herein excel many: I have esteem among the
Godly wise, and a name to live: I have a form of Godliness, and a shadow of
every grace of the Spirit, many Talents in my hand, and hence conclude, God
doubtless loves me, whoever he hates, Ergo. But neither of these argue well
for their sonneship, nor their eternal estate; for no where does the Scripture
make any of these signs of Gods special love, or our adoption.

It is evident by Scripture, That a Cain may prosper in the World as well as an
Abel, and a glutton excel a Lazarus, in these contingent things: An
Ahithophel, through his policy, may enjoy prosperity, while a Paul suffers
all adversity: A son of Beliall, may wear Purple and Scarlet, and fare
deliciously every day, while a Son of God wears sheepskins, and
goats-skins, and lives upon Gods Providence: A Nebuchadnezzar may have success
in his enterprises, as well as a Joshua for a time, Philistines may triumph,
while Israelites are led captive: A Judas may have as good natural parts, and
supernatural transient gifts, as a Paul, or a John, as a chosen vessel or a
beloved Disciple, yea, happily more: A Iesabell may be as beautiful in the eye
of man, as a Rebeckah: A Pharisee more exemplary in a form of Godliness, than
a Nathaniel: an Hipocrite may be more like a beloved Child of God, in his own
eyes, and other men's too, than a true Child of God. A foolish Virgin may have
as fair a Lamp in her hand, as a wise. By all which it is evident, That none
of these things, are sufficient to denominate a man, beloved of God, after a
special manner, nor to render him an Adopted Son of God.

In these words the Apostle lays before us, things quite contrary to these (to
wit) chastisement and scourging, as signs of Gods love; Here is love written in
Characters, a hand that every one cannot read, a hand that few can read right;
Here is love wrapped up in a rod, which none but a loving and beloved child,
can draw out, or well apprehend; none but a child, savingly endued with the
Spirit of his Heavenly Father, can see his love, when he feels his rod, or
argue his sonneship, 1 Cor. 11.32.
from his chastisement. To fetch an evidence of Gods Love, and a man's own
Adoption from Gods Chastisements and Scourgings, is peculiar to a Child of God,
and it is his prerogative, thus to do.

It is not every Adopted Child of God neither, that can thus argue his
sonneship; I am Chastised of God, therefore I am beloved of him; I am scourged
more than many others, therefore doubtless I am beloved more than others: It
must be a child, grown to some maturity in grace, that must thus conclude; Whom
the Lord loves, he corrects, etc.

Love, as attributed unto God, is not a quality; as it is in man, but an effect
of tree grace, and it is either more general or more special: Of the more
general Love of God toward man, we read in Mar. 10.21. where it is said, of
the young man that came to Christ, That Jesus beholding him, loved him. Of the
more special Love of God toward some, we read Ierem. 31.3. 2 These. 2.16. John
13.1.

The more general, or common Love of God, is manifested in, and by his common
gifts and dispensations, such as the young man that came to Christ was endued
with (to wit) great place in the World, great possessions, moral
righteousness, desire of, and endeavor after eternal life, with the
enjoyment of temporal felicity, and predominate corruption.

But the more special Love of God toward man, is manifested in, and by his
Fatherly chastisements and scourgings, as this Text tells us, Whom the Lord
loves, he chastises, etc, Whom the Lord loveth] after a special manner, he
sooner, or later certainly chastises; He scourges every son whom he
receives unto glory.

The Chastisements of God, are many for number, various for kind, differing in
measure, duration, and immediate causes; but my purpose is not to discuss
these, but to consider, when Gods Chastisements, of what kind soeever, are sure
and certain pledges of his more special and eternal Love toward a man; which
to find out, I will premise these four things.

First, That Chastisements and sufferings from God, are not pledges of Divine
love toward all: A man may be Chastised of God, and yet not be beloved of God,
but hated, as Esau was; All things says Solomon, come alike to all, and if all
things, then Chastisements alike to all; Eliphaz tells us, That a man is born to
trouble (it is as incident to him) as to the sparks to fly upward, Job 5.7.
Troubles are Chastisements; and these do not argue love to all that are visited
with them.

The second thing premised, is this; That although Chastisements and
scourgings, are not pledges of Gods Love to all, yet they are to some. Thou in
very faithfulness have afflicted me, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.75.

The third thing premised is; Who they are to whom Chastisements and scourgings
are pledges of Divine love? they are pledges of Divine love to them and to them
only, to whom all things work together for good (to wit) to the Adopted
Children of God; To them that love God.
When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world, says an Adopted Son of God, of himself and his
brethren, 1 Cor. 11.32.

The fourth thing premised is; When Chastisements and Scourgings are pledges of
Divine love, and that is, when they are sanctified: Sanctified chastisements,
and they only, are pledges of Gods special love toward man.

Quest. But how shall I know, whether Gods chastisements be sanctified ^o me,
or not?

Answ. Chastisements sanctified, have many appearances, many effects they
produce, whereby they may be known, a few of which I will mention, instead of
many.

1. Chastisements sanctified, make a man to reflect on himself, read himself
over, and call his sins to remembrance, as appears in Joseph's brethren, Genesis
42.21. and Job 7.20.

2. Chastisements sanctified, lead to repentance; Ephraim was by chastisements
sanctified, brought to repentance, Ier. 31.18, 19* and so was Manasseh, and the
Prodigal: By which it is evident, That Chastisements sanctified, make a man
turn from his evil way unto the Lord; they make a man turn to him that
smites; they regulate the whole man* and conform him to the whole Will of God,
they better his Obedience; Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I
have learned to keep thy Word, says David, Psa. 119.67. and it is said of Jesus
Christ, Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he
suffered, Heb. 5.8.

3. Chastisements sanctified, make a man humble, Cant. 1.5, 6.
vile in his own eyes; My soul has them still in remembrance, (says the
Church of her afflictions) and is bowed in me, Lam. 3.20. I am black (says the
Spouse, when under the sun of persecution) by my Mothers Children. Look not
upon me, because I am black, etc. The Churches afflictions were sanctified, and
hence it was, that she was humbled by them, and become vile in her own eyes.

4. Chastisements sanctified, wean a man from the world, mortify in him the
love of the world, and deaden his affections to the noblest vanities of the
world; they draw the heart from all things here below, and work it to a holy
contempt of them, and inhance the price of grace and glory.

5. They drive the soul to God, and indeare communion with him; they will make
a man pray frequently, and pray fervently; Seek the Lord early, and seek him
earnestly, wrestle with God in prayer, G^n 32.
witness Jacob and the Prodigal.

6. Chastisements sanctified, beget and increase love in the chastised, toward
the chastiser; Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee, says Solomon, Pro.
9.8. Chastisements sanctified increase love to God.

7. Chastisements sanctified meeken the heart, and moderate anger, mortify in
man hatred and malice, which generate thoughts and desires of revenge, against
the instruments in Gods hand; They beget patience under all strokes; I have
sinned, Mic. 7.9.
therefore I will bear the indignation of the Lord, says the soul, whose
Chastisement is sanctified, and justifiesGod in all his dealings.

8. Chastisements sanctified, soften the heart, and make it pliable to the will
of God; they subject a man unto Christ's yoke.

9. They fit a man for any condition that God calls him unto, prosperity or
adversity; they fit him to abound, and fit him to want, fit him to live to
Christ, and fit to him to dye for Christ; they fit a man to live to Christ
here, and to live with Christ heareafter in Heaven.

10. They make a man long to be dissolved, Thus did Paul's bonds operate in him,
Phil. 1.23.
to be with Christ, yet patiently to wait on God all the days of his appointed
time, until his change come, Romans 5.^. Job 14.14.

11. Sanctified Chastisements indeare to a man, his Fathers house, his house of
grace, and his house of glory; they did thus operate in David, Psa. 42. and in
Israel in captivity, Psalm. 137.1, 6. and in the Prodigal, Luke 15. When his
Chastisement was sanctified unto him, it indeared his fathers house.

12. Sanctified Chastisements will make a man labor to excel in grace; There
is no man so covetous after grace, as he to whom Gods chastising hand is
sanctified; There is none so sensible of the want of grace, nor of the worth of
grace, as this soul is, therefore such an one usually labors, above all
others, to excel in grace.

13. Finally, Sanctified Chastisements, leave impression behind them, when they
are gone; they do not only make impression, while they are present, as
unsanctified Chastisements many times do, but they leave impression behind
them, when they are removed; impression of holy fear, of love, of humility, of
watchfulness, of holiness, of compassion toward others under Gods Chastising
hand; They yield the peaceable fruit of righteousness, Heb. 12.11.
to them that have been exercised thereby, and the like; they do not barely
produce good purposes and promises, but resolve them into performances,
according to ability and opportunity.

By some one or other of these, every one may perceive, whether Gods
Chastisements be sanctified to him, or no; and so consequently, whether Gods
rod, upon himself, be a sign and pledge of Gods special Love toward him, or
not.

Object. But God Chastises in wrath and displeasure, as well as in love, In my
wrath I smote thee, says God of his own People, Isa. 60.10. In a little wrath
I hid my face from thee, etc. Isai. 54.8. How shall I then know, whether God
chastise me in love or in displeasure?

Sol. To find out this, Consider, 1. That those which the Lord here speaks of,
though they were the Lords own People by profession, yet they were not all such
by true conversion, they were not all beloved, after a special manner.

2. Know, That God may, and often times does, Chastise in wrath, and yet in
love too; When God Chastises his own Adopted Child, he many times does it in
wrath, and displeasure toward his sin, but always in love to his person.

Would thou then know, whether thou art Chastised of God in love, or not;
Consider, whether thou art an Adopted Child of God, or not; Try thy self by
what has been formerly said, and if thou find, that thou art truly such,
conclude thou may certainly, That all thy Chastisements do spring from love;
for whatsoever stroks God smites such an one with, he does it in Love to his
person, (this is a sure rule) though God speak bitter things against thee, as
Job complains he did against him, and do bitter things unto thee, yet all
springs from his love, though he bide his face from thee for a while, and
chastise thee with s^ourging, he does it in love to thy person; all Gods
dealings with thee, spring from his love, his love is the efficient whatsoever
be the meritorious or immediate cause of thy Chastisement; When God is angry
with thee, and smites thee for thy sin, it is in love to thy person, he loves
thee still. Is Ephraim my dear son, is he a pleasant Child? for since I
spoke against him, I do earnestly rem^ember him still, etc. Ier. 31.20.

All Gods Children, Note.
even the best of them all here, have faults, many faults* and God will not
suffer them to go unchastised; Children are sure of chaftisement, however
servants speed; legitimate sons are sure of chastisement, P^al. 89.30, 31, 32.
when they offend, however bastards escape; God has no time to chastise his
Children, but here, therefore they are sure of Chastisement here; it will not
stand with Gods Love to pass by them, and wink at their faults; the nearer in
relation, the surer of correction, the dearer in affection, the surer of
chastisement; Whom the Lord loves, he chastises, and scourges every son,
whom he receives.

Would thou then get a true evidence of the special Love of God toward
thee, and of this Adoption by Jesus Christ, Consider well of two things: First,
Whether thou have been Chastised of the Lord, yea, or nay? Secondly, Whether
thy Chastisiments are sanctified to thee, or not? and if thou can truly
conclude on the affirmative, thou have good ground to believe, that thou art
one beloved of God, after a special manner; that thou art an Adopted Child of
God, and an heir of Heaven: But if thou have been altogether free from, or
unprofitable under Gods Chaftisement, thou have just cause to fear, whether
thou art an Adopted Child of God, or not; at least that thou art not yet
brought home to thy Heavenly Father; For whom the Lord loves, he (certainly
sooner or later) chastises, as the Text tells us, Whom the Lord loves, he
chastises, and scourges every son, whom he receives.

Gospel Sufferings, OR Suffering as a Christian.
2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him.


IN these words, the Apostle briefly lays before us another and a higher
Evidence of our Salvation (to wit) suffering. Heaven the Kingdom of glory,
where Jesus Christ reigns, is here promised to sufferers: But to find out, what
kind of sufferers they are, to whom this great reward is promised, we must
consult with other Scriptures, for it is not to all kind of sufferers, that
this promise is made.

Before I speak of the kind of suffering, here spoken of, I shall here note
four or five things.

First, That suffering is a lesson very hard to flesh and blood to learn; which
the Apostle knowing, as a wise scholemaster, sets before us, his schoolers,
that which we all naturally desire (to wit) sovereignty, as the reward of this
service, as a motive to quicken our dull hearts to buckle to our duty. If we
suffer we shall also reign with him.

2. Active Obedience is a lesson hard to learn; passive Obedience is a lesson
harder to flesh and blood to learn; neither of them can we learn to any
purpose, unless Christ be our schoolmaster, but both of them will Christ
teach us, so far forth as he sees it necessary for us, if he once undertake the
work.

3. Suffering is of diverse sorts, good or bad, according as the true cause of
it is; a man may suffer for well doing, or for evil doing, it is to sufferers
for well-doing, not to sufferers for evil doing that the Crown is promised.

4. Suffering is either just, or unjust; suffering is always just from God,
but not always just from men, it is not to just suffering, but to unjust
suffering from men, that this promise is made.

5. It is not to sufferers for the evil of sin, nor to sufferers of the
evil of sin, to which the Crown is promised: But to sufferers of the evil
of punishment for the avoiding of the evil of sin, that it is promised, as
^ppears by comparing this Text with some others; Peter explains Paul's meaning
here, touching suffering, 1 Pet. 3.14. If ye suffer for righteousness sake,
happy are ye, Chap. 4.14. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are
ye, etc. Christ concurreth in this, Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12, and 19.29. Hence it is
evident, That it is not to all kind of suffering, but only to Gospel-suffering,
that this great reward is promised.

I will not here stand to distinguish between suffering for righteousness
sake, and suffering for Christ's sake, or for his name sake, but leave it for
them whose proper work it is.

1. But here note, 1. That the sufferings of the Gospel comprehend both the
Doctrine of the Gospel, Gospell-doctrine, Gospell-Discipline,
Gospell-Conversation.
and the Discipline of the Gospel, and Gospell-Conversation, and a man is a
sufferer for the Gospel, that suffers in the defense of either of these, or for
either.

2. And secondly. Note, That it is not suffering as an evil doer, but
suffering as a Christian, that denominates an heir of Heaven; Let none of you
suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evill-doer, says the Apostle;
Yet if any man suffer (as a Christian) let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify God on this behalf, 1 Pet. 4.15, 16. Hence it is evident, That it is
to him only that suffers as a Christian, that this promise of reigning with
Christ is made; The Apostles meaning in this Text then, is, That if we suffer
as Christians, we shall reign with him in glory.

Quest. But what is it to suffer as a Christian? or when may a man be said to
suffer as a Christian?

Answ. To suffer as a Christian, is to suffer as Christ did suffer; and a man
may be said to suffer, as a Christian, when he is truly conformable to Christ
in suffering.

Christ suffered for the Will of his Father, for the fulfilling of the Will of
his Father, and he suffered according to the Will of his Father; now when a man
does these two, when he suffers for the Will of Christ, and suffers according
to the Will of Christ, then does he suffer as Christ did, then may he be said
to be conformable unto Christ in suffering, and to suffer, as a Christian.

A man then suffers for the Will of Christ, when he suffers for doing that
which Christ would have him to do, or for refusing that which Christ would not
have him to do.

A man then suffers, according to the Will of Christ, when he suffers as the
Word of God requires him to suffer, ( viz.) when he suffers out of Love to God,
and suffers beleevingly, patiently, joyfully, courageously, and perseveringly;
for confcience toward God, that God may have honor thereby, and glorifies God
for suffering.

My purpose is not to enter upon an accute discourse of either of these, but
briefly to assert what I think necessary for the right understanding of them,
as God shall enable me.

1. It is the Will of Christ, that he that suffers for his Will, should suffer
out of love to his Will, and he that does suffer for the Will of Christ, and
does not suffer out of love to the Will of Christ, does not suffer according to
the Will of Christ, This is evident by the Language of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
13.3. Though I give my body to be burned, and have ^ot love, it profits me
nothing; it is as if the Apostle had said, it is the Will of Christ, that I
should suffer out of love to him, and if I do not thus, all my suffering is
worth nothing, it is not according to the Will of Christ, nor worth any thing
in Gods account; it comes to just nothing at last, it profits me nothing, etc.

A^ all our active obedience, so all our passive obedience, must spring out of
love to God, Note.
as the efficient cause of it, else it is worth nothing with God.

2. It is the Will of Christ, that he that suffers for his will, should suffer
beleevingly; this appears thus, It is the Will of Christ, that he that suffers
for his Will, should suffer patiently, joyfully, courageously and
perseveringly, but this a man cannot possibly do, except he believe; therefore
it follows by necessary consequence, that it is the Will of Christ, that he
that suffers for his Will, should suffer beleevingly. This is also evident by
Scripture, Ioh. 14.1. where Christ making a speech ^o his Disciples to fit them
for suffering, bids them believe, thereby declaring, that his Will was, that
they should suffer beleevingly; and intimating, That if they did not suffer
beleevingly, they did not suffer according to his will, although they suffered
for his will.

A man may be then said to suffer beleevingly, when he by faith commits the
keeping of his soul unto God in well-doing, as the Apostle Peter speaks; when
he believes that Christ will be with him in all his sufferings, strengthen him
to suffer, carry him through all that he calls him to suffer, and abundantly
reward all his sufferings for his sake, according to his Word.

3. It is the Will of Christ, that he that suffers for his will should suffer
patiently; God calls for patience in suffering; Be patient in tribulation, Romans
12.12. In your patience, possess ye your souls, Luke 21.19. We should follow
Christ in patient suffering, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.21, 23.
for even hereunto are we called: Hence it is evident, That he that suffers for
the will of Christ, does not suffer according to the will of Christ, except he
suffer patiently.

Divine patience, What?
Divine patience, or patience considered, as a divine quality, is the issue and
cream of many graces; It is a Diamond in the midst of a Triangle, (to wit ^ a
virtue between stupidity, despising the chastisement of the Lord, and fainting
under it; it is a grace which keeps a man quiet within, when all things are
troublous, and very unquiet without; it is a grace which possesses a man of
himself, when dispossessed of all earthly comforts; it is a special work of
the Spirit of God in the soul, enabling a man not stupidly, but quietly to bear
whatsoever God lays upon him, without feeling murmuring, or repining, against
God or man, in heart or in tongue, or fainting under his chastising hand.

When it is thus with a sufferer for Christ, then may he be said to suffer
according to the will of Christ in this particular (to wit) patiently.

4. Christ requires joy in sufferers for his will; Count it all joy Ja. 1.2.
when you fall into diverse temptations. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad Mat.
5.12.
says Christ. Rejoice in that day and leap for joy. Lu. 6.23.


It is divine joy, or the joy of grace, that Christ here calls for in sufferers
for his will; it is that joy, which Nehemiah calls, The joy of the Lord.

Divine joy, What?
And this is a holy passion of the soul, issuing out of the apprehension of what
Christ has done for it, and will do for it, reviving, elevating, and
strengthening the soul, and carrying it above it self. It is a wing grace,
which whiles the soul is actually possessed of, is thereby carried above it
self, above the world, and above Satan.

Faith and joy are the two wings of the soul, which bear it up, both in doing
and suffering* If either of these be c^ipt, the soul is much hindered thereby,
and exposed to many dangers.

Joy, as all other graces of the Spirit, has different degrees in different
times and subjects, and is usually greatest in the greatest sufferers, and
sufferings for Christ.

When a man is spoiled in his estate, spoiled in his good name, spoiled in his
body, or any thing respecting the preservation or felicity of this life, for
his faithfullness to the word and will of Christ; and yet with the good
Prophet, Rejoices in the Lord, and joys in the God of his salvation, Hab. 2.17,
18.
then may he be said to suffer joyfully, then may he be said to suffer
according to the will of Christ, in this particular.

5. Christ in his Word, calls for courage, in sufferers for his will; the will
of Christ is, that he that suffers for a good cause, should not be ashamed Mar.
8.38.
of his cause, nor of his sufferings. If any man suffer (as a Christian) let
him not be ashamed. 1 Pet. ^.16.
Be not thou ashamed of the testimony of the Lord, 2 Timothy 1.8.
nor of me his prisoner, says Paul to Timothy.

The will of Christ is, That he that suffers for his will should not be afraid.
1 Pet. 3.14.
If ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye, and be not afraid of their
terror nor be troubled. Fear them not, says Christ, thrice in one Chapter.

Mat 10.26.28, 31. Rev. 2.^0.
Fear no^ them that kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul, Phil.
1.28.

Christ compares his Church Cant. 1.9.
to a company of horses in Pharaohs Chariots, which in all probability were the
best in Egypt, and like to the war-horse, which the Lord describes to Job, Job
39. very courageous in the hottest battle. Christ by this metaphor hints unto
us, That his will is, that we should be very bold and courageous, in whatsoever
we do, or suffer for his sake, and that he expects it at our hands; his will
is, that we should be like a company of horses in Pharaohs Chariots, full of
spirits and courage, in doing and suffering, and not like a company of Jades in
a Dung-Cart, spiritless and unfit to bear any thing, for his sake.

Note.
It is Christian-courage that Christ requires in sufferers for his will.

Christian courage, Christian courage.
is a grace of the spirit, whereby a man resolves (through the help and
assistance of Jesus Christ) to cleave close to his word and will, and boldly to
stand for it, mauger all opposition; and chooses rather to suffer any thing,
than omit any thing, or commit any thing, that should derogate from the honor
of Christ.

A man does then declare Christian courage, when he is not ashamed, nor afraid
to own a good cause, or appear in it, because of suffering; when he can suffer
for the Gospel, or any Ordinance of God, and truly say with the Apostle, 1 Timothy
1.2. Romans 1.16.
Though I suffer these things, neverthel^ss I am not ashamed; I am not ashamed
of the Gospel of Christ, nor of the cause of God. And when with the three
Children, Dan. 3.18.
he slights the torment, and the tormentor; resolving in the strength of
Christ, to do his duty, whatsoever he suffer for it, and to cleave close to the
word and will of Christ, whether deliverance, or no deliverance arise here;
when he is more afraid to displease God than man; when he is more afraid of
losing things spiritual and eternal, than of losing things temporal; when he
chooses to suffer, rather than sin; when he endures the Cross, and despises
the shame; when he refuses base deliverance, Thus did the three Children we
read of in Daniel, declare their courage.
and yields his body rather than his cause, (his cause being good) into a
Tyrants hand.

When a sufferer for a good cause, does thus declare his courage, he declares
it in a high degree, and suffers according to the will of Christ, in this
particular.

6. Christ in his Word requires perseverance unto the end* in suffering for his
will; and it is unto the persevering sufferer, that this great reward of
reigning with Christ, is promised; Rom 2.7.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the Crown of Rev. 2.10.
life. He Mat. 24.13.
that shall endure unto the end* the same shall be saved.

Christian perseverance, is a conftant holding out in the Truth to the last
breath, Perseverance.
in the belief, love, profession, and practice of the Truth.

And this he may be said to do, that does never totally, nor finally apostatize
from the Truth once received.

It is possible, for one that perseveres in suffering, at some time, and in
some kind, Not^*
and measure, to desist from his former forwardness, through strong temptations
and humane frailty; witness Peter, who through fear denied his Master, and
forsware him, and yet did after suffer for him.

7. The will of Christ is, That he that suffers for his will wrongfully, should
do it for conscience sake, For conscience toward God 1 Pet. 2.19.
; conscience of his duty should be the principal motive, inducing him to
suffer; I do not say, the only, but the principal motive.

I think it not fit here to define Conscience, and therefore will pass by that.
A man may then be said to suffer for conscience toward God, when conscience of
his duty, is the thing that puts him upon suffering; when he to avoid sin, or
perform duty, exposes himself to suffering; when he out of scruple in
conscience, of the lawfullness, or unlawfullness of a thing, commanded or
forbidden by Authority, refuses it, and chooses rather to suffer in his
outward man, than to baffle his conscience, or displease God, by rebelling
against lawful Authority (which is Gods Ordinance;) He that does thus suffer,
does suffer for conscience toward God, and according to the will of Christ, in
this particular.

8. The will of Christ is, That he that suffers for his will, should aim at his
Honor and Glory therein; This appears thus; Whether you eat or drink* or
whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God, says the Text, 1 Cor. 10.31.
That is, do it so that God may have glory thereby, do it aiming at the Honor
and Glory of God therein; Hence I argue thus.

If it be the will of Christ, that I should aim at his Honor and Glory in all
that I do, then it is the will of Christ, that I should aim at his Honor and
Glory, in all that I suffer, for suffering is doing: But it is the will of
Christ, that I should aim at his Honor and Glory, in all that I do: Therefore
it is the will of Christ, that I should aim at it, in all that I suffer.

A man may then be said to aim at the Honor and Glory of Christ, in suffering,
when he makes that his direct, chief and utmost end, in all that he suffers;
when he makes the Honor and Glory of Christ, the final cause of all his
sufferings; when he suffers not out of vain glory, but that Christ may be
magnified thereby, when a man does thus suffer for the will of Christ, then
does he suffer according to the will of Christ, in this particular.

9. Finally, the will of Christ is, that he that suffers for his will, should
glorify God, for suffering. If any man suffer, as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed; but let him glorify God on thi^ behalf, 1 Pet. 4.16.

A man does then glorify God for suffering. 1. When he boldly and thankfully
acknowledges the favor of the Lord toward him, in calling him forth, and
enabling him to suffer, for his sake. 2. When he makes his sufferings, the
matter of his joy and thanksgiving; when he rejoices and praises God, that he
is counted worthy to suffer in any kind for Christ's sake. 3. When he doubles
his diligence in duty upon this account; thus did the Apostles glorify God,
for suffering, Phil. 1.29. Act. 5.41, 42.

Art thou then a sufferer; Consider whether thou suffer as a Christian, yea,
or nay? whether thou suffer for the will of Christ? and whether thou
suffer according to the will of Christ? And if thou can truly conclude on
the affirmative, thou have good ground to conclude, that thou art one that
shall reign with Jesus Christ, in his everlasting kingdom: If ye suffer, ye
shall also reign with him; and not only reign with Christ, but reign with him
in greater glory: For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Suffering as a Christian, is a real testimony of a real Christian; Note.
and suffering as a Christian is a high evidence of Gods special love toward
a person.

Do thou then suffer and suffer as a Christian; Thou may then safely
conclude, I shall reign with Christ: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown
of righteousness; An exceeding, and eternal weight of glory: A kingdom that
cannot be shaken; A Crown that cannot be taken; Glory that cannot here enter
into my heart to conceive; Glory that cannot be measured; Glory that fades not
away, but remains through all eternity; Glory that cannot enter into me, I
shall one day enter into. I now suffer with Christ, and for Christ, I shall one
day be glorified with Christ, and by Christ, whatsoever Satan or the world may
say to the contrary.

Sealing by the Spirit.
Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the
day of redemption. -- [Whereby ye are sealed, etc.]


THat which I pitch upon in this Text, as most for my purpose, is this, That
the holy Spirit of God does seal the Elect unto the day of redemption.

The whole Trinity does concur in this work of sealing souls to eternal
happiness; but sealing is here attributed to the third Person in Trinity (to
wit) the holy Spirit of God, because it is a work most proper to his Office; It
is the holy Spirit of God that seals souls to the day of redemption, as the
Apostle here tells us.

The persons sealed, by the holy Spirit of God, are the Elect of God, true
believers, as the Apostle intimates by that particle [ Ye] whereby [Ye] are
sealed, speaking of true believers. These, all these, and none but these, the
holy Spirit of God does seal unto the day of redemption, unto the day of the
full manifestation of our redemption, unto the day of the redemption of our
bodies from corruption, and the fruition of the redemption of our souls and
bodies from Hell, by Jesus Christ.

Sealing is a metaphor taken from Merchants, who use to seal their own wares,
for special ends.

The divine seals of God, are of a double kind, and of a double use; they are
of a double kind, they are either external, or internal; outward or inward;
^. External, or outward, and such a seal was Circumcision in the time of the
Law, it is so called by the Apostle, Rom 4.11. And such are our Sacraments*
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, now in the days of the Gospel.

2. Internal, or inward; the internal or inward seal of God, is the seal of
the holy Spirit of God, metaphorically so called; and this is that which this
Text points at.

Seals are of a double use, they serve to demonstrate, and to confirm; they
signify, and ratify; I speak after the manner of men; Gods seals do no less,
they demonstrate, they confirm; But Gods external seals, without the
internal seal of the Spirit of God, cannot assure any soul, of the special
love of God, nor of his Adoption; many outwardly sealed go to Hell, the outward
seals alone, cannot seal any soul unto the day of redemption; It is the inward
seal of the holy Spirit of God, that seals us unto the day of redemption, as
this Text tells us, Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed
unto the day of redemption.

The internal, or inward divine seal of the Spirit of God, is twofold,
Demonstrative, or Confirmative; The holy Spirit of God seals the Elect to the
day of redemption two ways, 1. With a seal of Demonstration, 2. With a seal of
Confirmation.

The seal of Demonstration; set by the Spirit of God, I call that a special
work of the holy Spirit of God, whereby a sinful soul is truly regenerated,
and the Image of God stamped upon him.

The seal of Confirmation, I call that a special work of the holy Spirit of
God within us, whereby we are persuaded and assured, after an immediate manner,
that we are the children of God, adopted in Christ, and beloved with an
everlasting love.

Both these seals agree in their efficient cause, for they are both the
special works of the holy Spirit of God, whereby the soul is marked for, and
assured of eternal happiness, when this life is ended.

Of the first of these seals (to wit) the seal of Demonstration, I shall speak
something from this Text, as God shall enable me; and somewhat of the other (to
wit) the seal of Confirmation from another Text, if the Lord permit, and so
conclude this work.

Before I speak further of this seal of Demonstration, or the appearances of
it, I will here premise six things.

First, That as a Merchant sets his seal upon his wares, by which he
demonstrates such and such wares to be his, and distinguishes them from all
other; so God sets his seal upon his people (to wit) this seal of regeneration,
by which he demonstrates them to be his, and distinguishes them from all the
people in the world, profane, moral, hypocritical: This I may call Gods
broad-seal, sealing a soul to the day of redemption.

Secondly, This seal God sets upon all his wares; all his adopted children, are
sooner or later sealed with this seal: every real Saint, every one that is
effectually called, has this seal of Demonstration set upon him, regeneration
wrought in him, Gods Image stamped upon him. But all the children of God have
not this in like measure, the impression is not alike visible in all, neither
to the parties themselves, nor to others; some bear this impression, as babes;
others, as men grown up to some maturity; all Gods adopted children bear this
impression truly, but none of them perfectly in this life.

The third thing premised is this, That this seal of Demonstration (to wit)
true regeneration, is of absolute necessity unto salvation; for, Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. This Christ in^^^nated to
Peter, Joh. 13 8. and plainly told Nicodemus, Joh. 3.5.
No man shall ever inherit the kingdom of glory, that has not this seal set
upon him in the kingdom of grace. Christ will own none of these wares for his,
in that other world, whom he does not thus seal in this world, it stands not
with his justice to own such.

The fourth thing premised is this, That this seal of regeneration demonstrates
to God, to man, to others, and to a man's self, except in some Viz. In case of
Ignorance, Temptation, Desertion.
cases, that he is Gods; He has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the
world, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth, 2 These.
2.13.

Fifthly, This seal of regeneration, Such a seal was set upon those, mentioned
Phil. 4.3. whose names the Apostle judged were in the Book of Life.
is such as others may discern; therefore I call it, a seal of demonstration:
The Image of God, if once stamped in truth upon the soul, cannot be hid no
more, than fire in a man's bosom; the love of God in the heart, will show it
self in the outward man; Nay, this seal of regeneration is many times more
obvious unto others, than unto the parties themselves: This seal is so lively
stamped on some of Gods people, that it shows it self very eminently in the
eyes of others, when they that have it, cannot, nor will not, behold it in
themselves.

The sixth and last thing premised is this, That this seal of regeneration,
wherever it is truly stamped by the holy Spirit of God, The saving graces of
the Spirit, are called, The earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.5.
is Gods mark, and the souls earnest for Heavens eternity; The Lord has set
apart him that is godly for himself, Psalm. 4.3. The person thus sealed is a
sequestered person, sequestered for the Lords use, sealed unto the day of
redemption; Where note, That this seal of regeneration, does confirm and make
sure the love of God unto the person on which it is set, as well as the other,
though not always to the apprehension of the person.

Object. But Satan does many times counterfeit this seal, and thereby cheats
and cosens many a soul; He counterfeiteth holiness, and persuades the soul,
that is but seemingly regenerate, that he is truly regenerate; and him that
has but civil holiness, that he has saving holiness; and by this sophistry
of his, cheats and undoth many a soul; How shall I then come truly to discern,
whether the demonstrative seal, set upon my self, be indeed the seal of the
holy Spirit of God* or but the counterfeit set by Satan?

Answ. 1. Wheresoever there is true regeneration wrought by the holy Spirit of
God, Satan's seal, which is upon our souls, as we come into the world, is
cancelled, corruption is not barely restrained, but mortified; The body is
dead, because of sin, as the Scripture speaks; the soul is bent against every
sin, it allows not it self in any known sin, Hates fin for its evil nature,
and because God hates it.
it hates all sin, but where Satan counterfeits this seal, corruption is but
restrained, the heart loves it still, and cherishes some one sin or other.

2. The soul ^hus sealed by the holy Spirit of God, bears the Image of God,
the Image of God is stamped upon it; as the seal is, so is the print which it
makes; the Spirit of God is a holy Spirit, and the soul that is sealed by it is
a holy soul: He is renewed in the spirit of his mind; Holiness is stamped upon
his heart and spirit* Ephesians. 4.23.
and from thence spreads it self through the whole man, and through the whole
life; from the time of conversion, regeneration, wrought by the Spirit of God,
makes the heart pure and holy, as well as the outward man; therefore the
Apostle calls it, Holiness of truth, Ephesians. 4.24. and says in another place,
The Spirit is Life, because of righteousness. Christ makes it a note of a good
man, that he can derive goodness from within, Luk 6 45. Therefore I may safely
pitch upon it, That Holiness engraven upon the heart and spirit of a man, and
from thence, declaring it self in the whole man, and in the whole life, is
vigor fit and but fit to give the denomination of a soul thus sealed;
regeneration wrought by the Spirit of God is begun in the inward man; it is
universal, and goes through every faculty of the soul, and every part and
member of the body, through the whole life and conversation; he that is truly
sanctified, is sanctified throughout, and holy in all manner of convers^tion;
he that is sealed by the holy Spirit of God, bears the Image of God in all
these.

But Satan's counterfeit seal of Demonstration, stamps his own image; he is
seemingly an Angel of light, whilst really a Devil; and he that is thus sealed
by Satan, resembles him in this, he is a seeming Saint, a real Devil; So
Christ spoke of Judas, Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil?

He that is thus sealed by Satan, has Holiness painted on his outside, but
wickedness graven on his heart, as is evident in the Scribes and Pharisees, who
were thus sealed by Satan; they were outwardly holy (as Christ shows at large,
Mat. 23.) but inwardly very ugly and rotten, and therefore calls them, whited
sepulchers, not sealed souls.

Civil Holiness may, and many times does enable a man to carry himself
civilly, and holily in the eyes of men; but saving Holiness makes a man
studious, and careful to approve himself unto God, in his very thoughts and
affections, and in the motions of his heart, as well as the motions of the
outward man; yea, this is that which he is most careful of, and industrious
about, that is sealed by the holy Spirit of God, his chief work is within
doors; his principal care, desire and endeavor, is to approve his heart unto
God, and so walk, that he may be accepted of him, and glorify him.

Then again, civil Holiness springs from moral principles, Saving Holiness
springs from divine principles
good education, and the like; but saving Holiness springs from love: love to
God is the root out of which it springs, as the Apostle shows, Ephesians. 1.4. The
soul that is thus sealed by the Spirit of God, his Holiness springs from love
to God, The love of Christ constrains him thereunto.

The soul that is thus sealed by the holy Spirit of God, dares not sunder what
God has coupled together (to wit) Holiness toward God, and Righteousness
toward men: a man truly regenerate, is careful of both, witness Paul, Act.
24.16. He makes conscience of all sin, and of all duty; he wars against all
sin, and has r^spect unto all Gods Commandments.

The soul thus sealed by the holy Spirit of God, is one in whom sin dwells
as a Rebel, and rules as a Tyrant only: He is one that is of all men the most
sensible of, and affected with carnallity in himself; I am carnal (says he)
sold under sin, Romans 7.

He is one that serves the Lord, with all humility of mind, Act. 20.19. The
more holy, and the more righteous a soul sealed by the holy Spirit of God is,
the more humble he is; Christ and Paul were notable examples of this.

He that is thus sealed by the holy Spirit of God, is a world-overcoming
creature, a flesh-overcoming creature, He is still figh^ing against these, and
at last overcomes them all.
and a Devil overcoming creature; He is more than a Conqueror (over all these)
through Christ that has loved him, and sealed him by his Spirit.

He is one that is a new Creature, and of this something has been already
spoken in this Treatise, to which I refer the Reader, for a farther discovery
of a regenerate person.

In fine, He that is thus sealed by the holy Spirit of God, is one that holds
on his way, and grows in grace. I join these together, so does Job, The
righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger
and stronger, Job 17.9. This seal of the holy Spirit of God, has this
priveledge, above and beyond all other seals, the impression which it makes
remains and increases. This seal of Demonstration, if once truly stamped, by
the Spirit of God, on a soul, abides there, the impression never wears out;
This anointing abides, as John speaks, 1 Ioh. 2.27. Truth of grace in the
heart, and it abides there, and the heart abides in the truth; When God gives
a man truth of grace, he gives it him, to have and to hold for ever; the soul
thus sealed bears in it the marks of the Lord Jesus unto the death, and most
eminently after death in glory; This seal of the holy Spirit of God is lasting,
and everlasting; True regeneration, seals a man to the day of redemption, but
this it could not do, were it not a lasting substance.

This may suffice to discern the reality of this seal of Demonstration by (to
wit) true regeneration, and to distinguish it from that counterfeit set by
Satan; I do not intend an innumeration of the qualifications and appearances of
a regenerate person here, but only endeavor to discry him, and distinguish
between him, and one but seemingly regenerate, and therefore strik^ (...), and
proceed to the other seal of the holy Spirit of God, (to wit) the seal of
Confirmation, mentioned before, and for this purpose shall pitch upon; Romans
8.16.

Spirits witness with our spirits.
Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self, bears witness with our spirit, that we are
the children of God.


THis is the last, but not the least evidence, that a child of God has in this
life, for Heave^s eternity; of this* I ^ay say, as David said of (...) sword,
There is none like that, give it me; There is no testimony to that of the
Spirit of God, witnessing with our spirits, to satisfy conscience, to resolve
all doubts, remove all scruples, and end all controversies, about our eternal
estate.

When the Spirit of God bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God (to wit,) by grace and adoption, the soul then enjoys heaven
upon earth, and has meat to eat, that the world knows not of; It is sealed
unto the day of redemption, indeed with a seal of Confirmation, and it knows
that it is so.

The Spirit it self, bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God: Hence it is evident.

That no man's own spirit, Note.
can truly ass^re him, of the love of God toward him, nor ^ his adoption,
unless the Spirit of God concur, and bear witness with his spirit, no more than
a man's own Deed or Seal, can assure him of what is delegated or assigned unto
him by another.

Neither is it the Spirit of God alone, simply and singly considered, that does
this, but it is the Spirit of God concurring with our spirits, the Spirit
bearing witness with our spirit, that does assure us of the love of God, and
our adoption.

When the Spirit of God by a special work of his upon our souls, convinces
them of the special love of God toward us, of our Justification, and
Sanctification, and we by faith assent thereunto, then does the Spirit bear
witness with our spirit, according to the meaning of this Text (as I conceive)
then is the soul sealed unto the day of redemption, with a seal of Confirmation.

And this is that seal, which I am now to speak of, and that which this Text
points at; This may be called Gods privy seal, sealing a soul unto the day of
redemption; Of this seal the Apostle speaks, Eph^s. 1.13. In whom after ye
believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, etc.

Before I speak of the appearances of this seal of the Spirit of God, I shall
here note two or three things.

Note.
This seal of Confirmation, God sets upon some of his people, but this he does
not set upon all his people; the Spirit of God does ^hus bear witness with our
spirits in some of Gods children, but it does not thus bear witness with our
spirits, in all Gods children. Neither does it thus bear witness, at all times
in those in whom it does at some: the Scriptures afford frequent examples of
this.

2. This testimony or witness of the Spirit of God, in whomsoever it is,
proceeds from, and depends on free grace, and is a token of royal favor,
to whomsoever it is granted; it is Christ's golden Scepter held up to the soul.

3. This seal or testimony of the holy Spirit of God, though it be the ratifier
of our Redemption, and Salvation in our hearts, yet it is not the meritorious
cause of it, neither is it absolutely necessary unto salvation.

4. This seal of the holy Spirit of God, on whomsoever it is set, is an
earnest, and but an earnest, of that inheritance, which he shall one day be
possessed of, with the adopted children of God in heaven: This is evident by
the language of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.14.

Obj. But Satan does sometimes coun^erfeit this seal too, he persuades the
soul, that it is in a good condition, and highly favored of the Lord, and
draws the soul to presume upon it, when as it is indeed in the very gall of
bitterness, and bonds of iniquity: How shall I then discern a true and
wellgrounded persuasion, and the testimony of Gods Spirit, from a presumptuous
concei^, and the Devils delusion.

Answ. We must try the Spirits, try the testimony that we have (if any,) so
says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 4.1. Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits,
whether they are of God.

Object. But how shall I do that? How shall I try the testimony that I have,
whether it be of God or no?

Answ. By the rule of faith, the written word of God, as the Lord directs,
Isa. 8.20. Luk 16.29. The written word of God (to wit) the holy Scriptures, is
the only true touchstone that we have, to try the Spirits, and their testimony
by. And it affirms,

Joh. 16.13, 14, 15.
First, That a true testimony of the holy Spirit of God, is ever agreeable, and
exactly answerable unto the written word of God: Gods witnesses do never
disagree in their testimony, the word of God, and the Spirit of God speak the
same thing; As a pair of Indentures do exactly answer one another, so does the
testimony of the Spirit of God, exactly answer to the testimony of the word,
the word of God and the Spirit of God speak the same thing; To the law, and to
the testimony, says the Lord, if they speak not according to this word* it is
because ther^ is no Life in them, Isa. 8.20. Hence it is evident, That if the
written word of God, do not concur with the testimony that thou have, that
testimony is not the testimony of the holy Spirit of God, but a mere delusion
of Satan, a dead and counterfeit thing; it is not a sealing unto the day of
redemption, but a sealing unto the day of destruction.

Secondly, The word affirms, that whosoever is sealed by the holy Spirit of
God, with this seal of Confirmation, is first sealed by him with a seal of
Demonstration; this seal of the holy Spirit of God is not an antecedent to, but
a subsequent of the other seal of Demonstration, it does not precede, but
follow after faith and sanctification; In whom after ye believ^d, ye were
sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, says the Apostle, speaking of this
seal, Ephesians. 1.13. Hence it is evident, That a man is first a true believer, he
has first a true faith, a true and real interest in Christ; He is justified,
and sanctified, and made a new Creature, before thus sealed by the holy Spirit
of God. Here I desire the Reader to note two or three things.

First, That it is a true believer only, Note.
that is capable of this seal of the holy Spirit of God, He that believes on
the Son of God has the witness in himself, 1 John 5.10. He only that
believes aright, has this witness of the Spirit of God in himself, he only
that has a justifiing faith, is thus sealed by the Spirit of God.

Secondly note, That this testimony of the Spirit of God is one of the kisses
of Christ's mouth, which the Church prays for, Cant. 1.2. But Christ does not
thus kiss and embrace his Children, when they be all filthy and nasty, he does
first cleanse them by his blood, and by his Spirit, justify them and sanctify
them, renew and heavenlize them.

Thirdly note this, That the Spirit, and the water and the blood, do concur in
their testimony, where the Spirit of God does be^r witness, so says the
Scripture, 1 Ioh. 5.8. There are three which bear witness in the earth, the
Spirit, and the water and the blood, and these three agree in one.

Fourthly note, That the blood and the water may, and sometimes do, bear
witness, where the Spirit of God does not thus bear witness with our spirits,
that we are the adopted children of God: But the Spir^t of God does never thus
bear witness, where the blood, and the water do not bear witness. Christ's blood
does satisfy for sin, and his Spirit cleanse from sin, wheresoever his
Spirit does thus bear witness; He therefore that thinks he is sealed by the
Spirit of God with a seal of Confirmation, and yet is not sealed with the seal
of Demonstration, is but deluded and bewitched by Satan, and in a fools
Paradise.

In the third place, whomsoever the holy Spirit of God does seal, with a seal
of Confirmation, whomsoever he does assure of the fatherly love of God toward
him, he does qualify with the disposition of a son (to wit) love to his
heavenly Father, fear of offending him, desire, care, and endeavor to walk
before him in all wel-pleasing, obeying his voice out of love, All Gods adopted
Children, have Hannah's portion, love, special love, but all of them have not
Be^jamin's double portion (to wit) love, and the assurance of it; This is a
choice favor, a high privilege.
mourning for its offenses, and depending on God its heavenly Father for all
things.

The soul thus sealed apprehends much love in God, and this generates much love
in it toward God again, and the things of God; this, says this soul, is no
common favor, but a singular; all of my Brethren eat not of this bread, wear
not this raiment; this is Benjamin's portion, and it calls for much love from
me, much filial fear and care, more duty and better done. And hence it comes to
pass, that this soul grows not careless and fearless, but more careful and
conscionable in duty, and tender of doing any thing that may displease God,
grieve the holy Spirit of God, whereby he is sealed; quench the motions
thereof, or cause him to suspend his testimony.

The soul thus sealed by the holy Spirit of God, is never better pleased with
it self, than when it can weep over Christ, whom it has pierced, and find
Christ bleed over it; it is never well, but when in this frame, it desires
nothing more than such a frame of spirit, as cannot look upon sin, but it
sighs for sorrow, nor upon its Savior, but it smiles for joy.

When Christ thus imparts himself to the soul, this soul speaks to Christ, as
God once spoke to Abraham, Now I know that thou love me, seeing thou have not
withheld from me, thy son, thine only son, whom thou love, said God to
Abraham: So says this soul to Christ, now I know that thou love me, seeing
thou have not withheld from me this grace that is so lovely in thy sight, but
when it cannot find Christ thus present with it, it is troubled.

Fourthly, The soul that has this seal, He has the spirit ofprayer, though
not the gift of prayer
or testimony of the Spirit of God, has a spirit of prayer; in whomsoever the
Spirit of God is a Spirit of adoption, he is also a Spirit of supplication;
whomsoever the Spirit of God does assure of the fatherly love of God toward
him, he enables to cry Abba, Father, and makes request for him with
unutterable Rhetoric; he enables the soul to pour it self forth to God, in
supplication and thanksgiving; this is evident by Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.15, 26.

The soul thus sealed by the Spirit of God, longs after, and delights in,
approaches to God, and God approaches to it in all his holy Ordinances; Let me
see his countenance, let me hear his voice, says the soul thus sealed, for
sweet is his countenance, and his voice pleasant, it delights to meditate on,
and walk with its God, it does not leave off duty, but performs it more
conscionably and spiritually.

In the fifth place, sound assurance produces fruitfullness; the soul that is by
the Spirit of God, assured of the grace and favor of God toward it, is
usu^lly the fru^tfullest in righteousness, as is ev^dent by the language of the
Apostle, Col. 1.6. After the Colossians knew the grace of God in truth, they
were more fruitful in righteousness, than ever.

Sound assurance of the love of God, produces care and industry, in the work
and ways of God, as is evident by the language of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.1, 8.
We know, we are confident, says he of himself, and other Believers; and what
follows? Therefore we labor, that whether present or absent, we may be
accepted of him, ver. 9. These men's assurance produced not carelessness and
sloth, but care and industry, and it is the property of good assurance so to do.

This condemns that Popish Tenet, That assurance of salvation is the destroyer
of all piety and charity. Note.
And it condemns that assurance that is fruitless or careless.

In the sixth place, Sound assurance produces joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. Faith of evidence
and joy, are inseperably united, they are Twins born at once, and if assurance
die, joy dies with it; In whomsoever the Spirit of God is a Spirit of
Confirmation, he is a Spirit of Consolation; the soul that is assured of the
love of God toward it, cannot but rejoice in it; spiritual Consolation does
not spring so naturally from any thing, as it does out of the witness of the
Spirit; joy may be (I mean some kind of joy) where assurance is wanting, but
assurance never goes without joy, spiritual joy.

There is a generation (as Solomon tells us) which in the midst of laughter,
their heart is sad; and there is a generation, which in the midst of sadness,
their heart rejoices; And those which are thus sealed by the holy Spirit of
God are they, such is the power of sound assurance, that it will make (I mean
instrumentally) the heart to joy, whilst the outward man sorrows; it will fill
the heart, with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, whilst the outward man is
filled with shame and contempt; yea* sound assurance is for the most part, then
strongest, and shows it self with most vigor and light somenesse within, when
the greatest damp of outward discomforts, lie upon the person, and the world
most frowns upon him, or persecutes him, for his frowardness and
faithfulness, in the cause of God. When Paul and Silas had much cause to sigh,
for their usage amongst men, they then sang and rejoiced, Act. 16.25. When the
Apostles did suffer shame for Christ, then did they most rejoice, Act. 5.41.
When the People of God were spoiled of their goods, and spoiled in their
persons, then did they rejoice; and whence sprang their joy in this
disconsolate condition, but from their assurance? They took joyfully the
spoiling of their goods [knowing] that they had in Heaven, a better, and
enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.

Assurance of Gods favor, produces joy according to its measure and degree,
assurance of hope, produces joy, assurance of faith, produces more joy; The
riches of the full assurance of understanding, most of all.

The joy that springs from assurance, is a heart strengthening joy, a life
lenghtening joy, and a joy that no man can take from us, it is a soul
enlarging, a shame despising, a God-glorifying, a world-overcoming, and a
sin-overcoming grace.

Paul is a notable instance hereof, he was thus sealed by the holy Spirit of
God, when he said, I am persuaded that neither Death nor Lfe, Angels,
Principalities, nor Powers, nor any other thing, shall be able to separate me,
from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord; and then did be serve
the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears, as himself says, Act
20.19. Sound assurance is heart-humbling, heart-molifying.

Paul, Romans 8.38, 39. compared with 1 Cor. 9.26, 27. I am persuaded (says he)
that neither Death, nor Life, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate
me from the Love of God, etc. Yet was he not hereby taken off from, but rather
incited to a holy jealousy of, and watchfulness over himself and all his
ways, as appears by the forecited place.

Note.
Sound assurance, and holy jealousy may well stand together; and he whose
assurance is void of holy jealousy and watchfulness, has great cause to be
jealous of his assurance.

Sound assurance is not the destroyer, but the Nurse of holy jealousy and
watchfulness; Neither is holy jealousy an enemy to, but a preserver of sound
assurance.

In the ninth place, Sound assurance works Moses and Paul are pregnant examples
of this; of the effects of this seal in Moses, we may read in Heb. 11. v. 24,
25, 26, 27. Exodus 32.31, 32 and in Paul, Phil. 3. v. 7, to 15. Act. 20. v. 19,
to 25.

In the tenth place, Sound assurance will

Sound assurance is not usually enjoyed long some thorn in the flesh, some
messenger (or other) of Satan's to exercise it, and humble it: thus it was with
the Apostle Paul, when thus sealed by the holy Spirit of God, as appears by 2
Cor. 12.7. and thus it is with other of the Children of God, who are thus
sealed by the Spirit of God, as each man's experience will witness; to this I
set a probatum est.

Sound assurance of the Love of God, makes Sound assurance makes the soul to
triumph over death the king of terrors, as appears in Paul, Romans 8.38 39. and 1
Cor. 15.55.
this seal of the holy Spirit of God, moves the soul nothing more, to desire to
be dissolved, to be with God; how long, Lord? says this soul, come Lord Jesus,
come quickly: I have a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, says a soul
thus sealed, Phil. 1.23.

The soul thus sealed by the Spirit of God, longs to be with God, yet labors
to wait patiently for him, all the days of his appointed time; Job was thus
sealed by the Spirit of God, when he said, I know that my Redeemer lives; he
was assured that Christ was his Redeemer, and he longed to be with him, yet
patiently waits for him, not a day or two, but all the days of his appointed
time, Job 14.14.

He that presumes, many times makes more haste, than good speed; But he that
believes makes not haste.

Finally, He that is thus sealed by the Spirit of God, As many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, says the Text, Romans 8.14. so
many as are led by the Spirit of God as a sanctifier, (and no more, have good
ground to conclude) they are the Children of God, by this rule of the Apostle,
and so consequently to conclude, That the testimony that they have of their
adoption (if any) is the testimony of the Spirit of God.

Having thus briefly spoken of this feal of confirmation, set by the Spirit of
God, and several appearances of it, I shall here desire the Reader to take
notice.

Note.
That this seal of confirmation, on whomsoever it is set by the Spirit of God,
is usually the resolution of many doubts, the blessing of many prayers and
tears, the fruit of a strong and well grounded faith, or the rich reward of
long patience in suffering evil, for doing good and eschewing evil, or the
victory and triumph of a sore spiritual war, or the fragrant flower of a
well-dressed garden, the rich crop of a well-manured field, or the Pearl
purchased, with the adventure of all the glory and Crown, of high degrees in
grace and holiness, the blessing of much acquaintance with, and experience of
the Word and Ways of God, and exact walking therein, the beginning of Heaven
upon earth, a cordial to keep from fainting under some great burden, the
frui^ion of sweet submission unto Christ's yoke, or a stock put into our hands
by God, for some great after-trading for God, Some singular doing or suffering
for God, or from God, by means of sin, or Satan's or men.
in doing or suffering: In a word, it is the most secret, sweet, and
soul-ravishing manifestation of the Love of Christ, that the Spouse of Christ
is capable of on earth.

This is that hidden Manna, and new name mentioned* Rev. 2.17. which no man
knows, ^ut he that has it.

This Christ promised to his Church, in the day of her sufferings for his sake,
as a special means to support her under, and carry her through, and above all
the troubles, that she should meet with in the world for her close cleaving to
his Word and Will, At that day (says he) ye shall know, that I am in the
Father, and you in me, and I in you, John 14.20.

Having spoken somewhat of the signs and demonstrations of these seals of the
holy Spirit of God severally: I will only add a word or two concerning such
signs and effects, as are proper to them both, jointly considered, and so
conclude this Manuscript.

The soul that is thus sealed by the holy Spirit of God (to wit) with the seal
of demonstration, and the seal of Confirmation.

1. Does earnestly long, and desire to be more sealed; He or she, that has
truth of grace, does earnestly long for, and endeavor after, more grace,
higher degrees of grace; He still presses toward the mark, Phil. 3.13. He
prays for, and endeavors after, what Christ has promised, in the name of the
whole Trinity to give, Cant. 1.11. Borders of gold, with studs of silver,
augmentation of all grace.

The soul that is by the Spirit of God, persuaded and assured of the Fatherly
Love of God, counts not that it has enough, but longs still to be more and
more confirmed in it; the taste that it has of the sweetness and goodness of
this wine, makes it long to drink deeper of it, and to desire flaggons of it,
Cant. 2 5. The sweetness, strength and comfort which the soul finds in, and by
the apprehension of the Love of God, makes it long and labor to apprehend it
more: Paul was assured of the Love of God, and he did exceedingly desire, and
labor to apprehend it more, as will appear by Romans 8.38, 39. compared with
Phil. 3.12, 13. The apprehension of the Love of God, does not satiate the soul,
but whets it, and sets appetite upon it; and hence it comes to pass, That

2. The soul that is thus sealed by the Spirit of God, highly prizes all those
means, Ordinances, and Instruments of God, whereby it came to be thus sealed,
and industriously, and conscionably uses them, for the carrying on and
perfecting of this work begun in it: The soul thus sealed by the Spirit of God,
knows experimentally, that it is but whilst the King sits at his Table, as
the Church speaks, Cant. 1.12. that his spicknard sends forth the smell
thereof; but whilst Christ continues his powerful presence in his holy
Ordinances, and his special spiritual presence in the soul, that grace does
thrive, or send forth any good savor, by thoughts, words, or deeds, and
therefore it longs earnestly after, and prays fervently for all these, as that
which is the life of its life, and the soul of its soul, the Chariot of the
Spirit, whereby he descends into our hearts and carries them up to Heaven. He
knows ex^er^mentally that all helps, public and private, are little enough,
to keep this seal fair unto the day of Redemption, and therefore slights none,
but carefully and conscionably uses all that God affords him. He knows that he
is never the near for that privilege of free access to the Throne of grace,
that Christ has purchased for us, unless he make use of it, and therefore
leaves not off praying; he finds experimentally, that he is little or nothing
the better for the public means (at least in heart) unless he duly and
conscionably use all private helps too; and therefore, as one sensible of his
own wants and weakness, and the Spirits worth and sweetness, he waits for the
movings of the Spirit at all these pooles.

But contrary wise, the Soul in which Satan counterfeits these seals of the
Spirit of God, when it is once thus sealed by him, is many times ready to say
as Esau, I have enough; and with Laodicea, I am rich, and increased with goods,
and have need of nothing, neither Grace, Ordinances, nor Ministers; leaves
Manna, and loathes it, declines and deserts the Ordinances, Churches, and
Ministers of Christ, and falls off from, or (at least) grows cold and customary
in duty, which evidently demonstrates it to be Satan's seal, and not the seal of
the holy Spirit of God, that is upon it.

3. The soul thus sealed by the holy Spirit of God* obeys the truth of God, as
it is discovered unto him by his Word and Spirit, in his Ministers; and he that
does not apply himself to do this, and yet thinks himself sealed, is but
bewitched, his testimony that he has, is but a bewitching, as the Apostle
intimates, Gal. 3.1.

Whosoever therefore thinks himself sealed by the holy Spirit of God, with a
seal of demonstration, and with a seal of confirmation, and yet does not these
three things, is deceived, and deceives his own heart; it is Satan's seal, and
not Gods, that is upon him; his sealing is a sealing to the day of destruction,
not a sealing to the day of redemption.

Having finished what I promised, I shall now draw to a conclusion of the
whole, and shall conclude this thus.

Having traveled through the holy Scriptures, and seached the Records thereof*
to see what I might find therein, that might entitle me to the inheritance of
the Saints in Light, I have taken notice of diverse remarkable places of
Scripture, very helpful for this purpose, some of which I have studied
industriously, according to my poor ability, and through the help of my
gracious God, have acquired some comfort and satisfaction thereby in this
weighty matter of evidence: what the Lord has been pleased to impart unto me,
in this weighty matter. I have committed to writing for my own present and
future benefit, and that I might leave it for a Legacy to my Children after me,
which having done, I commit this work, and the Reader of it to the blessing of
God, through Jesus Christ.

Trin. Vni Deo Gloria.
AN APPENDIX, To the Foregoing Discourse. Containing certain rules to be
observed by every Person, that has attained any good assurance of the Love of
God, and his own salvation, and desires to retain it.
FOrasmuch as assurance of the Love of God, and a man's own Salvation, is a
pearl of great price, hard to be gotten, but quickly lost; and being once lost,
harder to be regained, than gotten at first, as many examples in Scripture
show, and many Christians experience will tell them; I think it necessary, both
for my own behoof and the Readers, to add to this little draught of evidence,
some few rules of Direction to be observed, for the keeping of this precious
jewel, when it is once attained; but before I mention them, I desire the Reader
to take notice of four things,

First, That although a Christian, which has once a true and real interest in
Jesus Christ, cannot lose his inheritance, nor miss of salvation, yet he may
lose his evidence (I mean his assurance of it) and fear himself to be but an
Hypocrite, and a lost Creature, and Satan labou^s above all things, to rob him
of his evidence, whom he cannot rob of his inheritance.





to whom the Lord vouchsafes this royal favor, to study how to carry
himself, so that he may still enjoy it, this has been my work and endeavor
ever since the Lord has vouchsafed me any sense of his Love, and evidence of
my interest in Christ, for this purpose I have propounded to my self, and shall
here briefly commend to the Reader, these rules, which follow.

1. Having once gotten any good assurance of the Love of God, and thy own
salvation, thus do; Lay up this Jewel safe in the Cabbinet of a tender
Conscience.

2. Set a guard about it, guard it with the fear of God, and spiritual
watchfulness; In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence. Prove. 14.26.
Therefore be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long; All the day of
thy life, all thy life long; and labor to keep a constant, spiritual watch
over thy heart, over thy whole man and thy whole life. Follow the counsel that
Moses gave to Israel, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take bred to thy self, and keep thy soul with
all diligence, etc. Negative Rules.


What I shall say more concerning this subject, I shall conclude in two sorts
of rules; the first, Negative, The second, positive; The Negative rules are
these.

Peace being spoken to thy soul, take heed of doing any thing that should
infring or interrupt it, take heed of returning unto folly; Take heed of
relapsing into any sin; this rule the word prescribes, on this very ground,
Ps 85 8. Sin not away thi^ blessin^ give not r^ines to any lust; keep thy self
from the accused (...)*
beware therefore of returning unto former, or like offenses.

Beware of eating, touching or looking after forbidden fruit; all sin is
forbidden fruit, therefore take heed of it, and the first motions thereunto;
Remember Adam and Eve, who were by their external senses led to eat of that
fruit, which God had forbidden them to eat, or to touch, and thereby lost that
sweet communion with God, which they had before, and that influence of his
grace, which they had and might still have had, had they not eaten of that
fruit.

Shun all sin, hate and abhor all sin, especially scandalous sins;
remember Reuben and David; Reuben by one scandalous act, loft his privilege,
and David by one scandalous act lost his evidence.

Take heed of secret sins, allow not thy self in, give not way to any secret
sin, for these often interpose between God and the soul, between the Son of
Righteousness, and the soul, and eclyps the light of Gods Countenance, and the
bright beams, and ra^es of the Sun of Righteousness from us, Thou have set
our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy Countenance,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 90.8. therefore beware of these.

Take heed of sinning against l^ght, against any light* natural, moral, or
Divine: Sin not presumptiously.

Take heed of backsliding in heart, in profession or in practice, from the
truth of God, or power or form of godliness.

Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines, they are very
unsetling; But beware lest ye be led away with the error of the wicked, 2 Pet.
3.17.
and fall from your own steadfastness, as the Scripture speaks.

Take heed of abusing lawful things, meat, drink, marriage, apparel,
Christian liberty, and the like; take heed of abusing any of these, by
unlawful use of them; The Creature, as it is empty of what it promises, so it
is enticing and insnaring with what it has, and therefore had need to be
warily used, or it may soon be abused, and the abuse of it, grieve the holy
Spirit of God, and cause him to suspend his testimony, and God to hide his face
from thee.

Take heed of preferring the enjoyment of any thing, before the enjoyment of
God in Christ, and communion with him, or equalizing any thing with it.

Take heed of despising, slighting, neglecting, or formal using of ordinances,
or holy duties.

Take heed of melancholy. I mean, that humor which is properly so called;
Remember that God never gave any man any qualification, how glorious soever to
the end he should glory in it* Gods People may often say of their pride, as
Ieph^^^^ did of (...) daughter Alas my pri^e, thou have brought me very low
give not way to it, feed not thy self with it.

Take heed of carnal-confidence, Put no confidence in the flesh, nor in any
inherent thing; seek not after righteousness in thy self, to justify thy
person before God, or build upon.

Take heed of unnecessary diffidence, and f^aggering at the promises of God
through unbelief, and neglecting thy watch.

Take heed of spiritual pride; it is an ill flower springing out of a good
stemm, it often breeds contention between God and man, and brings men into fits
of a spiritual falling sickness, wherein they lie like dead men, and only foam
out their own sh^me, therefore beware of it.

Take heed of grieving the holy Spirit of God, Grieve not the holy Spirit of
God, whereby ye are sealed to the day of Redemption; By slighting his
testimony, or doing any thing contrary and disagreeing to his will.

Thus much of the first sort of rules* which are purely negative, and respect
things to be avoided, by him that would keep his evidence: I shall now speak of
the 2. sort of rules, which respect things to be done, by those that having
attained some good Evidence for Heaven, desire to keep and retain it.

1. If thou would keep thy assurance* labor to walk worthy of it, to be
thankful for it, and give God the glory of it; we sorfit many blessings by our
ingratitude, and God often takes that from us, the glory of which we do not
freely give to him.

2. If thou would still keep thy assurance, walk humbly with God, and walk
humbly with man, in the enjoyment of it.

3. If thou would keep thy assurance, labor to follow the counsel of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4.17. Ye hence forth w^lk not as other Gentiles walk, in the
vanity of their mind, etc. ye that have obtained of the Lord, such a choice
favor as this; ye which know in some measure, what it is to enjoy God, and
communion with him; Walk according to the ruls of the Scripture.
ye that have some ^ssurance of an inheritance that fades not away, walk not
in the vanity of your minds, nor after the vanities of the world, as others do
that never had such a jewel, as this, bestowed upon them. But see that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, as the Scripture
directs, E^hes 5 15, 16. labor to walk exactly with God, and exactly with men,
and redeem the time by improving of it; Walk worthy of God, as we are bid, 1
These, 2.12.

4. If thou would still retain thy Assurance, practice that good thou do
know, be careful of all duty toward God, and toward man, in every relation
wherein thou stand, and not only of the matter of duty, but also of the
manner of performing it.

5. If thou would still retain thy assurance, take upon thee Christ's yoke:
follow Christ's steps, and labor to walk according to Christ's rule in every
thing.

Labor to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiels of the
Devil: above all, take the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 16.

7. If thou would still retain thy assurance, study the grounds of thy
assurance ( viz.) the promises of God: study their freeness, their latitude,
their stability, their Author, and his faithfulness, and study thy interest in
the promises, and labor to live upon the promises.

8. In the eight place, If thou would still retain thy assurance, rest not
satisfied, with any measure of assurance attained, but still la^our to increase
thy assurance; count not thy self to have attained, or to have apprehended
assurance enough, but forget what is behind, and reach forth to that which is
before; follow after more, Press toward the mark, as the Apostle did, Phil.
3.12, 13, 14. Labor for increase of assurance; Labor for the riches (for all
riches) of the full assurance of understanding, as the Scripture speaks 2 Col.
2.
Labor to apprehend the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of the
Love of God, and to know the Love of Christ, which passes knowledge, to be
filled with all the fulness of God, as the Scripture speaks, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.

Quest. But you will say, How shall I do this? what may I do to increase my
assurance, and better my evidence?

Answ. If thou would increase thy assurance, and better thy evidence, thou
must do these eight things.

1. Thou must diligently and conscionably continue to use all those means and
ordinances, for the increasing of thy assurance, which thou did use for the
getting of it, and labor to be made better by those means thou usest.

2. Labor to grow up into Christ the head, from whom all the body, by joints
and bands, and all our graces by participation of his fullness, have
nou^ishment ministered unto them, and increase with the increase of God.

Labor to grow in grace daily.
3. Dye daily unto sin, and live unto righteousness, Labor to be more like
God and Heaven daily, if thou would have more assurance of thy interest in
God and Heaven.

4. In the fourth place, if thou would increase thy assurance, stir up the
gift of God, that is in thee; exercise and act grace, Labor to grow and
increase in grace, to be strong in grace, in all grace; but especially in the
grace of faith; He that increases knowledge (says Solomon) increases sorrow;
so he that increases faith increases assurance.

5. In the fifth place, If thou would still enjoy thy assurance and increase
it, then labor to improve the assurance thou have, be it more or less, to the
glory of God, thy own and thy brothers good; They that improved their Talents,
had a continuance, and an increase of them, whilst h^ that improved not his
Talent had it taken from him.

6. In the fixth place, If thou would increase thy assurance, diligently
follow every good work; Labor to be fruitful in every good work.

7. Then again, Mat. 25.
If thou woulde^^ increase thy assurance, use well the office, place, calling,
and relations, which God has set thee in; This is the way to attain great
boldness in the faith, as is easy to be gathered, from the Language of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.13.

8. Finally if thou would increase thy assurance, pray for the increase of
it; urge God with that general promise, Mat. 25.29. for the obtaining of this
particular blessing of increase of assurance.

Thus much for answer to the foresaid query, ( viz) what we must do to increase
our assurance and better our evidence. I return now to the work in hand, which
is to propound more rules to be observed by those, who having attained some
good evidence for Heaven, desire to retain it; I have already propounded eight
rules, I come new to the ninth.

9. If thou would still retain thy assurance, then labor to keep a holy
jealousy over thy self, and over all thy performances, and ways; holy
jealousy is no destroyer, but a nourisher and strengthener of good assurance.

10. If thou would still enjoy thy evidence, then labor to profit by all
Gods chastisements; God many times deserts his People, and hides his face from
them, because they do not profit by lesser Chastisements; he uses greater
rods, because lesser will not serve the turn: Labor therefore to discern Gods
design in every stroke of his, and to answer Gods ends in every correction.

11. In the next place, If thou would still enjoy thy assurance, then call
thy self often to account, and when thou espiest any failings in thy self,
speedily humble thy self before the Lord for them, renew Faith and Repentance,
seek pardon and reconciliation, apply the Blood of Christ for thy cure, let not
Conscience lie under the guilt of any known sin unrepented of; If our hearts
condemn us not, then have we confid^nce toward God, 1 John 3.21. Labor
therefore so to try, judge and condemn thy self that thy heart may not
condemn thee; Labor so to act Repentance upon every occasion, that conscience
may not find any guilt unrepented of, to charge thee with; Labor to prevent
conscience herein, by doing that thy self now, that it would do hereafter, by
being such a self condemning sinner, that thou may avoid a self-condemning
conscience: He that is not a self condemning sinner here, shall be sure of a
self condemning Conscience hereafter; Therefore O Christians! Judge your selves,
that you be not judged of the Lord; condemn your selves, that you be not
condemned of conscience (at least not justly.)

12. Let your Conversation be such, as becomes the Gospel of Christ, in
simplicity and godly sincerity: This was ground of confidence and rejoicing to
the Apostles, 2 Cor. 1.12. it may be so to thee, nay it will be so to thee,
whiles conscience speaks truth.

13. Cast thy self wholly upon the merit of Christ for righteousness, to
justify thy person before God.

14. Stand fast in the Lord, labor to keep the faith; Paul says, I have kept
the faith, and hence infers, Henceforth there is laid up for me, a crown of
righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

15. Then again, If thou would keep thy Evidence. hold fast (not only) the
faith, but also the profession of thy faith, without wavering, as the Author to
the Hebrews exhorts all Christians to do, Heb. 10.23.

16. In the next place, If thou would still retain thy assurance, then pray
for the continuance of it, and live for the continuance of it; follow the
counsel of Christ to his Disciples, watch and pray, that ye enter not into
Temptation.

17. Remember that the foundation of God stands sure, and his gifts of saving
grace are without repentance, and his love toward his, Pray that the Spirit of
God may still bear witness with thy spirit of Gods Love toward them.
is an everlasting love.

18. Finally if thou would still retain thy Evidence for Heaven and secure
it from danger, from Satan, and all his devices, then entrust Jesus Christ with
it who purchased it for thee; he and he only, is able to secure it.

Thus much for the rules to be observed by every one, that having attained some
good Evidence for Heaven, desire to preserve and retain it.

Now the Lord of his infinite mercy in Christ, enable me so to follow these
rules, and all the rules of his holy Word, that I may never know
experimentally, what a deserted condition is, but still enjoy the light of his
countenance, and the sense of his Love, and in death triumph over death, in
assurance of life and happiness that shall never end, that Christ may be
magnified in me, both in Life and in Death, and of me through all eternity.
Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are Print^ or sold by Simon Miller, at
the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Small Folio.
THe Civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany,
and King of that Nation, wherein our late unhappy differences are paralleled in
many particulars.

A general History of Scotland, from the year 767. to the death of King James,
containing the principal Revolutions and transactions of Church and State, with
political observations, and reflections upon the same: by David Hume of
Godscroft.

The History of this Iron Age.

Doctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament.

In Qarto Large.
Barklay his Argenis Translated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight.

Quarto Small.
Abraham's faith; or the good old Religion, proving the Doctrine of the Church
of England to be the only true faith of Gods Elect; By I. Nicholson Minister of
the Gospel.

The Anatomy of Mortallity: by George Stroad.

Aynsworth, on the Camicles.

Paul Bayn, his Diocesans Trial.

Gralle against Appolonius.

A Treatise of Civil Policy; being a clear decision of 4^. queries, concerning
prerogative right and privilege, in reference to the supreme Prince and the
people: By Samuel Rutherford professor of Divinity of St Andrews in Scotland.

Politic and Military observations of Civil and Military Government,
containing the birth, increase, decay of Monarchies, the cartiage of Princes
and Magistrates.

Mr. Tinchin his meritorious price of man's redemption cleared.

A^^rology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and Planets
have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided.

The Harmony of Confessions. 4o.

Octavo.
Florus Anglicus with Cuts,

The reconciler of the Bible, wherein above 2000, seeming contradictions are
fully and plainly reconciled.

A view of the Jewish Religion (...) their Rites, Customs, and ^^^emonies.

Ed. VVaterhouse Esquire his dis^^rse of piety and charity.

A view and defense of the Re^ormation of the Church of England, very useful
in these times.

Mr. Peter du Moulin, his Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to
prevent the delusions of the Priests and Jesuits who are now very busy
amongst us.

Herberts Devotions, or a Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and
Prayers, useful upon all occasions.

Mr. Knowles, his Rudiment, of the Hebrew Tongue.

A Book of scheams or figures of Heaven ready set for every four minutes of
times, and very ^seful for all Astrologers.

Florus Anglicus, or an exact Hi^tory of England, from the reign of V^illiam
the Conqueror, to the death of the late King.

Lingua, or the combat of the Tongue and the five Senses for superiority: a
serious Comedy.

The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discovery how a man may certainly know
whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God, or not.

The Poor man's Physician and Surgeon.

The Idol of Clowns.

The Christian moderator in 3. parts.

The Golden Fleece, or a discourse of the clothing of England

Duodecem.
Doctor Smith's practice of Physic.

The Grammar War.

Posselivs Apothegmes.

Faciculus Florum.

Crashaw's Visions.

Helvicus Colloqu^es.

The Christian Soulder, his combat with the three arch enemies of mankind, the
world, the flesh, and the devil.

In 24.
The New Testament. The third part of the Bible.

Plays.
The Ball.

Chawbut.

Martyred Soldier.


