CR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
His Majesty's Message to the House of Peers, April 22. 1642.
HIs Majesty having seen a Printed Paper, entitled, A Question answered how
Law are to be understood, and obedience yielded; (which Paper He sends together
will this Message) thinks fit to recommend the consideration of it to His
House o^ Peers, that they may use all possible care and diligence for the
finding out the Author, and may give directions to His learned Council, to
proceed against Him and the publishers of it, in such a way as shall be
agreeable to Law and the course of Justice, as persons who endeavor to stir
up Sedition against His Majesty. And His Majesty doubts not but they will be
very sensible how much their own particular Interest (as well as the public
government of the Kingdom) is, and must be shaken, if such License shall be
permitted to bold factious spirits to withdraw His Subjects strict obedience
from the Laws established, by such Seditious and Treasonable distinctions. And
of Doctrines of this nature His Majesty doubts not but that their Lordships
will publish their great dislike, it being grown into frequent Discourse, and
vented In some Pulpits (by those desperate Preachers, who are the great
Promotors of the distempers of this time) That humane Laws do not bind the
Conscience; which being once believed, the civil Government and peace of the
Kingdom will be quickly dissolved. His Majesty expects a speedy account of
their Lordships exemplary justice upon the Authors and Publishers of this Paper.

Whereunto is added His Majesty's Answer to both Houses of Parliament,
Concerning the Petition and Reasons to forbear his intended Journey to
Jreland. Presented the 18. of April (by the Earl of Stamford, Sir John
Culpepper, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Anthony Hungerford Esquire) and
returned the 22. of the same, 1642.
HIs Majesty has thought something of the Petition, and is much unsatisfied
with many of Your expressions therein: His Majesty will shortly send His
Parliament, a particular Answer, but for the present you are to tell them, that
as He resolved to do nothing concerning his Jrish Journey, before He should
receive Their Answer, so now He will not proceed further therein, until they
shall hear, further from Him again.

London, Printed by T. Fawcet, for J. H. 1642.


