HIS MAJESTY'S Last MESSAGE, September. 12. 1642. Directed to His Right Trusty
and Wel-beloved, the Speaker of the House of PEERS.

WITH A Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, Concerning an
insolent Letter sent to Mr. CLARKE at Craughton near Brackley in
Northamptonshire, From Sir JOHN BIRON Knight, since the inhabitants of that
County apprehended diverse Rebels under his command. Whereunto is annexed a
Copy of the said LETTER.

13. September. 1642. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
That this Declaration and Letter shall be forthwith printed and published.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for J. Wright. 14. September. 1642.

To Our Right Trusty and Well beloved, The SPEAKER of the House of PEERS.
WE have taken most ways, used most endeavors, and made most real
expressions to prevent the present distractions and dangers; let all the World
judge, as well by former passages as by Our two last Messages, which have been
so fruitless, that though we have descended to desire and press it, not so
much as a treaty can be obtained, unless we would denude our self of all
force to defend us from a visible strength marching against us, and admit those
persons as Traitors to Us who according to their duty, their oaths of
Allegiance, and the Law, have appeared in defense of Us their King and
Liege-Lord, whom We are bound in Conscience and Honor to preserve, though We
disclaimed all Our Proclamations and Declarations, and erecting of Our Standard
as against Our Parliament: All We have now left in Our power is to express the
deep sense We have of the public misery of this Kingdom, in which we
involved that of our distressed protestants of Ireland, and to apply our self
to our necessary defense, wherein we wholly rely upon the providence of God, and
the Justice of our cause, and the affection of our good people, so far We are
from putting them out of Our protection, when you shall desire a treaty of Us,
We shall piously remember whose blood is to be spilt in this quarrel, and
cheerfully embrace it. And as no other reason induced Us to leave our City of
London, but that with honor and safety We could not stay there nor raise any
force, but for the necessary defense of Our Person, and the Law, against levies
in opposition to both, so we shall suddenly and most willingly return to the
one and disband the other as soon as those causes shall be removed. The God of
Heaven direct you and in mercy divert those judgments which hang over this
Nation, And so deal with Us and our Posterity as we desire the preservation,
and advancement of the true Protestant Religion, the Law and liberty of the
Subject, the just rights of Parliament, and the peace of the Kingdom.

A DECLARATION Of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
WHereas Sir John Biron Knight, upon the 28 of August last with diverse Troops
of Horse in a Traitorous and warlike manner, did march into the County of
Northampton, with an intention to kill, rob, and spoil his Majesty's Subjects
in that and other Counties, to the great terror and afrightment of the
Inhabitants of those parts; whereupon diverse of His Majesty's loyal and well
affected Subjects of the said County, according to their duty did assemble
themselves together, and pursue the said Traitors, and Rebels, and apprehended
diverse of them, and routed the rest, whereby their Traiterous designs were for
that time prevented; Since which time the remainder of those Troops that
escaped, joined again in a body, and in manner as before, forcibly entered the
City of Oxford, and plundered, robbed, and spoiled, his Majesty's faithful
Subjects there, and forced diverse to leave their own habitations, and to fly
elsewhere for protection from their fury. And whereas the Lords and Commons,
have been since informed, That the said Sir John Biron, the head and
ringleader of those Traitors, in a presumptuous and insolent way, wrote a
Letter to one Master Clarke of Craughton a Gentleman of quality in the said
County of Northampton, a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed, whereby most
falsely and impudently he presumes to style the faithful, and dutyfull service
of His Majesty's good Subjects in apprehending and chasing the said Rebels by
the name of treachery and rebellion, endeavoring to transfer that odious crime
and title due unto himself to them, and using diverse menacing speeches against
Master Clarke, and others, thereby as much as in him lies to deter His
Majesty's good Subjects from resisting him and his associates in their
Traitorous attempts.

The Lords and Commons taking the same into their consideration, do declare
that the Assembling together of the said Inhabitants of the County of
Northampton, and their pursuing, apprehending, and chasing the said Rebels,
was according to the Laws of the Land and the duty they and all good Subjects
owe to the King and Commonwealth, and their service very acceptable to both
Houses of Parliament, who will take them and all others that shall follow their
good examples into their care and protection.

To M. Clarke at Craughton near Brackley in Northamptonshire.
SIR,
IN my way to Oxford, I made some stay at Brackley to refresh my self, and my
Horses, after a long march, where I was unexpectedly assaulted by sundry Troops
of rebels that came (as J am since informed) from Northampton, and the
adjoining places, and withal most treacherously set upon by the town of
Brackley, so that J was forced to make a speedy retreat to the Heath to resist
them, had they had the courage to come forth of the town. Jn this confusion
one of my Grooms who had charge of my baggage was surprised in the town,
another who had a Box, wherein was money, apparel, and other things of value,
left it in a land of standing Corn, which since has been found, and as J
hear brought to you; J have therefore sent this Messenger to require the
restitution of it; which if you do, I shall represent it to His Majesty, as an
acceptable service, if not, assure your self I will find a time to repay my
self with advantage out of your estate; And consider, that as rebellion is a
weed of a hasty growth, so it will decay as suddenly; and that there will be a
time for the Kings loyal Subjects to repair their losses sustained by rebels
and traitors; So I rest in expectation of a speedy answer by this bearer,

Your friend and servant, John Biron.
Oxford, 2. Sep. 1642.

FINIS.

