THE KINGS MAJESTY'S Letter to the Lord Willoughby, of PARHAM, June the fourth,
with his Lordships answer thereunto.

Together with a Letter sent by the Lord WILLOUGHBY, to an Honorable Member of
the Parliament.

Read at a Conference between both Houses this eighth of June, 1642.

LONDON, Printed for A. N.

MY LORD,
I Received a Letter from your Lordship, in which the House is pleased to ^oe
me a very great honor, far above any desert of mine, and little expected by
me; for my Lord, I well know my obedience ties me to fulfill their Comm nds,
and in th t I have done, I have but done my duty, and that which every honest
man ought to do, and ow^^h of right to the Parliament; and whosoever has that
principle in him, it will dictate to him as much, and keep him from other
bywayes, and for my own part, my heart ever was, and ever shall be, both
forward and ready to obey their Lordships commands in all things, both with
integrity and industry, and Gods curse light upon him and his, that carries
any other heart about him; My Lord, it is too mean a way for me to express my
acknowledgement in p^per, to the House for this high favor which I have
received by your Lordships Letter. I hope to make it appear by my actions that
their Lordships see, I am not an ^ngratefull servant. It is a great
encouragement to these parts, their Lordships resolutions, in giving their
Commands to have the rest of the Militia put in present execution, and truly my
Lord it was out of that regard that I did intimate it to my Lord of Essex, as
holding it a thing much conducing to the public good, and the only remedy to
cure these distractions which the Kingdom is in, not out of any regard to my
self, for I know if I suffer in executing their Lordships commands, it must be
against their wills, and when that day comes, I will not give a straw for all I
have, were I but a looker on. My Lord, as I was this day at Lincoln, where I
appointed to begin to Muster, there came a Messenger from his Majesty with
this Letter, which I held it my duty to acquaint the House with, and likewise
my answer, and am for Lincoln, where as in all other places, I shall be ready
to serve your Lordship.

As your most humble servant. T. WILLOUGHBY.
MY Lord, ere my letter was sealed up, I could not but give your Lordship an
account in how good a posture I found the Trained Band of Lin^olne, which was
far beyond my expectation, considering the unhappiness in the sickness
being dispersed in the Town, which hindered the appearance of some, but truly my
Lord that was fully supplied by a company of Volunteers, equal in number and
goodness of Arms to the Trained Bands.


Lincoln 6. June. 1642.
FINIS.

CAROLUS REX. To our trusty and wel-beloved, the Vice Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, and to all the rest of our loyal Subjects in that our
University.
Reverend Father in God, we greet you well,
WHereas we have received a most large and ample testimony of the Affection of
that our Loyal university to us, by the free loan of a very considerable
Sum of money, in a time of so great and Imminent necessity. These are to will
and require you to give to that our University from us, our Royal thanks, and
to assure them, and every of them, (our Loving and Loyal Subjects) that this
Testimony of their hearts toward us, shall never depart out of our Royal
memory, and that both they shall be carefully repayd, and the money employed
only upon the defense of our self. The true Protestant Religion, and the Laws
established in this our Kingdom, and whereas we hear, that for this Action,
so full of loyalty and Allegiance, Some of that our University have been
ordered to be sent for, these are to will and require you, to signify unto
them and every of them, (who assume such Power to themselves without us) That
we will and command, that no obedience be given to any such summons, holding
our self bound to protect and defend those, who shall be persecuted for that
cause, by having contributed to our defense and protection, And so we bid you
farewell.

Given at our Court at Beverly the 18. day of July 1642.

CHARLES R. To our trusty and well beloved the High Sheriff of our County, and
the Major of our City of OXFORD.
I Rusty and welbeloved, We greet you well, whereas We have lately received
very ample testimonies of the good affections of our University of Oxon, by the
loan of such Moneys as could be thence spared for the supply of Our urgent and
extraordinary occasions, For which dutiful and affectionate expression, We are
informed, that several worthy persons of that our University, our Servants and
others are threatened to be troubled and molested, We have thought fit to
commend the care, assistance and protection of that place and of the persons in
it, to you as a service, wherein you shall merit our favor and good acceptance
and of which we shall require an account And we do therefore will and require
you as you tender our displeasure, if any warrant, order, or other direction
whatsoever shall come to your hand for the apprehending or troubling any person
or persons of that our University for his good affection to our service in
advancing the business of lending and supplying us with money which we shall
never forget, that you be so far from countenancing or assisting any such
warrant or direction, that on the contrary you use your utmost power to
preserve those our good subjects from such oppression, the which we shall take
in very good part at your hand, and for so doing this shall be your warrant.

Given at our Court at Nottingham, July 22. 1642.

FINIS.

