THE Kings Cabinet opened: OR, CERTAIN PACKETS OF SECRET LETTERS and PAPERS,
Written with the Kings own Hand, and taken in his Cabinet at Nasby-Field, JUNE
14. 1645. By Victorious Sr. Thomas Fairfax; Wherein many mysteries of State,
tending to the Justification of that CAUSE, for which Sir Thomas Fairfax joined
battle that memorable day are clearly laid open; Together, with some
Annotations thereupon.

Published by special Order of the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign
of the King's Head, 1645.

IT were a great sin against the mercies of God, to conceal those evidences of
truth, which he so graciously (and almost miraculously) by surprizall of these
Papers, has put into our hands; nor dare we smother this light under a
Bushel, but freely hold it out to our seduced brethren, (for so in the spirit
of meekness laboring to reclaim them, we still speak) that they may see their
errors, and return into the right way: For those that wilfully deviate, and
make it their profession to oppose the truth, we think it below us, to revile
them with opprobrious language, remembering the Apostle St. Jude, and that
example which he gives us in his Epistle. They may see here in his private
Letters what affection the King bears to his people, what language and titles
he bestows upon his great Council* which we return not again, but consider
with sorrow, that it comes from a Prince seduced out of his proper sphere; one
that has left that seat in which he ought, and has bound himself to sit, to
sit (as the Psalmist speaks) in the Chair of the scornful; and to the ruin
(almost) of three Kingdoms, has walked in the counsels of the ungodly; and
though in our tenants we annex no infallibity to the seat of a King in
Parliament, as the Romanists do to the Papal Chair, (since all men are
subject to error) yet we dare boldly say, that no English King did ever from
that place, speak ^estruction to his people, but safety and honor; nor any
that abhorred that Seat and Council, but did the contrary. Therefore, Reader,
to come now to the present business of these Letters; thou art either a friend
or enemy to our cause: If thou art well affected to that Cause o^ Liberty and
Religion, which the two Parliaments of England and Sco^land now maintain
against a combination of all the Papists in Europe almost, especially the
bloody Tigers of Ireland, and some of the Prelaticall and Court Faction in
England: thou will be abundantly sati^fied with these Letters here printed, and
take notice therefrom, (...) the Court has been Caiolde, (that's the new
authentic word now amongst our Cabalisticall adversaries) by the Papists, and
we the more believing sort of Protestants, by the Court. (...) thou art an
en^my to Parliaments and Re^ormation, and made wilful in thy enmity beyond
the help of miracle^, or such revelations as these are, then it is to be
expected, that thou will either deny these papers to have been written by the
Kings own hand, or else that we make just constructions and inferences out of
them: Or lastly, thou will deny, though they be the King^ own, and bear such a
sense as we understand them in, yet that they are blameable, or unjustifiable
against such rebels as we are. As to the first, know that the Parliament was
never yet guil^y of such forgery, the King yet in all the Letters of his, which
have been hitherto intercepted, never objected any such thing, and we dare
appeal to his own conscience now, knowing that he cannot disavow either his
own hand writing, or the matters themselves here written. All the Ciphers,
Letters, all circumstances of time, and fa^t, and the very hand by which they
are ^igned (so generally known and now exposed to the view of all) will aver
for us, that no such forgery could be possible. As to our Comments and
Annotations, if there be not perspicuity and mode^y in them, there is no common
justice nor place for credit left amongst mankind: but indeed most of the main
circumstances want no illustration at all to the most vulgar capacities: and
therefore we affirm nothing necessary to be believed, but what the printed
papers will themselves utter in their own language: and yet for that which is
not so clearly w^rranted here, we have other Papers for their warrant, were
they not too numerous, and vast, and too much intermixed with other m^tter of
no pertinence for publication at this time. Touching the last objection, if
thou art a perfect malignant, and do not stick to deny, that there is any
thing in these letters unbeseeming a Prince, who professes himself Defender of
the true Faith, a tender Father of his Country, and has been so
sanctimoniously engaged with frequent, special vows of affection, candor,
sincerity, and constancy to his ^articular protestant subjects of England and
Scotland: Then know, that thou art scarce worthy of any reply, or satisfaction
in this point. Our cause is now the same as it was when the King first took up
Arms, (...) as it was when the King made most of these oaths and professions.
Our three propositions concerning the abolition of Episcopacy, the settling the
Militia of the three Kingdoms in good hands, by advice of Parliament, the
vindication of the Irish rebels, being all our main demands at the Treaty in
February last, and no other then the Propositions sent in June 1642. before
(...) stroke struck, will bear us witness that we have rather straightened then
enlarged our complaints. But were our cause altered, as it is not; or were we
worse rebels then formerly, as none can affirm which takes notice of our late
sufferings, and our strange pa^ience even now after the discovery of these
Paper^, and our late extraordinary success* in the Field, yet still this
clandestine proceeding against us here, and condemning all that are in any
degree Protestants at Oxford; as also granting a toleration of Idolatry to
Papists, indemnity to the murtherous Irish, in a close trading way for mere
particular advantage, cannot be defended by any, but by the falsest of men,
Papists; or the falsest of Papists, Jesuits. Hitherto the English have had
commission to chastise the Irish, the Irish have had the like to chastise the
English, both have spilt each others blood by the Kings warrant; yet as both
have been in part owned, so both have been in part disowned, and the King
himself has not appeared with an open face in the business, but now by Gods
good providence the traverse Curtain is drawn, and the King writing to Ormond,
and the Queen, what they must not disclose, is presented upon the stage. God
grant that the drawing of this Curtain may be as fatal to Popery, and all
Antichristian heresy here now, as the rending of the veil was to the Jewish
Ceremonies in Judea, at the expiration of our Savior.

15.
Oxford Ian. 9. Dear heart,
SInce my last, which was by Talbot, the Scots Commissioners have sent to
desire me to send a Commission to the general Assembly in Edinburgh, which I
am resolved not to do; but to the end of making some use of this occasion, by
sending an honest man to London, and that I may have the more time for the
making a handsome negative, I have demanded a passeport for Philip Warwick, by
whom to return my answer. I forgot in my former to tell thee, that Lentall the
speaker brags, that Cardinal Maz^rin keeps a strict intelligence with him;
though I will not swear that Lentall says true, I am sure it is fit for thee
to know. As for Sabrian, I am confident that either he or his Instructions are
not right for him who is eternally thine.

Even now I am advertised from London, that there are three or four Lords, and
eight Commons (besides four Scotch Commissioners) appointed to treat, and they
have named Uxbridge for the place, though not yet the particular persons. I am
likewise newly advertised that General Goring prospers well where he is, and
since Monday last has taken 80. of the Rebels Horse: and upon his advance they
have quitted Peterfield and Coudry.

POSTSCRIPT.
The settling of Religion, and the Militia, are the first to be treated on: and
be confident, that I will neither quit Episcopacy, nor that sword which God
has given into my hands.



29. 15
Copy to my wife 9. Jan. 1644. By P. A.
This is a true Copy, examined by Edm. Prideaux.



31.
OXford, Sunday 30. March. Dear heart,
since my last (which was but 3. days a go) there are no alterations happened of
moment, preparations rather then actions being yet our chiefest business, in
which we hope that we proceed faster then the Rebels, whose levies both of men
and money (for certain) goes on very slowly; and I believe, they are much
weaker then is thought, even here at Oxford. For instance, A very honest
servant of mine, and no fool, showed me a proposition from one of the most
considerable London Rebels, who will not let his name be known until he have
hope that his proposition will take effect; it is this, That fince the Treaty
is so broken off, that neither the rebels nor I can resume it without at least
a seeming total yielding to the other. The Treaty should be renewed upon thy
motion, with a pre-assurance that the rebels will submit to reason. The answer
that I permitted my ^ervant to give, was, That thou art the much (...) person
to be the means of so happy and glorious a work as is the peace of this
Kingdom; but that upon no terms thy name was to be profaned, therefore he was
to be satisfied of the rebels willingness to yield to reason, before he would
consent that any such intimation should be made to thee, and particularly
concerning Religion and the Militia, that nothing must be insisted upon but
according to my former offers. This I believe will come to nothing, yet I
cannot but advertise thee of any thing that comes to my knowledge of this
consequence.

I must again tell thee, That most assuredly France will be the best way for
transportation of the D. of Lorraines Army, there being diverse fit and safe
places of landing for them upon the Western coasts, besides the Ports under my
obedience, as Shelsey near Chichester and others, of which I will advertise
thee when the time comes.

By my next I think to tell thee when I shall march into the Field, for which
money is now his greatest want (I need say no more) who is eternally thine,

18. 31.
To my Wife 30. March. 1645. by Petit.
This is a true Copy examined by Edmond Prideaux.



30.
Oxford Thursday 27. March. DEar heart,
I wrote to thee yesterday by Sakefield, the subject of it was only kindness
to thee; which, I assure thee shall ever be visible in all my actions: And now
I come to Jermins account, given me by thy command, which is very clear,
hopeful in most particulars, and absolutely satisfactory as concerning thy
care and industry. As for the main impediment in the D. of Lorrains business
(which is his passage) why may thou not procure him passage through France? (if
that of Holland be stuck at) it will much secure and facilitate the Sea
transportation in respect of landing on the Western Coast, which I believe will
be found the best, there being not so many places to choose on, any where else.
But this an opinion, not a direction.

The general face of my affairs me thinks begins to mend, the dissensions at
London rather increasing then ceasing, Montrosse daily prospering, my Western
business mending (...), and hopeful in all the rest. So that if I had
reasonable (...) of money and powder (not to exclude any other,) I am confident
to be in a better condition this year, then I have been since this rebellion
began, and possibly I may put fair for the whole, and so enjoy thy company
again, without which nothing can be a contentment unto me. And so farewell dear
heart.

I intend (if thou like it) to bestow Percies place on the M. of Newcastle, to
whom yet I am no ways engaged, nor will be before I have thy answer. As for
Jack Barclay, I do not remember that I gave thee any hope of making of him
Master of the Wards: For Cottington had it long ago before thou went hence, and
I intended it to Secr. Nich. if he then would have received it: and I am
deceived if I did not tell thee of it.

I desire thee to command Lo. Jer. to read to thee the Ds Letter, which goes
herwith, and in it to mark well that part concerning the transportation of the
D. Lorrains Army.

23. 30.
To my Wife 27. Mar. 1645. by P. A.
This is a true Copy examined by Miles Corbet.



39.
OXford, Sunday 4. May. Dear Heart,
the Rebels new brutish General has refused to meddle with foreign Passes, so
as yet I cannot dispatch Adri^n May to thee, by the way of Lon don which if I
cannot very shortly, I will send him by the West, and now, if I could be
assured of thy recovery, I would have but few melancholy thoughts, for I thank
God my Affairs begins to smile upon me again, Wales being well swept of the
Rebels. Farrington having relieved it self; and now being secured by Gorings
coming, my Nephues likewise having brought me a strong party of Horse and Foot,
these Quarters are so free that I hope to be marching within three or four
days, and am still confident to have the start of the Rebels this year: I am
likewise very hopeful that my Son will shortly be in the head of a good Army,
for this I have the cheerful assurance of Culpeper and Hyde: Of late I have
been much pressed to make Southampton Master of my Horse, not more for good
will to him, as out of fear that Hamilton might return to a capacity of
recensuring me; wherein if I had done nothing, both jealousy and discontents
were like to arise, wherefore I thought fit to put my Nephew Rupert in that
place, which will both save me charge, and stop other men's grumblings: I have
now no more to say, but praying for and impatiently expecting of good news from
thee, I rest eternally thine.

39
To my wife 4 May 1645. By Malin St. Ravy.
This is a true Copy examined by Edm. Prideaux.



13
Oxford. 2. Jan. Dear Heart,
HAving decyphered thine which I received ye^terday I was much surprised to
find thee, blame me for neglecting to write to thee, for indeed I have often
complained for want, never mist any occasion of sending to thee; and I assure
thee never any dispatch went from either of my Secretaries without one from me,
when I knew of it.

As for my calling those at London a Parliament, I shall refer thee to Digby
for particular satisfaction, this in general; If there had been but two
(besides my Self) of my opinion, I had not done it, and the Argument that
prevailed with me, was, that the calling did no ways acknowledge them, to be a
Parliament, upon which condition and construction I did it and no otherwise,
and accordingly it is registered in the Council books, with the Councels
unanimous approbation; but thou will find, that it was by misfortune, not
neglect that thou have been no sooner advertised of it

As for the conclusion of thy Letter, it would much trouble me, if thou did
not know, thy desire granted before it was asked; yet I wonder not at it, since
that which may bear a bad construction, has been presented to thee in the
ugliest form, not having received the true reason and meaning of it, the fear
of some such mischance made me the more careful, to give thee a full account
by Tom Eliot, of the reasons of the D. of R. and E. of S. journey to London,
which if it come soon enough I am confident will free thee from much trouble,
but if thou have not the patience to forbear judging harshly of my actions,
before thou hear the reasons of them, from me, thou may be often subject to
be doubly vexed, first with slanders, then with having given too much ear unto
them. To conclude, esteem me as thou find me constant to those grounds thou
lefts me withal, and so farewell Dear heart.

21. 13.
Copy to my wife 2 Jan. 1644/5: by P. A.
This is a true Copy examined by Edm. Prideaux.



21
OXford 19. Feb. old style. Dear heart,
I cannot yet send thee any certain word concerning the issue of our Treaty,
only, the unreasonable stubbornness of the Rebels, gives daily less and
less hopes, of any accommodation this way; wherefore I hope no rumors shall
hinder thee from hastening all thou may, all possible assi^tance to me, and
particularly that of the D. of Lorraines; concerning which I received
yesterday, good news from Dr. Goffe, that the P. of Orange will furnish
Shipping for his transportation, and that the rest of his Negotiation goes
hopefully on, by which, and many other ways, I find thy effection so
accompanied which dexterity, as I know not whether (in their several kinds) to
esteem most; but I will say no more of this, lest thou may think that I
pretend to do this way, what is but possible to be done by the continued
actions of my life; though I leave news to others, yet I cannot but tell thee,
that even now I have received certain intelligence of a great defeat given to
Argyle by Muntrose; who upon surprise, totally routed those Rebels, killed
1500. upon the place. Ye^terday I received thine of 27. Jan. by the Portugal
Agent, the only way (but expressed) I am confident on, either to receive
Letters from thee, or to send them to thee; indeed Sabran sent me word
yesterday, befides some complements of the Emba^y of the rebels ships in France
(which I likewise put upon thy score of kindness) but is well enough content
that the Portugal should be charged with thy dispatches. As for trusting the
rebels either by going to London, or dis-banding my Army before a peace, do no
ways fear my hazarding so cheaply or foolishly: for I esteem the interest
thou have in me at a far dearer rate, and pretend to have a little more wit
(at least by the sympathy that is betwixt us) then to put my self into the
reverence of perfidious rebels. So impatiently expecting the express thou have
promised me, I rest eternally thine

I can now assure thee, that Hertogen the Irish Agent, is an arrant knave,
which shall be made manifest to thee by the first opportunity of sending
Pacquets.

11. 21
To my Wife 19. Feb. 1644/5 by P. A.
This is a true Copy examined by Edmond Prideaux.



20.
Dear heart,
the expectation of an express from thee (as I find by thine of the 4. Febr.)
is very good news to me, as likewise that thou art now well satisfied with my
diligence in writing. As for our treaty, there is every day less hopes then
other, that it will produce a peace. But I will absolutely promise thee, that
if we have one, it shall be such as shall invite thy return. For I avow, that
without thy company I can neither have peace nor comfort within my self. The
limited days for treating, are now almost expired without the least agreement
upon any one Article. Wherefore I have sent for enlargement of days, that the
whole treaty may be laid open to the world. And I assure thee, that thou needst
not doubt the issue of this treaty; for my Commissioners are so well chosen
(though I say it) that they will neither be threatened nor disputed from the
grounds I have given them; which (upon my word) it according to the little Note
thou so well remembers. And in this not only their obedience, but their
judgments concur. I confess in some respects thou have reason to bid me
beware of going too soon to London: for indeed some amongst us had a greater
mind that way then was fit; of which persuasion Percy is one of the chief, who
is shortly like to see thee, of whom having said this, is enough to show thee
how he is to be trusted, or believed by thee concerning our proceedings here.
In short, there is little or no appearance but that this Summer will be the
hottest for war of any that has been yet: and be confident, that in making
peace, I shall ever show my constancy in adhering to Bishops, and all our
friends, and not forget to put a short period to this perpetual Parliament. But
a^ thou loves me, let none persuade thee to slaken thine assistance for him who
is eternally thine,

C. R.
Oxford 15/25. Feb. 1644/5.
3. 20.
To my Wife 15. Feb. 1645. by P. A.
This is a true Copy examined by Edmond Prideaux.



22.
DEar heart,
now is come to pass what I foresaw, the fruitless end (as to a present
peace) of this treaty; but I am still confident, that I shall find very good
effects of it: for besides that my Commissioners have offered, to say no more,
full measured reason, and the rebels have stucken rigidly to their demands,
which I dare say had been too much, though they had taken me prisoner, so that
assuredly the breach will light foully upon them. We have likewise at this time
discovered, and shall make it evidently appear to the world, that the English
Rebels, (whether basely or ignorantly, will be no very great difference) have
as much as in them lies, transmitted the command of Ireland from the Crown of
England to the Scots, which (besides the reflection it will have upon these
rebels) will clearly show, that reformation of the Church is not the chief,
much less the only end of the Scotch Rebellion; but it being presumption, and
no piety: so to trust to a good cause, as not to use all lawful means to
maintain it, I have thought of one means more to furnish thee with for my
assistance, then hitherto thou have had: It is that I give thee power to
promise in my name (to whom thou think most fit) that I will take away all
the penal laws against the Roman Catholics in England as soon as God shall
enable me to do it; so as by their means, or in their favors, I may have so
powerful assistance as may deserve so great a favor, and enable me to do it.
But if thou ask what I call that assistance, I answer, that when thou know
what may be done for it, it will be easily seen, if it deserve to be so
esteemed. I need not tell thee what secrefy this bu^ines requires; yet this I
will say, that this is the greatest point of confidence I can express to thee;
for it is no thanks to me to trust thee in any thing else but in this which is
the only thing of difference in opinion betwix us: And yet I know thou will
make as good a bargain for me, even in this. I trusting thee, (though it
concern religion) as if thou were a protestant, the vi^ible good of my affairs
so much depending on it, I have so fully entrusted this bearer Pooly, that I
will not say more to thee now, but that herewith I send thee a new Cipher
(assuring thee, that none has or shall have any copy of it but my self, to the
end thou may use it, when thou shall find fit to write any thing which thou will judge worthy of thy pains to put in cipher, and to be decyphered by none
but me; and so likewise from him to the^, who is eternally thine.

20. 23*
To my wife the 5. March 1645. by Pooly.
This is a true Copy examined by Edm. Prideaux. 4



33: The little that is here in Cipher is in that which I sent to thee by Pooly.

Oxford, Wednesday 9 April. 1645. Dear Heart*
THough it be an uncomfortable thing to write by a slow Messenger, yet all
occasions, of this (which is now the only) way of conversing with thee, is so
welcome to me as I shall be loath to loose any; but expect neither news or
public business, from me, by this way of conveyance; yet judging thee by my
self even these nothings will not be unwelcom to thee, though I should chide
thee, which if I could I would do, for thy too sudden taking Alarms; I pray
thee consider, since I love thee above all earthly things, and that my
contentment is unseperably con^oyned with thine, must not all my Actions tend
to serve and please thee? If thou knew what a life I lead, (I speak not in
respect of the common distractions) even in point of conversation, which in my
mind, is the chief joy or vexation of ones life, I dare say thou would pity me;
for some are too wise, others too foolish, some too busy, others too reserved,
many fantastic. In a word, when I know no^e better (I speak not now in
relation to business) then 359 8. 270. 55:5:7:67:18. 294:35:69: 16:54:6:38:1:
67: 68: 9: 66: thou may easily judge how my conversation pleases me. I
confess thy company has perhaps made me in this, hard to be pleased, but not
less to be pitied by thee, who art the only cure for this disease. The end of
all is this, to desire thee to comfort me as often as thou can with thy
letters, and do not thou think, that to know particulars of thy health, and
how thou spendest the time, are pleasing subjects unto me, though thou have no
other business to write of? Bel^eve me, sweet heart, thy kindness is as
necessary to comfort my heart, as thy assistance is for my affairs.

To my Wife 9 April. 1645. by Bin^on.
This is a true Copy examined by Miles Corbet.



Oxford Thursday 20. March. Dear Heart:
UPon Saturday last I wrote to thee by Sabran (but this I believe may come as
soon to thee) and I have received thine of the seventh upon Monday last, which
gave me great contentment both in present and expectation, (the quick passage
being likewise a welcome circumstance) and yet I cannot but find a fault of
omission in most of thy latter Dispatches, there being nothing in them
concerning thy health. For though I confess, that in this no news is good
news, yet I am not so satisfied without a more perfect assurance; and I hope
thou will by satisfying me confess the justness of this my exception. I am
now full fraught with expectation (I pray God send me a good unlading) for I
look daily for some blow of importance to be given about Taunton or
Shrewsbury, and I am confidently assured of a considerable and sudden supply of
men from Ireland, likewise the refractory Horse (as the London Rebels calls
them) may be reckoned in, for yet it is not known what fomenters they have, or
whether they have none, if the latter, there is the more hope of gaining them
to me; howsoever I doubt not, but if they stand ont (as it is probable) good
use may be made of them. Of this I believe, to give thee a perfecter account
next week, having sent to try their pu^^es; Petit came yesterday, but he
having at London thrust his Dispatches into the States Ambassadors Paquets I
have not yet received them, and I would not stay to lengthen this in answer of
them, nor give thee half hopes of good Western news, knowing of an
opportunity for writing to thee within these three or four days; only I
congratulate with thee for the safe arrival of thy Tinne-adventure at Callis
and so farewell sweet heart.

Thine of the 10 I have newly received, whereby I find tha^ thou much mistakes
me concerning Ir. for I desire nothing more than a Peace there, and never
for^a^ thy commerce there; only I gave thee warning of some Irish in France,
whom I then thought, and now know to be knaves.

To my Wife 20. March 1644/5. by P. A.
This is a true Copy, examined by Edm. Prideaux.



Droit Wiche. Wednesday 14. May. Dear heart:
MArching takes away the convenience of sending my Letters so safe and quick
to thee, as when I was at Oxford, however I shall not fail to do what I can
to send often to thee; there is so little news for the present as I will leave
that subject for others, only upon Saturday last I received a Dispatch from
Montrose, which assures me his condition to be so good, that he bids me be
confident that his Countrymen shall do me no great harm this year; and if I
could lend him but 500. horse, he would undertake to bring me 20000. men before
the end of this Summer. For the general state of my affairs we all here
think to be very hopeful; this Army being of a good strength, well ordered,
and increasing; my Sons such that Fairfax will not be refused to be fought
with, of which I hope thou will receive good satisfaction from himself. Its
true that I cannot brag for store of money, but a sharp Sword always hinders
starving at least; and I believe the Rebels Coffers are not very full (and
certainly we shall make as good a shift with empty purses as they) or they must
have some greater defect, else their Leavies could not be so backward as they
are, for I assure thee that I have at this instant many more men in the Field
then they. I am not very confident what their Northern Forces are, but expect
they are much stronger then I am made believe. I may likewise include them.

Now I must make a complaint to thee of my Son Charles, which troubles me the
more, that thou may suspect I seek by equi^ocating to hide the breach of my
word, which I hate above all things, especially to thee: It is this he has
sent to desire me, That Sir John Greenfield may be sworn Gentleman of his
Bedchamber, but already so publicly engaged in it, that the refusal would be
a great disgrace both to my Son and the young Gentleman, to whom it is not
fit to give a just distaste, especially now, considering his Fathers merits,
his own hopefulnesse, besides the great power that Family has in the West: Yet
I have refused the admiting of him until I shall hear from thee. Wherefore I
desire thee first to chide my Son for engaging himself without one of our
consents; then, not to refuse thy own consent; and lastly, to believe that
directly or indirectly I never knew of this while yesterday at the delivery of
my Sons Letter. So farewell, Sweet heart, and God send me good news from thee.

To my Wife, May 14. 1645.
This is a true Copy, examined by Miles Corbett.



Dear Heart:
I Know thy affection to me so truly grounded, that thou will be in as much (if
not more) trouble to find my reputation, as my life in danger: therefore least
the false sound of my offering a Treaty to the Rebels upon base and unsafe
terms should disturb thy thoughts, I have thought it necessary (to assure thy
mind from such rumors) to tell thee the ways I have used to come to a
Treaty, and upon what grounds. I shall first show thee my grounds, to the end
thou may the better understand and approve of my ways; Then know (as a
certain truth) that all, even my party, are strangely impatient for peace,
which obliged me so much the more (at all occasions) to show my real
intentions to peace; And likewise I am put in very good hope (some holds it a
certainty) that if I could come to a fair Treaty, the Ring-leading Rebels
could not hinder me from a good Peaee: First, because their own party are mosi
weary of the War, and likewise for the great distractions which at this time
most assuredly are amongst themselves, as Presbyterians against Independents in
Religion, and General against General in point of command: Upon these grounds
a Treaty being most desirable (not without hope of good success) the most
probable means to procure it was to be used, which might stand with honor and
safety, amongst the rest (for I will omit all those which are unquestionably
councelable) the sound of my return to London was thought to have so much
force of popular Retorique in it, that upon it a Treaty would be had, or if
refused it would bring much prejudice to them, and advantageous to me; yet
(...) foolish or malicious people should interpret this as to proceed from
fear or folly, I have joined conditions with the Proposition (without which
this ^ound will signify nothing) which thou will find to be most of the
chief ingredients of an honorable and safe Peace. Then ob^, (...) a (...) at
London with Commissioners for both sides may be had without it, it is not to be
used; nor, in case they will treat with no body but my Self, so that the
conditions saves any a^pertion of (...), and the Treating at London the
malignity which our ^actious spirits here may infuse into this Treaty upon this
subje^. This I hope will secure thee from the trouble which otherwise may be
caused by false malicious rumors, and though I judge my self secure in thy
thoughts, from suspecting me guilty of any baseness, yet I held this account
neeessary, to the end thou may make others know, as well as thy self, this
certain truth, That no danger of death or misery (which I think much worse)
shall make me do any thing unworthy of thy love. For the state of my present
affairs I refer thee to 92. concluding (as I did in my last to thee) by
conjuring thee, as thou (...) me, that no appearance of Peace (and now I add)
nor hopeful condition of mine, make thee neglect to haste succor for him who
is eternally thine.

Copy to my Wife, December. 1644. by Tom. Elliot.
This is a true Copy, examined by Edm. Prideaux.



Oxford, 13. March, Old-Style. Dear Heart:
WHat I told thee the last week concerning a good parting with our Lords and
Commons here, was on Monday last handsomely performed, and now if I do any
thing unhandsome or disadvantagious to my self or friends, in order to a
Treaty, it will be merely my own fault, for I confess when I wrote last, I
was in fear to have been pressed to make some mean overtures to renew the
Treaty, (knowing that there were great laboring to that purpose:) But now I
promise thee, If it be renewed, (which I believe will not, without some eminent
good success on my side) it shall be to my honor and advantage, I being now
as well freed from the place of base and mutinous motions (that is to say, our
Mungrell Parliament here) as of the chief causers, for whom I may justly
expect to be chidden by thee, for having suffered thee to be vexed by them,
Wilmot being already there, Percy on his way, and Sussex within few days
taking his journey to thee, but that, I know, thou carest not for a little
trouble to free me from great inconveniences, yet I must tell thee, that if I
knew not the perfect stedinesse of thy love to me, I might reasonably apprehend
that their repair to thee would rather prove a change then an end of their
villainies; and I cannot deny, but my confidence in thee, was some cause of this
permissive trouble to thee.

I have received thine of the third of March, by which thou puts me in hope of
assistance of men and Money, and it is no little expression of thy love to me,
that (because of my business) Festivals are troublesome to thee, But I see
that Assemblies in no Countries are very agreeable to thee, and it may be done
a purpose to make thee weary of their companies, and excuse me to tell thee in
earnest, that it is no wonder, that mere Statesmen should desire to be rid of
thee, therefore I desire thee to think whether it would not advantage thee
much to make a personal friendship with the Queen Regent, (without showing any
distrust of her Ministers, though not wholly trusting to them) and to show her,
that when her Regency comes out (and possibly before) she may have need of her
friends, so that she shall but serve her self by helping of thee; and to say
no more, but certainly, if this Rebellion had not begun to oppress me when it
did, a late great Queen had ended more glorious then she did. In the last
place I desire thee, to give me a weekly account of thy health, for I fear
least in that alone thou take not care enough to express thy kindness to
him who is eternally thine.

The Northern news is rather better then what we first heard, for what by Sir
Marmaduke Langdales, and Montrosses victories, Carlisle and the rest of our
Northern Garrisons are relieved, and we hope for this year secured, and
besides all this, the Northern Horse are already returned and joined with my
Nephew Rupert.

To my wife, 13. March. 1644/5. By P. A.
This a true Copy examined by Edm. Prideaux.



Daintrey, Sunday 8. June. Dear Heart:
OXford being free, I hope this will come sooner to thee then otherwise I could
have expected, which makes me believe, that my good news will not be very
stale, which in short is this, Since the taking of Leicester my marching down
hither to relieve Oxford made the Rebels raise their siege before I could come
near them, having had their Quarters once or twice beaten up by that Garrison,
and lost four hundred men at a^ assault before Bostoll-House; at first I
thought they would have fought with me, being marched as far as Brackley, but
are since gone aside to Brickhill, so as I believe they are weaker then they
are thought to be; whether by their distractions, (which are certainly very
great, Fairfax and Brown having been at Cudgels, and his men and Cromwell's
likewise at blows together, where a Captain was slain, or wasting their men,
I will not say: besides Goring has given a great defeat to the Western
Rebels, but I do not yet know the particulars; wherefore I may (without being
too much sanguine) affirm, that (since this Rebellion) my affairs were never
in so fair and hopeful away, though among our selves we want not our own
follies, which is needless, and I am sure tedious to tell thee, but such as I
am confident shall do no harm nor much trouble me: Yet I must tell thee, that
it is thy Letter by Fitz Williams, assuring me of thy perfect recovery with thy
wonted kindness, which makes me capable of taking contentment in these good
successes; For as diverse men proposes several recompenses to themselves for
their pains and hazard in this Rebellion; so thy company is the only reward I
expect and wish for.

To my Wife 9. June 1645.
This is a true Copy, examined by Miles Corbett.



Dear Heart:
SUnday last I received three Letters from thee; one a Duplicate of the 30.
December. another of the 6. Jan. and the last of the 14. Jan. and even now one
Petit is come with a Duplicate of the last; wherein, as I infinitely joy in the
expressions of thy confident love of me, so I must extremely wonder, that any
who pretend to be a friend to our Cause, (for I believe thou would not
mention any information from the other side) can invent such lies, that thou
have had ill offices done to me by any; or that they care for my assistance
has been the least suspected, it being so far from truth, that the just
contrary is true. For I protest to God I never heard thee spoken of, but with
the greatest expressions of estimation for thy love to me, and particularly for
thy diligent care for my assistance: But I am confident that it is a branch of
that root of knavery which I am now digging at, and of this I have more then a
bare suspicion: And indeed, if I were to find fault with thee, it should be
for not taking so much care of thine own health as of my assistance, at least
not giving me so often account of it as I desire; these three last, making no
mention of thy self. Now as for the Treaty (which begins this day,) I desire
thee to be confident, that I shall never make a peace by abandoning my friends,
nor such a one as will not stand with my honor and safety; of which I will say
no more, because, knowing thy love, I am sure thou must believe me, and make
others likewise confident of me.

I send thee herewith my directions to my Commissioners, but how I came to make
them my self without any others Digby will tell thee, with all the news, as
well concerning Military as Cabalisticall matters. At this time I will say no
more, but that I shall in all things, (only not answering for words) truly show
my self to be eternally thine.

The Portugal Agent has made me two propositions, first, concerning the
release of his Masters Brother, for which I shall have 50000. l. if I can
procure his liberty from the King of Spain; the other is for a marriage
betwixt my Son Charles and his Masters eldest daughter: For the first I have
freely undertaken to do what I can, and for the other, I will give such an
Answer, as shall signify nothing.

I desire thee not to give too much credit to Sabrans Relations, nor much
countenauce to the Irish Agents in Paris, the particular reasons thou shall
have by Pooly, (whom I intend for my next Messenger.) In the last place I
recommend to thee the care of Jersey and Gernsey, it being impossible for us
here to do much, though we were rich, being weak at Sea.

To my wife* 30. Jan. 1644/5. By LEG.
This is a true Copy, examined by EDM. BRIDEAUX.



Ormond;
THe impossibility of preserving my Protestant Subjects in Ireland, by a
continuation of the war, having moved me to give you those powers and
directions; Which I have formerly done for the concluding of a Peace there, and
the same growing daily much more evident, that alone were reason enough for me,
to enlarge your powers, and to make my Commands in the point more positive. But
besides these considerations, it being now manifest that the English Rebels
have ( as far as in (...) (...)) given the Command of Ireland to the Scots;
that their aim is at (...) all subversion of Religion and Regal Power, and
that nothing less will content them, or purchase peace here. I think my self
bound in conscience, not to let slip the means of settling that Kingdom (if it
may be) fully under my obedience, nor to loose that assistance which I may hope
from my Irish Subjects, for such scruples as in a less pressing condition
might (...) be (...) at by me For their satisfaction, I do therefore, command
you to conclude a Peace with the Irish, whatever it cost, so that (...)
Subjects there may (...), and my Regal authority preserved, but for all this
you are to make me the best bargain you can, and (...). And though I leave the
managing of this great and necessary work entirely to you, yet I cannot but
tell you, that if the suspension of Poinings Act for such Bi^s as (...) be
agreed upon between you there, and the present taking away of the Penal^ Laws
(...): I shall not think it a hard bargain, so that freely and vigorously
they engage themselves in my (...) my Rebels of England and Scotland, for which
no (...) can be too hard, not being against (...).

(...)

A True Copy,

Zouch Tate.



To Ormond.
Oxford 16. Febr. 1644. ORMOND,
I should wrong my own service and this Gentleman Sir Timothy Fetherston, if I
did not recommend him and his business to you; for the particulars of which I
referr you to Digby: And now again * cannot but mention to you the necessity of
the hastening of the Irish Peace, for which I hope you are already furnished by
me, with materials sufficient: But in case (against all expectation and reason)
Peace cannot be had upon those terms, you must not by any means fall to a new
rupture with them, but continue the Cessation (according to a Postscript in a
Letter by Jack Barry (a copy of which Dispatch I herewith send you.) So I rest.

Postscript.
In case upon particular men's fancies, the Irish Peace should not be procured,
upon powers I have already given you, I have thought good to give you this
further Order (which I hope will prove needless) to seek to renew the
Cessation for a year, for which you shall promise the Irish (if you can have it
no cheaper) to join with them against the Scots and Inchequin; for I hope by
that time my condition may be such, as the Irish may be glad to accept less,
or I be able to grant more.



A true copy

Zouche Tate.



To Ormond.
Oxford 7. Ian. 1644/5. ORMOND,
upon the great rumors and expectations which are now of Peace, I think it
necessary to tell you the true state of it, lest mistaken reports from hence
might trouble my affairs there.

The Rebels here have agreed to Treat; and most assuredly, one of the first and
chief Articles they will insist on, will be, to continue the Irish War;
which is a point not Popular for me to break on; of which you are to make a
double use: First, to hasten (wit^ all possible diligence) the Peace there; the
timely conclusion of which will take off that inconvenience which otherwise I
may be subject to, by the refusal of that Article, upon any other reason.
Secondly, by dextrous conveying to the Irish, the danger there may be of their
total and perpetual exclusion from those favors I intend them, in case the
Rebels here clap up a peace with me, upon reasonable terms, and only exclude
them; which possibly were not councelable for me to refuse, if the Irish peace
should be the only difference betwixt us, before it were perfected there: These
I hope are sufficient grounds for you to persuade the Irish diligently to
dispatch a peace upon reasonable terms assuring them that you having once
fully engaged to them my word (in the conclusion of a peace) all the earth
shall not make me break it.

But not doubting of a peace, I must again remember you to press the Irish for
their speedy assistance to me here, and their friends in Scotland: My intention
being to draw from thence into Wales (the peace once concluded) as many as I
can of my Armed Protestant subjects, and desire that the Irish would send as
great a body as they can to land about Cumberland, which will put those
Northern Counties in a brave condition; wherefore you must take speedy order to
provide all the shipping you may, as well Dunkeirk as Irish Bottomes; and
remember that after March it will be most difficult to transport men from
Ireland to England, the Rebels being masters of the Seas: So expecting a
diligent and particular account in answer to this Letter, I rest

Your most assured constant friend, CHARLES R.
A true copy.

Zouche Tate.



To Ormond.
15. December. 1644. ORMOND,
I am sorry to find by Colonel Barry the sad condition of your particular
fortune, for which I cannot find so good and speedy remedy as the peace of
Ireland, it being likewise to redress most necessary asfaires here; wherefore
I command you to dispatch it out of hand, for the doing of which I hope my
public Dispatch will give you sufficient Instruction and Power; yet I have
thought it necessary for your more Encouragement in this necessary work to make
this addition with my own hand. As for Poinings Act I refer you to my other
Letter: and for matter of Religion, though I have not fund it fit to take
public notice of the paper which Brown gave you, yet I must command you to
give him my L. Musgray and Plunket particular thanks for it, assuring them that
without it, there could have been no peace; and that sticking to it, their
Nation in general and they in particular shall have comfort in what they have
done, and to show that this is more then words, I do hereby promise them, (and
command you to see it done) that the Penal Statutes against Roman Catholics
shall not be put in execution, the Peace being made, and they remaining in
their due obedience; and further, that when the Irish gives me that assistance
which they have promised, for the suppression of this Rebellion, and I shall be
restored to my Rights, then I will consent to the Repeal of them by a Law; but
all those against Appeals to Rome, and Praemunire must stand, all this in
Cipher you must impart to none, but those three already named and that with
injunction of strictest secrecy: so again recommending to your care the
speedy dispatch of the peace of Ireland, and my necessary supply from thence,
as I wrote to you in my last private letter, I rest.

A true copy.

Zouche Tate.



The Earl of Glamorgans Instructions to me, to be presented to your Majesty.
THat (God willing) by end of May, or beginning of June, he will land with 6000
Irish.

That the Gentlemen of the several Counties of Monmouth, Glamorgan, Brecknock,
and Carmarthen, will very speedily for your Majesty's service in securing these
Parts, raise and a^e four thousand men.

That the Ships which shall bring over the Irish, his Lordship designs to
block up (...) Haven, at which time he doubts not to draw these Welsh Forces
into Pembrockshiere.

That to advance these his undertakings, he has thirty thousand pounds ready,
ten thousand Muskets, two thousand case of Pistols, eight hundred barrells of
Powder; besides, his own Artillery, and is ascertained of thirty thousand pound
more which will be ready upon his return.

That he has intelligence from his Ships, that diverse Hollanders and
Dunkirkers come in daily to him.

In Order to this fervice, he commanded me humbly to put your Majesty in mind
of his Commission, and that he may in fitting time have such command in these
Counties as may be suitable to his employment, and conducing to the service in
hand: These being Counties in which (if other designs of Landing fail) he can
land in: And that your Majesty will seriously consider the services he has
done you in composing the distractions of the County of Monmouth: And that you
will be pleased to countenance Sir Thomas Lunsford, and graciously relieve the
Country in such things as without prejudicing your service may ease them.

Concerning the County of Monmouth only.
That by his Lordships means (who has now raised two Regiments himself;) Sir
Thomas Lunsfords Forces will be one thousand eight hundred foot, and seven
hundred horse which horse is intended to be quartred in the Forest of Deane
in places of secure quartring, as Langot attempted to have been taken by Sir
John Winter, a place of great conce^ment, both for the reducing the Forest,
and securing Monmouth-shiere.

That by his Lordships intervention and endeavors, your Majesty really sees he
has much quallified the sense of the grievances of the County, and moderated
their complaints by subducting the intended Petition, and therefore hopes your
Majesty will so specially commend their humble suit to Prince Rupert, as it may
be successful.

That though the prayer of their Petition is to reduce the contribution to the
proportion set by the Parliament at Oxford, yet his Lordship has so wrought,
as these Petitioners have under their hands obliged themselves to continue the
double payment for two Months more, and doubts not but in rela^ion to the
exigence of your Majesty's service to prevail for further time.

His humble suit is, that I may carry with me into the Country your Majesty's
Order, that the Forces of Sir Thomas Lund ford may not be removed, but upon
urgent occasion, until his retuine: And that only upon your Majesty's or
Prince Ruperts special Order, otherwise it will be a great obstruction and
discouragement in raising or continuing the number proposed.

That your Majesty will be pleased in their favor, to write your Lette^ to
Prince Rupert, and that the Country may have the honor to present it, to the
end, they may be eased of Free Quarter, exactions above their contribution, and
unnecessary Garrisons, that Chepstow and Monmouth may be the better strengthened.

That Sir Thomas Lundsford may be qualified with Authority, to protect them
according to such order as the Prince shall make,

March 21. 1644. These presented by your Loyal Subject Edward Bosdon.

This a true Copy.

Zouche Tate.



Colonel Fitz-William humbly prays and propounds as follows.
THat your sacred Majesty will vouchsafe to prevail with his Majesty to
condescend to the just demands of his Irish subjects the Confederate Catholics
in his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, at least in private.

That upon the consideration thereof Colonel Fitz-William humbly propounds and
undergoeth (with the approbation of Mr Hardegan now employed Agent for the said
Confederate Catholics in France) to bring an Army of ten thousand men and more
of his Majesty's subjects in his kingdom of Ireland, for his Majesty's service,
into England.

That Colonel Fitz-william undertakes for the sum of ten thousand pound
sterling. to leavy, ship, and arm, the said ten thousand men, and so
proportionably for more or less; and that the said money may be put into such
hands as may be safe for his Majesty as well as ready for the Colonel when it
shall appear the said Army shall be in a readiness to be transported into
England.

That upon the landing the said men, there shall be advanced to the Colonel
one months pay for all the Army, according to the Muster, for the present
support of the Army.

That Colonel Fitz William may be Commander in Chief thereof, and dispose of
all the Officers, and only be commanded by his Majesty, his Highness the
Prince of Wales, and Prince Rupert, and qualified with such Commissions as has
been formerly granted to his Majesty's Generals, that have Commanded bodies
apart from his Majesty's own Army, as the Marquisse of Newcastle, the Earl of
Kingstone, and others, hereby the better to enable him in the Leavies as well
as in the general conduct of the business; and that in respect the Parliament
gives no quarter to his Majesty's Irish Subjects, therefore that the said
Forces shall not by any Order whatsofover be divided.

That the Colonel may be supplied with a body of horse, of at least two
thousand, to be ready at the place of landing.

That the Colonel may be provided with Ammunition and Artillery, or with money
requisite for himself to provide necessary proportions for to bring with him.

That the Army shall be paid as other Armies of his Majesty's.

Having taken these Propositions into consideration, We have thought fit to
testify our approbation and agreement thereunto under our sign Manual
assuring what has been desired of us therein, shall be forthwith effectually
endeavored, and not doubting to the satisfaction of the Confederate Catholics
of his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, and to the said Colonel Fitz-William, so
that we may justly expect an agreeable compliance and performance accordingly
from all parties in these several concernments.

This is a true Copy of the Original sent by her Majesty to the King, May 16.
1645. A: Lowly, Secretary to the right Honorable the Lord Iermine.



A true copy.

Zouche Tate.



To my Wife,
14. Jan. 1644/5. by Choquen. Dear Heart,
POoly came the 12/22. Jan. to whose great dispatch, though for some days I
cannot give a full answer, I cannot but at this opportunity reply to something
in thy Letter, not without relating to something of his Discourse.

As I confess it a misfortune (but deny it a fault) thy not hearing oftener
from me, so excuse me to deny that it can be of so ill consequence as thou
mentions, if their affections were so real, as they make show of to thee; for
the difficulty of sending is known to all, and the numbers of each Letter will
show my diligence, and certainly there goes no great wit to find out ways of
sending, wherefore if any be neglected more, then our wits are faulty; but to
imagine that it can enter into the thought of any flesh living, that any body
here should hide from thee what is desired, that every one should know (excuse
me to say it) is such a folly, that I shall not believe that any can think it
though he say it: And for my affection to thee, it will not be the miscarrying
of a Letter or two that will call it in question; but take heed that these
discourses be not rather the effect of their weariness of thy company, then
the true image of their thoughts; and of this is not the proposal of thy
journey to Ireland, a pretty instance? For seriously of it self, I hold it one
of the most extravagant propositions that I have heard, thy giving ear to it,
being most assuredly only to express thy love to me, and not thy judgment in
my affairs: As for the business it self, (I mean the peace of Ireland) to
show thee the care I have had of it, and the fruits I hope to receive from it:
I have sent thee the last dispatches, I have sent concerning it, earnestly
desiring thee to keep them to thy self, only thou may in general let the Q.
Regent and Ministers there understand, that I have offered my Irish Subjects so
good satisfaction, that a peace will shortly ensue, which I really believe. But
for Gods sake, let none know the particulars of my dispatches. I cannot but
tell thee, that I am much beholding to the Portugal Agent (and little to the
French) it being by his means that I have sent thee all my Letters, (besides
expresses) since I came hither, though I expected most from Sabran.

I will not trouble thee with repetitions of News, Digbies dispatch which I
have seen being so full, that I can add nothing; yet I cannot but paraphrase
a little upon that which he calls his superstitious observation: It is this,
nothing can be more evident, then that Straffords innocent blood has been one
of the great causes of Gods just judgments upon this Nation by a furious
civil war, both sides hitherto being almost equally punished as being in a
manner equally guilty; but now this last crying blood, being totally theirs; I
believe it is no prefumption hereafter to hope that his hand of justice must be
heavier upon them, and lighter upon us, looking now upon our Cause, having
passed by our faults.

This is a true Copy examined by Edmund Prideaux.



XXIII. Copy to the D. of R.
RIchmond,
I thank you for the account you sent me by this Bearer, and have nothing of
new to direct you in, but only to remember you that my going to West. is not to
be mentioned but upon probable hopes of procuring a Treaty with Com. there or
there abouts, and that you mention the security I ask with my coming to West.
And I hope I need not remember you to Cajole well the Independents and Scots;
this Bearer will tell you how well our Western and Northern Associations goes
on to whom I refer you for other things. I rest.

This a true Copy.

Zouche Tate.



Memorialls for Secretary Nicholas concerning the Treaty at Vxbridge.
Oxford Feb. 1644.
FIrst for Religion and Church government I will not go one jot further then
what is offered by you already.

2. And so for the Militia more then what ye have allowed by me, but even in
that you must observe that I must have free nomination of the full half; as if
the total number Scots and all ^e be thirty, I will name fifteen; yet if they
(I mean the English Rebels) will be so base as to admit o^ ten Scots to twenty
English, I am contented to name five Scots and ten English, and so
proportionably to any number that shall be agreed upon.

3. As for gaining of part cular persons besides security, I give you power to
promise them rewards for performed services, not sparing to engage for places;
so they be not of great trust, or be taken away from honest men in possession,
but as much profit as you will: with this last you are only to acquaint
Richmond, Southampton, Culpeper, and Hide.

This is a true Copy.

Zouche Tate.



XXIIII. Directions for my Vxbridge Commissioners.
First concerning Religion.
IN this the government of the Church (as I suppose) will be the chief
question wherein two things are to be considered, Conscience and Policy. For
the first, I must declare unto you that I cannot yield to the change of the
government by Bishops; not only as I fully concur with the most general
opinion of Christians in all ages, as being the best, but likewise I hold my
self particularly bound by the Oath I took at my Coronation, not to alter the
government of this Church from what I found it. And as for the Churches
patrimony, I cannot suffer any diminution or alienation of it, it being without
peradventure sacrilege, and likewise contrary to my Coronation Oath but
whatsoever shall be offered, for rectifying of abuses if any has crept in, or
yet for the ease of tender conscences (so that it endamage not the foundation)
I am content to hear, and will be ready to give a gracious answer thereunto:
For the second, as the Kings duty is to protect the Church, so it is the
Churches to assist the King, in the maintenance of his just authority;
wherefore my Predecessors have been always careful (and especially since the
Reformation) to keep the dependency of the Clergy entirely upon the Crown;
without which it will scarcely sit fast upon the Kings head; therefore you must
do nothing to change or lessen this necessary dependency.

Next concerning the Militia.
After conscience, this is certainly the fittest subject for a Kings Quarrel;
for without it the Kingly power is but a shadow; and therefore upon no means
to be quitted, but to be maintained according to the ancient known laws of
the Land: (yet because to attain to this so much wished peace by all good men)
it is in a manner necessary that sufficient and real security be given for the
performance of what shall be agreed upon. I permit you either by leaving strong
Towns or other Military force into the Rebels possession (until Articles be
performed) to give such assurance for performance of conditions as you shall
judge necessary for to conclude a peace: provided always that ye take (at
least) as great care by sufficient security, that conditions be performed to
me: And to make sure that the peace once settled, all things shall return into
their ancient Channels.

Thirdly for Ireland.
I ^onfesse, they have very specious popular Arguments to press this point,
the gaining of no article more conducing to their ^nds then this: And I have as
much reason both in honor and policy to take care how to answer this as any:
all the world knows the eminent inevitable necessity which caused me to make
the Irish Cessation, and there remain yet as strong reason for the concluding
of that peace; wherefore ye must consent to nothing to hinder me therein,
until a clear way be shown me how my Protestant subjects there may probably
(at least) defend themselves; and that I shall have no more need to defend my
conscience and Crown from the injuries of this rebellion.

A true Copy.

Zouch Tate.



At Vxbridge on Wednesday the 29. of January, 1644. the Protestation under
written was unanimously consented unto, and taken by all his Majesty's
Commissioners appointed to treat there, toucheing a well-grounded peace.
IA. B. being one of the Commissioners assigned by his Majesty for this present
Treaty at Vxbridge, do Protest and promise in the sight of Almighty God, that
I will not disclose nor reveal unto any person or persons whatsoever (who is
not a Commissioner) any matter or thing that shall be spoken of during the
Treaty by any one, or more of his Majesty's Commissioners in any private debate
amongst our selves, concerning the said Treaty; so as to name or describe
directly or indirectly the person or persons that shall speak any such matter
or thing, unlefse it be by the consent of all the said Commissioners that shall
be then living.

Memorandum, That it is by all the said Commissioners agreed that this shall
not bind where any ten of the Commissioners shall agree to certify his
Majesty the number of Assenters or Dissenters, upon any p^rticular result, in
this Treaty, not naming or describing the persons.



This is a true Copy, examined by Zouch Tate.



XXVI. The Q. to the K. from York, March 30 1644. Also April.
MY dear heart;
I need not tell you from whence this bearer comes; only I will tell you, that
the Propositions which he brings you are good, but 260. I believe that it is
not yet time to put them into execution: therefore find some means to send
them back, which may not discontent them (and do not tell who gave you this
advise. Sr. Hugh Cholmely is come with a Troop of horse to kiss my hands: the
rest of his people he left at Scarborro^gh, with a ship laden with Arms, which
the ships of the Parliament had taken and brought thither, so she is ours; the
Rebels have quitted Tadcaster upon our sending forces to Whetherby, but they
are returned with twelve hundred men: we send more forces to drive them out,
though those we have already at Whetherby are sufficient, but we fear lest
they have all their f^rces there about, and lest they have some design; for
they have quitted Selby and Cawood, the last of which they have burnt: Between
this and to morrow night we shall know the issue of this business; and I will
send you an express: I am more careful to advertise you of what we do, that
you and we may find means to have passe-ports, to send: and I wonder that
upon the Cessation you have not demanded that you might send in safety: this
shows my love: I understand to day from London, that they will have no
Cessation, and that they Treat at the beginning of the two first Articles,
which is of the Forts, Ships, and Ammunition, and afterward of the disbanding
of the Army: certainly, I wish a peace more then any, and that with greater
reason: But I would the disbanding of the perpetual Parliament, first: and
certainly, the rest will be easily afterward: I do not say this of my own
head alone: for generally both those who are for you and against you in this
Country, wish an end of it; and I am certain, that if you do demand it at
the first, in case it be not granted, Hull is ours, and all Yorkshire, which
is a thing to consider of: and for my particular, if you make a peace and
disband your Army, before there is an end to this perpetual Parliament, I am
absolutely resolved to go into France, not being willing to fall again into
the hands of those people, being well assured, that if the power remain with
them, that it will not be well for mein England; remember what I have written
to you in three precedent Letters, and be more careful of me then you have
been, or at the least dissemble it; to the end that no notice be taken of it.
Adieu: the man hastens me, so that I can say no more.

York this 30. of March.
XXVII.
THis Letter should have gone by a man of Master Denedsdale, who is gone, and
all the beginning of this Letter was upon this subject: and therefore by this
man it signifies nothing but the end was so pleasing, that I do not for bear
to send it to you: You now know by Elliot the issue of the business of
Todeaster, since we had almost lost Scarborough, whilst Cholmly was here,
Brown Bushel would have rendered it up to the Parliament: but Cholmley having
had notice of it, is gone with our forces, and has re-taken it; and has
desired to have a Lieutenant and forces of ours to put within it; for which we
should take his; he has also taken two Pinaces from Hotham, which brought 44.
men to put within Scarborough, 10. Pieces of Canon, 4. Barrel^ of Powder, 4 of
Bullet. This is all our news; our Army marches to morrow to put an end to
Fairfaxes Excellency. And I will make an end of this Letter, this third of
April. I have had no news of you since Parsons.

A true Copy.

P. W.


30. March. 3. April.
XXVIII. The Queen to the King from Bath. April. 21. 1644.
MY dear heart,
Fred. Cornwallis will have told you all our voyage as far as Adburie, and
the state of my health: since my coming hither, I find my self so ill, as
well in the ill rest that I have, as in the increase of my Rhume.

I hope that this days rest will do me good: I go to morrow to Bristoll, to
send you back the Carts; many of them are already returned; My Lord Dillon told
me, not directly from you, though he says you approve it; that it was fit I
should write a Letter to the Commissioners of Ireland to this effect, That they
ought to desist from those things for the present, which they had put in their
Paper, and to assure them, that when you shall be in another condition then you
are now, that you will give them contentment.

I thought it to be a matter of so great engagement, that I dare not do it
without your command; therefore if it please you that I should do so, send me
what you would have me write, that I may not do more then what you appoint:
And also that it being your command, you may hold to that which I promise: for
I should be very much grieved to write any thing which I would not hold to, and
when you have promised it me, I will be confident. I believe also, that to
write to my Lord Muskery without the rest will be enough; for the Letter which
I shall write to him shall be with my own hand: and if it be to all your
Commissioners, it shall be by the Secretary. Farewell my dear heart, I cannot
write any more, but that I am absolutely

Yours.
A true Copy.

Zouch Tate.



The Q. to the K. from Paris. January 1644/5.
PAris, January,
I have received one of your Letters, dated from Marleborow of an old date,
having received many others more fresh, to which I have made answer: I will say
nothing concerning this but only concerning the affair of ( Gor.) If it be not
done, it is time, being very seasonable at this time, which I did not believe
before. I understand that the Commissioners are arrived at London; I have
nothing to say, but that you have a care of your honor; and that if you have a
peace, it may be such as may hold; and if it fall out otherwise, that you do^
not abandon those who have served you, for fear they do forsake you in your
need. Also I do not see how you can be in safety without a Regiment of Guard;
for my self I think I cannot be, seeing the malice which they have against me,
and my Religion, of which I hope you will have a care of both; but in my
opinion Religion should be the last thing upon which you should treat; For if
you do agree upon strictness against the Catholics, it would discourage them
to serve you: and if afterward there should be no peace, you could never
expect succors either from Ireland, or any other Catholic Prince, for they
would believe you would abandon them after you have served your self. I have
dispatched an express into Scotland, to Mountrosse, to know the condition he
is in, and what there is to be done. This week I send to Mr. of Lorrain and
into Holl. I lose no time: if I had more of your news, all would go better.
Adieu my dear heart.

A true Copy.

Zouch Tate.



My Wife 6/27 December. Ian. 1644/5.
The Q. to the K. Paris, Ian. 27. 1644/5. Also March 13.
PAris January; 10/27 my dear heart,
Tom. Eliot two days since has brought me much joy, and sorrow: the first, to
know the good estate in which you are: the other, the fear I have that you go
to London. I cannot conceive where the wit was of those who gave you this
counsel, unless it be to hazard your person to save theirs: but thanks be to
God, to day I received one of yours by the Ambassador of Portugal dated in
January, which comforted me much to see that the Treaty shall be at Vxbridge:
For the honor of God trust not your self in the hands of these people. And if
you ever go to London before the Parliament be ended, or without a good Army,
you are lost. I understand that the Propositions for the peace must begin by
disbanding the Army; if you consent to this, you shall be lost, they having the
whole power of the Militia, they have done and will do whatsoever you will. I
received yesterday Letters from the Duke of Lorraine, who sends me word if his
service be agreeable to you, he will bring you ten thousand men: Dr. Goffe whom
I have sent into Holland shall treat with him in his passage upon this
business; and I hope very speedily to send good news of this, as also of the
money. Assure your self I will be wanting in nothing you shall desire; and
that I will hazard my life, that is, to dye by famine, rather then not to send
to you: send me word always by whom you receive my Letters, for I write both
by the Ambassador of Portugal and the resident of France. Above all, have a
care not to abandon those who have served you, as well the Bishops as the poor
Catholics. Adieu, You will pardon me if I make use of another to write, not
being able to do it; yet my self in ciphers show to my Nephew Rupert, that I
entreat you to impart all that I write to you, to the end that he may know the
reason why I write not to him; I know not how to send great Packets.

My wife, 27/17, Ian. 16644/5
A true Copy,

Zouche Tate.



XXXI.
PAris this 13 of March, My Dear heart,
since my last, I have received one of your Letters marked 16. by which you
signify the receipt of my Letters by Pooly, which has a little surprised me,
seeming to me that you write as if I had in my Letter something which had
displeased you: If that has been, I am very innocent in my intention. I only
did believe that it was necessary you should know all: there is one other thing
in your Letter which troubles me much, where you would have me keep to my self
your dispatches, as if you believe that I should be capable to show them to
any, only to Lord Ier. to uncypher them, my head not suffering me to do it my
self: but if it please you I will do it, and none in the world shall see
them; be kind to me or you kill me: I have already affliction enough to fear,
which without you I could not do, but your service surmounts all: farewell my
dear heart; behold the mark which you desire to have to know when I desire any
thing in earnest, and I pray begin to remember what I spoke to you concerning
Jack Barkly for Master of the Wards; I am not engaged nor will not be for the
places of L. Per. and others, do you accordingly.

13 March 1644.
Newarke the 27. of June. MY dear heart,
I received just now your letter by my Lord Savile, who found me ready to go
away, staying but for one thing, for which you will well pardon 2. days stopp,
it is to have Hull and Lincoln, young Hotham having bin put in prison by order
of Parliament, is escaped: and has sent to 260. that he would cast himself
into his arms, and that Hull and Lincoln should be rendered, he is gone to his
Father, and 260 writes for your answer, so that I think I shall go hence
Friday or Satturday, and shall go lie at Werton, and from thence to Ashby,
where we will resolve what way to take, and I will stay there a day, because
that the march of the day before, will have bin somewhat great, and also to
know how the Enemy marches: all their forces of Nottingham, at present being
gone to Leicester, and Darby, which makes us believe, that it is to intercept
our passage, as soon as we have resolved, I will send you word: at this present
I think it fit to let you know the state in which we march, and what I leave
behind me for the safety of Lincolneshire, and Nottinghamshire: I leave 2000.
foot, and wherewithal to arm 500* more, 20. Companyes of Horse, all this to
be under Charles Cavendish, whom the Gentlemen of the Country have desired me
not to carry with me, against his will, for he desired extremely to go, The
Enemies have left within Nottingham 1000. I carry with me 3000. Foot, 30.
Companyes of Horse and Dragoones, 6. pieces of Cannon, and 2. Morters, Harry
Germyn commands the forces which go with me, as Colonel of my Guarde, and
Sr. Alexander Lesley the foot under him, and Gerard the Horse, and Robin Leg
the Artillery, and her she Majesty Generalissima, and extremely diligent,
with a 150* wagans of Baggage to govern, in case of Battle, have a care that
no Troop of Essex his Army incommodate us, for I hope that for the rest we
shall be strong enough, for at Nottingham we have had the experience, one of
our Troops having beaten 6. of theirs, and made them fly. I have received your
Proclamation or Declaration, which I wish had not bin made, being extremely
disadvantagious for you, for you show too much fear, and do not what you had
refolved upon. Parewell my dear heart.

The Queen to the King, 27. June, 1643.
CHARLES Rex,

IT is not unknown both to the French King and his Mother, what unkindnesses
and distastes have fallen between my wi^e and Me, which hitherto I have borne
with great patience, (as all the world knows) ever expecting and hoping an
amendment, knowing her to be but young, and perceiving it to be the ill crafty
counsels of her servants, for advanceing of their own ends, rather then her
own inclination: for at my first meeting of her at Dover, I could not exspect
more Testimonies of respect and love, then she showed, as to give one
instance, her first suite to me was, that she being young, and comeing to a
strange Country, both by her years and ignorance of the customs of the
place, might commit many errors, therefore that I would not be angry with her
for her faults of ignorance, before I had with my instructions learned her to
eschew them, and desired me in these cases to use no third person, but to tell
her my self, when I found she did any thing amiss, I both granted her
request, and thanked her for it, but desired that she would use me, as she
had desired me to use her, which she willingly promised me, which promise
she never kept, for a little after this, Madam St. George taking a distaste
because I would not let her ride with us in the Coach, when there was Women
of better quality to fill her room, claiming it as her due, (which in England
we think a strange thing) set my wife in such an humor of distaste against
me, as from that very hour to this, no man can say that ever she used me
two days together, with so much respect as I deserved of her, but by the
contrary, has put so many disrespects on me, as it were too long to set down
all, some I will relate: As I take it, it was at her first coming to Hampton
Court, I sent some of my Council to her, with those Orders that were kept in
the Queen my Mothers house, desireing she would command the Count of
Tilliers, that the same might be kept in hers, her answer was, she hoped that
I would give her leave to order her house as she list her self, (Now if she
had said that she would speak with me, not doubting to give me satisfaction
in it, I could have found no fault with her, whatsoever she would have said of
this to my self, for I could only impute it to ignorance, but I could not
imagine that she affronted me so, as to refuse me in such a thing publicly)
after I heard this answer, I took a time (when I thought we had both best
^easure to dispute it) to tell her calmely both her fault in the public
denial, as her mistakeing of the business it self, she instead of
acknowledging her fault and mistaking, gave me so ill an answer that I omit,
not to be tedious, the relation of that discourse, having to much of that
nature hereafter to relate. Many little neglects I will not take the pains to
set down, as her eschewing to be in my company, when I have any thing to speak
to her, I must means her servant first, else I am sure to be denied, her
neglect of the English Tongue, and of the Nation in general, I will also omit
the affront she did me, before my going to this last unhappy assembly of
Parliament, because there has been talk enough of that already, etc. the
author of it is before you in France, to be short, omitting all other passages,
coming only to that which is most rescent in memory: I having made a
commission to make my wi^es Joyncture etc. to assign her those lands she is to
live on, and it being brought to such a ripeness that it wanted but my consent
to the particulars they had chosen: she taking notice that it was now time to
name the Officers for her Revenue, one night when I was a bed, put a paper in
my hand, telling me it was a list of those that she desired to be of her
revenue, I took it, and said I would read it next morning, but withal told
her, that by agreement in France I had the nameing of them, she said, there
were both English and French in the note, I replied, that those English I
thought fit to serve her, I would confirm, but for the French, it was
impossible for them to serve her in that nature, then she said, all those in
the paper had brevetts from her Mother, and her self, and that she could admit
no other: Then I said it was neither in her Mothers power, nor Hers, to admit
any without my leave, and that if she stood upon that, whomsoever she
recommended, should not come in; then she badd me plainly take my lands to my
self, for if she had no power to put in whom she would in those places, she
would have neither Lands nor House of m^, but bad me give her what I thought
fit in pension; I bad her then remember to whom she spoke, and told her, that
she ought not to use me so, then she fell into a passionate discourse, how
she is miserable, in having no power to place servants, and that businesses
succeeded the worse for her recommendation, which when I offered to answer,
she would not so much as hear me; Then she went on, saying, she was not of
that base quality to be used so ill, then I made her both hear me, and end
that discourse. Thus having had so long patience, with the disturbance of that
that should be one of my greatest contentments I can no longer suffer those
that I know to be the cause and fomente^s of these humors, to be about my wife
any longer, which I must do if it were but for one action they made my wife
do, which is, to make her go to Tiburn in devo^ion, to pray, which action can
have no greater invective made against it, then the relation. Therefore you
shall tell my Brother the French King, as likewise his Mother, that this being
an action of so much necessity, I doubt not but he will be satisfied with it,
espec^ally since he has done the like himself, not staying while he had so
much reason: And being an action that some may interpret to be of harshnesse to
his Nation, I thought good to give him an account of it, because that in all
things I would preserve the good correspondency and Brotherly affection that is
between us.

His Majestyes instructions given me at W^nsteede, the 12^h of July, 1626.
signed 24.

A true Copy,

(...) Tate.



Oxford Ian: 1644/5. Dear heart,
I r^ceive it as a good Augure thus to begin this new ye^re, having newly
received thine of the 30. December. which I cannot stay to decipher, for not
loosing this opportunity, it likewise being a just excuse for this short
account: This day I have dispatched Digbies Sec: fully relating the State of
our affairs, therefore I shall only now tell thee, that the Rebels are
engaged into an equal treat, without any of those disadvantages which might
have been apprehended when Tom. Elliot went hence, and that the distractions
of London were never so great, or so likely to bring good effect as now hastly
that assistance was never more needful, never so likely as now to do good to
him who is eternally thine.

Copy to my wife, 1. Jun. 1644. by P. A.
This is a true Copy examined by Miles Corbett.



Oxford, thursday 24. April. HArry
lest my wife should not yet be fit for any business, I write this to you; not
to excuse my pains but ease hers, and that she may know but not be troubled
with my kindness, I refer to your discretion, how to impart my letter to her
or any other business, that so her health in the first place be cared for, then
my affairs: And now I must tell you that undoubtedly if you had not trusted to
Digbie's sanguine Complexion (not to be rebated from sending good news) you
would not have found fault with him for sending mistaken intelligence, for if
he should strictly tie himself to certain truths in this kind you must have
nothing from him but my Proclamations or Ordinances from the pretended houses,
but tell me can you not distinguish between what we send you upon certainty
and what upon uncertain reports without making an oath the mark of
distinction, and are you obliged to publish all the n^es we send you:
seriously I think news may be some times too good to be told^ in the French
Court: and certainly there is as much dexterity in publishing of news, as in
matters which at first sight, may seem of great^r difficulty: for as I would
not have them think that all assistance bestowed upon me were in vain so I
would not have them believe that I needed noe h^pe, lest they should underhand
assist any (...) to keep the balance of dissentien amongst us equal.

For matter of news and present State of my affairs I refe^re you to Digby
only this in general that if it shall please God to assist us this year but
half so miraculously as he did the last (my present State compared with what
it was this time twelve month) I am (...) hopeful to see a joyful harvest
before next Winter; nor do I think this in any humane probability, possible;
except my wife can procure me considerable assistance both of men and money; of
which I conceive little reason to despair, your last giving me good hope,
concerning Loraine, and though I say not, that, ^or the other, I have so good
an Author as 196. yet I hope you will not much blame my confidence, when 149.
in hers the 10. of March, says, jay une Affair assures que vous donnere 40000
Pistols que Je vous eussi envoye si J'eussi lu mon navi^r revenu avecl'estain.

In the last place I will impose that upon you, that is not reasonable to
expect from my wife, which is to give me a continual account, what letters
she receives from me and what miscarries or comes slowly, to which end ^ke
notice, that all my letters to her are numerarily marked on the top as this
with 37. and likewise I now begin the same with you: so farewell.

In your next let me know particularly how my wife is which though it be not as
I would have it, yet the perfect knowledge, will hinder me to imagine her
worse th^n she is, if well then every word will ple^se me. I have Commanded
Digby to write to you freely concerning Will Murry, which I hold to be
necessary as concerning Muntrosse business.

To the L. Jermin 24. April, 1645. concerning France.
A true Coppie,

Zouche Tate.



Dear heart,
Since my last by S^oquen I have had no means of writing, and as little new
matter: that which is now, is the Progress of the treaty, of which these
enclosed papers will give thee a full account: but if thou have them sooner
from London then me, thou have no reason to wonder, considering the length and
uncertainty of the way, I am forced to send by, in respect of the other: for
the business it self, I believe thou will approve of my choice of Treaters,
and for my propositions, they differ nothing in substance (very little in
words) from those which were last: wherefore I need to say nothing of them, and
for my instructions they are not yet made, but by the n^xt I hope to send them:
Now upon the whole matter I desire thee to show the Q. and Ministers there, the
improbability that this present Treaty should produce a peace, considering the
great strange difference (if not contrariety) of grounds that are betwixt the
Rebe'ls propositions and mine, and that I cannot alter mine, nor will they ev^r
theirs, until they be out of hope to prevail by force, which a little
assistance, by thy means, will soon^ make them so; for I am confid^nt, if ever
I could put them to a defensive (which a reasonable some of money would do)
they would be easily brought to reason. Concerning our intrges here at Oxford I
desire thee to suspend thy judgment, (for I believe f^w but pa^tiall relations
will come to thee) until I shall send some whom I may trust by word of mou^h;
it being too much trouble to us b^th to set them down in Paper.

Copy to my wife. 22. Ian. 1644.
This is a true Copy examined by Miles Corbett.



Dear heart,
I never till now knew the good of ignorance, for I did not know the danger
that thou were in by the storm, before I had certain assurance of thy happy
escape; we having had a pleasing false report, of thy safe landing at
Newcastle which thine of the 19. Ian. so confirmed us in, that we, at least
were not undeceived of that hope, till we knew certainly how great a danger
thou have past, of which I shall not be out of apprehension, until I may have
the happiness of thy Company, for indeed I think it not the least of my
misfortunes, that for my sake thou have run so much hazard; in which thou have
expressed so much love to me that I confess it is impossible to repa^, by any
thing I can do, much less by words; but my heart being ^ull of affection for
thee, admiration of thee, and im^tient passi^ of gratitude to thee, I could not
but say some thing, leaving the re^t to be read by thee, out of thine own
noble heart. The intercepting of mine to thee, of the 2 Feb. has bred great
discourse in several persons, and of several kinds as my saying I was
persecuted for places, is applied to all and only those that I there name to
be Suitors whereas the truth is: I meant thereby the importunity of others*
whom at that time, I had not time to name as well a^ some there mentioned, for
I confess^ 174. and 133. are not guilty of that fault, some finds fault as too
much kindness to thee (thou may easily voate from what constellation that
comes) but I assure such that I want expression, not will, to do it tenn times
more to thee on all occasions, others press m^e as being brought upon the
Stage, but I answer that having professed to have thy advice it were a wrong to
thee to do any thing before I had it. As for our Treaty (leaving the
particulars to this enclosed) I am confi^ent the wilt be content with it, as
concerning m^ part in it, for all the Soldiers are well pleased with what I
have done, but expect no cessation of Arms, for the lower house will have none
without a disbanding and I will not disband till all be agreed, lastly for our
Military aff^ires, I thank God that here and in the West they prosper well as
for the North I refer thee to 226. 14^. informati^n so daily expecting and
praying for good news from thee* etc.

Copy to my Wife, 13. Feb. 1643.
Oxford 13. Feb. 1643.
a true Copy

Zouche Tate.



Instructi^ns to Colonel Cookran t^ be pursued in his negotiation to the King
of Denmark.
YOu are to in^orme the King of D^nmarke, that by his Majesti^s command, as to
the nearest Allye of his Crown, his Uncle, and wh^m he believes will not be
unconcerned in his af^aires, as well in Interests as affection, you are sent to
give a p^rticular account of the State of his Majesty's aff^irs, to renew the
ancient Leagu^ and Amity that has been between the two Kingdoms, and
Families Royal* and to reduce it to m^re exact particulars, such as might be
useful to the present affairs of England, and all occurrences in the fut^re
of those of Denmark.

That the present a^air of your negotiation, is to demand an assistance from
his Matie* such a one as the present State of the affairs of England requires,
against a dangerous combination of his Maties subjects, who have not only
invaded his Matie in his particular rites, but have laid a design to dissolve
the Monarchy and frame of Government, under pretenses of Liberty and
Religion, becoming a dangerous precedent to all the Monarchies of Christendom
to be looked upon with success in their design.

That the nature of their proceedings has been such as has not admitted any
foreign treaty to be interessed in suppressing their design, without giving
them advantage of scandaling his Maties intentions, and drawing away
Universally the hearts of his people, whom they had insinuated under pretense
of reformation of particular abuses of Government, and Ministers of Estate, to
concur generally with approbation of their proceedings, and in which (though
the dangerous consequence and design were visible to his Matie) a present
compliance was necessary least any public opposition on his Maties part, that
might seem to defeat the great expectations which they had raised in the
Commons in those plausible particulars might have occasioned a gener^ll
revolte, throughout the Kingdoms, great jealousies being dispersed and
fomented amongst them o^ his Maties foreign treaties and force, to be used to
oppose and suppress those their desires and the moovers therein.

Upon the credit they had ^erewith built on the peoples opinions, they
proceeded under pretense of Reforma^ion of Religion to dissolve the Government
of the Church, according to its constitution in England a chief column and
support to that Monarchy and Crown.

They lastly invaded his Matie in all the Prerogatives of his Crown, and under
pretense of ill Ministers and Councillors of Estate, whom they pretended to
remoove endeavored to invest in themselves in all times for the future the
Domination of all Ministries of Estate, and of his Maties family; withdrew all
his revenues into their own hands, and ^o confirm themselves in an absolute
power of disposing his estate, en^red upon possessing themselves of the Militia
of the Kingdom, his Navy and Magazins, in which his Matie. being forced to
appear in opposition, dangerous tumults were raised against him, so that he
was forc^d to for sa^e London, for preservation o^ his Person, his Q^eene and
Children.

That since for the safety of the Queen he has be^n forced to send her unto
Ho^and, to retire himself to the best affected party of his Subjects, from
whence by declarations setting forth the sinister proceedings of that faction,
discovering their designs of innovating the government, and falsifying the
scandals they had imputed to him, he has had the advantage generally to
undeceive his people, to draw to him universally the Nobility and Gentry of the
Kingdom. But the other faction still keeping up some interest and credit with
the Commons, in the desperate estate they find themselves begin to make head
against him, have appointed a General, and are leavying Forces to maintain
their party, committing diverse acts of hostility, violence and rebellion.

That his Majesty having great encouragements given him by the exceeding
numbers of Gentry and Noblemen that resort to him, is already advanced near
them with 6000. Horse, and 10000. Foot.

That the States of Holland have condescended to give her Majesty the Queen a
convoy of the greatest part of their Fleet now at Sea, for her return into
England.

That diverse Forts and Counties upon his Majesty's personal app^arance, have
declared for him, so that his affairs at home grow daily into a better estate,
as he likewise expects and hopes, that all his neighbor Princes and Allies,
will not look upon so dangerous a precedent to their own Crowns and
Monarchies, without contributing to suppress this so pernicious a design,
begun within his Kingdom.

That to give his Majesty the juster ground to reflect upon the dangerous
consequences, in relation to his own interest, of their success. It has been
by them publicly moved in the Commons House long since, to interpose in the
accommodation of the Dutch and to set out a Fleet, to take away his Customs
of the Sound.

That they have since imputed to his Mtie. as a ground to scandal him with his
people, that he did negotiate, the introducing by his Uncle the King of
Denmark a foreign power to settle his affairs, and under that pretext have
given large Commission, and particular instructions to the Fleet, to visit,
search, and intercept all such Danish ships, as they should meet, and to fight
with, sink or destroy, all such as should resist them, not permitting the
same, or to take and detain them, having any Arms or Ammunition on board;
according to which they have searched, visited, and detained diverse, to the
great prejudice and interrup^ion of the Norway trade driven commonly in this
Kingdom, in their own bottomes: And that they did prepare force against
others, whom they permitted not to water, nor any other accommodation being
bound for the West-Indi^, and put in by stresse of weather in the West of
England*

That in pursuance of their great design of extirpating the Royal blood, and
Monarchy of England, they have endeavored likewise to lay a great blemish
upon his royal family, endeavoring to illegitimate all derived from his
Sister, at once to cut off the interest and pretentions of the whole Race,
which their most detestable and scand^lous design they have pursued, examining
witness^s, and conferring circumstances, and times to color their pretensions
in so great a fault: and which as his sacred Majesty of England in the true
sense of honor of his Mother, does abhor, and will punish, so he expects his
concurrence, in vindicating a Sister of so happy memory, and by whom so near
an union, and continued league of amity, has been produced between the
Families and Kingdoms.

That the particulars in which his Majesty does desire his assistance, are, in
the loan, and raising of men, money, arms, and Ships, all or such of them as
may consist best with the convenience of his own affairs: And of such in the
first place as may be most requisite and a wanting to his Majesty.

That to set his leavies on foot, and put him in a posture to protect his
subjects in all places that adheare to him, and receive their contribution;
100000. li. will be necessary for him, which his Majesty desires way by way of
loan. And for the restitution of it, besides his Kingly word, and solemn
engagement upon this treaty, he is contented of such his Crown Jewels as are
in his disposure, to leave his royal pledge, if it shall be desired.

The particulars of Arms that he desires, are 6000. Muskets, 1500.
Horse-armes, and 20. pieces of field Artillery mounted.

Assistance of men, he desires only in Horsemen, and to know in what time they
may be ready, and how many.

That the Holy Island, or New Castle are designed for the landing of the said
Horse, and M^gazin of the said provisions, for reception likewise, anprotection
of such his Ships as he shall think fit to employ for the countenance and
security of those his Subjects that shall trade upon these Coasts; and for
ascertaining the correspondence, and intelligence between the two Kingdoms; in
which the number is left to be proportioned as may best sort and agree with his
own affairs. And for which the Holy Island is conceived one of the aptest
Harbors in his Majesty's Dominions, being capeable of any Ships whatsoever, in
a very great proportion, an excellent ro^de at the entrance, a ready out let,
and a strong fort under his M^jesties command.

That in Lieu of his assistance contributed by the King of Denmark, his
Majesty will obliege himself, and ratify in express articles to restore
into the Magazines of Denmark, a like proportion of arms and ammunition, to
(...) and defray the charges of the money lent, and leav^es of Horse, and so
soon as his (...) shall be settled, and himself in a condition to do it upon
all occasions to contribute the assistance of his Fleet, in maintaining his
right and Title to the Customs of the Sound, against all persons whatsoever;
and to ratify the Treaty that was made last by Sir Thomas Roe, to enter into a
league offensive and defensive, against intestine rebellions. In pursuance of
which Treaty, while the negotiations and articles may be severally perfected,
his Majesty does expect this first supply of moneys, and arms, present
affairs, not admitting a delay in the same.

That in case the King of Denmark will lend money upon Jewels, there is in
Holland a great Collar of Rubies, and another of Rubies and Pearl, that may be
sent to him or delivered to his Agent here: Who may have order to pay the money
here: or any other Jewels.

That there have been in Discourses, several Propositions of Accommodation
made by them to the King, to which the King has at all times made more
advances on his part, then in reason could have been expected from him, and
the difficulties have still risen on theirs.

And that whereas his Majesty does understand, that a Person is addressed to the
K. of Denmark from his Parliament, to insinuate misunderstandings abroad with
his Majesty's Allies, as they have done at home among hi^ People, his Majesty
expects that he be neither received, nor permitted to remain within his
Dominions, to become an Intelligencer and Spy upon the Treaty and Negotiations
between their Majestyes, but that he be diomist and sent away so soon as ever
he shall arrive. Note this Paper concerning Cockram was not intercepted amongst
the Kings Letters, but is otherwise atte^ted.


ANNOTATIONS.
Much use may be now made of these precedent Papers, and many things therein
will appear very worthy of our Notice. For,

1. It is p^aine, here, first, that the Kings Counsels are wholly governed by
the Queen; though she be of the weaker sex, borne an Alien, bred up in a
contrary Religion, yet nothing great or small is transact^d without her privity
and consent. See Pap. 38. If the Prince make suite to bestow a place in his own
Bedchamber upon a Gentleman of extraordinary merit. The King cannot grant it,
to save his Sons reputation, already engaged by promise, till He has sent into
France, and begged the Queen grant. See pap. 11.

2. The Queens Counsels are as powerful as commands. The King professes to
prefer her health before the exigence, and importance of his own public
affairs. See pap. ^4, etc.) He avows constancy to her grounds and documents,
See pap. 5, etc.

3. The Queen appears to have been as harsh, and imperious toward the King,
pap. 34. as she is implacable to our Religion, Nation, and Government. She does
the offices of a Resident in France, to procure imbargoes of our Ships, to
raise foreign Forces against us, and in this she is restless to the neglect
of her own health, She vows to die by famine, rather then to fail the King
in such like negotiations, See pap. She confines not her agency to France, but
sollicits Lorrain for Men, the Prince of Orange for Shipping. She sends Arms
for Scotland to Montros* speeds Colonel Fitz Williams his Commission for
Ireland* pap 20. 21. The Counsels also in England which she gives the King are
of very pernicious consequence, thereby the Parliament must be disbanded, pap.
27. Treaties must be suspected, great care must be had in them of Her, and Her
Religion, pap. 30. Bishops and Catholics must be specially provided for, pap.
31. The King must be forwarned, that He cannot be safe longer, then he defends
all that have served Him, pap. 31. That peace cannot be safe to Him without a
Regiment for his Guard ^ala mode du France. pap 30. She interposes so in the
business of Ireland, that the King is not seen therein, nor obliged to any
thing immediately, pap. 29.

4. The King does yet in many things surpass the Queen for acts of hostility,
and covering them over with d^eper and darker secrecy. He imployes Collonell
Coockrayn to solicit the King of D^nmarke, making not only Papists our
enemies for religions ^ake, but all Princes though Protestants for Monarchies
sake, rather then fai^e of aid from thence, He stirs rumors about his
Mothers chastity, He promises to disobliege the Hollander in the business of the
Sound; He pawnes the Jewels of the Crown, pap. 39. He presses the Queen beyond
her own fiery propension, urges her to make personal Friendship with the Queen
Regent, furnishes her with dextrous policies, and arguments to work upon the
Mi^isters of State in France. Of his own accord, without entreaty He proposes
to the Queen the taking away all penal Statutes against Recusants in England.
It Is true, He does all by way of bargain for his own particular advantage: but
the Papists conditions are better then ours, in regard that the Queen her self
is trusted with that merchandise, pap. 8. He prostitutes his pardon and grace
to the Irish Rebels, importuning Ormonde, to use importunity to them, that they
will accept of indemnity, and free use of Popery, and desire nothing in lieu
thereof, but that they will transport six thousand men into England, and some
other supplies into Scotland. For this purpose He sends Posts after Posts, and
hastens the business the rather because being in Treaty with the two
Parliaments of England and Scotland, about prosecution of the Irish, He may be
prevented therein, and preingaged not to consent, See pap. 16. 17, 18, 19* He
only excepts against Appeals to Rome, and Pr^munires. All other things He
th^nkes cheap enough for the Irish. He must not now stand upon scruples (it is
his own word) all things not d^sagreeable to conscience and Honor are to be
admitted, and so to g^ant free exercise of idolatry, though ab^urd formerly, to
the most odious, flagitious murderers in the world, is but a scruple not
disagreeable either to conscience or honor. To bargain away our Acts of
Parliament by such clandestine engagements, as pass only by papers, and dare
not look upon the light, especially such Acts as concern our greatest
interrests, even those of Religion, supposes us to be slaves of the basest
aloye: and it is strange that the Irish and Papists should at all rest upon the
strength of such assurances, when they see Records and Parliament Rolls are of
no virtue at all, either to the English, or Protestants, See pap. 16. 17, 18,
19* He calls us a Parliament publicly, yet acknowledge us not a Parliament
s^cretly, He suppresses still his not acknowledgem^nt, only He enters it in
the Council Book at Oxford, and so though it be smothered to us, whom it most
concerns, yet it is registered for our enemies use, upon all occasions of
advantage. This favor we found from the Council at Oxford, that the Name,
though not the Thing, should be imparted to us: but even this was not willingly
and freely allowed by the King, had but two of his Advisers sided with him, all
the rest should have balanced nothing at all in this case. This is a sign
they sit there to great purpose, for though they are more worthy to be
consulted with then Parliaments: yet their votes are but indifferent things,
mere formalities, especially if there be any dissent at all amongst them, See
pap. 5. He in show seeks Treaties, and wins upon the People by that show, yet
chooses such Commissioners, and binds them up with such instructions, that all
accommodation is impossible. His aim is to win upon our Commissioners, and
for this purpose gives authority to propose rewards and other allurements, pap.
24. gives avisoes to Caiole the Scots and Independents; as to the Duke of
Richmond, pap. 23. presses for foreign Auxiliaries the more eagerly, pap. 12.
35. hopes to cast the odium of the breaking of the Treaty upon our ^ide, pap.
1. 7, 12, 15, 25, 37. He seems more zealous for Bishops and Papists (called his,
and the Queens friends) then the Queen her self, and therefore assures her of
his resolution therein, without any request of hers, pap. 7. He does not think
fit to treat with the Rebels, only by the Interposition of the Queen or of
Ormonde, but he sends particular thanks to Brown, Muskery, Plunket, pap. 19.
He pretends sometimes to have the hearts of the major and better part of his
Protestant subjects firm to him in this cause, yet trust none but Papists, and
therefore is advised by the Queen, pap. 31. by no means to disband for this
reason, because all the Militia is generally in the Parliaments hands. We see
what opinion the King has of Wilmot, Percy, Sussex. We see what opinion he
has of the Lords and Commons at Oxford who have discerted their trust here,
out of confidence in him: the 13. paper here tells us plainly what use the
King makes of them.

The King will declare nothing in favor of his Parliament, so long as he can
find a partty to maitaine him in this opposition; nor perform any thing which
he has declared, so long as he can find a sufficient party to excuse him from
it.

And indeed it is a sad consideration to think what unhappy use the King has
ever made of the obedience, and patient loyalty of this Nation; finding always
that he might without any opposition or danger at least deny their just
liberties, laws, and the very use of Parliaments; or if some urgency, or his
own necessities, or advantages had caused him to call a Parliament he might
afterward with as little opposition, deny whatsoever he granted under his own
hand; as the Petition of Right obtained with some difficulty, and broken
immediately after without any scruple may sufficiently testify. The
Pacification with Scotland was not assented to, until the English people showed
some averseness to that wicked war; and were loath any longer to fight for
their own slavery, nor was that Pacification any longer kept; then till a
Party strong enough was found to maintain the breach of it. But without other
instances, this Parliament had been happy, the King glorious, and his people
flourishing, if the King had found none to side with him against all these; and
it is strange that so long experience had not taught them more wifedome. But
they are now justly rewarded, and if they will but view the Kings Letter dated
M^rch 13. 1644. Where it will be app^rent to them he calls those, who have
deserted their trust in Parliament, and given up their fortunes and consciences
to a compliance with his will, by the name of a base, mutinous, and mungrell
Parliament, and despises them for retaining some little conscience to Religion,
and this Parliament. Lords and Gentlemen, make the right use of this; and if
you be not wicke^ enough to serve that purpose fully, to which you are
designed: endeavor to repent, and learn so much goodness, as may bring you
back to the right side. There will shortly be no Medium left you: whatsoever
you thought in the beginning (as our charity may think you were deceived) you
will find at last, that unless you think and act the same things, which
those unhumane Irish Rebels, or the worst foreign enemies to our Religion
and State could wish to see done, you are no fit Instruments for that cause,
which you have unhappily chosen, unless you return to the right way, you must
go as far in the wrong one, as that will lead you. The Chronicles tell us
that Henry Duke of Buckingham was dear to Richard the third, whiles he had so
much wickedness as to further the deposing or disinheriting of his two
Nephews: but when he was not bad enough to consent to the murder of those
Princes, he was rejected by that King, and afterward beheaded, if you cannot
learn how to go through with wickedness: learn a better lesson to return
to goodness; or else perhaps the wrong which you have done your Country in
betraying her trust, and by consequence shedding so much innocent blood, may be
at last revenged upon you, by them, for whom you did it. The King, who
despises you by the name of Mungrells, as not altogether firm enough to his
own design, in another late letter to the Earl of Ormond, gives thanks to
Muskeny, Plunket, and Brown, the chief Actors in that horrid Massacre of
Ireland. Which may teach the world what kind of men he confides truly in, and
who they are that must reap the benefit of his Conquest, if God (for the
sins of our English Protestants) should permit it: if Muskeny had been at
Oxford, the King had had one man more of his own opinion, in not acknowledging
the Parliament of England, for want of such, he is forced to complain. And you
may plainly see what a dishonorable use is made of your persons there, as men
merely operis secundi, a number only that serve to give countenance and
credit to the design of a dearer Party, and to persuade your Country, not
for your own behoofes, what is said to you, may be said to all, that are lead
by you, to all those thousands which have followed the King as your Train; for
the same opinions which render you now contemptible to the King: render you
acceptable to the major part of Protestants, which fides with you, and did at
first make the Kings Power so considerable, as it is, if there be any thing of
Protestants, of English men, of men remaining in you, resume that, whatsoever
it be, either acknowledge your selves such, as the King calls you under the
Rose, when he opens his breast to the only partaker of his thoughts; or declare
your selves such Patriots* such true sons of the Church as the King pretends
you to be, when he spreads his Oratory before the people. If we be Rebels at
London, because we are not so servile as you are, and you are mutineers at
Oxford, because you are not so servile as the King would have you. Let us know
by what definition either you or we are measured, and how we are distinguished,
and let us see that other third remaining party which the King ownes as his
loyal faithful party indeed. It concerns you to look both forward and
backward, and having now taken the dimention of the Kings mind by his secret
Letters, turn about awhile and look upon the same in his public
Declarations. See if you can reconcile his former promises to his present
de^ignes; for as you have had some representation of the latter in the former
part, you shall now be made Spectators and Judges of the former in this latter
part. The King (according to Digbies superstitious observation) in his Letter
of Jan. 14. last, takes it as evident, that Straffords innocent blood has
brought the judgment of this civil war equally upon both sides, both being
equally guilty thereof. The Kings meaning is, That he and his ^ide was as
guilty in permitting as the Parliament was in prosecuting. But now for
Canterburies blood, that being totally put upon the Parliaments score, he
doubts not but the hand of Justice will from henceforth totally lay the weight
of this guilt upon the Parliaments side. The truth is, Strafford and Canterbury
were the chief firebrands of this war, the two ill Counselors that chiefly
incensed the King against the Scots, and endeavored to subject all these three
Kingdoms to a new arbitrary Government, and were justly executed for attempting
that subvertion of Law which the King has perfected since. The King and Digby
both adjudged Strafford wor^hy of death, yet not for Treason, as it was
charged, but not being able to save his life, without using force, and finding
force very dangerous they left him to the block, against conscience, as is now
alleged. Canterbury remains in the same case, and now remorse of Conscience
(o^ rather the old project of altering Law) suggests to the King* That if no
resistance be used. Straffords president will cast Canterbury, and Canterburies
all the rest of the Conspirators, and so the people will make good their
ancient freedom still. Hereupon discontents break out, the King withdrawes into
Scotland, during his abode there the Rebellion in Ireland, some attempts
against Marquess Hamilton and others in Scotland, and some other dangerous
machinations in England put us into strange terrors and apprehensions. The King
at his return, December. 2. 1641. complains of these Jealousies, Frights, and
Alarms, with this profession* I am so far from repenting of any Act done this
Session for the good of my people, that if it were to do again I would do
it, and will yet grant what else can be justly desired. He concludes with a
recommendation of the business of Ireland, and finding the preparations for
the same slow, again on the 14. of December. he is patheticall in quickening them
thereunto. All this notwithstanding the Parliament finds the old faction at
Court to grow strong, and daily to attain to more prevalence with the King,
which besides other causes of jealousy makes them lay open the indisposition
of the whole State in a plain and sharp Remonstrance, December. 15. with the
Remedies thereof proposed. The King as to the business of Religion answers,
For preserving of the peace and safety of the Kingdom from the designs of a
Popish Party, we have and will concur with all just desires of our people in a
Parliamentary way. For Ireland we thank you for your care and cheerful
engagement for the speedy suppression of that Rebellion, the glory of God in
the Protestant Profession, the safety of the British there, our Honor, and
this Nations so much depending thereupon, etc. Your promise to apply your
selves to such courses as may support our Royal estate with honor and plenty
at home, and with power and reputation abroad, is that which we have ever
promised our self, both from your loyalties and affections. Here are words
that sound nothing but grace, and here is a clear testimony from the Kings
own mouth, concerning the merit of this Nation to this day; But
notwithstanding these promises and testimonies, the King discovers daily more
and more regret for Straffords execution, sticks closer to the counsels of the
same faction, and instead of hearkening to his Parliament, he commands a charge
of Treason to be framed against six Members, the most eminent and active in
both Houses. Also upon the fourth of Jan. the King comes in person with a great
Train armed into the House, and missing the five Members there, tells the rest
that he must have them wheresoever he found them. Here was the fatal
commencement of the war, for the next day the House declares, that they cannot
sit in safety any longer at Westminster, and therefore they adjourne for some
days, and retire into the City. December. 31. they petition for a Guard out of
the City, under command of the Kings Lord Chamberlain the Earl of Essex,
which is denied, yet with these expressions: We are ignorant of the grounds of
your apprehensions, but protest before Almighty God, had we any knowledge, or
belief of the least design in any of violence, either formerly, or at this
time against you, we would pursue them to condign punishment, with the same
severity and detestation as we would the greatest attempt upon our Crown; and
we do engage solemnly the word of a King, that the security of every one of you
from violence, is, and shall be ever as much our care, as the preservation of
us and our Children. These words were sweetly tempered, but won no belief,
nor could overpower contrary actions, wherefore the Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council of London, seeing nothing but symptoms of war in the Court,
frame a Petition, praying the King that the Tower of London may be put into the
hands of persons of trust, that by removal of doubtful and unknown persons
from about Whitehall and Westminster, a known and approved guard may be
appointed for the safety of the Parliament, and that the accused Members may
not be restrained or proceeded against, otherwise then according to the
Privileges of Parliament. The King grants nothing, but answers, That his
reception of such an unusual request, is a sufficient instance of the singular
estimation he has of the good affections of the City, which he believes in
gratitude will never be wanting to his just commands and service. Hitherto the
King speaks nothing, but in justification both of the Cities, Parliaments, and
Peoples loyalty. The tumults about Whitehall, etc. amounted to no war, are
imputed by the King to the Rabble, and by us to the Kings Party; the Parliament
is acquitted except the six Members, and the prosecution of them also is after
declined by the King, yet the King departs from the City, as unsafe, seeing
plainly it could not be ^verted from the Parliament. Upon the 20. of Jan. the
King sends a Message to the Parliament, to state the differences on both sides,
promising that when they are digested into a body, fit to be judged of, it
shall appear what he will do. In answer hereunto, the Commons House (the Lords
refusing to join) only petition for the raising up unto them and the State a
sure ground of safety and confidence, that the Tower of London and the Militia
of the Kingdom may be put into such persons hands as they should recommend.
The King replies; That the Militia by Law is subject to no command but his
own, which he will reserve to himself, as a principal and inseparable flower
of his Crown, professes to take care of Peace, and the rights of the Subject,
equally with his life, or the lives of his dearest Children: He further also
conjures them by all acts of duty and favor received, by hopes of future
mutual happiness, by their love of Religion, the Peace both of this Kingdom,
and Ireland not to be transported with fears and jealousies. The Parliament
could not believe themselves secured by these professions or asseverations, and
the King would not understand, that the settling the Militia at this time in
confiding hands, to prevent civil war, was any other, then the taking the
Crown from his head. Hin^ ill^ lachrymae; the King nevertheless persists to
declare his abhorrence of the Irish Rebellion, frequently inciting the
Parliament to send succors. He also strangely abjures any privity to plots or
designs against the Laws, etc. and further makes strict Proclamatlon, March
16. for putting Laws in execution against the Papists. The Parliament seeing
cause to suspect that the King and Queen did still favor Digby and others
flying from the justice of Parliament, and appearing to be Incendiaries by
Letters intercepted, knowing also that the Queen was going into Holland to
pawn the jewels of the Crown for Arms; and having diverse other grounds of
further apprehensions, again Petition concerning the settling of the Militia,
and the Kings return but are denied in both. Thoughts of Peace are now laid
aside, and Hull being a strong Town, and a Magazine of Arms, as also
Newcastle being the public Magazine of fuel, and a rich place, are looked
upon with sollicitous eyes but as the Parliament prevents the King in Hull, the
King prevents the Parliament in Newcastle: Yet the war being so far advanced,
is scarcely avowed on either side, nor is it agreed which part was put to the
defensive, and therefore on the 2. of June, 1642. before any blood shed,
another assay is made for Peace, and the Parliaments Cause stated fully in 19.
Propositions, are dispatched to the King; the maine things desired were
Reformation in Church Government, that power military and civil might be put
into confiding hands; That justice of Parliament might pass upon Delinquents,
but the Answer returned is, That if these things were granted, the King should
remain but the out side, but the picture, but the sign of a King. This,
though it was the Trumpet of war and the sound of defiance in effect, yet was
not so owned, for still the King says, He intends not to fix any disloyal
design upon both or either House of Parliament, he is rather most confident of
the loyalty, good affections, and integrity of that great bodies good
intentions: but the malignity of the des^gne (he says) has proceeded from the
subtle informations, mis^hievous prac^ises, and evil Councels of ambitious
turbulent spirits, not without a strong inf^uence upon the very actions of both
Houses. This was the utmost charge of Treason, that could be then brought
against the Parliament*, and the Propositions of the Parliament treated lately
at Uxbridge, in Febr. 1644. being no other in effect, then these of ^une, 1642.
this inference may be truly made, that the King has no cause to look upon us
now, otherwise then as he did then; and if he have varied since from those Vows
and Asseverations which he made then, the blame will not remain on this side,
but on his; so that the very calling to mind what has been said by the King,
will be now sufficient for our purpose.

1. Wherefore, as to the taking up of Arms at all against the Parliament, June
3. 1642, the King in his Declaration to the Freeholders of Yorkshire,
renounces any intention of war, his words are, To the end this present posture,
wherein we meet, should not affright you with the distempers of the times, we
wish you to look into the composition and constitution of our Guard, and you
will find it so far from the face or fear of war, that it serves to secure you
as well as us from it, etc. Also June 16. in his Delaration at York, he uses
these words; We again, in the presence of Alusighty God our Maker and
Redeemer, assure the world, we have no more thought of making war against our
Parliament, then against our own Children. To the fame purpose he made all his
Lords sign a testimonial with their own hands, in affirmance of his
profession. It Is true, afterward when he took the field with his increased
Guard, and became the Assaylant at Hull, (having also possessed himself of
Newcastle) he was driven to save himself by distinctions, for he had not
disclaymed all war in general, but all invasive war, and if the siege of Hull
had some show of invasion, yet indeed it was but in order to his defense, and
this was a subtilty that all the sub^igning Lords and others, it is thought,
had not foreseen till now.

2. As to the waging war against the Parliament, June 16. The King disclaimes
all thoughts of war against his Parliament, and in July, after the date of the
Earl of Essex his Commission, he abhors the like, Desiring no longer the
protection and blessing of Almighty God upon himself and his posterity, then
he and they shall solemnly observe the Laws in defense of Parliaments. Also on
Aug. 12. after He acknowledges that the King and Parliament are like the twins
of Hyppocrates, which must laugh and cry, live and dye together. So this guides
us to more distinctions, that the King may defend himself against a
Parliament, yet not fight against it, or he may assail a Malignant party in
Parliament, yet not touch the Parliament it self: These distinctions hold good
on this side, not on that: but by what distinction will the King put a short
period to this perpetual Parliament without violence? or how can he deny it
the name of a Parliament without hostillity? Examine the Letters further about
this.

3 As to the waging of War by Papists. The King August 4. when the Earl of
Essex his Army was in forming, in his Speech to the Gentry of Yorkshire avers,
That he had taken order that the power of the Sword should not come into the
hands of Papists. And Aug. 10. He makes strict Proclamation, That all Papists
presuming to list themselves under bim as Officers or Soldiers, should be
punished, and a way by Oath was prescribed for discrimination of them. Also
Aug. 29. The King gives Instructions to his Commissioners for Arrays to disarm
all Papists. So October. 27. after the battle at Edgehill the King thinks it
worth his excuse, That he had some few Popish Commanders in his Army, taken in
of great necessity, he concludes thus; We shall never forget our several
Oaths in our several Declarations, we are too much a Christian to believe
that we can break those Promises and avoid the justice of Heaven. It Is true,
afterward a new distinction came to light, for upon a Petition from the
Lancashire Papists, the King did avow, That Papists were by Law prohibited
Arms in time of Peace, not in time of War; and therefore he did not only
authorize but require them to arm themselves, servants, tenants, and use the
same Arms, etc. This distinction bore date long after the war begun, but that
was want of invention only.

4. As to managing the War by Irish Papists, he had never before named them
but with a bleeding heart: His words once were, We hope the lamentable
condition of Ireland will invite us to a fair intelligence and unity, that we
may with ^ne heart intend the relieving and recovering of that unhappy
Kingdom, where those barbarous Rebels practice such inhumane and unheard of
Outrages upon our miserable people, that no Christian ear can hear without
horour, nor story parallel. At an other time thus: We conjure all our Subjects,
by all the bonds of love, duty, or obedience that are precious to good men to
join with us for recovery of that Kingdom. In July, at the Siege of Hull, he
conjures both Houses as they will answer the contrary to Almighty God, to unite
their force for recovery of Ireland. In October, from Ayno, in his
Proclamation, he excuses the taking of Clothes and some Draughthorses sent for
Ireland, as done of necessity and against his will. In December the King
answers some Irish Protestants thus: Since the beginning of that monstrous
Rebellion I have had no greater sorrow then for the bleeding condition of that
Kingdom. Nay, since the Treaty at Uxbridge, the King in public washes his
hands of all countenance given to the Rebels, and turns the blame upon the
Parliament, though in private he had been (as it were) a suitor to them for
Peace, and some assistance from them by private Letters to Ormond. Quere how
this may be reconcilable, etc.

5 As to the granting of a toleration. The King March 9. 1641, in answer to the
Parliaments Declaration, uses these words, Our faithful and zealous affection
to the true Protestant Profession, and our resolution is to concur with our
Parliament in any possible course for the propagation of it and suppression of
Popery. In April 1642. he calls God to witness, with this assurance, That he
will never consent (upon whatsoever pretense) to a toleration of the Popish
Profession, or abolition of Laws now in force against Recusants. Also April 25.
He has no other end but to defend the true Protestant Profession, etc. God so
deal with us, as we continue in these Professions. So in his Speech in the
head of his Army, Sept. 19. So in his Proclamation of pardon to London, October
29. All the professions we have made in our several Declarations for
suppression of Popery and maintenance of Religion, the Laws, etc. shall be as
inviolably observed by Us, as we expect a blessing from Almighty God, and
obedience from our Subjects. Quaere then how this may be confistent with taking
away Statutes in England and Ireland made for suppression of Popery, and that
by the Arms of Papists.

6 As to the bringing in of foreign Force, The King March 9. 1641. in his
Declaration from Newmarket, says, Whatsoever you are advertised from Rome,
Venice, Paris, of the Popes Nuncio's soliciting, Spain, France, etc. for
foreign Aids, We are confident no sober honest man can believe Us so desperate
or senseless to entertain such designs as would not only bu^y this our
Kingdom in sudden destruction and ruin, but our Name and Posterity in
perpetual scorn and infamy. Also March 26. 1642. about solicitation suspected
of the King of Denmark, his words are, We have neither so ill an opinion of
our own merits, or the affections of our Subjects, as to think our self in
need of foreign Force. Also August. 4. the King in his Speech to the Gentry
of Yorkshire acknowledges, He is wholly cast upon the affections of his people,
having no hope but in God, his just cause, and the love of his Subjects. What
distinction can now satisfy us, that neither Irish, French, Lorrainers, Dutch,
Danes, are forreiners? The concealing of this by sealing up the lips of the
Queen and Ormond, and Cockram must supply all distinctions.

FINIS.

