His Majesty's Gracious ANSWER, To the Proposition of both Houses of
Parliament for Ireland, sent the 24. of February, 1641.

With News from NOTTINGHAM,

BEING The Copy of a Letter sent from a man of good quallity there residing,
to a Merchant of London, February, 18. 1641.

WHEREUNTO Is added the Copy of a Letter sent from the Lord Digbie to Colonel
Lunsford, and by mistake of the bearer, delivered to one Mr. Langford in Covent
Garden, And so by him discovered

London, Printed for J. T. 1641.

A Copy of a Letter sent from a Gentleman of good worth in Nottingham, to a
Merchant of worth and Quality living in London.
Worthy Sir,
HAving the opportunity of this bearer a Gentleman my near Neighbor, I could
not let him pass without a salute in a line or twain, hoping of your health
and welfare with the rest of your Family; as thanks be to God, mine are herein,
at this present.

For News I do earnestly desire you to impart such of probability, as shall
come to your hearing, beseeching the Almighty God, to guide and direct all
proceedings in that Honorable and High Court of Parliament, to his glory, and
the content and happiness of all his Majesty's Kingdoms. I desire much to
hear how the Papist Rebels proceed in Ireland, for we have too many
ill-affected Papists amongst us here in our Country.

And for our Castle of Nottingham, it was of late in the custody of one Mr.
Traford a Papist, whereby great jealousies were in most men's minds raised, for
for the Castle is a place of a most impregnable strength, and Situated upon a
Rock, with infinite store of Vaults and hollow Caves underground, able to
receive infinite store of men, and horses, with all other furnitures of
Ammunition for War, which the Governors of the Town taking into their
consideration, caused a very strong guard and watch to be kept about it night
and day, in which posture it stands yet, Messengers being sent up to the
Honorable House of Parliament, there is a Vault in the Castle called Mortimers
Hole, which is wide and very spacious, and a great dis^^nce from thence.
Another Cave called Mortime^ watering-place, in all which places it is supposed
above two thousand men with Horses and Furniture may be kept and concealed.

The suspicion of all which was much more increased by a Rumor of great
quantities of meat killed by Mr. Trafords appointment against Christmas, with
a great many of Beefes, Muttons, and Hogs, he himself being a near Gentleman,
and keeping ordinarily but a small Retinue of Servants about him, since the
Officers of the Town have taken that strict Course of watching and warding
about the Castle, he has removed his dwelling into a Lodge of a Park near
adjoining, where he keeps very privately, and some suppose he is gone away
from thence secretly, we are so distracted at these occasions here about us,
that no man almost (for fear of treacheries, and Plots from the Papists) dares
go to the Church without his Pistol, and sword by his side, I beseech God
that Peace and quietness may be settled amongst us.

Sr. I desire to hear from you what is news, and of the I^te^^ ^^ssage^
concerning our Countryman Sir John ^iron, who we heard was chosen Lieutenant
of the Tower, and also what news concerning the Bishops, here is expectation
daily of new furnishing, and rectifying all the strong Holds of our Country.

Sir.

I am sorry J have been so tedious in my relation, which J fear has a little
troubled your patience, but I trust you ^ake all in good part, and so I take my
leave, and rest.

Your ever assured friend till death, J. T.
Nottingham this 14. day of February, 1641.
The true Copy of a Letter sent from the Lord George Digbie to Col. Lunsford.
Most worthy and noble Colonel.
YOur fidelity and constancy have bound me unto you, and although our design
took no b^tter effect, I shall with the less value, or prize your Real
disposition. For I am none of those men, who by the success in their
proceedings, and who think none deserving, but those whose actions are crowned
with happy and prosperous event, and so measure the event, and not the c^use.
Let us not be discouraged because our Adversaries have given check unto our
proceedings, but let us play our game valiantly and discreetly, and I am
confid^nt, that if we can but keep them from giving of us check mate, the game
will be ours. Our power is daily increased and strengthened in Ireland, and I
am certain, that had we as much opportunity as strength, we might obtain our
desires here in England, but we must wait and expect for our best advantage,
and not be like your too hasty Mothers, who whilst they do too much hasten
the birth of their issue, they bring forth abortives. Patience will mature and
produce what rashness and too much have would otherwise destroy and ruinate.
We have yet done nothing that we need fear, only that our Adversaries as yet
are the stronger, if to be Loyal and faithful to his Majesty be culpable, we
must plead guilty, who yet have done nothing, but what was for the secu^ity of
his Crown and Privilege, if it be demanded why I have absented my self, I
shall not be wanting of sufficient reason for their satisfaction. Let me
understand from your own hand the condition of the times, as soon as I arrive
you shall have intelligence of it, I could wish you with me, but I hope and am
almost confident, that you are secure, where you now abide, for they have not
any power for what has yet been enterprized any way to punish, or question,
nothing being acted either against the King or Commonwealth. Be careful in
your carriage and discourse, for you have many which daily lie in wait to
entrap you; But I shall not need to counsel you any further, but for the
present, take my leave, and rest.

Your faithful friend. George Digbie.
From the Downs aboard the 10. Whelpe, February, 20. 1641.
HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS Answer, To the Proposition of both Houses of Parliament
for Ireland, sent the 24. of February, 1641.
HIs Majesty being Glad to receive any proposition that may repair the
Calamity of his distressed Kingdom of Jreland especially when it may be
without burden or Imposition, and for the ease of his good Subjects of this
Kingdom, has graciously considered the Overture made by both Houses of
Parliament to that purpose, and returns this Answer.

That as he has offered and is still ready to venture his own Royal person
for the recovery of that Kingdom, if this Parliament shall adv^se him
thereunto, so he will not deny to contribute any other assistance he can to
that Service, by parting with any profit or advantage of his own there, And
therefore (relying upon the wisdom of this Parliament) does consent to every
proposition now made to him, without taking time to ex^mine whether this course
may not retard the reducing of that Kingdom, by exasperating the Rebels, and
rendering them desperate of being received into Grace, if they shall return to
their obed^ence.

And his Majesty will be ready to give his Royal assent to all such Bills as
shall be tendered unto him by his Parliament for the confirmation of every
particular of this proposition.

FINIS.

