Five several Papers, Delivered by the KING TO THE Commissioners at the
TREATY. AND Six papers presented by them to his Majesty WITH An exact Journall
of the most remarkable passages of each day since the TREATY began.

Die Sabbathi 23. September. 1648. THese Papers are printed and published for
satisfaction to the Kingdom, and to prevent the false scandals reported about
the Treaty. Several Papers signed CHARLES REX.



London Printed by Robert Ibbitson.

AN Exact Journall of the most remarkable passages of each day since the Treaty
began.
Noble Sir,
ON Monday morning Sep. 18. 1648. The Lords and the rest of the Commissioners
(after prayers with the Chaplains, who pray each of them by turnss, one, one
week, another, another week Mr. Vines prayed this week) they went (but not
the Chaplains) to the place of the Treaty, and sent word to His Majesty, that
they were come and ready to wait upon His Majesty at the Treaty: (this was
about 9 a clock in the morning.) The Commissioners were appointed a room
near unto the Chamber where the Treaty is, which is a withdrawing room, (in
which is several other rooms) until his Majesty calls for them. The King is
in one part of the House, the other is reserved for the Commissioners when they
come to the Treaty.

Immediately after they were come, and word brought to the King, that the
Commissioners were ready, His Majesty passes from Sir William Hodges to the
Treaty in His Coach, with the Lords and others that attend His Majesty, and His
Footmen, and Coachman, with new suites laid with broad plate silver lace, two
in a Seame. His Majesty came into the Treaty Chamber, where is a large table:
At the upper end whereof is a Canopy and a Chair of State for His Majesty,
where He sat down.

His Majesty being set, sent out for the Commissioners into the Treaty Chamber,
who coming into His Majesty's presence, stood bare to the King. His Majesty
bad them sit down at the table, the Commissioners (very modestly) refused it at
first, but His Majesty pressing them, they sat down at the other end of the
Table, but all bare both the Lords and Commons. No body at all, comes into the
room, but the King alone, and the Commissioners from the Parliament.

That day they read their Commission (to the King in the morning) and other
things in relation to the preparations of the Treaty, which they fell upon in
the afternoon.

The King went to dinner to His Quarters, and the Commissioners to theirs and
in the afternoon fell to the Treaty again, and made some entrance, and parted
again at night to their respective lodgings.

September. 18. 1648. The effect of His Majesty's first paper.
HIs Majesty desired the Propositions, and Copy of their Instructions.

September. 18. 1648. The effect of the Commissioners Papers.
The Commissioners first Paper.
MAy it please your Majesty; Having made known our Commission to treat
personally with your Majesty, upon the Propositions formerly presented at
Hampton Court, as they concern the Kingdoms of England and Ireland. And this
Treaty to be for forty days, beginning this present, and to proceed in the
first place upon the Propositions following in order, Viz. For recalling, and
annulling all Oaths, Declarations, etc. And to receive your Majesty's Answer
in writing. Wherefore we pray that nothing may be understood to be binding of
either side, but what shall be so set down in writing. Accordingly we are
ready to present your Majesty a paper concerning that first proposition for
Recalling Oaths, Declarations, etc.

Signed by the Commissioners.

His Majesty's second Paper.
Nothing to be binding but what should be agreed upon in writing.

The Commissioners second paper.
Desiring his Majesty to give his Royal assent to this Proposition ensuing:
That whereas both Houses of Parliament have been necessitated to undertake a
war in their just and lawful defense, etc. An Act of Parliament may pass,
whereby all Oaths, Declarations, etc. against both or either Houses of
Parliament, or against any for adhering to them, etc. to be declared null, and
that publicly intimated in all Parish Churches, in all your Majesty's
Dominions of England and Ireland, etc.

His Majesty's third paper.
His Majesty desired to have the Propositions of the English and Irish entirely
together, etc.

The Commissioners third paper.
We humbly Answer, That the Propositions themselves were formerly presented to
Your Majesty at Hampton Court, we conceive are in Your Majesty's hands,
excepting that of the Court of Wards, delivered since in the Isle of Wight,
etc. what concerns our instructions, we humbly say, that we have no Warrant
from our Houses to deliver any Copy.

The Commissioners fourth paper.
As to the latter part of the second paper delivered in the morning, we shall
acquaint the Houses, that no agreement put in writing, be binding till the
conclusion of the whole Treaty, unless it shall be otherwise especially agreed.

Tuesday Sep. 19.
THe King and the Commissioners met again in the same order that they had done
the day before, and Treated both forenoon and afternoon. None of them do go to
the King at all, but in the Treaty Chamber, and altogether publicly at the
Table, where there are made many gallant Speechs, insomuch that His Majesty
gives them this Character, That they are a company of very wise men. The King
is very merry, and free, and has such freedom that many resort to Him, to the
Court to kiss His hand, but the Commissioners never go thither none of them,
since the first Saturday, but daily meet His Majesty in the Treaty Chamber.
That night the King and the Commissioners upon His Majesty's desire, adjourned
until Wednesday night.

19 September. The Substance of His Majesty's fourth Paper.
CHARLES R.

In Answer to your Paper of the 18th Sept. concerning the Recalling of all the
Oaths, Declarations and Proclamations heretofore in all, or to be had, against
both or either Houses of Parliament or against any for adhering unto them, or
for doing, or executing any Office, Place or Charge by any Authority derived
from them: And all judgments, Inditements, Outlawries and Inquisitions in any
of the said Causes, and all Grants thereupon, made or had to be made or had, be
Declared null, suppressed, and forbidden, and that this be publicly intimated
in all Parish Churches, and other places needful, within His Majesty's
Dominions of England and Ireland. His Majesty, etc. Concerning that expression
that both Houses of Parliament have been necessitated to undertake a War for
their just defense, etc.

Sept. 19. The Commissioners fifth Paper.
For our giving the Propositions entirely together, we find not our selves
warranted to present our desires concerning all the Propositions at once, or in
any sort to Treat them but in Order, but what we have drawn out for our own
use we shall give your Majesty to expedite the Treaty. And this draught is
separated from what concerns the Kingdom of Scotland. And this we do not in
way of Treaty, but out of desire to satisfy your Majesty, etc. We humbly
desire your Majesty's Answer to our Paper delivered yesterday concerning the
Proposition for Recalling all Oaths, Declarations, etc. And other proceedings
thereupon against the Parliament, or those that acted by their Authority.

Wednesday Sep. 20.
MR. Recorder came hither, from London, and went with the Lords, and the rest
of the Commissioners to the Treaty in the afternoon. And they sat very close,
and debated matters very deep, in all which the Commissioners argued so
gallantly with His Majesty, and gave such Reasons to every thing debated on,
that the King admired their wisdom and gravity. That night they adjourned
until Thursday in the afternoon. But His Majesty told the Commissioners that
he was not certain, that he could then be ready, but said that he would either
come to them, and proceed to Treat then, or give them reasons why he could not
come that night, and then proceed to the Treaty on Friday.

The business that thus holds in Dispute is, about the matter of the fault upon
whom the guilt of the blood shed these wars shall be laid, and how as to
freeing His Majesty, which His Majesty would have done.

His Majesty's fifth Paper.
His Majesty desired to know, whither they had any power to consent to any
Omissions or Alterations, if upon a debate he should give Reasons to satisfy
such Omissions or Alterations.

Septem. 20. The Commissioners sixth paper.
We are ready by debate to show how reasonable our desires are, and there will
be no reason that we should alter or recede from them. But if in the matter of
this, or any other debate, your Majesty give such reasons as shall satisfy us
for any omissions or alterations in the papers we sent to your Majesty, we
shall then do therein as we are warranted by our Instructions, which we have
not power to make known, as we have declared (in a former paper of the 18 of
this instant) to your Majesty.

Thursday Sep. 21.
HIS Majesty could not dispatch to be ready to Answer what was before
propounded by the Commissioners, and therefore put it off until the next day.
And His Majesty sent Answer by His Secretary, that He could not meet the
Commissioners that night, and delivered in Reasons why He could not meet that
afternoon.

The Secretaries are admitted to be behind a Curtain, where they Treat, in
the time of the Treaty.

There is as yet nothing denied by the King to be passed; though nothing
actually granted. But the great rub is not get removed. His Majesty is loath to
charg Himself with the guilt of the blood spilt. The Commissioners are very
faithful to their Instructions. To morrow His Majesty puts in His Answer.

Newport 21 Sep. 1648.
FINIS.

