Die Mercurii 22 October. 1644.

IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament: That M. Ashurst
and M. Gowrdon do from this House give thanks to M. Calamy, for the great pains
he took in the Sermon he preached this day at the entreaty of the Commons at S.
Margarets Westminster: It being a day especially set apart for a Public
Humiliation, and to desire him to print his Sermon* And it is Ordered that none
shall presume to Print his Sermon without being authorized under the
Handwriting of the said M. Calamy.

H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I Authorize CHRISTOPHER MEREDITH, or his Assigns to print my Sermon
abovenamed, and no man else.

EDMUND CALAMY.



Englands Antidote, AGAINST The Plague of Civil War. Presented in A SERMON
BEFORE THE Honorable House of COMMONS, on their late extraordinary Solemn
Fast, October 22. 1644.

By EDMUND CALAMY, B. D. and Preacher at Aldermanbury, LONDON.

LUKE 13. 4, 5. -- Or those eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloe fell, and
slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in
Jerusalem?

I tell you Nay: but except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

LONDON, Printed by A. Miller for Christopher Meredith, at the Sign of the
Crane in Paul's Churchyard, MDCLII.

TO THE HONORABLE the House of COMMONS, now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe subject matter presented unto you in this Sermon, is Repentance: A Theme
that concerns you not only as you are Parliament men, betrusted by the people
with the happiness of the Kingdom, but as you are Gentlemen betrusted by God
with immortal souls. It is a question with some (though with me it is no
question) Whether a wicked man can be a good Parliament man? But I suppose it
is a question with none, That if the man go to hell for want of repentance,
what shall then become of the Parliament man? For this grace is absolutely
necessary for your own salvations; so necessary as that there is not the least
crevise for an impenitent sinner to get into heaven at. And it is necessary
also for the preservation of the Kingdom. For it is The only way, and an
infallible way to deliver us from this man-devouring, and land-devouring
Judgment that is now upon us, as is proved at large in the ensuing Discourse.
And therefore I could heartily wish that one of the Sermons preached before you
every Fasting day, might be a Sermon of Repentance, And that all our Pulpits
might sound forth nothing but the the Doctrine of Repentance; and that this
might be the Language of every godly Minister, Repent O England, Repent,
Repent. It was once said, and that very truly, Inter altercandum veritas
amittitur. I am sure it may be more truly said of our times, Inter disputandum
paenitentia amittitur, The people of the City of London have almost disputed
away their Repentance. I have read of one that by long studying of
School Divinity was so besotted that he quite forgot the Lords Prayer. And I
fear that in our days through the heat of disputation about matters of
Discipline, Faith, and Repentance is much forgotten both by Minister and
People. And therefore as it was the excellency of our first Reformers (for
which they are eternally to be praised) to bring the Divinity of former times
(which was much perplexed, and almost lost amongst the multitude of unnecessary
School-utrum's) unto a plain positive Scripture-Divinitie: So it will be the
excellency of all the godly Ministers in England (for which Posterity will
bless them) to bring all the multitude of the unnecessary Questions that are
amongst us, to this Unum necessarium of Repentance.

But then our care must be, that this Repentance be a right Repentance. For
most people deceive themselves into hell by a false Repentance. The nature of
man is wonderful prone, First, To think it an easy thing to Repent, Secondly,
To think that Repentance is an ordinary common Theme, and that it is an easy
matter to make a Sermon of Repentance. Thirdly, To think that it is in his
power to Repent when he will. Fourthly, To think that God will be contented
with any slight Repentance. Fifthly, To think that little sins need no great
Repentance. Sixthly, To think that he repents when he does not. Seventhly, To
defer his Repentance till he come to be old or sick, Eighthly, To trust to
his Repentance, and to think to make God amends by his repentance.

All these are common and dangerous errors. The Lord deliver you from them.
Remedies against most of them are discovered in the following Sermon, which
though I suppose your multitude of businesses will not suffer you to read
over; yet your multitude of businesses must not hinder you from the present
practice of it. For he that excuses himself from present Repentance by the
multitude of his employments, what does he else, but excuse himself out of
heaven, as they did, Luke 14. 18, 19. that brought Apostles why they could not
go to heaven?

Your affairs are many and weighty, yet I beseech you always remember Christ's
speech, Luke 10. 41, 42. Martha, Martha, thou art careful about many things,
but one thing is needful. The Lord make you Students of such things, which,
when well studied, will study you into Christ and into Heaven. Most men study
things that study them into envy, and into contentions, and into things to be
repented of. The Lord make you to study that Repentance which is a repentance
never to be repented of.

So prays, Your much obliged spiritual servant, EDMUND CALAMY.

A Sermon preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at their
extraordinary Day of Humiliation, October 22, 1644.
Acts 17. verse 30. latter part. -- But now commands all men every where to
repent.
The former part runs thus. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but,
etc.
AMong all the Texts that are in the Bible, there is no one Text more suitable
to these times, then this that I have read unto you; But now God commands all
men every where to repent: God has been preaching repentance to England by the
Ministry of his word almost these hundred years; but England has turned a deaf
ear to Gods preaching, and God is now preaching repentance, not only by his
Word, but by the sword; (for the sword has a voice as well as the word, Mic.
6. 9. And the sword speaks louder then the Word) God is riding throughout all
England, upon his red and bloody horse, thundering out repentance to every City,
Country, Town and Family; and that which was the last speech of Master
Bradford, when he was burning at the stake, is now become the voice not only of
the Word of God, but of the Sword of God. Repent Oh England, repent, repent;
The Text is very suitable, the Lord make it as profitable as it is suitable.

If any shall object and say; That the doctrine of repentance is a doctrine
that we all know already. I answer, if you know this doctrine so well, the more
shame you practice it so little. You know the Story of Chrysostom, that
preached many Sermons to the people of Antioch against Swearing, and the people
began to be weary of that subject; and asked him, when he would leave preaching
against swearing: He answered, when you leave swearing, I Will leave preaching
against swearing. Would you have the plaster taken away before the wound be
cured? I could heartily wish, that all the godly Ministers of England would
combine together, never to leave preaching the sword-removing, and
landpreserving doctrine of repentance, till they had persuaded all the people
of England to repent, and till God should be pleased upon our repentance, for
Christ's sake, to turn away the judgments that are now upon us. The words
themselves are part of that famous Sermon that Saint Paul did preach to the
Athenians, to drive them from their old Idolatries and Superstitions, to which
they and their forefathers had been so much addicted. In the whole verse we
have three parts: First,

A description of the times in which their forefathers lived, 1.
they were times of ignorance; But the times of this ignorance: No wonder they
were Idolaters, for they were ignorant: They sat in darkness and saw no
light, and no wonder for a man in the dark to err and go astray.

A description of Gods carriage and behavior toward those 2.
times; And the times of this ignorance God winked at. By which words you must
not understand, as if God did allow of their Idolatries, but there is a twofold
meaning of those words.

1 God winked, that is, God did not so severely punish your 1.
forefathers that lived in time of ignorance for their Idolatries, as he will
do you that live in time of knowledge if you continue in these courses. For
ignorance does excusare a tanto* though not a toto; your forefathers knew no
better, and therefore were no better. But now God will wink no longer. For we
live in times of knowledge. And he that knows his masters will and does it
not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

2. God winked at your forefathers, that is, God did 2.
not care so much for them, as he does for you, God despised them; The word in
the Greek is (...) the same word that is used Act. 6. 1. and it signifies to
neglect and despise. God did neglect your forefathers and suffered them to go
to hell in their Idolatries, but now God takes more care of you, for God has
sent me to preach Jesus Christ for your salvation; And therefore it is no
excuse for you to plead the example of your forefathers, for the times of
ignorance God winked at, but now God commands you to repent of the sins your
forefathers lived in.

Here we have a description of the Duty that God required of 3.
them, and that God requires of us, and that God requires of all men every
where. But now God commands all men every where to repent: But now, not now
exclusively, but now eminently, now rather then at another time, now more then
at another time; But now. God does not only entreat, but he does command; and
he does not only command some men, but he commands all men; and not only in
some places, but every where: But now God commands all men every where to
repent. In the words thus explained, there are five Observations; I shall wave
the first four, and pitch only upon the last; the first is,

That to live impenitently in times of knowledge, is a sin that God Doct. 1.
will not wink at; To be a drunkard, or an adulterer, or an idolater, etc.
under the times of the Gospel, is a sin that God will never bear; And the
times of ignorance God winked at, but now, etc.

That it is a great blessing to a nation, for God to send the Gospel Doct. 2.
to a nation. And the times of ignorance God neglected and despised, but now
God has sent the Gospel to you, God takes more care of your salvation.

That long prescription of time for Idolatry and superstition, is no Doct. 3.
good argument to maintain Idolatry and superstition. This was the argument
that the Athenians brought against Paul's doctrine, ver. 18. This man seems to
be a setter forth of strange gods, He preaches new doctrine that our
forefathers never heard of, and therefore we will not hearken to his doctrine.
This was the argument the Jews brought against Steven and his doctrine, Acts 6.
14. We have heard him say, that this Jesus shall alter the customs which Moses
delivered us. This is the great argument the Papists use to maintain their
Masse-book, their adoration of images, and the rest of their superstitions. In
King Edward the sixths days, when the great rebellion was in the West, the
only argument that was brought by the Rebels to uphold their rebellion was,
because that King Edward did endeavor to bring in a new way of worshipping of
God, which they and their Forefathers did not know. And this is the great and
only reason, that makes many poor and ignorant people to cry down the
Parliament; and for this cause many thousands have taken up Arms to fight
themselves into Popery and slavery: And all because they fear the Parliament
will take away their old Episcopal government, their old Cathedral service,
their organs, altars, crossings of their children in Baptism, and other such
like customs. For my part, I am not ignorant of what dangerous consequence it
is, to alter and change the customs of a kingdom, and I know the Parliament is
so wise, as that they will not alter, and the Assembly of Ministers so
judicious, as that they will not advise them to alter any custom in the
worship of God, but upon very grave and weighty considerations. But howsoever,
this is no good argument: Because I have been accustomed to come to Westminster
to hear the Organs play, and to hear Cathedral service; And because I my self
was signed with the sign of the cross when I was baptized; And because I have
lived all this while under Episcopal government, therefore I will take up Arms
rather then the Parliament shall make me to worship God in any other way then I
have been accustomed. The Text confutes this Argument, And the times of this
ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every where to repent. Former
times were times of ignorance, and times wherein men's consciences were
oppressed, and mouths stopped from speaking. But now the times are times of
Reformation; now God has given greater liberty, and has sent a greater light
into the kingdom. And now God commands all men every where to repent.

That the Commandments of Gods Ministers, they are Gods Doct. 4.
Commandments; God commands all men, says the Text; that is, God by me
commands; my Commandment is Gods Commandment. These four Doctrines I shall
not any further meddle withal, but the Doctrine that through the help of
Almighty God I shall desire to insist upon, is this:

That Repentance is the great Commandment of God for these Doct. 5.
times: Or thus; That Repentance is the duty of these days; Repentance is the
unum necessarium for England: Repentance is the primum and maximum mandatum for
England: But now God commands all men every where to repent. And there are two
Reasons, why that God commands England to repent now, rather then ever before.

The first Reason is common to England with the Athenians. 1.


The second reason is proper to England: The first reason is 2.
Paul's reason: The second reason is Englands reason.

The first reason why England should now repent, and why this The first head of
Reasons.
duty is now so necessary, is because that now are the times of the Gospel; and
not only so, but times wherein the Gospel is preached with more purity and
power then ever; and therefore God commands us all to repent now more then
ever. And there are diverse reasons why that they that live under the Gospel
should repent more then other people* and rather then other people:

1. Because Repentance is one of the first lessons that the Gospel teaches,
And therefore John Baptist that was a harbinger to the Gospel, came preaching
the doctrine of Repentance, and saying, Repent, for the kingdom of God is at
hand, Mat. 3. 2. And the first Sermon that Christ preached was a Sermon of
Repentance, Mat. 4. 17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say,
Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And the first lesson that Peter
taught the Jews, Act. 2. 28. was to repent, And therefore it is called, Heb. 6.
1. one of the principles of the doctrine of Christ: And he must needs be an
arrant dunce in the School of the Gospel, that has been twenty, thirty, or
forty years in the School of the Gospel, and has not yet learned the first
lesson of the Gospel.

2. Because Repentance is not only one of the first, but one of the chiefest
lessons of the Gospel. For, for this very end and purpose Christ came down from
heaven, and was made man, that he might preach repentance, as you may read,
Luke 5. 31. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

3. Because Repentance, as it is one of the first and chiefest lessons of the
Gospel, so it is one of the chiefest purchases and privileges of the Gospel.
As Christ came from heaven to preach repentance, so he shed his blood to
purchase repentance. And therefore he bids his Disciples to go and preach
repentance in his Name, that is, as his purchase, Luke 24. 47. Repentance is a
backdoor to escape Gods wrath by, made up of Christ's blood. A door that the
Angels had not, nor Adam, till Christ had purchased it for him. The Covenant of
Works admits not of it. Repentance is the proper privilege of the Covenant of
Grace.

4. Because Repentance is one of the chiefest gifts of the Gospel. For as
Christ became man to preach Repentance, and shed his blood to purchase
repentance; so he is also risen from the dead, and exalted at Gods right hand,
to be a Prince and Savior to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of
sins, Act. 5. 31. Hence I gather, That to be under the Gospel, and to live
impenitently, is to sin against the incarnation of Christ, it is to sin
against the bloodshed of Christ, it is to sin against the resurrection and
exaltation of Christ, it is to sin against the purchase and donation of Christ,
and against the chief privileges of a Christian.

But then again, God requires that you that live under the Gospel, Reason 5.
that you especially should repent, more then other nations; because the Gospel
does hold forth two powerful Arguments and Motives to persuade you to repent;
such as no other Religion can hold forth: The first Motive is,

The consideration of Gods infinite love to mankind, in sending Motive 1.
Jesus Christ to die a cursed death, to save all that believe and repent from
hell and damnation: This is in a kind an omnipotent Argument to persuade a
sinner to repentance: Was Jesus Christ crucified for me, and shall I crucify
him by my bloody oaths and blasphemies? etc. Was the Lord Jesus Christ broken
for me, and shall not my heart be broken for my sins against him? this is
instar mill argumentorum. There is a story, that when Caesar was killed in the
Senate by Brutus and Cassius, Anthony the Senator took his bloody Robe, and
carried it to the Market-stead, and showed it to the people; Behold (says he)
the bloody Robe of your quondam Emperor: And thereby he did provoke them to
the revenge of his death. And certainly the contemplation of the bloodshed of
Jesus Christ, is an unanswerable argument, to constrain us to repent of our
sins against Christ: He that would repent aright of sin, let him go to Mount
Calvary, and there he shall learn two lessons, that no other Religion can teach
him; First:

Mount Calvary will teach him, that God is so displeased with 1.
sin, that nothing but the death of a God could satisfy the wrath of God for
sin.

Mount Calvary will teach him that all that Christ did there 2.
suffer must be suffered by him to all eternity, if he does not repent. This is
an omnipotent argument, if God makes it effectual.

But besides this motive, the Gospel holds forth as in a clear glass a second
motive; which is,

The consideration of the eternal Judgment, This is an Argument Motive 2.
that Paul brings in the verse after my Text, But now God commands all men to
repent, because he has appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, etc. There will come a
terrible day of judgment: and in that day, if there be any one sin unrepented
of, the devils shall as soon be saved as you, This is a mighty Argument to
persuade you to repentance; The least sin will damn you in that day without
repentance; the greatest sin cannot hurt you in that day if you repent.

But besides these Motives, the Gospel does also afford two Reason 2.
great Helps to work repentance, which no other Religion can afford: and
therefore we that live under the Gospel, we must repent rather then other: The
Gospel affords the help of Knowledge, and the help of Grace: First,

1. The Gospel affords the help of Knowledge; for God has The first help.
promised that in the times of the Gospel all men shall know him from the least
to the greatest; we that live under the Gospel know that Drunkenness, and
Adultery, and Swearing, are the works of hell, and will bring to hell; we know
this, and therefore though God winked at the times of ignorance, God will not
wink at us if we be guilty of these sins; We that live under the Gospel, know
that the worship of God, the more spiritual it is, the more beautiful it is
in the eyes of God who is a Spirit: And that the outward pomp of Gods service
is an attire more fit for the Whore of Babylon then for the modest Spouse of
Christ: And that Music in Gods service, though it may please the ears of men,
yet it is unpleasing in the ears of God: And that the best Music that will
please God, is the sighs and groans of a bleeding heart for sin. This we all
know: and therefore God will not wink at our Superstition: The times of
ignorance God winked at, but now under the Gospel he calls you all to repent:
For we know that Repentance is as necessary as heaven: And that it is one of
the first principles of the Doctrines of Christ, Heb. 6. 1, 2. And that it is
one of the vital parts of a Christian, without which a Christian is but a
carcass of a Christian: As the soul is necessary to the life of the body, so
repentance is necessary to the life of a Christian; it is as the very soul of a
Christian; a Christian is no true Christian without it, We know this: And
therefore God will not wink at an impenitent sinner in these days: We know
that there are but two ways to heaven; either by innoceney, or by Penitency;
And he that will look to go to heaven by innocence, must find a ladder by
himself to climb to heaven by: There is no way to heaven since the fall of
Adam but by repentance: And therefore Tertullian says, he was nulli rei natus
nisi paenitentiae, born for nothing else but to repent: This we all know; and
therefore not to repent now, is a sin that God will never suffer. Besides
this,

2. We have the help of Gods Spirit, for the Ministry of the The second help.
Gospel, is the Ministry of the Spirit; and God has promised to pour out his
Spirit upon all flesh in the times of the Gospel: And therefore God looks we
should be more spiritual in his worship then the Jews were: And not to repent
under the Gospel; is not only to sin against the Minister, but it is to sin
against the Spirit of God. Now the sum of all the first Argument is this:
That he that lives under the Gospel, and lives impenitently, sins against the
Birth, Death, Resurrection, and Exaltation of Jesus Christ: sins against the
greatest arguments, that God can use, to persuade him to repent; sins against
the greatest helps that God can afford him to repent; He is a sinner left
without all excuse, He is a Monster in Christianity; And the hottest place in
hell is too cold for him, All this is Paul's reason, and it is common to us with
the Athenians.

But now give me leave to set before you Englands reason, why The second head
of Reasons.
God would have us now especially to repent; A reason proper to England, in
regard of the sad condition that England is now in. And the reason is this:
Because these are times of war and bloodshed, this is the day of Jacobs
trouble: And therefore God does especially call for repentance in these days:
This appears, Joel 2. 12. Therefore also now (says the Lord) turn unto me,
speaking of times of famine, (as some think) or times of war, (as others think)
therefore now turn unto me with all your hearts, with fasting, weeping, and
with mourning.

And there are four Reasons that England does present before Four Reasons why
we should repent in these times of war and bloodshed, more then at other
times.
you why that these miserable times should persuade you to repentance, more
then ever before: The first is,

Because God does now use such an Argument to persuade us to Repentance, the
like to which he never yet did use, since England was England: Gods Argument is
this; Repont, O ye Lords and Commons, or else I Will give you over to Beggary:
Repent, Reason 1.
or else I will give you over to Popery; I Will give you over to slavery; Repent,
or else I Will plunder your houses; I Will give up your wives and daughters to be
defloured; Repent, or else I Will burn your Cities; Repent, or else I Will remove
the Gospel from you. And not to repent when God uses such Arguments, is a sin
that God will hardly pardon; as you shall read in the 22. of Isaiah, 12, 13,
14. In that day the Lord called for weeping and mourning, (speaking of a time
of war) and baldness, and sackcloth, etc. But behold, joy and slaying of
Oxen, etc. and it was revealed in mine ears, etc. Surely this iniquity shall
not be purged from you, till ye die; that is, it shall hardly ever be pardoned.
And then secondly,

Because God has now taken away all those Hindrances and Reason 2.
Impediments that did heretofore lie in your way to hinder you from repentance;
and therefore now God especially calls you to repentance. There are five
Obstructions that hinder many from repentance; The hope of long life;
Inconsideration; the Patience and long suffering of God; the abundance of
flattering Preachers; and the abundance of wealth, prosperity, jollity and
feasting, etc. Now God has taken away all these Impediments* Five Impediment*
which did formerly hinder many from repentance which are now removed.


The first Impediment is the hope of Long life. This is a mighty Giant to
hinder most people from speedy repentance; every man thinks he may live one day
longer, and therefore every man deferres his repentance one day longer. But now
God has removed this stumbling block. There is no man can hope for long life
now. These are killing days. These are dying days. These are days wherein
every man should carry his life in his hand, and the grace of repentance in his
heart: It is a sign of an Atheist not to repent now.

A second Impediment is Inconsideration. And therefore it is 2.
said expressly, Ier. 8. 6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright: no
man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? For did a sinner
seriously consider the unexpressible woe and misery he brings upon himself by
not repenting; what a sad condition it is to be eternal fuel to everlasting
fire, and to be deprived of the beatificall vision. Did he further consider the
goodness and kindness of God toward him every day, notwithstanding his
daily provocations, and what an unkindness it is to sin against such a God.
Did he consider the affronts and indignities that are offered to God by
sinners. And also the ineffable love of Jesus Christ toward him, in dying a
cursed death to free him from hell and damnation. And did he seriously and
conscientiously dwell upon these thoughts, this would (through Gods assistance)
quickly wind up his soul to a right Repentance. But these truths lie like a
sealed Letter, like a Treasure locked up, like fire under the embers; without
any use or benefit for want of Consideration. And therefore David says, Psa.
119. So I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. And
Peter, when he remembered Christ's speech, and had weighed it, as the word
signifies, he went out and wept bitterly, Mark 11. 72. But our God has taken
away this impediment in a great measure. Now people have time and leisure to
search and try their ways. And this is the proper business of such times,
Ecclis. 7. 14. In the day of adversity consider: When the Prodigal Child was
in great distress, then he came to himself and repented, Luke 15. 17. And
Solomon prays, That if the people of Israel in their captivity should be
think themselves and repent, etc. 1 King. 8. 47. These are times wherein God
does in an especial manner call upon us to consider seriously of the anger of
God against England, and what those sins are which have provoked him to
anger, and to repent of those sins. And we have time and leisure thus to do.

The third Impediment, is the Patience and long-sufferance of 3.
God* As the Sun hardens the Clay, so does the goodness of God harden a
wicked man in his sins, Eccl. 8. 11. but now God has taken away this
impediment. For now the patience of God is at an end. Now the heavy wrath of
God lies upon England: Now the Axe is laid at the very root of the tree; God
has been holding up his Axe many years against England; but now God is hewing
down the Tree of England at the very roots: It is high time now we should begin
to repent.

A fourth Impediment is the abundance of flattering Preachers, 4.
(to which you have been accustomed I fear in this place too much heretofore)
that have preached Peace, Peace, and have strengthened the hands of wicked men
in their sin, by promising them life, Ezekiel. 13 12. But now (by the help of
you Right Honorable; for which we bless God) God has (in a great part)
removed all these flattering Teachers: And now the doctrine of Repentance is
preached with power, and in the demonstration of Gods Spirit: And therefore now
especially God calls you to repent.

A fifth Impediment is the abundance of wealth, case, joviality, 5.
and prosperity. These are mighty Goliahs to hinder men from repentance.
Prosperity is apt to make a man secure, proud, forgetful of God, impatient of
reproof, Ier. 22. 21. I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou said, I
will not hear, etc. When Iesurun waxed fat, he kicked, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 13. The
Oxen that go in the fattest pasture soonest come to the slaughterhouse. But
now God has taken away your prosperity, your wealth, and your joviality. These
are times of affliction; these are fit times for humiliation, and repentance,
and weeping, and mourning: And therefore now you have no excuse, if you do not
repent.

The third Reason why England should repent now, more then Englands third
Reason, why she should repent now more then at other times.
at other times, is: Because that repentance is the only way to remove the
man-devouring and Land-devouring judgment that is now upon us: I say, it is
the Only way, for so says Christ Luke 13. 5. Except ye repent, ye shall all
perish. And so says Christ also, Revel. 2. 5 16, 21* 22* So also says Moses,
Lev. 26. 14, 17. Deuteronomy. 28. 15, 25. Which Texts have a moral equity, and do
set out the unchangeable will of God to the end of the world. So also says
David, Psalm. 7. 12.

Does not, God many times remove the judgment of the Object.
Sword, or of the Plague, etc. from a Nation when that Nation does not repent?
Has not God many times removed the Plague from the City of London, when London
has not repented of her iniquities?

To this Objection I answer three ways.

First, It is one thing far God to remove his Anger from a Nation, Answ. 1.
another thing for God to remove his judgments from a Nation. God never
removes his anger till a nation repents; but God does sometimes remove a
judgment, when the sins that caused it are not removed. But when God does so,
This very removing his judgments is a great judgment. For as it is a great
punishment for God not to punish a sinner in this life, but to reserve him for
hell; as you may read, Hos. 4. 14. So it is also a great punishment for God
sometimes to remove a punishment: as is plain, Isa. 1. 5. Why should ye be
stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more etc, That is, Why should I be
so merciful unto you, as to punish you? As it is a great mercy for God to
punish a sinner in this life, according to that saying, Misericordiae est
aliquando subtrahere misericordiam; So it is a great affliction for God to take
away the Sword, Famine, or the plague, and reserve men for hell and damnation.
As God sometimes gives mercies in anger; (as he did Quails to the Israelites)
Nam multa concedit Deus iratus, quae negat placatus: So he sometimes takes away
judgments in anger.

Secondly, I answer, That God may upon the prayers of his Answ. 2.
people, and upon the outward humiliation of the wicked, remove a judgment:
but then this is but a temporary removal. It is rather a proroguing then a
removing of the judgment. For if the sins that brought the judgment be not
truly repented on, ruin and destruction will come at last. Ahab was at last
destroyed, and so were the Sodomites; and so was the old world, though
reprieved for a while. For except ye repent, ye shall all like wise perish,
says Christ: They shall perish sooner or later. And so the Jews did forty
years after, to whom Christ then spoke, A sinner of a hundred years old, shall
be accursed, Isa. 65. 20. And so also Eccl. 8. 12, 23. Isa. 3. 11*

Thirdly, I answer, When a judgment is removed, and the Answ. 3.
sins that procured it not removed, it is rather changed then removed. If God
love thee, he will change it into another corporal affliction. But if he
intends to destroy thee, he will take it off thy body, and inflict it upon thy
soul. He will give thee up to hardness of heart, as he did Pharaoh. He will
take the plague off thy body, and suffer the plague of sin to increase in thy
soul: which is not to cure, but to change the judgment for thy everlasting
ruin. This God does as a just Judge, But that which this third Reason holds
forth is this, That there is no way to obtain a total and blessed removal of
this Land-devouring judgment but by repentance.

The fourth Reason why England should repent now more then Reason 4.
at another time, and rather then at another time is,

Fourthly, Because Repentance is a most certain and an infallible Englands
fourth Reason why she should repent now, more then at another time.
way to remove the great plague of Civil War that is now upon the Kingdom.
Mistake me not, I do not say, God will remove the bloody Sword for our
Repentance, But this I say, God will not remove it without Repentance: and upon
our repentance he will remove it. Though Repentance be not causa propter quod,
yet it is causa sine qua non. It is not the cause for which, but the cause
without which God will not do it. And not only so, but repentance is also causa
removens prohibens, Repentance removes those sins that do hinder a Nation from
deliverance; and in this sense is a cause of our deliverance. Repentance is the
qualification of that Nation which God intends to preserve.

Will you secure us, that God will heal the Nation if it repents? Object.


If the Repentance of England be national and sincere, there is Answ.
no doubt of it. For we have three Texts that speak thus much in plain terms,
Ier. 18. 7, 8. 2 Chronicles 7. 14. Lev. 26. 40, 41, 42. etc. These Texts are the
Charter of heaven, to prove that Repentance, if it be sincere and national, is
an infallible way to save a Nation from ruin.

What answer you to that Text, 2 King* 23. 26. where it is Object.
said, That notwithstanding the Reformation in Josiah's days, the Lord turned
not from the fierceness of his great wrath* etc. because of all the
provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal*

I briefly answer three things.

First, That the repentance that was in Iosiah's time, was the Answ. 1.
Repentance of Josiah and some few other, but it was not national. And
therefore you may observe, that it is punctually said, almost in every verse of
the 2 Kin. 23. That Josiah put down the Idolatrous Priests, and Josiah defiled
Tophet* and read the law etc. There is no mention made of the voluntary
concurrence of his Princes and people, as is expressly mentioned in the
Reformation of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30. 14, 15, 16, 23, 27. etc. 2 Chronicles. 31. 1.
And it is worth the noting, that whereas Josiah began to reign when he was
eight years old, 2 Chronicles. 34. 1. it is said, that in the eight year of his
reign, he began to seek after the God of David his father, 2 Chronicles. 34. 3. But
yet it was four years after, before he began to set upon the work of
Reformation, 2 Chronicles 34. 3. and it was ten years after, before the book of the
law was found, as appears, 2 Chronicles. 34. 8. which was a sign that in his first
eighteen years there was but little reformation, and therefore no doubt he met
with great opposition from his people, which is an argument that the repentance
was not national.

Secondly, But suppose it was national, yet it is certain it was Answ. 2.
not sincere, as appears plainly, Ier. 3. 10. (for Jeremy prophesied in
Iosiah's days) and also 2 Chronicles. 34. 32. where it is said; That Josias caused
the people to stand to the Covenant they had made, which implies a kind of
forcing them to it.

But Thirdly, I answer; That this Repentance of what nature Answ. 3.
soever it was, it did turn away the judgments of God, for the present, from
Judah, and it did keep them from ruin. As long as Josiah lived, and as long as
the people continued in his Reformation, so long they were preserved. But after
Iosiah's death wicked Kings arose, and the people forsook the Lord, and
therefore God was forced to destroy them. For this see 2 Chronicles. 34. 33. 2 Chronicles. 36. 14, 17. etc. So that it is plain notwithstanding this objection,
that Repentance is an infallible way to remove Englands misery if it be
national. etc.

But suppose the nation should not repent, what good will my Object.
personal repentance do to the nation or to my self?

Much good every manner of way; For first, Personal repentance, Awsw.
if right, will always save thy soul from hell, Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31, 32.

Secondly, It will for the most part save thy body also from ruin, even then
when God is destroying the nation wherein thou art, Ezekiel. 14. 14. Especially if
there be four qualifications found in thee: first, If thou be one of those
that mourn for the abominations that are committed in the land, Ezekiel. 9. 4.
secondly, If thou be one of those that are vexed with the unrighteous
conversation of those with whom thou live, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8, Thirdly, If thou
be one of those that keep thy self pure from those sins for which God
destroys the nation in which thou live, Genesis 6. 9. Fourthly, If thou be
one of those that appear for God in sinful times, then God will appear for thy
deliverance in destroying times. Jer. 39. 17, 18. And for this very reason did
God deliver Jeremy himself, and gave him his life for a prey. But because Gods
people many times are ashamed of Gods cause in evil days, and because they do
not keep themselves unspotted from the sins of the times, and because they
are not vexed and do not mourn for the abominations of the land wherein they
live, hence it is that they are many times involved in the outward calamity
that falls upon the nation.

Thirdly, Personal repentance will sometime save a whole nation, as we may
read in the example of Moses, Who often stood in the gap to turn away the
wrath of God from the people of Israel. Psalm. 106. 23. And the Prophet Jeremy
bids us Run ye to and fro, etc. and if ye can find a man, if there be any that
executes justice, that seeks the truth* and I will pardon it, Jer. 5. 1.
This also we read, Eze. 22. 30. Ec 9. 14, 15. If there had been ten wheatears
in Sodom, God would have spared all the chaff for their sakes, Genesis 18. 32.

Fourthly, Personal repentance, though it does not always preserve thee from
a temporal judgment, yet it always sanctifies a temporal judgment, and
turns it into a blessing. It takes away the curse and the poison of a
judgment. And though the affliction be not bonum in it self, yet it shall turn
to thee in bonum. As the same flail falls upon the corn and chaff, but for
different ends, the one to be burnt, the other to be laid up in the barn: So
the same judgment that is an utter ruin to an impenitent sinner, shall be for
the benefit and happiness of a repenting sinner, as is excellently set out by
the parable of the good and bad figs. Ier. 24 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. In a word,
There are four kind of Arks that God provides for his children in times of
public calamities; and one of these four Arks God will provide for thee if
thou repentest. First, Either he will provide an Ark of prevention by death
before the calamity comes, Isa. 57. 1. Thou shall rest in the grave as in thy
Ark; and shall not see the evil that is coming upon the Nation. And thy very
dust will be precious in Gods sight. For Christ cannot be perfect without it,
Ephesians. 1. 23. Or secondly, he will provide an Ark of deliverance and preservation
from the judgment when it comes, as he did to Noah, Lot, Jeremy, and will do
to thee also if thou have the four qualifications forementioned. Or thirdly, an
Ark of supportation under the judgment, and sanctification of the judgment.
Or fourthly, an Ark of salvation by the judgment, It is but winking (as the
Martyr said) and thou shall be in heaven presently.

This is all I shall say for the explication. Only I shall make bold to put you
in mind of an Ordinance of Parliament made by you, Feb. 15. 1642. In which
pious and religious Ordinance you call upon the whole Kingdom to practice that
which I preach before you this day. And you therein say, That Repentance is the
only remedy to turn away Gods judgments. And that it is an excellent remedy, a
successful remedy, and an unfailing remedy. These are your own expressions. I
shall therefore take the point for granted, and having spent so much time in
the explication, I shall now proceed to the application.

If Repentance be the unum necessarium for England; if it be Use.
the great Commandment; Here is a black Bill of indictment against all those
that live impenitently even in these days. That swear and will swear even in
these days. That are drunkards and adulterers, and will be so even in these
days. That love their old superstitious practices as much as ever. That
willingly neglect holy duties, or perform them negligent, even in these bloody
days. In a word, that live in any one known sin without Repentance. I beseech
all such (as a Minister of God) to hearken to the evil of their condition.

Not to repent at any time is a damnable sin. And indeed there is no sin
properly damns any man but the want of faith and repentance. The sin against
the holy Ghost is therefore only unpardonable, because God has threatened never
to give repentance to the man that commits it, Heb. 6. 4. It is not the falling
into the water drowns any man, but the lying in the water: So it is not the
falling into sin that damns any man, but the lying in sin without repentance.

Not to repent at any time, is so damnable a sin, that Austin thinks that the
sin against the holy Ghost is nothing else but finalis impoenitentia. Which
though I conceive to be an error, yet I know this to be a truth; That no sin
damns any man, to which finalis impoenitentia is not an adjunct.

But not to repent in such times as these are, is a sin that has a double
aggravation upon it to make it exceeding sinful.

For first, these times are times of the Gospel, times of knowledge, 1.
times of the Spirit. And though God winks at the times of ignorance, yet he
will not wink now. To sin against the Gospel is a greater sin then to sin
against the Law, Heb. 10. 28, 29. For he that sins against the Gospel, sins
against more mercy then he that sins against the Law. And Gospel sins will
bring Gospel curses, which are greater then Legal curses. If any man sin
against the Law, he has the Gospel to fly unto; but if he sin against the
Gospel, what shall he then fly unto? The Curse of the Gospel is Anathema
Maranatha. Not to repent now, is to sin against the privilege of the Covrnant
of grace; against the purchase and donation of Christ; against the Incarnation,
death, resurrection, and exaltation of Jesus Christ; as I showed before.

And secondly, These times are times of affliction; and not 2.
only so, but times wherein God afflicts us with the sorest of his
judgments. And therefore not to repent in these days, is not only a
Soul-destroying but a Land-destroying sin. It is a sign thou love neither
wife, non child; nor houses, nor lands; nor soul nor body. For there is no way
to preserve all these from ruin, but by repentance.

Not to repent in such times as these are, is to harden our hearts above the
hardness of a Jew. We have a Proverb, As hard-hearted as a Jew. A sinner
impenitent under affliction, is more hardhearted. For the Jews sought God
diligently, and early; and with great weeping and mourning in their affliction,
Hos. 5. 15. Psalm. 78. 34. 1 Samuel 7. 6.

Not to repent in such days as these, is to be worser then the very Heathen;
for not only the Heathen Ninevites but the Heathen Mariners in a storm, every
man cried to their God. Now Mariners ordinarily are the worst of men. Not to
repent in these sad days is to harden our hearts above the hardness of rocks;
as you shall see in*the fifth of Jeremy, and the third verse, I have corrected
them, and they have not amended, etc. they have hardened their faces above the
hardness of rocks; as if he should have said, If their hearts were not harder
then rocks, in times of affliction they would have repented.

Not to repent in these days is the brand of a Reprobate: 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. It
is most emphatically expressed. And in the time of this distress he did
trespass yet more against the Lord* This is that King Ahaez. It is a brand for
ever upon him. And yet notwithstanding all this, where shall we find a
penitent sinner? It is an easy matter to find a sinner, but where shall we
find a penitent sinner even in these days? I beseech you tell me, what sin
have you left since these wars began? Are you not as proud as ever? Are you not
as covetous? Are you not as vain in your fashions? as vild in your courses as
ever? What sin have you left since you took your Covenant, and swore to
reform your lives? This is a day wherein you must search your hearts; I beseech
you now in the presence of God return me an answer. May not God say as it is in
the eighth of Jeremiah and the sixth: I have hearkened and heard, etc. and no
man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? No man repents.
Do you Noblemen, you Gentlemen, you Common people, do you repent? Can the Lord
hear you repent? He hearkens, he stands at your doors, to listen whether you
repent. May not Jesus Christ upbraid the Parliament of England* and the people
of England, as he does the people of the Jews, in the 11. of Matthew and the
20. Then Jesus began to upbraid the Cities, wherein he had wrought many
miracles, because they repented not. I do not come here to upbraid any man, but
my Lord and Master Jesus Christ does upbraid you, whosoever you are, for whom
God has wrought such mighty wonders, as he siath done for this Parliament, if
you do not repent. The truth is, (And oh that I could speak it and you hear it
with grief of heart!) we are now come to that pass, that many men begin to
scorn to hear a Sermon of Repentance. It is a sign, say some, the Minister has
been idle that week, or that his stock is spent when he comes to preach of such
a common Theme as Repentance: Men begin now to have itching ears, to hearken
after new and unknown truths: which for the most part do prove to be old
errors. And that which is yet more sad, many godly people in City and Country
that were wont in their private meetings to discourse about Repentance, and how
they should do to get a broken heart for sin, and how they should do to get
power over their evil lives: Now all their discourse is of this opinion or
that opinion, insomuch that unless God be merciful to us, we are come to that
pass, that we shall quickly dispute away all our repentance, and all our
faith; and we shall quickly dispute our selves out of our godliness, and out
of our Religion. And that which is yet more sad, Are there not some that preach
against humiliation? and that tell us, that humiliation is but a backdoor to
heaven, and a backdoor to Christ? Are there not some that tell us, that
Repentance is a legal Grace? (whereas I proved unto you even now, that it is
the very proper grace of the Gospel; and the proper purchase of Christ's blood,)
Are there not some that teach, that God sees no sin in his elect children; and
that the very being of their sins is abolished out of Gods sight? And that God
is never displeased with his people though they fall into adultery, or any
other sin: no, not with a Fatherly displeasure? And that God never chastises
his people for any sin: no, not with a Fatherly chastisement? And that an
unbeleeving and an impenitent sinner is as actually pardoned in Gods sight of
all his sins, as he is if he believes and repents? And do not some of these
now begin to grieve, that they have grieved so much for their sins? And that
which is saddest of all: are there not multitudes of people, even in the City
of London (a City so well instructed) carried away with these grace-destroying
and Land-destroying Opinions? Truly these are black signs, that God intends
to bring the Cloud of Blood London-ward. And that God intends that London
should drink of the Cup of Blood, because London is so ready to he infected
with the Cup of Errors: and the cup of grace-destroying Opinions. And for my
part, I am more afraid of this Cup, then of the other; more afraid of these
divisions, then of the Power and strength of the enemy; for he grows strong by
these divisions. The Lord give us hearts to lay these things to heart! and the
Lord give us hearts to repent of these sins!

If this be the great Commandment of God to England, that Use 2.
England should now repent, now rather then ever; now more then ever: I beseech
you let us all subscribe to the obedience of this Text: and let this
Commandment be written this day in every one of our hearts* Oh that the Word
of God, and the Sword of God, might preach this doctrine again and again; and
oh that the Lord would make it to take deep impression in every one of our
souls! Remember the Motives: These are the times of the Gospel, wherein God
holds forth such arguments to move us to repentance, which no other Religion
can hold forth: arguments drawn from the incarnation of Christ, from the
resurrection of the dead, and the day of judgment. These are times of
Knowledge, these are times of the Spirit; These are times of blood, now God
thunders from heaven: now God presents you with a terrible Argument to move you
to repentance: Now God has taken away all your Hindrances that did hinder you
from repentance. And there is no way to remove the man-devouring sword, but by
repentance; and repentance is an infallible way. These are the Motives; and
Motives sufficient to make the very stones in the Church to repent, if they had
a capacity to do it: sufficient to make the Devils in hell to repent, if they
had had the happiness to have been put into a possibility of salvation upon
their repentance: But the devils are not so happy. For the truth is, repentance
is not only a duty, but a happiness. It is a happiness that there is such a
gate as repentance to get into heaven by. Christ Jesus shed his blood (as I
told you) to make this door. The devils have no such door. And it is a
happiness also, that God will for Christ's sake accept of a sinner upon his
repentance. It is vain in man's Court for a murderer or a thief to plead his
repentance: But it is not so in Gods Court. Blessed be God that after our
shipwreck by Adam, there is such a plank as repentance for a poor sinner to
swim to heaven upon: And this is another mighty Argument to persuade you to
repent. He that refuses to repent, refuses to be happy.

But now give me leave to draw down this Doctrine to All sorts of men are to
repent.
all sorts of people, according to the words of my Text: But now God commands
all men every where to repent. First, All men; And then Every where, All men.

1. Repentance it is not only a garment for poor men to put 1. Great men.
on, but God calls the rich men of the world to repent; God calls the great men
of the world to repentance. Say unto the King and Queen, Humble your selves:
And Oh that God would speak that word to the King and Queen this day; that the
Lord would command them to repent; Great Manasseh he was a great sinner, and
did greatly humble himself, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. And the great King of Nineveh put
on sackcloth, and humbled himself, he and his Nobles: David King of Israel made
his very bed to swim with tears for his sins. Great men sin against a God that
is greater then they: and Great men must appear before the Great God, at the
Great Day of Judgment. There is a great day of judgment, a terrible day of
Judgment, wherein the great men of the world, and the Kings of the earth, and
the rich men, and the mighty men shall desire for the mountains to cover them,
and to hide them from the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17. Great men do
more hurt by their sins then others, and therefore God will punish them more
then others; and therefore they are to repent more then others: 'Potentes
potenter torquebuntur. The truth is, Hell is provided on purpose for great men;
I mean, such as are greater in sin then in greatness; otherwise, Greatness
is an ornament when it is joined with goodness; but for those that are
wickedly great, and greatly wicked great men, Tophet is ordained of old; yea
for the King it is provided, Isa. 30. 33. And therefore God calls Great men,
Princes, Noblemen, and Gentlemen to repent.

2. Repentance is not only an Antidote for Drunkards, 2. Men that live civilly
are to repent.
Whoremongers, and Oppressors, etc. But God calls them that live Civilly, and
that are morally good, to repent. You must repent because you pretend to make
conscience of doing that which is just to man; but you make no conscience to
do that which is just to God, to give him his due in the duties of the first
Table.

You must repent, because either you constantly neglect holy duties, or you are
constantly negligent in holy duties, which both are great iniquities.

You must repent, because at the best you are but Negatively good. There is no
positive goodness in you. Though you abstain from evil, yet you do not do
good; though you do not swear great Oaths, yet you do not speak holily. And
every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into
the fire.

You must repent because you do all good duties, either from natural
principles, or which is worse, from sinful principles, and for natural ends;
or which is worse, for wicked ends.

You must repent, because of your immoderate love of the world; and because you
would fain serve God and Mammon; and because you are afraid to be too good; as
you are afraid to be very bad so you are afraid to be very good; you are afraid
to venture too much for God, afraid to be too forward in his Cause; which are
all horrible iniquities.

You must repent of your inward iniquities, your inward adulteries, and your
inward murders; and you must repent of your little oaths, and your little sins
(as the world calls them, though properly there is no sin little, because no
little God to sin against.) And you must repent of your secret iniquities. For
he that is but civilly and morally good, makes no conscience of inward sins, he
is never troubled for his original sin, and for the body of sin that is within
him. He makes no conscience of little sins, and for the most part, he has some
backdoor or other, to some secret iniquity which the world knows not of. You
see then there is great reason that they that live civilly should repent also.

3. Repentance is not only necessary for those that live civilly, Thirdly, Men
that live religiously are to repent.
but God calls his own children that live religiously, and he calls upon them in
a more especial manner to repent. And therefore Christ sent John Baptist a
holy just man to go before him to preach repentance, to show that holy and just
men need repentance. When the people of God sin, they sin against more
light then others, and against more means of grace then others; against more
mercies then others; they sin against better principles then others: God takes
it more unkindely at their hands; and they dishonor God more by their sins
then others: And therefore the people of God ought especially to repent. They
have an ability within them to repent; they have the grace of repentance, and
therefore God especially commands them to repent: when they sin, God will
chastise them sooner then others, surer then others, more then others in this
life; and therefore they ought to repent sooner then others, and more then
others, and surer then others: God will chastise them sooner then others, 1
Pet. 4. 17. The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God. And
in the second of the Romans and the ninth; Tribulation and anguish upon every
soul that does evil, but first on the Jew, and then on the Gentile; God will
punish the Jew before the Gentile, and the Christian before the Jew. God
punishes them sooner, and therefore they must repent sooner; and God
chastises them surer then others. Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the
families of the world, therefore I Will be sure to punish you. And God chastises
them more then others in this life, Lam. 4 6. The punishment of the daughter of
Zion is above the punishments of Sodom. Dan. 9. 12. Under the whole heaven has
not been done as upon Jerusalem. And therefore God calls on his own people to be
sure to repent more then others. And I doubt not but you that fear the Lord,
will hearken to my counsel this day.

When Gods people fall into any gross sin, such as adultery and murder, though
they do not loose jus haereditarium ad coelum, their right and title to heaven,
(For David was a child of God, though a child under wrath, in the midst of
his sins; he was not a child of wrath, but a child only under wrath) yet they
lose jus aptitudinale ad coeium, they lose their fitness to enter into that
holy place of heaven. And this fitness is not recovered till they actually
repent. And therefore Repentance is very necessary for the children of God.

And thus you see that God calls upon the worst of men, and upon the best of
men; upon the least of men, and the greatest of men to repent. God calls upon
all men, says the Text. But most especially upon you that are Parliament men,
You are to repent as you stand in a double capacity.

First, As Gentlemen.

Secondly, As Parliament men.

First, As you are men. For as the Prophet Oded said to the 1.
Princes of Judah, so do I say to you this day: Are there not with you, even
with you sins against the Lord your God? And therefore God calls upon you, even
upon you to repent.

There is an Ordinance of Parliament (which I named even now) that calls on all
the Kingdom of England to repent; and in that Ordinance you set down fourteen
Sword* procuring sins; you command that that Ordinance be read in our private
Families, and in our Churches: you reckon there fourteen sins, which are like
unto fourteen Iron whips, with which God is now whipping England to the very
blood: Now it is not enough for you to command England to repent of these sins:
but God requires, that you your selves should repent of them also. As it is not
enough for a Minister to call upon his people to repent, but the Minister
himself must repent also: So it is not enough for you to desire the subjects of
England to repent, but you must repent even this day of these sins; I will name
the sins over: For they be your own; I mean, such which you have commended to
the Kingdom that they should repent of; God requires that if upon examination
you find your selves guilty, you should repent of your Contempt of the holy
worship of God; and your Contempt of the holy Ordinances of God; and your
Contempt of Holiness, and of Gods holy Ministers; God requires and commands
that you should repent of gross and affected ignorance under the light of the
Gospel; of Unfruitfulness under the means of grace; of Unthankfulness for the
many mercies you have received from him; of Incorrigiblenesse under the
judgments that are upon the land: God requires you should repent of your Oaths
and Blasphemies; of your Fornications and Adulteries; of Drunkenness and
Gluttony; of your Contentions and unnatural Divisions; of your Pride. Vanity,
and Prodigality in apparel; of your Oppression, Fraud and Bribery: One Sin I
had like to bave forgotten, and that is the sin of the Profanation of Gods
Sabbaths: But I would desire you likewise to remember that there is an
Ordinance of Parliament lately printed, wherein you require the Kingdom of
England to apply their hearts to the sanctification of the Lords Day, both in
public and private. This you command us; Now I beseech you tell me, Do you do
so your selves? that which you command the Kingdom, as a Minister of Jesus
Christ I command you to put in practice; and to repent of those sins which
you command us to repent of, so far as you are concerned in them. And to
remember further that your Ordinance tells us, that we ought not to repent
slightly, but we ought to be deeply humbled; we ought to mourn with a godly
mourning, and with a hearty-abhorrency and detestation of these sins. Now the
Lord calls upon you this day to do thus: And to do thus more then others, you
that are Gentlemen, because these sins in you are more scandalous, and do more
hurt, both by Imitation, and by Imputation: They do more hurt by Imitation,
because great men are like unto Looking-glasses, according to which all the
Country dress themselves; whatever they do other men follow: And your sins
do more hurt by Imputation, for God does many times impute the sins of the
Rulers upon the People, as he did impute the sin of David upon the people of
Israel. And therefore God requires you this day to repent in dust and ashes:
And to be humbled before the Lord, as you are Gentlemen; that is the first. But
then secondly,

God commands you to repent as you are Parliament men; As 2.
you are men, with a personal repentance; as you are Parliament men, with a
Parliament repentance.

And here give me leave to speak to you first divisim, and then conjunctim.

First, To speak to you singly and severally: I beseech you search and try your
ways. And if there should be found any amongst you that drive the designs of
Oxford, and that are present at Westminster, only to betray their Country, the
Lord unmask such, and the Lord give them repenting hearts: This is to build
your houses upon the blood of three Kingdoms; this is to sell your souls for
preferment; And it is just with God that such men should not only lose their
souls, but lose their very preferment also; as Judas that sold his Master, and
hung himself. And then again, If there be any amongst you that drive your own
designs, and seek your own ends, and not the public good; and seek your own
ends more then the public good; and seek your own ends to the detriment of the
public good: these are crying abominations, and the Lord calls for a Parliament
Repentance this day: It was the Complaint of the Apostle of his time, Omnes
quae sua sunt quaerunt, etc. Phil. 2* 21. All men seek their own, and no man
seeks the things of Jesus Christ. If the Apostle Paul had been alive in our
days, I wonder what he would have said of our times. For truly, if God should
unrip us here before the Congregation, I am afraid he should find many of our
hearts to be made up of nothing but of self-love and creature-love; and yet
notwithstanding this is a sin, and not only against the light of the Word, but
against the very light of nature; for the light of nature teaches us, that all
private good should be swallowed up in the public* And the very Decii and
Curtii, and Aristides, and many other Heathens will rise up in judgment
against many Christians in this particular. There is a famous Text in Ier. 45.
3, 4. Behold (says the Lord) I do now begin to pull down what I have built,
and to destroy what I have planted, and seek thou great things for thy self?
seek them not. Is this a time to seek your own ends? this is just as if a man
should have his house on fire, and in stead of seeking to quench his house,
should go and trim up his chamber: what will become of his Chamber when the
house is burnt? It is just as if a man when the Ship he is in is sinking,
should go and enrich his own Cabine; The Lord give you hearts to repent of this.

Or if there be any amongst you that favor Malignants, because they are your
friends, though enemies to God and his Cause; this is a great sin to be
repented on greatly. And I say to such, as the Prophet to Iehosaphat, 2 Chro.
19. 2. Because you help the ungodly, and love those whom the Lord hates;
therefore wrath is gone out from the Lord against you.

Now let me consider you conjunctim, as you are united into one body. And here
give me leave to put you in mind of a prayer of Austins, very necessary to be
made by you this day: Lord deliver me from other men's sins: For this is a
certain rule; That all the sins of the Kingdom which are committed by your
connivance or allowance, are the Parliament sins, and they call for a
Parliament Repentance. And therefore I beseech you search and try your hearts,
and consider how far you are accessory to the sins of the Kingdom, that so you
may be wrought up not only to a personal but to a Parliament humiliation. And
if it does appear that you have taken more care in settling your own Liberties,
then in settling of Religion: If you have taken more care to build your own
houses then Gods house, this is a crying sin; and this makes you accessory to a
thousand sins that are committed in the Kingdom. Again. If you do not labor
according to your duty, and according to your power, to suppress the Errors
and Heresies that are spread in the Kingdom; all these errors are you errors,
and these heresies are your heresies, and they are your sins, and God calls for
a Parliamentary repentance from you for chem this day; You are the Anabaptists,
and you are the Antinomians, and it is you that hold, That all Religions are to
be tolerated, even Judaism and Turkism; That the Soul is mortal and dies with
the body; etc. These are your errors if they spread by your connivance. For the
sins of the sons of old Ely, are imputed to old Ely himself. And when the
people of Israel had profaned the Sabbath, Nehemiah contended with the Nobles
of Judah for suffering them, and tells them, that it was they that did profane
it; because they suffered the people to profane it, Neh. 13. 17.

Thus also all the guilty blood that God requires you in justice to shed, and
you spare; God will require the blood at your hands. And all the Bribery, all
the cousenage, and all the robberies which are committed in the Kingdom, which
you can punish and do not, these are all your sins, Oh that the Lord would work
up your hearts to the meditation of these things, and that the Lord would make
your hearts like wax, and this word like the Sun to melt them. Thus God calls
you to repentance as you are men, and to a Parliament repentance as you are
Parliament men: And God calls you to do all this now, God now commands you now
to repent: The commandment is now, and the practice must be now: There must be
two nows, the nunc of the Commandment, and of that you have heard abundantly:
but now there must be also the nunc of Obedience: God now commands you, now to
practice this Text, for otherwise for ought you know, you may be in hell the
next hour* peradventure you may, and peradventure you may not. But howsoever
you put your everlasting estate upon two peradventures: peradventure God will
deny thee space to repent next hour; or if he give thee space, peradventure God
will deny thee grace to repent. And if any of these two peradventures should
happen? thou art undone to all eternity. Who can tell but they may happen* for
God has threatened, Luke 12. 46. That if that servant say in his heart, My Lord
delayeth his coming, and shall begin to beat the men-servantt, etc, the Lord of
that servant will come in a day that he looks not for him, and at an hour
when he is not aware, and will cut him asunder. etc. And therefore as the
Apostle says, Iam. 4. 13, 19. Say not, To morrow I will go to such a city,
etc. for what is your life, is it not even a vapor? So say I, say not, I Will
repent to morrow, for it may be God will deny thee space to morrow, and deny
thee grace to repent to morrow: put not your eternal souls on a peradventure;
God calls upon you to repent now, even now.

Give me leave to add three Motives more, and to call them Englands Motives to
the Parliament of England, to persuade them to present repentance.

First, The only reason why God does not repent of the evil of punishment,
Englands three other motives to persuade the Parliament of England to
repentance.
is, because you do not repent of the evil of sin; the only reason why God
delays to turn away his wrath, is, because you delay to turn unto him. We cry
out, How long, Lord? how long? When will thou have mercy upon England? When
will thou sheath up the Sword? And God he calls, How long O England? Motive 1.
Oh Parliament of England? when will you turn unto me with all your heart? when
will you repent of all those sins you command the Kingdom to repent of? how
long will it be before you be washed from your Uncleanness? when will you
turn to me? when will it once be? Jer. 13. 27. I appeal to your consciences: Is
it fit that God should cease fighting against us by the Sword, before we cease
fighting against him by our sins? But if you would turn unto God, let me assure
you, The very same day that you turn, God will turn: You have a Text for it in
the second of Haggai, and the eighteen verse. Mark, the very day wherein you
begin to build my house, from that very day, I Will prosper you: Nay, let me tell
you, the very minute that you begin to repent, God will repent; you have a Text
for it, Ier. 18. 7, 8. At what instant I shall say, concerning a Nation to
destroy it, etc. If that nation turn, I Will repent of the evil I thought to do
unto them. As a personal repentance is a means to obtain a personal
salvation, so a national repentance is a means to obtain a national
salvation: At that very instant that thou turnest from thy sins, God will save
thy soul: so on that very day that a Nation turns from sin, God will turn
from his anger. A Parliament is the representative Nation, and therefore I call
a Parliament repentance, a National repentance. This is one of Englands
motives, and it is a powerful one: God will keep touch to a very day, to a very
minute.

Secondly, The reason (says England) why God begins to repent Englands second
Motive.
of the good that he has begun to do for you, is because you do not repent of
the evil you have done against him. If you look into the Word, you shall find
that God is said as well to repent of his good works and of his mercies, as of
his judgments: in Ier. 18. 10. If you do evil in my sight, etc. I Will repent
of the good I intended to do unto you: and in Josh. 24. 20. If you do evil
I Will consume you, after I have done you good. And we see by sad experience,
that God has begun to lead us of late back into the wilderness again, and
has given us a great defeat in the West: God begins to repent of the good
which he has done for us: and why does God do this? Because we repent not of
our evils against him. God begins to carry us back, because we turn our backs
to God; but if we did repent of our evils against him, God would do us good,
and never repent. But England has a third Motive, and Oh that God would give
you ears to hearken unto it!

Thirdly, The reason why all our fasting does prevail no more Englands third
Motive.
with God, is because we do not join repentance with our fasting; because our
fasting days are not repenting days: We have now almost been three years a
fasting; and we have had many extraordinary fasts, and yet we are not
delivered. We are as far from the end, as we were in the beginning: and what
is the reason? Not because the way of fasting is not Gods way to heal a Nation;
but the reason is, because we do not fast aright. Suppose, not I, but England
speaking unto you in her own behalf, and bewailing the manner how fasting days
are kept in this place.

For first, You bring not your Fasting apparel with you; here are many of you
appear in this place rather in a triumphing way, then in a penitent way;
whereas the great King of Nineveh, he laid aside his robes, and so did his
Nobles. And though God regards not the outside so much, nay God scorns the
outside without the inside, yet God looks to have the outside, as well as
the inside: And then again,

Secondly, Here is a great deal of Fasting, but where is your weeping? where is
your mourning? Look into the Word of God, and you shall always see fasting and
weeping go together; God scorns your fasting, if there be not weeping joined;
Turn unto me with all your hearts, with fasting, (what next?) with weeping,
Joel 1. 12.
and with mourning: Nay fasting and mourning are all one in Christ's sense; in
Matthew. 9. 15. Can the children of the Bridegroom mourn when the Bridegroom is
with them? but when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, then shall they
Fast. Here fasting and mourning are put for one and the same thing: Now because
there is a great deal of fasting, and so little weeping, that is the reason why
our Fastings do no more good; We keep days of humiliation without any
humiliation, and therefore God scorns our days of humiliation. It is a very
sad thing to see that in stead of weeping on a fasting day there are many that
turn a great part of it into sleeping; we turn our weeping into sleeping, we
weary God, and weary our selves; and in stead of soul-afflicting, we afflict
God by our negligent addresses to God on that day. Were it not strange to see a
condemned Malefactor, while he is pleading for his life at the Bar, to fall
asleep, would you not say, this man cares not much for his life? You come
hither like so many condemned Malefactors, and you come to plead for your own
lives, and for the lives of three Kingdoms; and for you to fall asleep while
you are pleading for your lives, God scorns such fastings; and that is the
reason says England, why I am not healed by your fastings. And then again,

Thirdly, there is a great deal of Fasting, but there is no Reformation: a
great deal of talk of reformation, but there is no practice of reformation; we
have a great many Covenants of Reformation, but there is no performance of our
Covenants: We swear to reform, but we do not reform; we fast one day, and feast
the devil all the month after many times; Do we do as the King of Nineveh did,
and as his Nobles and people did? they cried unto the Lord, and turned every
man from his evil way; but because there is no such turning from sin amongst
us, because there is no reformation; that is the reason why our fasting does no
more good. Beloved in the Lord, suffer me to speak my mind plainly; Could I
see the Parliament of England do as the King of Nineveh did, and all the Nobles
of Nineveh did; could I see them all appear here, and lying down in dust and
ashes, weeping, and mourning, and lamenting before the Lord, and humbling their
souls in good earnest, and every man turning from his iniquity, and from the
violence in his hand; such a fasting day would save the lives of three
Kingdoms; such tears would prevent the effusion of the blood of thousands; such
a day would be loud music in the ears of God; The Lord make this day to be
such a day.

Thus much I thought good to say in reference to the general expression in the
Text, But now God commands All men.

Secondly, But then it is added in the Text, God commands all All men must
repent every where.
men every where (that is another expression) to repent; If we must repent any
where, we must repent every where; for,

First, Because God fills every where; If thou can commit a sin where God is
not, there I Will give thee leave not to repent; but if God be every where, we
must repent every where, because God is every where. And then again,

Secondly, Because some devil or other is every where: I do not say, that the
devil is every where, but some devil or other is every where; and therefore we
must repent every where, because our Accuser is every where, and our Judge is
every where. And then again,

Thirdly, Because death will meet us every where: If there be any place wherein
thou art exempted from death, I Will give thee leave not to repent there; but
death will meet with thee every where, and therefore God commands all men every
where to repent. And then again,

Fourthly, Because we must give an account for all the Actions that we do every
where: God at the day of judgment will ask thee an account of that that thou
have done any where; and therefore we must repent every where. And then,

Fifthly, Because we sin every where, we sin in our Churches, and therefore God
calls for a Church-repentance: We sin in our Parliament, therefore God calls for
a Parliament-repentance: We sin in our Sacraments, therefore God calls for a
Sacrament-repentance: We sin in our beds, in our shops; and therefore God calls
for repentance in our shops and in our beds. God calls to the Assembly of
Ministers to repent of their sins; God calls not only to the people at Oxford
to repent, but to the people at Westminster to repent; God not only calls to the
pretended Parliament at Oxford, but the true Parliament at Westminster to
repent: God calls all men every where to repent. And then again,

Sixthly, Because Gods judgments are every where; Gods judgments fill every
Town, every City, every Country; the Sword devours every where, and therefore
God commands us to repent every where.

Thus much for the second exhortation,

There is one Question yet behind which must have an answer Quest.
before I can conclude.

Some will say, What is that Repentance which is the unum necessarium for
England, and which is The great Commandment of God for England? Is there any
man that does not repent?

There is much talk indeed in the world, and much dispute about Answ.
Repentance, and much profession of repentance. And every man says he
repents. But I fear that most people mistake the nature of true repentance,
and so are cheated of their salvation by a rotten and false repentance.

There is a threefold mistake of repentance. A threefold mistake of repentance.


First, Some think it an ominous thing to repent, and judge of repentance, as
some ridiculously judge of making their Wills, who refuse to make their Wills in
their health, as thinking it an omen and presage of their death. So many refuse
to repent in health, because they think it a work of sickness, and if they
should do it in health, it would hasten their death. This opinion is not worth
confuting.

Secondly, Some think it an easy thing to repent, and therefore deal with
repentance (as one says) as countrey-people do with Physicians, who never send
for them, till they be breathing out their last breath; So many never think of
Repentance till they be upon their deathbed, and then they conceive that these
five words, Lord have mercy upon me, are as efficacious to send them to heaven,
as the Papists conceit that their five words of consecration are able to
transubstantiate the bread in the Sacrament into the body of Christ. Most
people think it very easy to repent. It is but repenting, says the sinner.
But this But is a hard But, It requires the omnipotent power of God to work
repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Therefore it is called a rending of the heart, Joel
2. 13. which is a hard work. And it is likewise called a ploughing up of the
fallow ground of our hearts. It is a Transmutation, a change of the whole man
from sin to God, which is no easy work.

Thirdly and especially, Most people think they repent, when they do not. And I
believe that the reason why so many go to hell, is not so much for want of
repentance as for want of a right repentance. We read, Act. 11. 18. of a
repentance unto life, and 2 Cor. 7. 10. of a repentance never to be repented
on: where note there is a repentance which is not unto life, and a repentance
to be repented on. Repentance is a rare jewel. But as there is no jewel but it
may be counterfeit, so there is no grace but it may be counterfeited: As there
is a counterfeit faith, a dead carcass of faith, so there is a bastardly
repentance, poenitentia spuria and non genuina; or as Austin calls it,
Poenitentia infructuosa. And as a counterfeit jewel is nothing worth, no more
is a counterfeit repentance. And as many are undone by the buying of a
counterfeit jewel: so there are many in hell through the mistake of this jewel,
that yet thought it may be, they had repented aright, and so might all their
friends possibly think likewise. Now therefore the great question will be, What
is that repentance unto life, that repentance never to be repented on, which if
I have, I may assure my self that I am in the state of salvation?

For the answer to this, I will briefly show,

1. What is not that repentance which is unto life. 2. What repentance is that
repentance which is unto life.
What repentance is not that repentance which is unto life. There Six sorts of
repentance, which are not the right repentance. Pharaoh's repentance, and
wherein it failed.
are six sorts of Repentance which are not the right repentance.

The first is, Pharaohs repentance. After he had obeyed God in letting the
people of Israel go, he repents of this his good action, as Exodus 14. 5. This
was a repentance unto damnation, not unto salvation. Some such I have known,
that in their young days have been zealous and forward for private fasts, and
for all other religious exercises, and afterward have Apostatized from these
ways and persecuted them in others, and repented that ever they had been so
strict and zealous. This is a wicked repentance. Thus, many in our days
(through the error of their judgment) repent that ever they have been
troubled so much for their sins, and that they have fasted so much, and wept so
much. This is a repentance to be repented on.

The second is Saul's repentance, 1 Samuel 15. 24. This repentance Saul's
repentance, and wherein it failed.
was as fair, and as full in outward repentance, as David's to Nathan, 2 Samuel
12. 13. But yet Saul's repentance was not unto life. It failed in four things.

First, His confession was without sorrow, he acknowledged his sin; but we
read not that his heart smote him for his sin, or that his heart was broken
for his sin, as David's was. Secondly, Saul's confession was not free, but forced
from him by Samuel with dint of argument. But David's heart smote him for
numbering the people, and he confessed the sin before God smote his people with
the plague, 2 Samuel 24. 10. Thirdly, Saul's confession was by way of diminution,
he labors to lessen his sin, and to put the fault upon the people, 1 Samuel 15.
21, 24. But true confession of sin is with aggravation of the sins we confess.
Thus did David, 2 Samuel 24 10, 17. Thus does Daniel and Ezra, Dan* 9. Ezra 9.
Fourthly, Saul's confession was mingled with pride; 1 Samuel 15. 30. he desired
honor with the people, though he had no respect from God nor from Samuel. True
confession is an humble confession, Ezra* 9. 6.
The third is Ahabs repentance. His repentance was so great Ahabs repentance,
and wherein it failed.
and so remarkable, that God bids Elijah take notice of it, 1 Kin. 21. 27, 29.
His repentance is expressed in four particulars; He rent his clothes, he put on
sackcloth, he fasted, he lay in sackcloth, and went softly. But yet it was not
a repentance unto life. It failed in three particulars. It was but an outward
repentance. All the forenamed expressions were outward, he rent his garments,
but his heart was not rent. And therefore God rewarded him only with an outward
reward, 1 Ki. 21. 29. Ahah was like a ripe plum that is soft without, but has
a hard stone within* 2. It was a worldly and carnal repentance, for fear of
the loss of his kingdom, and for fear of the dogs that Elijah threatened should
lick up his blood. 3. It was a repentance for sin, but not from sin. You shall
read in Scripture, not only of a repentance for sin, 2 Cor. 12. 21. Rev. 9.
20. but also of a repentance from sin, Act. 8. 22. (...), so it is in the
Greek. So also, Heb. 6. 1. Repentance from dead works. Now Ahab did not repent
from his sin. For in the next Chapter he is as bad as ever he was.

The fourth is, The Israelites repentance, you shall read often The Israelites
repentance, and wherein it failed.
of their repentance, 1 Samuel 7. 6. Iud. 2. 1, 2, 3. Iud. 10. 10. But their
repentance was not unto life. It failed especially in two particulars. 1. It
was only and merely for fear of the Lord, it was only when they were in
distress, as appears often and often in the book of the Judges, and also Psa.
78. 34. 2. It lasted only as long as the rod lasted, when the affliction was
past they returned to their sins again, Psalm. 78. 36, 37. Iud. 4. 1. Iud. 6. 1.
etc. They were just like iron, which while it is in the fire, is soft and
malleable to any thing, but when it is taken out of the fire, grows presently
hard again: or like unto water, that while it is upon the fire is very hot, but
when taken off, presently grows cold. And this, I fear, is all the Repentance
that many have in these days. Some so bad as not to repent at all, even in
these killing days; but they that do repent, I fear it is only for fear of the
rod, and it will last no longer then the rod lasts. The Lord give us hearts
to search our hearts whether it be not so.

The fifth is The repentance of Judas. The Text says, he repented, Iudas's
repentance, and wherein it failed.
and confessed his sin, and made satisfaction. Mat. 27. 3, 4. And he
justified also Christ's innocence, and he took shame to himself in going to the
high Priests to confess his sins. But yet his repentance was not unto life;
though there be many in the world that pretend to a right repentance, that
cannot plead so much to justify their repentance as Judas can. But it failed
in diverse particulars. First, his repentance was (...), not (...). The Greek
word is not the same with the Greek word in my Text for repentance. Paenituit,
sed non resipuit; he sorrowed for what he had done, but he was not reformed
from what he had done, for he that murdered Christ before, murdered himself
presently after. It was no life-reforming sorrow. Secondly, Judas repented, not
out of hatred of the sin that he had committed, but only to quiet his
conscience, he felt a hell in his conscience, and to quiet that he repented.
Thirdly, This repentance was wholly legal, only for fear of hell, and it was
wholly without hope of mercy. It was a desperate repentance, and it drew him
not to Christ, but to the gallows. True repentance is out of love to God; and
it is always mixed with hope, Ezra 10. 2.

The sixth is, The Heathen man's repentance. There is in a Heathen man a natural
conscience, and when he sins against the light The Heathen man's repentance, and
wherein it failed.
of nature, this natural conscience will accuse and condemn him, and this
oftentimes works a natural and moral repentance. Thus when Alexander in his
drunken sit had killed his dear friend Clitus, when he was sober, he was
troubled in conscience for it, and sent to all the several kinds of
Philosophers (as it were to so many Ministers) to know what he might do to
appease his conscience, and to satisfy for that sin. Thus Polemo, when in
his drunken fit he came to the School of Xenocrates, and heard him reading of
sobriety, repented of his drunkenness, and became sober ever after. This I
relate to the shame of thousands of Christians. But yet this was not a
repentance unto life. For here nature reforms nature. Refined nature reforms
nature abominably profaned. Sober Alexander reforms drunken Alexander. Here is
no turning to God, no eye to Gods glory, no sorrow for displeasing of God. It
is a repentance upon natural and moral grounds, which is not a repentance
unto heaven. Thus, many repent of their gaming, and of their drinking and
whoring; because it destroys their estate, or their bodies, or their good
names. This is a natural repentance, upon natural grounds, but not a
repentance unto life. Thus you see what that repentance is which is not unto
life. It is our duty to examine whether we exceed these six sorts. There are
many that are cried up for great professors that come short of them. And it
must needs be a miserable thing to come short of those that come short of
heaven. It is not enough to repent as Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, the Israelites,
Judas and the Heathen repented* But we must labor to exceed them, and amend in
all those things wherein they failed. We must not repent of our good actions,
as Pharaoh did; but of our bad actions. Our confession of sins must be with
shame and confusion of face, with heartbreaking sorrow, it must be free and
voluntary, not forced, it must be an humble and self-abasing confession. Our
repentance must not only be outward as Ahabs was, but inward also; it must be a
rending of the heart, a pricking at the heart. Sin must not only be oculi
dolium but it must be cordolium. Our repentance must not only be for sin, but
from sin. We must not repent for fear of the rod only, as the Israelites did;
for this is to repent out of self-love, and not out of love to God. This
Repentance may be in a man that has no grace. This is to fear hell, not sin.
Neither must our Repentance vanish as the morning dew. We must not return to
our vomit after the affliction is over. This is to act as a dog, not as a
Christian; This will bring utter desolation, Ezr 9. 13. This is to mock God who
will not be mocked, or rather it is to mock our selves into hell. Our
repentance must not be only to quiet conscience, to escape hell, as Iudas's
was, but it must be a filial Evangelicall Repentance, arising out of love to
God whom we have offended, and out of hatred of sin, and it must always be
mingled with hope of mercy. Our Repentance must arise not only from natural
and moral, but from Supernatural and Theological grounds and principles.

Now I come to show more particularly what is that repentance A description of
true Repentance.
which is a repentance unto life; a repentance never to be repented of: What is
that repentance which whosoever has is certainly in the state of salvation.

For the brief answer to this you must know, that true repentance It is a
golden chain with five links.
is a medicine made of Christ's blood that must have five ingredients in it. And
if any one of these ingredients be wanting, the medicine will not avail us unto
salvation, It is a Golden chain that must have five links, and if one link be
wanting, the chain is of little use.

The five links of this golden chain are:

First, Godly sorrow for sin. Secondly, A hearty confession of sin.
Thirdly, A sincere endeavor to forsake all sin. Fourthly, Satisfaction for
sin. Fifthly, A turning to God by new obedience.
Wherever there is true repentance: First,

There is godly sorrow for sin; God has tied sin and sorrow First, godly
sorrow.
together with Adamantine chains: and a woman may as soon look to be delivered
of a child in a dream, as for a man to repent without sorrow: sorrow indeed is
the daughter of sin, but God has made the daughter to be a means to destroy
the mother; you must not look to fly to heaven with pleasant wings; you must
not look to dance with the devil all day, and sup with Christ at night; to live
all your lives long in Dalilahs lap, and then to go to Abraham's bosom when you
die: wheresoever there is true repentance there will be sorrow for sin. But
this sorrow it must be (...) 2 Cor. 7. 10. A sorrow caused for Gods sake; a
sorrow more for the offense done against God, then for the punishment due unto
us. It must be a repentance toward God, as it is called, Act. 20. 21. because
it eyes God and his offense, more then the punishment. It is called a lamenting
after the Lord, 1 Samuel 7. 2. It is a mourning for Christ whom we have pierced
by our sins, Zech. 12. 10. Not so much a mourning for the misery we have
brought upon our selves by our sins, as for the dishonor we have brought to
Christ. It is a mourning for sin as sin, as it is offensivum Dei, aversivum a
Deo, as it is an act of disobedience, an act of unkindness, as it is an act
polluting and defiling the soul, making the soul unlike God, and like the
devil; an act that will bring the soul to the devil, etc.

True sorrow must not be only attrition but contrition, which is the grinding
of sin to powder. A rock may be broken in pieces, and yet be hard still. True
sorrow is when our rocky hearts are ground to powder, and made soft and pliable
to do and suffer whatsoever God shall require at our hands. It is (as one
says) annihilatio voluntatis, a swallowing up of our own wills in Gods will.
And wheresoever there is this godly sorrow, if the heart be deeply wounded and
pierced with it,

Secondly, There will be also true confession of sin. Even as a The second
link of the chain of Repentance, confession of sin.
stomach when it is surcharged with too great fullness, it is never quiet till
eased by vomit: So if the conscience be overladen and brim-full of sorrow for
sin, it will never be at ease till sin be vomited up by confession. Sin
in the conscience is as a thorn in a man's foot, as needles in the flesh, or as
poysonfull matter in a sore, which lies burning and aching with pain. In such
cases there is no rest unless the sores be lanced and the poison expelled.
Confessio peccati est medicina peccati; (says Naz.) It is vomitus sordium
animae, David did but purpose to confess his sin, and God forgave him. Psalm.
32. 5. He that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy, Pro. 28. 13. Judah (which signifies
Confession) got the Kingdom from Reuben. True confession of sin is the way to
the Kingdom of heaven. In confession we accuse our selves, and we judge our
selves. By accusing our selves we put the devil out of office. And by judging
our selves worthy of damnation we put God out of office: for if we judge our
selves, we shall not be judged of the Lord.

This is the second link of the chain. But here you must remember that this
confession must not be like unto Saul's confession, but like the confession of
Ezra, Daniel, David, as was said but even now.

The third link of the golden chain of Repentance, is an inward The third link
of the chain of repentance, an inward forsaking of sin.
sincere endeavor to forsake all sin everlastingly. All poenitentia is in vain
without resipiscentia, (...) in vain without (...). It is to no purpose to
repent for your sins, unless you repent from your sins; for a man to say he
repents of sin, and yet does not forsake it, he speaks a contradiction. As for
a man to say that he is changed from a fool to a wise man, and yet remains a
fool, he says that which is a contradiction; so for a man to say he repents of
his swearing, and yet to swear; to say he is turned from his adultery, and yet
remains an adulterer, he says a contradiction: as Tertullian says
excellently, He that repents with a contradiction, God will pardon him with a
contradiction: thou repentest, and yet continuest in thy sins; God will pardon
thee, and yet send thee to hell; there is a pardon with a contradiction.

True repentance must be joined with an endeavor to forsake sin. But then we
must remember that this forsaking of sin must have four properties. It must
first be inward. We must put away evil from before Gods eyes, as it is Isa. 1.
16. We must do that which is good in Gods eyes, as the good Kings of Israel
are said to do. A man may go to hell for the inward desire to sin, though he
should never commit any outward act of sin. It is not enough to restrain sin,
but we must endeavor to mortify it. A Lion chained is a Lion still. Secondly,
It must also be sincere. Two things make a good Christian, good actions, and
good aims. Though a good aim does not make a bad action good ( as we see in the
case of Uzzah) yet a bad aim makes a good action bad, as we see in the case of
Iehu. We must forsake sin not for worldly respects, or self ends, but we must
say with Joseph, How can I commit this thing and sin against my God? Thirdly,
It must be universal. We must make conscience to abstain from every sin, as
well as from any sin. We read Iud. 8. 30, 31. that Gideon had seventy sons
and one bastard; and that bastard was afterward the means to kill all his
seventy sons, Give me leave to apply this in a spiritual sense. Though thou
have seventy good duties, and yet if thou have one bastardly sin which thou
delightest in, this sin will take away the benefit and comfort of all thy
good duties. Fourthly, It must be everlasting. It is not enough to fall out
with sin, and afterward to be friends again: but we must so hate it as never
to be reconciled. The Prodigal Child never returned to his prodigality; nor
David to his adultery.

The fourth link of the golden chain of repentance, is satisfaction The fourth
link, satisfaction for sin.
for sin. This is a part of Repentance much abused by the Papists, and
seldom spoken of by our Divines; but of great use if rightly understood. The
Papists teach, That Christ by his death satisfied for the guilt of sin, and for
the eternal punishment; but as for the temporal punishment of sin, Christ
left that to us to satisfy for by deeds of Penance here, and by Purgatory
hereafter. But this Doctrine is false and heretical. First, It is a derogation
to the full satisfaction of Jesus Christ. He is a perfect Savior. Secondly,
This makes every man in part his own Savior. Thirdly, This takes away the
freeness of forgiveness of sins. Fourthly, This takes away all the comfort
of afflictions. For if afflictions be satisfactions to Gods vengeance, and part
of the temporal curse due to sin, where is the comfort of affliction? Fifthly,
What can a poor creature contribute to satisfy an infinite God? All
satisfaction must be de propriis, of some thing that is our own. And what can
we give to God to satisfy him, but that which he has first given to us?
Besides satisfaction is a just proportionable recompense for an injury: And
what proportion between the action of a finite creature, and the wrath of an
infinite God? And therefore satisfaction in a Popish sense is abominable; but
in a Catholic Orthodox sense it is a point of great consequence. A true
penitent sinner will make satisfaction to God, to the Church, to his brother,
and to himself.

First, He will make satisfaction to God. Not in a Popish sense, Satisfaction
to God.
Not by tendering up his Repentance as a recompensation to the injury offered to
the great God by his sin; but by presenting the Lord Christ and his
satisfaction for an atonement. And therefore the Jews in the Old Law when they
had committed a sin, they were to bring a sacrifice, and first to confess
their sins over the sacrifice, and then to offer up the sacrifice for a
propitiation. This sacrifice was a type of Christ. He that will procure pardon
from God of sin, must not only mourn for it, confess it, and turn from it;
This is not sufficient to procure pardon; because our repentance at the best is
imperfect, and we must repent for the defects that cleave to our repentance.
But if we would procure pardon, we must tender up Jesus Christ by faith to make
up the breach that sin has made. We must repent, but not trust to our
repentance. He that trusts to his repentance makes an Idol of it, and makes a
Christ of it, We must not bottom our selves upon repentance, but upon Christ
only.

Secondly, He will make satisfaction to Gods Church. If he has Satisfaction to
the Church of God.
offended it by any scandalous sin he will take shame to himself in a public
way of reparation. For this purpose did David write his penitential Psalms,
which are Psalms of David's satisfaction to Gods Church for the offense he had
given to it. Thus Solomon wrote his Book of Ecclesiastes to make recompensation
to the Church of God, which he had wronged by his Apostasy. And I trust
(through Gods mercy) to see this Discipline put in execution in England.

Thirdly, He will make satisfaction to his brother, to his body, Satisfaction
to our brother.
and to his soul.

First, To his body. If thou have wronged thy brother in his good 1. To his
body in his good name.
name, which is more precious to him then his life, God will not accept of thy
repentance, unless thou endeavourest to make up the injury thou have done to
his good name. Many go to hell for want of practicing this. This is no easy
duty. For a man's good name is like a white piece of paper, which when once
blotted, can hardly be made clean again without some remainder of defilement.

So again, If thou have wronged thy brother in his goods, God In his goods.
will not accept of thy repentance, unless thou endeavourest with Zaccheus
(according to thy ability) to make restitution. This is a lesson for all men,
but especially for Soldiers to lay to heart.

Secondly, He will make satisfaction to his soul. If thou have 2. To his soul.
been a Moral cause to make thy brother sin, it is not enough for thee alone
to repent, but thou must endeavor not any out of charity, but out of justice,
to bring thy brother to repentance also. If thou have persuaded a woman to
lewdness, a man to drunkenness, it is thy duty to make them soul-restitution:
a Doctrine little preached, and less practiced; but of absolute necessity, in
regard of thy endeavor at least to do it. For want of this soul-satisfaction
many souls miscarry.

Fourthly, He will make satisfaction to himself. If he has injured
Satisfaction to himself.
his body by intemperate eating and drinking, and his soul by taking too much
liberty in things indifferent, he will take a holy revenge upon himself; of
which you shall read, 2 Cor. 7. 11. Holy revenge is a necessary companion of
true repentance. This holy revenge consists in fasting, and in abstaining
from lawful delights when they prove soul-snares. If thou have sinned by
frequenting such and such company, thou must be revenged of thy self by wholly
abstaining from their company. If thou have sinned by the abuse of lawful
games, etc. thou must wholly renounce them. If by immoderate love of the world,
thou must be revenged of thy self by a greater measure of charity to the poor.
Thus Saint Paul did beat down his body, and brought it into subjection, etc. 1
Cor. 9. 27. When Hilarion felt his lusts boiling, and his body prone to
filthiness, he said, Ego faciam, aselle, ut non calcitres, I will keep this
Ass from kicking, by abstinence. This part of repentance is little regarded
now adays* though there cannot be true repentance without it. A true penitent
will be revenged of his sins, as Cranmer was of his right hand, which he first
burnt in the fire (when he was at the stake) because with that he had
subscribed to Popery. Thus the Ephesian converts, Act. 19. 19. burnt their
Books before all men: and the women that had prided themselves in their
looking-glasses, brought them to the building of the Tabernacle, Exo. 38. 8.
Thus ought every true penitent to do. Thus much for the fourth link of the
golden chain of repentance.

The fifth and last link of the golden of repentance, is, Turning The fifth
link, Turning to God by newness of life.
unto God by newness of life. Man by sin turns his back upon God, and
wandreth from God as the Prodigal child from his father. Now repentance is a
returning back unto God. And therefore in the Old Testament it is expressed
under this name: It is called a Turning unto God. It is not enough to cease
from evil, but we must also do good: As a man cannot go with one leg, nor a
bird fly with one wing; no more can any man mount up to heaven by forsaking of
sin, if he does not also labor to turn to God.

And this is the consummation of repentance, and the happiness of it. Whereas
disobedience estrangeth us from God, who is our light and life, in whose
presence is fullness of joy, etc. Repentance brings us back again into the
love, favor, and friendship of God. And therefore Luther says well, That
optima and optissima poenitentia est nova vita: which saying, though condemned
by Pope Leo the tenth, yet certainly it is a most excellent saying: Repentance
without Reformation is a deformation; it is a foundation without a building.
All sorrow, confession, and forsaking of sin without this turning unto God by
holiness of life, is fruitless and unprofitable.

And thus you have the Golden Chain with all the five links.

Now what remains: but

First, That all you that pretend to a right Repentance, be persuaded Use 1.
to examine your selves whether you have this medicine with the five
ingredients, this golden chain with the five links. There are some that will
confess their sins, but it is with dry eyes and hard hearts. Others that
will mourn for their sins, but not forsake them. Others will forsake some
sins, but not all. Some forsake sin outwardly but not inwardly: some
forsake sin, but do not turn to God: some forsake sin, but do not make
restitution. If a child be born without his legs, or arms, or eyes; we say
it is a monster, a deformed child: Such a monstrous kind of repentance most
people have. Some have a leg of repentance, some have an arm of repentance, but
few have the whole child of repentance. Herod had a leg of repentance, he
reformed in many things; but his repentance was but a lame repentance. Balaam
had a kind of repentance, and so had Iehu; but it was but a monster, not the
perfect child of repentance. Examine seriously and let conscience speak: Have
thou the child of repentance formed in thee with every limb in truth; though
not in perfection? Say not thou repentest aright unless thou have all the
links of this golden chain.

Secondly, Labor to put on this golden chain this day. It will Use 2.
be an excellent ornament to Lords, Ladies, and Gentlemen. The Lord give you
hearts to do it. Repentance is Christ's gift, he is at Gods right hand to give
it. Sue to him for it, and he will bestow it upon you. And be sure to remember
this truth of God: If any one link of this chain be wanting thou can not be
saved. For I am not now preaching of points in difference between us and the
Papists; or between Protestant and Protestant; but of those things which all
will confess to be true, If any one of these ingredients be out of the
medicine, this medicine of repentance will do thee no good. And therefore
labor to thy utmost endeavor by prayer and all other means to obtain all five
this day. I say, this day, for this day God calls, and you call; God calls for
repentance, and for present repentance, and for a complete repentance; and you
call for mercy for your Armies; for present mercy, and for a complete mercy:
Would you have God hear you, and will not you hear God? Consider whether this
be equal: Would you have God give you a good return of your prayers, and will
not you give God a good return of his Word? The occasion of our meeting this
day, is to pray to God, that God would be pleased to own our Forces, for we
know not how soon they may be engaged; and that God would be pleased to fight
our battles, and not to suffer us to miscarry as we have done lately. Now do
you think God will regard your prayers this day, if you do not repent this day?
It is not praying, but it is the penitent prayer that prevails with God: It is
in vain to recruit your Armies, if you recruit your sins: God looks for
penitent prayers, humble prayers: Let the Parliament of England never forget
the 7. of Joshua* 10, 11, 12. etc. Get thee up, says God to Joshua, why lie
thou on the ground? there is a sin committed, and I will not hear thy prayers
till the sin be removed: Let the Parliament of England remember the Battles of
the Children of Israel against the Benjamites; though their cause were never so
good, yet notwithstanding because they were Idolaters, and because they did not
manage their cause well, therefore God suffered them twice to miscarry: Let the
Parliament of England never forget the story of the people of Israel, 1 Samuel 4.
that went out and carried the Ark of God with them, and went out to fight
against the Philistims who were the enemies of God, and yet they miscarried
because of their iniquities; And let the Parliament of England never forget the
23. of Deuteronomy 9. When your Hosts go forth to fight against your enemies,
then keep your selves from every evil way; then, then especially. A repenting
Parliament; a repenting Army; and a repenting people; what miracles might not
they do? The Lord make the Army, the Parliament, and all the People such. Amen,
Amen.

FINIS.
The Names of the other Works M. Calamy has printed, and several other Books,
all printed and sold by Christopher Meredith at the Crane in Pauls-Church-yard,
viz.
2. ENglands Looking-glass, on Ier. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. 3. Gods free mercy to
England, on Ezekiel. 36. 32. 4. Noble man's Pattern, on Josh. 24. 15. 5. An
Indictment against England, on Mat 12. 25. 6. The Door of Truth opened, In
answer to M. Henry Burton. 7. A just and necessary Apology. In answer to M.
Henry Burton. 8. The great danget of Covenant-refusing and breaking, on 2 Timothy
3. 3. All by M. Edmund Calamy.
D. Arrowsmiths Covenant-avenging Sword, on Levit. 26, 25. D. Barlow's Guide to
Glory, on Psa. 73. 34. M. Bridges Ioabs Counsel, on 2 Samuel 19. 5 6, 7, 8. M.
Bodius Alarm to War against Babylon, Rev. 18. 6. D. Burges, on Ier. 50. 5. on
Psa. 76. 10. Two Sermons on Ier. 4. 14. Examination of 9. Reasons against
Bishops.
M. Caryls David's prayer for Solomon, Psa. 72. 1, 2, 3. M. Carters Isreal's
peace, on Judge. 20. 26, 27, 28. M. Couants Woe and Weal, on Ier. 30. 7. M.
Colemans Christians course and Complaint, Ier. 8. 20. The hearts Engagement, on
Ier. 30. 11. Gods unusual Answer, on Psalm. 65. 5. Hopes deferred and dashed,
Job 11. 2.
M. Ellis sole-path, on Micah 5. 5. M. Edes, Three Sermons, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20,
21, 22. Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. Psalm 37. 35, 36, 37.
M. Gattakers Thanksgiving for 88. Psalm 48. 7, 8. M. Goods public Spirit, on
Act. 13. 36. M. Gipps, on Psalm. 46 1. M. Hardwicks Difficulty of Sions
deliverance, Psalm 126. 5, 6. M. Hicks Glory and Beauty, on Isa. 28. 5, 6. The
Life and Death of David, on Act. 13. 3, 6. Advantage of Afflictions, Hos. 5. 15.
M. Hookers Faithful Covenanter, Deuter. 25. 24, 25. M. Ienkins Self-seeking
discovered, on Phil. 20, 21. Reformations Remora, on Hag. 1. 1, 2. Sleeping
sickness, on Isa. 29. 10. Busy Bishop. in answer to John Goodwin. The blind
Guide. in answer to John Goodwin.
M. Iessop's Angel no Bishop of Ephesus, Rev. 21. M. Ley's Fury of War, on
Ier. 4. 21, 23. Monitor of Mortality, First part on James 4. 14. Second part,
on Genesis 44. 3. Answer to M. Saltmarsh's Query about the Presbyteriall
Government. Light for Smoke, a Reply to M. Saltmarsh. An After-reckoning with
M. Saltmarsh.
M. Mockets Churches Troubles, Several Sermons, on Genesis 22. 14. Covenanters
Looking-glass, on Deuteronomy. 29. 9. Gospel Duty and Dignity, on Matthew. 13. 46.
M. Mewes spoiling of Jacob and Israel, on Isa. 42. 24, 25. M. Newcomens craft
and cruelty of the Churches adversaries, Neh. 4. 11. Ierusalems Watchmen, Isa.
62. 6, 7. Use of disasters, Josh, 7. 10, 11. Against Toleration, Phil. 1. 27.
All-seeing eye of God, on Heb. 4. 13. Popes deadly wound by D. Burges.
M. Profits Englands Impenitency, on Isaiah 9. 14. M. Reyners Babylons
Earthquake, on Haggai 2. 6, 7. M. Salways halting stigmatized, 1 Kings 18. 21.
D. Stantons Rupes Israelis, Deuteronomy. 32, 31. Phinchas Zeal, Psalm 106. 30.
D. Smith, Psa. 107. 6. M. Thorowgood Moderation justified, Phi. 4. 5. M.
Udall's Good of Peace, and Ill of War. Psa. 29. 11. M. Wards God judging
among the Gods, Psa. 82. 1. Good will of him that dwelt in the bush.
M. Woodcocks Christ's warning, Rev. 16. 15. Lex Talionis, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Joseph
paralleled, Genesis 49, 23, 24.
M. Whittaker Christ the Settlement, on Haggai 2. 7, D. Wilkinsons Babylons
ruin, on Zech. 1. 18, 19. 20, 21. Gainful Cost, 1 Chronicles. 21, 24. Miranda
stupenda, Number. 23. 23.


