ENGLANDS Looking-glass, PRESENTED IN A Sermon, Preached before the Honorable
House of COMMONS, At their late solemn FAST, December 22. 1641.

By Edmund Calamy, B.D. And Preacher at Aldermanbury, LONDON.

EZEKIEL. 18.31. Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby ye have
transgressed, and make you a new heart and a new Spirit, Why will ye die, O
house of Israel. Published by Order of the House.

LONDON, Printed by I. Raworth, for Chr. Meredith, and are to be sold at the
Crane in Paul's Churchyard, 1642.

To the Honorable House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
OBedience is a virtue of such great worth, that Luther did rather desire to
have grace to be obedient, than power to work miracles. Out of this very
Principle it was, that I first adventured to preach before such a grave and
judicious Senate, Mallem obedire quam miracula facere. Luther.
coram tam multis viris and tam paucis hominibus. And from the same Principle
it is, that I now present the Sermon to a more public view. The time allotted
for the making of it, was so short (by reason of your more serious affairs)
that it might have been a sufficient Apology, to excuse both the preaching and
printing of it, had not pure Obedience justly silenced all such Apologies. And
now it is printed, the Sermon it self is so poor and mean, that it may fitly be
answered to me, what Apelles once did to a Painter, who having drawn many Lines
in a little space of time, and boasting to Apelles that he had done so much in
so short a time; it was replied, That he wondered that he had drawn no more.
But yet howsoever, my humble request is, That you would accept of this poor
Mite, this little Goats-haire, which your commands (like a Midwife) have
brought into the world. And indeed the kind entertainment it found in the
hearing, and the great acknowledgement of your Thanks (far above all
expectation or desert) afterward, is an abundantly sufficient incitement
against all discouragement whatsoever. The subject of the Sermon is of great
concernment. It is about the ruin and repair of Kingdoms and Nations; a matter
suitable for you that are the representative Body of the Kingdom. Sin ruins
Kingdoms. When Nicephorus Phocas had built a mighty Wall about his Palace for
his defense, he heard a voice in the night, crying (...). Though thou build'st
thy walls as high as Heaven, sin is within, and this will easily batter down
thy walls. Sin is like a Traitor in our own bosoms, that will open the gates
to the enemy. Sin weakens our hands, and makes them unapt to fight. Sin takes
away the courage of our hearts. It was not the strength of Ai that overcame the
Israelites, but Achans sin. Sin causes a great Army to be overcome by a
little one. 2 Chronicles. 24.24.
The Army of the Syrians came with a small company of men, and the Lord
delivered a very great host into their hand, because they had forsaken the Lord
God of their Fathers. The sins of England, are the enemies of England. These
beleaguer our Walls, and are as so many Canaanites always rising up in
rebellion against us. But now on the contrary, Repentance and Reformation
repairs and upholds Kingdoms and Nations: this is their Fortress and Tower of
defense; their Munition, Armor, and Wall of Brass to defend them.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any People. Prove.
14 34.
The Lord in mercy ruinate our sins, and not the Nation! the same Lord work
a National Reformation, and make you his Instruments in this great work! Much
has been done by you this way already (which is acknowledged in this ensuing
discourse, with great thankfulness) The Lord enable you to perfect what you
have begun. He that is the Finisher of our faith, finish this much-desired
Reformation! It is very observable, that when God raised up Magistrates, such
as Nehemiah, Zerubbabel, and others, to pity Sion that lay in the dust, and to
repair her breaches: at the same time he raised up Prophets also, such as
Haggai, Zechariah, and others, to strengthen the hands of the Magistrates, and
to encourage them in so noble a service: and therefore it is expressly said.
Then the Prophets, Ezra 5.1.
Haggai and Zechariah prophesied unto the Jews that were in Judah and Jerusalem
in the Name of the God of Israel, even unto them. Then (and not before) rose up
Zerubbabel and Jeshua, and began to build the house of God which is at
Jerusalem; and with them were the Prophets of God helping them. And Ezra 6.14.
The Elders of the Jews builded, and they prospered through the prophesying of
Haggai the Prophet, and Zechariah the son of Iddo; and they builded and
finished it, according to the Commandment of the God of Israel, etc. By both
these Texts it appears, that the Magistrates began and finished the reparations
of Gods House, by the help of the Prophets of God. Suffer me, therefore (as
diverse others have done before) the unworthiest of all Gods Ministers,
according to my duty and place, to beseech and exhort you to the consummation
of those blessed good things which you have begun to do for the Church of God
in England. And the God of all blessings, bless you and yours.

So prays Your much obliged Spiritual Servant, EDMUND CALAMY.

A Sermon Preached at a Fast before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
Jerem. 18.7, 8, 9, 10. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it.

If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.

And at what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom, to build and to plant it:

If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of
the good wherewith I said I would benefit them.


THis Text may fitly be called a Looking glass for England and Ireland, or for
any other Kingdom whatsoever; wherein God Almighty declares what he can do with
Nations and Kingdoms, and what he will do.

1. What he can do. He can build and plant a Nation. and he can pluck up, pull
down, and destroy a Nation. And when a Kingdom is in the depth of misery, he
can in an instant, if he but speak the word, raise it up to the top of
happiness; and when it is in the height and Zenith of happiness, he can in
another instant speak a word, and throw it down again into an Abyss of
misery.

2. What he will do. God will not always use his Prerogative, but he will
first speak before he strikes, Verse 7.
he will first pronounce judgment before he executes judgment. Verse 8.
And if that Nation against which he has pronounced the evil of punishment
turn from their evil of sin, Verse 8.
then will God repent of the evil he intended to do unto them: And not only
so, but he will build and plant that Nation, and of a barren wilderness, make
it a fruitful Paradise. But if that Nation do evil in Gods sight, Verse 9.
and will not obey his voice, Ver. 10.
then will God repent of the good wherewith he would have benefited them, and
pull down what he has built, and pluck up what he has planted, and of a
fruitful Paradise, make it a barren wilderness.

By all this it appears, That as this day is a National day, and this
Honorable Assembly a National Assembly, so this Text is a National Text,
every way suitable for the occasion about which we are met. The Lord make it as
profitable to you, as it is suitable for you. From the words thus explained, I
gather these four Doctrinall conclusions.

1. That God has an absolute power over all Kingdoms and Nations, to pluck
them up, pull them down, and destroy them as he pleases.

2. That though God has this absolute Prerogative over Kingdoms and Nations,
yet he seldom uses this power, but first he gives warning.

3. If that Kingdom against which God has threatened destruction, repent and
turn from their evil; God will not only not destroy that Kingdom, but build
it, and plant it. Or thus,

National Repentance will divert National judgments, and procure National
blessings.

4. That when God begins to build and plant a Nation, if that Nation do evil
in Gods sight, God will repent of the good he intended to do unto it.

The first is this,

1. That God has an independent and illimited Prerogative over all Kingdoms
and Nations to build them, Doct. 1.
or destroy them as he pleases.

This is set forth in the beginning of the Chapter, by ocular demonstration.
God bids Jeremy Arise and go down to the Potters house, etc. them, Verse 2.
and when he came there, he beheld the Potter making a Vessel of clay, and
breaking it, and making it again another Vessel, Verse 4.
as seemed good to the Potter to make it. And God himself makes the
application; Oh House of Israel, cannot I do with you as this Potter, says the
Verse 6.
Lord? Cannot I make you Vessels of honor, or dishonor? cannot I save you,
or destroy you as I please? Behold, as the clay is in the Potters hand, so are
ye in mine hand* O House of Israel. Because Nebuchadnezzar would not confess
this truth, he was driven to school to the beasts of the field, and he had the
heart of an Ox, till he acknowledged, that God does whatsoever he will in the
Army of Heaven, Dan. 4.34, 35.
and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand, or say
unto him, What do thou?

Reas. 1.
This supremacy of Gods power, is founded upon this absolute Right that God
has over us as he is our Creator. For he is Jehovah, that gives being to all,
and receives being from none. Of him, To. 11.36.
and to him, and through him are all things. All creatures are beams from his
Sun, drops from his Ocean. If I speak (says the Text,) I in whom all men live,
move, and have their being; I that made all things out of nothing, and can as
easily turn all things into nothing, If I speak. This power of God over
Kingdoms, has two properties.

1. It is illimited and independent, which appears by three expressions in the
Text 1. By these words, At what instant; which hold forth unto us, that God can
destroy a Nation in an instant, in the very twinkling of an eye. In the
morning the Sun shone upon Sodom, but before night it was destroyed with fire
and brimstone. The old World was drowned (as Luther thinks) in the Spring time,
when all things began to bud and blossom. The flood came suddenly, says
Christ, it came de repent, according to the vulgar translation of these words,
when they least expected it. And on the contrary, God can in an instant make a
Nation happy. The Israelites were in an instant brought out of Egypt; Eodem die
fuistis omnium miserrimi and omnium beatissimi. Nox una non tantum vos a morte
in vitam traduxit, sed ex abysso profundissima evexit supra omnem terrenam
faelicitatem, ac si in nubibios equitaretis.
and were in one and the same day, of all people most miserable, and of all
people most happy, as Calvin well observes upon this Text. 2. By these words
-- I shall speak. If God do but speak to destroy a Nation, it is presently
destroyed: He spoke the word, and the World was made; and if he speak the word,
the World will return to its first Principles. If I bring a sword upon a land,
and say, sword go through that land, so that I cut off man and beast from it.
Though these three men were in it, as I live, says the Lord, they shall
deliver neither sons nor daughters, etc. Ezekiel. 14.17, 18. On the contrary, if
God do but speak to plant a Nation, it is planted; for Gods benedicere, is
benefacere. 3. This absolute power of God is likewise deciphered by three
synonimicall expressions in the Text, To pluck up, pull down, and to destroy.
Which three words do intimate, That God has an illimited Prerogative over
Kingdoms, and that he can overturn, overturn, overturn uhem, as it is said,
Ezekiel. 21.27. Or as Hugo glosseth upon the words, He can pluck up all mercies,
pull down all judgments, and destroy them; that is, make an utter ruin of them.

2. This power of God, is universal. For the words run in general, At what
instant I shall speak concerning a Nation: not this or that Nation, but a
Nation indefinitely. There is no Kingdom exempted from Gods jurisdiction, or
that has Letters Patents to privilege it. If I speak concerning Jerusalem, or
concerning England, etc. God is the Governor of the whole World, all alike to
this Heavenly Potter.

Use 1.
If Gods power over Kingdoms be so large, If and so absolute; let all the World
stand in awe, and not dare to sin against such a mighty and terrible God: Isa.
40.15.
A God before whom all the Nations of the World are as a drop of a bucket, and
as the small dust of the balance. And if all Asia, Africa, Europe, and America
be but as the drop of a bucket; what a little drop of that bucket is one man,
though never so great? If all the World be but as the dust of the balance,
what a little little particle of this dust is one man? Iere. 10. 6, 7.
Who would not fear thee, oh King of Nations? forasmuch as there is none like
to thee, O Lord; Thou art great, and thy Name is great in might. Will ye not
fear me, says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence, Iere. 5.22.
which has chained up the sea with fetters of sand? etc. That am the God of
earthquakes, the God of thunder and lightning; a God that can cast both body
and soul into Hell fire. Who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a man,
that shall dye, and of the son of man which shall be made as grass? and
forgettest the Lord thy maker, Isa. 51.12, 13.
that has stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundatons of the earth?
Think of this you that are greater in sin, than in greatness, that make no
other use of your greatness, but as of Letters Patents to free your selves
from all humane punishments, and to license you to make your wills your laws,
and your lusts your gods; and to commit not only peccata, Text.
but monstra, that are Pessimi maximi, not Optimi maximi. The great Jehovah
against whom you sin, is greater than the greatest; he binds Kings in chains,
and Nobles in lincks of iron. He has provided Tophet of old; yea, for the King
it is provided. Isa. 30 33
Hell was made for great men as well as poor. Observe how resolutely and
emphatically the Prophet speaks, yea, for the King it is prepared. Potentes
potenter torquebuntur. Ingentia beneficia, ingentia vitia, ingentia supplicia.
To whom God has given great mercies, if they abound with great vices, God will
inflict great punishments upon them. Think of this you that trample the blood
of Christ under your feet, by your prodigious oaths, and by the contempt of
the day, worship, and servants of Christ. The blood which you contemn is
nobler than the noblest blood that runs in your veins: It is the blood of the
eternal God, of that God, before whom the great, as well as the small, must
appear at the great day of Judgment; in which terrible day, the Kings of the
earth, and the great men, Reve 6. 15, 16.
and the rich men, vnd the chief Captains, and the mighty men will hide
themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains: And say to the
mountains and rocks fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, etc. They that are here clothed
in silk and velvet, shall wish for the mountains to cover them (which yet shall
be but a poor shelter; For the mountains melt at the presence of the Lord, and
the rocks rend asunder when he is angry. They that made others to fly away
from them as innocent Lambs, from devouring Wolves, shall be afraid of the
wrath of the Lamb that sits on the Throne. Great men must dye as well as
others, and when they are dead, there is no difference between the dead bones
of Philip of Macedon, and other men, as Diogenes told Alexander. Remember the
woeful Catrastophe of Herod the great, Agrippa the great, Pompey the great. Oh,
let all men fear to sin against that God that removed the Assyrian Monarchy to
the Persian, and the Persian to the Grecian, and the Grecian to the Roman.
That touches the mountains and they smoke, before whom the Devils fear and
tremble. Oh, let not our hearts be harder than the rocks, worser than Devils!
Oh England, fear the God of Heaven and earth! Oh you House of Commons, Psalm. 4.
tremble and sin not; most in the World sin and tremble not. Do you tremble,
and sin not: We are all in Gods hand, as a fly in the paw of a roaring Lion,
as the clay in the hand of the Potter. 1 Cor. 10.22.
Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we stronger than he? Consider the
advantages God has us at, and our dependencies upon him, and let us not dare
to sin against him.

A Sanctuary in all distresses and dangers. Let us fly to this God of power,
Use 2.
who gives Kingdoms, and takes away kingdoms as he pleases. The great
superintendent. Fly to him as to thy Ark, thy Pella, thy City of refuge. And in
our deepest miseries let us sing cheerfully the 46. Psalm, as Luther was wont
to do. God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. I will
not fear though the earth be moved and though the mountains be carried into
the midst of the sea, etc.

A divine project to secure a Nation from ruin; Use 3.
to make this great Jehovah our friend; for if God be on our side we need not
fear those that are against us. Deus meus and omnia: Tranquillus Deus,
tranquillat omnia. And for this very purpose we are here met this day in Gods
Sanctuary, flying to the horns of the Altar, to beseech that God who is the
only Potentate, King of kings, and Lord of lords, that only does wonderful
things, that he would be reconciled unto us; that he would quiet the commotions
that are in Ireland, reduce the Rebels into order, sheath up the sword that is
there drawn, and quench the flames that are there kindled. That the Lord would
knit the heart of our Sovereign to his people more and more, and of his people
to him. That he would unite both Houses of Parliament, that they may join
together with one heart as one man, to relieve poor Ireland, and reform
England. Athanas. in vita Antonij.
Athanasius tells us that Anthony the Monk fought against the Devil with that
Text, Psalm. 68.1. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, let them
also that hate him flee before him. The Devil is more afraid of this Text,
then any other: for he knows he is Gods greatest enemy, and if God arise, he
must needs be scattered. Oh, let us set God on work this day, to destroy the
implacable enemies of his Church; arise oh Lord, and scatter the Irish rebels!
arise oh Lord, and confound Antichrist, and build up the walls of Jerusalem!
The Romans in a great distress were driven to take the weapons out of the
Temples of their Gods, and to fight with them, and so they overcome. This is
our course this day, we fight with the weapons of the Church, Prayers and
Tears. The Spartans walls were their spears: Our walls are our prayers, our
help stands in the Name of the Lord, who has made Heaven and earth. Lord
speak a word and Jericho shall fall, be favorable to England and Ireland;
Lord take away our tin, and purely purge our dross! Our trust is not in our
bow, nor spear. Let us labor to become Gods favorites, and then we have all
happiness concentred in two words.

The second Doctrinall conclusion. Doct. 2.


Though God has this absolute power over Kingdoms and Nations, yet he seldom
uses this power, but first he gives warning. I say he seldom uses it: for I
do not lay it down as a general rule: Deus non alligat suas manus! God may,
and does sometimes destroy at once, and give no warning. Thus he dealt with the
Heathen Ammonites and Idumaeans, as Calvin observes; but he seldom or never
sends any great judgment upon his own people, but first he speaks before he
strikes. First Verba, then Verbera, as it is in the Text. At what instant I
shall speak, etc. If that Nation concerning which I have pronounced, etc. First
God pronounces a judgment before he executes a judgment; he lightneth before
he thundreth; he hangs out his white Flag of mercy, before his red Flag of
utter defiance; first he shoots off his warning Pieces, before his murdering
Pieces. And the Reasons are,

1. That all the World may take notice, Reas. 1.
that all punishments and afflictions come not by chance, or fortune, but from
the immediate hand of the great God. It is he that forms the light, and creates
darkness; it is he that makes peace, and creates evil, I the Lord do all
these things. Isa. 45.7.
And therefore God gives warning to imprint this doctrine: That there is no
evil of punishment, but from God.

2. Because God is loath to punish. Reas. 2.
Minatur Deus, ut non puniat: they that mind mischief, give no warning. When
Absalom intended to murder Amnon, he spoke neither good nor bad unto him, 2 Samuel 13.22. Neither would God reveal his intentions to destroy us, but only
because he desires not to destroy us. I read of one that came to murder one of
the Roman Emperors, and by speaking these words, Hunc tibi pugionem mittit
Senatus, detexit facinus fatuus, and non implevit. Another was seen whetting
his sword, and by that, suspected and detected. But it is otherwise with God,
he gives many items, and sets many Beacons on fire before he destroys a
Nation. As Ambrose observes upon Genesis 9.13. He puts his bow in the Cloud; Non
sagittam, sed arcam, not his Arrow, but his Bow; the Bow cannot hurt us, but
the Bow forewarns us of the Arrow; and the string of the Bow is to usward, to
show how unwilling God is to punish: He must first turn the Bow and put in the
Arrow, before he can shoot. And as it is, Psalm. 7.12. If you will not turn, I
will whet my sword, I will bend my Bow, and make ready my Arrow. First God
whets his sword before he strikes, and bends his Bow before he shoots, his
Arrow is unprepared, etc. And all this, because he is a Father of mercies, and
a father you know is loath to whip his child. I afflict not willingly, Lamen.
3.33. Fury is not in me, Isa. 27.4. It is your sins that put thunderbolts in
my hands. As a Woman brings forth her child with pain, and a Be never stings,
but when he is provoked: So it is with our good God, He never punishes, but
when there is no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. When God came to punish Adam, he
came slowly, in the cool of the day; but when he comes to show mercy, he
comes leaping over the hills, Cant. 2.8.
and skipping over the mountains. God was but six days in making the whole
World, and yet as Chrysostom well observes, he was seven days destroying one
City, the City of Jericho.

Reas. 3.
God gives warning for the glorification of his justice. That all those persons
and nations that are destroyed, may have no Apology, no excuse, but may be
speechless at the great day of account, Ne dicant sibi non praedictum Cave.
There is no Christian nation, shall be able to say, That God destroyed them,
and yet never gave them warning. Read the second and third Chapters of the
Revelation; observe Christ's warning to the seven Churches. This made them
without excuse; forewarned, forearmed.

If this be Gods ordinary course, Use 1.
Let us admire and adore the patience of God toward our Persons in particular,
and toward this Nation in general, in which we live: A Nation not worthy to
be beloved, A Nation as ripe for destruction, as any other Nation. How many
Tapers has God set on fire? How many white Flags of Mercy has God hung out?
How often has he shot off his warning pieces, to forewarne this Nation, that
God would pluck it up, pull it down, and destroy it. Jonathan shot three
Arrows, not to hurt David, but to help David by foretelling him of Saul's
murderous intention against him; But God has shot not only three, but eight
Arrows, to forewarne, and forearme us. The Lord awaken our secure hearts, to
the consideration of these things: God has spoken eight ways to this Nation,
by all which he has intimated his intention to destroy us.

1. He has spoken unto us by the voice of his Ministers, that with one mouth
and lip, have foretold us of desolation, and destruction. It has been the
constant voice of Gods faithful Servants, from the Pulpit, for these many
years early and late. Now this voice is not to be slighted; For surely the
Lord will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto his Servants the
Prophets, Amos 3.7.

2. He has spoken to us by the voice of his lesser judgments. For God has
two sorts of judgments, Rods and Scorpions: Footmen, and Horsemen, as it is
expressed, Ierem. 12.4. And he deals with a Nation, as a Physician with his
Patient. If a lesser potion will not work, the Physician will prescribe a
stronger. God has sent many lesser judgments, The Smallpox, unseasonable
Weather, the Plague in a moderate way; but these judgments have been slighted
and contemned; And lesser judgments contemned, are Harbingers to usher in
greater: God threatens, Levit. 2.6. If his people will walk contrary to him,
he will punish them seven times more: and afterward he adds, That if they
will not be reformed, he will punish them yet seven times more, and yet seven
times more. Verse. 18.21, 24, 28. I, even I, will chastise you in fury, seven
times more for your sins. As the ancient Consuls of Rome had Rods, and Axes,
carried before them: Rods as ensigns of their lenity to penitent offenders;
But Axes as tokens of their severity, against incorrigible offenders: So God
has his Rods, and his Axes, his puning Knife, and his Axe. If his pruning
Knife will not amend us, his Axe will hew us down, and cast us into the fire.

3. God has spoken to us by the death of his godly Servants. For the righteous
perish, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away; none
considering that the righteous is taken away, from the evil to come, Isa.
57.1. Thus Methusalem that godly Patriarch died, the very year the flood came.
And his name signifies, A messenger of death; His death did presage the flood.
Thus Austin was taken away by death, immediately before the sacking of Hippo
where he lived. Paraeus before the taking of Heilderberg. Luther a little
before Wars came into Germany, as he himself did fore-signifie at his death.
Thus the death of Saint Ambrose was a forerunner of the ruin of Italy. The
many Reverend Preachers, The Chariots, and Horsemen of Israel, that in these
few years are gone to their graves in peace; are as so many blazing Comets to
portend our ruin.

4. God has spoken to us by the voice of other Protestant Nations beyond the
Seas, that have drunk deep of the Cup of Gods wrath. Herodotus tells us, that
in a certain Egyptian Temple, there was a Statue built for Sennacherib, (this
was he that besieged Jerusalem, and blasphemed the God of Israel, and was
afterward slain by his sons) and upon this Statue was this Inscription;
(...), Look upon me, and learn to be righteous. Me thinks I hear Rochell,
Bohemia, the Palatinate, and other parts of Germany, saying: Oh England look
upon us, and learn to be righteous. God will not always make you like Goshen,
when we are plagued as Egypt: make you like Noah in the Ark, when we are
drowned with a flood of miseries: make you like Gideons dry Fleece, when we are
like his wet Fleece, bedewed with sorrow and lamentation. You must not look
always to drink so deep of the Cup of prosperity, when we have drunk so deep
of the Cup of adversity. God has made us examples to you; but if you amend
not, God will make you your selves the next examples. It is a most true saying:
Legimus Historias, ne ipsi fiamus historia. If you will not learn
righteousness by our History, God will make you the next History. Discite
justitiam moniti and non temnere Divos. This is a loud and powerful voice.

5. God speaks now more nearly unto us, by the bloody rebellion that is in
Ireland; The sword that is there drawn, is like the Comet, that for a whole
year hung over Jerusalem, in the likeness of a fiery flaming sword. This sword
is Gods warning piece to England: It is like Tamberlaines red Flag, threatening
ruin, and desolation to us; For it is an old saying, He that would England
win, must with Ireland first begin. A Serpent, the nearer it is, the more
dangerous it is. The sword is now come very near us: It is like a Serpent in
our bosoms: The Lord awaken our sleepy spirits. God has 3. swords. The sword
of the Angel, which is the plague: the sword of the Spirit which is his Word:
and the sword of the Enemy. We have been woefully massacred with the first
sword. The Plague has been grievously upon our bodies, but the plague of sin
still remains upon our souls; this sword has done little good. If the sword
of the Spirit will not now at last cut down our sins, we must expect the
sword of the enemy to cut us down, and to destroy us.

6. God now also speaks unto us by the many sad divisions, and unhappy
fractions that are in Church and State. A Kingdom divided against it self,
cannot stand. It is observeable, that scarce ever any great enemy entered this
Kingdom, but when it was at Schism and division within it self. Tacitus
says, that nothing gave the Romans more advantage against the ancient
Britains then this, Quod factionibus and studijs trahebantur. Mandubratius (as
Caesar calls him) out of hatred against Cassibellanus, brought in Julius Caesar.
Adminius, brought in Claudius. Gnortigernus first, and Mordredus after brought
in the Saxons. In vita 1. Agrip.
Toustains division and inrode, made way for the Normans; Lib. 5 de Bell. Gal.
and there were more divisions than one to help in the Danes. And there is
nothing more likely to bring in the Romans once more into our Kingdom, than
these Mandubratians, the Adminians, J had almost said these Arminians. Oh sad
divisions* these are as thick black clouds threatening a great shower of
desolation.

7. God speaks unto us by the great demur and delay of the reformation of the
Church. For the Child of reformation is come to the birth; but there wants
strength to bring it forth. This is a sign, That there are some great
obstructions in the Kingdom, that hinder the birth of this much desired
Child. And it shrewdly presageth, as if God had begun to repent of the good,
that he has begun to do for us; And that, it will be with us, as it was with
Tamar, in the time of her travel, Genes. 38.28,29. Zarah first puts forth his
hand out of the Womb, but afterward drew it in again, and Pharez came out in
his stead. So it gives us cause to fear, least the Child of Mercy should go
back into the Womb again, and the Child of judgment come forth in his
stead.

8. God has spoken to us by the voice of our own consciences. There is no man
that lives in any known sin, but his conscience has often told him as Abner
did Ioah, Will not this sin bring bitterness in the latter end? And as
Reuben to his Brethren, Did I not tell you of this aforehand? That this sin
would bring you to hell. There is a Light which God has set up in all our
souls, which is as a Beacon, set on fire, to give notice of Gods Wrath and
Vengeance. This light is Conscience, Tertul. Apolog.
which Tertullian calls praejudicium judicij. This is Gods bosom Preacher; and
when this is silenced, it portends nothing, but utter ruin and desolation.

And thus you see how many ways, God has given warning to this Kingdom.

Now I beseech you, Let the long-suffering, and goodness of God, drive us to
repentance. This is the use the Apostle Paul makes, Romans 2.4. which is the more
to be laid to heart, because that Saint Peter pickes out this exhortation from
out of all the Epistles of Paul, as one of the choicest, and urges it upon
those, to whom he wrote, as you may read, 2 Pet. 3.15. And account the long
suffering of the Lord, is salvation; even as our beloved Brother Paul also has
written unto you. Now I conceive, this is no where written, but in the place
forementioned. Let not that which is our salvation (as Peter says) become our
damnation. Let us follow the example of Noah, Heb. 11.7. Noah by faith being
warned of God, of things not seen as yet, moved with fear prepared an Ark, to
the saving of his house, etc. Noah had but one warning, and that of a
judgment, which had no print in nature: But we have had eight kinds of
warnings, and there are many prints and footsteps of Gods judgments amongst
us. O let us believe these Voices of God and let faith work fear, and fear
work care to prepare an Arc, before the Flood comes. Let us be amended by
Gods warning-peeces, lest we be consumed by his murdering-peeces.

Motives
There are two Motives to quicken us to the obedience of this exhortation.

Gods warnings are in Gods keeping. No man has a lock and key of Gods
patience. He is long-suffering, but not always suffering, and how long he
will suffer, no man knows. Sometimes God is warning of a people 120. years, as
he was the old world. Sometimes but 40. years, as he dealt with the Jews,
before the destruction of Jerusalem, Sometimes but 40. days, as in Ninive's
case. Sometimes but one night as in Lots case, who had warning of the burning
of Sodom, but the night before. We in this Nation have had many years warning.
I fear me, the Taper is almost burnt out: That the Sun of our prosperity is
ready to set. And that the houre-glasse of our happiness is almost run out.
This is our last warning. Mistake me not; I do not prophecy what God will do;
but what we deserve God should do, and what we may justly expect he will
do, and what we ought to provide, if he should do. Let us amend now, or
never; before the day of Mercy be past, before the Drawbridge be taken up. It
may be too late the next year.

necessitate and aggravate our condemnation.

1. They will necessitate our condemnation. For there are three degrees of Gods
wrath. His threatening wrath, his punishing wrath, and his condemning Wrath. And
this is Gods Method. First, He threatens* before he punishes: And if his
threatening anger reform us, we shall never feel his punishing anger; but if
his threatenings prevail not, we shall certainly feel his punishing anger.
And if neither threats, nor punishments prevail, nothing remains but his
condemning Wrath. Si non audies vocem misericordiae, senties vocem judicij. Si
nonaudies primam tubam, Bernard.
senties ultimam. Si non audies Deum minantem, senties punientem and
condemnantem. What destroyed the old World, but because they did not regard
Noah's warning? What destroyed Lots sons in Law, but because they mocked at
Lots warning.

2. They will aggravate our condemnation: For as a child in the Mothers womb,
the longer it is in the womb, before it comes forth, the bigger the child
will be, and the more pain it will put the Mother unto. So the longer God keeps
in his wrath, and is patient toward a Nation, the bigger the child of wrath
will be, when it comes forth, and the greater will be our misery and
affliction. This Metaphor God himself uses, Isaiah 42.14. I have a long time
holden my peace, I have been still, and refrained my self; now will I cry like
a traveling woman, I will destroy, and devour at once. Though God has leaden
feet, yet he has iron hands. The longer he is before he strikes, the heavier
the blow will be, when he strikes. Patience is the proper purchase of the
blood of Christ. There was no patience under the first Covenant. Bernard.
Sermon de triplici miseric.
Deus non expectabat Angelos, non expectabat Adamum, God did not wait for the
Angels, nor for Adam; but as soon as ever they had sinned, He throws the one
out of Paradise, the other into Hell. But for us sinful sons of Adam, God for
Christ's sake tarrieth, and waits our conversion. Oh, let us not sin against
the merit of Christ's blood! Read the 5 c. Psa. 21, 22. These things thou have
done and I kept silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as
thy self: but I will reprove thee and set them in order before thine eyes. Now
consider this, ye that forget God; lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none
to deliver. Let us not stop our ears from hearing these eight Voices, lest God
turn his words into blows, and stop his ears from hearing our voices in our
extremities. There are two degrees of mercy in God, Bernard. Sermon. de
triplici miseric. and quatuor miserat.
Misericordia parva, and misericordia magna, His little mercy, and his great
mercy. For God to wait our conversion, and to fore-warne us of evil to come,
this is a mercy, and a great mercy in it self considered. But it is but a
little in comparison of the second mercy, which is the great mercy. And that
is, when God gives us grace to make a holy use of his patience, to make his
patience our salvation, and to be led to repentance by it The Lord bestow this
great mercy upon us!

The third Doctrinall conclusion.

That National turning from evil, Doct. 3.
will divert National judgments, and procure National blessings. So says
the Text: If that Nation turn from their evil, then will I repent, and not
only so, but verse. 9. I will build, and plant it, etc. The Doctrine is a
merciful qualification of Gods absolute power, he is so far from using it,
as that he indents and covenants with every Nation. If they repent, I will
repent. Now whereas God is here said to repent, it is spoken (...), but it must
be understood (...). God is not as man, that he should repent; He is said to
repent, because he does that which men do when they repent. I will repent,
That is, Deus vult mutatione^ sed nunquam mutat voluntatem, Aquinas. Deus
aliquando mutat sententiam, sed nunquam mutat decretum, Greg.
I will turn my judgments into mercies. God does sometimes will a change, but
he never changes his will. God from all eternity decreed to be served in the
old Testament with types and figures, and in the New Testament, in spirit and
truth. Here was a will of achange, but no change in Gods will. When God is said
to repent, the change is in us, not in God. As when the Sun softneth the wax,
and hardneth the clay; here is a different act of the Sun; but the change
arises from the different object, not from the Sun. So God from all eternity
decrees to punish the impenitent, and to bless the penitent. And when a Nation
by Gods Almighty grace becomes penitent, God turns his punishments into
blessings; but the change is in the Nation, not in God.

And now give me leave to speak my mind freely; (...), Naz.
J am not come hither this day to feast your ears, but to wound your hearts;
you must not expect elegant and fine phrases. Non licet in tanta miseria
disertum esse, This is a day, not for humane, but divine eloquence. Non loquor
disertae sed fortia. A day wherein we are to cry mightily unto God, to knock
aloud at Heaven gates, and to extort mercy from Gods hands, by a holy and
acceptable violence. And for my part I know not any Doctrine more suitable to
work upon your hearts and affections, then this plain conclusion; That there
is no other way to procure blessings from God, or to turn away judgments from
the Land, but by turning from sin unto God. The wrath and punishments which
sin has twisted, Repentance will untwist. Sin is as a thick Cloud,
stopping the Sunshine of Gods mercy; but if we turn from sin, this will
melt the cloud, and cause the Son of Righteousness to shine upon us. Sin,
it is as a Devil in the Air, to hinder our prayers from ascending; but if we
turn from sin, this will charm the Devil, and make Satan like lightning
fall down from Heaven. Sin is like so many great pieces of Ordnance, planted
and charged upon high mountains, ready to shoot down Cities and Kingdoms:
But if we turn from sin, this will take away the force of these Cannons, and
make them as Paper-shot. Sin is a wall of separation between God and us: To
turn from sin, will break down this wall. Sin is the great makebate
between God, and man: Sin dissolveth Parliament unhappily: Sin puts
variance between a King and his Subjects. Sin destroyed Rochel and the
Palatinate; it brought the sword into Ireland, and will bring it into England,
unless we turn away from all our evil doings. To turn from sin, is a key
to unlock all the chests of Gods mercies. It is Clavis viscerum Dei, A
preservative against all misery. Oh the divine Rhetorique, and omnipotent
efficacy of Repentance! This is that Rainbow, which if God sees shining in
our hearts, he will never drown our souls. That star which will bring us to
Christ. A repenting faith, Tertul. de paenit. Paenitentia radens and verrens
peccata, Ibid.
is our Sacra anchora to fly unto; it is Ilex misericordiae: it ties Gods
hands, and charms his wrath. There is no thunderbolt so great, no wrath so
furious in God, but Repentance will abolish it. This Abigail, will easily
appear our Heavenly David, though he march never so furiously. Repentance is
so acceptable to God, that he rewarded Ahab for his hypocritical repentance,
that others by his example might be provoked to turn truly to God, who knew
not his repentance to be hypocritical. I have here a large field of matter,
for a year, rather than a day: But as a little Boat may land a man into a
large Continent; so a few words may suggest matter sufficient to a judicious
ear, for a whole lives meditation. I shall not spend time in unfolding the
nature of this duty of turning from sin; or in showing the reasons why this
turning is so potent to divert judgments, and procure mercies (this is the
work of every Sermon. Use of exhortation unto two Duties.
) I will only make one Use of exhortation (for it needs application, more
then explication.)

To beseech you to turn the doctrine into practice, and to express the
sincerity of your Repentance, by two duties, which are as the two poles, upon
which our turning from sin does move. By humiliation and reformation;
Humiliation for sins past, Reformation for the time to come: Humiliation
without Reformation, is a foundation without a building: Reformation without
Humiliation, proves often a building, without a foundation. Both of them
together, comprehend the Essentialls of this great duty, which is the very
quintessence of Practical Divinity.

To Humiliation.
Let us turn unto God by humiliation, for sins past. This day is a day of
humiliation. A Sabbath of weeping and mourning: Wherein we should wash the
feet of Christ with our tears, wherein we should weep bitterly, before the
Lord, power forth our hearts like water, and strive who should put most tears
into Gods bottle. I beseech you, let us turn unto God with true penitent
tears, drawn from the Well of a broken heart, fetched out with the backet of
Gods love.

Let us sanctify a fast, and afflict our souls before the Lord, that this day
may become a day of atonement. And because the Well is deep, and our hearts
are very hard, and some, it may be, want buckets to draw water withal: Seven
Buckets to draw out the water of tears.
Give me leave to offer unto you seven buckets, which will serve, as seven
helps to humiliation.

1. Let every man consider his own sins, which he himself is guilty of. Have
we not broken the holy, and righteous Commandments of God a thousand times,
and shall not this break our hearts? Have we not broken our vows and
covenants which we have often made with God, and will not the meditation of
this break our hearts? Job 14. 17 Ps. 56. 8.
God in Scripture is said to have a bag and a bottle. A bag to put our sins
in, and a bottle to put our tears in. Have we not filled Gods bag with our
sins, and shall we not now fill Gods bottle with our tears? Does it not
grieve us, Ephesians. 4 30.
that we have so often grieved the Holy Spirit of God? Are we not heavy laden
with those sins, Am. 2. 13.
with which God himself is pressed as a Cart with sheaves? Is not God himself
broken with our whorish hearts, Ezekiel. 6. 9.
and will not this break our hard hearts? Have we not had years of sinning?
Oh let us have one Day of mourning! Have we not trampled the blood of Christ
under our feet, and shall not the blood of this Scapegoate melt our adamantine
hearts? It is an excellent saying, That in all the sins we commit, Six Reasons
to move us to great sorrow for little sins.
we must not so much consider the sin that is committed, as the God against
whom it is committed. And this will provoke us to great Humiliation for little
sins, as well as great sins. For there is no sin simply little. minimum
spirituale, the least offense is committed against an infinite God; and
therefore deserves Caesar to death. For the wages of sin is death. The wages of
sin as sin, and therefore of every sin. A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia.
Non est distinguendum ubilex non distinguit. And therefore let us I beseech
you, mourn with a great lamentation, for our little oaths, our idle words, our
omissions of good duties, and defects in good duties, etc. Can we mourn for
the loss of our estates, for the death of our Children? And shall we not
mourn that we have lost God, and the peace of a good conscience by our sins;
and that our hearts are so dead and dull to goodness? Can we cry for the
stone in the bladder, and not for a stony heart? The stone in the bladder can
but kill the body; but a stony heart will cast body and soul into Hell. Weep
for those diseases that will destroy soul and body for ever. We have been
often in the valley of Hinnon, sacrificing our sons and daughters unto
Devils, by their wicked educations; improoving our parts and mercies, to the
service of the Devil. Oh, let us this day descend into the Valley of Bacah,
and let us make this Church a Bochim, a place of weeping. We have many
Church-sins, Sermonsins, Sacrament-sins. Let us have Church-tears for our
Church-sins.

A second help to humiliation, Buck. 2.
is the consideration of the sins of the Nation wherein we live. This Kingdom
is an Island encompassed with three Oceans; not only with an Ocean of water,
but also with an Ocean of mercies (no Nation more exalted in mercies) and I may
as truly add with an Ocean of sins. And that which makes our sins the
greater, is because our mercies have been so great. We have sinned under
mercies; we have provoked God, at the Sea, even the red Sea. Ps. 105 7.
This was a great aggravation of the Israelites sin, and so it is of ours. We
have sinned not only under mercies, but with our mercies, we have made a
golden Calfe, with the jewels of mercies which God has bestowed upon us. We
have taken the Members of Christ, and have made them the members of a Harlot.
What sin is there under the cope of Heaven, whereof any Nation is guilty, which
we have not engrossed to our selves? Let us weep for the beastly drunkenness
of this Nation: But why do I call it beastly? for generally beasts are sober:
It deserves a name inferior to beasts, for so it makes a man for the time.
Aust. Epist 6 4.
Austin says, that in his days drunkenness was grown to that height, as that
there was no remedy against it, but by calling of a Synod. And in our days it
is grown to that Gyant-like bigness, as that there is no hope of redress,
but in the Parliament. Woe to this Land because of this sin; this is that
which will make us unable to stand before our enemies, and to stagger like a
drunken man. For this sin God gives a Land over to the spirit of giddiness.
Let us weep for the blasphemous swearing that is in the Nation, wherein (if in
any thing) there is a pride taken in offending God, for other benefit of it I
know none.

For this sin the land mourns, and let us mourn. Weep for the adultery
and fornication, which as an Epidemicall disease has overspread the Nation.
Heb. 13.4.
Whoremongers, and Adulterers God will judge. If man will not, God will. He
that divorceth himself from his wife, and joins himself to a harlot, God will
divorce himself from such a man, and divorce his mercies and blessings from
him. Weep for the covetousnes of the Nation. This sin is the root of all
evil: and for this sin God will root out a Nation. He that is swallowed up
with earth, (as Corah, and his company) his ears stopped with earth, his heart
stuffed with earth, God will give him earth enough when he dies; and they that
love earth so immoderately, are likely to have little enough of Heaven. Weep
for the oppression, Extortion, Bribery, Lying, Griping, Usury, Cousenage and
Deceit in trading. These sins will cause a fourth Ocean to encompasse this
Island, and that is an Ocean of misery. Let us shed tears for the innocent
blood that is shed in the Land; for the divellish pride that is amongst us:
Pride of heart, pride of apparel, in following the fashions of every Nation
almost. How justly may we expect, that God should make us slaves to that
Nation, whose fashions we so eagerly follow? Mourn for the great profanation
of our Christian Sabbath Day: how can we expect that God should give us rest in
this Land, if we will not give him a Sabbath, a day of rest? Oh, let our eyes
gush down with rivers of tears! Oh that our heads were fountains of tears
for the Idolatry (that Land-devouring sin of Idolatry) for the superstition,
the Apostasy, the contempt of the Gospel, and of the Ministers, and Ministry
of it that reigns amongst us! It is time for God to deprive us of Manna, when
we begin to be weary of it; the time may come we may have Sermons few enough,
that neglect them so much as some do. The Confessors that fled for their
Religion in Queen Mary's days, Vrsin's preface to his Catechism.
acknowledged (as Vrsinus relates) that that great inundation of misery came
justly upon them, for the neglect of, and unprofitablenesse under the Gospel,
which they had enjoyed in King Edwards days. And if they were so severely
punished for a few years contempt of the Gospel; what a superlative degree of
punishment do we deserve, that have had the Gospel of Peace, and the peace of
the Gospel, for almost an hundred years, and yet are so unlike the Gospel in
our conversations? The time would fail, if I should make a catalogue of our
National sins. Oh, let us be one of the mourners in Sion, for the
abominations of the Land; that so we may be marked out for safety. And let us
take this rule to persuade us. Those sins which we know others to commit, and
yet mourn not for them, these sins become our own sins: And therefore we may
well pray with Austine, Lord deliver me from other men's sins, which for want
of mourning and grieving for, I have made mine own.

3.
A third bucket to draw the water of tears withal; is the consideration of the
great breaches that are in Church and State. We are divided in minutula
frustula (as Austine of the Donatists.) Let these breaches break our hearts,
Let these rents rend our hard hearts. For the division of England let us have
great thoughts of heart.

4.
A fourth help to humiliation, is the consideration of the miseries that are
like to come upon us as the woeful consequent of these breaches. As our
Savior Christ, when he came near Jerusalem, and beheld the sin of it, and
the desolation that was impendent over it, he wept, saying; Oh that thou had
known, even thou, Luk 19. 41, 42.
at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they
are hid from thine eyes, etc. So let us contemplate the sins of England, and
the destruction which we may justly expect as the fruit of our sins; and
let us weep over England, and say, Oh England, England, that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee! Oh that thou had known,
even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong to thy peace. It
is reported of Xerxes, Justin.
that having prepared 300000. men to fight with the Graecians, and beholding so
great a multitude of Soldiers; he fell a weeping out of the consideration,
that not one of them should remain alive, within the space of an hundred
years. Much more ought we to mourn, when we consider the abundance of people
that are in England, and the abundance of sin perpetrated among us; and what
shall become not only of our bodies within these few years, but what shall
become of our souls to all eternity.

A fifth Bucket is, the contemplation of Germany, A fifth help to humiliation.
which is now become a Golgotha, a place of dead men's sculs, and an Aceldama, a
field of blood. Some Nations are chastised with the sword, Others with famine,
Others with the man-destroying Plague. But poor Germany has been sorely
whipped with all these three iron whips at the same time, and that for above
twenty years space. Oh, let us make use of this Bucket, and draw out water,
and pour it out before the Lord this day; let us send up our cries to Heaven
for Germany. It is a sign that we are not true members of the body of Christ,
because we have no more fellow-feeling of the miseries of the same body. A dead
member has no sense of its own misery, or of the bodies distemper. If we be
living members, we will simpathize with the calamities of Gods people.

A sixth Bucket.
A sixth help to Humiliation, is the consideration of the bleeding condition of
Ireland. I need not relate (you have great reason to know it better than my
self) the inhumane, barbarous, Canniballisticall, and super-superlative
outrages, butcheries, and massacres that are there committed by those bloody
Rebels. Oh, let us send up one tear this day, as an Orator to the Throne of
Grace, to plead for mercy for poor Ireland! This is one chief cause of this
general Fast, to pray and weep for Ireland. Help it (Right Honorable) Oh,
help it with your Prayers and Tears. Tears have voices as well as words. Ps
6.8.
I thank thee, oh Lord (says David) that thou have heard the voice of my
weeping. Where note, weeping has a voice. And as music upon the waters
sounds farther, and more harmoniously than upon the Land: So Prayers joined
with Tears, cry louder in Gods ears, and make sweeter music then when tears
are absent. When Antipater had written a large letter against Alexanders Mother
unto Alexander, Plutarc. in vita. Alexand.
the King answered him: Do thou not know that one tear from my Mother, will
wash away all her faults? So it is with God; A penitent tear is an undeniable
Ambassador. An object looked upon when it is in the water, seems bigger than
when it is out of the water. Let us look upon Irelands misery through the
water of our tears, and this will represent it in its due proportion. Let us
weep, because we cannot weep, let our hearts weep, because our eyes cannot
weep. To move your hearts a little more, suffer me to propound three examples.
1. The example of Abraham, who was so zealous for the preservation of Sodom,
that by an humble importunity he brought God down to these terms, that if there
had been ten Wheat-ears in Sodom, all the Tares should have been spared for
these ten men's sake. And when God was gone from Abraham, he continued so
solicitous for the good or Sodom; that (as Luther thinks) he could not sleep
all night. I am sure the Scripture says, Genesis 19.27, 28.
He gate up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the Lord,
and he looked toward Sodom, to see what was become of his Prayers. If Abraham
did thus much for Sodom, for wicked Sodom; ought not you to be much more
zealous for the Protestants in Ireland, who profess the same faith, and are
under the same Government with us in England? 2. Neh. 1.3, 4 5.
Let me offer the example of Nehemiah, who though for his own particular he
was in great prosperity, and in great favor at the Court; yet when he heard of
the afflict on and misery of the people of God at Jerusalem, he sat down and
wept, and mourned, and fasted, and never desisted, till he had obtained leave
to go and help his brethren at Jerusalem. 3. I shall propound the example of
Hierome, who was writing a Commentary upon Ezekiel; Proemium Co^mentar. in Ezekiel.
but when he heard of the besieging of Rome (a place wherein he had formerly
lived) and of the death of many godly people, he was so astonished and amazed
at the news, that for many nights and days he could think of nothing. Et in
captivitate Sanctorum se esse captivum putabat. He thought himself taken
captive, 1 Sa. 4.19.
amongst those that were taken captive. I might add the story of Phineas wife,
but I forbear. Let these examples be your instruction and encouragement. Me
thinks I hear a voice in Ireland, like the voice that was heard in Rama,
Lamentation and weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children,
Mat. 2. 18.
and would not be comforted because they are not. Me thinks I see (do not you
so also?) the poor people of Ireland looking out of their windows, and crying
out as the Mother of Sisera. Jud, 5.28.
Why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his Chariot?
Why is aid so long delayed? where are Englands bowels? Me thinks I see the very
flames of this great fire that is kindled in Ireland. Oh, let this fire melt
our hard hearts into pity and compassion! I doubt not but this Bucket will
draw out a great deal of water this day.

There is one Bucket more, the last, 7.
but not the least; and that is the consideration of the Lord Jesus Christ. His
body was rent and torn for us. Oh, let this rend and tear our hearts that
ever we should sin against such a Christ! His blood was poured forth as a
sacrifice for our sins. Oh, let us pour forth our tears, for our offenses
against him! Beloved in the Lord; This is a day wherein we ought to make
conscience to get our hearts affected with deep sorrow for sin; otherwise we do
but take Gods name in vain. Now there is no way more powerful to produce this
effect, then by going to mount Calvary, and by burying our selves in the
meditation of Christ crucified. There is a story of an Earl called Elzearus,
that was much given to immoderate anger; In vita ejus apud Surium.
and the means he used to cure this disordered affection, was by studying of
Christ, and of his patience in suffering the injuries and affronts that were
offered unto him; and he never suffered this meditation to pass from him,
before he found his heart transformed into the similitude of Jesus Christ. We
are all sick of a hard and stony heart; and if ever we desire to be healed of
this soul damning disease, let us have recourse to the Lord Jesus Christ; and
never leave meditating of his breakings kings and woundings for us, till we
find virtue coming out of Christ, to break our hearts. Let us pray to the
great heart-maker, that he would be the heart-breaker. So much for the duty of
humiliation.

The second duty is Reformation.
The second duty wherein we must express our turning to God is Reformation.
Humiliation is not sufficient without Reformation. It is not enough to be
broken for sin, but we must also be broken from sin. As a bird cannot fly
with one wing, nor a man walk with one leg; no more can we get to Heaven by
Humiliation, without Reformation. Both of them conjoined, are the legs and
wings by which we walk and fly to Heaven, And therefore let me most earnestly
exhort you to repent from sin, as well as for sin. The Crown we fight for this
day, the Garland we run for, the Mark we aim at, is Mercy; this is our joint
suit, That God would show mercy to England and Ireland. Now the way to obtain
mercy is clearly expressed, Prove. 28 13. He that confesses and for saketh his
sins, shall have mercy. This God calls for from Heaven; this all the faithful
Ministers in the City preach for this day, Reformation, Reformation,
Reformation. As Master Bradford at the stake cried out, so do I at this time,
Repent, O England, repent, repent. There is a threefold Fast, a Fast from
meat, from mirth, and from sin. The two first will not suffice without the
last. A beast may fast from meat. The Devils fast, says Ambrose. The old World
(as some think) did never eat Flesh, and yet they were all drowned. Though we
could fast till we were perfect Anatomists; though we could pray and kneel,
till our knees were as hard as Camels knees (as it is reported of James the
brother of Christ) yet all were to no purpose, without this turning from sin.
This is jejunium magnum, as Austin says. This is jejunium totius anni,
jejunium omnium partium. This is the great and the everlasting fast, to fast
from sin by reformation.

Now this Reformation, This Reformation must be,
it must have two Properties, which are both of them mentioned in the Text. 1.
It must be Personal, 2. It must be National. It must be personal; for so
says the Text; 1 Personal.
If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, A
malitia sua. Every man has some sin which is his peccatum in delicijs, his
dilectum delictum, his beloved sin, the sin of his constitution. Let us turn
from that sin, whatsoever it is; and if we know not what that sin is, let us
turn from every sin, and so we shall be sure to turn from that sin. This
the King of Niniveh commanded that every one of his Subjects should cry
mightily unto God; Jona. 3.8.
and not only so, but every one to turn from his evil way, and from the
violence that is in their hands. Thus must we; we must be able to say with
David, I have kept my self from my sin. Ps.18. 23.
We live in times wherein there was never more turning. Some turn like the
Dog to the vomit, and like the Sow to the wallowing in the mire: Some turn
Atheists, some Papists, some Socinians, some Arminians. Some turn like the
weathercock, which way the wind blows; which way soever preferment goes,
that way they turn: Many turn Neurers: Many turn from Christ's side, to be of
Antichrists side; Many turn cold and Icy for God and his Church: Some are like
unto the Chamelion, that will change it self into any color but white. So
many will turn to be any thing but good. If times turn ill, they will be
naught; but if times turn good, they will not be good. But I beseech you, let
all us here present before the Lord this day, turn sincerely unto the Lord our
God from all iniquity. Let us strip our selves stark naked, of all the rags of
the old Adam. Repent of your pride; dust and ashes does better become you.
Repent of your gluttony and drunkenness, let weeping be your drink, and
fasting your meat. Repent of your swearing. Condemn your selves out of your
own mouths, that God may justify you. Repent of your covetousness: If ever
you expect to gain Heaven, look not after the earth so much. Repent of your
Adultery, that God may marry you unto himself, and least you be married to
eternal flames. Repent of your security, that you may live securely. No way to
escape damnation, but by Repentance; and no man that ever repented aright, but
did escape damnation. Oh that this day might be the conversion of some sinner,
that they may be able to say, From such a fasting day, I began to turn unto
God! Oh that this Fasting-day might be a Festivall-day to the Angels in Heaven;
who rejoice at the conversion of a sinner! Oh that some Zacheus would make
restitution this day! That some Prodigal child would return to his Heavenly
Father! God Almighty exceedingly delights to show mercy to a penitent sinner.
As a husbandman delights much in that ground, that after long unfruitfulnesse
proves fruitful, and calls his friends and neighbors, to behold that ground:
As a Captain loves that Soldier, that once fled away cowardly, and afterward
returns and fights valiantly; Even so God is wonderfully inamoured with a
sinner, that having once made shipwreck of a good conscience; yet at last
returns and swims to Heaven upon the plank of Faith and Repentance. This is a
notable provocation to all wretched hard-hearted sinners to turn unto God by
true Repentance. God is so far from refusing you, that he rejoices in your
conversion, and is more ready to receive you, then you are to come. And I may
safely add, That in some sense God delights more in a penitent Prodigal, then
in one of his righteous children. As the good Shepherd rejoiced more in his
lost sheep, then in his 99. sheep; Luke 15.
And the good Woman in her lost groat; And the good Father in his lost son,
more then in the son that went not astray. It is true, that Innocence of life
is better, simply and absolutely considered, than Repentance: And it is more to
be desired to live without sin, than to have grace to repent after sin. As a
whole Garment is better than a rent Garment, and yet a rent Garment may be so
handsomely pieced together, that there shall be little difference between that
and a whole Garment. A penitent sinner, that feelingly apprehends the great
mercy of God in pardoning so great a sinner as he was; the sense of this
distinguishing love of God toward him, raises up his heart to a higher pitch
of zeal, and enables him to draw near to God with more affection, and fervently
to be more tender of sin, and to do, and suffer more for God many times, than
those that are more righteous than he is. As suppose, two men at Sea, the one
comes safely to shore without danger, the other escapes to shore not without
great hazard and peril of life: He that comes without hazard has more cause
simply to be thankful; yet ordinarily, he that had the greater danger, out of
sense of his danger, will return more praise than the other. Saint Paul
labored more than all the other Apostles, because he was a greater sinner than
all the other Apostles, and had obtained greater mercy. Therefore Mary Magdalen
loved much, because much was forgiven her We never read that the blessed
Virgin ever came to wash the Feet of Christ with her tears. But Mary Magdalen,
a great sinner she did it, and she comes first to the Sepulcher, and afterward
(as some report) she spent 30. years in Gallia Narbonensi in weeping for her
sins. Gregory brings the example of David, who after he had obtained pardon for
murdering Vriah, and committing adultery with Bathsheba, fell a longing after
the water of Bethlehem. But when the water was brought, He poured it forth
before the Lord, 2 Samuel 23.15, 16.
and would not drink of it, because it hazarded the lives of his men. Observe
how tender of sin David was after his Repentance. He that before had spilt
innocent blood, is now troubled in conscience, for putting the lives of his men
in jeopardy: He that before longed for another man's wife, does now repent, for
desiring another man's water. Bernard brings the example of Peter, who before
his denial, considently told Christ, Though all for sook him, yet he would
not; Yet afterward, when he had repented of his denying of Christ, he was so
tender, that when Christ purposedly asked him three times, Love thou me more
than these? he answers not comparatively, as before, but positively; Only Lord
thou know I love thee. And this is another provocation to exhort all sinners
to lay hold upon this holy Anchor, this wrath-charming Repentance. Come all ye
prodigal children, all ye lost sheep that have gone astray: Behold your
Heavenly Father is not only ready, but joyful to receive you; and if rightly
understood, more joyful, than in his faithful Children. Was there ever mercy
like to this! Oh that we had hearts to embrace it! And the greater any man is
in estate, and parts, the more honor God shall have, if such a man will turn
to God this day. Great men are the Looking-glass of the Country where they
live, according to which, most men dress themselves: If they be wicked, the
whole Country is much the worser by them. The vices of Rulers are rules of
Vices, Quo grandius nomen ca grandius scandalum.
Quicquid faciunt praecipere videntur. If the head be giddy, the members reel,
If the liver be tainted, the body is dropsy. Jeroboam made all Israel to sin.
But when great men prove good men, it is not to be expressed, Act. 18.8.
what good they do. When Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, believed on
the Lord, many of the Corinthians hearing, believed also. When the Master of
the family was converted, his whole family were also baptized. The Lord make
all great men, good men and good men (of parts and abilities) great men.

It must be national.
As this Reformation must be personal, so also it must be national. For so
says the Text, If that Nation against which, etc. A particular man by turning
unto God, may turn away a particular judgment. But when the sins of a Nation
are general, and the judgments upon a Nation general, the turning must be
general. If the Sea has broken the banks, and overflown the Country, it is
not the care of one or two men, by repairing their banks, that can prevent the
inundation. Even so when God is overflowing a Land with a general destruction,
there must be a general endeavor to make up the whole breach. There must be a
Court-Reformation, a Countrey-Reformation, a City-Reformation, Church and
State-Reformation, a Generall-Reformation.

But how shall we do to obtain this general Reformation? Quest.


Two ways. Answ.


If you that are the representative Body of this

The second way to reform a Nation, is when Nehemiah, Nehe. 3, 1.
that the Nobles of Tekoah did not put their necks to the yoke of the Lord,
this was a great blemish to them. Let not, I beseech you, the like brand of
infamy be cast upon any of you. It cannot be denied but that this Nation needs
Reformation, not only in reference to the Commonwealth, but also to the
Church. The Prophet in the ninth verse, compares a Nation to a House that needs
building, and to an Orchard that needs planting. And sure it is, that the House
of this Nation is much out of repair: the House of the Lord lies waste, and
there is much rubbish in it. Many pollutions have crept into our Doctrine, much
defilement into our Worship, many illegal innovations have been obtruded upon
us; the very posts and pillars of this House, many of them are rotten, the
stones are loose and uncemented; the House exceedingly divided and distracted
with diversity of opinions; the very foundation is ready to shake, and the
House to fall down about our ears. The Garden of this Nation is over grown with
weeds; and there are many not only unprofitable, but hurtful trees planted in
this Garden. Now this is the great work that the Lord requires at your hands,
Oh ye Worthies of Israel! To stub up all these unprofitable Trees, and to
repair the breaches of Gods House, to build it up in its beauty, according to
the pattern in the Mount, and to bring us back not only to our first
Reformation in King Edwards days, but to reform the Reformation it self. For
we were then newly crept out of Popery, and (like unto men that come newly out
of prison, where they have been long detained) it was impossible but our
garments should smell a little of the Dungeon from whence we came. It is said
of Lazarus, that when he came first out of the Grave, Ioh. 1 1.44.
He came forth bound hand and foot with Grave-clothes, and his face was bound
about with a Napkin. So it was with us in our first Reformation: it was a most
blessed and glorious work, like the resurrection from the Grave: but yet
notwithstanding we came out of this Grave bound hands and feet with our Grave
clothes, and eyes-blinding Napkins; we brought many things out with us which
should have been left behind. Our Savior Christ rose from the dead, and left
all his linen clothes behind him. Ioh. 10.5.
So must we bury all superstitious Ceremonies in the grave of oblivion, and
perfect a Reformation according to the Word of God. And as our Savior Christ,
in the place forementioned, Ioh. 11 44.
commanded his Disciples to unbinde Lazarus, and to take away his
Grave-clothes. Oh that you also would command the Apostles of Christ, the
faithful and learned Ministers of this Kingdom to meet in a free National
Synod, for to inform you about the taking away of these grave clothes, and
eiesblinding Napkins, or whatsoever else shall appear to be prejudicial to the
piety and purity of of Gods Worship. But then I do most earnestly beseech you
to take heed that those whom you call to this Synod, be not like unto the
Cardinals and Prelates who met at Rome, to consult about Reformation of the
Church, Sleidan Convent.
of whom Luther speaks. That they were like unto Foxes that came to sweep a
house full of dust with their tails, and instead of sweeping out the dust, they
swept it all about the house, and made a great smoke for the while, but when
they were gone, the dust fell all down again. I doubt not but if this motion
(which I offer in all humility) succeed, your Wisedoms will be careful to make
such qualifications both of the Persons that are to choose, and to be chosen,
that no Minister liable to any just exception, shall have a voice in this
Synod, for fear lest our greatest remedy prove to be our greatest ruin. But
this by the way.

Oh that the Lord would make me an instrument this day to encourage you to go
on in the work of Reformation. Isai. 62.1.
For Sions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake I will not
rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the
salvation thereof as a lamp that burns. Arise, arise, have mercy upon Sion,
for the time to favor her, yea, the set time is come: Let it pity you to see
Sion in the dust. Let this be the product of this solemn Fast to quicken you to
a National Reformation. When Moses had been conversing with God, his face
shone when he came down. You are now conversing with God in the Mount; Oh that
your lives might shine forth in holiness, after this day: and that it may be
with you as it was with Hezekiah, when he and all his people kept the Passover
together; the first thing they did before the killing of the Passover was, 2 Chronicles. 30.14, 15. 2 Chronicles, 31.1.
the taking away all the Altars that were at Jerusalem, and casting them into
the brook Kidron. And when the Passover was finished, all Israel that were
present, went out to the Cities of Judah, and brake the Images in pieces, and
cut down the groves, and threw down the high places, and the Altars out of all
Judah, and Benjamin, in Ephraim also, and Manasseh, until they had utterly
destroyed them all. I speak not of any tumultuous, disorderly, illegal way,
but of an orderly and legal reformation: Which I desire (like this of
Hezekiah) may be the issue of this day.

The Motives are many. Motives to a Reformation.


1. If you build Gods house, God will build Houses for you, Hebrew Midwives, he
will bless and prosper you. Ex. 1.21.
Remember what the Prophet Haggai says. Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in
your ceiled houses, and this house lie waste? Now therefore, thus says the
Lord; Hagg. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
consider your ways, Ye have sown much, and bring in little, ye eat, but ye
have not enough, ye cloth you, but there is none warm; and he that earneth
wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes. Thus says the Lord,
Consider your ways, go up to the Mountain, and bring Wood and build the house,
and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, says the Lord, etc.
Read also, Verse 9, 10, 11.

2. Consider what Mordecai said unto Esther. Esth. 11. 13, 14, 15.
Think not with thy self that thou shall escape in the Kings house, more then
all the Jews, for if thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall
there enlargement, and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place; But
thou and thy Fathers House shall be destroyed. And who knows whether thou art
come to the Kingdom, for such a time as this? As Jerome said concerning the day
of judgment. That whether he did eat, or drink, or whatsoever he did, he did
always hear the voice of the Archangel, Arise ye dead, and come to
judgment. So do I desire that you would at all times, and in all places,
remember and consider this soul-awakening speech of Mordecai and Esther.

3. Consider the famous examples of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Zerubbabel, what care
and pains they took for the rebuilding, not only of the Walls, but also of the
Temple of Jerusalem. It is not enough to set the State in tune, but you must
remember to repair the Temple also. Be not afraid of Tobiah, Sanballat, or of
any other enemy. Zach. 4 7.
Who art thou O great Mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain. A
Parliament Man must be like Athanasius, who was Magnes and Adamas. A Loadstone,
and an Adamant. A Loadstone by his affable carriage, and courteous behavior,
drawing all men to the love of him. But in the cause of God he was as an
Adamant, untameable and unconquerable.

4. If we reform and turn, God will turn; If we turn from the evil of our sins
God will turn from the evil of his judgments. Tertullian speaks of himself,
Tect. de poenitent.
That he was born to nothing else but to Repentance. An excellent saying for
every one to lay to heart. The first Text that ever John Baptist preached on,
was Repentance. Matthew. 3. ^.
The first that ever Christ preached on, was Repentance. And the first thing
that Christ commanded his Apostles to preach, was Repentance. Mat. 4. 17.
God himself has consecrated Repentance, Luke 24. 47.
by his own example, says Tertullian, Tertul. de poenit.
Dedicavit poenitentiam in semetipso. He repents to teach us to repent. This
is that which God not only commands, and entreats, Ezekiel. 18.
but swears that he would have us to do. Happy we for whose sake God swears,
Tertull
but most unhappy if we believe not God when he swears, and if we live not as
we believe.

Will a national reformation certainly divert Gods judgments from a Nation?
Quest.
Did not Josiah reform, and yet it is expressly said, That notwithstanding
this Reformation, 2 King. 23. 26.
Yet the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath, wherewith his
anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations that Manasses
had provoked him withal.

1. A national reformation will certainly deliver us from everlasting misery.
Answ.
2. It is Gods ordinary way for the removeall of temporal judgments. There is
no instance fully against it, but this of Josiah: but to this it may be
replied, that Iosiahs reformation in reference to the multitude, was
hypocritical; and therefore it did only prorogue and adjourn; but not totally
remove Gods wrath. That it was so in regard of the people, appears, Ierem. 3.
10. And yet for all this, her treacherous sister Judah has not turned unto me
with her whole heart, but fainedly, says the Lord. A sincere National turning
will certainly divert National Judgments, and procure National Blessings.

5.
If we will not turn, reform, and repent of our sins, God will repent with a
new kind of repentance, he will not repent of the evil, but repent that he
has repented of the evil; he will repent of the good wherewith he said he
would benefit us. And this leads me to the fourth Doctrinall Conclusion.

Doctrine 4. Doct. 4.


That when God begins to build and plant a Nation; if that Nation do evil in
Gods sight, God will unbuild, pluck up, and repent of the good he intended to
do unto it. This is a point of great concernment, expressly set down in the
tenth verse. It is certain that God has begun to build and plant this Nation,
and he has made you his Instruments (Right Honorable) in this great work. We
read, Zechary 1.19. of four horns, which scattered Judah and Jerusalem. By
these four horns, are meant all the enemies of Gods people, that are always
pushing at them, and goring of them. And verse 20, we read of four Carpenters
whom God raised up to fray away these horns. Such Carpenters have you been unto
us: You have knocked off all those horns wherewith the fat Bulls of Bashan pushed
at us: You have endeavored to under-prop the House of this Kingdom, and to
keep it from falling: You have stubb'd up many unprofitable Trees, and taken
away (at least, in your endeavors) many rotten posts: you have removed a great
deal of rubbidge: You have been our Ebedmelech's, to release our Ieremies out
of the Dungeon. Indeed you have done mavelous things, blessed be the Name of
the Lord! And we have cause to be enlarged in much thankfulness, though you
never have opportunity to do more for us. Ezra blessed God that had given them
a little reviving in their bondage. Ezra 9 8.
A man that has been for many years in a dark Dungeon, will rejoice
exceedingly for a little crevise of light, though never so little. We have been
in the Dungeon of despair, and we bless God for the little crevise of light
let in by your means. We have lien among the pots (inter ollas fuliginosas)
sullied with filth; Psa. 68.13.
and there is a crevise of hope (in the Valley of Achor) that we shall be as
the wings of a Dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.
And though this child of hope be but yet an Embrio; Zac. 4.10.
We will not despise the day of little things. Ezra 10. 11.
When Ezra had laid the foundation of the Temple, there was great joy and
rejoicing. We doubt not but there is a foundation laid of better times, and
such a foundation which shall never be taken away. The Lord recompense all the
pains you have taken, upon you and yours. And yet let me add one word as a
parenthesis; Nehe. 12.22.
that Nehemiah after all his good services he had done for the Church,
sub-joyns these words. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and spare me; he
begs pardon for his noble work of Reformation. Blessed be God here is hope of a
fair building, and of a most beautiful Paradise, if things succeed as they
have begun.

But now mark the Doctrine. When God begins to build, and plant, if that
Nation do evil, God will un-build what he has built, pluck up what he has
planted, He will repent of the good, etc. For you must know, that God repents
as well of his mercies, as of his judgments. When God had made Saul King, and
he proved stubborn and disobedient, God repented that ever he made him King.
When God saw that the wickedness of the old World was great upon earth, Gene.
6.
He was grieved at the very heart, 2 Samuel 6.
and repented that ever he made man. When David was bringing home the Arc with
great pomp, because it was not brought home in due order; and because of
Vzzah's sin, God repented of what he was doing, and the Arc stayed in the
middle way. When the people of Israel were come out of Egypt, and very near
Canaan; because they brought an evil report upon the Land of Canaan, and
murmured, The Lord repents of what he had done, and carries them back again
forty years journey through the vast howling Wilderness.

Reason. Reason.


1. Because Gods Covenant with a nation is conditional. quamdiu se been
gesserit. If that Nation obey my voice, then will I build it and plant it: but
if it disobey my voice, then will I pluck it up, pull it down, and destroy it.
The Lord is with you, 2 Chronicles. 15 2.
while ye be with him: and if ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if you
forsake him, he will forsake you. 1 Samuel 12.23.
If you do wickedly, you shall perish, both you and your King.

2. Because that sin is so pernicious to a Trojans had their Palladium; as
long as that was safe, they were safe. The Romans had their Ancile; as long as
that was kept, they were secure. The Israelites had their Ark; as long as that
was sure, there was a defense upon Mount Zion. Pure and undefiled Religion, is
the Palladium, the Ancile, the Ark, to preserve Kingdoms. But sin betrayeth
Religion into the hands of superstition and idolatry. Sin is a Serpent in the
bosom, a thief in the house, poison at the stomach, a sword at the very heart
of a Nation. If the Serpent be in the bosom, it will bite; if a thief in the
house, he will steal; if poison in the stomach, it will pain us; if a sword at
the heart, it will kill us. Use.
Use.

Hence we may learn what the reason is of the great delay in the Reformation of
the Church; why the child of Reformation sticks in the Birth; why the hand of
mercy begins to be pulled in; and why many observers of the times begin to fear
that this is not, as yet, the appointed time wherein God will have mercy upon
Sion. I am very confident, that the fault is not in you to whom I speak; but it
is laid down, 2 Chronicles. 20. 33. Howbeit the high places were not taken away, for
as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their Fathers.
The people of the Land would not bear a through Reformation. I deny not but that
the Land in which we live is a Land of uprightness. Of. 26.
As many amongst us truly religious, as in any place in the world, of the like
bigness. But yet the Bulk of our people are wicked, and their hearts are not
as yet prepared to the yoke of the Lord. Oderunt vincula pietatis. They are
unreformed themselves; and it is no wonder they are so opposite to a through
Reformation. It may be said of many amongst us, as Jeremy did once say of his
people, The Prophets prophecy falsely, Ier. 5. 31.
and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so;
and what will ye do in the end thereof? Now it is this sin of the Land that
weakens your hands, and divides you sometimes one from another, and keeps you
from perfecting this great work of Reformation. And I conceive no way better to
remedy this, than by sending a faithful and painful Ministry thorowout the
Kingdom. For if you will be pleased to observe, you will find that those
places which are rud'st and most ignorant, most irregular; and where the least
Preaching has been, are the greatest enemies to Reformation. This is a work
worth, of serious consideration. The Lord stir up your hearts to consider it,
and open your eyes also, clearly to perceive that there are more with you, then
against you; and that when God reformes a Nation, he does not find us
prepared, but he makes us prepared. When God shows mercy to a Nation, there
goes power with the mercy to heal the Nation, Ezekiel. 36. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

If when a Nation does evil in Gods sight, Use 2.
God will repent of the good he intended, etc. Let us repent of our evils
committed against God, that he may not repent of the good he intends to do unto
us. Choose which you will, If we repent, God will repent of the evil, etc. If
we repent not, God will repent of the good, etc. And suffer me to tell you.
That when God begins to draw back his mercies from a Nation, that Nation is in
a woeful plight, God repented that he made the old World; And what followed?
The next news you hear, is, they were all drowned. He repented that he had made
Saul King, and the next news we hear, is, That he was rejected from being King.
He repented that he had brought the Israelites out of Egypt; and thereupon he
carries them back again, and swears that not one of them should enter into
Canaan, but that all their carkases should perish in the Wilderness. It is God
only that can build and plant a Nation. He is the only Architect that can build
our waste places, and make up our dilapidations, though never so great; he is
the only Gardner to pluck up our Weeds, and to plant useful and fruitful
Trees in the Orchard of this Nation. And if he please he can do it, and that in
an instant with a word speaking. For so it is in the Text, At what instant I
speak concerning a Nation to build, and to plant it; Though the House of the
Kingdom be never so much out of repair, God can in an instant build us, and
plant us, and make us better then ever. But if God begin to repent of what he
has done, woe to the Nation, Psa. 1:7 1.
For except the Lord build the House, they labor in vain that build it, in
vain to rise up early, and to sit up late, etc. God will unravell all, and
though he has brought us near Canaan, he will carry us back again, and make us
to tarry forty years for a Reformation, or it may be he will at last carry us
back again to Egypt, which was the last and greatest curse, Deuteronomy. 28 68.
threatened against the people of Israel, and it is the greatest misery that can
come upon this Nation.

But on the contrary, if we turn from our evil ways, God will perfect his
building, and finish his plantation, he will make us a glorious Paradise, an
habitation fit for himself to dwell in; he will set up his ordinances after a
purer manner, and watch over us for good from the beginning of the year to the
end of it. Oh that these words of mine might be as goads, and as nails to
fasten this point upon your hearts, that it may take deep impression, and abide
for ever upon your spirits. It may be some will say, That this doctrine is as
common as the highway: It is true, It is a common high way, but it is the high
way to heaven. And though it be not a Doctrine to glut your ears, yet it is
savoury meat, such as Jacob provided for Esau, whereby he obtained the
blessing. Turn or burn for ever in Hell. Let every man labor first to turn
himself, and then let us endeavor to reform one another. There is a great
complaint in the Kingdom. The Ministers complain of their people, that they are
factious, seditious, covetous, dis-respectfull of the Ministry, etc. And that
because they do not reform; therefore the judgments of God are not turned away
from us. The people complain of their Ministers, that they are dumb dogs,
greedy dogs, which can never have enough, and that they are superstitious, more
for pomp then substance; and that until the scandalous Ministers be removed,
Gods heavy hand will never be removed from us. The rich complain of the poor,
that they are lazy, and theevish, The poor of the rich, that they are proud and
hard-hearted. The superiors cry out against their inferiors, and the
inferiors against the superiors. And because every man expects when his
neighbor should turn, hence it comes to pass that no man in particular
turns. We look for that in another, which we forget to do in our selves. I know
no way to reconcile this division, but by raising a new division, and by
persuading all sorts of people to strive, who should be the first in turning to
God, who should first get into Christ, who should first get into the Ark. Every
man strives for worldly precedence. Oh let us strive for this spiritual
precedence! It is no pride in this to go one before another. He is the humblest
that goes first. And being reformed in our own persons, let us in the next
place labor to reform one another. We are all of one nation, of one body, one
flesh, one Church. There is a National Communion, a Moral Communion, a
Political Communion, a Spiritual Communion amongst us. I may add, There is a
Communion in misery. We are all in the same condemnation. Let us labor to
pity one another, and to turn one another. Let every man search what drunkard,
what swearer, what adulterer, etc. He has in his House, and either cause the
sin to depart from the person, or both sin and person from his house.

First reform your own families, and then you will be the fitter to reform
the family of God. Let the Master reform his servant, the Father his child,
the Husband his Wife. Will a man keep a servant in his house all night, if he
were assured he would murder him before morning? Such a servant is sin, It
will murder soul and body. Let us cast it away from our selves, and from our
families.

There is one Motive more, and that is from the aid you are sending to Ireland,
to distressed Ireland, that at this instant calls to England with aloud cry for
help and assistance. I doubt not, but you are sensible that delay is as bad as
denial almost. I shall offer only one Text to be considered on when you send
forth your help, and that is Deuteronomy. 23. 9. When the Host goes forth against
their enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing. If sin be in the Host,
it will make you turn your backs upon your enemies; Turn to God, and he will
make your enemies turn their backs upon you.

But it is not in my power to turn, Object.
unless I were praedestinated?

I answer with Master Bradford, that we must first go to the Grammar-schoole of
Repentance, Answ.
before we can be admitted to the University of Praedestination. It is not a
dispute about Praedestination that will turn away Gods wrath, but it is the
practice of humiliation and Reformation. It is most certain, that God is not
the cause of any man's damnation. He found us sinners in Adam, but made none
sinners. Thy perdition is of thy self, oh Israel! And it is as certain, that
it is not in the power of man by nature to convert himself. And that therefore
God commands what we cannot perform, that we might thereby take notice what we
should do, and what we once could do in Adam, and where we should go to get
power to do that which we cannot do of our selves. Go to the Word, that has a
creating power. God oftentimes in speaking gives power. Go to prayer, for
converting Grace. Pray with Austine, Lord give me what thou command, and
command what thou will. It is an excellent rule observed by the same Author.
That there is nothing required of us from God as a duty in Scripture, but it is
either promised by God as a gift, or some of Gods Saints have prayed for it as
a gift. As for example. God commands us to turn unto him, but Jeremy prays for
it; Turn us, oh Lord, and we shall be turned. And God promises it, Deuteronomy. 30.
6. Ezekiel. 36. 26. Let us therefore be sensible of our inability to keep the
commandment of the text; and let us believe in his promise, to give us power
to keep it, and pray for the performance of his promise.

FINIS.

