HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS MESSAGE AND Summons to the City of Gloucester AUG. 10.
1643.
With Their Answer thereunto.
OUt of Our tender Compassion to Our City of Gloucester, and that it may not
receive Prejudice by Our Army, which We cannot prevent, if We be compelled to
assault it, We are personally come before it to require the same, and are
graciously pleased to let all the Inhabitants of, and all other Persons within
that City, as well Soldiers as others, know, That if they shall immediately
submit themselves, and deliver this Our City to Us, We are contented freely and
absolutely to pardon every one of them without exception; And do assure them
in the word of a KING, that they nor any of them shall receive the least
Damage or Prejudice by Our Army in their Persons, or Estates; But that We will
appoint such a Governor, and a moderate Garrison to reside there, as shall be
both for the ease and security of that City and that whole County. But if they
shall neglect this Profer of Grace and Favor, and compel Us by the Power of
Our Army to reduce that place (which by the help of God We doubt not We shall
be easily and shortly able to do) they must thank themselves for all the
Calamities and Miseries must befall them. To this Message We expect a clear
and positive Answer within two hours after the publishing hereof, And by these
presents do give leave to any Persons safely to repair to, and return from
Us whom that City shall desire to employ unto Us in that business. And do
require all the Officers and Soldiers of Our Army, quietly to suffer them to
pass accordingly.

August 10. 1643.
We the Inhabitants, Magistrates, Officers and Soldiers within this Garrison
of Gloucester: unto His Majesty's gracious Message return this humble Answer.
That We do keep this City according to Our Oaths and Alleagiance to and for
the use of His Majesty and His Royal Posterity; And do accordingly conceive
Our selves wholly bound to obey the Commands of His Majesty signified by both
Houses of Parliament; And are resolved by Gods help to keep this City
accordingly.

De. Wise Major. John Brewster. William Luggo. My. Singleton. Thomas Hill.
Thomas Pury. John Scriven. Nich. Webb. Io. Dorney. Anth. Edwards. John Halford.
Toby lordan. G. Dawidssone. Robert Maxwell. Edw. Massy. Con. Ferrer. Hum
Mathewes. Isaac Dobson. Edward Gray. Charles Blount. Peter Crispe. Rob.
Backhouse. Ia. Harcus. Tho. Pury Iun. Rob. Stevenson. Tho. Blayney.


LEt the World now judge if His Majesty could have sent a more Gracious Message
to His most Loyal Subjects, and whether these desperate Rebels deserve any
Mercy, who after so many Offers do still refuse a Pardon. But since their
returning this Rebellious Answer, they have set their own Suburbs on fire,
which surely is not to keep the City either for the KING or Parliament.

Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1643.


