A MESSAGE FROM The Royal Prisoner at Windsor, to the Kingdom of Scotland;
And His Majesty's Resolution, concerning the Ordnance and Impeachment of High
Treason, against His Royal Person, by the Parliament and Army, and His
Majesty's Speech and Prayer, upon receipt of the Intelligence, of their choosing
Commissioners, for bringing Him to a speedy Trial. Dated from Windsor the 3 of
January, 1648. Liknwise, a Declaration from Gloucester-shire, Worcestershire,
and Hereford-shire, concerning the King, and His Trial; And a Declaration of
the Ministers of Lancashire, touching his Majesty, and the Army; Delivered in
their Pulpits to their several Congregations.

royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed for W. FIELDING, 1648

A MESSAGE From the Royal prisoner at WINDSOR TO The Kingdom of Scotland,
concerning the dangerous proceedings of the Lord Gen: Fairfax and the Army
against his Majesty's person.
Right Honorable,
HIs Majesty has received intelligence from Westminster, that the General
Council of the Army are resolved to bring him to a speedy trial, and to that,
have drawn up the Bill of Attainder and Charge against him, for profecuting the
same; all which his Majesty does very ill rescent; for, (with a sad and
melancholy heart, and tears trickling down his sacred cheeks) he says, That
his conscience begins to dictate sad and dismal apprehensions to his memory,
and that he much fears, the Clouds begin to gather to a head, for the
eclipsing and evacuating the splendour and glory of his days: However, he has
made his peace with God, and is resolved to undergo the cross and afflictions
of this transitory life, be it with loss of Life, or Imprisonment.

Yesterday by another express from London, the King received a further
confirmation of the proceedings of the Lords, Commons, and his Excellency,
touching the Orddance of attainder, for impeaching him of high treason, who
after receipt thereof, betook himself to private meditation, and as it is said,
besought the Lord in prayer, for the space of two hours, humbly imploring his
sad and miserable condition, and desiring of the Lord, to inspire his heart
with wisdom and understanding, and to enable him to stand firm in the presence
of all those, who are now acting and contriving things of so great consequence
against him, and also, that he may have both power and knowledge, to answer to
all the objections, clauses and particulars, which shall be exhibited against
him.

Which done, his Majesty withdrew from his privy chambed, and took a walk upon
the Territs of the Castle, who fixing his eyes toward London, was seen to lay
his hand upon his breast,, uttering many sad and mournful expressions.

His Majesty has had some conference with one Mr. Sanders, who intimates, that
he desires to hear his Charge, and to be brought to a speedy trial.

We hear that the Royal prisoner Duke Hamilton has sent a message to
Scotland, purporting the affairs of England between King, Parliament, and Army:
the rest of the Royal party begins to bewayl their sad and deplorable
conditions, and some have vowed, that if once they could escape this present
Net of Justice, they would enter into protestation, never to incur the like
penalty for the future.

Windsor 3 Jan. 1648.
Jan: the third, The Commons communicated the Ordinance (for trial of the
King) to the house of Peers for their concurrence, which was assented to. And
for the better confirmation of the present trvall, and foundation thereof, and
prevention of the like for the future, the House declared, viz. Resolved, That
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do declare, and adjudge, That by
the fundamental Laws of this Realm, it is treason in the Kings of England for
the time to come, to levy War against the Parliament and Kingdom of England.

The Commons appointed to consider of drawing up of a charge against, and
consider of the manner of the Trial of his Majesty, reported an Ordinance this
day to the house, for attainting him of High Treason, and for trying him by
such Commissioners as should be nominated in the body of the said Ordinance.

The house having read it the first time ordered to have it read again to
morrow morning at ten a clock. The charge runs thus, That Charles Stewart has
acted contrary to his trust, in departing from the Parliament setting up his
Standard making a war against them, and thereby been occasion of much blood^hed
and misery to the people, whom he was set over for good: That he gave
Commissions to Irish Rebels, etc. and since was occasion of a second war, etc
besides what done contrary to the Liberties of the Sbuject, and tending to the
destruction of the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, etc.

The Bill of Attainder runs high, against his person, charging him with high
treason: His trial will be at Westminster, and his Majesty is expected to be
there on Mund^y next.

The further resolution of the Army touching the King.
HIs Excellency, and the General Council of the Army have fully resolved upon
their debates, touching the trial of the King, and are resolved to bring him to
a present trial, the manner of it is as follows, viz. 6 Lords, forty Commons,
and ten Colonels, Lieutenant colonels, and Majors, who are to receive
Instructions (as Commissioners) Ior managing and prosecuting of the Bills of
Attainder and Impeachment against the person of the King; and are resolved to
establish and confirm a true and lasting Government within this Kingdom, and
that the best they can imagine for a Commonwealth, which contains these
particulars, viz.

1 The Magistrate to have power in things civil and natural. 2 The Subject to
be free, submitting to the Civil Laws. 3 No toleration for Popery nor
Prelacy. 4 None to be forced to fight in War against their will* etc.

And the General Council have further resolved and declared, That the
Parliament shall not proceed against any persons to give Judgment, but
according to what is Law, Rason, and Equity.

And for the better facilitating and establishing of a true and lasting peace
within this Nation, the General Council of the Army have passed the remaining
part of the Articles for an Agreement of the People, and are determined
speedily to consider of a form of conclusion and subscription to this
Agreement as to the Officers of the Army.

Summons are also sent to the Prince of Wales, and the Duke of York, to require
their present appearance, and to desist from their Engagement, in acting
against this Kingdom, and involving their place of Nativity in another bloody
and intestine War, and a day is prefixed, for their return, that in case they
refuse to yield obedience to the said Summons, then to be declared against as
Enemies to the peace of this Kingdom, and to be degraded of all Titles and
Honors, belonging to either of them.

Yet notwithstanding, we have one precious Flower and Blossom to six our eyes
upon, viz. the Duke of Gloucester, (the Kings youngest Son) who in all
probability, will speedily be advanced to great Honors and Dignities, to the
great admiration of the whole Kingdom.

Yesterday the Committee reported the Ordinance of Attainder against Charles
Stuart, and the names of such Commissioners as should try him, which are, the
Earl of Denbigh, Earl of Pembroke, E. of Kent, E of Mnlgrave, E. of Nottingham,
and Lord Gray of Wark.

Of the House of Commons, the Lord Munson, L. Lisle, L. Gray of Groby, Lieu.
Genesis Crumwell, M. G. Skippon, Com. Gen: Ireton, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir John
Danvers, Col. walton, Col: Moor, Col: Boswell, Col: Rossiter, Col: Ven, Col:
Thorney, Col: Lassels, and about 30 Members more.

Of the Army that are not members of the House of Commons, the L. Genesis Fairfax,
Col: Whalley, Col: Rich, Col: Waller, Col: Tomlinson, col: Scroop, Col:
Sanders, Col: Pride, col: Twisleton Col: Huson, Col: Barkstead, Col: Horton,
Col: Desborough, Col: Dean, and Col: Okey.

Of the City of London, Alderman Pennington, Alderman VVoollaston, Ald: Fooks,
Ald: Gibbs, and Alderman Andrews.

The Judges are, the Lord chief Justice Rolls, chief Justice of England,
Justice St. John, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Lord chief Baron
VVild. And two out of all the 40 Counties throughout the Kingdom, all which
commissioners, who are to fit as a Jury, are to consist of 150, and any 20 of
them are to be a C^mmittee for trial of the King, and to give sentence against
him. By this Ordinance the Commissioners are limited to a months time, to make
a final determination of the business, the place of trial is said to be at
Westminster.

A message is said to be sent from the Parliament, to the several Counties of
the Kingdom of England, concerning the trial of the King, for satisfaction of
the people.

Letters this day from several Counties in the West of England purports, That
the Knights, Gentry, and Commonalty* of Gloucester-shire, Somerset shire,
Hereford-shire, and Worcestershire, have declared their unanimous resolutions
to comply with the Army, for the settling of the peace of this bleeding and
distracted kingdom, and executing of speedy and impartial Justice upon the
grand Delinquents of this kingdom, and that all of them may be brought to a
speedy trial, to answer to their Charge and Impeachment exhibited against them*

But from the North letters say, That the Clergy in those parts cannot rescent
the proceedings in the South, especially the Black-coats of Lancashire, who do
openly declare in Pulpit to their several Congregations, That the ways of the
army are inconsistent with the word of God, and that their Designs tends to
nothing more, then the subversion of Religion, Government, and Law; But some of
the Grandees are silenced, and taken into custody by the well affected of that
County.

FINIS.

