royal blazon or coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for preventing of Disorders in the Nightime, in the Garrison
of OXFORD.
WHEREAS We have been informed, that many and great Disorders have been, and
are frequently Committed in this Garrison of Oxford both in the Evenings, and
in the Night time. And the Lords and Commons of Parliament here Assembled at
Oxford have besought Us, That by Our immediate Warrant and Command, such
Disorders may for the future be prevented and suppressed, And that all persons of
what degree or quality soever they be, may be inhibited and restrained from
committing the like hereafter. We have therefore thought fit to publish this
Our Proclam^^^^^ and do hereby straightly charge and command all Heads of
Colleges and Halls within this Our University of Oxford, and all Inhabitants
in Houses opening into any Street, Lane, or place of Common passage within this
City and Garrison of Oxford, that every Evening upon shutting in of daylight,
and when the Nights shall be dark, they cause Lights to be hung up before their
Colleges, Halls, and dwelling Houses respectively, toward or into the
Streets, Lanes, and Common Passages, to continue burning till the Tap-too be
beaten. And that no Person or Persons of any degree or quality soever, shall
after the beating of the Tap-too, stay or continue in any Tavern,
Victualing-house or Alehouse, or in any other house or place, where Wine, Ale,
Beer, or Victuals shall be sold or retayled, unless it be such Person or
Persons as are, or shall be Lodged or Quartered in any such house; And farther,
That no keeper of any Tavern, Victualing-house, or Alehouse, shall permit or
suffer any Person or Persons whatsoever, to continue eating or drinking in any
such House, after the time aforesaid; And if any Person or Persons being in any
such House, shall after the time aforesaid refuse to go or depart from thence:
then the Master or Keeper of any such House, shall make the same known at the
Maine-Guard, to the end, that by assistance from thence, such Persons may be
removed and carried to the Guard; And in case he shall not crave such
assistance, the Master or Keeper of the House, as well as the Persons so
refusing to depart, shall be taken and carried to the Guards, and punished
according to their demerits. And farther, We do hereby Charge and Command all
Persons of what degree whatsoever, that after the beating of the Tap-too, They
repair to, and keep within their Lodgings, without noise or disturbance in the
Streets. And We do Charge and require the Governor of Our said Garrison
Oxford, That he cause these Our Orders and Commands to be straightly and
punctually observed, and to punish all such as shall offend or do to the
contrary, by putting them in Guard or otherwise, as is used in Garrison Towns
in time of War, without any Connivance or distinction of Persons whatsoever.

Given at Our Court at OXFORD, this Third of February, in the One and Twentieth
year of Our Reign. 1645.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Universitie, 1645.


