His Majesty's MESSAGE To the Lords and Commons in Parliament, Sept. 5.

Together with A DECLARATION of the Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT, IN ANSWER
to the said MESSAGE.

Lunae 5. September, 1642.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this be forthwith printed
and published;

H. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. Dom: Com.



Printed, for Edw. Husbands and John Franck, and are to be sold at their shops,
in the middle Temple, and next door to the sign of the King's Head in
Fleet Street, Septem. 7. 1642.

His Majesty's Message to the Lords and Commons in Parliament, Sept. 5.
WE will not repeat what means We have used to prevent the dangerous and
distracted estate of the Kingdom, nor how those means have bin interpreted,
because being desirous to avoid effusion of blood, We are willing to decline
all memory of former bitterness that might make Our offer of a Treaty less
readily accepted.

We never did Declare, nor ever intended to Declare both Our Houses of
Parliament Traitors, or set up our Standard against them, and much less to
put them and this Kingdom out of our Protection: We utterly Profess against
it before God and the World. And further, to remove all possible Scruples which
may hinder the Treaty so much desired by Us; We hereby Promise, so that a day
be appointed by you for the revoking of your Declarations against all Persons
as Traitors or otherwise, for assisting of Us, We shall with all
cheerfulness upon the same day recall Our Proclamations and Declarations, and
take down our Standard: In which Treaty, We shall be ready to grant any thing
that shall be really for the good of our Subjects; Conjuring you to consider
the bleeding condition of Ireland, and the dangerous condition of England, in
as high a degree as by these Our offers We have declared Our Self to do: And
assuring you that Our chief desire in this world is to beget a good
understanding and mutual confidence betwixt Us and Our two Houses of
Parliament.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, In Answer to His
Majesty's Message.
WHereas His Majesty in a Message, received the fifth of September, requires
that the Parliament would revoke their Declarations against such persons as
have assisted His Majesty in this unnatural War against His Kingdom: It is
this day Ordered and Declared by the Lords and Commons, That the Arms which
they have been forced to take up and shall be forced to take up for the
preservation of the Parliament, Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, shall not be laid down, until His Majesty shall withdraw His
Protection from such persons as have been Voted by both Houses to be
Delinquents, or that shall by both Houses be voted to be Delinquents, and shall
leave them to the Justice of the Parliament, to be proceeded with, according to
their demerits; to the end that both this, and succeeding Generations may take
warning with what danger they incur the like heinous crimes, and also to the
end that those great charges and damages wherewithal the Common wealth has
been burdened in the Premises, since His Majesty's departure from the
Parliament, may be born by the Delinquents, and other malignant and disaffected
persons: And that all His Majesty's good and well-affected Subjects, who by
Loan of Moneys, or otherwise at their charge have assisted the Commonwealth,
or shall in like manner hereafter assist the Common wealth, in time of extreme
danger, may be repayed all Sums of Money by them lent for those purposes, and
be satisfied their charges so sustained, out of the Estates of the said
Delinquents, and of the malignant and disaffected party in this Kingdom.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this Declaration be
forthwith Printed and Published.

H. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


