THE MONSTER OF SINFUL SELF-SEEKING, ANATOMIZED.

TOGETHER WITH A description of the Heavenly and Blessed SELFE-SEEKING.

In a SERMON Preached at Paul's the 10. of December, 1654.

By EDM: CALAMY, B. D. and Pastor of Aldermanbury, London.

1 COR. 10. 24.

Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth.

1 COR. 13. 5.

Charity seeks not her own.

ROMANS 15. 2, 3.

Let every one please his neighbor, for his good to edification: For even
Christ pleased not himself.

Qui neglecta proximorum cura, sui tantum amator est, id assequitus, ut ne
seipsum quidem vere amet; Quemadmodum enim in membris, unius detrimentum ad
alia quoque membra pervadit; and in aedificiis, unius partis ruina, ad alias
extenditur: sic and in Ecclesia, qui fratrem suum negligit, se seque
tantummodo, and suam procurat utilitatem, sibi etiam ipsi vel invitus damno
est. Nam qui in rebus necessariis, periclitantem vidit fratrem, manumque non
porrigit, in gehennam mittitur, majori detrimento, quam erat illud quo frater
afficiebatur, etc. Theophyl.

LONDON, Printed by I. G. for NATH: WEBB, and WILL: GRANTHAM, at the Bear in
St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door, 1655.

PACK Mayor.
A special Court holden on Tuesday the 19. day of December, 1654.

ORdered that Mr. Calamy be desired from this Court, to print his last Sermon
at Paul's.

SADLER.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, CHRISTOPHER PACK, Lord Major, AND The Right
Worshipful Aldermen of the famous City of London.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THis ensuing Sermon was ordered by you to be printed, it has stuck long in
the birth, by reason of multitude of intervening impediments: Now at last it is
come into the world, and is Civitas Dei incipit et construitur ex amore Dei, et
crescit ad odium suiipfius. Civitas vero Diaboli incipit ab amore sui, et
crescit usque ad odium Dei per contemptum proximorum. Qui enim proximu^ odit,
et contemnit, mox etiam Deum odio babebit, et contemnit. Aug de Civ. Dei, lib.
1.
here humbly presented to you, as an expression of that respect and service
which I acknowledge to be due, and shall ever be ready to pay. The subject
matter of it is to discover and Anatomize that ugly and deformed Monster of
sinful selfe-seeking, and ^o show the sinfulness and cursednesse of it. There
are two Cities (says Austin) The City of God, and the City of the Devil: The
City of God is begun and built up by the love of God, and increases, even to
the hatred of our selves; but the City of the Devil, begins from the love of
our selves, and increases, even to the hatred of God, by the contempt of our
brethren; for he that hates and contemns his brother, will in a little while
hate and contemn God. It cannot be denied, (no not by one made up of Charity)
that there are many Citizens of this City of the Devil. Many who instead of
loving God, to the contempt of themselves, love themselves to the contempt of
God: Many who seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ', or which is
as bad, if not worse, who seek their own, under the hpocriticall pretense of
seeking the things of Christ. It is reported of Cnidius a great Architectist,
who building a sumptuous Watchtower for the King of Egypt (to discover the
dangerous rocks by night to his Mariners) caused his own name to be engraved
upon a stone in the wall in great letters, and afterward covered it with Lime
and Mortar, and upon the outside wrote the name of the King of Egypt in Golden
Characters, as pretending that all was done for his glory and honor: But
herein was his cunning, he knew that the water in a little time would consume
the plaistering (as it did) and then his name and memory should abide and
continue to after Generations. There are many such in this Nation, who in their
outward discourse and carriage, pretend to seek only the glory of God, the
good of his Church, and the happiness of the State. But if we had a window to
look into their hearts, we should find nothing there written, but self-love
and selfe-seeking. My care has been in the following discourse, to set out the
greatness and grievousnesse of this sin, and how destructive it is both to
Church and Commonwealth. Besides what is there said, give me leave to add:

1. That it is one of the greatest curses under Heaven, for God to give a man
over to his own hearts lust, to do whatsoever seems good in his own eyes, to
make himself the principle, rule, and end of all his actions. Better be given
over to the Devil, then to our selves. I read of one given over to Satan for
his Salvation, but never of any given over to himself, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
but for his ruin and destruction.

2. That this sinful selfe-seeking is not only a sin that makes the times
perilous, but our condition damnable. ^ Tim. 3. 2.
It shuts the man who is guilty of it unavoidably out of Heaven. When he dies
his Motto may be,

Here lies a Man-pleaser, and a selfe-pleaser, but not a God-pleaser, who
sought himself while he lived, and lost himself when he died. Who loved
himself for a minute, and hated himself to all eternity:

Or thus,

Here lies a man who lived in ease while he lived, and now lives in easelesse
torments: Who by over-pampering his body, destroyed his Soul: Who lived
undesired, and dyed unlamented, who lived to himself, and thereby undid
himself.

The Lord preserve you from this sin, and make you true Decet sa^e cum qui
mag^ vir futurus est, neque seipsum, neque s^a diligere; sed ju^a semp^r five
ab ipso, five ab also geran^ur.
Commonwealth (not private-wealth) men. It becomes him, (says a wise Heathen)
who would be a great man to love neither himself, nor any thing that is his,
but just things, whether done by himself, or by another.

I have made bold to add a few lines to that discourse which I had before you
concerning the blessed and heavenly self-seeking, wherein I show, That a
selfe-denying, selfe-examining, selfe-judging Christian, is the truest
selfe-seeker. That he that preferres the keeping of a good Conscience before
the keeping of his Estate, or Life, the good of Church and State before his own
good, is a blessed self seeker. He that loves himself and not God, loves not
himself, and he that loves God and not himself, loves himself; according to
that excellent saying of A^st. Nescio quo inexplicabili mod^, etc. I know not
by what Nescio quo inexplicabili mod^ quisqu^ (...), non Deum amat, non se
am^t, and quisqu^ D^um, non s^psum amat, ip^e se amat Qui enim non potest
vivere, d^ se, mo^itur utique amando se: cum ve^o ille dil^gitur de quo
vivitur, ^on se diligendo mag^ diligit, qui prop^rca se non diligit, ut cum
diligat de quo vivit. Aug de T^ctat. 123 in Joanne^.
unexpressable way, but sure I am of this truth, That he that loves himself,
and not God, loves not himself; and he that loves God, and not himself, he
loves himself. For he that cannot live of himself, dies presently by loving
himself; but when he is loved from whom, and by whom we live, in not loving
himself, he loves himself the more, because therefore he loves not himself,
that he might love him by whom he lives.

The Lord make you such selfe-seekers: Such a one was Nehem^ah, of whom it is
said, that he sought not his own, but the Neh. 2. 10.
welfare of the people of God; Such another was David, who preferred Jerusalem
before his chief joy: Such were Old Psalm. 137. 6.
Ely, Ezra, Jeremiah, Daniel, etc. Such ought you to be.

It is not long since you kept a Fast, to humble your selves before the Lord,
in reference to the many sad, lamentable, and unusual Fires kindled amongst us.
Now it ought to be your care (as the true fruit of this Fast) not only in your
personal capacities to abstain from, but as you are public Magistrates of
this City, to endeavor (so far as your power will reach) to suppress all
those sins for which God has threatened this great Judgment. This is a divine,
blessed, and most heavenly self-seeking. God has threatened to destroy a Nation
by fire,

1. For Sabbath breaking, Jer. 17. 27. 2 For despising and misusing the godly
Ministry, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. 19. 3. For assuming the Office of the Ministry
without a lawful call. Numb. 16. 16, 17, 18, 35. 4. For worshipping God after
a false manner, Lev. 10. 1. 2. 5. For breaking the Brotherly Covenant, Amos. 1.
9, 10. 6. For pride, Idleness, fullness of bread, uncharitableness, for
giving our selves over to Fornication, and going after strange flesh, which
were the sins of Sodom (Ezekiel. 16. 49. compared with Jude 7.) and for which God
reigned fire and brimstome from heaven for their destruction.
The Lord cloth you with zeal as with a Garment, and enable you to be
isntrumental to quench the burnings which these sins have kindled, and to make
this famous City a habitation of Justice, and a Mountain of holiness, Jer.
31. 23. That the name of it, from this day may be, The Lord is there, Ezekiel 48.
35. So prays

Your Servant in the work of the Lord, Edm: Calamy.

PHIL. 2. 21. For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.


THese words may very fitly be called Paul's complaint, or black bill of
indictment drawn up against the Times in which he lived.

There are 4 things that make this complaint very remarkable:

1. Because it is not made out of Passion, Faction, or any private discontent;
but by a holy Man of God, as he was guided by the Holy Ghost: And therefore it
is a true, and a most just complaint.

2. It is not spoken of the Heathens, who knew not No^ loquitur de i^ qui plane
abjece^ant studium (...), sed de i^ ip^s, quos pro fratribus habebat, in o quos
ferebat in su^ (...). Illos tamen ita calore dicitur rebus suis curandis ut
sint ad opu^ Domini frigidiores. Calv. in loc. De Christians and Ministris
Apostolo Ser^o est. Est. in loc.
Christ, (for it is no wonder for them that knew not Christ, not to seek the
things of Christ) nor of Apostate Christians that had totally forsaken Christ;
but (as Calvin and Estius observe) of Brethren and Fellow Laborers, of such
Christians, that were not only baptized into the name of Christ, but also
professed a great deal of Love outwardly to Christ and his cause, and yet it
is said even of those, That they sought their own, and not the things of Jesus
Christ, And therefore it is not only a true and a just, but a great, most sad
and heavy charge.

3. It is not drawn up by way of prediction, what should happen in the last and
worst times of the world, but by way of Declaration, what was practiced in the
Apostles days when the Church of Christ was a Virgin Church, flourishing in
all its beauty and glory, whilst the blood of Christ was yet warm, and
Christians by this warm blood were sodered together in Love and Unity, whilst
it was the golden age of the Church, even in the Apostles days, All men sought
their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ. Had these words been a Prophecy
of our times, which are the last and worst times, the iron age of the Church,
in which it is crumbled into a thousand fractions, it had been no wonder; but
to charge them upon the Primitive Apostolical times, that in the infancy of
Christianity, all men should seek their own, and not the things of Christ,
this makes the complaint not only very true, and very heinous, but also very
strange and wonderful.

4. The charge it self in its own nature, is higher than any other in all
Saint Paul's Epistles, and (if I be not mistaken) I may truly call it, the
blackest bill of indictment, that was ever drawn up against the pure primitive
Apostolical age; which that we may the better understand, we must consider,

1. The heinousness of the offense. 2. The multitude of the persons offending.
1. The offense is both Affirmative and Negative: 1. Affirmative, All men seek
their own. Their own honor and advancement; Their own, (...)?
Not the honor of Christ, but their own honor, their own private gain and
advantage; not the profit of Religion, but their own profit; their own
delights, pleasures, and recreations; their own ease, safety and security, not
the safety of the Gospel, but their own safety; their own wills, lusts, and
carnal contentments. Not to please Christ and do his will, but to do their
own wills, and to please themselves. And to speak according to the language of
our times, Their own private, carnal, and Creature-interest.

Quest. But why are these things called their own?
Answ. Not because they are so properly, for there is nothing truly ours but
our sins. Our health, wealth, riches and honors are not ours, but Gods, Hag.
2. 8. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, etc. Hos. 2. 9. My wood and my
flax, etc. We are but Stewards of these things, and Stewards at the will and
pleasure of the Lord. That is properly called our own, which we may keep as
long as we please, and do with it what we please, but we cannot do so with
our health, riches and honors, etc. For riches have wings and fly away from us
whether we will or no, and so have honors, and health, and therefore cannot be
said to be our own properly, neither may we use them as we please, but
according as God has prescribed, therefore they are called another man's, and
not our own. L^k. 16. 12. We our selves are not our own, 1 Cor. 6. 19. You
are not your own much less are these bodily comforts our own; but they are
here so called, because men have a civil title to them, and because in the
opinion of the world, they are their own.

This is the positive and affirmative part of the offense, and it is of an high
nature. For a Christian that believes the immortality of his Soul, to seek his
own bodily promotion and interest, and to neglect the profit and comfort of
his eternal Soul: For a Christian that is elected and called to things
heavenly and everlasting, to seek only after things earthly, and temporary,
this is a sin of the superlative degree.

And it will appear the greater, if we consider,

2. The Negative branch of the offense, And not the things of Jesus Christ. The
things of Jesus Christ are the things of the Church of Christ, which are
therefore called the things of Christ,

1. Because Christ is the Husband of the Church, and the things of the wife are
the things of her husband. 2. Because Christ has purchased them for us by his
Death and Passion. 3. Because of the great love that Christ has to his Church,
which is so great, as that the Churches interest is his interest, and her
injuries his injuries, Act. 9. 4. -- (...). They that neglect the things of the
Church, neglect the things of Christ.
Q. But what are the things of Jesus Christ?
A. In general, they are nothing else but the preservation and propagation of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. The building up of the Church of Christ in
verity, purity, and unity.

But more particularly, the things of Christ are,

1. The pure worship of Jesus Christ, the Preaching of the Word, and
administration of the Sacraments in Christ's way. 2. The precious truths of the
Gospel. 3. The government of the Church according to Scripturepatterne. 4. The
day of Christ. 5. The godly Ambassadors of Christ. 6. The Reformation of the
Church, when corrupted in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline.
Now then the charge is, That the Christians in the Primitive times (both
Ministers and others) did seek their own interest, and not the interest of
Jesus Christ; to build their own houses, and not the houses of God; to ingrosse
a Kingdom to themselves, and not to propagate Christ's Kingdom.

Q Did these Primitive Christians not at all seek the things of Christ?
A. This word Not is not to be taken positively, but (as Calvin says)
comparatively. We must not suppose Non ita accipi^ quasi suis tantum commodis
intenti nullam p^or us Ecclesiaecura (...) haberunt sed quod impl^ it^ privatis
co^dis ad publicum Ecclesiae bonum p^omovendum negligentiores erant, Calv. in
loc.
that Church Officers and Church Members did absolutely throw away all care of
Christ, and the Churches of Christ; but the meaning is, that they did not seek
the things of Christ cordially, sincerely, zealously, and primarily. They
sought them in the least place, and in the last place. They pretended to seek
the things of Christ, but sought their own things, under color of seeking the
things of Christ, and therefore are said not to seek them at all.

The charge will be yet greater, if we consider,

2. The multitude of the persons offending: The text says, All men.

Q. Was there no man in the Apostles days that sought the good of the Church
of Christ?
A. The word All is not here to be taken collectively, but distributively; not
for every one of all sorts, but for all sorts; not for all men properly, but
for many, as it is taken 1 Cor. 10. 23. or for the most of men, as it is 2 Timothy
4. 16. All men forsake me, etc. that is, most men. Thus Calvin, Quod omnes
dicit, non urgenda est particula universalis, no nullam exceptionem admittas,
erant enim alii quoque qualis Epaphroditus, sed pauci: Verum omnibus tribuit
quod passim erat vulgar.

The full meaning then of the text is this, That even in the Apostles days, In
aureo illo saeculo, in quo omnes virtutes ^in.
effloruerunt, in that golden age, in which all virtues did flourish, there
were many, and very many Church members and Church Officers that professed
outwardly a great deal of love to Christ and his Church, and yet
notwithstanding sought their own ease, quiet, honor, and profit, more than
the preservation and propagation of the Kingdom of Christ; their own private
gain and interest before, and more than the interest of Jesus Christ.

The words thus expounded, are a perfect representation of the times in which
we now live. Methinks I can hardly see a man in place and power, but I can see
it written upon his forehead in great Characters, this man seeks himself and
not the things of Jesus Christ. If I had a window to look into the hearts of
all here present, I fear me I should find many selfe-seekers, but few
Christ-seekers, so that this text may sitly be called, Englands looking-glass:
wherein we may behold,

1. The great sin of England, I may truly say the sin, that is the Father
and Mother of all her other sins, the Metropolis of all sin, and that is,
Her seeking her own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ.

2. The great and chief cause of all the miseries and calamities that have
happened to this nation. The Source and Original of all our unhappiness,
Because all men seek themselves, and no man the things of Christ.

3. The only way and remedy to be freed from all our miseries and afflictions,
and that is, by walking quite contrary to the text. By seeking the things of
Jesus Christ, before our own things, and more then our own things, and by
seeking them heartily, thoroughly, zealously and sincerely; this is the only
balm to cure Englands soars, the only England-preserving mercy. For these
three ends and purposes, I have chosen this text; The Doctrine I shall insist
upon is,

Doct. That amongst the multitude of Christians, who profess love to Christ
and his Church, there are many selfe-seekers, but few Christ-seekers. Or thus,

That it is an ancient, common, grievous and hidden iniquity, for a Christian
professing love to Christ, to be a selfe-seeker, and not a Christ-seeker.

1. It is an old and ancient sin, as old as the Primitive times. A sin of
1600. years standing.

2. It is a general and Land overspreading sin. A sin that has seized upon
men of all sorts, upon Ministers, Magistrates, Masters and Parents. An
Epidemicall disease.

3. It is a great and grievous sin, a Soule-destroying, a Church and
State-destroying sin.

4. It is a secret and hidden sin, a sin that most are guilty of, and yet
few will confess their guiltiness. There is no sin has more Fig Leaves to
hide it, more excuses to extenuate it, more cloaks to cover it, than this sin.

That I may the better uncase and uncloath this great transgression, I shall
briefly answer to these 4. questions,

Qu. 1. Whether all selfe-seeking, be diametrically opposite to Christ seeking?

Qu. 2. What is that self seeking, which is inconsistent with Christ-seeking?

Qu. 3. What is the reason that amongst such a multitude of Christians, there
should be so many selfe-seekers, and so few Christ-seekers?

Qu. 4 Wherein the grievousnesse, and mischievousnesse of this sin consists?

Qu. 1. Whether all selfe-seeking be contradictory to Christ-seeking? Whether a
man may not be a Christ-seeker, and yet a selfe-seeker?
Ans For answer to this you must know, that it is not simply and absolutely
unlawful for a man to seek himself, no more than it is to love himself.
Religion does not destroy natural affections, but only regulates them, and
sanctifies them; Gratia non extinguit sed ordinat affectiones, says Aquinas,
Non tollit sed attollit naturam, Grace does not destroy, but elevate nature. It
does not dry up the stream of selfe-seeking, but only turns it into the right
channel. Religion does not pluck up, but weed the garden of Nature. As
Musicians when their instruments are out of tune, will not break but tune them.
So Religion does not abolish, but only tune and order our selfe-seeking.

Therefore you shall find in Scripture, that there are many arguments drawn
from self-love, and selfe-seeking, to persuade us to holiness, and dissuade
us from sin, Deuteronomy. 28. Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 32. 46, 47. Is. 1. 19. Romans 2. 7, 8. Romans
8. 13. Gal. 6. 8. The Scripture gives us leave to love our selves, and to seek
our selves, so it be in a right manner. Moses did not sin in having an eye to
the recompense of reward. Nor did the Martyrs who could not accept deliverance,
that they might obtain a better resurrection, Heb. 11. 35. who received
joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves that they had in
Heaven a better, and an enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34. It is said, even of
Christ himself, That for the joy that was set before him, he endured the
cross, and despised the shame, etc. Heb. 12. 2. There is a great difference
between amor mercenarius, and amor mercedis, Mercenary love, and the love of
the reward. Mercenary love is, when we serve God only for reward. This is
sinful, but to make the hope of reward one motive of service, is not only
lawful, but necessary. For it is our duty to use all Gods Motives, as well as
all Gods Ordinances, and as it is a sin for any man to say, that he has no
need of Gospel Ordinances, so also to say that he has no need of
Gospelmotives, amongst which, this is one of the chiefest.

Know therefore that there is a threefold selfe-seeking.

1. There is a lawful and an allowed selfe-seeking. 2. There is not only a
lawful, but a heavenly and blessed selfe-seeking. 3. There is a sinful,
cursed. and Diabolical selfe-seeking.
1. There is a lawful selfe-seeking, and that is, when a Christian seeks his
own private gain and honor in the last place, and in the least place, when
he seeks the things of Christ, in the first and chief place, and his own
things lesser, and after the things of Christ, when he seeks his own things,
not in separation from, opposition to, competition with, but in subordination
to the things of Christ. In a word, when a Christan seeks his own things in due
order and measure, so as not to hinder, but to further his seeking the things
of Christ, this is a lawful selfe-seeking.

2. There is not only a lawful, but a most Divine Angelical, heavenly, and
blessed selfe-seeking. Here I shall hold forth this Scripture Paradox, That no
man can be truly said to seek himself, that does not seek the things of
Christ. That the more we seek the things of Christ, the more we seek our
selves. That he that seeks not the things of Christ, does not seek himself,
but destroy himself. That a Christ-seeker, and a true self-seeker are terms
convertible.

Qu. What is this heavenly and blessed selfe-seeking?
Ans. To understand this aright, is a point of great concernment. For the more
we know of this Divine selfe-seeking, the more we will shun and abhor the
sinful self-seeking. Give me leave to deliver what I have to say about it, in
these ensuing Propositions, which I do not name as several distinct heads, but
as diverse instances of a divine and sublimated selfeseeking, (amounting most of
them, to one and the same purpose.)

That man who seeks the good of his Soul, more than the good of his body,
seeks himself after a Divine manner. The Body Prop. 1.
of Man is the worst half of Man, vilissima pars hominis, The shell, the box,
the carcass of Man. Intus est, quod homo est, The Soul of Man is the Man of
Man. Animus uniuscujusque is est quisque. And therefore he that seeks to get
his Soul beautified with grace, to be made Christ's picture, and a real member
of his body, this Man, and this Man only, seeks himself. He that seeks the
good of his body, to the hurt of his Soul, does not seek himself, but the
destruction both of Body and Soul. That Man that makes such a fire, as to
burn himself and his house, does not seek the good of himself nor his house.
That Merchant that so over-loads his Ship, as to drown it, and himself, does
not seek his own good. Even so that Man that over-pampers his Body, that
labors curare cutem, magis quam animam, to stuff his body with dainty food,
to cloth his body with fine apparel, and in the mean time to neglect his most
precious Soul, this Man does not seek himself, but ruin himself. For the
happiness of the Body, depends upon the happiness of the Soul. If the Soul
go to Hell at death, the Body at the great resurrection will go thither also:
And therefore he that beats down his body, and brings it into subjection, and
labors to make it a fit servant to his soul, that endures hardship with his
body, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, that wears and tires out his body in
the service of God; that works with his body for the good of his soul; this is
the true, heavenly, and blessed selfe-seeker.

That man who seeks his eternal good more than his temporal; Prop. 2.
who seeks not only to make himself happy for forty or fifty years, but for
ever and ever; This man seeks himself after a divine manner. For what will it
profit a man to be happy for a few years in this life, and to be miserable for
ever in hell hereafter; How quickly will a man in hell forget the happiness he
had here? He that makes provision to live pleasurably and comfortably while he
lives, but makes no provision to live happily when he dies, this man may seem
to love himself for a minute, but sure I am he hates himself to all eternity.
He that lays up treasure for himself upon earth, but none in heaven, may be
accounted rich in this world, which will quickly end, but he will be poor
world without end. Such a selfe-hater was Dives, Luc. 16. and the rich fool,
Luc. 12. and such are all they that lay up treasure for themselves, but are not
rich toward God, Luc. 12. 21. He is a divine selfe-seeker, who labors to live
holily here, that he may live happily hereafter; to live graciously here, that
he may inherit eternal glory hereafter.

He that denies his sinful self most, seeks himself most. Prop. 3.
He that hates himself as corrupted by Adams fall, and seeks the utter ruin
and extirpation of the old Adam within him, this man does truly love himself.
This is divine self-seeking, to kill thy sins, that thy sins may not kill thy
soul. As Zipporah by circumcising her child, saved the life of her husband: So
the way to save thy soul, is to circumcise and pare off (...), all superstuity
of haughtiness, James 1. 21. This is the meaning of that which Christ says,
Mat 5. 29, 30. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee, for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. And if thy right hand offend
thee, cut it off and cast it from thee, for it is profitable, etc The more thou
hate thy gainful and pleasurable sins, the more thou love thy self. As a
man in a Dropsy, the more he denies himself drink the more he seeks himself;
because the less he drinks the more he destroys his disease. Even so the
more thou deniest thy corrupt self, the more thou seek thy self, because the
more thou deniest thy corrupt self, the more thou destroyest thy spiritual
diseases; the more thou ruinatest the Devils faction within thee, and weakenst
the opposition of the Flesh against the Spirit. He that loves his sins, hates
his own soul, Pro. 8. 36. Gal. 6. 8. he that sows sin, shall reap hell, he
that makes provision for the flesh, provides fuel for bell fire. He that
nourishes the old Adam within him, cherishes that which tainteth and
polluteth all his holy duties, which indisposeth him to all good, and disposes
him to all evil, he cherishes his Souls greatest enemy, 1 Pet. 2. 11. he
delights in that, which was Paul's greatest misery, and which made him cry out,
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death,
Romans 7. 24. therefore I may truly say, he that is the greatest selfe-denier, is
the greatest selfe-seeker.

He that seeks to do most service to God in his generation, that seeks his own
glory, by seeking Gods glory, is a Divine self seeker. Prop. 4.
The reason is, because the perfection of every thing consists, in attaining
the end for which it was made. As the perfection of meat is to be eaten, he
that hoards it up and will not eat it, destroys it. The end for which God
made Man is to serve him, to glorify him here, and enjoy him hereafter.
Therefore the more service we do to God, the more we seek his glory; the more
we attain the end of our creation, and therein we are the more happy. He that
loves himself for himself, and for his own ends, destroys himself, because
the end for which God made us, is to serve him, and not our selves. When all
the streams of self-love flow into the great Ocean of the love of God, this
is Divine self-love. Oh that men would thus labor to love themselves, and
seek themselves, to look upon themselves as servants and instruments unto God
and his glory; to say, Lord, how may I advance my self, by advancing thy name!
how may I glorify my self, by glorifying of thee? How may I seek my self,
by seeking thy praise, and perfect my self, by disposing of my self of my
understanding, memory, will, heart, affections and actions, in order to thee
and thy glory.

The more a man serves God out of pure love, without reflection Prop. 5.
to self, the more he seeks himself; for this is a certain truth, The less
we seek our selves and our own ends in any holy duty, the more we seek our
selves, because the less we seek our selves, the more we seek God and his
glory, and the more we seek God and his glory, the more reward we shall have.
The less we look after reward for that we do, the more reward we shall have;
and therefore the Papists who teach men to do good works that thereby they
might merit heaven, (supposing their Doctrine to be true) lose all the reward
of their good work. He that serves God to merit by his service, cannot merit
by his service; the more he eyes merit, the less he meriteth: He that serves
God for his own ends, does not serve God but himself; but he that serves God
for Gods sake, shall be rewarded by God. The less we eye our selves in any
duty, the more reward we shall have, and therefore the more we seek our selves.

That man who seeks the glory and honor of God, above his Prop. 6.
own glory and honor, is a Divine self seeker. The reason is, because the
happiness of Man is more in God than in himself. As the happiness of a
member of the body is in conjunction with the body, (take it from the body it
dies.) So the happiness of Man is in conjunction with God, who is our
chiefest good, who is an universal good, therefore he that seeks union with
God most, seeks himself most. As the safety of the beam is more in the Sun
then in it self, and of the stream in the Fountain, then in it self. So the
safety, comfort and happiness of every Christian, is more in God then in
himself; therefore he that seeks the glory and honor of God, more than his
own glory and honor, is a heavenly and blessed selfe-seeker.

He that loves the public good more than his own private Prop. 7.
good, that seeks the prosperity of Sion and Jerusalem, of Church and State
more than his own, is a Divine selfe-seeker. Oh that this word were mingled
with Faith! A man that is in danger to have his head cut off, will willingly
(even out of self-love) lift up his arm and suffer it to be cut off to save
his head, because his life is more in his head than in his arm. Our safety is
more wrapped up in the public welfare, than in our private, and therefore they
who prefer the public, before the private, are the truest selfe-seekers.
Thus did Old Ely, he mourned more for the loss of the Ark^, than of his two
Sons. Thus also did David, Psa 137. 6. He preferred Jerusalem above his chief
joy, In a storm at Sea, he that seeks the preservation of the Ship, seeks most
the preservation of his own Trunk, for if the Ship be drowned, his Trunk cannot
be saved. The truth is, if the Church and the true Religion be destroyed, to
what purpose is it for a godly man to live? I read of Titus Vespasian, that
when the Soldiers had destroyed the Temple of Jerusalem, they came to him and
asked him, what they should do with the Priests that did supervive? Kill them
(said he) for now their work is at an end. When Religion is destroyed, what
will it advantage a godly man to live? therefore they that seek the good of the
Church, more than their own, are blessed selfe-seekers.

That man who had rather lose wife, children, estate and life it self, than
sin against God, is a Divine selfe-seeker: The Prop. 8.
reason is, because his happiness is more in keeping a good Conscience, than
in keeping his Estate or saving his Life. The holy Martyrs who loved not their
lives unto the death, were the greatest self seekers. It is a most blessed
selfe-seeking, to suffer the fire of Martyrdom, to avoid the fire of Hell, to
lose earthly promotions, to attain everlasting honors: And therefore Christ
argues from self-love, Mat. 16. 25. Whosoever will save his life shall lose
it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it; so also Mark.
10. 29, 30. the ancient Martyrs did the like, Heb. 10. 34. Heb. 11. 35. He that
loses all for Christ, shall find more than he has lost in Christ.

From all that I have said concerning this blessed selfe-seeking, I gather
these three conclusions:

1. That no Man is a true self, seeker, who is not a true Christ-seeker.

2. That true Religion, and a conscientious walking according to the rules of
it is founded upon Right reason, and that no man can be truly said to be a
rational man, who is not a Religious man; for the more Religious any man is,
the more he seeks himself and his own happiness; the more irreligious he is,
the more he ruinateth and destroys himself.

3. That whosoever would love himsel^e, and seek himself aright, must labor
to seek the things of Jesus Christ. Oh that I could persuade you to this
blessed Selfe-seeking, to seek your own gain and honor, in seeking the
honor of God, and good of Church and State.

But now in the third place, besides this lawful, and this heavenly, and
blessed self seeking, there is a sinful, cursed, and devilish selfe-seeking,
a selfe-seeking which is complained on in the Text, inconsistent and
incompossible, with a true Christ-seeking, which is the root of all the
miseries that have happened to this Nation. The great Church and State, and
Soul-destroyer. This leads me to the second question.

Quest. 2. What is that selfe-seeking, which is inconsistent with Christ
seeking?
Answ. It is a spiritual Monster with six heads.

1. When a Christian seeks his own things dividedly from the things of Christ,
when he seeks his own case, safety and interest, and cares not at all what
becomes of Jesus Christ, and his cause, when he sets up himself, and makes
himself the principle, rule, and end of all his undertakings, acting from self
as a principle, by self as a rule, for self as an end. When a Man makes
himself his God, worshipeth himself, and does whatsoever he does for his
carnal self, serves himself in Committees, Army, Parliament, Ministry, and
cares not what becomes of Religion and Reformation. This is the first head of
this Monster; such a selfe-seeker was Gallio the Deputy, Act. 18. 17. who cared
not what became of Religion. If it had been a matter of wrong, he would have
heard it, but because it was a matter of Religion, he cared for none of those
things. Such selfe-seekers, were the people of M^roz, and therefore the
Israelites were commanded to curse them, Judges 5. 23.

2. When a Christian seeks his own things, and the things of Christ also, but
seeks his own things antecedently to the things of Christ. When he first seeks
his own things, and afterward the things of Christ; of this the Prophet
Haggai complanes, Hag. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11. The people said, It was not
time to build Gods house, but it was time to build their own houses. Therefore
the Heavens over them were as brass, and the Earth withheld her fruit.

3. When a man seeks his own things, and the things of Christ also, but seeks
his own things, chiefly and principally, not only before, but more then the
things of Christ, and that both in his value and esteem, and in his love and
affection. When a man prizeth his own profit and preferment, and loves his
own praise and glory more than the profit, praise and honor of Christ and his
Gospel. Such were the Gaderens, who preferred their Hogs before Christ. Such
were the Merchants and Farmers, Mat. 21. 3. who made light of the call of
Christ, and preferred their Farms and Merchandising before Christ and his
Gospel. Such was Demas, who forsook Paul and embraced the present world, and
such were the Pharisees, John 12. 43. Who loved the praise of Men, more than
the praise of God.

4. When a Christian seeks his own things in seeking the things of Christ,
when he pretends to seek the things of Christ, and yet intends no such thing,
but seeks himself even under color of seeking the things of Christ. Such a
one was Jehu, who pretended a great deal of zeal for the Lord of Hoasts. Come
(said he to Jonadab) and behold my zeal, etc. but he did but pretend a zeal
for God, his zeal was to purchase the Kingdom to himself. Such a one was
Balaam, who pretended that if he had a house full of Gold and Silver offered
him, he would not go beyond the Commandment of God, and yet notwithstanding
he did but counterfeit, for he loved the wages of iniquity, and was mad after
the preserments that Balac proffered him. Such another was Demetrius the
Silver-Smith, who pretended a zeal to the great Goddess Diana, and therefore
caused an uproare against Paul to defend the Goddess, but it was the gain he
got by making Shrines for Diana, that was the principle that set him on work,
he pretended Diana, but intended himself, he had dolum in idolo, as one says.

5. When a man seeks his own things, when they stand in competition with, and
in opposition to the things of Christ, when things come to so narrow a bridge,
that either he must part with Estate, Liberty, and Life, or with Christ and a
good Conscience: If he chooses to part with Christ and a good Conscience,
rather than with his Liberty, Estate or Life, this is a wicked self-seeker.
Such a one was the young man in the Gospel, who forsook Christ, rather than he
would part with his great possessions. Such was Spyra, who himself tells the
story; that he placed Wife, Children, Liberty, Estate and Life, in one part of
the balance; And God, Christ, the Gospel, and a good Conscience in the other,
and forsook the last to preserve the first.

6. The last head of this Monster is, when a Christian seeks the good of his
Body, to the prejudice of his Soul, when he bestows all his time, all his
strength, and all his cares and endeavors, in providing for his perishing
carcass, and neglects to provide for his eternal Soul, when he lays up all
his treasure upon earth, but has no treasure laid up in Heaven, when he is
anxiously solicitous for his comfortable living in this world, but strangely
neglectfull, to take care for his happy living in the other world, this is a
sinful, cursed, and devilish self-seeking. So much in answer to the second
question.

The third question is, How is it possible that there should be so many men who
profess themselves to be Christans and (in words at least) profess love to
Christ and his interest, and yet notwithstanding should seek their own
interest before, and more than the interest of Christ?
Answ. This Soule-destroying and Church destroying selfe-seeking proceeds
from six sinful and cursed roots.

1. From want of true and unfeigned love to Jesus Christ, and his interest.
Love is a most powerful affection, the Masterwheel that carries the whole
Soul after it. Amor meus pondus me^, says Aug. ^o feror quo^unque feror. As
the primu^ mobile in the heavens carries all the other Spheres about with it,
so Love carries the whole man with it. Love is as strong as death, many waters
cannot quench love, neither can the flood drown it. If a man would give all the
substance of his house for love, it would be contemned, Cant. 8. 6, 7. If we
did love the Lord Jesus and his Gospel, in good earnest, we would rather part
with Liberty, Estate, Life, and all our own things, than lose the things of
Christ as the blessed Martyrs did. But because there are few men that love
Jesus Christ in sincerity, hence it is that most men seek their own things,
and not the things of Christ.

2 This proceeds from that cursed self-love, which is in all men by nature.
Of this you shall read, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5. where self-love is placed in the
forefront as the cause and r^ot of all the other sins there named. Self-love
is like a great tree, and eighteen sins as eighteen branches sprouting out from
this root, because men are lovers of themselves, therefore they are covetous,
proud, unthankful, unholy, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, etc.
From this sinful self-love proceeds this sinful self-seeking. As the love of
Christ is the root of Christ-seeking, so the love of our selves is the root of
sinful self seeking.

3. From that immoderate and inordinate worldly love which is in all men by
Nature: for (as a Martyr well said at the stake) if we should unrip and
anatomize a wicked man, we should find nothing in him but self-love, and
worldly love: by Nature we love the Creature m^e than the Creator, pleasures
more than God, and the praise of Men, more than the praise of God. By nature we
love our own gain, and our own safety, and ease, more than the things of
Christ; and therefore it is that we seek our own things, and not the things of
Christ.

4. From that hypocrisy, insincerity, and rottenness of heart which is in all
men by nature, hence it is that men pretend Jesus Christ, but intend their own
private interest, because of the hypocrisy and falsenesse of their hearts.
Thus the Pharisees, who were Hypocrites, under pretense made long prayers that
they might devour widows houses, Mat. 23. 14. Thus Herod pretends to worship
Christ, when his intendment was to worry him, Mat 2. 8. Thus Jesebel
proclaims a Fast, and pretends Religion, but intends only to put Naboth to
death, and to get his Vineyard. Thus Absolem covers over his Rebellion with the
fair cloak of Religion, 2 Samuel 15. 7. There are two things that are in all men
by nature:

1. To make a show of Religion.

2. To cover over all manner of wickedness under the show of Religion;
Ungodliness is so odious, that if it should appear in its own colors, all
men would abhor it; and therefore as the Devil never shows himself but
under some handsome form, sometimes under Samuels mantle, sometimes transformed
into an Angel of light; so does sin and iniquity always appear under the form
of godliness. The Apostle tells 2 Timothy 3. 5. that in the last times there
should be men, who should be lovers of themselves, treacherous, heady,
high-minded, without natural affection, etc. having a form of godliness;
which last words are to be understood (...) as relating to all the former sins.
They should be Covenant-breakers, having a form of godliness, covetous, false
accus^rs, blasphemous self-lovers, having a form of godliness. They should
(through the Hypocisie that is in them) cover all their sins under the vizard
of a form of godliness.

5. This sinful self-seeking arises from that spiritual ignorance and
blindness which is in all men by nature. There is no wicked man rightly
understands what it is to seek himself: for he thinks, that if he seeks to
satisfy his corrupt self, he seeks himself; if he seeks the good of his body
with the neglect of his soul, he seeks himself. He thinks that if he seeks his
own ease, gain, safety, and preferment, without looking after the things of
Christ, that he seeks himself. Thus did the rich Fool, Luke 12. who built his
barnes bigger, and said, soul take thy ease, etc. he supposed that he sought
his own happiness in so doing: and so did the rich Glutton, when he clothed
himself in purple, and fared deliciously ever day, etc. But now did a wicked
man convincingly understand, that this self-seeking is self-hating, and
self-destroying: That the rich Glutton by pampering his body, damned his soul:
that the rich Fool, by laying up goods for a few years, lost his soul to all
eternity: That he that denies himself most, seeks himself most, He that serves
God best, seeks himself most: He that seeks the glory of God before his own
glory, and the good of Church and State more than his own good, seeks himself
most: that he that loses his life for Christ, shall find a better life in
Christ. Did he (I say) convincingly believe this, he would not sinfully seek
himself: Therefore this sinful self-seeking proceeds from that spiritual
ignorance and blindness that is in all by Nature.

6. Lastly, it springs from that spiritual self-deceit and souldelusion that
is in all men by nature: Every man by nature, is (Narcissus like) in love with
himself, blind in his own cause, and apt to think that he seeks the things of
Christ, when he does not, and that he does not seek his own things in
opposition to, competition with, or comparison of the things of Christ; even as
the Philosopher, who could not be persuaded, but that snow was black, or the
mad Athen^an, hat all the ships that came to Athens were his. So there are
multitudes of Christians, who fancy to themselves, that they do seek the things
of Christ, when it is apparent to others that they do not: and by this
self-deceit cousen themselves into Hell. Thus you see the cursed roots from
whence this sinful self-seeking proceeds.

The fourth and last question is, wherein the grievousnesse Qu. 4.
and mischievousnesse of this sinful self-seeking consists?
Answ. It is a sin of the first magnitudo. Though it be an inward invisible
sin, and therefore not so infamous and scandalous to the eyes of men, as some
other sins are, yet it is very odious and abominable in the sight of God.
Though it be minoris infamiae, yet it is majoris culpae. For,

1. It is a sin against the express words of the Scripture. The Apostle says,
1 Corin. 10. 24. Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth. The
sinful selfe-seeker lvies Antipodes to this Text, he seeks his own, and not
another wealth.

2. It is a sin against the light of nature. Nature it self teaches us, that
no man is born for himself, but for the good of the Commonwealth, in which he
lives. The very Heathens abominate a self-seeker.

3. It is a sin against the pattern that Christ has left us: For he came into
the world, not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him; he
pleased not himself, Romans 15. 2. he made himself of no reputation, he humbled
himself, and became obedient, even to the death of the Cross: He denied
himself so far, as to be made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. Now it is a certain Maxim, That he who
does not follow the example of Christ's life, shall never have any benefit by
the merit of his death: Christ is meritum only to those to whom he is exemplum.

4. It is a sin against the royal law of Charity. Charity is a most noble
grace, the very queen of all graces; it is as necessary as it is excellent For
though we bestow all we have to feed the poor, thou^h we give our bodies to be
burnt, yet if we have not Charity, it profits us nothing. But now a
self-seeker is made up all of uncharitableness.

1. He has no love unto Jesus Christ and his interest, and there is a double
curse pronounced against those that love not the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 16. 22.

2. He has no love to his Neighbor, but for his own ends; it is amor
concupiscentiae vel amicitiae, it is not love, but merchandise.

3 He has no love to Church nor State. All his love centers in himself: He is
wholly compounded of self-love, and creature love, which is a composition God
hates.

5. It is a Sin that makes all our holy duties abominable in the sight of God.
Though the actions we do be never so holy, yet if we do them upon politic
designs, if we aim at our selves in what we do, the Lord abhorres us and all
we do, as we see in the Pharisees, who in their Alms, Prayers and Fastings,
did all to be seen of men, and therefore God abhorred all they did. Self-aimes
pollute and putrify all holy actions.

6. It is a sin of horrible Hypocrisy: for it is making use of Religion as a
ladder to clime up to pre^ment, and then casting the ladder away; it is setting
up God as a Pander to our ambitious and covetous interest, which is Hypocrisy,
to be abhorsed. This is uti Deo ut ^ruamur nobismetipsis, which is no little
transgression.

7. It is Idolatry in the highest degree; it is (...) a worshipping of self; it
is making our selves and our own interest, the root, rule, and scope of all our
undertakings, which is to make an Idol of our selves and to usurp the throne
of God. It is Idolatry against the first Commandment, which is greater than
Idolatry against the second, by how much the heart is better than the knee.

8. It is a sin that is the fruit of six cursed roots (as you have already
heard) and the root of many cursed fruits: It is (...) omnium v^tiorum, a sin,
and the cause of all sin, the Pl^e so^e o^ Church and State, the great
Church-devouring, and State destroying sin To give some few instances.

What is the reason that the Government of the Church, so happily began, is now
obstructed, and almost quite broken in (...)? Is it not because all men seek
their own, and no men the things of Christ?

What is the reason that the house of God lies wast, and every man labors to
build his own house?

Why is it that men complain of taxes and want of trading, but no man
complains that the House of God is neglected, the pure Ordinances despised,
and the godly Ministry undervalued? Is it not because all men seek their own,
and not the things of Jesus Christ?

What is the reason that the truths of Christ are trampled under feet, and men
are suffered to deny the Divinity of Christ and of the Scriptures, and no man
says, why do you so? But let a man but speak a word against the laws of men,
he shall be severely punished: Is not this, because all men seek their own, and
not the things of Jesus Christ?

What is the reason that so few Gentlemen, Citizens, and Ministers; appear for
the things of Christ? that so many silence themselves, and suffer Religion to
be almost lost, and yet dare not appear for it? Why is it that our Lectures
are so little frequented in most places^ that many think nothing too much to
give to their (...), but any thing too much for their Minister? that (...)
Master will be very exact to see his servant do his business upon the week
da^es, but indulge him to do what he will upon the Lord day? Is it not because
all men seek their own and not the things of Jesus Christ?

What is the reason that the things of the Church drive on so slowly, like the
Egyptian Chariots, when the wheels were taken off? what is the reason that
there is so much oppression and injustice in places of judicature? So much
cousenage and false dealing in our commerce one with another, in a word, what
is the cause of all our miseries both in Church and State? Is it not because
all men seek their own, and not the thin^s of Jesus Christ? thus you have the
greatness and the mischievousnesse of this sinful selfe-seeking. So much for
the Explication of the Doctrine, I come now to the Application.

Is this be so, that amongst the multitude of Christians that Applicat.
profess love to Christ and his cause, there are many, yea very many, that ^ek
their own, and not the things of Christ. Let us then (...) beseech you) behold
as in a glass, the sinfulness and miserableness of the times wherein we
live, for if the Apostle compla^ of his times, which were the first and the
best times, the golden Age, the Primitive, Apostolical, Virgin-Church, when the
Saints of God met together in one place, with one accord, much more may we of
our times, which are the last and worst, the iron age, wherein the Church of
Christ is woefully divided, and wonderfully Apostatized: How justly (I say) may
we take up this sad complaint against our t^es: All men seek th^i own, not the
things of Jesus Christ?

And yet I dare not say, all men collectively, I believe there are a few names
even in England. which have not defiled their garments, and have not bowed
their knees to Baal, some Magistrates, some Gentlemen, some Ministers and
Citizens yet remaining, who seek the things of Jesus Christ more than their
own, yea, with the neglect and loss of their own, who seek the prosperity
and welfare of Sion, more than their own. Some Ezra's, Nehemiah's, and
Daniel's, that lay to heart the desolations of the Church, and with Old Ely are
more troubled about the Ark of God, than their own private relations: But
these are a very few in comparison It is certain, that most of all sorts are
guilty of this sinful selfe-seeking, most Magistrates, most Gentlemen,
Ministers and Citizens. Now then let us examine our selves, whether we be not
amongst the number of this multitude. To quicken you to this consider,

1. That this sin is both a New and an Old Testament sin. It reigned not
only in Paul's time, but in Debora's, and Baraks, who tell us that for the
divisions of Reuben, there were great searchings of heart, because he abode
among the Sheep-folds, and cared not what became of the Church of God, Judges
5. 15, 16.

2. It is a common and ordinary sin, few are free from it.

3. It is a great and crying abomination, as you have heard.

4. It is a great and hidden iniquity, an inward, invisible, and spiritual
sin, that consumes England as a moth, not as a Lion: It is threatened, Hos. 5.
12. 14. That God would be to Ephraim as a Moth, and as a Lion, Murder,
Adultery, Sodomy, injustice, etc. devoures England as a Lion, but self-love
and self seeking destroies it as a Moth secretly, and yet certainly: Let us
therefore be very serious in the work of selfe-trying.

There are three sorts of men whom I indict as guilty of this sinful and
cursed selfe-seeking.

1. Such as seek their own things, and not at all the things of Christ. 2.
Such as seek their own things before, and more than the things of Christ. 3.
Such as pretend to seek the things of Christ, but seek their own things, under
the color of seeking the things of Christ.
1. Such as seek their own credit, profit, preferment, ease and safety, and
not at all the things of Christ: It is reported of Agrippina, the Mother of
Ner^, who being told, that if ever her Son came to be Emperor, he would put her
to death; she answered, ^eream ego modo ille imperet. Let me perish so he may
be Emperor. There are many such, who say in their hearts, Perat religio modo
ego imperem; So I may get an estate, and grow great in the world, no matter
what becomes of Religion and Reformation.

Quest. Are there any Christians of this mind?
Answ. There are many who are called Christians at large of this mind, who
have the name and but the name of Christians, and carry this name as Uriah did
his Letters to Joab, Non ad salutem, sed ad runam, not for Salvation, but
Damnation, you shall know them by this Character.

Let such men as these have their trading as formerly, enjoy outward
prosperity, and be freed from taxes, they will think themselves sufficiently
happy. It is all one to them whether all Religions be tolerated, or none at
all. These men say with Tiberius the Emperor, Diis Deorum curae sunto. Let God
take care of Religion, all our care is for our outward estate; these are they
that make their Money their God, who mind earthly things whose end is
damnation, of whom I may say as Christ of Judas, better they had never been
borne.

2. Such as seek their own things before, and more than the things of Christ,
who seek their own interest, more cordially, more industriously, and more
vigorously, than the interest of Religion. Thus did the Gaderens (as you have
heard) thus do most Christians.

Quest. How shall I know whether I prefer in my judgment, affections, or
conversation, my own outward interest, before the interest of Christ and the
Gospel?
Answ 1. If the seeking of thine own things take up the first, best, and most
of thy time. If thy marrow and strength of thy Soul, go out after them, if
thou make them thy (...), thy Primum quaerite, and unum necessarium, and the
things of Christ, thy (...), and idle hour. If the seeking of thine own, make
thee neglect the things of Christ, or seek after them negligently, this a sign
that thou do overvalue and over-affect thine own things, and undervalue,
and dis-affect the things of Christ.

2. If thou mournest more for personal miseries, than for the desolations of
Sion, it is a sign thou mindest thine own things more than the things of
Christ, this is a frame of spirit, quite opposite to true Saintship. Ezra,
Nehemiah, David, Daniel and Jeremiah, were more afflicted with the miseries of
the Church then their own.

3. If the seeking of thine own things take away thy courage for Christ and his
cause, and make thee come to Christ by night, as Nichodemus did, and the more
thou have of the world, the less thou appearest for Christ and his Gospel; the
more honors, the more fearful: If the preserving of thine own things make
thee betray the things of Christ by sinful silence, or base cowardice, this is
a sign thou preferrest thine own interest before the interest of Christ.

4. If the seeking of thine own things make thee seek to find out excuses, and
vain pretenses, to hinder thee from appearing for Christ, this is a sign, etc,
I read Luke 14 18. when the Servant was sent to fetch the Guests to the great
Supper of the Gospel, they all with one consent, began to make excuse, etc. The
times wherein we live, are very sinful and perilous: the Truths and Ministry
of Christ are trampled under feet, Religion and Reformation neglected. Now God
by us his Ambassadors, calls upon you to appear for his Truths, and for his
Gospel ministry, and Gospel Ordinances. Meth nks I hear the Nobleman say, I
have a great estate to lose, pray have me excused: I hear the rich Citizen
say, I shall be utterly undone in my trading, pray have me excused: I hear the
voluptuous Epicure say, I have married a wife, pray have me excused. Take it
for a certain rule, If the seeking of these outward things puts thee upon
excuses, thou seek them sinfully: For if you look into the text
forementioned, you will find that the excuses there made were

1. Lying and false, they say they cannot come, whereas the truth was, they
would not come, non posse pretenditur, nolle in c^usa est.

2. Poor and frivolous; What is a Farm in comparison of Heaven? marrying a
Wife in comparison of being married to Jesus Christ?

3. Vain and unprofitable. For notwithstanding the excuses they made, it is
said, verse 24. That none of these men which were bidden shall taste of my
supper.

4. Unreasonable and unconscionable. For they made those things laqueos
Diaboli, snares and impediments to hinder them from Christ, which would have
been vincula obedientiae, motives and encouragements to bring them to Christ.

5. Lastly, If when thine own things and the things of Christ come in
competition, and thou must either part with the one or the other, if thou
choosest as Spyra did, and as the young man in the Gospel did, rather to part
with Christ and his Gospel, than with thy profit and preferment, this is a sure
note that thou seek thine own things, before and more than the things of
Christ. I read of Tiberius Emperor of Rome, that he sent to the Senate to
receive Christ into the number of their Gods, but they refused to do it upon
this account, because if they received him, they must reject all their other
Gods, and therefore chose rather to renounce Jesus Christ, than to receive him,
and part with the rest of their feigned Deities. If thou renouncest and
rejectest the Lord Christ and his Truths, rather than thou will lose thy
creature-enjoyments, thou art a sinful self-seeker of the highest form.

But now on the contrary, If thou pursuest after the things of Christ in the
first and chief place; If thou mournest more for Church desolations than
personal miseries; If the more wealth thou have, the more courageous thou art
for God, and art glad, that thou have an Estate to lose for Christ's cause; If
the seeking of thine own things do not put thee upon lying, vain, frivolous,
and unconscionable excuses; If thou art like unto Hormisdas, a Nobleman of
Persia, who was deposed from all his Honors because he would not deny his
Religion, and afterward restored again, and a little after solicited again to
deny Christ and his truths, but he rent his purple robe, and laid all his
honors at the foot of the Emperor, and said, Si propter ista me denegaturum
Christum put as, ea denuo accipe. If you think to gain me to deny Christ for
the re-obtaining of my honors, take them all back again: If this be the frame
of thy heart, it is a certain token that thou prizest, love and seek the
things of Christ before, and more then thine own things.

3. The third sort of those who are guilty of this sinful selfe-seeking are
such who pretend to seek the things of Christ, but seek their own things,
under color of seeking the things of Christ, who hold forth the preservation
and propagation of Religion as a stalking horse, to catch men by, as a blind
to deceive the world; but aim a^ nothing less then Religion, but either with
Demetrius at their own gain, or with Jehu at the obtaining of a Kingdom, or
with Balaam at the wages of iniquity. This sin of selfe-seeking is so odious
both to God and Man, that it never appears upon the stage in its own
likeness, but always covered over with Samuels mantle: There is no sin has
more (...) and (...), Figleaves and religious cloaks to cover it, then this
sin. By this means the Pope of Rome has purchased his triple Crown; It is
said Rev. 13. 11. that Antichrist should have two horns like a Lamb, but yet
act like a Dragon, signifying unto us, that Antichrist should under color of
Religion, act all his villainies, and bloody Massacres, and by this means
deceive all the world. Therefore Antichristianisme is called a Mystery of
iniquity, that is, iniquity covered over with fair shows and pretenses of
godliness; What Murders, what Treasons has not the Pope committed under the
color of defending the Catholic Religion? under pretense of being Peter's
successor, and of having ^eters keys, and chair? Witness the holy league (as
it was called) in France; witness the Gunpowder treason amongst us, undertaken
under show of Religion, for the defense of the Catholic cause.

What I affirm of Papists and Jesuits, the like I say of all the Errors and
Heresies that have been broached in the Christian world; The Apostle tells us,
that the first Authors of Heresies and Schisms were great self seekers. Men
greedy Titus 1. 11. Romans 16. 18. 2 Pet. 2. 2. 1 Timothy 6. 5.
of filthy lucre, who served not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, who
made merchandise of the Souls of people, making gain their godliness, not
godliness their gain. But though they were such, yet they did not appear to
be such, but seemed to be very holy and selfe-denying: Therefore Christ calls
them, Wolves in sheeps clothing, ravening Wolves inwardly, Mat. 7. 15.
though innocent Sheep outwardly. They honied over the poison of their
Doctrine, with good words, and fair speeches, to deceive the hearts of the
simple, Romans 16. 18. Such a one was Pelagius (one of the greatest enemies to
the Doctrine of Grace that ever the Church had) who made such a show of
godliness, that when Hierome first wrote against his Heresies, he was forced
to conceal his name, lest by appearing to write on purpose against him, his
book should have been rejected by the people, who did so highly magnify him.

Let me add, This is a sin which not only Papists and Jesuits, Schismatics
and Heretics, but most Christians in the world are tainted withal. It is a
most true saying, Pauci amant Iesum propter Iesum, there are few, and but very
few, who love Christ for Christ's sake: Most people follow Christ for the
loaves, and make use of Christ to serve their own ends and interest. Let a Man
be to marry a Wife, and he will in words pretend, that it is Religion and
Godliness that he most of all desires; but if you had a window to look into
his heart, you will find that it is Money which is his chief aim. But
amongst all sorts of Men, the great Statesmen, and deep Politicians are most
eminently guilty of this sin, who usually bring Religion upon the stage merely
to usher in their Politic designs. It is a cursed Maxim in Machiavel, that
Kings and Princes should labor after a show of Religion, but not look much
after the substance; For the substance would be a burden, but the show of it
would be very useful for the carrying on of their own ends and designs. This
wicked advise and counsel is followed by many Kingdoms and Commonwealths at
this day: there was scarce ever any State or Church-reformer who did reform
Religion for Religions sake, but for his own ends, either to be revenged of
his enemies, or to gain Church-revenues, or to be a coy-Duck, to draw a party
to side with him. Let me give in a few Examples;

It pleased God so to order affairs, in Henry the Eights time, that the Popes
supremacy was abolished in England: But what was the principle that moved the
King to do this? was it out of love to the true Religion? or was it not rather
that thereby he might be revenged of the Pope, who would not allow of his
Divorce from his first Wife?

I have read of Maximilian Emperor of Germany, who living in Luthers time,
professed a great deal of zeal after Reformation; and especially, in plucking
down golden Images. But the story says, that it was not so much out of hatred
to the Images, as out of love to the gold, which made him undertake it.

In the History of the Civil Wars in France, I read that when the Princes of
the blood fell out one with another, one party called in the Protestants to
their assistance, not out of love to Religion, but that thereby they might
gain a party.

That which I say of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, the like I say of Armies; I
read of Goliahs sword hid in a cloth behind the Ephod, 1 Samuel 2. 9. The sword
never appears to the world under bloody colors, but always clothed with a
linen Ephod, pretending Reformation of abuses in Church and State. But it is
worth remembering, that this sword was the sword of Goliath, who was a defier of
the Israel of God, and a great enemy to Religion. The sum of all amounts to
this, that in all ages of the Church, especially in times of Civil War, and
in times of Reformation, there are thousands that hold forth to the world, in
their words and Declarations, a sincere desire to propagate the Gospel and the
Kingdom of Christ, and to advance the pure Ordinances of Christ, yet
notwithstanding mind nothing really and inwardly, but their preferment and
advancement.

Quest. But how shall I know whether I am but a pretender to the things of
Jesus Christ? whether I am one who makes use of Religion to serve mine own
interest? Whether I am like Demetrius the Silver-smith, who minded his gain
more then his Goddess?
Answ. If we would deal faithfully with our own Souls, we could not but
easily know this. To help you in it, take these rules:

1. If thou art as zealous for the advancement of Religion and Reformation,
when it does not concern thy int rest, as when it does; this is a certain
sign thou seek the things of Christ in sincerity: Thus it was with Moses,
in the Rebellion of Corah and his company, there was a conjunction of
interests; the conspiracy was against God and Mo^es, but the Idolatry of the
Golden calfe, was only against the interest of G^d, Moses was not prejudiced
by it, and yet he was every way as zealous for the glory of God in the latter,
as in the former. But now on the contrary, if thou drivest furiously when any
gain is to be got by a Reformation, but very heavily and slowly, when thy
interest is not at all concerned, this is a sign that thou make use of
Religion for thine own ends. Thus it was with Iehu, he had a double Idolatry
to root o^t, the Idolatry of Baal, and of Ieroboams Calves; he destroyed the
first, but continued the second, because it was against his interest to abolish
it. Thus it is with many Masters of Families, if their Servants play the
thieves, they will cry out against them as dishonourers of God; but let the
same Servants profane the Sabbath, or abuse the name of God by vain Oaths,
they are not troubled at it, because it is not against their private interest.

2. A pretender to the things of Christ, if he undertakes to do service for
Church or State, he will do it by halves, so far as it makes for his interest
and no farther. This is the reason why the Reformation of Religion in most
places of the Christian world is but a patcht Reformation, and as a Cake half
baked, because that States and Kingdoms mould the Reformation, not according
to the Word of God, but according to State-interest. Thus it was in Henry the
Eights time, he thrust out the Popes Supremacy because it furthered his design
of a second Marriage, but he continued much of the Popish Religion, and made
six Articles called A whip, with six strings, which were the death of many
godly men. Erasmus has a notable saying of Luther, That he had been a good
man, had he not meddled too much with the Monks bellies, and the Popes triple
Crown, the Pope was willing to yield to a Reformation of the Church, so far as
it might consist with the upholding of his triple Crown, and no farther, etc.

3. A pretender to the things of Christ when he has got what he aims at, will
leave Christ wholly, and lay aside all his pretenses. As the Angels who
appeared to Abraham and Lot, and diverse others, assumed bodies, not out of love
to the bodies they assumed, but only to do their errant, and when they had
done it laid them aside. So there are many who assume a profession of Religion
for the pursuing of their ambitious designs, which when they have obtained
they lay aside, as the Fisherman did his Net, when he was made Pope; when he
was an Abbot, and then a Bishop, and then a Cardinal, he would have his Net
spread for a Table-cloath, to put him in mind of his mean and poor original;
But when he came to be Pope, he then commanded his Servants to lay aside his
Net, for now he had caught what he had been so long Fishing for.

4. He that seeks his own things, under pretense of seeking the things of
Christ, will walk contrary to his Protestations, Declarations, Vows and
Covenants, even then, when he seems outwardly to be most solemn and serious in
making of them. Thus did Balaam, he protests, that if he had an house full of
Gold given him, he could not do any thing contrary to the will of God, and yet
at the same time, he goes with the Messengers sent by Balac. Are there not
many amongst us, who when they Covenanted with hands lifted up to Heaven, to
endeavor the extirpation of error and Heresy, and whatsoever was contrary to
sound Doctrine, did even at the very same time, secretly foment and countenance
the things they Covenanted against?

5. Lastly, He that pretends to the things of Christ, and intends his own,
cares not by what ways and means he compasses his ends, nor by what kind of
persons; whether the ways be lawful or unlawful, the persons good or bad, it
is all one to him so he may obtain his ambitious intendments, which is a
certain sign of a notorious hypocrite. For he that truly and sincerely
endeavors to promote the Glory and Honor of Christ, will never go out of
Christ's way to obtain his desires. For Christ will be more dishonored by his
sin, than honored by his endeavors, though never so laborious and sincere.

Let us I beseech you examine our selves, according to these several notes and
marks, whether we be guilty of this sinful cursed and Devilish selfe-seeking.
And know, that if this sin rule and reign in us, it makes us accessory to a
fourefould murder; It makes us selfe-murderers, Church and State-murderers, and
Christ-murderers. It brings us under a double Gospel curse, for if any man love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be (says the Apostle) Anathema Maranatha.
The Lord give us hearts seriously to weigh these things.

The second Use is, an use of Exhortation, which is twofold: 2. Use.


1. To beseech all here present, whether Magistrates, Ministers or private
Citizens, to take heed of this sinful Exhort: 1.
selfe-seeking, and six headed Monster, of seeking our own gain and credit
seperatedly from the things of Christ, or before, or more then the things of
Christ, of seeking our own things under pretense of seeking the things of
Christ, or when they stand in opposition to, or competition with the things of
Christ, of seeking the good of our vile bodies, with the neglect of our
precious and immortal Souls. As Christ says of Covetousness, so I of this
sin, Take heed and beware of sinful selfe-seeking, consider the exceeding
greatness of this sin, and the woeful and mischievous fruits and effects of
it. This is the plague-soar of Church and State; The great Caterpillar that
devours all the green things of the land. This has destroyed our Parliaments,
our Ministry, our Gentry: This is that which obstructeth that glorious
reformation so long expected and desired, etc. This is not selfe-seeking but
selfe-hating and selfe-destroying: he that seeks to give satisfaction to his
corrupt self, is just like a Man who gives strong wine to his friend in a high
Fever, which is not to love him, but to kill him. He that seeks to please his
sinful self, seeks to strengthen his disease, to maintain that within him,
which God hates, and to nourish that which will destroy his Soul. He that
seeks the welfare of his body, and neglects the welfare of his soul, destroys
(as I have said) both body and soul. This is just as if a Husbandman in time of
Harvest should gather in his stubble, and leave his corn to be devoured by
hoggs. Just like a Father who takes care to feed and cloth his children, but
not to instruct and teach them. In a word, he that seeks his own ease and
safety, his own gain and credit, his own pleasure and satisfaction, and
neglects and slighteth the things of Christ, this Man is the greatest
selfe-hater, and selfe-destroyer; For he that sesks not the interest of Christ,
shall never have any interest in Christ.

2. To beseech you to labor for the divine, heavenly, and blessed self-seeking
mentioned in the beginning of the Sermon: Exhort. 2.
Physicians when they see men bleed immoderately at the nose, will let them
blood in another vein, that so they may make a diversion, and thereby stop the
bleeding. Oh that God would use me this day, as his instrument, to make a most
glorious and most happy diversion, and to turn you all from self-seekers, into
Christ-seekers! Oh that I could prevail with you, to seek the things of Jesus
Christ before, and more then your own things! Oh how happy would London be, if
it could be said of it; All thy Magistrates, Ministers, and private people,
seek the things of Christ more vigorously and cordially then they do their own
things.

To move you to this, consider,

1. What these your own things are which you so immoderately and inordinately
seek after?

1. They are not your own in a proper sense, as you have heard.

2. They are not Worth owning, they are vain and empty, empty of reality, and
Soul-satisfaction, they are vanishing and perishing, like houses made of Snow
or wax, and not only so, but they are also vexing and tormenting, according to
what is said by one that had full and ample experience of them, Eccles. 2. 2,
17, 26.

2. Consider the excellency of the things of Jesus Christ which you so much
neglect and undervalue. The truths of Christ, the Ordinances, Day, Ministry,
and Government of Christ, the Preservaon, Propagation, and Reformation of
Religion: These are Glorious and Excellent things in their own Nature, and so
far exceeding your own things which you so greedily labor after, that they are
not worthy to be named that day in which we speak of the things of Christ. I
want time to set out the transcendent Glory and Excellency of Gospel
concernments, and the vanity, emptiness, and nothingnesse of all our own
Earthly enjoyments. Only let me desire you to take notice;

1. That Jesus Christ sought not his own things, he left Heaven for us, and
shall not we neglect Earth for him?

2. For what poor trifles you despise the glorious things of the Gospel.

3. If you seek not after the things of Christ more then your own, you are in
a cursed condition, and better you had never been borne.

4. The things of Jesus Christ shall prosper, though you seek not the
prosperity of them. What Mordecai said to Ester in another case, I crave leave
to say to you, Enlargement and deliverance shall arise to the Ester 4 14.
people of God from another place, but thou and thy Fathers house shall be
destroyed. There will a time come when the Mountain of the Lords house shall
be Isaiah 2 2.
established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the
Hills, and all Nations shall flow to it; when the Kingdoms of this world shall
become the Rev. 11. 15.
Kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ, when the little stone cuts out of the
Mountain without hands, shall destroy all opposite Kingdoms, and become a
great Mountain and fill the whole earth, when every Nation Dan. 4. 35. 41, 45.
and Kingdom that will not serve the Lord Jesus, shall perish, and be utterly
wasted. For neglecting to set up this Kingdom of Christ, God has destroyed
Isa 6. 60. 12.
many Nations and Kingdoms, and so he will us, if we follow their examples; If
we prefer the building of our own houses, before the builing of Gods house,
God will build up his own house by other instruments, but he will destroy us
and our Houses.

3. Lastly, Consider: That man seeks himself most, who most seeks the things
of Christ. He that is the greatest Christ-seeker, is the greatest self seeker.
For God has said, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
and all these things shall be added unto you. When Solomon begged wisdom, God
gave him wealth and riches as an overplus. If we seek the things of Christ, in
the first and chief place, God will give in our own things into the bargain,
even as Paper and thread is added to a bought commodity.

Thus I have put an end to the Sermon of selfe-seeking, Oh that I could put an
end to the sin of selfe-seeking! Two things I dare affirm:

1. That this sin has been the Original cause of all Englands miseries. 2.
That it will never be well with England, nor shall we ever see better days,
till this sin be mortified.
Let us go to Christ, and labor by Faith, to fetch power from his Death, to
crucify and mortify this sin; Let it be our daily prayer, that England may
have more Christ-seekers, and fewer selfe-seekers; or which is all one, That
God would make us all true selfe-seekers, by making us true Christ-seekers.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 18. Their own, what. in the marg. put into the Text, next after
their own. p. 3. l. 28. leave out the figure 4. and join the line to the
foregoing. p. 7. l. 7. for could r. would. p. 9. l. 33. for haugtinesse r.
naughtiness. p. 17. l. 14. for blasphemous r. blasphemers. p. 18. l. 29 for
^vies r. lives. p. 19. l. 17. for vel amicitia, r. non amicitiae. p 19. l. 23.
for abhorsed, r. abhorred, p. 2^. l. 3. for runam r. ruinam. ibid l. 33. for
thy r. the. p. 24. l. 36. for would r. should. p. 33. l. 25. for builing r.
building.


