Royal coat of armsBY THE KING.
A Proclamation of His Majesty's Grace, Favor, and Pardon to the Inhabitants
of His Counties of Stafford and Derby.
WHEREAS We have taken notice, that by the Malice, Industry and Importunity of
several ill affected and seditious Persons in Our Counties of Stafford and
Derby, very many of Our Weak and seduced Subjects of those Our Counties have
not only been drawn to exercise the Militia, under color of a pretended
Ordinance, without and against Our consent, (a crime of a very high nature, if
We would strictly enquire thereinto;) but have made contributions of Plate,
Money, and Horses, toward the maintenance of the Army now in Rebellion against
Us, and have at last actually themselves taken Arms against Us; We do hereby
publish and declare, That We are graciously pleased to attribute the Crimes and
Offenses of Our said Subjects of those Our Counties to the power and faction of
their Seducers, who, We believe, by Threats, Menaces, and false informations,
compelled and led them into those Actions of Undutifulnesse and Disloyalty
toward Us; And We do therefore hereby offer Our free and gracious Pardon, to
all the Inhabitants of Our said Counties of Stafford and Derby, for all
offenses concerning the premises committed against Us, before the publishing of
this Our Proclamation, except Sir John Gell, and Sir William Brereton Knights,
against whom We shall proceed according to the Rules of the Law, as against
Traitors and Stirrers of Sedition against Us, And whom We do hereby require
all Our Officers and Ministers of Justice, and all Our loving Subjects
whatsoever, to apprehend and cause to be kept in safe Custody, till Our
pleasure be farther known. Provided that this Our grace shall not extend to any
Person, who after the publishing this Our Proclamation, shall presume by Loan,
or Contribution to assist the said Army of Rebels, to assemble and Muster
themselves in Arms without Authority derived from Us under Our hand, to enter
into any Oath of Association for opposing Us and Our Army, or to succor or
entertain any of the Persons excepted in this Our Proclamation, or in Our
Declaration of the twelfth of August. But We must and do declare, That
whosoever shall henceforward be guilty of the Premises, or of either of them,
shall be esteemed by Us, as an enemy to the public Peace, a Person
disaffected to Us, and to the Religion and Laws of the Kingdom, and guilty of
High Treason, and shall accordingly receive condign punishment, of which We
give them timely notice, that they may proceed accordingly at their Perils.
And we do hereby require Our High-Sheriffes, Commissioners of Array, Justices
of the Peace, and all other Our Officers and loving Subjects to resist, oppose,
and apprehend all such persons, as shall presume to make any Leavies in those
Our Counties, under what pretense soever without Authority derived from Us
under Our hand. And We likewise Will and Require them and every of them to be
Assistant to all such as shall either Command the Traine-bands of those Our
Counties, or make any Leavies in the same by virtue of Commission under Our
great Seal or Sign Manual. And Our Pleasure is, That this Our Proclamation
shall be read in all the Parish Churches and Chappells within those Our
Counties of Stafford and Derby.

Given at Our Court at OXFORD, this five and twentieth day of March, in the
Eighteenth year of Our Reign.
God Save the KING.
Printed at Oxford by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1642.


