NEW MATTERS OF High and great Consequence, Printed the twelfth of March.
Anno. 1642.

1. His Majesty's Speech to the Committee the ninth of March, when they
presented the Declaration of both Houses of Parliament at New Market.

2. His sacred Majesty's Letter to the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, which was read in both Houses of Parliament, concerning matter of
great weight which was sent lately from Royston.

3. An Order of both the Houses of Parliament, concerning such men of worth as
are chosen in the City of London, and entrusted with those sums of money which
have bin gathered in and about the City, for the relief of our brethren in
Ireland, and how it should be disposed of by them.

Printed at London for Francis Coules and Thomas Banks 1642.

His Majesty's Letter to the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
concerning Sir Edward Herbert,
CHARLES REX,

RIght trusty and well beloved Counselor, We greet you well, and have thought
good hereby to certify that We did the third of January last, deliver to Our
Attorney certain Articles of Accusation engrossed in Paper, a Copy whereof we
have sent here enclosed and did then command him in our Name, to acquaint our
House of Peers, that diverse great and Treasonable designs and practices
against Us, and the State had come to Our Knowledge; for which We commanded him
in our Name, to accuse the six persons in the said Paper mentioned of High
Treason, and other high misdemeanors by delivering the Paper to Our said House
and to desire to have it read, and further to desire in our Name, that a select
Committee of Lords, might be appointed to take the examinations of such
witnesses as We would produce, and as formerly had bin done in Cases of like
nature, according to the justice of the House, and the Committee to be under a
command of secrecy as formerly, and further in Our Name to ask liberty, to
add and alter if there should be cause, according to justice: and likewise to
desire that Our said House of Peers would take care of the securing of the
said persons as in justice there should be cause: We do further declare that
Our said Attorney did not advise or contrive the said Articles, nor had any
thing to do with, or in advising any breach of Privilege that followed after.
And for what he did in obedience to Our commands, We conceive he was bound by
Oath, and the duty of his place, and by the trust, by Us reposed in him so to
do; And had he refused to obey Us therein; We would have questioned him for
breach of oath, duty, and trust.

But now having declared, that we find cause wholly to desist from proceeding
against the persons accused, We have commanded him to proceed no further
therein, nor to produce nor discover any proof concerning the same.

Given at Royston, the fourth of March. 1641.
A Letter sent by order of both Houses of Parliament, to the high Sheriff of
every Shire, concerning matters of great Consequence.
Also an Order of both Houses of Parliament; concerning such persons as are
appointed for the gathering of such sums of money in London, as is intended
for the reducing of the Rebels in Ireland, etc.
Master Speaker,
THe Lords and Commons being deeply sensible of the unspeakable calamities,
which his Majesty's good Subjects of the Kingdom of Ireland do now suffer by
barbarous cruelties, and Massacres of the Rebels there, and conceiving these
printed Propositions herewith sent (being ratified by his Majesty's Royal
Assent, and the unanimous approbation of both Houses of Parliament) do
undoubtedly tend, to the speedy and effectu^^^ ^educing of those bloody Rebels,
the propagating of the Protestant Religion, the augmenting of the greatness,
and Revenew of the Crown of England, and the establishing of an happy and
firm peace for the future in his Majesty's three Kingdoms, And all this to
be effected (by Gods gracious assistance) without the general charge of the
Subjects and to the great advantage of those that shall under-write, have
thought fit to require you to publish these printed Propositions and
Instructions at this Lent Assizes, to the intent that all his Majesty's good
people within your County may take notice of the benefit they may receive by
under-writing in due time, and that so many of them then present and willing to
subscribe, may give up a note of their names, sums, and Dates of their
Subscriptions to you, to be entered in the paper book, mentioned in the printed
Instructions, which is forthwith to be sent unto you; And you are further
directed hereby at this Lent Assizes (if they be not past) by the advice and
assistance of the Justices of Peace for your County then present, to appoint
certain days and places, most convenient for this service, when, and where
your self, and the Justices of Peace within each division will be present to
receive the names, sums, and times of subscription of such of his Majesty's
well-affected Subjects within your County, as shall not have subscribed at this
Lent Assizes, their names, sums, and times of subscription to be likewise
entered into the Paper book. And if this be come to your hands after the
Assizes; then to appoint such times and places, as may best speed this service.

And further, your self and the Justices of Peace, the Ministers of Gods Word,
and persons of quality within your County, are hereby earnestly desired to show
themselves active, and exemplary in advancing this great and pious work, as a
service tending so much to the glory of God, the honor and profit of his
Majesty, and the peace and tranquillity of his three Kingdoms for the future.

And you are likewise to inform those that shall under-write, that the Act of
Parliament (which his Majesty has promised to pass for the settling of those
two Millions and a half of Acres) is already in hand, and that the Lands are
to be divided so indifferently by lot amongst them that under-write, that no
one man whatsoever shall have more respect or advantage then another in the
division.

And lastly, you are to give a speedy account to the Parliament of your
proceedings herein, and of those that do really advance this service; Thus not
doubting of your utmost care and diligence herein, we bid you heartily
farewell.

Your loving Friend.
March 5. 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that John
Warner, John Towes, Thomas Andrews, Aldermen, and Lawrence Halsted Esquire, or
any two of them shall receive all such subscriptions and sums of money as
shall be subscribed, and paid in according to the printed Propositions made for
the speedy reducing of the Rebels of Ireland, and assented unto by his Majesty
and both Houses of Parliament, and are daily to attend that service at the
Chamber of London, from eight of the clock till eleven in the forenoone, and
from two of the clock till six in the afternoon, and it is further ordered,
that this order shall be forthwith printed and published.

Diurnall Occurrences in Parliament, from the 7. day of March to the 10. 1642.
On Monday the 7. of March.
THE Declaration wherein the House of Commons give their reasons for the
jealousies that they had, and fear of dangers, was sent up to the Lords, and
passed there the greater part of them. After it was passed, four of the Lords,
and eight of the House of Commons were appointed to carry it to morrow to his
Majesty, and also to invite him to come to London; and withal liberty was
granted for them to speak as occasion should be offered by the King, what
they thought meet. The four Lords were the Earl of Pembrooke, the Earl of
Holland, the Lord Dunsmore, and the Lord Seimor The eight Commons were, Mr
Fines, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir William Litton, Sir Henry
Mildmay, Sir Simon Munford, Sir John Bots, Sir William Strickland.

Sundry Irish Commanders taken in Bark, coming from France, and by a tempest
forced into a creek in the west Country, were brought up to London, and
committed to Newgate.

Most part of this day was spent about the book of Rates of things exported out
of the Land and imported into it.

While the Committees of the House of Commons, with the Committees for the
Scots were sitting together, Sir David Cunningham came from Scotland, and
certified, that their Kingdom was very well settled, and well aff^cted to our
Parliament, and that the Incendiaries that were there, and such as were feared
to plot secret matters were so brought down, as they were not able to do any
thing. Withal he certified, that the 2500 soldiers went to Ireland Friday was
fortnight.

A letter from Ireland was read in the House of Commons, which certified, that
Drohedagh being hard besieged by the Rebels, and they by their long siege
brought to such straights as they were forced to eat horses; the Commander of
the City encouraged the soldiers that were there to sally out, and thereupon
they slew above 60 of them, put the rest to flight, brought in good store of
provision, both of Oxen and sheep. Withal, that about the same time, the
chains and boats, which the Rebels had then blocked up the River withal, were
with a mighty storm broken and driven away, insomuch as ships laden with
provision entered the Town, and much refreshed it.

On Tuesday March 8.
The House of Commons made a review of their answer, which they sent to the
Kings last Message about the Militia.

Sergeant Wild, and others of the House of Commons were sent up to the House of
the Lords to lay the charge against Mr. Attorney, whose charge was not of
Treason; but high misdemeanor. Mr. Attorney desired Counsel to answer: It was
replied, that the accusation laid to his charge, being matters not of Law, but
of Fact, and against the privileges of the House, he was not to have Counsel,
but to answer himself viva voce.

There was a Letter, which the King wrote to the Lord Keeper, and by him
communicated to the Lords, the particulars whereof is specified at large in the
second page of this Book.

Colonel Francis Edwards being questioned about words that he spoke last
Friday against the King and Parliament, answered, that he remembered not any
such words: but would not deny but that he might speak them; but yet said,
that if he spoke them, it was in drink. This answer satisfied not the House,
but he was committed.

Soldiers that are in Ireland sent a complaint to the Parliament, that the
Treasurer that was to pay them their wages, took sixepence in a pound from
them: which complaint the Parliament observing to be very just, Ordered that
the Soldiers should have their full pay, and that the Treasurer should be
otherwise considered for his pains about the money.

On Wednesday. March. 9.
Mr. Arthur Trellare, Burgess of Plimmoth, was expelled the House for saying,
upon a question of a Guard being at White Hall, and a Guard about the
Parliament, that the Kings fears did arise from the Parliament, and the
Parliaments fears arose from the King: and that it was Treason for the
Parliament to have a Guard without the consent of the King.

A Scotch-man informed against one Dr. Brown, that he should say, that our
King Charles was Rex Scotiae, non Scotorum, King of Scotland, not of the Scots.
Thereupon a Messenger was sent for him.

Mr. Attorney this day appearing before the Lords, had Counsel appointed him
by the Lords, who appeared there; but the Commons refused to be present, and
they that should have enforced the Accusation, refused to come. The Counsel
appointed for him by the Lords, was Mr. Recorder of London, and Sir Thomas
Benesfield both of them refused to plead for the Attorney, and thereupon the
Lords committed them to the black Rod.

Much time was spent in perfecting the book of Rates for things exported out
of the Land and imported into it; and also about settling the Statute for 400000
I. upon Lands, and likewise upon the bill concerning the million of money for
the Rebels Lands.

On Thursday, March the 10.
The House of Commons sent up to the Lords, that they would be pleased to
subscribe to the Million, as they themselves were willing to do, and that for
example sake. The Dutch Merchants desired underwrite two hundred thousand
pounds. Upon debate it was voted, that they should have liberty to underwrite
one hundred thousand pounds, if they did it within a time prescribed, and that
the whole Million were not before subscribed by English and Scots.

According to the Order that was made yesterday, to send for Doctor Brown upon
that which was informed against him, a messenger was this day dispatched away
for him.

Information was this day given unto the House that some of the Kings Printers
were sent for to go unto York, and that they were packing up their Presses
and preparing themselves for that journey.

Whereas a motion had formerly been made concerning a Lecturer to be settled at
Branford, the Parishioners Petitioned for one Mr. Hinderson to be their
Lecturer, the House referred the consideration thereof, to the choice of the
Parishioners.

Dr. Burgess and Mr. Ash are appointed to preach before the House of Commons
at the next fast. Much time was also this day spent about the Book of Rates,
yet is it not finished, for they went but to the letter O.

The House of Commons ordered that after the public businesses of this Land
and Ireland are ended, they shall come together again according to their
ancient custom, at 8. a clock in the morning, and sit till 12, and that
private Committees shall sit in the afternoon for particular businesses, as
they were wont formerly to do.

There was a great dispute in the House of Commons about Generals for the Navy
under the Lord Admiral, in case he should not be well, or not otherwise able
to go in his own person, and the question was, whether there should be three,
or only one: reasons for three were rendered, that there would be employment
sundry ways, as to keep the Seas at Dunkirk to keep them likewise about the
entering into Ireland, and for other Services: but was concluded that one was
sufficient, power being given unto him, to choose others under him. The Earl of
Warwick was the particular man that was chosen to be General under the L.
Admiral.

His Majesty's Speech to the Committee the 9. of March, when they presented the
Declaration of both House of Parliament at New Market.
I Am confident that you expect not that I should give you a speedy Answer to
this strange and unexpected Declaration: and I am sorry (in the distraction of
this Kingdom) you should think this way of address to be more convenient,
than that proposed by my Message the twentieth of January last to both Houses.

As concerning the grounds of your fears and jealousies, I will take time to
answer particularly, and doubt not but I shall do it to the satisfaction of
all the world: God in his good time will, I hope, discover the secrets and
bottoms of all Plots and Treasons, and then I shall stand right in the eyes of
all my People. In the mean time I must tell you, that I rather expected
vindication for the imputation laid on me in Mr. Pym's Speech, than that any
more general rumors and discourses should get credit with you.

For my fears and doubts, I did not think they should have been thought so
groundless, or trivial, whilst so many seditious Pamphlets, and Sermons are
looked upon, and so great Tumults are remembered unpunished, uninquired into. I
still confess my fears, and call God to witness, that they are greater for
the true Protestant profession, My People and Laws, than for My own Rights
and Safety. Though I must tell you, I conceive, that none of these are free
from danger.

What would you have? Have I violated your Laws? Have I denied to pass any
one Bill for the ease and security of my Subjects? I do not ask what you have
done for me?

Have any of my People been transported with fears and apprehensions? I have
offered as free and general a pardon as your selves could devise.

All this considered, there is a judgment from heaven upon this Nation, if
these distractions continue.

God so deal with me and mine, as all my thoughts and intentions are upon
right, for the maintenance of the Protestant Profession, and for the
observation and preservation of the Laws of this Land, and I hope God will
bless and assist those Laws for My Preservation.

As for the additionall Declaration, you are to expect an Answer to it, when
you shall receive the Answer to the D^claration it self.

FINIS.

