C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation declaring His Majesty's Resolution for settling a speedy Peace
by a good Accommodation, and an Invitation to all His Loyal Subjects to join
together for His Assistance therein.
AMongst: the many Troubles wherewith (for more then two years last past) We
have been involves, nothing has more afflicted Us, then the real sense of
our Subjects sufferings, occasioned by this most unnatural War; And the
chief of Our Care has been (and by Gods assistance shall still be) to settle
them in a happy Peace, with that freedom of enjoying the exercise of their
Religion, Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws of this Kingdom, as
they or any of their Ancestors enjoyed the same in the best times of the of the
late Queen Elizabeth, or Our Royal Father. And as we have always professed in
the sincerity of Our heart, That no success should ever make Us averse unto
Peace, so have We always when God has blessed Us with any eminent Victory,
solicited the Members of both Houses of Parliament remaining at Westminster by
frequent Messages for a Treaty conducing thereunto: and in particular upon Our
late Victory over the Earl of Essex his Army in Cornwall (which We wholly
attribute to the immediate hand of God) We presently dispatched a Message to
them to desire a Treaty for Peace and Accommodation; of which, as likewise of
that former Message for Peace, which We sent them from Evesiam the fourth of
July late, We have yet received no answer. And therefore have resolved with Our
Army to draw presently toward London, and Our Southern and Eastern Counties,
not looking upon those parts as Enemies to Us, and so to suffer by the approach
of Our Army, or the disorders thereof (which We will use all possible means to
prevent) but as Our poor Subjects oppressed by power (of which We rest assured
the greater part remain loyal to Us) and so deserving Our protection. And We
hope that at a nearer distance of place there may beget so right an
understanding between Us and Our People, that at length We may obtain a
Treaty for Peace, and a full, free and peaceable Convention in Parliament, and
therein make an end of these umhappy differences by a good Accommodation. In
which We hereby assure all Our People upon Our Royal Word, and the Faith of a
Christian (which is the greatest Security We can give them) that We will insist
only upon the settling and continuance of the true Reformed Protestant
Religion, Our own undoubted Known Rights, the privileges of Parliament, and
Our Subjects Liberty and Property, according to the Laws of the Land, and to
have all these settled in a full and free Parliament, whereby the Armies on both
sides may be presently disbanded, this Kingdom may be secured from the danger
of a Conquest by Foreign Forces, all Strangers now in Arms may return to
their own Countries, and Our poor Subjects be forced of those grievous
burdens, which by reason of the late Distractions, have (much against Our
will) too much pressed them. And to the end Our Subjects may no longer be
missed by false pretenses, We do desire all of them, as well in Our own
Quarters, as where the Rebels have usurped a power, to take into serious
consideration the duty and loyalty which by the Law of God and their Oath of
Allegiance they owe unto Us, and more particularly that part thereof which
concerns the defense of Our Person, and assistance of Us against Rebels, and
such as rise in Arms against Us, which they may find plainly set down in the
Statute of the II. year of King Henry the 7. Cap. I. And We do hereby require
Our Subjects within Our own Quarters through or near which We shall pass, by
that duty they owe to Us and their Country, that they forthwith prepare
themselves with the best Arms they can get, to be ready, and to join, and go
along with Us in this present Expedition (We resolving to take special care to
place them under the Command of Gentlemen of Quality of their own Countries,
to their good content and satisfaction.) And We likewise require and authorize
all Our good Subjects, as well the Trained Bands as others of Our City of
London, and Our Southern and Eastern Counties, to choose their own Commanders
and Leaders amongst those Gentlemen and Citizens that are of approved loyalty
to Us, and Lovers of the Peace of their Country, and upon Our approach toward
those parts, to put themselves into Arms, and march in warlike manner to
assist Us in this good work, and free themselve from the Tyranny of their
fellow Subjects, under which they groan, Commanding and authorizing them to
seize such places of Strength in those Southern and Eastern Counties as the
Rebels have possessed themselves of; to oppose with force of Arms such
persons as shall resist them in obeying these Our Commands, and to apprehend
and secure the persons of all such as shall endeavor to continue this
Rebellion, and to hinder the settling of the Peace of this Kingdom in a full
and free Convention of Parliament; (the only visible means left, by the
blessiing of God, to redeem this Nation from utter ruin) wherein We will
afford Our utmost protection and safety unto all Our Subjects that shall give
Obedience to these Our Commands. And as We doubt not but that all Our good
Subjects will come chearefully to Our assistance for so good an end (beyond
which We do not requre it) so We trust that God, who has hitherto wonderfully
preserved Us, will crown this action with happy success, for his glory, and
the welfare of this poor Nation.

Given at Our Court at Chard the 30. day of September1644.
P^^^^^^ (...) by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University. 1644.


