THE HAPPINESS Of those who Sleep in Jesus, OR, The Benefit that comes to the
dead bodies of the Saints even while they are in the Grave, Sleeping in Jesus.
Delivered in a SERMON Preached at the Funeral of that Pious and Religious Lady,
the Lady Anne Waller, At the New Church in Westminst. Oct. 31, 1661. Together
with the Testimony then given unto her. By Edm. Calamy, B. D. and Pastor of
Aldermanbury.

Rev. 14.11. And I heard a Voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them. John 11
11. Our Friend Lazarus sleeps, but I go that I may awake him out of Sleep.
Upon which words St. Austin says.

Domino dormiebat qui eum tanta facilitate excitavit de Sepulchro, quanta tu cx
citas dormientem de Le^to, hominibus autem mo^taus erat, qui eum suscitare non
poterant.

1 These. 4.16. The Dead in Christ shall rise first. London, Printed by I. H.
for Nathanael Webb, at the Royal Oak in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little
North-Door, 1662.

Royal Oak
printer's or publisher's device

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Sr WILLIAM WALLER.
Sir,
IT has pleased the wise God, and your heavenly Father, to exercise you with
variety of sad Providence, and to train you up for himself and his Kingdom, by
many Troubles and Afflictions. It has always been his Method to prepare his
Children by light and moment any crosses, for a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory, and by imbittering the pleasures of this world, to sweeten the
delights of a better

This, Sir, has been your Portion, And I doubt not but you have learned, and
are instructed by God in whatsoever state you are, therewith to be contented,
and are made able to say with David, It is good for you that you have been
afflicted.

This last Trial was one of the sorest that ever yet betided you, being the
loss of so Precious a Lady, so suitable a Wife, full of so much Goodness and
Prudence. But when you consider, that your Loss is her Gain, that she is taken
away from the evil to come, that she is not lost, but gone before to her
Father, and your Father, to her God, and your God; that her Soul is at rest in
Abraham's bosom, and her body, even while in the grave, asleep in Jesus, and who
it is that has taken her from you; this does much allay the immoderateness of
your sorrow, and enables you to say with holy Job, Job 1.21.
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be the Name of the Lord; and
with holy David, Psalm. 39.8.
I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.

There are three great Truths, which if well digested, will prove
heart-quieting, and compose the Spirits of Gods people, and make them calm and
satisfied in the worst of days and dangers.

1. That all the Providence of God, though never so dark and m^sterious, and
seemingly contrary to his Promises, shall all of them at last concur to the
fulfilling of his Promises; For we know that all things shall work together for
good to those who love God.

2. That sanctified Afflictions are great blessings, and that Correction, when
joined with Instruction, is a certain Character of Election. That God had one
Son without sin, but no Son without Sorrow; That Afflictions are Divine
Touchstones, to try the truth and strength of our Graces, Divine Furnaces, to
purge out the Dross of our sins; Divine Files to pare off our spiritual Rust,
and Divine framing Houses, to dress us, and make us fit for Heaven.

3. That Jesus Christ has altered the Nature of Death, and made it a Gate to
everlasting Life. That Christ has sanctified, sweetened, purchased, conquered,
and disarmed Death, so as it is now become the best Friend we have next to
Jesus Christ. For we shall never be free from sin, nor perfected in Grace, nor
see God Face to Face, till we die.

This last grand Truth is made out fully in the ensuing Sermon, wherein also is
showed the Benefit that the Bodies of the Saints obtain while in the Grave, by
sleeping in Jesus. Many Sermons tell us the Advantage that the Soul reaps by
death, but this will discover what our vile Bodies gain even while they are
rotting in the Grave.

Sir, It was your desire it should be made public, and out of pure obedience
so it now is. For there is nothing in it that is elaborate, and more then
ordinary, or that renders it worthy the perusal of a judicious Eye. But the
Testimony given of your Noble Lady, as it is true, so (I conceive) it is worth
reading and imitating, and may well be called a Looking-glass for Ladies to
dress themselves by every Morning. It will teach them to make Religion their
Business, and to spend more time in decking their Souls with Grace, then their
Bodies with vain Attire, that a Neck-lace of Graces, is more worth then a
Neck-lace of Pearls.

St. Hierom writes much in commendation of many Holy and Religious Ladies,
Paula, Marcella, Euslochium, etc.
living and dying in his days, and proposes them as Patterns to others for
their Imitation. In like manner, I thought meet to propound the example of your
most Excellent Lady, which if well followed in those things wherein she was
praiseworthy, will without doubt bring us to everlasting Happiness.

The Lord give a Blessing to what is said in the following Discourse, and make
up to you in himself, what you have lost in the want of your Dear Consort, and
be your Comforter and Counselor in all Conditions.

So Prays, Your Servant in the Work of the Lord, Edm. Calamy.

THE HAPPINESS of those who Sleep in Jesus, OR, The Benefit that comes to the
dead Bodies of the Saints, even while they lie in the Grave, Sleeping in JESUS:
1 THESSALONIANS. 4.14. -- Even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with
him.
N the former Verse, the Apostle persuades the Thessalonians not to mourn
immoderately for the Saints Departed. He does not forbid them to mourn, but not
to mourn without measure. Religion does not abolish natural Affections, but
only mode(...)hem. Grace does not destroy, but rectify Nature; it dep(...)ot
of sense, but teaches the right use of Senses. And he b(...) diverse Arguments
to diswade us from immoderate M(...)ning.

Because this would bewray our Ignorance of the blessed estate of Gods Children
after this Life. This is set down, v. 13. But I would not have you to be
ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep.

2. This is to act as hopeless, Heathens, not as Christians. This is put down
in the same Verse, -- That ye sorrow not even as others, that have no hope.
Though Heathens who have no hope of a better Life after this, do mourn
immeasurably, yet this does not become Christians, who have hope in death, and
who believe the Life Everlasting.

3. Because the death of a Saint is not an utter Extinction, and abolition of
the man, but only a quiet and comfortable sleep. Verse 13, 14.

4. Because they are so far from being abolished, and utterly extinct, that
they are asle^^ in Jesus. They are, even while they are in their Graves, at
rest in the Arms of Jesus. The Greek is, (...), they that sleep by Jesus. But
as Grotius observes, (...) is put for (...), so it is taken, Romans 4.11. 1 Timothy
5.14. And so it is expressly said, v. 16. of this Chapter, (...), the dead in
Christ. And also, 1 Cor. 15.18. (...), They that sleep in Christ.

5. Because at the great day of Judgment, they shall be raised from out of
their Graves, and raised to the resurrection of Life, and raised by the power
of God, and by virtue of their Union with Christ, v. 14. For if we believe that
Jesus died, and rose again, even so, them also which sleep in Jesus, God will
bring with him. Even so, That is, as Christ died, and rose again, so shall all
that are dead in Christ, rise again, by virtue of their Membership with Christ
(For if the Head be alive, the Members must live also) and by the Power of God.
The same God that raised Christ from the dead, will raise all that are united
to him, and bring them with him at the dreadful day of Judgment.

6. Because Christ will carry all his Saints whom he shall raise, up into
Heaven with him, where they shall be for ever with the Lord, in perfect
Happiness.

The Text that I have chosen contains three of these Arguments, which I shall
sum up in these three Doctrinal Conclusions.

Doct. 1. That the death of a Saint is nothing else but a quiet, comfortable,
and blessed sleep.

Doct. 2. That the bodies of the Saints, even while they are in their graves,
are asleep in Jesus.

Doct. 3. That Jesus Christ will raise the dead bodies of the Saints, and join
their souls to them, and bring them with him to judgment, and then carry them
into heaven, where they shall be ever with the Lord.

Doctrine 1.
That the death of a Child of God is nothing else but a quiet, comfortable, and
happy sleep.

For the understanding of this I shall answer to three Questions.

Quest. 1. What part of a Child of God is it that sleeps when he dies?

Ans. There are some who say, That the soul sleeps as well as the body, and
that when a man dies both Body and Soul lie asleep till the Resurrection. And
this they prove from the example of Stephen, Act. 7 57
because it is said of him, That he fell asleep. But still the question is,
What part of Stephen fell asleep? Not his Soul: For he commends that into the
hands of Christ; Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. And he saw the heavens opened,
and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God ready to receive his Soul
immediately. It was the Body of Stephen fell asleep, but his Soul was presently
received by the Lord Jesus into heaven. When a man dies, his body returns to
dust from whence it came, but the soul returns to God who gave it, Eccl. 12.7
either to be judged to everlasting happiness, or everlasting misery. Indeed,
In one sense the soul may be said at death to fall asleep, that is, It is at
rest in Abraham's bosom: But it is not asleep in the Anabaptistical and
Socinian sense, so as to lie in a dead Apoplexy or Lethargy* neither capable of
joy or sorrow, of happiness or misery till the Resurrection. This is a most
uncomfortable and unscriptural opinion.

When St. Paul desires to be dissolved and to be with Christ, he does not
desire to lie asleep till the Resurrection, and neither to see, know, or enjoy
Christ, but to be made happy with him, and by him.

When Christ promised to the penitent Thief, Anima eorum sint colligat^ in
horto Edenis, Amen, Amen, Amen, Selah.
That that day he should be with him in Paradise; his meaning was, That he
should enjoy unspeakable pleasures with him. Thence the Jews write upon the
graves of their dead friends, Let their souls be gathered in the Garden of
Eden, Amen, Amen, Amen. Selah.

The Souls under the Altar, of them that were slain for the Word of God, and
for the Testimony which they held, are not in a dull Lethargy without sense or
understanding, but cry with a loud voice, Rev. 6.9, 10.
How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth, etc.

The Souls of just men made perfect in heaven are not asleep, Heb. 12.23
but enjoy Celestial felicity. And the soul of Lazarus was immediately upon
his death received into Abraham's bosom, and filled full of consolation.

Polycarpe, Eusebius. lib. 5 cap. 11
that ancient and stout Champion of Jesus Christ, when he was at the Stake,
amongst many other excellent words which he uttered, this was one, That his
soul should that very day be represented before God in heaven.

The truth is, This opinion of the Soul-sleepers is as pernicious as the
opinion of those who say, That the Soul dies with the Body, and rises with the
Body. For this sleep must be either Natural, or Metaphorical; Of the first the
Soul is not capable, and the second is nothing else but Death it self. The Book
is called, Psychopannychia.
Therefore Calvin, in his Book written on purpose against these Hypnologists,
says excellently, They that say, that the soul lives when out of the body, and
yet deprive it of all sense and understanding, Qui animam vivere fatentur,
illamque omni sen^u spo^^ant, prorsus animam fingunt quae nihil animae habcat
aut animam ipsam a se ipsa avellunt; cum cjus natura, sincqua consistere ullo
modo ucquit, sit. moveri, sentire vigere intelligere: atque (ut ait
Tertulli^ous) animae anima sensus slt.
do feign to themselves a Soul which has nothing of a Soul in it, and divorce
the Soul it self from it self: For the nature of the Soul, without which it
cannot any way consist, is to have motion, sense, and understanding. And as
Tertullian says, That Sense is the very soul of the Soul. So much in answer to
the first question.

Quest. 2. Is not the death of a wicked man called a sleep as well as the death
of a Saint?

Answ. This cannot be denied. It is said of Baasha, Omri, and Jeroboam, who
were three wicked Kings, that they slept with their Fathers. But then I answer:

1. That this is but very seldom used.

2. That the death of an ungodly man, though it be a sleep, yet it is not a
quiet, and comfortable, but a disquietting and terrifying sleep. As
Nebuchadnezzar was much troubled in his sleep, and, as many sick men have very
unquiet sleeps, so as they are more sick when they awake than before they
slept, so is it with a wicked man. Both good and bad (says St. Austin) sleep
at death; But it fares with them as with those who dream in their sleeps:
Dormit omnis mortuus, and bonus, and malus, sed quomodo interest in ipsis qui
quotidie dormiunt, and exurgunt, quid quisque videat in somnis, alii sentiunt
laeta somnia, alii torquentia, it a ut evigilans dormire timeat, ne ad ipsa
iterum redeat: sic unusquisque hominum cum causae sua dormit, and cum causa sua
surgit; and interest quali quisque custodia recipiatur, ad judice^ postea
recipiendus, etc.
Some dream of things delightful, and are comforted: Some of terrifying things,
insomuch as when they awake they are afraid to sleep again, left their
terrifying dreams should return. So (says he) every man sleeps at death
according to the condition of the life he has led, and accordingly rises and
is judged. The Souls of good and bad at death have different receptacles; The
good have joy and happiness: The wicked, misery and torment. The Soul of the
wicked goes immediately to Hell, where it has little list to sleep, and his
body lies asleep in the grave. But how? Even as a Malefactor that sleeps in
Prison the night before he is executed, but when he awakes he is hurried and
dragged to execution. So the wicked man falls asleep at death, but when he
awakes, he awakes to everlasting damnation. But a Child of God, when he sleeps
the sleep of death, he sleeps in the arms of his Eldest Brother, and when he
awakes, he awakes unto everlasting happiness.

Quest. 3. In what particulars may the death of a Child of God be compared to
sleep?

Answ. I have already in a Sermon printed (without my knowledge) given thirteen
resemblances between death and sleep, and therefore must of necessity here omit
them lest I should seem actum agere. At the present I shall only mention these
two.

1. The death of a Child of God is called a sleep, Habent omines animae cum de
seculo exierint, diverse as receptiones suas haebent guadium boni, and mal^
tormenta.
because he is thereby laid to rest. The Scripture calls their graves, their
beds of rest. And the Apostle tells us, That they which dye in the Lord rest
from all their labors. They are at rest from all corporal and spiritual evils.

First, From all corporal evils.

1. From all sicknesses, diseases, pains, and all other bodily infirmities.
Tract. 49. in Joan.
Death is that great Physician which will cure Gods people of all diseases at
once, and for ever. Thus the blind and lame man said one to the other at the
Stake: Isa. 57.2
Bishop Bonner will cure thee and me this day. Rev. 14.13


2. From all worldly grief and sorrow. For at death all tears shall be wiped
from their eyes, and there shall be no more sorrow, Rev. 21.4.

3. From all laborious and painful employments; Martha shall have no more need
to complain of Mary, nor shall the Prophets of God waste their bodies by
preaching. Ipsa cessabunt misericordiae spera ubi nulla erit indigentia, nulla
miseria.

4. From all the wrongs, injuries, and persecutions of the wicked world. In
this life they are mocked, scoffed, and persecuted, but when death comes, they
are like a man above in the upper Region, where no winds nor storms can come.

5. From the evils to come upon the wicked world. Thus St. Austin was laid to
rest immediately before Hippo was taken by the Vandals. Luther, before the Wars
brake out in Germany, and Paraeus before Heidleburgh was sacked by the
Spaniards.

Secondly, From all spiritual evils.

1. From the hurt of the Devil and his temptations. Death puts them above his
reach, so as he shall not be able to hurl one fiery dart any longer at them.

2. From evil company, and evil examples. In this life the Wheat are mingled
with Chaff and Tares, and cannot but hear the name of the Great God blasphemed
and dishonored, which is a great vexation to them, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8
as it was to Lot in Sodom. But at death they shall be separated from all chaff
and tares, and shall never hear God dishonored any more.

3. From Divine desertions. In this life God many times withdraws the light
of his countenance from his sinning Children, which is more terrible to them
than death it self: For if his loving kindness is better than life, Psalm 63.3
then his frowns are worse than death. But after death the light of Gods
countenance shall shine perpetually upon them, and never admit either of a
cloud, or Eclipse.

4. From the very being and existence of sin. The death of the body frees them
perfectly from the body of death. Death dries up the bloody issue of sin,
Peccatum peperit mortem, and silia devoravit matrem.
root and branch. As sin at first begat and brought forth death, so death at
last destroys sin, as the worm kills the tree that bred it. Therefore St.
Austin says, Plus restituitur quam amittitur. More is restored to a Child of
God than he lost in Adam: For Adam had only a power not to sin, but he by death
has an impossibility of sinning. Sin was Obstetrix mortis, a Midwife to bring
death into the World, Homo non moritur sed peccatum mori^ur and miseria.
and death is Sepulchrum peccati, a Sepulcher to bury sin in. Insomuch as death
is now become not so much the death of the man, as of his sin and misery.

Hence it is that our burying places are called by the Greeks Dormitories,
K(...).
or sleeping-places, and by the Hebrews, The houses of the living.

2. The death of a Child of God is called a sleep, propter spem resurrectionis.
To intimate unto us the assurance of a Resurrection. Joh. 11.11.
Thus Christ says of Lazarus, Our friend Lazarus sleeps, but I go that I may
awake him out of sleep. Death is nothing else (says St. Chrysostom) but a
temporary sleep. Mors non est mors, sed somnus and do^miti^ temporaria, Homil,
22. ad populum Antinchenum. Somnus est mors quaedam brevior, mors vero somnus
longior, -- Consanguineus lethi soper. Scriptura cos qui mortui sunt, vocat
dormicutes ob spem Resurrectionis, qua celerim^ ^vigilabunt (x somno mortis,
and ex lecto, id est, ex sepulchro. Sermon. 32. de Verbis Apostoli. Tom 10.
Sleep is a short death, and death a longer sleep. As he that goes to sleep,
sleeps but for a certain time, and awakes in the morning out of sleep: So he
that sleeps the sleep of death, when the Trump of God shall found, shall awake,
and arise out of his grave as out of his bed in the morning of the
Resurrection: St. Austin says, That the Scripture says of those that are
dead, that they are but asleep, because of the certain hope of a Resurrection,
by which they shall speedily be awakened from the sleep of death, and raised
out of their Sepulchers as out of their beds. Hence it has formerly been, and
still is a godly custom amongst Christians when any of their religious friends
die, to say of them, They are not dead, but Obdormi^nt in Domino, They are
asleep in the Lord. And this they do for the comfort of their Relations, and to
create in them a contempt of this present life, and a sure and certain hope of
a Resurrection unto life everlasting.

Before I make use of this, I shall speak something to the second Doctrine.

Doctrine 2.
That the bodies of the Saints, even while they are in their graves, are asleep
in Jesus -- They that sleep in Jesus.

This is a very excellent and singularly comfortable expression, worthy to be
seriously weighed and considered. For the understanding of it I will show,

First, What it is to sleep in Jesus.

Secondly, What glorious benefits and advantages come to the bodies of the
Saints by this privilege.

1. What it is to sleep in Jesus. This expression signifies two things.

1. That a true Saint dies a Member of Christ, united to him by a lively
says. Rev. 14.13. (...).
He is one that abides in the Faith till the last gasp, and (as the Apostle
says) dies in the Lord; that is, engraffed into the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. That he does not only die in Christ, but continues a member of Christ, and
united to him even while he is in the grave. For this Text speaks of all Saints
departed from the beginning of the World -- So also they that sleep in Jesus;
that is, They that are now in their graves, and are there asleep in Jesus. The
like phrase is used, 1 Cor. 15.18. Then they also which are fallen asleep in
Christ are perished. The Apostle speaks of such who had been long in their
graves, and yet all that while were asleep in Christ. The bodies of the Saints
in the grave, though turned to dust, are yet notwithstanding united to Christ,
and Members of his Body; and though separated from their Souls, yet are not
separated from Christ: Even as the Body of Christ, while in the grave, was even
then united to his Divine Person. Though soul and body were separated one from
the other, yet neither of them were separated from the Divine Person. So the
Body of a man in Christ, though separated by death from his Soul, yet it is not
separated from Christ. Though it say to Corruption, Thou art my Father, and to
the Worms, Thou art my Mother, and my Sister, yet it may say also to Christ,
Thou art my Brother, and to God, Thou art my Father. And therefore the Saints,
even while they are in their graves, are said to be Christ's, 1 Cor. 15.23. --
Afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. And are said to be dead in
Christ, 1 These. 4.16. Not only to die in Christ, but to be dead in Christ; that
is, to continue in Christ even while dead. And that they do so, appears further
by these two Reasons:

Reas. 1. Because the Union between Christ and a true Christian is spiritual
and everlasting.

1. It is spiritual, and therefore needs no vicinity of place to preserve it. A
Husband and Wife, a Father and his Child are really united together, though a
thousand miles distant.

2. It is everlasting, Hos. 2.19. I will besroath thee unto me for ever, etc.
Herein it exceeds the Union between a Man and his Wife, which is only till
death them do part. But the Union between Christ and a true Christian is not
separated by death: Once in Christ, ever in Christ, Joh. 8.35.

Reas. 2. Because Death is Christ's purchase, 1 Co^. 3.21, 22, 23.
and part, of the Saints Ioynture. The Apostle tells the Corinthians, All
things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, etc. or life or death, etc. and ye
are Christ's, etc. These words teach us these two lessons:

1. That Death is part of the Saints Magna Charta as well as Life. Death is the
Believers rich Portion, and peculiar privilege.

2. That Christ has purchased death for his children, as properly as life. He
has made over death for their jointure, and rich portion, as much as Paul,
Apollo, or Cephas, nay, as much as heaven it self. Christ has altered the
nature of death, insomuch as that now it is become our best friend next to
Jesus Christ: For we shall never be rid of sin, nor perfected in grace, nor see
God face to face till we dye. It is become a gate to heaven, an outlet to all
misery, and an inlet to everlasting happiness. Now then if Death be Christ's
purchase, and a part of the Saints Ioynture, without doubt, it does not
separate us from Christ, for then it would be but an ill purchase, and
jointure, obtained not for our good, but our great hurt, contrary to the
express words of the Apostle, and also contrary to Romans 8.28. All things work
together for the good of those that love God. Et mors praecipue, and especially
Death, as St. Austin says.

The second thing propounded, is, To show what those glorious benefits and
advantages are, which the bodies of the Saints enjoy while they are in their
graves asleep in Jesus.

For answer to this, you must know, That as soon as ever the soul departs out
of the body, the body presently loses all its beauty and comeliness, and
becomes a rotten and stinking carcass; It goes down to the house of
rottenness, to the dungeon of darkness, and is laid in the cold earth, dust to
dust, ashes to ashes. And yet even then it has a six-fold benefit, by being
asleep in Jesus.

1. Though the body be turned to dust, yet that very dust is precious in Gods
sight. Psalm. 116.15.
As the death of the Saints, so also their dust is precious to God. There is a
twofold dust that God loves.

1. The dust of Sion.

2. The dust of his Saints.

First, The dust of Sion, Psalm. 102.13, 14.

Secondly, The dust of the Saints. The golden Ore in the Mine is not so
precious to us, as this golden dust is to God. Job tells us, That out of the
earth comes the dust of gold; Job 28.6.
but I may truly say, That in the earth there is golden dust, even the dust of
Gods Saints. As Balaam says concerning the people of Israel, Number 23, 10,
Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel?
So may I say, Who can sufficiently express the love that God bears to the dust
of Jacob, and to the bodies of his people, while in their graves? The Apostle
tells us, Romans 8.38.
That neither life nor death is able to separate us from the love of God which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord. God loves the bodies of his Saints as well as
their souls, and their bodies when turned to dust. That very dust is part of
Gods election, (for God has elected the bodies of his Saints unto eternal
life, as well as their souls) and it is part of Christ's Redemption, and the
Spirits Sanctification. O what a comfort is this to a dying Child of God!
Though all his friends will forsake him when brought to the grave (the Husband
will leave his dear Wife, and the Children their dear Father) yet God will not
forsake him, but go down to the grave with him, and the watchful eye of his
providence will be over his dust and ashes. And as Rispah kept the dead bodies
of Saul's seven Sons, 2 Samuel 21.10.
and spread a Tent over them, so as the birds of the air could not hurt them by
day, nor the beasts of the field by night. So will God keep the dead bodies of
his Saints, and spread the Curtain of his protection over them, and as he took
care of them while they were in the sepulcher of their Mothers womb, so he
will also take care of them while they are in the sepulcher of their Mother
earth. He that loved them in Sepulchro uteri, will love them in utero Sepulchri.

2. They that sleep in Jesus have this benefit by it, That Christ by his burial
has sanctified the grave, and sweetened it, and perfumed it, insomuch, that
though in its own nature, it be as loathsome prison, a house of rottenness, and
a place of terror; yet to a man dead in Christ, the nature of it is altered,
and to him it is as a soft bed, wherein he is laid down quietly to take his
rest, and there to remain asleep, free from all cares, fears, and troubles till
the Resurrection of the dead. Though the grave in its own nature be a dreadful
place, a stinking charnel-house, and a rotten prison to the wicked and ungodly,
where they lie waiting for the Great Assizes; yet to the Children of God,
Christ has made it a Magazin and Storehouse to keep their bodies safe till
the great Resurrection. And he has also made it a beaten and plain way to
heaven. Christ Jesus himself went to heaven thorough the grave, and so must we
and all the Godly. We must first put off the rags of Mortality, before we can
put on the robes of Immortality. To a wicked man, the grave is a thorough-fare
to hell, but to a man asleep in Jesus it is a passage to heaven, where Christ
is. And if St. Austin was willing to go even thorough hell to Christ in heaven,
much more may we be willing to go thorough the grave to him.

3. They that sleep in Jesus have this benefit also, That by their Union with
Christ, and by the watchful Providence of God, there is a substance preserved,
so as they are not utterly extinct, and annihilated by death, but something of
their bodies remain undestroyed. There is nothing utterly, totally, and finally
destroyed in a Child of God by death, but sin and misery. The rotting of the
body in the grave is but as the rotting of the Corn in the earth, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.36. The Seed is cast into the earth, and there it
dies, and rotteth, but is not utterly extinct, but rotteth in the ground, that
it may be quickened again: So the bodies of the Saints rot in their graves that
they may be raised again, and made like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ.
And this is another reason why the death of a Child of God is called a sleep,
because as a man asleep is not extinct, no more is he in the grave. There is a
substance preserved, and as David says of an afflicted righteous man, Psalm.
34.20.
that God keeps all his bones, not one of them is broken: So God keeps the
dust and ashes of his Children, so as they shall not be utterly and totally
consumed.

Object. But is there not a substance preserved also in the bodies of the
wicked?

Answ. It is true, Their bodies are not utterly destroyed, but remain, not by
virtue of their Union with Christ, but preserved by the Almighty power of God
as a terrible Lord, and severe Judge, and remain, as in a prison, till the
great day of Judgment, in which they shall appear before Christ, and then be
condemned to hell. Happy were it for a wicked man if his body were annihilated
by death, (as it were happy for a Traitor if he died in Prison, and escaped
hanging.) But herein consists the difference between him and a man asleep in
Jesus, A man out of Christ is not properly preserved in the grave, but rather
reserved by the power of Christ to be afterward tormented in hell: But a man
in Christ is not only reserved, but by virtue of his Union with Christ, and
preserved to enjoy Eternal glory with their souls at the Great Day of Judgment.

4. He that sleeps in Jesus has this benefit also, That though his body
lies rotting in the grave, yet his soul is all the while in heaven, where it
enjoys the glorious presence of God, and of his Saints and Angels: I say, his
soul, which is his best half, which is the Man of man, is in heaven. Indeed,
his body, which is but as the Box and Carcass, is in the grave; but the
substance and Jewel is in heaven.

Object. What benefit does the body in the grave gain by his souls being in
heaven?

Answ. I gains this double benefit:

1. If his Soul be in heaven, it is certain the Body will come thither at last:
For it is but as the shadow to the substance, and if the substance be in
heaven, the shadow will undoubtedly follow.

2. Though the Soul be in heaven, yet it can never be perfectly and completely
happy till it be reunited to the Body. For God made the soul to be the form of
the body, and to dwell for ever in it: And if it had not been for Adams
transgression, the body and soul should never have been separated. This
separation is the fruit of sin, and therefore the soul in heaven has appetitum
unionis, a desire to have this breach made up, and to be united again to his
body, because he shall have a more perfect and complete being with it than
without it. The Scripture tells us, That it waits for the redemption of his
body, Romans 8.23. Rev. 6.10.
and that it prays that God would accomplish the number of his Elect, that so
they may again be joined to their bodies, and have Coronam perfectam and
publicam, a public and perfect Crown of glory. The souls in heaven (says
Bernard) pray for their bodies in the grave; They are not like the chief
Butler, who forgot Joseph when he was restored to his former dignity. They
remember they have bodies still in the grave, which were companions with them
in the service of God, in Prayer, and Fasting, and suffering afflictions for
Christ. And they know, that by reunion with them their happiness will be much
increased; and therefore they cannot cease pra^ing for them, and Christ will in
due time come in glory to raise them up unto everlasting life.

A fifth benefit that accrueth to the body that is asleep in Jesus, is, That
Christ himself cannot be perfect till it be raised from the dead. As a natural
body cannot be perfect without all its members, no more can Christ mystical, as
head of his Church, be perfect till every member of his body be glorified.
Therefore it is said, Ephesians. 1.23. That the Church is the fullness of him who
fills all in all, which is to be understood of that voluntary condition,
whereunto Christ has subjected himself in being the Head of the Body, that is,
his Church. So that as a natural body is maimed and imperfect if the least
member be wanting: So is Christ, as Head of his Church, maimed and imperfect
till all the bodies that are asleep in Jesus be reunited to their souls, and
received into glory for ever with Christ.

Lastly, The body by being asleep in Jesus, has this great benefit, That
though it lies rotting in the grave, yet it rests in hope. This was David's
comfort, Psalm 16.9. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices, my
flesh also shall rest in hope. There is not a member of Christ, but when he is
breathing out his last breath, may use David's words with David's comfort -- My
heart is glad, my glory rejoices, and my flesh also (which is shortly to be
put into the grave) shall rest in hope, in a forefold hope: 1. That it shall
rise again. 2. That the same body shall rise. 3. That it shall rise by virtue
of its Union with Christ. 4. That it shall rise to glory everlasting. And this
leads me to to the third and last Doctrine.


Doctrine 3.
That Jesus Christ will raise the dead bodies of those that sleep in him, and
raise them as their Head and Savior, and bring them with him to Judgment, and
then carry them into Heaven, where they shall be ever with the Lord.

All these particulars are comprehended in the words of the Text -- God will
bring with him. But before he brings them, he must first raise them. The bodies
of the Saints shall not always dwell in the dust; Isa. 26.19.
therefore the Prophet Isaiah calls upon them to awake and sing, Awake and
sing, ye that dwell in dust. A strange expression! Is there any cause of
rejoicing for those who dwell in dust? Yes; Awake and sing ye which dwell in
dust, for the Earth shall give up the dead which are in it, and the Sea also.
As the Whale cast up Jonah on the shore, so shall the Sea cast up her dead.
When Jonah was swallowed up by the Whale, one would have thought he had been
utterly lost, yet God did but speak a word to the Whale, and he cast him on the
dry land. The grave to an Atheistical eye is like the belly of the Whale; and
an Atheist is ready to think, that the Child of God is utterly lost. But when
the Trumpet shall sound, and the Archangel speak the word, the Whale shall
cast up Jonah; the Sea shall give up her dead, and the Earth also, for they are
but Gods Stewards, unto whom he has betrusted the bodies of his Saints, and
when God calls them to give an account of their Stewardship, they will give in
a most faithful account, and will not leave one body behind. They are but
tyring-houses or withdrawing rooms for a while; they are but sleeping-places.
And as a man when he goes to sleep hops to awake again in the morning; So do
the Saints of God fall asleep by death with a sure and certain hope of a
Resurrection from the dead. So then, All that sleep in Jesus shall rise again.

And they shall arise with the same bodies, (the same for substance, though not
for qualities) otherwise it were no Resurrection, but a new Creation. Joh.
5.28.29.
Christ tells us, That all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and
shall come forth. The Apostle tells us, That this mortal body shall put on
immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53.
and this corruptible body shall put on incorruption. This was Jobs comfort
upon the dunghill, Job 19.27.
That with these very eyes he shoould see his Redeemeer. And it cannot stand
with Gods Justice, that one body should sin, and another be condemned, and one
body serve him, and another be crowned. The same body then shall rise.

And rise by virtue of its union with Christ. This is hinted in the Text -- For
if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in
Jesus will God bring with him. By the same power by which Christ raised up
himself, by the same power he will raise all that are by the Spirit united to
him: For he is the Husband of his Church, and the Husband will raise his
Spouse. He is the Shepherd and King of his Church, and the Shepherd will
raise his Sheep, and the King his Subjects; and therefore he is called the
first fruits of them that sleep. 1 Cor. 15.2.
As the first fruits did sanctify the whole lump: So by Christ's Resurrection
all that die in the Lord are sanctified unto him, and assured of their
resurrection by him. 1 Cor. 15.20.
And it is said, As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive;
that is, all that are in Christ shall be raised by the power of Christ, as
their Head, and as their Merciful Savior and Redeemer. If the Head be above
the water, the Body cannot be drowned, but will rise after it. And let me add.

It shall rise after a most Glorious manner; 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.
It is sown in Corruption, but it shall be raised in Incorruption. It is sown
in dishonor, but it shall be raised in Glory. It is sown in weakness, but it
shall be raised in power. It is sown a natural Body, but it shall be raised a
spiritual body. For Jesus Christ in his Incarnation assumed our Bodies, as well
as our souls, and at his Death, suffered for us, in his Body, as well as in his
Soul. Our Bodies are united to him, and Members of him, Temples of the Holy
Ghost, and Instruments in his Service, as well as our Souls. And therefore he
will glorify our Bodies, as well as our souls, and make them like unto his own
Glorious Body. It is impossible to set out all the Glory that God will bestow
upon the bodies of his Saints, at the great Resurrection. Eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither has in entered into the heart of man to conceive what
God has prepared, even for the bodies of those that love him. Some part of
this Glory I have discovered already in a Funeral Sermon in Print, and
therefore shall now forbear to mention it.

The Bodies of the wicked shall come out of their Graves, as out of their
Prisons, as so many Malefactors, to appear before an Angry Judge. They shall
come out of their Graves, as the chief Baker did out of Prison, to be executed
in Hell for ever. They shall rise with great Fear and Trembling, and shall call
to the Rocks and Mountains, to hide and cover them from the wrath of the Lamb.
But the Bodies of those who sleep in Jesus, shall rise out of their Graves, as
out of their Beds, with great Joy and Rejoicing. They shall come out of their
Graves, as Jonah out of the Whales Belly, as Daniel out of the Lions Den, as
the Chief Butler, who came out of Prison, to be restored to all his former
Dignities, and as Joseph, who after his Release out of the Go^l, was made Lord
of Egypt. So shall the Bodies of the Saints be raised out of their Graves, to
be made like unto the Angels, and to have their Faces shine like the Sun in the
Firmament, Mat. 13.43.
and to be crowned with everlasting Glory.

Now the Dead in Christ, thus raised, Christ will bring with him, at the great
and dreadful Day of Judgment, and he will cause them to sit with him in his
Throne, as he sits with the Father in his Throne, Rev. 3.21. and he will
advance them to be Judges of all the wicked and ungodly, and not only of wicked
men, but of the wicked Angels; I say to be Judges, as coassessors with Christ,
and Approvers of his Sentence. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.
This is a high Preferment, not proper (as the Papists think) to the Apostles,
and such who have left all for Christ, but common to all the Saints of God, who
are such indeed and in Truth. I deny not, but that the Apostles shall have
eminentiorem Thronum, a more eminent degree of Glory then other Saints. But yet
this Honor of judging the world, is common to all Saints, to the least, as
well as to the greatest. They that now are judged and condemned by the wicked
of the world, shall one day, sit with Christ in his Throne, and judge their
Judges, They that are now tempted, buffeted, and sometimes foy^ed by Satan,
shall one day be Judges of him and all his Angels.

Now after the Day of Judgment is finished, Christ will carry up all that sleep
in him, with himself into Heaven, where they shall be ever with the Lord in
perfect Happiness. So much for the explication of the three Doctrines.

Use 1.
Let us not mourn immoderately for the death of our Godly Friends and
Relations. This is the Use which the Apostle would have us to make. 1 These 4.13.
Mourn we may, but not as the Heathen, who have no hope. Let us remember, that
the death of a Child of God is nothing else but a comfortable and blessed
sleep; that he goes to the Grave, as to his Bed, and there lies free (as a man
asleep) from all Cares and Troubles, and at rest from all his Labors, that
even while he is in the Grave, he is asleep in Jesus, and there continues a
Member of his Body; that his very dust is precious in Gods sight, and part of
Gods Election, Christ's Redemption, and the Spirits Sanctification. That by
virtue of its Union with Christ, his body while in the Grave, is not utterly
extinct, but there is a Substance, not only reserved, but preserved, to be
raised to everlasting Glory. That Christ has so perfumed the Grave, as that it
is nothing else to him, but as a Tyring-house, and withdrawing-Room. In a word,
that he lies down in his bed till the Morning of the Resurrection, and then he
shall put on stolam immortalitatis, the Garment of Immortality, and his vile
body shall be made like unto the Glorious Body of Jesus Christ. Let us comfort
one another with these words: Let us not weep immeasurably for those from whom
all Tears are wiped away, but let us consider their unspeakable g^in. Death
has put an end to all their temporal and spiritual evils, and opened a door
for them to everlasting Happiness.

Use 2.
Let these Doctrines serve as a Precious Antidote to all the people of God
against the fear of Death, and of the Grave. Why should we fear that, which if
it should not happen, we should be superlatively miserable? as the Apostle
says, If we had hope only in this life, we were of all people most miserable;
And therefore when there was a Rumor spread concerning St. John, 1 Cor. 15.17.
that he should never die, he himself, Chapter 21.23. rectifieth the Mistake; yet
Jesus said not unto him, he shall not die. As if he should say, God forbid I
should be so miserable, as never to die. Though a man in Christ could live for
ever in this world, and be always young, rich and healthful, yet he would
account himself most miserable, because while he is here, he is absent from
Christ, who is his Life, and from God, who is his Happiness, and full of sin,
which is his greatest Burden. And therefore as Jacob rejoiced, when he saw the
Chariots which should carry him to his Son Joseph, so should the People of God
rejoice, when Death approaches, which will carry them to Christ. And as God
said to Jacob, Fear not to go down to Egypt, Genesis 46.4.
for I will go down with thee, and I will also surely bring thee up again: So,
methinks, I hear God saying to all his Children, Fear not to go down to the
House of Rottenness, for I will go with you, and tarry with you, and watch over
your dead As^es with the eye of my Providence, and will surely bring you out
again, and raise you unto Eternal Glory.

Let us not look upon Death, as presented unto us in Natures Looking-Glass, but
as it is set down in a Scripture-dress. Nature presents Death in a terrible
manner: The Philosopher calls it, of all terrible things, Job 18, 14.
most terrible. Job calls it the King of Terrors, It is terrible three manner of
ways.

1. Because it is a Separation between two dear and ancient Friends, the Soul
and the Body, who having lived long together, are very loath to part asunder.
There is nothing more contrary to Flesh and Blood, then the separation of the
one from the other.

2. Because it is the Fruit of sin. Romans 6.
For the wages of sin is death. Had Adam never sinned, we never should have
died; By one man sin entered into the world, Rom 5.
and death by sin, and this makes it terrible.

3. Because of the After-claps of Death. For after Death comes Judgment, Heb.
9.27.
and after Judgment, everlasting Salvation, or everlasting Condemnation. This
makes Death very terrible to those who have the guilt of sin upon them
unrepented of, and who are under the just fear of Everlasting Burnings, and
indeed to all men out of Christ, death is of all terrible things most terrible,
as you shall hear in the next Use.

But to you that are in Christ, the sting of death is taken away, and it is
become of all desirable things, most desirable; It is (...), Phil. 1.23.
as the Apostle says; It is much far better. It is nothing else but a quiet
and placid sleep; a putting off our clothes and going to bed till the Morning
of the Resurrection. Therefore Austin says, That a Child of God should be as
willing to die, as to put off his Clothes, because Death is nothing else to
him, but a putting off of his Body (which is Animae Vestimentum, the souls
Garment) and a departure from Misery to everlasting Happiness, a le^ting the
Soul, as a Bird, out of the Cage of the Body that it may flee to Heaven. Mors
piorum est Natalis vitae e^erna. Obstetrix vitae melioris, Profect o ad
Civitatem Dei. Ianua ad vitam eternam Porta Gloriae, Medicamentum
Immor^alitatis.
Death to a Child of God is the Birthday of Heavens Eternity, a putting off of
its Earthly Tabernacle, and a going to a House made without hands, eternal in
the Heavens. It is an uncloathing of himself, that he may be clothed upon with
his House which is in Heaven. It is a going to his Fathers House, where he
shall enjoy perfect and perpetual Happiness.

There are 10 Springs and Fountains of Consolation to a true Saint against the
fear of Death.

1. When he dies, though his Body be laid in the Grave, yet his Soul is
immediately received up into Heaven, his best part is at the Instant of Death
blessed and happy.

2. His Body at death does not die, but only sleeps (as Christ said of dead
Lazarus) and is at rest, and is asleep in Jesus, even while it is in the Grave,
and is part of that man who is a Member of Christ, and under the Care and Love
of God.

3. His Soul, though it be in Heaven, can never be perfectly and completely
happy, till his Body be joined to it.

4. Christ himself, as he is the Head of his Church, can never be perfect till
his Body be raised from the dead, and crowned with a Crown of Glory.

5. Christ has conquered Death for him, he has not only sweetened and
sanctified it, but conquered it, according as it was fore prophesied, -- I will
ransom them from the Power of the Grave, Hos. 13.14.
I will redeem them from Death; O Death I will be thy Plagues; O Grave I will
be thy Destruction. He has led Captivity Captive, Ephesians. 48.
and death is one of those Captives, as well as the Devil. He has disarmed
Death, and taken away the Sting of it, so as to a man in Christ, death is a
Serpent without a Sting. It is like the Viper which skipt upon S. Paul's Hand,
Acts 28.
which did not at all hurt him. It is like the Brazen Serpent, which though it
had the shape of a Serpent, yet it hadnot the Nature of it, but was a healing,
not a stinging Serpent. So is death to a Child of God. It is so far from
hurting of him, that it is now by Christ's death, become his greatest Advantage,
and he may triumph over it, and say with the Ap. O Death, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57,
where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? the sting of death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be to God, which gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

6. There is this Spring also of Consolation against the Fear of death, because
he that has an Interest in Christ, cannot die suddenly, though he die never so
suddenly, that is, though he die never so suddenly in regard of time, yet he
can never die suddenly in regard of Preparation. For he is always habitually
fitted, and prepared for Death, he is justified by Faith, and sanctified by the
Spirit, and is above the hurt of damnation: For there is no Condemnation to
those that are in Christ. Romans 8.1.
He has not his Graces to seek, when he comes to die, which is no little
Happiness.

7. He can never die miserable, though he die never so miserably. Though he die
upon a Dunghill, or in a Goal, or upon the Gallows, or at a stake, wheresoever,
and howsoever he dies, he dies happily. Romans 12.13.
For so says the Apostle, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord. They are
blessed, though they die upon a dunghill. Though Stephen was stoned to death,
yet he died happily; for while he was stoning, he saw the Heavens opened, and
Christ ready to receive him. Though Lazarus was starved to death, yet he died
blessedly, because the Angels carried his Soul into Abraham's B^som. Though King
Josiah died in War, yet he died in peace. A man in Christ dies in the Arms of
Christ, 2 Kings 22.20.
and though he dies never so miserably, as to his outward condition, yet he
may sing a Nunc dimittis with old Simeon, Luke 2.29, 30.
Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
thy Salvation.

8. There are 3 Expressions which the Scripture uses concerning death, which
are singular Fountains of Consolation against the Fear of it.

1. The Apostle S. Peter calls it (...), Mors non est exitus, sed transi^us, non
obitus, sed abitus.

Mortui non sunt amissi, sed praemiss^^, Cypr. de Mortalitate. Profectio est
quam putas Mortem.

Tert. de patientia.


2 Pet. 1.15. I will endeavor that (...) after my Decease, etc. Death is
nothing else, but an Exodus out of Egypt, unto our Heavenly Canaan. It is not a
dying, but a Transmigration, a passage from the Valley of death into the Land
of the Living.

2. The Apostle S. Paul calls it (...), Phil. 2.23. I desire to be dissolved,
(...), that is (as Grotius interprets it) That my Soul may return to God from
whom it first came. Others say, It is a Metaphor taken from Mariners, who are
said to loose from the Haven, when they depart from the shore. Death is nothing
but a hoysing up of Sail (as it were) for heaven.

3. Old Simeon calls it A(...), Now Lord let thou thy Servant depart in
peace. Luke 2.29.
The Greek Word signifies a Release, and dismission out of prison. Thus it is
taken, Acts 16.35, Acts 5.40 Luke 23.17. And it holds forth these two Lessons.

1. That the Soul is in the Body as in a Prison. Therefore the Greek Words for
the Body, are (...) quasi (...), vincio. And Petrarch says, That he that
glories in the strength of his Body, glories in the strength of his Prison.
And when Plato saw one of his Scholars overcuriously pampering his Body, Qui
gloriatur in viribus corporis, gloriatur in viribus carce^is.
he said to him, What do you mean to make your Prison so strong? The Soul is in
the Body as in a Prison, in 3 Respects.

1. Because the Soul is hidden in the Body, as a man is hidden in a Prison. As
Plato says of Virtue, That if a man could see it with corporal eyes, he could
not but love it. So may I say of the Soul; If a man could see the Beauty, Glory
and Excellency of it, he could not but admire it, and highly value it. But it
is hidden in the Body as in a Prison.

2. Because the Soul is hindered by the Body, and that Three ways.

1. It is hindered from Heaven. For whilst we are in the body, we are absent
from the Lord, and we cannot be with Christ, till we be dissolved. And this is
truly a Prison wherein a man is absent from his best Friends and Acquaintance.

2. It is hindered from Heavenly Operations. For the Body takes up all the time
from the Soul; as the Lean Kine of Pharaoh devoured the fat, so the Provision
for the Feeding and Clothing of the Body, eats up the time that should be
spent about the Soul. It is with the Soul and Body, as it was with Abraham and
Lot. Abraham had his Cattle and his Servants, and Lot his, so that the Country
was too narrow for them. So the Soul has her work, and the Body his, and there
is hardly time enough for both; so as the one must needs hinder the other, and
they never will be well till separated. The Cloth is too short to cover them
both. And this must needs be a great Bondage when the Handmaid shall be
preferred before her Mistress, Hagar before Sarah.

3. It is hindered in all its Heavenly Operations. For the Body weighs down
the Soul. As a Bird that has a stone tied to its Leg, is weighed down that it
cannot fly aloft. So is the Heavenly Soul in the best Christian depressed by
the Body, that it cannot mount aloft in Prayer and other Holy Exercises. The
Soul and Body are like a pair of Scales, the more the one is up, the more the
other goes down. As Saul's Armor was a Burden to David, so is the Body to the
Soul. The Body is quickly tired in the Service of God. The Spirit is willing,
but the Flesh is weak, like a strong man upon a Jadish Horse, etc.

3. Because the Soul is defiled by the Body, as a man in a Nasty Prison. God
gave man a Heavenly Soul, and an Earthly body, that the Heavenly Soul might
lift up the Earthly Body toward Heaven: But now it fares quite contrary. Our
earthly Bodies have weighed down our heavenly Souls, and made them earthly and
sensual. Tamdiu versata est Anima in Tabernaculo, ut ipsa versa est in
Tabernaculum. The Soul has lived so long in a Body of flesh, that it is (as it
were) fleshified, and bodified. The Soul looks through an eye of flesh, and
every thing seems fleshly to it. It is diverted by the Body from its true End.
The true End of the Soul is to know God, to love, fear and serve him. But the
body diverts the Stream, and turns the Soul to serve men, and to provide for
back and belly. And therefore it may fitly be called the Souls Prison.

2. It holds forth this Lesson also, That Death is the Souls Jail-delivery. It
is the letting of it loose from its Bonds and Fetters. Its is setting it at
Liberty, like a Bird escaped out of a Cage. Now Lord let thy Servant depart;
that is, be set at liberty from the prison of my body.

9. There is this Comfort also against the fear of death, That Jesus Christ is
gone to heaven on purpose to prepare a place for the dead bodies of his Saints,
and he will come again, and raise them up, and take them to himself, that where
he is, there they may be also, John 14.2, 3. Therefore he is said to go into
Heaven as a Forerunner, Heb. 6.20. Whither the forerunner is for us entered. Now
a forerunner supposes some that are to follow. Christ is entered before, to
take up Lodgings for all that are asleep in him, and has (as it were) written
their several Names upon their several Lodgings, as is intimated, Heb. 12.23.
To the Church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven; and keeps them
empty till they come to Heaven to fill them, as is hinted, 1 Pet. 1.4. --
Reserved for you in heaven. Therefore we are said to fit with him in heavenly
places, because he went up to take possession of it for our use, and benefit,
and fits there in our Nature, and as our Head, not as a private Citizen of
Heaven, but as a Representative of all the Elect of God, and will ere long come
down, and take them up to himself, and so they shall ever be with the Lord.

10. The last Spring of Consolation against the fear of death is, That Death
will put a perfect and perpetual end to all his Miseries, whether spiritual or
corporal (as I have showed) and open a door to infinite and unexpressible
happiness for ever and ever.

Let these ten Considerations be made use of, as precious Antidotes against the
flavish fear of death.

Use 3.
The woeful and miserable condition of those, who die in an unregenerate
condition, in their sins unrepented on, and whose bodies lie in the grave ^ not
asleep in Jesus, but asleep in sin; to these men death is of all formidable
things most formidable. It is a most cruel, biting, and devouring Serpent with
eight Stings.

1. To a man out of Christ, death puts an end to all his outward contentments,
to all his riches, honors, and pleasures, to whatsoever a wicked man accounts
his Heaven, and his happiness; and this must needs be as a stinging Serpent to
him. Judge. 18.23, 24.
We read of Micah, that when the men of Dan stole away his Gods, he followed
them crying, and they turned back, and asked him what aileth thee? he answered,
ye have taken away my gods, etc. and do you say to me, what aileth thee? When a
wicked man dies he loses all his Gods, For he makes his riches, honors and
pleasures his gods, and no wonder the memory of death is so bitter to him.

2. It deprives him of all his hopes. Job 11.7.
For when a wicked man dies, his expectation shall perish, and the hope of
unjust men perishes. The righteous has hope in death. His Motto is, Dum
expiro, spero. But a wicked man's hope perishes at death, and gives up the
Ghost, Job 11.20. His Motto is Dum expiro, despero Death puts an end both to his

Hopes. Earthly and Heavenly


1. To his earthly hopes A wicked man builds Castles in the air, and promises
great matters to himself, and says, as the Rich man, Luke 12.19.20.
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat,
drink, and be merry. But God says to him. Thou fool, this night thy Soul shall
be required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou have provided.
Death dasheth all his earthly hopes; and that which is worse,

2. Death dasheth all his Spiritual and supernatural hopes. A wicked man is
ready to nourish in himself a presumptuous hope of Heaven, and doubts not but
that he shall be saved; but when he comes to die, all his hopes of Heaven
perish, and are as a Spiders web, easily swept away, Job 8.14. The Lord
rejects his vain confidence, Jer. 2.37. Now this is a misery above
expression, for a man to be disappointed of his eternal hopes.

3. Death puts an end to all the sweetness, pleasure and profit that is in sin.
There are two things in the Serpent, sin. The speckled black, and the sting in
the tail of it. The pleasures of sin for a season, and the eternal pains
attending it. A man out of Christ while he is alive and in health, sucks out
the carnal sweetness that is in sin, it is as honey to his mouth. But when
death comes, the sweetness of sin vanishes, and nothing remains but the sting
and torment of it. Even as a Thief, as long as he is unfound out, lives merrily
upon what he has stolen, but when he is found, and cast into Prison and
condemned to be hanged, then he feels nothing but bitterness and sorrow. So it
is with a wicked man; As long as he is in health and in prosperity, he takes
great delight and content in sinning, but when he comes to be attached and
arrested with Death, then the misery and cursedness of sin appears before him.
Then he begins to say, Where is all the carnal pleasure I once took in my
sinful courses? Nothing now remains but the Sting. Momentaneum quod delectat,
aternum quod cruciat. That which delighted me was but momentany, but that which
will torment me, is eternal.

4. Death must needs be a stinging Serpent to a man out of Christ, because it
puts Conscience into office to wound and torture him. The great design of a
wicked man in health is to blind, or bribe his Conscience; but death puts it
into office, and sets it on his proper Throne; and Conscience once awakened
becomes a biting Serpent, and a gnawing worm, never suffering him to be at rest
night nor day. Sin is like a piece of wood, which while it is in the water
seems very light, floating on the top of it, but when it comes to the shore,
ten men can hardly stir that, which one man before might have carried which way
he lifted. While a wicked man is in health and in prosperity, his sins seem
light to him, but when he comes to the shore of Death, then they begin to be
heavy, then Conscience, like a Mastive Dog, flies in his face, and his sins
appear in their ugly colors, with all the aggravating circumstances, and sting
him exceedingly.

5. Death puts an end to Gods patience, to the day of grace and mercy, and to
all the means of Salvation. For there is no repenting in the grave whither we
are going. This life is a day of grace and Salvation. Now Ahashuerosh holds
forth his golden Scepter. Now the Hourglass of patience is running, the
drawbridge is let down, and the white Flag of mercy is hanged out; but when
Death comes, the white Flag is taken down, the Hourglass run out, the
Drawbridge taken up, the day of grace and patience at an end. Et qui fluvios
sanguinis nunc dabit guttam aqua in Inferno negabit. And he that will now give
us rivers of his blood to wash away our sins, will not in Hell give us a drop
of water.

6. A man out of Christ has also this unhappiness, that whenever he dies,
he dies suddenly, though he die never so leasurely; Suddenly in regard of
preparation, though not in regard of time, For he dies like the Foolish
Virgins, having his Oil to buy, his graces and evidences for Heaven to get,
which is no little misery. For Death is a time of spending, not geting, whether
you consider the Soul, or the Body. And as that man is in a sad condition, as
to his outward estate, that has laid up nothing in health to maintain him in
sickness; So he is in a sadder, as to his eternal estate, that is unprovided at
Death of a Stock of Grace, and Scripture Cordials. This man dies suddenly
though he die never so leasurely.

7. He dies miserably, though he die never so happily; though in his bed, and
in his old age; though buried in great pomp, yet dying in his sins he is cursed
at death, and cursed after death.

8. Lastly, and especially, because Death opens a Door to endless and easeless
miseries. It is gaudiorum finis and malorum omnium principium, The end of all
his joy, and the beginning of all his misery. If Death were an utter
extinction, and annihilation it were not so terrible; but herein is the terror
of it, because it lets the Soul out of the Prison of the body, to go to the
everlasting Prison of Hell. Death is Gods Sergeant to arrest a wicked man, and
after arrest to carry him to the Judge, there to receive the sentence of
Condemnation, and after that to be delivered over to the Jailer, to be carried
to the fiery Prison of Hell, there to remain for ever. It deals with every
wicked man as it did with Dives, it carries him a Tenebris ad Tenebras, from
the darkness of sin, to the darkness of Hell. All these particulars show unto
us the woeful and miserable condition of those who die out of Christ.

Use 4.
Let us all labor so to live, that when we come to die, we may be sure to
sleep in Jesus. For all the ten forementioned Fountains of consolation, against
the fear of Death, belong only to those who sleep in Jesus.

Quest. What must we do that we may be made partakers of so great a happiness.

Answ. We must do two things.

1. We must labor to get into Christ while we live, and we shall be sure to
die in Christ when we die, and sleep in him when in the grave. We must make it
not our (...), but our (...), not our ultimum, but our primum quaerite. Not our
last, but our first and chief work to get out of the Old Adam into the New
Adam, out of the root of abomination, into the root of acceptance by a
Christ-appropriating Faith. For it is the great office of justifying Faith
(...) (as Chrysostom. says) to bring us into the possession of Jesus Christ. We
must be willing to part with all our goodly Pearls to buy this Pearl of
price. We must account all things but dung and dross (all creature
excellencies, all Church Priviledges, and all civil righteousness) and suffer
the loss of all things that we may gain Christ.

2. We must labor to get a Death-enduring assurance of our interest in Christ.
The reason why many of Gods children are so unwilling to die, is, because they
do not know their title to Christ, and the happiness of those that die in him.

Before Old Jacob knew his Son Joseph to be alive, he received no comfort by
his being alive. Before Mary Magdalene knew the person with whom she discoursed
to be Christ, she was not revived by discoursing with him. Before a child of
God knows that Christ is his, and has purchased Death for his great advantage,
it is impossible for him to embrace it with comfort. This then is the second
work of every good Christian, and the work of his whole life to get a Tribunal
proof assurance of his being in Christ.

Quest. How may a man know that he has an interest in Christ?

Answ. By three Texts of Scripture.

1. By 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ he is a new Creature. He that is
inwardly and outwardly renewed (renewed in every part though imperfectly in
every part) may assure himself of his interest in Christ.

2. By Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. A man may have flesh in him, and
yet be in Christ, but he that walks after the flesh and makes provision for it,
to fulfill the lusts of it has no share in him. But he that walks after the
Spirit, and is led by the Spirit, and is spiritually minded, may be assured of
his interest in Christ.

3. By Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts. They that make it their work to crucify not only the
flesh, but the affections and lusts of it, and are always crucifying and
mortifying it, are in a Gospel-account esteemed as c^ucifiers of the flesh, and
do crucify it ( desiderio and conatu, though not actu) in their desires and
endeavors, though they cannot while in the body perfectly subdue it; and may
be confident that Christ is theirs, and they are Christ's, and that Christ Jesus
shall be to them in life and death advantage.

THat you may be the better encouraged to make it the work of your whole Life,
to gain Christ, and an Assurance that you have gained him; let me set before
you the example of this excellent Lady (the Lady Anne Waller) for whose funeral
we are here met this night. Of whom I may truly say as Nazianzene (...).
of his Sister Gorgonia, That we need not fear lest we should exceed in
praising her too much, but rather lest we should be deficient in praising her
too little. It is not my custom to speak much in commendation of the Dead; But
something I must crave leave to speak at this time, not so much for her
commendation (for she has no need now of our Eulogies) but for our imitation.

I shall not at all mention her birth and noble extraction, nor meddle with any
thing that concerns her in her natural and civil capacities; but only speak
something about her Piety and Godliness; which indeed is the truest Nobility.
She was (as Saint John styles the Lady to whom he wrote his second Epistle) an
Elect Lady; whether you take Elect, for a choice and precious Lady, or for one
who was elected by God from all eternity unto life everlasting: She was one who
made Religion her business, nor (as some Ladies do) her Idle hour, but her
daily labor: One who sought first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness,
making it Her care to walk before God in truth and uprightness of heart, and to
keep a Conscience void of offense both toward God, and toward man. She was
early conversed to Jesus Christ, and that she continued steadfast in Faith and
Holiness to her lives end, appears by these following Demonstrations.

SHE WAS
1. A diligent attender upon Gospel Ordinances, delighting much in the House of
God, and preferring the Word of God above her appointed food. A constant Writer
of Sermons, and wrote them in her Heart as well as in her Book, and her life
was an exact Commentary upon the Sermons she heard. She has a large Book in
Folio written with her own hand, wherein under several Heads of Divinity, she
has registered the Observations of her reading both out of the Scriptures
(which were her delight) and out of the Writings of our best Divines, and out
of her own experiences.

2. Very conscientious in observing the Lords Day. Her custom was after Sermon
both in the Morning, and Afternoon to retire into her Chamber, and to call
before her her maidservants, and such boys as served in the House, to give
account what they had heard; helping their memories wherein they failed,
clearing up the sense of what was delivered, wherein it might seem obscure unto
them, exhorting and pressing them to be doers of the Word, and not hearers
only, concluding all in Prayer with them.

3. Very careful in receiving the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ
every Month, if she were not hindered by indispensable necessity. And in her
preparation thereunto she was most diligent. For help herein she had made a
Collection of the best Rules and Directions she could get about that Subject.

4. Taught of God not only notionally, but experimentally to live by Faith.
For she met with many trials in her outward estate, both when a Wife, and when
a Widow. But by Faith in Jesus Christ, she was more than Conqueror over them
all.

5. Frequent and constant in her private Devotions, both in praying, reading
and meditating at set hours.

6. A fixed Star in the Firmament of Gods Church, not like a little Child
tossed to and fro with every Wind of doctrine, but rooted, built up, and
stablished in the Faith, and in the Orthodox Truths of Christian Religion.

7. Abundantly charitable to all in want and necessity, especially to such who
feared God, and had his Image upon them. Yea she was ready (as the Apostle
says) even above her ability, to distribute to the Necessities of the Saints.
For being advised by a Friend, (who well approved of her Gracious temper and
frame of Spirit) to take care of her self, and to remember her debts, and other
occasions she had to discharge, she did with much Affection and ^ears s^y, That
she could not eat her Bread with comfort, while the Servants of God were in
hunger and nakedness.

8. A Lover and Honourer of pious and painful Ministers. Upon the Close of the
Late unhappy Wars, so soon as she had a Liberty to return to her Estate and
place of Adobe near Oxford, and when her Estate (through the Calamity of those
times) was at a low ebb, the first thing she did, was more then she could well
do, her poverty abounding unto the Riches of her Liberality) to provide and
maintain at her own cost (in effect) a preaching Minister there (the poor old
Incumbent being superannuated, and unfit to serve the Cure, though he received
the Profits of the Place.) Upon her remove from thence to her Husbands
Habitation, immediately after she was settled there, she fell to workagain, and
set up a Lecture in the Parish, which was continued by the ablest Ministers
thereabouts, until it received Interruption by the Troubles which befell her
Husband. This good Affection to the advancement of the Gospel, and
Gospel Ministry, she sealed up in her last Will, by a Legacy of a considerable
sum to be distributed to poor Ministers.

9. Of a public spirit, not to be numerated amongst the sinners, but mourners
in Sion, for the sins of Sion. She was one that sought the welfare of the
Israel of God, and was as solicitous and thoughtful about the Concernments of
Christ and his Gospel, as about her own, if not more then her own.

10. A very prudent Dady, a Credit to her Profession, of very good
Understanding and Judgment in the things of God, able by her wise and Christian
Counsel, to comfort, and build up others; which she frequently did, insomuch
that many have blessed God for the Advice they received from her.

11. Eminent in the Discharge of all Relative Duties (in the conscientious
performance of which, the power and Beauty of Godliness does especially
consist.)

She was careful to keep up the observation of Family Duties twice a day, and
of catechizing the Children and Servants once a week, commending those who were
forward, admonishing and reproving those that were tardy and averse, and
imposing little Penalties upon them, payable to the poor, and by all the ways
she could, endeavoring to win them to the Service of God.

As a Daughter, she was very obedient to her Parents, insomuch that her Mother
did once publicly say, a little before her death, That she was the Child who
did never disobey or displease her in all her Life.

She was an excellent Mother, bringing up her Children in the Nurture and Fear
of the Lord, and walking before them as an Example of Piety and Humility.

As a Mistress, she was wonderful diligent in training up her Servants in the
ways of God; insomuch, as that she was a means of the Conversion of two of
them; one of them acknowledged it upon her Deathbed; the other yet living (a
sober Christian) will confess the same.

She was excellent and transcendently eminent in her Relation as a Wife,
insomuch that her Husband says of her, as the Wise man of the Virtuous woman,
That her Price was far above Rubies, that his heart did safely trust in her,
that she did him good and not evil all the days of her life, that she
stretched out her hand to the poor, yea she reached forth her hands to the
needy. That she opened her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue was the Law of
kindness; that her children rise up and call her blessed, her husband also, and
he praises her, and says, many daughters have done virtuously, but thou
excellest them all. Let her own works praise her in the gates. The Truth is,
she was a Lady of ten thousand, and they that knew her intimately, will confess
that I do not hyperbolize, and they that knew her not, will I hope, believe
that I dare not (standing in this place, as Gods Ambassador) give flattering
titles, for in so doing, my Maker would soon take me away. Job 32.22.


12. And lastly, as she lived, so she died, she lived holily, and died happily.
Her last sickness was long and violent, wherein, though she was never heard to
let fall one word unbeseeming the mouth of a blessed Christian, yet she would
often charge her self for complaining, though enforced thereunto by the
extremity of her p^ins. But yet in the midst of all her Anguish, she ceased not
to testify her Faith in God through Christ, as her only Anchor-hold and
supportation, exhorting with a powerful sweetness those about her, and her
relations when they came to her, to make sure of that Interest, and to apply
themselves to the Service of God with all faithfulness and diligence, which was
that that would bring them peace at last.


Toward the end of her Sickness, she took occasion to speak to some Friends
that were about her Bed, touching an unhappy difference between her Husband,
and one of his Sons (wherein she had been most injuriously defamed, as a person
that had done ill Offices between them, and contributed Fuel to that Flame)
professing in the presence of that God before whom she was to make her Account,
that she was innocent from the thought of such an Offense, and that no carriage
of his, had ever so far transported her, as to make her to desire, much less to
endeavor any thing that might be to his prejudice. And that she desired his
good and welfare, with the same heart, as if both he, and the rest of the
Children had been all her own. (I give you her own words.) The day before her
death, she challenged her Husband to speak, whether she had ever instigated him
against his Son, or done any thing to keep up that difference. And he did then
(as in the presence of God) clear her, and avow this Truth, That she had many
times made his peace, and brought him to a reconciliation with him (once with
Tears) but never had done him any ill Office.

One thing I must add of mine own knowledge; That this Excelcellent Lady was
much troubled in her life time with the slavish fear of death. I told her then
out of mine own frequent experience, that they that were so much afraid of
death, while living, and thereupon, were careful to prepare for it, would be
free from the fear of it when they came to die. And it happened accordingly:
For though she had not those ravishing Joys which some sometimes have, yet she
had such a Calmness and quietness of mind, and peace of Conscience, that she
could cheerfully and most willingly surrender up her s^ul into the hands of her
Redeemer.

In the l^st day of her sickness, it pleased God in some measure to allay the
extremity of her Pains, and to afflict her only with shortness of Breath (which
increased upon her to her last) but her understanding was clear, and her Speech
free a few moments before her Departu^e. She continued throughout the day in an
admirable composed, quiet and serene frame of Spirit, and wholly gave her self
to glorify God, and to exhort all others to do the like, and to give up
themselves to his Service.

A Reverend Minister coming to visit her, she entertained him with a cheerful
Aspect, and desired him, to search and examine her heart, what way of
wickedness he could find in it, and pressed him to deal freely and plainly with
her, and not to spare her. (I deliver her own expressions) His discourse was
comfortable to her. She complained of the sinfulness of her Nature, and the
wickedness of her heart, but still with a Confidence in the Merits of her
Savior, upon whom alone she rolled her self. After that, she desired him to
pray by her; which he did, and she heard him with an unmovable stilness and
Attention, giving him thanks when he had done. She continued in the same
Heavenly Temper with many Gracious Expressions, until about eight of the Clock
that night, and then finding (as we had reason since to suppose, though she
made no show of it) that her death was approaching, she requested the minister
to pray by her again; he happened to be something long (though contrary to his
Intention) when toward the latter end, she made a sign unto him, which he
taking notice of, and thereupon concluding, she said, I thank you Sir, and
forthwith bowing down her head, within a few Minutes delivered her blessed Soul
into the hands of her heavenly Father.

Thus she lived, and thus she died, and thus being dead, she yet speaks; and
now is gone to that place where she has no more need of Prayers, but all her
Prayers are turned into Hallelujahs. The Lord give us Grace so to imitate her
holy Life, that when we come to die, we may die in Christ, and when laid in
the Grave, may sleep in Jesus, and in the Great Resurrection, may both in Body
and Soul be taken up into Heaven, to be for ever with the Lord in perfect
Happiness, Amen.

FINIS.

