A Part of the Late King's ANSWER To the Humble PETITION and ADVICE Of Both
Houses of Parliament Sent unto his Majesty with nineteen Propositions the
second of June 1642.

My Son, fear thou THE LORD, AND THE KING, and meddle not with them that are
given to change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the
ruin of THEM BOTH,

Prove. 24.21, 22. Him that says to the wicked thou art righteous, him shall
the people curse, Nations shall abhor him,

Prove. 24.24. Printed at the Request and Charge of Sir Francis Nethersole
Knight, for the settling of the minds of all the good people of this Kingdom in
the love of the ancient Legal form of Government, whosoever may become the
Governor thereof.

With two Letters of the said Sir Francis Nethersole, one already printed
before his Project for an equitable and lasting Peace, and the other a written
Letter therewith sent to diverse persons, never before Printed.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

A part of the late Kings Answer to the humble Petition and Advice of both
Houses of Parliament sent unto his Majesty, with nineteen Propositions the
second of June 1642.
WE suppose these Demands by this time to appear such as the Demanders cannot
be supposed to have any such real fear of us as has been long pretended, they
are too much in the style, not only of equals, but of Conquerours, and as
little to be intended for removing of jealousies (for which end they are said
to be asked, and that is not as Merchants ask at first much more then they will
take, but as most necessary to effect it which (if they be) God help this poor
Kingdom, and those who are in the hands of such persons, whose jealousies
nothing else will remove) which indeed is such a way, as if here being
differences and suits between two persons, where of one would have from the
other several parcels of his ancient Land, he should propose to him by way of
accommodation, that he would quit to him all those in question, with the rest
of his Estate, as the most necessary and effectual means to remove all those
suits and differences. But we call God to witness, that as for our Subjects
sake these Rights are vested in us, so for their sakes, as well as for our own,
We are resolved not to quit them, nor to subvert, (though in a Parliamentary
way) the ancient, equal, happy, well-poised, and never-enough commended
Constitution of the Government of this Kingdom, nor to make our Self of a King
of England a Duke of Venice, and this of a Kingdom a Republique.

There being three kinds of Government amongst men, Absolute Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy, and all these having their particular conveniences
and inconveniences. The experience and wisdom of your Ancestors has so
molded this out of a mixture of these, as to give to this Kingdom (as far as
humane prudence can provide) the conveniences of all three, without the
inconveniences of any one, as long as the Balance hangs even between the
three Estates, and they run joyntlie on in their proper Chanel (begetting
Verdure and Fertility in the Meadows on both sides) and the overflowing of
either on either side raise no deluge or Inundation. The ill of absolute
Monarchy is Tyranny, the ill of Aristocracy is Faction and Division, the ills
of Democracy are Tumults, Violence and Licentiousness. The good of Monarchy
is the uniting a Nation under one Head to resist invasion from abroad, and
Insurrection at home: The good of Aristocracie is the Conjunction of Counsel in
the ablest persons of a State for the public benefit: The good of Democracie
is Liberty, and the Courage and Industry which Liberty begets.

In this Kingdom the Laws are joyntlie made by a King, by a House of Peers,
and by a House of Commons chosen by the People, all having free Votes and
particular Privileges: The Government according to these Laws, is trusted to
the King, Power of Treaties of War and Peace, of making Peers, of choosing
Officers and Councillors for State, Judges for Law, Commanders for Forts and
Castles, giving Commissions for raising men to make War abroad, or to prevent
or provide against Invasions or Insurrections at home, benefit of
Confiscations, power of pardoning, and some more of the like kind are placed
in the King. And this kind of regulated Monarchy having this power to
preserve that Authority without which it would be disabled to preserve the
Laws in their Force, and the Subjects in their liberties and proprieties, is
intended to draw to him such a respect and relation from the great Ones, as may
hinder the ills of Division and Faction, and such a fear and reverence from the
people, as may hinder tumults, violence, and licentiousness. Again, that the
Prince may not make use of this high and perpetual power to the hurt of those
for whose good he has it, and make use of the name of Public necessity for
the gain of his private Favorites and Followers, to the detriment of his
people, the House of Commons (an excellent Conserver of Liberty, but never
intended for any share in Government, or the choosing of them that should
govern) is solely entrusted with the first Propositions concerning Leavies of
Money^ (which is the sinews as well of Peace as War) and the impeaching of
those, who for their own ends, though countenanced by any surreptitiously
gotten Command of the King have violated that Law, which he is bound (When he
knows it) to protect, and to the protection of which they were bound to advise
him, at least not to serve him in the contrary. And the Lords being trusted
with a Judicatory power, are an excellent Screen and Bank between the Prince
and People, to assist each against any encroachments of the other, and by just
judgments to preserve that Law, which ought he to be the Rule of every one of
the three. For the better enabling them in this, beyond the examples of any of
our Ancestors; We were willingly contented to oblige our self, both to call a
Parliament every three years, and not to dissolve it in fifty days, and for
the present exigent, the better to raise money, and avoid the pressure (no less
grievous to us then them) our People must have suffered by a longer continuance
of so vast a Charge as two great Armies, and for their greater certainty of
having sufficient time to remedy the inconveniences arisen during so long an
absence of Parliaments, and for the punishment of the Causers and Ministers of
them, We yielded up our Right of dissolving this Parliament, expecting an
extraordinary moderation from it in gratitude for so unexampled a Grace, and
little looking that any Malignant Party should have been encouraged or enabled
to have persuaded them, first to countenance the injustices and indignities we
have endured, and then by a new way of Satisfaction for what was taken from us,
to demand of us at once to Confirm what was so taken, and to give up almost
all the rest.

Since therefore the power Legally placed in both Houses, is more then
sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny, and without the power
which is now asked from us, We shall not be able to discharge that Trust which
is the end of Monarchy, since this would be a total Subversion of the
Fundamental Laws, and that excellent Constitution of this Kingdom, which has
made this Nation so many years both Famous and happy to a great degree of
Envy; since to the power of punishing (which is already in your hands
according to Law) if the power of preferring be added, we shall have nothing
left for us, but to look on; since the incroaching of one of these Estates upon
the power of the other is unhappy in the effects both to them and all the rest;
since this power of at most a joint Government in us with our Counselors, (or
rather our Guardians) will return us to the worst kind of Minority, and make
us despicable both at home and abroad, and beget eternal Factions and
Dissentions (as distructive to public Happiness as War) both in the chosen,
and the Houses that choose them, and the people who choose the Chusers; since so
new a power will undoubtedly intoxicate persons who were not born to it; and
beget not only Divisions among them as equal, but in them contempt of us as
become an equal to them, and insolence and injustice toward our people, as now
so much their inferiors, which will be the more grievous unto them, as
suffering from those who were so lately of a nearer degree to themselves, and
being to have redress only from those that placed them, and fearing they may be
inclined to preserve what they have made, both out of kindness and policy;
since all great changes are extremely inconvenient, and almost infallibly beget
yet greater changes, which beget yet greater inconveniences.

Since as great an one in the Church must; follow this of the Kingdom; Since
the second Estate would in all probability follow the fate of the First, and
by some of the same turbulent spirits jealousies would be soon raised against
them; and the like Propositions for reconciliation of Differences would be then
sent to them, as they now have joined to send to us, till (all power being
vested in the House of Commons, and their number making them incapable of
transacting Affairs of State with the necessary Secrecy and expedition; those
being retrusted to some close Committee) at last the common people (who in the
mean time must be flattered, and to whom License must be given in all their
wild humors, how contrary soever to established Law, on their own real Good)
discover this Arcanum imperii, That all this was done by them, but not for
them, grow weary of journy-work, and set up for themselves, call Parity and
Independence; Liberty; devour that Estate which had devoured the rest; Destroy
all Rights and Proprieties, all distinctions of Families and Merit; And by this
means this splendid and excellently distinguished form of Government end in a
dark equal Chaos of confusion, and the long Line of our many noble Ancestors in
a Jack Cade, or a Wat Tyler:

For all these Reasons to all these demands, our Answer is, Nolumus Leges
Angliae mutari: But this we promise, that we will be as careful of preserving
the Laws in what is supposed to concern wholly our Subjects, as in what most
concerns our Self: For indeed we profess to believe, that the preservation of
every Law concerns us, those of obedience being nor secure, when those of
protection are violated; And we being most of any injuried in the least
violation of that, by which we enjoy the highest Rights, and greatest Benefits,
and are therefore obliged to defend no less by our, interest then by our duty,
and hope that no jealousies to the contrary shall be any longer nourished in
any of our good people, by the subtle insinuations, and secret practices of
men, who for private ends are disaffected to our honor and safety, and the
peace and prosperity of our People. And to show you, that no just indignation
at so reproachful offers shall make us refuse to grant what is probable to
conduce to the good of our good People, because of the ill company it comes
(...), We will search carefully in this heap of unreasonable demands, for so
much as we may (complying with our conscience, and the duty of our Trust)
assent unto, and shall accordingly agree to it.

Minute of a written LETTER sent to many with the Printed one, and Project for
an equitable and lasting Peace.
July 1648. SIR,
I Send you here with a project, the design whereof is to unite all them of
what opinion or party soever in Church or State, that are of this judgment,
That the later of them cannot be rendered more happy by any Vtopian alteration,
then it may be by making sufficient provision for the continuance of the well
experimented government thereof within the ancient bounds, as it and they are
already established by the known Law of the Land: nor the former like ever to
be settled again in any Government, till this be agreed upon on all sides, That
if it be the duty of the Civil Magistrate to make any Laws concerning
Ecclesiastical Policy, then it is sin, because Treason in this, and (I think)
in all other States for any man of any opinion by force of Arms to attempt the
Reformation of the Laws in being, how contrary soever to the institution of
Jesus Christ, or to the advancement of his Kingdom they may think those Laws
to be. Of which judgment in both points you are conceived to be. That is all
the reason of this address to you, and of this further request that you would
be pleased to put other copies sent herewith into the hands of wise men of your
acquaintance, and of the same mind with you, upon the terms mentioned in the
conclusion of the prefixed Letter; and to do me the honor to vonchsafe me your
self, and to procure me from them, such an answer thereunto as I have had the
presumption for the matter to prescribe, because I best know my own end in
desiring it, being no other, but that I may employ it to the facilitating of a
safe, and well-grounded peace, which is the earnest longing of all good men. I
know not why you, or they, or any honest man should be shie of doing me this
favor for fear of any danger: Yet because the times are indeed very queazie, I
send you hear with such a direction for the conveyance of your Answer to me,
that if you keep your own counsel it will be impossible for man to find you
out without my discovering you, which I do hereby engage the faith of a
Gentleman never to do without your leave: and perchance you may take that for
some security, when I shall have told you that I have often written this
sentence of my own making in the Books of many of my friends of diverse Nations,
Maximum ad vitam adjumentum intemerata fides, And that though this hand be
unknown to you, yet he is not that makes use of it to subscribe himself as in
truth he is,

Sir, Your most humble and faithful servant P. D.

A Letter sent to diverse prudent persons of all sorts.
SIR,
I Humbly pray you to take the pains to peruse first the Declaration of the
Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, of the fourth and his Majesty's of
the twelfth of August. 1642. After them the Considerations Dedicated to the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City in the year 1642. Comparing the second
sheet thereof with a part of the Declaration of the Army of the 14. of June
1647. from those words, [But because neither the granting of this alone, etc.]
to these [we desire that the right and freedom of the people to represent,
etc.] And in the last place the Project I send you with this, (built upon the
same foundation: which was first laid in the Considerations, and which the
Army once thought firm enough to support their hopes of common and equal
right, and freedom to themselves, and to all the freeborn people of this Land)
at as much leisure as you may obtain from your many other great occasions, and
with as much attention as you may think fit to bestow upon a piece of no more
worth, bearing these thoughts in your mind while you are reading it.

1. Whether it had not been honorable for the King and his Party safe for the
Parliament and theirs, and equitable for both, to have made a Peace upon the
terms therein designed at the time of the writing thereof, which was upon the
first news of the Scots resolution to come into England the second time, and
from a desire to have kept them out then by agreeing among our selves.

2. Whether (under favor, and with all humbleness be it written) it had not
been more conducible to the Reformation and establishment of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England, and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, which ought to be the only rule
thereof) and to the extirpation of Popery, Superstition, Heresy, Schism,
Profaneness, and whatsoever may be found contrary to sound Doctrine and the
power of godliness: And to the preservation and defense of the Kings Majesty's
person, and authority of the rights and liberties of the Parliament of England,
and the liberties and public weal of this Kingdom, for the King and all the
subjects thereof at that time to have come to a peace among themselves upon the
said designed terms, then to have continued the War by calling in strangers to
their respective assistance upon the terms practiced by one side, and in
probability designed by the other.

3. Whether it may not be thought more expedient for the two Houses of the
Parliament of England, and the whole people thereof, to come to an agreement
with his Majesty upon the same terms at this time notwithstanding the great
alteration of affairs in their favor since the Project was designed, then
either to engage in a new War against the Scots, with such a division among
Englishmen as will be an indubitable consequent, if not an antecedent thereof,
or to admit them to be Umpires in the affairs of England, as they will become,
if the differences between his Majesty and his English Subjects should by Gods
mercy come to an Accommodation upon their third, as those between his Majesty
and the Scots did upon their first bringing an Army into this Kingdom.

4. Wheather any, and what exception can be taken to the justice or
equitableness of any particular Article of the Project, even at this time,
without having respect to this practicableness thereof, whereof perhaps there
may be less doubt ere long, though I yet see no other sufficient ground for it
but this, that methinks the tide is turning. Such are the revolutions of humane
affairs.

And lastly, in case any of the said Articles shall be judged though neither
unjust, now unequal, yet impracticable, as things now stand, wheather the said
Project may not be reduced to fit the present conjuncture of affairs with some
additions, abatements, or alterations; and what alterations, abatements, or
additions may be found just and reasonable for the two Houses of Parliament to
insist upon, and for his Majesty to yield unto in respect of the change and
present state of affairs.

Secondly, to pass your censure, and let me know your sense upon all the
aforesaid particulars with the freedom a freeman of this Kingdom, for whom I
conceive it to be lawful with due submission to those in authority to confer
together in a private way about the best means to recover, and maintain a
lasting Peace in the Realm; especially at a time when there is cause of fear
that it may be yet longer discontinued by the coming in of strangers in Arms,
which is once more our condition at the present. And in particular, How you
conceive the Militia may be settled so, as may be honorable for the King, and
yet safe for his Parliament and Kingdom of England, according as is designed in
the Project: Upon the recept of which favor from you, I do hereby engage
myself to make you a return of my thoughts upon the fifth and last Article, and
by way of Advance do now let you know, that to the three first I should make a
short Answer in the Affirmative, to the fourth in the Negative.

In the last place I do here promise you to keep your Answer to my self only,
if you shall so require me, or if I shall publish it with your leave, yet never
to discover your name, if you shall command me to conceal it. In exchange of
which promise I must crave one from you, to suffer no copy to be taken in
writing, nor any new impression to be made either of the Project, or of this
Letter, until I may find the season opportune for the Publication of them,
which I do not as yet. And for that reason though I send you them in Print, to
ease the trouble of transcribing, I have made sure to have all the Copies in my
own keeping. And so I remain.

Sir, Your most humble servant. P.D.
Dated Junii -- 1648. the Climacterical year of this Kingdom.
POSCRIPT.
SIR,
UPon second thoughts I find it necessary for me to give you a brief account
why I did not publish this Project when it was first designed, nor in all the
long time sit hence elapsed, and yet have thoughts of doing it now. You may
therefore please to understand, that my purpose at first was to have printed
two Copies thereof, the one at London, the other at Oxford, to avoid the great
prejudice of being reputed partial. But before I could effect this, it came to
my knowledge that the writer of the Considerations had found means to have them
put into the hands of certain persons of prime quality, and credit in both
places, and had found that the cornerstone of his Considerations, and of my
Project (borrowed from him) was rejected by some of too great power on both
sides, as he foresaw, and foretold it was like to be. This made me give over my
purpose at that time. And from that time the Design lay by me as a neglected
and useless piece, till the Army having gotten the King into their power, was
upon their march from Newmarket with an intention (as was voiced) to have
brought his Majesty up to London without more ado. The apprehension I then had
that this might prove very dangerous to the Commonwealth, (to the prosperity
whereof, and of his Majesty, if I know my own heart, it bears with an equal
pulse) stirred me so far that I was once more determined to have published my
conceit what, and no more was needful to be transacted before his Majesty's
return to his Palace at Westminster, and to that end had sent this simple
Project to a Licencer. In this nick of time forth came the Armies Declaration
of the 14. of June, 1647. Wherein finding the maine of what I had ever thought
very expedient, if not altogether necessary, to be mainly insisted on by Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and his Officers and soldiers, I was much rejoiced to see the
work whereunto I desired to have contributed my weak endeavors to be taken
into abler hands, and there I left it. Whether his excellency, and his chief
Officers, (for the opinion of his common soldiers and their Agitators is to be
of no regard) be since fallen from what they (...) declared to be their
deliberate, and determinate judgment, I leave him and them to give an account
to God, and the World. I am sure it is commonly believed, that they only made
show of being of the mind at large ^^pressed in the fore mentioned Declaration
to ingratiate themselves with the Kingdom, till by that means they had quietly
gotten all the strength thereof into their own, and their parties hands: And
that they are at present the most averse of any other to a Personal Treaty at
London, On the other side it is too manifest, that the generality of the City,
and Country, are perhaps too violent for his Majesty coming thither without
engaging his Royal word to pass the three Preparatory Bills, apprehended like
to be of hard digestion to his Majesty, and it is further apprehended that the
two Houses of Parliament may also happen to be divided upon this point.
Perchance a middle way may be found as fair, and safe, as either of the
former, and not impassable either with his Majesty or with the two Houses. This
induced me now to submit my conceit to censure of wiser men. And if for the
groundwork it shall be so happy as to receive any measure of approbation from
any considerable number of such as your self, it is not impossible that I may
be thereby emboldened to expose it to the eye of the people, which I conceive
to be sharper then the sight of any one, or of any few of the wisest men of the
land. Sir, I crave your pardon for this addition to your trouble, and remain as
before, and ever.

FINIS.

