THE Saints Transfiguration: OR The Body of Vileness changed into a Body of
Glory.

A SERMON Preached at Martins Ludgate October 19. 1654. At the Funeral of that
Reverend, and faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST Dr SAMUEL BOLTON, late Master
of Christ's College in Cambridg, With a short account of his Death.

By EDMUND CALAMY, B. D. Pastor of Aldermanbury in London.

To which are annexed Verses upon his Death, composed by diverse of his Friends
and Acquaintance.

The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are
taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to
come. Isa. 57. 1. Your fathers where are they? and the Prophets do they live
for ever? Zach. 1. 5. London, Printed for Joseph Cranford at the Sign of the
Phoenix in Paul's Churchyard, M.DC.LV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT EARL OF WARWICK, BARON OF LEEZE.
Right Honorable:
IT has pleased God to take unto himself a Reverend, Learned and Pious
Minister Dr BOLTON, one who feared God above many, who was (not without just
cause) highly esteemed by your Lordship, whose memory is very precious to you,
and who was very dear to a Religious Daughter of yours now with God (whom I
mention for Honor sake) the Lady Lucy Roberts.

The ensuing Sermon preached at his sad Funerals, I crave leave to dedicate to
your Lordship, as a public acknowledgement of the many and great favors I
have received from you. The design of it is, to wean Christians from the
overmuch love of their bodies. All men by nature are prone curare cutem magis
quam animam, to take more care and spend more time for their bodies, then for
their souls: Hence it is that they think no cost too much that is laid out for
the feeding and clothing of their bodies, no gift too great that is given to
the Physician to heal them when diseased, but any thing too much which is given
to a godly Minister for the good of their souls: Hence it is, that the working
days are too few, and too short for their bodily profits and pastimes, but the
Lords day which is the Queen of days, because it is the Souls Market Day for
Heaven, is burdensome to them, and very tedious. Hence it is also that they are
willing to lay out Nine parts of their Estate for their bodies, but unwilling
to part with the Tenth for soul-advantages. The scope of this Sermon* is to
show the vanity and sinfulness of these and such like practices.

It tells your Lordship

That the Body is the worst half of man, the box the shell, the carcass: That
the Soul is the Jewel, the life, the man of man.

That the Body is a Vile body made of vile materials, subject to vile diseases
and to vile abominations, and that he that provides for his body and not for
his soul, is like unto a husbandman that in harvest time gathers in his
stubble, and leaves his Corn to be devoured by his Hoggs; or like unto a
Goldsmith, that weighs exactly his dross, but disregards his gold. And also

He that provides for his Body with the neglect of his Soul, is like unto a
Merchant that overloads his Ship so as to drown himself; or to a man that makes
so great a fire to warm himself by, as to burn his house and himself in it.

It shows your Lordship also

That this vile body will never be changed into a glorious body till the great
day of the resurrection, and that then the Lord JESUS will come from Heaven on
purpose to fashion our vile bodies like unto his glorious body.

That this life is not the time appointed for the good of our bodies only or
chiefly, but of our souls principally and especially.

That the only way to make our bodies glorious, is by getting our souls to be
made gracious.

That the happiness of the body depends upon the happiness of the soul: If the
soul be adorned here with Christ's righteousness, the body will be clothed with
glory unexpressible hereafter. If the soul when separated from the body be
polluted and belepred with sin, the body and soul will both of them be
eternally miserable at the resurrection.

These Lessons are very suitable and seasonable for all sorts and degrees, but
especially for you (Right Honorable) whose body now begins to wax old, and
will shortly go down to the house of rottenness and be crumbled into dust.

I doubt not but God has sufficiently taught you the vanity and emptiness of
all earthly greatness. That greatness without goodness, is like the greatness
of a man with a Dropsy, which is his disease not his happiness: That Riches
without Righteousness are but heaps of dung: And that nothing but Grace will
make you truly and eternally honorable.

God has taken you off (out of love to your precious soul) from all public
employments, and thereby has lent you much time to provide for eternity. He
has given you a Noble Countess, a precious Consort, a beloved Companion, a
dear Yoak-fellow (united to you not only by marriage relation, but by true love
and most entire affection) who will be glad to go hand in hand with you in
heavens way.

To both of you my obligations are very many and very great, the characters of
your Love are visible and legible by all: All that know me know my relation to
you: My prayers to God for you both shall be, That God would give you more of
himself, and of those mercies which cannot stand with damnation: That he would
keep you good in bad times, and constant to your principles in Apostatizing
times: That he would lengthen out your days for his glory; and that this
Sermon may be isntrumental to make you mind your bodies less, and your souls
more; that when the great day of judgment shall come, your vile bodies may be
changed into the likeness of the glorious body of JESUS CHRIST.

So prays, My Lord your servant in all spiritual things EDM. CALAMY.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Dr BOLTONS Funeral.
PHIL. 3. 20, 21. From whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things
unto himself.


WE are here met to perform the last office of love for a worthy, reverend and
godly Minister of Jesus Christ, Dr SAMUEL BOLTON late Master of Christ's
College in Cambridge. And this Text that I have chosen, will afford us many
suitable and seasonable meditations and considerations for such a meeting. For
here you have.

1. The Condition that the bodies of men (even the best of men) are in in this
life; they are vile and contemptible: Our vile body. The Greek words are very
emphaticall, (...), the body of vileness, Tremelius.
corpus humilitatis nostrae, or, Beza.
corpus nostrum humile. The word (...), signifies, vilem and abjectam
conditionem, qualis est vilium servorum, a vile and abject condition, such as
is of slaves and vassals. The same word is used, Corpus humilitatis pro eorpore
humili; Hebraismo non ignoto. Justinianus in locum.
Luke 1. 48. He has regarded the low estate of his handmaiden, (...), It is is
also used James 1. 10.

2. The condition that the bodies of the Saints shall be in at the glorious
resurrection: They shall then be changed, and made like unto the glorious body
of the Lord Jesus Christ, (...), shall then be (...), The body of vildnesse
shall then be a body of glory.

3. The Persons whose bodies shall be thus changed, and they are such who have
their conversation in Heaven: But our conversation is in Heaven, from whence we
look for a Savior who shall change our vile body. Not every vile body, but our
vile body. The bodies of the wicked shall be ugly and loathsome, but the bodies
of those whose dispositions and actions are heavenly, shall be beautiful and
glorious.

4. The Person that shall make this great change in our bodies; and he is the
Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.

5. The time when this great transfiguration shall be made, and that is at the
great day of judgment, when our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ shall come from
Heaven, for this very end and purpose, to fashion our vile bodies like unto his
glorious body.

6. The means by which all this shall be accomplished, and that is, According
to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, and
therefore able to make this glorious transfiguration and transformation of our
bodies.

7. The use we are to make of all this, and that is, To wait and expect, to
long and look for the coming of our Lord Jesus to judgment, for the
accomplishing of this glorious Metamorphosis -- From whence we look for a
Savior.

By what has been already said, you may perceive, that this Text is a precious
Cabinet, full of many excellent Jewels; for here is

The doctrine 1. Of the bodies vility, fragility and mortality. 2. Of the
resurrection of the just. 3. Of the bodies immortality and glorification at the
resurrection. 4. Of the great and dreadful day of judgment. 5. Of the great
errand and message for which Christ shall come to judgment, and that is to
glorify our bodies: Now all these Doctrines are very suitable to such an
Assembly as this is; the Lord make them as profitable to you as they are
seasonable for you,

My purpose is to pick out only two of these Jewels, and to show you

1. What is the condition of our bodies for the present.

2, What our bodies shall be at the resurrection.

First, To speak of the (...), then of the (...); first of the body of
vileness, then of the body of glory.

Doct. 1. That the bodies even of the best of Saints for the present are vile
bodies.

Doct. 2. That the Lord Jesus Christ at the great day of judgment, shall raise
these vile bodies, and charge them into the likeness of his own glorious body.

Doct. 1. That the bodies even of the best of Saints for the present are vile
bodies.

The holy Apostle foresaw how prone men and women would be to be proud of their
bodies, to pamper them, to spend all their time, and lay out all their strength
to provide for their bodies, even with the neglect of their more precious
souls: And therefore that he might wean people from the immoderate love of
their bodies, he purposely calls them vile bodies: and 1 Cor. 15. 43, he calls
them dishonorable bodies, or bodies of dishonor, (...).

Qu. But you will demand; In what respects may the body be said to be a vile
body?

Ans. The body may be said to be a vile body,

1. In reference to its primitive constitution, even before it was defiled with
sin; for it was made of dust of the earth, the and not of dust simply, but of
dust mingled with water, of clay and muddy dust, ex pulvero limoso and lutoso:
The body was not made of celestial materials, of the Sun, Moon or Stars;
nor of precious materials, of gold or silver; but of the worst and lowest of
the elements, ex fragili and vili materia, of frail and perishing, of ignoble
and contemptible materials, and therefore may fitly be called a vile body.

2. Since the fall of Adam, our bodies are called vile bodies, because subject
to vile diseases, thereis no disease so vile, but the body of man is subject
unto: Job was a man eminent in godliness, yet his body was full of soars and
biles ^^om the crown of his head to the sole of his foot; and he says of
himself, Job 7. 5. My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust, my skin
is broken and become loathsome. Who can reckon up all the diseases that man's
body is liable unto? The Stone, the Govt, Leprosy, Plague, Colic, Strangury,
Diabolical possession, Madness, Sciatica and small Pox, are not the tithe of
them; and therefore it may fitly be called a vile body.

3. Because subject to vile abuses by Tyrants and cruel Persecutors: A Tyrant
cannot hurt the soul of a child of God, but he can torture and kill his body.
It is said of the blessed Martyrs, of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.
37. They were stoned, they were sawed asunder, were slain with the sword; They
wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, destitute, afflicted and
tormented. All these sufferings were bodily, and therefore it may well be
termed a vile body.

4. Because subject to vile abominations and wickednesses. For since the fall
of Adam our bodies are instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, Romans 6. 13.
they are servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity, Romans 6. 19 In
some to drunkenness, in others to adultery, theevery and murder; in others to
sodomy, by which the bodies of men are made vile and dishonorable, according
to the saying of the Apostle, Romans 1. 24. Wherefore God also gave them up to
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own
bodies between themselves.

5. Because even in the best of Saints, The Greek for a body is (...) quasi
(...), And (...) a (...).
it is a great impediment and hindrance to their immortal souls, and therefore
called sepulchrum animae, and vinculum animae, The sepulcher of the soul, the
fetters and manacles of the soul. For the most precious soul,

1. It is hidden in the body as a man in a dark dungeon, or as a bright candle
in a dark lantern, the excellent nature, beauty, and glorious operations of it
cannot be seen. For it may be said of the soul (as Plato says of virtue) that
if a man could but see it he could not but love it: but it is hidden in the
body as in a prison.

2. It is hindered by the body in three respects.

1. It is hindered from Heaven: 2 Cor. 5.
For whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. This
earthly house must first be dissolved, before we can come to the house made
without hands, eternal in the Heavens.

2. It is hindered from heavenly operations; for the body takes up all the time
from the soul. As the lean kine of Pharaoh devoured the fat, so does the body
devour the time that should be spent about the soul. It is with the soul and
body as it was with Abraham and Lot, Abraham had his servants and cattle, and
Lot his, and the country was too little for them. So the soul has her work,
and the body his work, and there is hardly time enough for both, so that the
one must needs hinder the other, and they will never be right till separated.
Now this must needs be a great bondage, when the handmaid shall have more
attendance then the Mistress, Hagar preferred before Sarah.

3. It is hindered in all its heavenly operations; As a bird that has a stone
tied to its leg, is weighed down and cannot fly aloft: so is the heavenly soul
in the best of Saints, depressed and weighed down with the body, that it cannot
fly aloft in Prayer and heavenly meditations. The body is quickly tired in holy
services, As Saul's armor was a burden to David, so is the body to the soul.
Therefore the Apostle says. 2 Cor. 5. 4. We that are in this Tabernacle do
groan, being burdened. The spirit is willing* but the flesh is weak; like a
strong man riding upon a dull horse.

3. It is defiled and made more sinful by the body. God gave man at first a
heavenly soul and an earthly body, that the heavenly soul might lift up the
earthly body: But it proves quite contrary; our earthly bodies have weighed
down our heavenly souls, and made them earthly and sensual. Tamdiu versata est
anima in Tabernaculo, ut ipsa versa est in Tabernaculum. Bernard.
As clothes when they are died lose their Names, and are called scarlet or
stammell: so the souls of men have received such an ill tincture from their
bodies, that they may fitly be called worldly, sensual and carnal. The soul
is diverted by the body from its true end: The true end of the soul is to love
God and to live to God, but the body turns the stream, and ingrosseth all for
back and belly, and therefore may very justly be termed a vile body.

6. The body may be said to be vile, in reference to its dissolution and
separation, For when it once dies, it is then evident to an eye of flesh, that
it is nothing but a rotten, stinking, putrefying carcass; that body which while
united to the soul seemed very lovely and beautiful, when once the soul leaves
it, it becomes an ugly, deformed, ghastly carcass, mouldring quickly into dust,
That says to corruption Thou art my Father, and to the Worm Thou art my Mother
and my Sister, Job 17. 14.

7. It is called a vile body, in comparison of the precious soul. The body is
the worst half of man; it is half, but it is the worst half: it is vilissima
pars hominis: it is the box, the shell, the house of man; but it is the soul
that is the kernel, the Jewel, the inhabitant. The soul of man is the man of
man, Intus est quod homo est. The soul is as an Angel dwelling in the body as
in an house of Clay. Plato tells us, that is is (...), an heavenly plant, and
of a divine offspring. The Scripture tells us, that it was not made of the dust
of the earth as the body was, but ex ore Dei, Genesis 2. 7.
by the breath of God: made a Deo though not de Deo, by God immediately, though
not of the essence of God. And when a man dies, the soul is not turned to dust
as the body is: The soul does not die with the body. Stephens soul was not
stoned when his body was stoned. When the body returns to the earth as it was,
the soul returns to God who gave it, Eccl. 12. 7. And therefore in comparison
of the soul, the body may be said to be a vile body.

8. Lastly, It is called a vile body, in comparison of what it shall be at the
great day of the r^^urrection: for then it shall changed and metamorphized, and
made like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ, and therefore in comparison
of what it shall be hereafter, it may well be styled for the present a vile
body.

Let us often meditate upon this appellation and Epithete that is given unto
the body: Use.
it is called a vile body, or a body of vileness: Vile, when separated from the
soul, vile whilst united to the soul: Vile before defiled with sin, but
especially vile since it was defiled with sin* Vile because subject to vile
diseases, to vile abuses by wicked persecutors, to vile abominations: Vile,
because it is an impediment of the soul: Vile in comparison of the precious
soul, and in respect to what it shall be at the glorious appearing of Jesus
Christ. Let this Meditation teach us these Lessons.

1. A lesson of humility. Lesson 1.
The body we carry about us is but a vile body, and therefore let us not be
proud of it: It is corpus humile (as Beza translates this Text) or corpus
humilitatis, a body of humility, and therefore let it teach us humility. God on
purpose has made the body of man of the worst and lowest element, that he
might not be lifted up with pride, but have a mean and low esteem of himself.
Hence it is also that in Scripture it is compared to things that are very mean
and contemptible; Isa, 40.
To the grass of the field, to dry stubble, to a leaf driven to and fro, Job
13. 25, 28.
to a thing that is rotten, and to a garment that is moth-eaten. It is compared
to such mean things, that we might learn to have a mean esteem of it. Why art
thou proud oh dust and ashes? What is Man but handsome mudd and gilded
rottenness? What are Riches but brighter dust? And what are Honors but heaps
of dung? dust you are, and God will lay your honors in the dust. Why art thou
proud O dust and ashes? The birds make their nests of that which thou art made
of: Every beast treads under his feet that which thou were made of: every
crceping thing disposes at pleasure of that which thou were made of: every
blast of wind scatters that which thou were made of, and why art thou proud
oh dust and ashes? Bernard in three expressions sets out the vileness of the
body, It is (says he) sperma faetidum, saccus stercorum, esca vermium, it is
worms-meat, it is a sack of dung, etc.

I have read a story of a certain stone that was brought to Alexander the
Great, which being put into one part of a pair of Scales, weighed down
whatsoever was put into the other part: but if a little dust had been cast upon
the stone, then every thing weighed down the stone. The Moral is true though
the History prove a fable; as one of his Wisemen told him; This stone (said he)
shows what thou art oh Alexander. Whilst thou live thou weighest down all
that oppose thee, the whole World cannot new content thee, when a little dust
is cast upon thee, that is, when thou art dead, then every man will outweigh
thee, and minor eris quam quicquid mundi, thou will be lesser then any man in
the world. Such another story is reported of the Father of Alexander, that he
kept a boy on purpose, to come to him every morning and to bid him Remember he
was a man. (...).
Let us be always mindful that we are but dust, dust we are and to dust we
must return: Let us cast dust upon our silks and velvets, upon our gold and
silver, upon our beautiful faces: Let the great Ladies make this Doctrine
their Lookingglasses to dress themselves by every morning: Remember thy body is
a vile body, and therefore be not proud of it.

2. A Lesson of Mortification: Lesson 2.
This vile body of ours is subject to be abused by the devil to vile
abominations, and therefore let us go to Jesus Christ, to get power to mortify
and crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts. There is a body of sin
in all men, and this is that which makes this body of ours to be so vile. Let
us by a lively faith make application of the death of Christ, Romans 6. 6.
that the old man being crucified, with him the body of sin may be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not serve sin. Excelledt is that expression of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 27. But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection,
least that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self should be a
castaway. Upon which words Austin has this saying, Si aries de grege, quid
tener agnus, etc, If the great Ram of the flock has need to beat down his body
and to bring it under subjection, how much more should we tender Lambs use all
means for the keeping of it under? The body is called by Hierom, jumentum
animae the beast of the soul, and when this beast begins to kick against the
soul, In vita ejus per Hieronymum.
we must labor to subdue it by fasting and prayer, and say as Hilarion did,
Faciam Asine ut non calcitres.

3. A Lesson of Contentation: Let us be contented with our condition though
never so Poor: Lesson 3.
Though thy apparel be mean, and thy diet mean: mean things become a vile body.
And if for a good conscience thou be put into a vile prison, into a dark and
stinking dungeon as the Martyrs have been, let us be contented with it, for our
bodies for the present are vile bodies: Thou can not be poorer then thou were
at first, and wilt be at last; for naked we came into the world, and naked we
must return again. And though thou have a diseased and sickly body, and have
met with many losses and crosses, yet be contented; remember that the bodies of
the best of Saints in this life are vile bodies. I have read of Themistocles,
that he invited many Philosophers to dinner, and that he borrowed diverse dishes
of one Amyntas; in the midst of dinner Amyntas comes and fetches away half his
dishes; the Philosophers asked Themistocles how he was able to bear this
affront? He answered mildly, He might have took away all. If God has taken
away half thy children, half thy estate, be contented, all is his, and he might
have taken away all.

4. Let this Epithete teach us a lesson of heavenly courage and fortitude;
Lesson 4.
let us not fear what the worst of men can do unto us, for they can but kill
this vile body. This our Savior teaches Matthew. 10. Fear not them that can
kill the body, and after that can do no more. If a Tyrant could kill the soul,
then indeed he might be feared, but he cannot reach that, he can but hurt the
body, ths vile body, a body subject to a thousand diseases, and to innumerable
abominatious; a body that will shortly dye of its own accord; and why then
should we fear what vile man can do against this vile body? especially if we
consider, that when he has done his worst against it, it shall in spite of him
rise again, and of a vile body, become a most glorious body. Oh let us not make
shipwreck of a good conscience to preserve this vile body; let us not destroy
our precious souls to save this vile carcass!

5. If the body be vile in comparison of the soul, Lesson 5.
then let us be encouraged unto soul-diligence. Let us not set the servant on
horseback, and suffer the Master to go on foot; let us not prefer the
handmaid before the Mistress, the box before the Jewel, the vile body before
our precious and immortal souls. The body is made of dust, and who ever
advanced dust? we use to sweep away dust from off our clothes, and out of our
houses. The body is but a lump of earth, a rotten carcass without the soul, oh
let us not prefer it before the soul! let us not bestow that time, that
heart, those affections and endeavors upon the body, which are due unto the
soul!

It is a sad thing to consider, how most people, even those that believe the
Doctrine of the souls Immortality, do Jacob-like, (though upon a different
occasion) put their right hand upon the youngest Son, and their left hand
upon the eldest, spending the best of their days, and strength, and affections
upon these vile bodies, and in the mean time neglecting to provide for their
eternal souls. Give me leave to illustrate this by a similitude: Suppose a man
should invite a Nobleman to his house, and only provide provender for the
Noblemans horses, without any provision at all for himself, only such as his
horses feed on, would not this be a course entertainment? and yet so do most
men deal with their immortal souls. The soul is as this Nobleman, lodging in a
body of clay as in a poor cottage; the body is (as you have heard) jumentum
animae, the souls beast; and when you consume your days in pampering and
clothing your bodies, taking no care for your noble souls, this is but (as it
were) providing provender for the horses, without any provision for the
Nobleman: for the soul is never the richer for all our worldly wealth, never
the fatter for our delicate fare, nor ever the finer for our silken clothes. I
read that St John in 3 John 2. prays for Gaius, That his body might prosper
and be in health even as his soul prospered. But if we should make such a
prayer for many of our people, we should rather curse them then pray for them;
for if they had no better bodies then they have souls, they would have very
poor, lean and naked bodies. Let Christians labor so to live that this prayer
may be fit for them, that we may cheerfully put up this petition for them, That
their bodies may prosper even as their souls prosper: Let the chiefest part
have the chiefest care, the best part the best of our strength and days.

6. Lastly, Lesson 6.
Let us from this Epithete learn a lesson of thankfullness: Our bodies are
bodies of vileness, and therefore if God has given thee a body more handsome
and more healthful then others have; if God has made any of us ex meliore
luto, of better earth; if he has made us golden vessels in regard of our
outward condition; if he has raised any of us from the dust, and set us in
high places; especially if God has made us elect vessels, vessels of mercy in
regard of our eternal condition, as I doubt not but there are many such here,
oh give God a great deal of glory, and give him all the glory. If he has made
thy vile body an instrument of righteousness unto holiness; if he has
sanctified it, and made it a Temple fit for the holy Ghost to dwell in, then
let me speak to you in the language of the holy Ghost; 1 Cor. 6. 15. 19. 3. 17.
Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ? will you take the
members of Christ, and make them members of an harlot? God forbid. Know you not
that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, etc. And If any
man defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy. Will you abuse that body
that is the Temple of the holy Ghost to sin and iniquity? God forbid,

I shall now pass from the first Observation to the second, with which our
worthy and dear brother was much refreshed, and did often repeat in my hearing,
and upon that account I made made choice of this Text at this time. The
Observation is,

That the Lord Jesus Christ at the great day of judgment, Doct. 2.
shall raise these vile bodies, and change them into the likeness of his own
glorious body.

This Doctrine is an Alablaster box full of precious consolation: It was a
great comfort and support to our dear brother when he was going out of this
world, and oh that it might be a like precious Cordial to us when we shall be
in his condition.

For the better understanding of the Doctrine, I shall propound these five
Questions,

1. What is that change that Christ shall make in our vile bodies at the
resurrection? Quest. 1.


The bodies of the Saints when dead, Answ.
and separated from their souls, are not separated from Jesus Christ, and
therefore are said to be dead in Christ; 1 These. 4. 15.
while dead they are united to Christ, and by virtue of this union Christ as
their Head will raise them at the last day, and at their resurrection they
shall be changed, non quoad substantiam sed quoad proprietates, the substance
of their bodies shall not be altered, but only the qualities, As wool when it
is died into a purple or scarlet die, is the same wool for substance though it
be made more glorious; so the bodies of the Saints at the resurrection, shall
be the same for substance though made more excellent and more glorious. This
was Jobs comfort, Job 19. 25, 26, 27.
that with those very eyes of his he should see his Redeemer, and that he
himself should see him and not another. 1 Cor. 15. 53.
The Apostle tells us, That this mortal body must put on immortality, and this
corrupt^ble body must put on incorruption. The ancient Christians when they
rehearsed that article of the Creed, Credo resurrectioneme carnis, I believe
the resurrection of the flesh, were wont to add, Etiam hujus carnis, even of
this my flesh. It cannot stand with Gods justice (says Hierom) that one body
should sin and another body be damned, that one body should serve him and
another be crowned; this is contrary to the justice of God, and to the very
nature of the resurrection; for a resurrection is, when the same body that
dies rises again, otherwise, it is rather a new creation then a resurrection.
As the body of Christ after his resurrection, was the same for substance though
much more excellent and glorious, so shall the bodies of the Saints be at their
resurrection. As a Goldsmith (says Chrysostom) takes a little gold and puts
it into a refining pot and melts it, and then out of that gold forms a golden
vessel fit to be set before Kings: so the Lord Jesus Christ melts the bodies of
his Saints by death, and out of their dead ashes and cinders will form a vessel
of gold, a glorious body, fit to live with God and sing Hallelujahs in Heaven
to all enternity.

2. Quest. 2*
What are those transfigurations and transformations that Christ shall make in
our bodies at this day? what is this metamorphosis, wherein does it consist?

It is impossible to set out all the glorious excellencies with which Christ
will adorn our bodies in the great day of the resurrection. Answ.
Quae sit and quam magna spiritualis corporis gloria quoniam nondum venit in
experimentum, Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 22.
vereor ne temerarium sit omne quod de illa profertur eloquium, How great the
glory of our spiritual bodies shall be, because we have no experience of it, I
fear it will be rashness for any man (says Austin) to speak peremptorily about
it: It will be the marriage day between Christ and his Saints, and he will
endow their bodies with glorious qualities as well as their souls, for he
assumed their bodies as well as their souls, suffered in body as well as in
soul, died for their bodies as well as for their souls, and therefore will
glorify their bodies as well as their souls.

Give me leave to mention some of those glorious perfections with which our
vile bodies shall be beautified at that day.

1. The bodies of the Saints at the resurrection shall be free from all sin,
Romans 7.
Paul shall not then complain of a law in his members rebelling against the law
of his mind, nor cry out, Oh miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? we shall at that day not only have a posse non
peccare, a possibility not to sin, as Adam had in innocence, but a non posse
peccare, an impossibility of sinning.

2. Our bodies shall be made immortal and incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15. 53, 54.
This mortal shall put on immortality, as a garment never to be put off again;
Death shall be swallowed up in victory Adam in innocence, as he had a power not
to sin, so also not to die; but the Saints at the resurrection shall have an
impossibility of sinning and of dying. Not but that our bodies are naturally
corruptible even at the resurrection, but by the presence of God filling them,
they shall be made like the Angels, immortal. And if embalming the body can
preserve it from putrefaction for many years, much more will the presence of
God preserve it from death for ever.

3. The third endowment is brightness and splendor, It is sown in dishonor,
but it is raised in glory, 1 Cor. 15. 43. The body is not so miserable under
the curse, as it is blessed in the promise. As in the state of corruption it is
abased lower then all created bodies, so in the state of glory it is exalted
higher then all other bodies; Mat. 13. 43.
For the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father. Not that they shall not outshine the Sun, but because there is no
more shining body visible to us, therefore are the bodies of the Saints in
glory compared thereunto. M. Norton in his Orthodox Evangelist.
The glory of the body (says one) will exceed all the beauty and splendor of
Gems, Pearls, Heavens, Sun, Moon and Stars, yea even the Heaven of Heavens,
though all were put together. This Text tells us, that our vile bodies shall be
made (...), conformable to the glorious body of Christ. This is abundantly
sufficient to set out the glory of our body at that day: for the body of Christ
now in Heaven is unexpressibly glorious. We have a specimen of this in the
transfiguration, Matthew. 17. 2. Peter, James and John were not able to bear the
sight of the glory there manifested, which yet was but a glimpse of that glory
which he now has in Heaven. Some Divines are of opinion, that the brightness
which Paul saw when he was struck blind and fell to the earth, Acts 9.
was the brightness of the body of Jesus Christ. Romans 22. 23.
Sure I am, that Christ's body is the light of Heaven: And if Stephens face in
this life was seen as the face of an Angel; Acts 6. 15.
if Moses his face did so shine in being forty days with God, Exodus 34. 30.
that the people could not behold it, how glorious shall our bodies be when we
shall be for ever with the Lord, and when our bodies of vileness shall be
fashioned like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ?

4. The fourth endowment is beauty and comeliness: The bodies of the Saints
shall be perfectly complete in all their parts; if maimed and defective here,
it shall be supp^ied at that day, which is a day of restitution of all things,
Acts 3. 21. And not only so, but all crookedness, lameness and
ill-favouredness, which are the fruits of sin, shall be removed, Jacob shall
halt no more, nor Mephibosheth complain of lameness, nor Isaac of dimness. As
the body of Adam in innocence was lovely and beautiful, complete in all its
parts, so shall ours be at the resurrection.

5. The fifth is majesty: Great shall be the majesty of the body at the
resurrection. If a good man in this life has such a majesty in his
countenance, as to cause men to fear to sin in his company; If Valens the
Emperor said of Basil, That he never looked upon him, but his countenance
strock an awe and terror into him: oh what majesty will be in the faces and
countenances of the Saints in that day?

6. The sixth is spirituality: It is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body, 1 Cot. 15. 44. Not spiritual for substance but for qualities:
For 1. It shall have no need of meat or sleep, etc. but shall be as the Angels
of God, Matthew. 22. 30. Non quoad Angelicam essentiam, sed Angelicas
proprietates. Tertullian says, That the Saints shall have corpora reformata
and Angelificata. If Moses was forty days upon the mount without meat and
without sleep, upheld by the power of God in the state of mortality, much more
shall we be upheld for ever in the state of immortality. 2. It shall be a
spiritual body, because it shall be absolutely subject to the spirit. In the
state of glory, the soul shall not depend upon the body, but the body upon the
soul. In this life the soul is as it were carnal because so serviceable to the
flesh, but then the body shall be spiritual because so serviceable to the
spirit.

7. The seventh is Agility and nimbleness: It shall be able to move upwards and
downwards, Vbi volet spiritus, ibi protenus erit corpus.
like a bird in the air; Luther says, That the body shall be able to move up
and down like a thought. Austin says, It shall move to any place it will as
soon as it will. The Scripture says some such thing, 1 These. 4. 17. We shall
be caught up together in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, as so many
AEgles flying up to their blessed Carcass. Upon this account also it is said,
That we shall be as the Angels, because we shall be able to move as they do: M.
Norton.
If the Saints shall be like the Sun in its brightness, why not (says one)
in its motion also, which the Learned allow to move a Million, and one hundred
sixty thousand miles in an hour: If so swift may be the motion of natural, how
swift the motion of glorified bodies shall be, we shall know when we come to
make use of it.

The eighth endowment is Powerfulnes: It is sown in weakness, but it shall rise
in power, 1 Cor. 15. 43. The power that the body shall have will be wonderful:
Luther says, That it shall have a power to be able to tess the greatest
mountains in the world like a ball: Anselme says, They shall be able to shake
the whole earth at pleasure; How true this is we shall know hereafter: Sure I
am for the present, That the weakest in glory shall be stronger then Sampson in
his greatest strength: and that the bodies power shall be so great, as to be
able to be the souls instrument in the enjoyment of God in all the highest
operations without intermission. In this life when the soul is busied about
high and sublime matters, the body presently faints, Dan. 8. 27. but then it
shall attend without any faintness or weariness. In this life the eye is
dazeled at the brightness of the Sun; but then it shall be strengthened to
behold glorious sights and not be dazeled at it: the body shall be elevated and
strengthened by God, to bear that exceeding eternal weight of glory that shall
be put upon it.

Unto all these glorious perfections and excellent indowments, I might add An
admission to behold with our bodily eyes the sight of Christ as man. That we
shall see Christ as man with these eyes, Job manifestly testifies, Job 19. 25,
26, 27. And that this sight will add much to our happiness is easily evinced:
For the sight of Christ as man is the next object unto the beatificall vision
it self: For the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily, and this does as
it were radiate through his body; hence there must needs arise (as one says)
great joy unto the beholder, Norton in his Orthodox Evangelist.
both from the eminency of, and our interest in this object. Christ in glory,
and Christ in glory ours; As much of the Creator as is possibly visible in the
nature of man, will be to be seen in Christ; as much contentation as the
creature can be made partakers of by the sight of any one visible object, will
be the portion of the beholders of Christ, as he is man. All this is in answer
to the second Question.

3. How is it possible that ever these bodies of ours should rise again, Quest.
3.
and these vile bodies be made like unto the glorious body of Christ?

With man this is impossible, Answ.
but with God nothing is impossible. My text tells you how this shall be done,
even according to the mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things
unto himself. The Lord Jesus Christ is almighty, and therefore he is able to do
it. Tertul.
He that can make a man being nothing, out of the dust of the earth, can
certainly repair him out of that dust when he is something. It is as easy to
God to give a body to a soul at the resurrection, as to breathe a soul into a
body at the first creation. Both Philosophers and Divines write of the Phoenix,
that first she is consumed to ashes by the heat of the Sun, and that
afterward of her ashes arises a young one, which is the same Phoenix risen
from the dead. The Apostle tells us, That the corn must first be cast into the
ground, 1 Cor. 15.
and there die and rot before it will spring up; which shows, that a
resurrection from the dead is possible even in nature. What is every night, but
the grave (as it were) of the days light? What is the morning, but the
resurrection of the day? What is winter, but the death (as it were) of fruits?
and what the spring, but the resurrection of them? What is death, but a pulling
down of the house of our bodies? and what is the resurrection, but the building
up of the same house more gloriously? And cannot the Almighty God do this? We
see by experience, that our most curious glasses, are made by art even of
ashes; and cannot the omnipotent and everliving God, raise men's dead bodies out
of ashes? The earth and sea are Gods stewards, with whom he has betrusted the
bodies of men; and when God shall call them to give an account of their
stewardship, they will faithfully discharge their trust, and will not keep back
one dead body. The grave is but the bodies withdrawing-room or sleepi^g-place,
and the time will come, when they that are asleep in the dust of the earth
shall awake, etc. Dan. 12. 2. And it is as easy for God to distinguish between
dust and dust, and to give to every man his own dust, as it is for a gardener
that has diverse seeds in his hand to sever them, and know them one from
another. A curious Watch-maker can undo his Watch, and put it together again. A
skillful Alchymist can extract one metal out of another: much more can
Almighty God distinguish one dust from another, as well as one man from
another. In a word: It is as easy for God to make our vile bodies glorious, as
it is for a beggar to put off his rags, and to put on the apparel of a King.
Our dear and Reverend Brother did fully believe this, and therefore he three
times in my hearing repeated these words; According to his mighty power, his
mighty power, even his mighty power, he is able to change this vile body of
mine, and make it like unto his glorious body.

4. Shall all bodies be made thus glorious? Quest. 4.


No: Answ.
The bodies of the wicked shall rise at the last day, but it shall be to their
everlasting shame, ruin and confusion. They shall be immortal, but they shall
be immortal fuel to immortal flames. The bodies of the wicked shall come out
of their gravos as out of their prisons, and as so many malefactors to appear
before an angry Judge. They shall come out of their graves as the chief Baker
did out of prison, to be hung in chains in hell for ever, where they shall
endure all kind of extremities figured out unto us by the sad condition of
Dives, who could not get a drop of water to cool his tongue. The bodies of the
wicked shall be as ugly, loathsome carcasses to look upon, and their faces
shall gather blackness and darkness, Isa. 66. 24. They shall arise with great
fear and trembling, and shall call to the hills and mountains to cover and hide
them from the presence of the Lamb. Oh the horror and astonishment that shall
be at that day, when the foul of a wicked man shall come out of hell, and be
again united to the body: How will the body curse the soul, and the soul the
body? How will they befool one another? Certainly this greeting will be very
terrible; the Lord grant we may never come to have experience of it.

5. What are the Characters of those men and women, Quest. 5.
whose vile bodies shall be made like unto the glorious body of Christ?

1. There is one Character of them in the text: Answ. 1.
If thou art one that have thy conversation in Heaven, then thy body shall be
made glorious: For our conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for
a Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile bodies, and make
them like to his glorious body, etc. If thou be a man that mindest earthly
things; if ambitious, covetous or voluptuous; if given over to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh, thy body shall rise, but it shall rise to everlasting
condemnation: But if heavenly-minded; if thy disposition and conversation be
heavenly, when Christ comes from Heaven, he will make thy body heavenly and
glorious.

2. If a real member of Christ's mystical body, Answ. 2.
thou shall be made partakers of the glory of Christ's natural body. Christ has
a double body, a body mystical, and a body natural: If thou be a real
member of Christ's mystical body, I say a real member, not only a member by
outward profession, but by a holy conversation; if truly united by a
heart-purifying faith unto Christ's mystical body, thou shall be conformable in
glory to Christ's natural body: And therefore it is said, That at the day of
judgment Christ shall be glorified in his Saints. 2 These. 1. 10.
Here he is glarified by his Saints, but then he shall be glorified in his
Saints, that is, in the glory that the members of his mystical body shall have
at that day. Col. 3. 3.
For Christ shall then have a double glory; 1. A personal glory; for he shall
come with power and great glory, Matthew. 24. 30. 2. A sociall glory, a glory
which he communicates to his Saints, and by which glory he shall be glorified.
For when Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear with him in
glory. And the glory of the members shall redound to the glory of the head:
Therefore the Saints are called, the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8. 23. If a member
of Christ, though but as the toe in his body, thou shall be filled brim full of
glory at the resurrection.

3. If thy soul be gracious here, Answ. 2.
thy body shall be glorious hereafter: If clothed with Christ's righteousness,
if enriched with the jewels of the Spirit, thy body shall be everlastingly
beautiful and glorious; for the happiness of the body depends upon the souls
happiness. If when thou die thy soul goes to hell, thy body at the
resurrection must go thither also: If to Heaven, thy body will follow it
thither also: according as thy soul is, beautiful or deformed, so shall thy
body be happy or miserable. So much in answer to the five Questions.

Use 1. To you that are the Saints of the most high God, who have your
conversation in Heaven while you are upon earth, who are real members of
Christ's mystical body, whose souls are adorned with the robe of Christ's
righteousness; To beseech you to consider the blessed and happy condition that
your bodies shall be in at the resurrestion, for then your vile bodies shall be
made like unto the glorious body of Christ, Matthew. 13. 43.
(...), shall be (...); then shall you shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of
your Father: All sin, and all sorrow, and all bodily deformities shall be
utterly removed; you shall be as the Angels of God in heaven, your bodies shall
be honorable, glorious, powerful, spiritual, perfectly beautiful, lovely
and majesticall, and (as Aquinas says) transparent like glass. Let the
consideration of this

1. Comfort you against the fear of death: As God said to Jacob, Genesis 46. 3, 4.
Fear not to go down into Egypt, for I will go down with thee, and I will also
surely bring theo up again, etc. So let me say to you, Feat not to go down to
the house of rottenness, fear not to lay down your heads in the dust, for God
will certainly bring you out again, and you shall come out in a most glorious
manner: Fear not to have this house of your body pulled down, for God will rear
it up again, and make of it a most glorious structure.

2. Let this comfort you against the death of your godly friends; for when a
godly man dies, nothing dies totally and finally in him but sin: Death to a
Saint is nothing else but sepultura vitiorum, a burying of his sin. Non homo
sed peccatum hominis moritur, the man dies not but his sin; for the soul does
not die at all, but is immediately taken up into the bosom of God; and the
body, though it be turned into dust, yet even this dust is precious in Gods
sight; this dust is part of Gods elestion, this dust is united to Jesus Christ,
(and therefore when a Saint dies, he is said to fall asleep in Christ, 1 Cor.
15. 18. and to be dead in Christ, 1 These. 4. 16.) and at the last day it shall
be raised up again. It is sown in corruption, but it shall be raised in
incorruption: It is sown in dishonor, it shall be raised in glory: it is sown
in weakness, it shall be raised in power: it is sown a natural body, it shall
be raised a spiritual body,

There is a Text in Job, which our Reverend Brother did mention often in his
sickness, and with which he did seem to be much refreshed, it is Job 21. 33.
The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him. Which words, though spoken of
the wicked, yet are in a more eminent manner applicable to the true Saint, who
sleeps quietly and sweetly in his grave as in his bed, free from all trouble
and molestation.

3. Let this comfort those that have diseased or deformed bodies, that are
troubled with the Stone, Gout, Strangury, disiness in the head, or any other
disease whereby they are made unserviceable, or at least not able to do that
good they would: there will a day come wherein they shall be perfectly healed
and cured: The Resurrection is the Saints best Physician.

4. Let this encourage you to be willing (if God call you to it) to part with
your ears, eyes, legs, hands, or head it self, for the keeping of a good
conscience; for you shall have all your limbs restored to you again at the
great day of restitution of all things. Famous is the story that Josephus tells
of one of the seven Children in the Maccabees, who when he was to have his
tongue cut out and his ears cut off, he said to his Mother, These members I
have received from Heaven, and for the Law of my God I despise them, and trust
that I shall receive them again: I shall have a better tongue at the
resurrection of the just.

5. Let this exhort you especially that are true Saints, whose bodies by grace
are become the Temples of the holy Ghost; to labor to glorify God in your
bodies as well as in your spirits, for they are Gods, and they are bought with
a price as well as your souls. To labor to keep under your bodies, and to
bring them into subjection: 1 Cor. 9. 27.
To yield your members as instruments of righteousness unto God, Romans 6. 13. 14.
and as servants of righteousness unto holiness. Let me beseech you by the
mercies of Jesus Christ who has redeemed your bodies, that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service. Think not any service too much for God with those bodies which shall
one day be made so beautiful and glorious. Let godly Ministers be encouraged
to wear out their bodies in their Ministerial employments, for they that turn
many unto righteousness, shall shine as stars for ever and ever.

Use 2. To you that are wicked, that is, who are members of the devil, whose
souls are beleapred with sin, who mind earthly things, whose God is your
belly, whose glory is your shame; To beseech you to consider the sad and
miserable condition you shall bn in at that day. Your bodies indeed shall rise,
but they shall rise unto everlasting cindemnation, Joh. 5. 24. and unto
everlasting shame and contempt, Dan. 12. 2. your vile bodies shall then be
cursed bodies, and your sinful bodies shall be tormented for ever with the
worm that never dies, and the fire that never goes out.

Use 3. A divine project how to make your bodies beautiful and glorious. If
there were a Physician here upon earth that could cure all your bodily diseases
and deformities, and make them immortal, how would you prize him? I have told
you this day of such a Physician, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall one day
come from Heaven on purpose to make our vile bodies like unto his glorious
body. Oh that this word were mingled with faith! Methinks if any Motive could
prevail with you that are Gentlewomen and great Ladies, this should, Behold a
way how to make your bodies eternally beautiful! What trouble and pain do many
women that are crooked endure, by wearing Iron bodies to make themselves
strait? What vast expenses are many at for the beautifying of their rotten
carcasses? Hearken unto me thou proud dust and ashes, thou gilded mud, that
labourest to beautify thy body by vain, foolish and sinful deckings and
trimmings, and think thy self decked in the want of decking, that pamperest
thy body in all voluptuousness, and make thy self by thy strange fashions so
unlike thy self, as that if our civil forefathers were alive again, they would
wonder what strange monster thou were. Hearken unto me I say, and consider thy
madness and folly: by laboring so much to adorn thy body with the neglect of
thy soul, thou undoest both body and soul. The only way to make thy body for
ever beautiful, is (as I have said)

1. To have thy conversation in Heaven while thou art upon earth, and when
Christ comes from Heaven, he will change thy vile body and make it like his
gloriom body.

2. To labor to be a real member of Christ's mystical body, and then thou
shall partake of the glory of his natural body.

3. To get a gracious soul here, and thou shall be sure to have a glorious body
and soul hereafter.

There is a saying of Bernard worthy to be written in letters of gold: Christ
has a treble coming: Once he came in the flesh for the good of our souls and
bodies: Now he comes in the spirit (by the preaching of his Ministers) for the
good of our souls. At the last day he shall come for the good of our bodies to
beautify them and glorify them. Noli oh homo praeripore tempora, do not oh
man mistake thy time! This present life is not the time for thy body: It is
appointed for the beautifying of thy soul, and adorning it with grace and
holiness. The resurrection is the time wherein Christ will come from Heaven to
make thy body glorious. How quite contrary to this do most people live? Let it
be our wisdom (with the children of Issachar) to have understanding of the
times. 1 Chro. 12. 31.
Study in this your day to get good and gracious souls, and you shall be sure
at the great day to have blessed and most glorious bodies. Labor to get your
souls beautified by Christ's second coming with justification and
sanctification, and Christ at his third coming will make thy body glorious
above expression.

HAving finished my discourse upon the Text, I know it is expected that I
should speak something of our Dear and Reverend Brother, whose sad funerals we
now celebrate. It has pleased God within a little space to take to himself
many godly and able Ministers, which without doubt is a very great judgment;
and the greater, because most people are so little sensible of it. And not only
a great judgment in it self, but a presage of greater to come; Isa. 57. 1.
For the righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men
are taken away, none cinsidering that the righteous is taken away from the evil
to come. The Rabbis have a saying, Quando Luminaria patiuntur Eclipsim malum
signum est mundo, It is an ill sign to the world when the Luminaries of Heaven
are eclipsed. God has extinguished many glorious Lights of late, I need not
put you of this City in mind of Dr Gouge, Mr Walker, Mr Whitaker, Mr Gataker,
Mr Strong, etc. nor you of the University of Dr Hill, and now of this godly
Minister Dr Samuel Bolton late Master of Christ's College in Cambridg. If I
should enter upon his commendation, (...).
I may truly say what Gregory Nazianzen does of his Sister Gorgonia, that there
is more fear least I should speak too little, then that I should speak too
much. He was a burning and shining light in this our Israel, an interpreter one
of a thousand: a man of excellent Ministerial abilities, a workman that needed
not to be ashamed, dividing aright the word of truth. He was one that did study
not only (...), but (...), not only to preach well, but to live well: His life
was an excellent commentary upon his Sermons. As Nazianzen says of John
Baptist (who is called The voice of the crier,) that he was all voice: a voice
in his habit, a voice in his diet, a voice in his dwelling, a voice in his
conversation, as well as in his preaching: So may I truly say of our Reverend
Brother, he was tota vox, all voice; a voice in his life as well as in his
Doctrine; he lived his own Sermons, and preached louder by his good
conversation then by his heavenly doctrine. Nam Vita Praedicatorum est
vocalissima. Gregorius vir per omnia incomparabilis, qui verbo and operibus
clarus splendididissimum lumen scientiae Ecclesiae praebuit, dum ca docuit quae
fecit, nec seipsum condemnavit agendo contraria quam docebat.
What Ruffinus says of Gregory Nazianzen, may fitly be applied unto our dear
Brother; He did those things himself which he taught to others, neither did he
condemn himself by practicing contrary to what he preached. He had not only
dona honoraria, but dona salutifera: not only gifts for the good of others, but
graces for the good of his own soul. There are many Ministers that have rare
gifts, but they are like a Pearl in a Toads-head, because their lives give a
lie to their Doctrines: But this our Reverend Brother had not only gratias
gratis datas, but gratias gratum facientes, he was not only learned but
religious, and (which is his highest commendation) he was an humble Saint.

There are four things (says Luther) that make a Minister, Prayer, Reading,
Meditation and Temptation: Our Christian Brother was not only a man of Prayer,
Reading and Meditation, but a man assaulted with many Temptations, with more I
believe then many hundred of Ministers are. He was often buffeted by Satan, and
therefore more able to comfort them that were in trouble, by the comfort
wherewith he himself was comforted of God. And let me take the boldness to tell
you, that he has left a writing behind him, wherein he has recorded all the
outgoings of God toward him, and all the experiences of Gods shining with the
light of his countenance upon him, and also of his withdrawings and hiding his
face from him: He has written down both the Apogaeum's and Perigaeum's (as I
may so speak) both those times wherein God was at a distance from him, and when
he approached nearer to him.

His desire to win souls to Christ by preaching was so great, that though he
was head of a College in Cambridg, and had no Ministerial charge of his own,
Dr Tuckney in his Funeral Sermon of Dr Hill.
yet notwithstanding he preached gratis once every Lords day for many years
together. The like is said in print of that Reverend and godly Minister Dr Hill
late Master of Trinity College.

Here I must not forget what has been told me since the preaching of this
Sermon; That our dear Brother, in the ordinary course of his Ministry, had
preached over the third Chapter to the Philippians, to the latter end of the
verse immediately before my Text: and behold how by the overruling Providence of
God (unknown to me) it has happened, that the last verse of the same Chapter
(which he left unfinished) was chosen for his Funeral Sermon. But though he
lived not to preach of this verse, yet he now lives in Heaven, waiting for that
blessed time, when his vile body shall be raised out of the grave, and be made
like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ.

Before he was Master of Christ's College, he preached three or four years in
this place, six or seven years at Saviors Southwark, and for some time at
Andrews in Holburn, to the great satisfaction of all the godly that waited upon
his Ministry. And though he be now dead, yet he still speaks, not only by the
holiness of his life and graciousness of his doctrine, but also by the many
Books he has left in print, in which you may behold a fair character of his
piety and Ministerial abilites. He was very orthodox, and sound in judgment,
he had no spiritual Leprosy in his head, witness those two Books of his, The
Arraignment of Error, and A Vindication of the Rights of the Law, and Liberties
of Grace. He was of a public spirit; witness that Book of his A word in season
to a sinking Kingdom. He was very careful in admitting men and women to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; witness that Book of his called, The Wedding
Garment.

The time of his sickness was long, tedious and costly; his diseases many, very
many, but his patience was exceeding great: he would usually say, That though
the providence of God were dark toward him, yet he had light within. A little
before he died, he said to one that was lifting him up, Let me alone, let me
lie quietly, for I have as much comfort as heart can hold. The last time I was
with him, I found him wonderfully desirous to be dissolved and to be with
Christ: I heard him say, Oh this vile carcass of mine, when will it give way
that my soul may get out and go to my God? When will this rotten carcass be
consumed, that I may mount up to Heaven? And when he saw any probable symptoms
of death (which he called the little crevises at which his soul did peep out)
he was exceedingly joyful.

It was his desire to be buried without any Funeral pomp; which puts me in
mind of a saying recorded in the life of Pelican, Melchior Adamus in vita
Pellicani.
of an Uncle of his who would not be buried in his Scholastic habit (as the
custom then was) testamento cavit ne aliter sepeliretur quam simplex alius
Christianus, He ordered it in his Will, to be buried as a private Christian,
and not as a Doctor; and the reason he gives is, because he hoped resurrecturum
se ad judicium, non ut Sacerdotem and Doctorem, sed ut humilem Christianum,
That he should rise at the day of judgment, and appear before God, not as a
Priest or Doctor, but as an humble Christian. This was the desire and hope of
our Reverend Brother, and this text that I have preached on, was matter of
great rejoicing unto him whilst he thought of that day when his vile body,
subject to so many diseases, should be made like unto the glorious body of
Christ, according to the working, the mighty working (as he three times
repeated it) whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. And so
I leave him in the arms of his blessed Savior, beseeching God to make up this
great loss of him to the Church of Christ in general, and to the University of
Cambridg in particular.

FINIS.
TO THE Memory of the Right Worshipful SAMVEL BOLTON, D. D. late Master of
Chr. Coll. in Cambridg.
COme, let our Petty brooks of sorrow fall
Into a full swollen stream of general
Sadness, in pursuit of that blessed soul hence
Put off to the eternal confluence
And Ocean of goodness; Happy he
Whose grief is swallowed in that blissful sea.
Weep we once more (whose Fathers hast'ned death
And Church Estate expiring with their breath,
Make us a lower sort of Orphans) we
Who found in Him still freshest memory
Of whose we were, that tenderness of heart
Which the deceased spirits seemed to impart.
And yet nor we nor she (from whose torn breast
Death snatched away th'indearing close lodged guest,
Untimely, misaccounting his years sum
And hudling up in's life, days yet to come.
Such were our hopes, and such the promises
Of a firm tempers seeming healthfulness.)
Nor we nor she to private loss must pay,
What we should in the common treasure lay.
In universaller calamity,
There Is sacriledg in such a privacy.
Such is the fright when the main body flies
Or gives ground, or when a Soldier spies
A breach in the chief-fortress; so were we
(Who fancied a blessed perpetuity)
Appaled when we saw his strength decline
Whom we wished as immortal as divine.
The College scarce could hear't, though by degrees
We were dril'd on into our miseries.
Was it death's mercy, or deaths cruelty?
That we might feel, or fit our selves to die?
We languish'd all the while in him, at last
Into th'Dead College all our Fellow's past.
This grief's too straight still, and he little knew,
What the World owed, that thinks his tears undue.
Does not, if such a part of goodness fall,
Goodnesses common spirit convey to all
A members sadness? I'n't the Church throughout
Its body pained when an Eie's put out?
Where shall we now such a meek Moses find
To recall wrangling Brethren to one mind?
Many will help it on, but who will bemoan
A sad Church rent into division?
'Twas the work of a soul, as his, overcome
With benign sweetness, such a one in whom
Dwelt the image of full Goodness, as above
Calm and serene in its firm peace and love.
One to the World so dead that evermore
In the worlds things he seemed stepped out of door,
As one that is gone for some few hours abroad,
Or whom some small affairs call out of's road.
Then was he at his home, then only free
When the employment was pure heavenly.
How naturally in spiritual discourse
Was his speech fluent, ready, without force
And unaffected, one might safely say,
Then he was in his temper, in's own way.
Like him who tired with a barbarous sound
In a strange country, happily has found
One of his natives: now he may reflect
On his own home in's well known dialect.
View his divine attendance, his soul pressed
On messages to Heaven, and addressed
To his immortal Fathers, not with words
Which malapert Buffons speak to their Lords:
Nor peremptory sauciness, built on
A fond God-levelling communion.
But in beseeming reverence. By and by
(As touched by'illapses of Divinity)
Raised into heavenly ardors: while just as
Bodies moved swifty, along where they pass
By their own violence impress a motion
Even on by-standing dullness. His devotion
Roused and enliv'ned all the neighbor hearts
By holy-magick touch more then the arts
Of Pulpit-Orators, more motive he
Snatched our souls up by vigorous sympathy.
Such was his zeal, a fire not nourished
By earthy matter, purer then what is fed
By popular applause and basest gain,
His zeal was of a far more heav'ly strain.
It never gave fire to Cannon, nor did light
Musquitiers matches: in no civil fight
Was it a conduct, or ere served in flame
To burn dissenters bodies or their Name.
Such searching fires earths mixture do proclaim*
When, like some wandering fires, from book to book
Skipt it? From Paul to Littleton or Cook?
'Twas pure and steady, powerful, nor fierce.
By gentleness it had the might to pierce
A sinners heart, ashamed to see more sense
In him then in himself who did the offense.
In preaching, prayer and life we well might see
Divineness: Man now, in mortality.
Plead not, blessed soul, against us, that thou art gone
As tired with us dull to be wrought upon.
That thou made have impatient of our stay
Who fondly loytring would not hie away.
It Is but our guilt, He Is more Good now, nor far,
Christs-Colledg Keeper still and Tutelar.
J.SEDGWICK. Chr. Col. C.

An Epitaph on the truly Religious and Learned Doctor BOLTON Master of Christ's
College in Cambridg.
Tired with a Body, and the Age, here lies
One that was Holy, Learned, Just, and Wise;
Lived when the Court seemed heavy, and the Sea
Grew proud, yet Patience preached and Modesty.
Though Fears urged Fears, and Hope pursued Hope,
Pulpits against Pulpits bandied, yet the scope
Both of His Text and Life was peace; fair Peace!
Heaven's Legacy, the busy world's scorned Ease!
By taking Care of Souls He did not mean
Providing Lordships for his heirs; so clean,
So spotless were his Aims: his greatest store,
Was Love and Praise; Promotion made him Poor.
'Twas not the practice of his Zeal to Groan
Against Plurality and neglect his One.
His Matter always did become the place,
Diurnals never turned the second Glass.
Called from the City, he succeed One
Turned out by Death, Fates Sequestration:
Which Place he served with cheerful Love and Care,
Firm Justice, open Candor, hearty Prayer,
(Free from base shriveled Faction, hungry strife,)
Even to the loss of Riches, Health and Life.
Stay, Reader, and bestow a Tear
On this Dusty Fruitful Bed,
The Spring will then dwell always here,
And Violets never hang the head.
Pray, the Earth may lightly press
Her entrusted Urne below;
May the same prayer thy Relics bless,
When they shall rest, as his do now.
T. STANDISH.

Upon the Death of the Pious and Learned SAMUEL BOLTON, Doctor of Divinity and
Master of Christ's College in Cambridg.
NOt that my gadding Muse affects to show
Her courser beauties to the common view;
Not that she thinks such harsh ill-tuned Lays,
As hers, are fit to celebrate thy praise;
Dares she present these verses; but as they
Who hundreds hold of others, yet do pay
Naught but a Pepper-corn: by this she shows
Though she brings little, yet it is much she owes
To thy dear Memory and honored Name,
Immortal BOLTON, Heir of lasting Fame.
Whose known deserts and unreproved worth
Needs not her slender skill to blaze it forth:
But can commend it self to aftertimes
Without the help of Elegiack Rimes.
Though others under brass and marble placed,
Keep not their Names and Titles undefac'd;
Though Monuments themselves decay, and must
Confess their ruins, and resolve to dust;
Though all things else be subject to the Laws
Of fickle Change and Times devouring jaws;
Yet wisdom has a never decaying root
And virtuous pains bring everlasting fruit:
And they that labored have and lived like Thee,
Their Names shall last to all eternity.
Nor seems it strange that virtuous men should best
Oblivion escape, which often involves the rest
Of things and persons, whose poor low desires
Are not affected with such high aspires.
The Principles by which most men do move
Are private Interest and base self-love:
So far their friendship and their hate extends
It self, as serves their own contracted ends.
Hence as that Earth-begotten brood which grew
From teeth which Cadmus in the furrows threw,
Within a while by civil discord slain,
Returned unto her Mother earth again
And scarce left any token to appear
To tell the ensuing age that once they were:
So bad men quickly vanish, and are gone
Buried in earth and dark oblivion.
But those like thee whose more enlarged breast
With better thoughts and purer fire's possessed;
Who make themselves no scope to which they bend
Their actions but the common good attend;
Cannot pass unregarded hence but Fame
Ennobles and perpetuates their Name.
Who ere did to the infant world impart
Some signal benefit or useful art,
Had Temples built unto him: Hence arose
Ceres and Bacchus and such gods as those.
Would truth dispense and piety admit
Of such like Deities, 'twere far more fit
T'account Thee one then those that taught us how
To tread the winepress first and hold the plow:
Since this grand difference 'twixt thee we find
And them; they fed the body thou the mind.
Wm W BRYCHE.

On the deplored Death of the Reverend Doctor SAMUEL BOLTON Master of Christ's
College in Cambridg.
TO mourn in verse, and write an Elegy,
Is even grown as common as to die;
Poetic sorrow serves but for a mask
To other passions; 'twere an easy task
For grief that is feigned, or at best but feigned
To boast it self in eloquent complaint.
But where internal sorrow has possessed
The very vitals, and corrodes the breast
With inward care, where the oppressed heart
Does inly languish with consuming smart;
The soul is choked, and the spirits spent
With mutual conflict, e're they find a vent.
Such real anguish, such unfeigned grief,
Does scarce admit the pitiful relief
Of sighs and tears; such dolor scarce affords
Imperfect sentences, and broken words.
The case is ours, whom sorrows violence
Has strongly touched with a vigorous sense
Of our calamity: whose deep distress
Our minds with grief astonished cannot express.
No wonder then in so just cause of tears
And sad complaints, so little pomp appears
Of mournful Elegies, and funeral songs;
This loss does more affect our hearts then tongues.
Our sincere mourning seeks not after fame
In these just Rites; let others then proclaim
Their forced sorrow with exalted cries,
Our real grief makes silent Obsequies.
W. LEIGH.

Upon the Death of the Reverend, his never to be forgotten Friend, Dr BOLTON
Master of Christ's College in Cambridg.
IS BOLTON dead? and shall not England weep,
That we no longer such a Saint could keep.
Alas! the world not worthy was of Thee,
The Saints above did want thy company.
Thy virtues, graces, praises, and thy worth,
No tongue alive is able to set forth.
Thou wast a burning, and a shining Light
In this our Orb; few left which shine so bright.
Thy Minister' all Gifts, thy Zeal, were rare
Thy Piety, no less thy gifts in Prayer.
And in a word (Blessed Soul!) Thee to commend;
Thy Praise knows no beginning nor no end.
JOHN CROFTS Minist. C. C. C.

FINIS.

