A just and necessary APOLOGY AGAINST An unjust Invective, Published by Mr
Henry Burton in a late Book of his, entitled, TRVTH STILL TRVTH, THOUGH Shut
out of doors.

By Edmund Calamy B.D. and Pastor of Aldermanbury.

EXODUS 20. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. MAT. 5.22.
But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say unto his brother,
Racha, shall be in danger of the Council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool,
shall be in danger of hell fire. LONDON, Printed for Christopher Meredith at
the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, 1646.

TRVTH, No longer TRUTH, but turned into Gall and Wormwood: OR, An ANSWER to a
late Pamphlet written by M. Burton, and entitled, Truth, still Truth, though
shut out of Doors.
IT was the law of the Areopagite Judges, that those that pleaded before them,
(...)
should plead without prefacing, and without passion. M. Burton quite contrary
to this law, first begins with a Preface, and then writes a book so full of
passion, as that whosoever reads it will acknowledge, that at least when he
wrote it, he was not only (...), (as he confesses of himself, pa. 2.) but (if
I may invent a word to express that which cannot be expressed by any word now
in use) (...), a man, not only of like passions with others, but made up all of
passion; and that whosoever will contend with him, shall be loaded with dirt,
rather then with arguments, and forced not so much to answer Objections, as to
wipe off aspersions. For my part, I will not defile my self, nor my answer with
reckoning up all the opprobries and calumnies that are cast upon me, not only
collaterally and obliquely (as the supposed penman of the Pamphlet, as he calls
it, to which he frames his Reply) but directly and by name. Only I crave leave
to present this true, but short character of his book. His words are swords and
spears, rather then words. He fights with his heels, rather then with his head,
and kicks, rather then argues, and whips, rather then answers. Scarce any man
since Montagues Appeal has written with more bitterness. I may say of him, as
D. Rivet does of Bishop Montague, Non potest vir ille s^ne con^iti^^ quenquam a
quo dissentit vel in levissimi^ ^o minare. Rivet. Apol.
This man cannot mention a man from whom be differs, though but in slight
matters, without a reproach. And as Plato said to Diogenes, when he trod upon
the pride of Plato, Thou treadest upon my pride with greater pride: So does M.
Burton tread upon me, and whatsoever is blame worthy in me, with a pride more
then Episcopal. And surely, if to be railed upon and reviled be sufficient to
bring a man into discredit, then must I be esteemed as (...), as the dung,
offscouring, and filth of the world. But to all his bitter invectives, I will
return the same answer that Austin did, who when he was told that his adversary
was too hard for him in railing, he said. It was an easy thing that way to
conquer Austin; but the Reader should perceive it was, Clamore, non veritate,
by loud crying, not by truth. And what Hierom said against Helvidius, Arbitror
te verita^e convictum ad maledicta converti. It is a sign of a man not able to
stand before the truth, when he betakes himself to reproachful language.

Non eget veritas Mauri jaculis, nec arcu.

Non taliclypeo, non defensoribus isti^.

Neither is it my purpose to meddle with the controversy between M. Burton and
Aldermanbury; I say, between M. Burton and Aldermanbury. For though M. Burton
says, That his quarrel is only with four men in Aldermanbury, yet, if the
Reader will lose so much time, as to look into his Narrative, he will find
that he calls upon all Aldermanbury to be ashamed and confounded for shutting
him out of doors, as he phraseth it. But I will not make this quarrel mine.
For as I was never thought worthy by M. Burton to be desired to give leave to
his first admission; so also I was not at all made acquainted with his
dismission, and therefore am not at all concerned in the business. And
although I shall be willing to open, not only the doors of the Church, but the
door of my heart, in admitting M. Burton in a brotherly and Christian
compliance; yet, notwithstanding I shall for ever shut the door of my lips from
speaking any more about t^is controversy. And the rather, because that whereas
in the book to which he answers, there are these words, And that all men may be
fully convinced of Aldermanburies love and good affection toward M. Burton, we
do here profess to all that read these lines, That if M. Burton will be
pleased to forbear preaching his Congregationall way amongst us, and preach
such things, wherein both sides agree, we will re-admit him with all readiness
and cheerfulness, and will promise to endeavor upon all occasions to come and
hear him; which offer, if M. Burton refuses, let the worldjudge, whether M.
Burton shuts himself, or be shut-out of the Churchdoors of Aldermanbury. To
this friendly invitement, he answers not a word; which makes me for ever
despair of his brotherly correspondency with us in our Churches. And truly, if
M. Burton will not only refuse to take a Pastoral charge in our Congregations,
but condemns our Churches, as having inseparable corruptions in them (for so
he says, p. 13. and repeats it twice) I say inseparable, till the very frame
of them be made new; wherein he sideth directly with the Brownis^, and denies
our Churches to be true Churches, as wanting a right foundation, and
constitution, page 14. in which, I am assured our dissenting Brethren will be
dissenting Brethren from him also) and refuses to give us the right hand of
fellowship, as it is, p. 13. and says, That people cannot with a safe
conscience communicate with us, as it is, p. 23. nor acknowledge our Ministers
to be their Pastors truly, as it is, p. 23. and will not forbear to preach
those dangerous errors in our Churches, no wonder that any conscientious
Presbyterian should be shie of admitting him to preach to their people.

Neither is it my design to answer this book of 33. pages, in all the
particulars, Aulus G^llius, (...)?
Nam quis leget hac? As one said to a Philosopher, that in a great tempest at
sea fell a asking many trifling Questions, Are we perishing, and do thou
trifle? So say I to M. Burton, Is the Ship of England a sinking, and are there
truths of the highest concernment now in agitation, and shall I stand trifling
away my precious time in long replies? I cannot do this, if I would; neither
would I, if I could. And besides; this Truth is now grown stale and
threed-bare, especially to this new-truth-itching age, and by this last book is
so drowned in Gall and Wormwood, as that it may well lose: it is name, and be
called Gall and Wormwood, as that star is, which fell from Heaven, Revel. 8.11.
and as clothes when died receive the name of those colors into which they
were died. And therefore I will not abuse either my self, or the patience of
the Reader, or an Athenian eye so much as to frame an answer to every
particular.

But that which makes me put pen to paper, though most unwillingly, is, because
I am in this bitter Pamphlet painted out to the world in all my worst apparel,
and rendered as Blackamore-like, and as odious as the pen of an angry Scribe
could make me. Now although, I thank God, I can say with the Apostle, Non
aesti^o humanum diem, With me it is ^ small thing to be judged of men; and no
new thing to be misreported and misrepresented: yet notwithstanding, because
this report comes from so Reverend a man as M. Burton, and some may possibly
believe it for the Authors sake: I am bound in conscience not to be so cruel
to my good name, as to see it murdered in my life time, and by my silence to
consent to the murdering of it, or to suffer such a picture to go uncensured,
when a few words will discover the maliciousness and falsenesse of it. And
besides, I am twice challenged by name to answer him, and thorowout his whole
book he speaks very undervaluingly of the Reformation begun in our Churches,
and lays stumbling blocks in our peoples way, which necessity calls to remove.
All which I shall (...), in few words endeavor to do.

To begin first with his Index expurgatorius of my life. I read of a Painter,
that being to paint King Antigonus that wanted an eye, painted that side of his
face only that had an eye, that so his deformity might not appear. But M.
Burton quite contrary labors to set me out in all my deformity.

Page 5. He says, I have not under pretense of enjoying my Ministry, abased
my self to the superstitious innovations of the Prelates, and thereby caused
many both Ministers and people through my example to fall into the same snare.
Let the guilty apply it. And let some of Aldermanbury remember Edmundsbury, I
say no more, verbum sapienti. Here M. Burton sets out himself in all his
embroidery, that so my picture might be the more ugly. But M. Burton may
remember that there was a time when he did abase himself to the superstitions
of the Bishops, as hundreds in this City can witness. And when he was
appointed by a Prelate to satisfy the consciences of some that did scruple
that wicked Oath, Ex officio, which he did endeavor to do, as I am credibly
informed. All which I relate to show that that which he says of himself is not
true, and what little cause he has to accuse others for things done 12. years
ago, that not many years before was guilty of as bad things himself.

And whereas he bids some of Aldermanbury remember Edmundsbury, I would have
him to know, that if it were lawful to boast, I could tell him, That for 10.
years I preached at Edmundsbury faithfully and painfully thrice a week. And
that there are many now in Heaven blessing God for my Ministry there; and that
I can have the testimony of all the godly people and Ministry in Bury, and
thereabouts, in a larger manner then is fit for me to desire; and that I
refused offers of 400lb per annum to tarry with them; and that I have been
often called to return to them, with expressions of their unhappiness in my
departure: but I am a fool in thus boasting, let the Reader pardon me, since I
am constrained unto it. One thing more I will add, That had not Bishop Wren
put in his foul feet, to defile those clear waters, I should have lived and
died with that people, whom I still love and bear in my heart, and am assured
that if M. Burtons book come amongst them, they will abominate it, because it
makes use of Edmundsbury to make me odious to Aldermanbury.

But M. Burton, page 7. Bids the Scribe put M. Calamy in mind how one at
Edmundsbury or Rochford, that he might not suffer for the truth, did prostitute
his Ministry to all those superstitious and idolatrous Innovations of the
Prelates in those days, whereby he became a snare in Mispeh, both to Ministers
and people: And that for so doing, according to divine Canon, he was to be
barred from his Ministry as Ezekiel. 44.13. And he bids him tell me the example
of Origin, etc.

The Reader may perceive by these words, and those that follow, page 7. and
page 8. That the indictment is drawn in very high language, and that I am
charged as guilty, not only of superstition, but Idolatry, and Idolatry as bad
as that of Origin, when he offered incense to Idol-gods; and that for so doing,
I am for ever to be debarred from my Ministry: Which accusation is so high, as
that I cannot but say as the Archangel faith, Jude v. 9. The Lord rebuke thee.

In answer to this black bill of indictment, I say, that so far as it holds
forth to the world any thing that is true, I shall be willing to own it. Of all
Austins works, there are two books of his which I have ever most prized, and
desire most to imitate, his book of Confessions, and his book of Retractations.
Who does not admire David in his Psalms, which we call poenitentiall, or Psalms
of spiritual restitution, wherein he labors to satisfy the Church for the
scandal he had given? And Solomon also for his Ecclesiastes, or his book of
his spiritual retractations? Chrysostom observes it of Paul, as his greatest
honor, that although he had obtained pardon of God for his sins, yet he is not
ashamed to reckon them up to the world, 1 Timothy 1.13. And therefore, I hope,
none shall show more willingness in confessing or retracting any thing wherein I
have erred. And if I have wanted the fore-wit of innocence, I will not be
wanting in the after-wit of godly sorrow and true repentance. Thus much I
answer in general.

But in particular to M. Burton I answer.

1. That whereas he calls himself, page 11. my elder brother; he deals in this,
not as a brother, much less as an elder-brother, that should have less
passion, and more discretion. And whereas he calls me, page 9. a Christian, he
deals with me in this, not as with a Christian. For suppose I were guilty of
all he writes, yet I would answer him, as Beza did the Papists (who, because
they could not answer his arguments upbraided him with the vices of his youth)
Hihomires invident mihi gratiam Christi, These men envy me* the free grace of
God that has pardoned these in me. And as Austin answered the Donatist (that
separated from all the Christian Churches in the world, and affirmed, that
there were no true Churches to be communicated withal but theirs, and were
also divided amongst themselves in minutula frustula, as Austin says) who not
being able to confute his arguments, reproached him for his former life, when
he was a Manichee, The more (faith Austin) you blazon my sins and spiritual
diseases to the world, the more will I commend my Physician that has healed
them all.

2. But I answer in the second place, That this indictment is drawn with a
blacker coal t^^n the truth will bear, and is as false as odio^. And herein M.
Burton deals with me, just as Christopher Dow dealt with him. This Christopher
Dow was one that undertook to answer M. Burtons book, called an Apology, or an
Appeal, and spends all his second Chapter in ^ipping up the life of M. Burton;
he tells us that. But I will not off^r s^ much injury to M. Burton, or discover
so much malice in my self, as to copy out that foul picture that is there drawn
of M. Burton: I abhor such dealing. I believe not the things to be true:
because I soppose them spoken out of malice, to render his adversary odious.
^re^ate the story, only to manifest to the indifferent Reader, that M. Burton
takes just the same course with me, raking up from the dead what he conceives
was done by me 12 years ago at least: which things, though they should all
prove true, yet, I hope, the impartial Christian will no more justify M.
Burtons practice against me, then they did Christopher Dows against M. Burton.
But when they shall perceive the charge to be false, they will conclude, that
M. Burton has committed such a fault, which a sea of water will hardly wash
off.

First, He says, Let the Scribe put M. Calamy in mind, how one ^ Edmundsbury
or Rochford, etc. It shows then he cannot tell at which of these two places
this Idolatry was committed, whereby the Reader may perceive upon what slender
information he builds his heavy accusation. But let M. Burton take notice of
that, which thousands will attest beside my self, that I left Bury (a place for
situation and wholsomenesse of air, so excellent, that Camden says, Sol no^
vidit ^rbem s^t^ elegantiorem) to go to Rochford, where I got a quartane ague
that continued many years, and s^ffered as much misery, I dare say, as any of
our dissenting brethren did in their banishment into the unwholesome air of the
Low Countries, merely and only to be free from conformity to Bishop Wrens
Innovations.

He says, That at Edmundsbury or Rochford, I did prostitute my Ministry to
all those superstitious and idola^rous Innovations of the Prelates in those
days; and I did this, that I might not suffer for the truth, and that by this
I became a snare in Mispeh to Ministers and people, and that for so doing I am
to be debarred from my Ministry, and that in this I did as bad as Origin, or
the Christian soldiers in Julians days, that offered incense to Idolgods. To
all which, let not M. Burton be offended, if I answer in his own words, p. 1.
Find me a man that has sharp teeth, etc. But I will not answer railing with
railing. Only, I say, this is a high breach of the ninth Commandment: For can
M. Burton prove that I did prostitute my Ministry to all those superstitious
and idolatrous Innovations, etc. I say, to all, etc. Surely, I never bowed to;
or toward the Altar, to, or toward the East. I never read that wicked book of
liberty for sports upon the Lords day. I never read prayers at the high Altar,
placed at the upper end of the Church, where the people could not hear. I have
often preached against Innovations, and once I did it at a public Visitation,
and was called in question for my labor, and should have been sent for to the
High Commission, had not God raised up a special friend to prevent it. I never
justified the Oath ex Officio, nor ever prosecuted any man or woman at the High
Commission. I never (to my best remembrance) at any time preached for the
justification of any of the Innovations. In some few things I did, I confess,
conform according to the light I then had, out of the uprightness of my heart,
not to avoid suffering for the truth (the Lord knows) though M. Burton
sitting as Lord over my conscience is not ashamed to judge of my intentions, as
well as my actions, and to say, I did it that I might not suffer for the truth:
which cannot but be a rash, if not a most unjust censure. And for those
particular things wherein I yielded, I had the consent of the godly people in
Bury, who did profess unto me, that if my conscience would give me leave to
yield to those things, they would not be offended with what I did, nor like my
Ministry any whit the worser; and how then could that that I did be such a
snare to Ministers and people? But how will M. Burton prove that that which I
did was Idolatry, and to be paralleled with the Idolatry to the Heathenish
gods, like that of Origens, and of the Christian soldiers in Julians time, and
for which I am to be debarred from my Ministry? Surely, when he wrote these
words he consulted more with Machivil, then with his Bible: I will answer in
his own words, page 16 Calumniate boldly, and some reproach will stick, by this
time our stomach being accustomed to the poison under his tongue, has learned
to digest all. But let M. Burton ask his own conscience how far in former times
he has been guilty of that which he accuses others. And if I should be so
wicked, I could name some of his brethren of the Congregationall-Way, that have
yielded far more to the Prelates innovations then I have done. But I abhor to
practice that which I condemn in others.

But that which follows is (if any thing can be) more oftensive and
scandalous, and renders me more odious and abominable.

Page 7. But you will say, you have repented: Would God it Were a repentance
not to be repented of. For Were it so, how could the old spirit of bondage
still remain, only turned into the spirit of domination? Or how could there be
such an Antichristian spirit in man to oppose the Kingly Government of Jesus
Christ over consciences and Churches, and to persecute all those of this Way?
Or how could men be still so ignorant of the Ways of Christ, and stand out so
stiffly against them, had they truly bewailed their former superstitious
abominations? They clamor on us to show them a Model, a pattern of What We
hold. We call upon them for sound repentance for their superstitious practices,
in subjection to an Antichristian Hierarchy, according to that, E^ek, 43.10,
11. If they be ashamed for all their iniquities, then show them the pattern of
the house. Thus far M. Burton.

The plain English of these words is this, That none ever repented of their
conformity to Prelaticall Innovations, but Independents. And that there is a
spirit of domination in all Ministers that are not of his way: and that the
government which he m^intains is the Kingly office of Jesus Christ; and that
they are all of an Antichristian spirit that oppose it: which words savor so
much of that spirit of domination and Antichristianisme, which he condemns in
others, as that I wonder M Burton is so blind as not to see it. But I perceive
by this very pass^ge, that let the Presbyterian Ministers meet never so often
to humble themselves by prayer and fasting for their former conformity (as they
have often done) yet, if they will not turn Independents they must still be
accounted amongst the number of those, that as M. Burton says, page 7. have
been vassals to Antichrist, and defiled themselves with doing the drudgeries of
lording Prelates, and Without any more ado, when occasion is offered, With dry
eyes to pretend for Christ in a Way of Reformation. Surely such kind of
language will never gain Proselytes to the Congregationall-Way.

For my own particular I crave leave to declare to all that shall read these
lines what I have done to manifest my repentance, and let M. Burton then judge
whether it be a repentance to be repented on, or no.

First, I went to Bury, and there made in a Sermon, a recantation and
retractation of what I had done, in the hearing of thousands. And this I did
before the times turned against Episcopacy, not out of discontent, nor because
I was disappointed of my expected preferment at Court.

Secondly, After my coming to London at the beginning of this Parliament I was
one of those that did join in making Smectymnuus, which was the first deadly
blow to Episcopacy in England of late years.

Thirdly, My house was a receptacle for godly Ministers in the worst of times:
here was the Remonstrance framed against the Prelates: here were all meetings.
I was the f^^st that openly before a Committee of Parliament did defend that
our Bishops were not only not an Order distinct from Presbyters, but that in
Scripture a Bishop and Presbyter were all one. I blush to sp^ak of these
things, but the judicious Reader will consider how I am provoked to it, and
will pardon me. The Lord knows I did these things to make reparation to the
Church of God, for what wrong I had done Her. For my conscience was at last
fully satisfied, that the bringing in of those innovations was but a
shoing-horn to draw in, if not the Pope, yet Popery, and it was the grief of my
soul that I had had the least hand in ushering in either the one or the other.

But what is all this, as long as I turn not Independent? This will not
satisfy M. Burton. And therefore he brings that plac^, Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. If
they be ashamed for all their iniquities, then show them the pat^rn of the
house. But may we not be ash^med of our iniquities, and yet continue to hold
the discipline of the reformed Churches? Has God showed the pattern of his
house to none of the reformed Churches in Geneva, Fr^nce, Scotland, etc? This
is a bold assertion: m^st we comply with M. Burton in his Model (which I
perceive by what is in his book, is far different from the judgments of his
brethren) or else we shall never see the pattern of Gods house? But What Will M.
Burton say to those Presbyterian Ministers that never conformed either to the
old or new Ceremonies of the Prelates? What Will be say to old M. Dod, M.
Hildersham, M. Ball, etc. M. Rathbane, and many others? Did not those reverend
Ministers see the pattern of Gods house? And yet it is Well known that they Wrote
many books against those that refused communion with our Churches, and were
their greatest enemies.

But M. Burton goes on to cast abroad his wilde-fire, and adds, That all the
Reformation here and there pretended to be set up in Parishes, has rather
Cam^lion-like received it is form from the fashion of the times, then from a
real, intrins^cal change wrought in the heart by the Spirit of Christ. The
best way of answering this pass^ge would be to rake a little, and but a little
in M. Burtons dunghill, and to bestrew him with two or three of his own dirty
flowers, that he may tell others how sweet they smell, but I dare not, Nobis
non licet esse tam disertis, I mu^t follow the Apostles rule, Romans 12.21. Be
not overcome of evil, but overcome evil With good. But how dares M. Burton say,
that all the Reformation set up here and there is but pretended to be set up,
and that it has no real, intrinsecall change, etc? The Lord give him a heart
seriously to consider the rashness and uncharitableness of this speech.

But he adds, page 8. That such as now glory most in their new Reformation,
were they not among the very last that held up the Servicebook, a^ loath to lay
it down, till very shame left it? Here the Reader may perceive that M. Burton
does antiquum obtinere, and resolves to like no Reformation, but what ends in
separation. And why may we not glory in our new Reformation, which in some
places has as much Scripture purity, as the best of theirs, and is joined
with unity also, which theirs want? And what is M. Burtons Church, and his new
Reformation, that it must lift up it self above all other Churches, and other
Reformations? If I may believe reports, there are divisions not a few among his
people, and -- But I must not believe reports: yet notwithstanding, if M.
Burton takes leave in a bitter manner to s^y, page 13. Does he not bewray his
gross or wilful ignorance, if not insolence, in asking what defilements are
still in their Churches? I hope he will give me leave in a mild manner to
demand of him, whether there be no defilements in his Church? And whether his
Church be purified according to the purification of the Sanctuary? And whether,
if a Church be not purified in every thing according to the purification of the
Sanctuary, a man cannot with the comfort of a good conscience communicate in
that Church? for so he seems to say, page 23. which is a Doctrine, as fa^re
from truth, as it is from peace and unity. As for the Service Book, let M.
Burton know, that at a meeting at my house, it was resolved by above a hundred
Ministers, after a long debate upon diverse weighty considerations, that all
that could in their judgments submit to the reading of some part of it, should
be entreated for a while to continue so to do. To this our dissenting
Brethren, then present did agree, and one of them made a speech to manifest his
concordance. This is enough to give any man satisfaction for the late laying of
it down. And if M. Burton means that Aldermanbury was among the last that held
up the Service Book, he is exceedingly mistaken in this; as he is in many other
things, as hundreds can witness for me.

And thus I have endeavored to answer so much of the book, as relates to my
former life and conversation. As for my answer to the other particulars, which
amounts to another sheet, I will condemn it to perpetual silence; and the
rather, because as Jacobs cattle by looking upon the rods, when they did
conceive, brought forth cattle speckled and spotted, Genesis 30.41. So my fear
is, left by conversing too much with his bitter invectives, I should also bring
forth as angry a Pamphlet as his is, contrary to my genius, and natural
temper. For as the Painter engraved his named so artificially into the picture
of Min^rva, that whosoever should undertake to deface his name should be forced
to deface the goddess also: So has M. Burton so interlaced and interwoven his
scoffing and railing speeches thorowout his whole book, that it is impossible
to answer one, but I shall be necessitated to answer the other also, which will
ill become a Presbyterian, nor well become an Independent; and therefore I draw
a vail over the rest. Epist ad Nepotianum,
Only I will put M. Burton in mind of a saying that Hi^rom relates of Domitius
an Orator, Cur ego te, inquit, habeam at principem, cum tu me non habeas ut
Senator^m? If he exp^^ts that I should account him as a Brother, and as an
elder Brother, let him not account me as an Heathen, and as a Publican; let him
not so bitterly inveigh against our Assemblies, if he looks to preach in our
Assemblies. And if he would be accounted as a Confessor and Martyr, let him
not expose my good name to Martyrdom, and therein make me a Martyr, and
himself a Persecutour: For it will always be accounted as great a persecution
to be branded in our good names, and stigmatized for Idolaters and
time-servers, etc. to all posterity by M. Burtons pen, as to be pillored and
lose our ears by an Episcopal hand.

FINIS.

