THE KING HIS MAJESTY'S Most Gracious SPEECH, Made to the Lord Mayor, the
Recorder, and the rest of the Aldermen of this Honorable and renowned City of
London, upon Thursday, November the 25, 1641.

And his Message to the Lords, concerning the Trained bands, with Theirs, and
the House of Commons Petition to His Majesty. And His Royal Answer by the
Earl of Warwick, and the Earl of Bristow.

With the Examination of diverse of the Irish, lately apprehended as suspicious
Persons.

And Orders from the High Court of Parliament, concerning the suppressing of
Papists.

As also, another Order for the recalling of the Trained bands, to their daily
Attendance, as formerly, Nov, 27, 1641.

London, Printed for W. R. 1641.

FIVE MOTIONS Moved Jn the House of PEERS,
FIrst, for the removeing of Papists from the Court.

2. For taking them quite off of all places of Command whatsoever, in their
several Counties: as Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Indges of Liar, and
Terminer, and Justices of the Peace, etc.

3. For confining them to the several places of their abode, and within five
miles thereof.

4. To restrain them from London, and from within-ten miles of the Court,
wheresoever.

5. For taking away from them Licenses, formerly granted, and to restrain the
Grant of them for time to come; according to several Propositions, sent up to
their Lordships, by the House of Commons.

THE EXAMINATION OF Diverse Irish apprehended as suspicious persons.
THE House of Commons being informed of some Irish people lately come over;
which were held to be suspicious persons, who lodged at one Mr. Rosses in
Rosemary Lane: whereupon order was given for the search of the said house, and
the bringing of such Irish, as should be there found in the house: to the end
they might be examined what account they could give for their repair hither.

And notice was given to the house of eight Irish men, and three women that
were taken, and brought thither by virtue of their warrant; whereupon Order was
given for their safe custody, and a Committee was appointed to meet in the
Inner-Chamber of the Court of Wards, and to examine them: Then the Irish being
thither brought before them, were examined what occasions they had hero in
London, and whether they brought, received, or sent away Letters into Ireland,
since their arrival: but they were found to repair hither only for
Necessities sake. And one of them in his Examination being demanded of what
Religion he was, answered, a Protestant: and being asked how long he had been
so, answered, three weeks: and being further demanded how he came so lately to
be converted, having bin a Papist all his lifetime before: he answered, that
he was taken one night in the watch, and they converted him, which caused a
smiling.

After their Examination, it was ordered, that they should be sent unto the
Gate House. But after their Report, being delivered into the House by the
Committee: upon consideration thereof, they gave order for their discharge.

And it was likewise ordered, that their Host, Captain English, an Irishman:
upon Information, that he had bin lately in Spain, should be brought before
the same Committee to be examined: who when he came, did answer very crosly;
and being asked what Countryman he was, said, his name was English, and the
like Answers he made to other Questions; for which peremptorinesse, he was
turned over to the Lord chief Justice to be further examined, with
specification, that good bail should be taken for his forth-comming.

THE Kings Majesty's Speech to the Lord Major, Recorder, and Aldermen of LONDON.
HIS Majesty expressed his gracious acceptance of their Loyalty, and
Obedience, and that he was thoroughly possessed by that Days Action, of the
Truth of their Affection toward him, as became good Subjects: and though he
had heretofore doubted thereof; yet now finding to the contrary, hereafter they
should find Him to bear in mind their loves: and promised them to govern,
according to the Laws of the Land; and especially, he would have great care
for the maintaining of the true Protestant Religion: according to the purity it
was established by his late famous predecessors, Queen Elizabeth, and his
Royal Father King James

And for that part of London-Derrie, which had not long since bin given to him
by Law, He would most freely confirm, and settle it on them again; so soon
as the present jars, and rebellion in Ireland is quieted. And for what other
requests they had made to him, he would have them in mind, and satisfy them
therein, with all conveniencie.

HIS Majesty's Message, to the Lords House, by the Lord Keeper.
His Majesty was expected at the Lords House on Friday last; and great
preparation was made for his coming; but because he came not, it pleased his
Majesty to send a Message by the Lord Keeper, as follows.

THat his Majesty thought it fitting, that the Trained bands should be
discharged, having long attended on both houses: not only in respect that it
was a great burden unto them, but also that he hoped, that there was no cause
of danger, which might require their attendance any longer.

When the Lords had received this Message, they sent word thereof to the House
of Commons.

The Answer of the House of Commons.
The House of Commons returned a Message to the Lords, desiring them to join
with them in petitioning to his Majesty, that they might be continued for some
few days longer, till the affairs of the House were better settled.

The Lords joined with them, and sent to his Majesty to Hampton Court, to move
him therein.

They who carried the Message to the King, were the Earl of Warwick, and the
Earl of Bristow.

His Majesty's Answer,
THe Lords brought this Answer from His Majesty, that he was pleased that the
Trained Bands should be continued for four or five days longer; till such
time as the House of Commons had delivered up their Reasons, for longer
continuance of them: and that on Tuesday next, he would be there himself, and
then receive them.

Die Saturni. November. 27. 1641.
An Order for the recalling of the Trained Bands to their daily Attendance
again.
To the Captains of the Court of Guard.
THis is to require and command your Attendance, as formerly, till further
Order shall be by his Majesty, and the House taken therein.

FINIS.

