royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


BY THE KING.

A Proclamation Commanding the due Execution and Observance of certain Orders
lately Published concerning Contributions.
WHEREAS certain Contributions or Weekly Rates and Payments have been agreed
to be answered to Us by the Inhabitants of diverse Counties in this Our Kingdom
of England, for and toward the support of Our Armies, raised for the just and
necessary defense of Us and Our good Subjects in the Time of this Rebellion: in
the Assessing of which Contributions and payments, as also in the demeanor of
Our Soldiers toward those who pay the same, diverse abuses and injuries have
been discovered to the great disheartening of Our good Subjects in their
undertakings for Us, and the manifest prejudice of Our Affairs. For the
removing and remedy whereof, Certain ORDERS have been framed and composed by
the Advice of the Lords and Commons of Parliament Assembled at Oxford, and
presented to Us, which We do well approve, and have caused the said ORDERS to
be published in Print, in a Book entitled, ORDERS Presented to His MAJESTY by
the Advice of the Lords and Commons Assembled at OXFORD, for the more
Indifferent Rating and Levying of Moneys to be raised by way of Contribution,
and to prevent the disorders of the Soldiers of His MAJESTY'S Armies and
oppression of other His good Subjects. We do therefore by this Our
Proclamation Declare and Publish Our Will and Pleasure to be, That the said
ORDERS shall be strictly observed by all Persons whatsoever, and be duly put
in execution. And We do hereby Charge and Require all Our Commissioners
entrusted or authorized by Us touching the said Contributions and payments
within the several and respective limits of their Commissions; And all Majors,
Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, and other Our Officers, and all other Our
Subjects whatsoever, whom it may concern, that they conform themselves
thereunto. And We do hereby likewise straightly Charge and Command all Officers
and Soldiers of Our Armies, That they submit and yield obedience to the said
ORDERS, and that they presume not in any sort to act or do any thing contrary
to the same, as they will answer their contempt therein at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the Eight day of May, in the Twentieth years of
Our Reign. 1644.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, 1644.


