Gods free Mercy TO ENGLAND. Presented as a Precious, and Powerful motive to
Humiliation: IN A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, at
their late solemn Fast, Feb. 23. 1641.

By EDMUND CALAMY, B.D. and Preacher at Aldermanbury London.

JOEL 2. 12, 13, 14. Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me
with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: and
rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for
he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil: Who knows if he will return and repent, and
leave a blessing behind him, even a meate-offering, and a drink offering unto
the Lord your God? Published by Order of the House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed for CHRISTOPHER MEREDITH, at the Crane in S. PAVLS
Churchyard, 1642.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.
AMong all the Mercies which God has vouchsafed to bestow upon this Kingdom
by your help, the procuring of a Monthly Fast, from his Royal Majesty
(during the wars of Ireland, and the unsettled condition of England) is not
the least. For by this means the Churches of England are set in a monthly
posture of war to fight with Prayers and Tears (which are the Churches
weapons) against all the enemies of our peace and prosperity: And may very
fitly resemble the Tree of Life, mentioned Revel. 22. 2. which yielded her
fruit every Month, and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the
Nations. I doubt not but through Gods blessing, this Monthly Fast will prove
an England-and-Ireland-healing Fast, if it be celebrated as it ought to be,
with weeping, mourning, and brokennesse of heart for sin, and from sin. Great
is the efficacy, and omnipotency of prayer and fasting: So great, Vincit
invincibilem ligat omnipotentem.
as that it would require rather a large volume than a short Epistle to
express it. And therefore I purposely wave it, as a theme in which a child
cannot want eloquence, and in which I should sooner know where to begin, than
where to make an end. As the Jews had their Monthly Feast, which they called
their New Moons, in 2 King. 4. 23. Amos 8. 9 Numb. 29 (...) H^b Antiqu^ty.
which the Word was preached, their shops shut up, and special sacrifices
offered up to God: And as they had their Feast of Trumpets, in which they
blowed their trumpets all day long (especially in their first New Moon) from
Sunrising, till night: So, Blessed be God, we now enjoy our Christian New
Moons, and Evangelical Feast of Trumpets. We have not only our Monthly
Sacrament Feast to refresh our souls withal, in most of our congregations,
(which would be as the hidden Manna, Revel. 2. 17. an unspeakeable consolation
to the Religious party, if you would be pleased (most, noble Senators) to
appoint by your authority some spiritual railes (as you have taken away other
kind of railes) to keep away all dogs and swine from polluting that holy
Ordinance) but we have also our New Moon F^st, in which the Word is preached,
trading cease, and Sacrifices of prayer, praises, and alms, are tendered up
to God, in the name of Jesus Christ. We have our Feast of Trumpets, in which
our godly Ministers throughout the whole Kingdom lift up their voices as a
Trumpet, and all the whole day* are either the mouth of the people to God, or
Gods mouth to Esaias 58. 1.
the people, showing unto England their sins, and to the people of this Land
their transgressions, and calling them to humiliation, and reformation. From
hence it comes to pass, That (if Englands just fears, and Irelands miseries
should so long continue by reason of our sins) we are likely to be blessed by
the providence of God, bringing good out of evil, with twelve National,
solemn, public Fasts every year, which (if rightly kept) will be as the
twelve Gates of the New Jerusalem, spoken of, Revel. 21. Every fast will be as
a Gate to let us in, into a part of the New Jerusalem of Mercy, and happiness
promised to the people of God, here upon earth. And there is one thing more,
which adds much to this new monthly mercy, and that is, That notwithstanding
your most weighty and important affairs, you are pleased to keep this Fast,
your selves in your own Persons, after a most solemn and religious manner
every Month. Which pious example no doubt will be a notable encouragement to
all the Kingdom to follow so good a President, and a mighty provocation to the
religious and solemn observance of it. It is said expressly of the King of
Niniveh (though a Heathen) that he came from his Throne, laid his robes from
him, and that his Nobles and people from the greatest of them to the least put
on sackcloth. And, as Chrysostom well observes, Their sackcloth prevailed
more with God, then all their purple robes: Quod non poterat Diadema, id saccus
obtinuit. Such a famous example do you hold forth, who are the chiefest of our
Tribes; to which I doubt not but the lowest of our people (unless they will
be worse than Heathens) will cheerfully conform.

This ensuing Sermon was preached at your last Monthly Fast, and it is now by
your command exposed to public view. There is nothing in it, that makes it
worthy the Printing, but only your kind acceptance of it; which is as a
Royal stamp upon some inferior metal to make it current. It is the property
as of God in Heaven, so also of all earthly gods who are truly noble, not only
to give great gifts worthy of the givers, but also to accept of poor and small
gifts, though unworthy to be given, when given with a thankful heart, as of a
(...) Art^xes.
handful of water, a cup of cold water, a poor widows mite, a little goats
hair, and semblably of this following discourse, which now becomes public
under your Patronage. The Lord grant it may accomplish that for which it was
Preached! That Englands mercies may be a motive, and a means of Englands
humiliation and Reformation. And that by confessing our sins with a happy
confusion of face (as the Text requires) we may prevent that unhappy
confusion, which is otherwise likely to come upon us. The same Almighty God
multiply all his gifts and graces upon you, be a Sun and a shield unto you,
appearing always in the Mount of straits, causing all Mountains to become a
Plain before you, and inabling you to consummate all those good things which
you have begun to do for this Church and State.

So prays your much obliged spiritual Servant, EDMUND CALAMY.

Die Veneris 25. Febr. 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons, That no man shall Print the
Sermons Preached at the last Fast day before the House of Commons by Mr. Calamy
and Mr. Marshall, besides themselves, for the space of these two months,
without the particular license and approbation of the said House of Commons.

H. ELSYING Cler. Parl. D. Com.

These are to give notice, that I appoint C. Meridith to Print my Sermon.

EDM. CALAMY.

A SERMON PREACHED AT A FAST Before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
EZEKIEL. 36. 32. Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known
unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel.


WE are here met this day to keep a day of humiliation, to outcry the cry of
our sins by the cry of our Prayers, and tears, to wrestle with God, with our
hearts, and with the devil: With God for a blessing upon England and Ireland;
with our hearts, to get and keep them in a frame suitable to the work; with the
devil, least he steal away the benefit of this day. Now as the Prove. 27. 1
Wiseman says, Who knows what a day may bring forth? Who knows what a mercy
such a day as this may bring forth? Who knows what a rare success this day may
have throughout all England? The Lord give a blessing unto it.

To help you in the work of this day, I have chosen this Text. It is the skill
of a workman, not only to make good work, but fit work. A garment is not well
made, though never so good, if not fit made: This has been my care to choose a
fit text. It cannot be denied but that God has done much for England, and that
England has done much against God. Now my purpose is to lay the sins of
England against God in one scale, and the mercies of God to England in the
other scale, and to call upon you this day to be humbled, and ashamed, and
broken in heart before the Lord, that ever you should sin against such a God.
There are but two ways to break a stony heart: As there are two ways to cure
a stone in the bladder: either by cutting out the stone, or by dissolving it
with soft medicines; So there are but two ways to cure a stony heart: either
by the heartcutting threatenings of the Law, or by the heart-melting mercies of
the Gospel; I have this day chosen the latter way. I will not carry you up to
Mount Eball, or Mount Sinai: But to the Mount of Blessings. And I shall labor
by the heart-dissolving mercies of the Gospel to break your stony hearts: It
is the duty of a Minister to follow God in his providence. When God sends
judgments upon a Nation, then must we preach judgments to that Nation; But
when he sends mercies, then must we preach mercy: Now God has brought England
into the school of mercy, and has placed it in the highest form, and has
made it Captain of the school. And it is my duty to teach you what lessons
you are to learn in this school. This Text holds forth one lesson, which is
the proper lesson for this day, and that is, to be confounded and ashamed, that
ever we should sin against such a God. I read in the second of Judges, that
there came an Angel of the Lord from Gilgall, to the people of Israel in
Bochim, and preached a Sermon of mercy, in which he commemorates, First Gods
kindness in bringing them out of Egypt, and into Canaan; and secondly, Their
unkindnesse in disobeying of God: And all the people when they had heard this
Sermon, lifted up their voices and wept, in so much as the very place was
called Bochim, that is, Weepers. This Angel was not an Angel properly so
called, but a Minister, as most think: And therefore he is said to come from
Gilgall, not from beaven: The Rabbines say it was Pbine has the son of
Eleazar: God has sent me hither this day as his Angel upon the same
Embassage, I am to reminde you of Gods merci^s to us: And of our ingratitude
against him: O that it might have the same effect: That we may all of us lift
up our voices and weep, and that the Church may be called a Bochim, a place of
weepers!

In the words themselves we have four parts,
1. A mercy supposed: in these words, I will do this: which intimates, That God
had promised to do something for the house of Israel. 2. The Author of the
Mercy proposed: in these words, I will do this says, the Lord God. 3. The
false reason of this mercy deposed, by way of proclamation in these words, Not
for your sakes do I this, be it known unto you O house of Israel. 4. The true
use of the mercy imposed: in these words, Be ashamed and confounded for your
own ways, O house of Israel.
1. The mercy supposed: I will do this: If you look back into the Chapter you
shall find, that God promises many rare Part. 1.
and great mercies to the house of Israel, Mercies in Folio, Mercies
unspeakable: God promises to gather them out of all Countries: Verse. 24.
And to bring them back to their own land; To cleanse them from Idols: And
from all filthiness: To sprinkle clean water upon 25. 26. 30.
them: To give them a new heart, and a new spirit: And to take away their
hearts of stone, and to give them a heart of fiesh: And to multiply all outward
blessings upon them, etc. Observe from hence;

That God does sometimes show mercy to a Nation when it Doctr. 1.
least deserves it, and least expects it.

This is apparent out of the text: When Ezekiel wrote these words, the house of
Israel was in the house of bondage, Captive in Babylon. Their condition was so
desperate in regard of their misery, that Ezekiel compares them to dry bones in
the grave, chap. 37. And God demands of Ezekiel: Can these dry Ezekiel. 37.
bones live? He answers: O Lord God thou know: for my part I know not. Their
estate was hopeless, and helpless: And it was as desperate in regard of
sinfulness, as appears in the 17, 18, 19, 20. verses of this Chapter: When
they were in their own land, they were as abominable before the Lord as the
uncleanness of a menstruous Verse. 17.
woman: And when they came into Babylon, they were so wicked, as that the holy
name of God was profaned by them while the Babylonians out of scorn and
contempt said, These a^e the people of the Lord, and are gone forth out of his
land: And yet behold God does here promise to perform rich and unexpected
mercies to such an undeserving Nation.

My desire is that this Doctrine may be a Looking-glass for this Nation, in
which we may behold the several miracles of mercy that God has bestowed upon
us: A Nation not worthy to be beloved, and yet beloved above all Nations of the
world; God has made us like Saul, taller by the head in mercies than all other
Nations: There was indeed a time when this Island was called Albion, ab albis
Rupibus; but at that time it was black, and defiled, worshipping of stocks and
stones, even the Devil in stead of God: We had our Druides, our Flamines and
Archiflamines; We offered our Sons and daughters alive in sacrifice, Non ad
honorem, sed ad injuriam religionis: Our religion was Tristissimum
superstitionum Chaos, as Cambden says: but it pleased God, presently after the
death of Christ to send the Christian Religion among us: Christ made haste to
convert England; Some say that James the brother of John, some S^mon Ze^tes,
some that Peter and Paul, but all agree that Joseph of A^imathea preached the
Gospel here, and here he died: And that which makes much for the mercy of God
to this happy Island; the first Christian King that ever was in the world, was
King Lucius a Britain; and the first Christian Emperor was borne in England,
even Constantine the Great: And when we came afterward to be woefully drowned
with Popish heresies and Idolatry; the first King that ever shook off
subjection to Antichrist, after he was discovered by Luther, was King Henry the
eighth; and the first King that ever wrote in Print that the Pope was
Antichrist, was King James of famous memory; God has made us not only
Protestants, but reformed Protestants; We have enjoyed the Gospel of peace,
and the peace of the Gospel for almost an hundred years: In this Century God
has multiplied deliverances upon deliverances; we have had our 88. and our
Gunpowder deliverances, but as Benjamins mess did exceed all his brethrens,
and as Joseph's shease was lifted up above the sheaves of his brethren; so the
mercies of these two last years do far exceed all the mercies that ever this
Nation did receive since the first Reformation, mercies that deserve to be
engraven in every one of our hearts: And if Achilles was happy in Alexanders
judgment, because he had a Homer to record his fame: It would no doubt be a
great honor to this Kingdom, if it had a better Homer to Chronicle the
passages of these late years: Give me leave to name, and but to name some few
of them.

First, The bappy Pacification between^ Scotland and England; God has freed us
from Civil wars, which of all wars are most uncivil; from intestine
wars, wars that would have eaten out our own bowels; from wars of
Protestant with Protestant, which of all wars are most cruel: Odia
proximorum sunt acerrima.

Secondly, The mighty turn that God has made in this Kingdom for the better;
for we were all upon the Tropicks turning to Popery, as some that are most
moderate do now confess: The ill affected party had got a mighty faction, men
in authority and power; pits were dug for the Righteous; Gallowses provided
for Mordecai, because he would not bow to Haman; dens of Lions for Daniel,
because he would not leave praying; fiery surnaces for the three children,
because they would not worship the golden Image; dungeons for Jeremy, because
he would preach the truth with boldness; We were like firebrands in the fire;
like birds in the snare; but God Almighty has made a blessed turn of things
for the better: the enemies are thrown into the dens and dungeons they
prepared for the godly, the pits they dug for others they themselves are
fallen into; the enemies of the Church hang down their heads, and the godly
begin to lift them up; Our Isaacs are delivered, and the Rams are caught in
the bush, and as the Wiseman says, The Righteous Prove. 11. 8
is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead; The wicked
shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressors for Prove. 21. 18
the upright.

Thirdly, The Protestation against all Popery and Popish Innovations; next to
that Protestation from which we bear the name of Protestants the greatest
mercy; God has brought a great deal of good to this Kingdom by it.

Fourthly, The great hope we have of a reformation of the Church and State. We
may now say in some good measure, as it is Canticles 2. 11. The winter is past,
the rain is over and gone, the flowers appear on the earth, the time of the
singing of birds is come: You know the birds sing early in the morning at the
break of day, and the flowers appear at the beginning of the Spring; Blessed
be God, here is a fair spring toward, the day begins to dawne, Reformation
begins to blossom, and we hope that the winter of adversity is past and gone,
unless our new sins do provoke God to repent of the good he intends to do
unto us, as he dealt with Saul for his new transgression, after he had
thought to have established him King, 1 Samuel 13. 13, 14.

Fifthly, The many grievous yoakes that God has freed us from, so many, as
that the day would hardly suffice to repeat them: God has delivered us from
Civil yoakes, and from Spiritual; from Monopolies; from the late Canons
mounted up against all good men, but now turned against themselves; from the
Star Chamber, and from the terrible High Commission, that wrack and torture of
conscience, and conscientious men; which was appointed like the dogs in the
Capito^l, to scare away thieves, but has for the most part barked only at
honest men; from those two terrible Oaths, the Oath ex Officio, and the Oath
of the late Canons, whereby the Prelaticall party thought for ever to rivet
themselves into the Kingdone, and to be above the hurt of the King and
Parliament; this Oath is now made the great Canon to shoot them down.

Sixthly, The discovery of the secret underminers that have for these many
years labored to blow up our Religion, and under the name of Puritan to scare
all men from being Protestants: God has done to us as he did to Ezekiel, he
has opened a door in the wall to behold all the trecheries that are plotted
in secret, and there is nothing devised against Church or State, but God raises
up one E^isha or other to discover it; in so much as we may say of England, as
Balaam of the Israelites, Surely there is no ^nchantment against England,
neither is there any divination against the Houses of Parliament. Here are six
mercies: Now there are also diverse circumstances with which these mercies are
apparelled, that are as remarkable as the mercies themselves; as we say of
some things, that the curious workmanship of them is more worth than the things
themselves, (as in a Watch or Clock) so these circumstances are as glorious
and as observable (if not more) than the mercies themselves; and these are
likewise six.

First, for God to do all this for England, and to do it in a legal way, in
a Parliamentary way. This is the first Circumstance. It was that which our
enemies did much threaten that we should never see Parliament more, but
blessed be God, we do see it to our great joy and comfort. It was the happiness
of England that in her first reformation she was acted by authority: Our
reformation began from the head, and not from the feet: And it is now no little
blessing, That this second reformation begins from the heads of our Tribes in
the old and good way of a Parliament, and not by a popular tumult.

Secondly, to do it in a peaceable way: It is with us as it was in the
building of Solomon's Temple; Here is no noise of hammers, or axes, but all in a
quiet way: Whereas other Nations have travailed through blood to a reformation,
All things are managed among us without bloodshed, blessed be God.

Thirdly, to do it in a praying way; not by the weapons of war, but by the
weapons of the Church, Prayers and Tears; In stead of fighting, we have
Fasting, and in stead of the enemies drums, we have Aarons bells sounding in
our ears: Our people have prayed up a reformation.

Fourthly, to do all this for us, when we were in a most desperate condition;
when all our faithful Ministers with one lip preached desolation and
destruction, when thousands had left us as Rats and Mice do a house when it is
ready to fall, when we Psalm. 63. 13.
lay among the pots fullyed with superstition; for God then to begin to make
us, as the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow
gold; to make us a glorious Church, to purge out our dross, and whatsoever
gives just offense, and to make us white as the snow in Salmon; (It is reported
of Salmon, That it is Psalm 63. 14.
an high hill shadowed with trees, dark, and full of pits, but when the snow
is upon it, it is white. Our condition was like the hill of Salmon, we were in
dark and dismal condition, full of pits and snares, but God is making us
white as the Snow in Salmon, and all on the sudden contrary to all
expectation is opening a door of hope for us, when we were in the valley of
Achor.) This is an admirable circumstance.

Fifthly, to do all this, for such a sinful Nation as England: a Nation which
has engrossed all those sins for which God has destroyed other Nations, as
namely, Contempt of the Gospel, Countenancing of Idolatry, loathing of Manna,
Crying down Preaching (...) the Idol of England, preaching against Preaching:
Teaching for good doctrine, That Bishops and tithes are Jure Divino, and yet
the Lords day is but Jure human^: crying up the holiness of Churches, and at the
same time crying down the frequency of Preaching in these Churches: exalting
the holiness of places, and at the same time depressing the holiness of
persons, and the holiness of the Christian Sabbath: A nation guilty of
Apostasy, Opposition to Reformation, Bitterness against the people of God,
loaded with blood-guiltinesse, blasphemies, adulteries, oppression, drunkenness,
covetousnes, and such like sins.

Sixthly, And to do all this for such a Nation, and not for other Nations; Not
for Germany, not for Ireland. Although we drink as deep of the cup of sin
as they, yet that God should give us no cup, but a cup full of mercy to drink
off; to make us like Goshen, when all other Protestant Nations are plagued as
Egypt, O what a rare Circumstance is this!

These mercies, and these circumstances are so great and so wonderful, as
that, if I had as many tongues as hairs on my head, they would not all suffice
to set out the praises of God for them: And indeed I can hardly forbear from
turning this day of humiliation, into a day of thanksgiving. Surely God
requires a thousand thousand Hallelujahs; And that we should bless him upon a
thousand stringed Instrument: Here is fuel enough. The Lord kindle a great
fire in every one of our hearts, to burn out all our lusts: to infiame our
cold hearts with the love of such a God: and to make us ashamed and confounded
that ever we should sin against him.

The second part of the Text is the Author of these mercies, 2 Part.
in these words: I will do this says the Lord God. Here I observe, That the
deliverances that come to a Nation, come from Jehovah Adonai. National mercies
come from the God of Nations; And that all Doctr. 2.
the world may take notice that mercies come from God, he ordinarily does two
things.

First, he delivers Nations at such times, and when they are in such straites,
as that none but a God can deliver them. Thus he delivered his people out of
Egypt, when they were in their worst estate, Cum duplicant^r lateres, tunc
venit Deus: thus he delivered his people out of Babylon, when they were as dry
bones in the grave past hope; this is a time fit for a God to work, as it is
Deuteronomy. 32. 36. The Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
servants, when he sees that their power is gone, and that there is none shut
up, or left.

He delivers Nations by such ways and such means that 2.
none but a God can do.

First, By little means: Thus he tells Gideon, The people that are Judge. 7. 2.
with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest
Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand has saved me; and
therefore he brings the Army from 32 thousand, to ten thousand, and from ten
thousand, to three hundred; and afterward delivers them without the help of
these three hundred, by Trumpets, Pitchers, and Lamps: Thus he delivered Israel
from a huge host of Philistims, by the help of Jonathan and his Armorbearer: 1 Samuel 14.
And in 2 Kings 3. 22, 23. he makes a fancy to be the foundation of a great
victory, the Sun shines upon the water, and the Moabi^es conceive it to be the
blood of the Israelites, and by this fancy were vanquished.

Secondly, By unlikely means: Thus God preserved Noah by an A^ke, wherein he
was buried, as in a dark sepulcher; dwelling among wild beasts, floating on
the waters without a Pilot to guide him; only the Text says, God shut him in,
and by his Genesis 7. 16.
power kept him from sinking: Thus God made the Jailer (an unlikely Instrument)
to wash the stripes of Paul and Silas, and Act 16
Revel. 12. 16. he makes the earth to help the Woman, that is, the basest and
the most unlikeliest of the people.

Thirdly, By contrary means: Thus Jonah was preserved from drowning by a
Whale, and was kept vivus in sepulchro; thus Joseph was made Lord of Egypt by
being cast into prison, and the blind man cured with clay and spittle, a way
more likely to put out his eyes than to cure him.

Fourthly, Without any means at all: And thus God delivered his people out of
Babylon; For when God turned again the captivity Psalm. 12^*
of Sion (says David) they were like unto them that dream; now men know not
what they shall dream of when they go to bed; we dream of strange things, we
do not study our dreams; such was their deliverance out of Babylon, a
strange, uns^ught, (...) for deliverance, just as a dream: now God does all
this, that it might appear, that deliverances come not from secondary causes,
but from his own arm and power.

Let this Doctrine be an other Looking-glass for this Nation; Englands mercies
come from the God of England, we may truly say with David, If the Lord had not
been on our side, if the Lord had Psalm. 126.
not been on our side when men rose up against us, they had swallowed u^ up
quick, and the streams had gone over our souls: There is not only the
finger of God, but the hand, even the right hand; the a^me, even the strong
arm of Jehovah, the only wonder-working God in Englands mercies; and this
will appear, If either you consider the mercies themselves; Or the time when
we received them; Or the manner how we received them.


First, If we consider the mercies themselves, they are so super-superlative,
as that we may say of them, as Protog^es did of a curious line which he saw
drawn in a Painters shop; None but (...) could draw this line; so none but a
God could do such great things: These mercies declare the glory of God, and
these deliverances s^ew forth his handy works; works worthy of a God.

Secondly, If we consider the time when we received them, for God suffered us
to be at the very pits brinke, and between the very teeth of the Lions, as
Daniel was, and like Isaac ready to be slain even Tantum n^n, and then he came
from heaven to help us, O beatos articulos temporis! O happy articles of time!
When my enemies came up against me, says David, then (and not before) God
fought for me.

Thirdly, The manner how God has brought about these mercies is so rare, as
that we may not only say (as David to the Woman) Is not the hand of Joab in
all this? but we may certainly conclude, The hand of God is most conspicuous
in all Englands mercies; Never since the first day of the creation of the
world, when God brought light out of darkness, has God more appeared in the
works of his providence in bringing good out of evil, than in these last
years, wherein he has suffered the enemies of the Church and State to dig
pits, and then he has caught them in the pits that they themselves have
dug; In the net which they bid is their own Psa^. 9. 16
foot taken; the wicked is snared in the works of his own hand. Higgaion.
Selah. As Christ whipped out the buyers and sellers by a whip made of their
own cords, which they brought to tie their beasts withal; so God has whipped
out the enemies of this Church and State, by whips of their own making; He
has taken them by their own iniquities, and has held them with the cords
Prove. 5. 22.
of their own sin: Goliath is killed with his own sword; H^man hanged upon
his own G^llowes: All that our enemies have done these many years has been
but as the weaving of a spiders web, Esaias. 59.
and the hatching of Co^atrice eggs, for they have consumed their bowels by
what they have weaved, and they are destroyed by the eggs which they have
hatched; God has delivered us not only by little means, by unlikely means,
but by contrary means; he has brought unity out of division: The endeavors
to divide the Nations of England and Scotland, have been the means of their
farther union: (we have indeed a saying, Omne malum ab Aquilone; but we may
well turn it, and say, Omne bonum ab Aquilone, for Scotland has been the
cause of a great deal of good to England) God has brought liberty out of
oppression: If things had not been so bad, they would not now have been so
good; if man's wickedness had not been so evident, Gods goodness had not been
so transparent; God has made our enemies Preservatives, to be their
Destructives, and has ruinated them by what they thought to be established;
their very rising has been their ruin; and by endeavoring to bring
themselves too high, they have overgrasped themselves, and almost lost all; In
all those things wherein they dealt proudly, God was above them: God has made
all Exodus 1^. 11.
our Destructives to be our Preservatives; and by those ways by which they
thought to destroy us, they have preferred us; and all this has been done not
so much by the wisdom of the Parliment, nor by the graces of his Children, as
by the very lusts and pride of the Adversaries: This is the Lords doing, and it
is mavelous in our eyes: and we may safely say with David, Surely the Ps. 67.
10.
wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder of wrath shall thou
restrain. Give me now leave (right Honorable) to make two uses of these two
Doctrines: If these mercies come from God,

Let God have the glory of all his mercies. Use. 1.


And glory with all his mercies. Use 2. Use 1. P^al. ^15.


Let God have the glory of all his mercies; let us say with David, Not unto us
O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name we give the praise: Not unto us,
because not by us; let us give the praise, and the whole praise to God: The
nature of man is wonderful prone to sacrifice to his own net, and to ascribe
the glory of deliverances to himself; Nebuchadnez z^r spoke and said, Is not
this great Babell that I have built, by the might of my power, and for the
honor of my Majes^y? and Moses himself spoke unadvisedly Dan. 4. 30.
with his lips, when he said, Shall we bring water out of this Rock, etc? as
if he had done it by his own power: and therefore let us take heed of this
sin. There are two things in every mercy.

First, the comfort and benefit of the mercy.

Secondly, the praise and glory of the mercy. Now God gives us the comfort and
benefit, but the praise and glory he reserveth to himself: this is like
Potiphars wife, that Joseph must not meddle withal: Z^latur Deus propter
gloriam. This I speak the rather, because I preach to them whom God has made
one of the Instruments of all our mercies; You are the golden pipes through
which these mercies come to us, and you must be as golden pipes, in suffering
the praise to pass through you, not reserving any to your selves: you must
sing the Angels song, Glory be to God on high, in earth peace; and say with
Bernard, Mihi plaeet distributio Angelica, Gratanter accipio quod re^inquis,
relinquo quod retines, abjuro gloriam, ne amitterem pa em. It was that which
the King of Sweden did often complain of, and much bemoan, saying, That God
would surely take him out of the world before his work was done, because
people did idolize him and ascribe too much unto him.

May we not give praise and thanks to the Parliament that Quest.
has taken such indefatigable pains for our good?

Yes certainly, but not as to the first Authors and Fountains, but Answ.
only as to the Messengers of the good things we e^joy; as when a great Lord
sends a gift by his servant, we may thank the servant for his pains in
bringing the gift, and give him a reward for his pains, but the whole praise
for the gift is to the Lord that sent it; so it is here, the great God has
made you (right Honorable) his Servants, and Ambassadors to bring great
blessings to us; And we thank you for your cost, and care, and pains, and the
Lord reward you a thousand fold; But the mercies are not yours, but Gods; And
therefore, Not unto you, not unto you, but unto God be all the praise. You must
be as careful to appropriate all the glory to God as Joab was to preserve the
glory of David, when he sent for him, to come to Rabbah and take it 2. Sam. 12.
28.
lest if Joab had taken the City, it should have been called by his name. Let
not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his
might, nor let the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that gloryeth,
glory in the Lord. It was the last speech of dying Chrysostom; Glory be to God
from all creatures. Let the Jesuits at the end of their Books subscribe; Laus
Deo, and beatae Virgini; Praise be to God, and the blessed Virgin; Let this be
the badge of the Beast: But let every true Protestant subscribe; Soli Deo
gloria, to God only be praise; for so Christ has taught us, Thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the glory; And therefore to him only be glory.

And as we must give God the glory of his mercies, So we must Use (...)
give glory to God with all his Mercies. We must improve Englands mercies to
the glory of the God of England; England is an Island encompassed about with
four Oceans: An Ocean of water: And of late years an Ocean of dangers: And
now I am sure with an Ocean of sins; and an Ocean of mercies. O let us add
one Ocean more, an Ocean of service, and obedience; as God has done singular
and extraordinary things for us, so let us do some singular and extraordinary
service for God. He has made England a miracle of mercy; let England be a
miracle of obedience: A Christian in England must not only servire Deo, sed
and adulari, as Tertullian says: He must be rich in good works as God has
Englands mercies must be made, Moti^a obedientia.
been rich in mercy. We must eight ways improve Englands mercies.

First, let us make these mercies, Motives to obedience and service. As God
made the deliverance out of Egypt a motive to the keeping of the ten
Commandments, I am the Lord which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage, therefore thou shall have none other Gods but me: Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. So let us make Englands
mercies a Motive to the keeping of Gods Commandments. I beseech you by the
mercies of God offer up your bodies a living ^rifice, holy Romans 12.
and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonab^ ^vice; ^et the great turn of
times move us to turn to God: Let us not take Gods name in vain, after so
many mercies; Let us not profane Gods day, commit whoredom, make our lusts
our laws, our money our God, after so many mercies.

Secondly, let us make these mercies, as so many cords and bonds (...) (...)
to tie us fast to God and his will. Gods mercies, says Austine, are like to a
Needle, that sowes two pieces together that are rent and torn asunder. Man and
God by nature are separated, but his benefits and mercies must be used as
Needles to sow them together, and to knit them to God in obedience. It is Gods
promise, I will draw thee unto me with the cords of love. Now God has reached
out many cords of love to this Kingdom, O let these golden cords draw us unto
him: Let us not be like Sampson that burst all his cords in sunder. I read of a
man in the Gospel whom no cords could bind, but I read also he was possessed
with a devil: It is a sign that the spirit of the devil is in you, and not
the Spirit of God, if these Cable robes of mercy will not draw you to the
obedience of Gods will.

Thirdly, let us make these mercies as so many Memorandums to put us in mind
of our duty: As Ahashuerus on a certain night when Memorandums of duti^.
Ester. 5.
he could not sleep, called for the Chronicles, and there was read to him a
good deed that Mordecai had done, and presently he asked what honor and
dignity had been done to Mordecai for this? So must we make a Catalogue of
Gods mercies, and keep them by us, and be ever and anon reading of them, and
saying What honor has God had for all my honor and riches and other mercies
received from him? And when we begin to forget a duty, then run to our
Catalogue. As God commanded Moses to keep the pot of Manna, for a Memento to
put the Israelites in mind of his great mercy in giving them Manna: so must
our hearts be as the Arc to keep Gods mercies, to put us in mind of God, and
our service to him when we are ready to forget him.

Fourthly, let us make these mercies Looking-glasses to see God Specula (...).
(...)
in, and not walls to separate between us and God: God never appeared more in
his wisdom, power, goodness, and mercy then in these days: And not to see
God in good works of his providence, is a curse, and will bring a curse: That
it is a curse appears Jeremy, 17. 5, 6. Cursed be the man that trusts in
man, and makes flesh his Arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord; for he
shall be like a heath in the desert, and shall not see when good ^mes: And that
it brings a curse appears Psalm. 28. 5. Because they regard not the works of
the Lord, nor the operation of his hands; he shall destroy them and not build
them up.

Fifthly, let us make these mercies as so many footstools to raise us up
Footstooles of obedience.
to higher mercies; Let us use these mercies reflexively: not terminatively:
And say as good Fulgentius did, when he saw the glory of Rome, Sitalis est Roma
terrestris, qualis est Roma caelestis? If Gods mercies be so rare here in the
valley of tears, what are they in the mountain of joy?

Sixthly, let us make these mercies as so many bridges to lead us over to better
mercies: to such mercies, which are at Gods right Bridges to obedience.
hand, and in his right hand; and which are the mercies of his right hand. All
temporal mercies are the mercies of Gods left hand, which he gives to many
whom he will put at his left hand at the day of Judgment. Spiritual mercies
are the mercies of his right hand, and mercies in his right hand, For his right
hand is full of righteousness: Let us be earnest Petitioners for those
mercies, Psalm. 48. 10. Psalm. 16. 11.
which whosoever has, shall be placed at the right hand of Christ, at the day
of Judgment; and shall be made partakers of those everlasting pleasures, which
are at Gods right hand. Let us not be like that woman, that when ^er husband
sent her a jewel as a token of his love, to put her in mind of him, fell in
love with the jewel and forgot her husband. Let us not make these mercies our
God, but bridges to lead us over unto God.

Seventhly, let us make these mercies as so many Cordials to Cordialls of
comfort
comfort us in all distresses: and if God at any time should bring this Nation
into new straites and dangers; Let us say as Manoahs wife did unto Manoah, If
the Lord did intend to destroy England, Judge. 13. 23.
surely he would never have bestowed so many mercies upon England.

Eighthly, let us make these mercies as so many means, and instruments Media
and instrumenta obedientiae.
of service; Let us serve God with our health, wealth, and parts; Let us serve
him, Cheerfully, liberally, thankefully, fruitfully, lest God send upon us
that curse threatened, Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy
God with joyfulnesse, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all
things: Therefore shall thou serve thine enemies which the Lord shall send
against thee, in hunger, in thirst, in nakedness, in want of all things: And
he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck until he has destroyed thee: Let
us rend our hearts and not our garments, and turn to the Lord, for he is
gracious: Joel 2. 13.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever: There Psalm. 137.
is mercy with thee O Lord, and therefore thou art to be feared: Let us fear
to sin against a God of such mercy; Let us admire these mercies, and admire
him for his mercies: And say with David, Who am I O Lord, and what is mine
house that thou should bring me hitherto? and is this the manner of man O
Lord God? And let us pray that excellent prayer, Domine da gratitudinem cum
misericordia, (...) Sam. 7. 18.
nolo misericordiam sine gratitudine; Lord give us thankful hearts with thy
mercies, Lord give us obedient hearts with thy mercies, Rather let us be
without mercy, than not to have grace to glorify thee with thy mercies.

The third part of the Text is, the false reason of the mercy deposed, and that
by way of Proclamation; Be it known unto Part 3.
you O House of Israel, that it is not for your sakes that I do this; Nec per
vos, nec propter vos; Neither by you, nor for you; It is I, that do it, says
the Lord; and for my own names sake I do it; Not for your sakes. This
Proclamation is very often inculcated for fear lest men should ascribe mercies
to their own merits, which all are very apt to do. It is said in the 22.
verse of this Ezekiel. 36. 22.
Chapter; Say unto the House of Israel; Thus says the Lord, I do not this for
your sakes O House of Israel, but for my holy names sake, which you have
profaned among the heathen whither you went; Thus Ezekiel 20. 44. And you
shall know that I am the Lord, when I have wrought with you for my names sake,
not according to your wicked ways, nor according to your corrupt doing^, O ye
house of Israel, says the Lord; Thus also, Deuteronomy 9. 4. Speak not thou
in thine heart (for many will think so in their hearts, though ashamed to
speak it with their tongues) after that the Lord thy God has cast them out
from before thee, saying, For my righteousness the Lord has brought me to
possess this Land; But for the wickedness of these Nations the Lord does drive
them out from before thee; This is repeated again at the 5 verse, that it may
not be forgotten; Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightnes of thy heart
do thou go to possess the land, etc. This is also again repeated verse 6.
Understand therefore, that the Lord thy God gives thee not this good land to
possess it for thy righteousness, for thou art a stiffenecked people; And in
the 7. verse he calls upon us to remember it, and not forget it. Hence observe,

That National mercies come from free grace, not from free will; Doct. 3.
Not from man's goodness, but Gods goodness. My desire is, that this Doctrine may
be a third Looking-glass for England. If any shall ask, How it comes to
pass, that England has been like No^s A^ke, safe and secure, when all other
Nations have been drowned with a sea of blood: Why England is like Gideons dry
fleece, when all other Nations are like his wet fleece bedewed with miseries
and lamentations: No other answer can be returned; but Gods free grace and
mercy: I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy: May I not do what I will
with mine own? May not a man that has two debtors equally indebted to him,
spare the one and not the other, as he pleases? Be it known unto you, O house
of England, It is not for your sakes, for you are a stiffenecked people, but
for my holy names sake.

But does not God indent and Covenant with a Nation, upon its repentance, to
show mercy, how then is Gods mercy free? Quest.


Repentance it self is of Gods free grace, 2 Timothy 2. 25. In meekness
instructing them that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will Answ. 1.
give them repentance. Repentance is Gods free gift, and therefore Christ is
said to be exalted by God, to be a Prince and a Savior, for Acts 5. 31.
to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins.

Repentance is not the cause for which God spares a Nation, 2.
but only a qualification of that Nation which God will spare: Repentance
denotes the Persons whom God has freely promised to pardon, but not the c^se
for which he promises to pardon; as the Gnomon in the Dial is not the cause
why the Clock goes right or wrong, but only an Indication whether it go
right or wrong.

If Englands mercies come from Gods goodness and not our Use. 1.
righteousness, let us not think our selves more righteous than Ireland,
because we are not wallowing in blood as Ireland; Think you, says Christ,
that those eighteen upon whom the tower in Luke 13.
Silce fell, are sinners above all men that dwell in Jerusalem? I tell you nay:
I that am the Judge of the world, I tell you nay. The nature of man is prone to
censure Germany and Ireland as horrible sinners above others, but I tell you
nay, says Christ. When the Barbarians saw the Viper skip upon the hand of
Paul, they concluded presently, Sure^y this man is a murderer; but they were
Ac^. 2^.
Barbarians, and in this they acted the part of Barbarians. It is a barbarous
action to censure them that are punished by God, to be the greatest of sinners.
Judicia Deinm sunt t^mere discutienda, sed formidoloso silentio vener and a
says Gregory. Be it known unto you, O England, it is not for your
righteousness you are spared, not because you are better, but because I love
you better; not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord, for if Ireland be
sinful, England has a great share in this sinfulness, because it has taken
no more care to bring those Popish Rebels to the knowledge of the Gospe^ of
Jesus Christ. Let England say as Lysima^hus did, (who was on a sudden called
forth out of a house, where he was at supper, (by his good Genius, as the
Heathen say,) and as soon as ever he was out of doors, the house fell down and
killed them all which were within) Good God, says he, to what evil am I
reserved! So let Eng^and say, Good Lord to what super-transcendent judgment am
I reserved, if I repent not. And this makes way for the second use.

If Englands mercies come from free grace, let not England presume upon Gods
mercies, as i^ intailed upon them and their Use. 2.
posterity: for it is as free for God to take away his mercies, as it was free
to give them; And thus Christ tells the Jews in the forementioned place, I tell
you n^y, but except ye repent ye shall likewise perish; and so they did within
forty years after, with a severe destruction. And so do I say to England,
Except England repent, England also shall perish; let not England be high
minded but fear. God has a devouring sword for England, as well as Ireland:
And therefore let England this day humble it self in dust and ashes, for
though God defer Englands judgment, longer than Irelands, or Germanies, yet
as sure as there is a God in Heaven, unless we repent, we also shall perish:
Gods forbearance is no acquittance: It is one thing to forbear a debtor, and
another thing to acquit a debtor: The longer God is fetching about his hand,
the heavier will the blow be when he strikes. What so calm as the Sea? but yet
when a storm comes, what so tempestuous? What so blunt as iron? but when it is
sh^rpned, what more sharp? None so patient and merciful as God, but yet when
he begins to strike, and his anger is kindled, how unexpressible is his fury?
Consider this you that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver you.

If free grace has preserved England, let England bless God for free grace,
and say, as it is Lament. 3. 22. It is the Lords mercy Use 3.
that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not; not because our
sins fail not, for our sins are as many as our mercies, but because his
compassions fail not: It is the Lords mercy that we sinful men and women are
not consumed; O give God the glory of free grace, as it is expressed, Malachi
3. 6. I am the Lord, I change not, therefore you sons of Jacob are not
consumed: Not because you have not changed your God, not because you are good
and righteous, but because I am unchangeable, therefore you sons of Jacob are
not consumed. Let us say as David, We have not got our Psalm. 44. 3.
peace and plenty by our own sword, neither has our own arm saved us, but
thy right hand, and thy arm, and the light of thy countenan^e, because thou
had a favor unto us. If thou art converted, bless God for free grace: For
who made thee to differ from another? and what have thou which thou have not
received? and if thou did receive 1 Cor. 4. 7.
it; why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? Let us ascribe all
our Deliverances and all our mercies, the mercy of the Pacification, the mercy
of Reformation, the mercy of the Union of both Houses of Parliament, the
discovery of all plots and treasons against this Church and State, our freedom
from all our yoaks, and all the good things that God has done for us unto free
grace, and say as God to Zerubbabel, Not by might no^ by power, but by my
Spirit, says the Lord of hosts. Who art thou, O great mountain, before
Zerubbabel? thou shall become a plain, and he shall Zach. 4. 6, 7.
bring forth the head stone thereof with shouting, and crying, Grace, grace
unto it: Let grace, grace be our constant acclamation.

If free grace has preserved England, not free will, Let England Use (...).
maintain free grace above free will. I find in history, that Pelagius the
greatest enemy to free grace that ever the world had, was borne in England;
and I am sure that England of late years has been too great a friend to
Pelagianisme, under the name of Arminianisme. Bradwardine an Englishman
complains of his time, (as Hierome before had done of Arianisme) That almost
all the world was gone after the error of Pelagius, and he cries out, Exurge
Deus, and judica causam tuam: I am confident, that this complaint, and this
prayer might justly have been taken up in reference to England these few years
past: for there was A mighty faction risen up in the Church (so I dare now call
it, blessed be God) who advanced free will above free grace, and subjected the
power of grace to the power of free will: which faction prevailed so far, as
that whosoever was not an Arminian, was e^mine, A doctrinall Puritan (as he
was then termed.) The Universities were poisoned with this doctrine, and all,
preferment stre^med this way. We were come to that height, that the doctrine of
Arminianisme was accounted the doctrine of the Church of England. And
therefore, I beseech you (right Honorable) to take this into your most serious
consideration: Place free grace in its throne; advance free grace, that has so
much advanced you: root out Arminianisme; settle our doctrine (not only our
discipline) that there may be no shadow of plea in it for an Arminian. King
James of famous memory, in a Declaration written to the States of Holland, calls
Arminius, the enemy of God: and a book of Bertius, of the Apostasy of the
Saints, A blasphemous book, whose very Title makes it worthy the fire: and he
persuades the Low Countries betimes to root out those heresies and schisms,
which if they suffered to have the reins, would bring the curse of God upon
them, infamy through all the Reformed Churches, and a perpetual rent and
distraction in the whole body of their State. I speak to wise men, consider
what I say. And certain it is, if temporal deliverances be the fruits of Gods
free grace, much more are spiritual and eternal. Therefore we are said to be
justified freely by his grace, and to be Elected according to the good pleasure
of his will; and whereas the Ephesians. 2. Eph^. 1. Rom 6 23.
Apostle says, that the wages of sin is death, he does not add, the wages
of grace is eternal life, but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. It is not free will, but free grace that puts the difference
between Jacob and Esau; It is not of him that Rom 9.
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. It is an
excellent saying of Augustine, Timeo ego animae meae salutem aliqua ex part
libero arbitrio committere, Iam afraid to commit the least Iota of my salvation
to free will: and the same Father does much and often commend a saying of
Cyprian, In nullo gloriandum, quoniaem nostrum nihill est, We must glory in
nothing, because nothing is ours. Bernard most sweetly, Horreo quicquid de meo
est, ut sim meus, I abhor whatsoever is mine, that I may be mine. Bucer
likewise has these words, Si v^l tantillum boni a Deo non est, Deus non est,
if the least beam of holiness be in us without the efficacious work of Gods
grace, he is no longer a God. Now surely the act of assenting to the offer of
grace, is the chief work of conversion; And the Arminians deny this to be
effectually, inseparably, and inevitably from God, which is to ungod God, in
the opinion of Bucer.

If Englands mercies come from free grace, let England serve God freely. God
loves a free people, a free will offering: let the Use 5.
service of God come freely from us; God gives us freely, let us give freely to
Ireland, The Papists upbraid us Protestants (I know not how truly) that there
was never any Law made for rates for the relief of the poor, till the
reformation of Religion; in times of Popery they gave freely without
compulsion. It is for the hardness of our hearts that there needs such a law:
let us be ashamed to ^e out-striped by Papists in our free serving of God. I
deny not, but that it is lawful for a man with Moses to have an eye to the
recompense of reward; but there is a great deal of difference between Amor
mercenarius, and amor mercedis, between mercinary love, and the love of the
reward: Mercinary love is to serve God only for reward, this is meretricious
love, this is to serve our selves, not God; this is to make use of God, to
enjoy our selves; but the love of the reward, is to make Heaven a motive of our
service, but not the last, nor the greatest. A right Christian loves Heaven for
God, not God only for Heaven. He that loves God only for heaven, loves God
for that which is inferior to God. Chrysost^me has an excellent saying, If
God should command me to obey him, and afterward throw me into hell, yet I
would obey him. This is my Heaven to be obedient, this is my meat and drink to
do the will of God. Merces amoris amor, He that loves God, that loved us
freely, will love him freely.

The fourth and last part of the Text, is the true Use we are to 4 Part.
make of Gods mercies, contained in these words, Be ashamed and confounded for
your own ways O house of Israel. The words in the Hebrew are both of the same
signification; be ashamed and ashamed. Erubescite and rubore afficiamini, So
Junius: blush for shame, and be confounded with shame, for your own ways,
that is, for your own evil ways, and for your doings that are not good (as
it is expounded in the former verse) O house of Israel. Give me leave to alter
the persons, and in stead of the House of Israel to put in the house of
England, and so it will suit most excellently to this Assembly here gathered
together this day. For the House of Commons is the house of England
representatively. Let us then read the words thus: Be ashamed and ashamed, for
your own evil ways, O you house of England.

That the contemplation of Gods free mercy to Nations and D^ct. 4.
persons ought to be a mighty incentive, and a most effectual argument to make
them ashamed, and ashamed, ashamed for sin for the time past, and ashamed to
sin for the time to come.

This is a motive that the Prophet Ezekiel does often use, Nevertheless, I
will remember my covenant with thee, and I will establish unto thee an
everlasting covenant, then shall thou remember Ezekiel. 16. 61, 62, 63.
thy ways, and be ashamed, etc. That thou may remember, and be confounded,
and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified
toward thee, for all that thou bast done, says the Lord of hosts. That is,
when I shall be graciously reconciled unto thee in Jesus Christ, then thou
shall be confounded and ashamed for thy evil doings. As also Ezekiel. 20. 41, 42,
43. I will Ezekiel. 20. 41, 42, 43.
bring you out from among the people, etc. And ye shall know that I am the
Lord, when I shall bring ye into the land of Israel, etc. And there shall ye
remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled, and
ye shall loath your selves in your own sight, for all your evils that ye have
committed. So also in the verse before my text. Then shall ye remember your
evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in
your own sight Ezekiel. 36. 31.
for your iniquities, and for your abominations. Then: that is, when I shall
bestow my mercies upon you, Tken shall ye loath your selves for your iniquities.

And this is the argument (Right Honorable) which I spread before you this day
to help forward the work of humiliation. It is a day of deep mourning and
lamentation, a day wherein it is no hypocrisy to appear to men to weep. It is
no sign of an effeminate man, but of a penitent man to weep this day. It is
not vain glory, but Gods glory to be heard sighing and groaning. This is sweet
music in Gods ears. Woe be to that man that is not humbled in a day of
humiliation: woe be to us if the day break up before our bearts be broken! Now
the motive which I will bring to persuade you to loath your selves for your
abominations, and to be ashamed and confounded for your own evil doings, is
from

The many rare and great mercies that God has bestowed upon the Nation in
general, and upon our persons in particular.

And there is great reason why the mercies of God should make us ashamed for
sin, and ashamed to sin.

Because to sin against God after mercy is a sin of such a crimson die, as that
it must needs make us blush, if any grace be in our hearts. The greater the sin
is we commit, the greater is our shame to commit it. Now it is a sin of a
very high nature to sin after mercy, for these reasons.

Because every new mercy we receive from God, is a new kindness; Reas. 1.
and the more kindness we sin against, the more unkind it is to sin, and
the more shame to be so unkind to that God that is so kind to us. Caesar took
it very unkindly at the hands of Brutus, upon whom he had bestowed so many
favors, when he came to stab him: What thou my son Brutus! God takes it very
unkindly when a Nation upon whom he has bestowed great mercies, commits great
sins. And therefore he expostulates Jer. 2. 5.
with the Jews; What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they have
gone far from me, etc. Why are your Fathers so unkind? Neither say they,
Where is the Lord that brought us up out of the land of Egypt? Thus also he
complains, Jerem. 31. 32. They have broken my covenant although I was a
husband unto them. Jer. 31. 3^.
It is a self-confounding sin, to be unkind to a kind God.

Because every new mercy is a new obligation to obedience; and (...) 2.
the more obligations we sin against, the more shame it is to commit the sin.
As to sin against a man's father and mother, is a greater sin than to sin
against a man's brother and sister, because we are more obliged to our parents
than to our brethren and sisters. He that kills his father (says Cicero)
commits many sins in one, he kills him that begat him, and brought him up, etc.
So to sin against God after mercy, is to commit many sins in one: it is to
break as many bonds, and to sin against as many obligati^ns, as we have
receiv^d mer^ies.

Because every new mercy we receive from God is a new talent, (for mercies are
talents, betrusted with us by God as stewards, (...). 3.
for which we must give a severe and strict account at the day of Judgment)
and the more talents we sin against, the greater is our sin, and the more shame
to commit it. To whom much is given, of him much shall be required. If the man
that had but one talent, when he came to give up his account, was confounded
and made speechless, and bound hand and foot, and cast into hell fire for not
improving it; What shame and confusion of face, and how many hels do they
deserve that have received not only one, five, or ten, but many hundred
talents of mercies, and do not only not improve them, but mis-improve them to
the service of sin and Satan?

Because to sin after mercy, is a sin of formal unthankefulnesse; ^.
There is mat^riall unthankefulnesse in all sin, because every sin is committed
against God that is our Creator, Preserver, and Rede^mer; but to sin against
mercy, is to be formally unthankefull. Now unthankfulness is a sin that will
make any ingenuous man ashamed to be guilty of it. Indeed it is the Epito^ of
all sin. Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris. The whole duty of man says
Augustine, consists in this, Vt anim^ non sit ingrata Deo, to take care that
our souls be not unthankful to God* and therefore an unthankful man neglects
the whole duty of man. Unthankfulnes is a sin that mak^ the times perilous. It
is a sin for which God gave over the (...) T^m 3 1 R^. (...). 21. 27.
Heathen to a reprobate mind: Because when they knew God, they did not glorify
him as God, but became unthankefull, etc. theref^e God gave t^em up to their
own hearts lusts, etc. And if God dealt thus with the Gentiles for sinning
against the mercies only of creation, how severely will he punish us that sin
against creating mercies, redeeming mercies, and against mercies of all kinds?
For it is a certain rule, The more merry we receive from God, the greater is
the unthankefulnesse to sin against such a God. The Romans made a Law, that
if a Master did free a servant from bondage, and afterward that servant proved
unthankefull, the master had power to re-inslave ^im. The great God has freed
this Nation from Egypt, and Babylon, from the Gunpowder treason, and from many
slaveries. Now if we prove unthankful after all these mercies, we may justly
expect to be re-inslaved.

It is a sin of formal injustice; for every deliverance does (...). 5.
bind over the delivered, to the service of the deliverer; so says the
Apostle, You are not your own, for ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor 6. 19.
therefore glorify God with your bodies, and with your spirits, which are
Gods; and so also, Luke 1. 74. That we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies might serve him without fear, in holiness and ^ighteousnesse, etc.
Among the Romans the parties delivered, were the servants of the deliverers.
And therefore to break Gods Commandments after deliverance, is to be guilty
of the horrible sin of injustice. Thou art not only unthankefu^l, but unjust,
which is a brand that will confound any man.

It is a sin so great, that God himself stands amazed at it, that R^s. 6.
any man should be so impudent as to commit it. Esaias 1. 2. Hear O Heavens, and
give ^are O earth, for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished and brought up
children, and they have rebelled against me; The Ox knows his owner, and the
Ass his Masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people do not consider; Ah
sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, etc. This is a sin that makes
us worse than the Ox or the Ass: A sin that makes a Nation that is guiliy of
it, not only sinful, but laden with iniquity, as an Ass with a burden. Thus
also God calls to the Heavens, Jeremy 2. 12. Be astonished O ye Heavens at
this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord; Why? what is
the matter? For my people have committed two evils, they have forsaken m^ the
fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisternes, broken cisternes,
that will hold no water. This is a sin that breaks the very heart of God: and
it had need break our hearts to commit it. I am broken, says God (of Ez^k. 6*
9.
his people Israel) for their whorish heart. If God be broken with it, it is
time for us to be broken with it.

It is a sin so great, as that it puts a great aggravation upon every R^as 7.
sin; It makes the least sin of us in England, greater than the greatest sin
of the Heathens; of the Christians in Germany, and Ireland; yea than the sin of
the devils themselves.

1. Greater than the sins of the Heathen, because we sin against greater
mercy; Tribulation and anguish upon every soul that Romans 2^.
does evil, first upon the Jew, then upon the Gentile: Why first upon the Jew?
Because the Jews received more mercies than the Gentiles. I may justly add,
First upon the Christian, then upon the Jew, then upon the Gentile, because the
Christian has received more mercy from God, than either Jew or Gentile. You
only have I known of all the Nations of the earth, therefore I will punish
(...) 3. 2.
you for all your iniquities; because you sin against more light, more grace,
and therefore your sin is more ungracious.

2. This makes the least sin of us in England greater than the greatest sin
of Germany, or of Ireland, because God has dealt more mercifully with us,
than with them: therefore Christ says, Woe be to thee Chorazin, woe be to thee
Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been
done in Tire and Sidon, Math. 11. 21, 22.
they would have repented long ago in dust and ashes. But I say unto you, it
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of of judgment, than for
you. If Bohemia, and the Palatinate had had the mercies and deliverances, that
we have had, they would have repented in dust and ashes, therefore it shall be
easier for them at the day of judgment, than for us. And thou Capernaum which
h^st been exalted to heaven, shall be brought down to hell, etc. God has
listed us up in mercies to heaven; therefore we must look for the lowest hell,
if we abuse them.

3. This makes the sins of England greater than the sin of the Devils, though
not simply, yet in three respects.

1. The Devils never sinned against the blood of Jesus Christ; Christ never
dyed for them, but he dyed for us. For verily he took not on him the nature
of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham. Heb. 2. 16.


2. The Devils never sinned against Gods patience. God was not patient toward
them, but as soon as ever they sinned, he cast them into hell. Deus non
expectabat Angelos, as Bernard says: but we sin against the blood of Christ,
and the patience and longsuffering of God, which is very great toward mankind.

3. The Devils never sinned against any example. For they were the first that
sinned, and were made the first example; but we have had diverse examples of
Gods wrath against sin, the example of the Devils, and of the punishment of
the old world, of Sodom and Gomorrah, and many hundred such like, and yet we
sin notwithstanding al these examples. In these three respects to sin against
the mercies of God, is more than diabolical.

It is a sin that takes away all excuse, and will so confound a Reas. 8.
man at the day of Judgment, that it will make him speechless. This is
excellently set out in the 9 chapter of Ezra, the 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. verses, O
my God, says Ezra, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, O my
God: for our iniquities are in^reased over our heads, etc. For we were bondmen,
yet our God has not forsaken us in our bondage, but has extended mercy to us,
etc. And now O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken thy
Commandments. What excuse shall we bring? What shift shall we plead? What
shall we say? That is, we have nothing to say. This interrogation is an
emphaticall negation. Had I not come unto you, says Christ, ye had had no
sin, but now ye have no excuse. Had not God shown such mercies to England,
it might have had some Apology to plead for its contempt of the Gospel, for its
pride, for its adultery, and drunkenness, but now it has no excuse. To sin
after mercy shuts up all defense. What shall we say after this, O our God? for
we have forsaken thy Commandments.

This Doctrine is a black bill of indictment against all those that Use 1.
are not ashamed to sin against God, notwithstanding the mercies they have
received from God. God has done mighty things for this Nation, he has heaped
deliverance upon deliverance; We have had more deliverances than there are
Commandments. And yet notwithstanding are there not many of us that sin in
the midst of mercies? That are like the Horse and Mule that have no
understanding? Psalm 32. As a Horse, the more it is pampered, the more it
kickes against the rider; so there are many, the more they are fed to the full
with mercy, the more they rebel against the God that feeds them; Like unto the
thick vapors, which are first exhaled by the Sun, and afterward when they
come into the Air, stop the light of the Sun from shining upon us. There are
many such vapors whom God has exalted, and lifted up in ^nour above others,
that make no other use of their honor, but to darken the glory of God, and to
hinder the light of God from shining upon us. Let conscience speak; Are we not
as proud, as covetous, as blasphemous, as adulterous, as ungodly as ever,
notwithstanding all that God has done for us? May I not say to you as Moses to
the Israelites; Do ye thus requite the Lord, O ye foolish people and unwise?
Is not he thy father Deu^. 32. 6
that bought thee? Has he not made thee, and established thee? Is not he the
God that has multiplied mercies upon us? The Lord humble us this day for this
sin.

There are diverse sorts of men come under this reproof.

1. Such as sin notwithstanding mercies.

2. Such as sin under mercies, at the same time when God is showing mercy
unto them. Of these David speaks, Our Fathers understood not thy wonders in
Egypt, they remembered not the multitude Ps 10^. 7.
of thy mercies, but provoked him at the Sea, yea even at the Red Sea. This was
a great aggravation. They sinned at the very place where they were delivered,
and at the very time when they were delivered, at the Sea, even the Red Sea:
And as it is at the 13. verse, They soon forgot his works; the word in the
Hebrew Ps. 109. 13
is, they made haste to forget his works. This is our condition: God has
brought us into the school of mercy, but are there not many among us that
turn this school of mercy into the school of iniquity? that remain
irreformable in a year of Reformation, that not only hate to be reformed, but
hate the very Reformation it self? that sin under mercies, even under
mercies?

3. Such as sin with the mercies of God, that like the Spider, suck poison
out of those flowers out of which a Be suckes honey; that suck their
damnation out of those mercies, out of which the godly suck their salvation;
that make a golden calfe of the jewels of mercy, and sacrifice their sons and
daughters unto devils; that turn the grace of God into wantonness; that
improve their honors, learning, wealth, parts, to make themselves more active
to sin against God, to be Ingeniose nequam, facundi, sed malo publico. As
Basil says of Eve, That God gave her to be a (...).
helper to Adam, and made her of the rib of Adam, but the devil took this
rib, and made a dart of it, and with this dart shot at Adams heart, and wounded
him to death, Per costam petit cor, so God has bestowed mercies upon us to
help us to serve him more chearefully, more liberally, but there are many that
play the devils part, and that take these mercies, and make darts of them to
shoot against God, and his cause: Non ho^ quae situm mun^s in us^.

There are thousands in the world that are worser for the mercies they receive
from God, that are like unto a dunghill, the more the Sun of mercy shines
upon them, the more they stink and putrify in all sin. And as the clay is
hardened by the Suns shining upon it, so there are many, the more health, the
more wealth, the more honor, the more mercy they receive from God, the more
they harden their hearts against God; like Elies two sons, the kindlier their
father dealt with them, the worser they were; like Absalom, that as soon as
ever his Father received him into Jerusalem, then he began to conspire against
him. Of these David Psalm. 55. 19
speaks, Because there are no changes in their lives, therefore they fear not
God, because they meet with no crosses; and Psalm. 73. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Because
they are not plagued like other men, therefore pride compasses them about as a
chain, they have more then ^eart can wish, therefore they speak wickedly and
loftily, and set their mouths against the Heavens, etc. like Dionysius, that
because he prospered in his voyage by sea, after he had robbed a Temple,
boasted and said, Behold, how the gods love sacri^edge! I beseech you (Right
Honorable) let us examine whether we be not guilty of these sins, ^or they
are such sins which we are all very prone to commit. Hezeki^ though a good
King, yet he sinned after mercy; when he was recovered of his sickness, his
heart was lifted up with pride. 2 Chro. 36 22.
Lots Wife also, as soon as ever she was delivered out of Sodom, began to
Apo^tize. N^y Let himself after he had received so great a merry, and had
seen so fearful a judgment, yet when he came to Z^r he was drunk, and
committed incest, which he never did while he was in Sodom. And Noah also when
he came out of the A^ke was made drunk, which he never was when he lived among
the wicked in the old World. And David also, when delivered from all his
enemies, then he said in Psalm. 30. 6.
his prosperity he should never be moved, and then he lay with Bathsheba, and
murdered Uriah. And therefore if we be guilty of this sin, Let us be deeply
humbled for it before the Lord this day.

There is no sin that does more provoke God to anger, or sooner cause him to
destroy a Nation, and to destroy it utterly, than this sin: To sin after
mercy* under mercy, and with mercies. So it is said Ezra 9. 13, 14. Seeing thou
O God have given us such a deliverance as this, should we again break thy
Commandments, and join in affinity with the people of these abominations?
would thou not be angry with us, till thou had consumed us, so that there
should be no remnant nor escaping? To sin after mercy, and with mercy,
procures universal and utter destruction. Because I called, and ye refused, I
have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, Prove. 1. 24
I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, etc.
God is never more angry than when he laughs. Quod Deus loquitur cum risu, id tu
legas f^etu. We have never more cause to weep, than when God laughs. Zach. 7.
13, 14. Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried and they would not
hear, so they cried and I would not hear, says the Lord of Hoasts, but I
scattered them with a whirlewind among all the Nations, whom they knew not;
thus the laud was desolate after them.

There are diverse reasons (besides the reasons before named) why this sin (to
sin with the mercies of God) should be such a God-provoking, such a
Land-destroying sin; which I the rather mention, that they may be forcible
helps to humiliation, which is the proper work of this day.

Because mercy in it self is so rare and excellent a jewel, bestowed Reas. 1.
upon England purposely to serve God withal, that to abuse it to the
dis-service of God, must needs be a God-provoking sin: for these rules in
Divinity are very clear.

1. The greater the person is we sin against, the greater the sin; as to offer
an affront to a King, is a greater offense than to injure a common Gentleman.

2. The better the person is against whom we sin, and the more good we expect
from him, or have received from him, or the more need we have of him, the
greater is the offense to offer wrong unto him. Now mercy is the greatest and
chiefest of Gods attributes. In themselves Gods attributes are all equal, but
in regard of our necessities, as oil swims above all other liquors, as the
Eagle is the chief of birds, the Lion of beasts, gold of metals, so mercy is
the chief of all Gods attributes, and therefore to sin with mercy must needs
be a horrible sin. Mercy is an attribute that we al stand in need of; the best
of men need mercy as well as the worst of men. Mercy it is the best friend we
bave, and indeed the only friend in Gods bosom to plead for us, it is the only
Orator, and Ambassador to intercede for us, it is the only fiery chariot to
carry us up to heaven. When Justice pleads against us at Gods bar, we have no
refuge but to his Mercy-seat. And therefore to abuse so dear a friend as
mercy, and so great a friend as mercy, and such a precious friend, and such a
necessary friend, must needs make us ashamed, if not past shame, and must needs
provoke God to anger, though he be full of mercy; especially if we consider the
superlative mercies that God has bestowed upon England; for this is another
rule in Divinity: The more elevated, and the mo^e distinguishing any mercy is,
the greater the sin, to abuse it to sin. Corruption optimi pessima, the best
things abused, prove the worst sins.

Because he that sins with the mercies of God, fights against God Reas. 2.
with his own weapons, which must needs provoke God. Suppose a man should
come into a Smiths shop, and take up the Smiths own hammer, and knock him on
the head, this were to commit a double sin, not only to kill the Smith, but to
kill him with his own hammer. Such a double sin are they guilty of, who the
more wit they have, the more they plot against God, and the more health, and
honor, and wealth, the more they despise God and his Commandments, with their
wealth and honor. If a Surgeon should freely bestow pains and charge to
cure a man of a lame hand, and he should as soon as ever he is cured kill this
Surgeon with his cured hand, this were a horrible ingratitude, and a
provoking sin. Thus do they, that when they are delivered from sickness and
made whole, fall presently to sinning against God with their health. This sin
is so great, that the Apostle cries out, Shall I take the members of Christ,
and make them the members of an Harlot? God forbid; the word in the Syriake is,
God forgive: God forbid, God forgive, I should be so vile and wicked.

Because he that sins with the mercies of God, turns the greatest Reas. 3.
good into the greatest evil, and brings darkness out of light, which is a
work proper to the devil. It is Gods work to bring light out of darkness,
good out of evil, but it is the devils work to bring evil out of good. Now
to sin with Gods mercies, is to bring the greatest evil out of the greatest
good; To bring the darkness of sin out of the light of mercy. It is to act a
devil, which God must needs abhor, and which will certainly bring u^ to
the devil.

To sin with mercy is to make mercy to be our adversary. And if Reas. 4.
mercy plead against a Nation, then look for speedy destruction. Mercy is our
best friend (as you have ^eard) but when we sin against it, we turn our
chiefest friend into our bitterest enemy, and mercy it self cries to God
against us, and the cry of mercy cries louder against us than the cry of
justice. As poison when it is mingled with sweet Wine, the Wine puts strength
into the poison, and makes it more powerful: so the sweet mercies of God, when
they are mingled with our sins, put strength into our sins, and make them more
powerful to destroy us. In the tenth of Judges 11. God brings in his
deliverances to plead against the people of Israel. Did not I deliver you from
the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, and from the c^ildren of Ammon, and from
the Philistines, the Zidonians also and the Amalekites? etc. Yet you have
forsaken me, therefore I will deliver you no more. When justice pleads against
a Nation, there is mercy to fly unto: but if mercy (because it is abused to
sin) become our enemy, there is no way but everlasting ruin.

To sin with the rare and choice mercies of God (such as the Reas. 5.
mercies of England are) is a sin of such transcendent unkindnesse, as that God
cannot but destroy such a Person, (...) such a Nation that is guilty of it.
When David was used unkindly by Nabal, upon whom he had bestowed many
courtesies, how did this unkindnesse provoke David to anger? in so much as he
said, Surely in vain have I kept all that this fellow has in the Wi^dernesse,
so that nothing 1 Samuel 25. 21, 22.
was missing of all that appertained unto him, and he has requited me evil for
good: so, and more also do God unto the enemies of Da^id, if I leav^ of all
that pertain to him by the morning light, any that pisseth against the Wall.
Thus is the great Jehovah enraged when we sin with his favors. God will say,
In vain have I adorned thee with all the Jewels of my mercy, which thou as a
swine have trampled under thy feet. In vain bave I given thee learning, and
riches, and my Gospel, etc. for thou have requited me evil for good,
therefore in destroying I will certainly destroy thee.

Thus also we read in the 2 Samuel 10. When David sent a kind Embassage to King
Hanun, to comfort him after his fathers death, and he despised and abused the
messengers, shaving off the one h^lfe of their beards, and cutting off their
garments in the middle, etc. this did so far incense David, as it made him
destroy them al after a rigid manner. Gods mercies are like David's messengers
messages of love. God looks we should improve these messages to his glory. But
if we despise them, and abuse him with them, he will utterly destroy us. O
consider this, you that forget God, You that undervalue his mercies, You that
contemn his mercies, You that sin with his mercies. How angry was Christ with
Peter, because he would not suffer him to wash his feet? he seems to be more
angry with him than when he denied him, because he refused an act of Christ's
love. Christ took it unkindly, at Peter's hands. When God comes in love to us,
and offers to wash us, and to reform us, if we refuse to be washed, and choose
rather to wallow in the mire of sin and superstition, this will provoke God
more than if we did flatly deny him. We would have healed Babylon, Ier. 51. 9.
but she is not healed, forsake her, and let us go every one into his own
Country, for her judgment reaches unto Heaven, and is lifted up even to the
skies. Which words tell us, That those that sin with mercies, shall be lifted
up as high in judgment as they are in mercy. Thus it is likewise said Ezekiel
24. ver. 13. Because I have purged thee and thou wast not purged, thou shall
not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to
rest upon thee. Oh that the Lord would give us hearts to lay these things to
heart! Oh let us be ashamed and confounded, ashamed, and ashamed, that ever we
have sinned, after mercies, under mercies, and with mercies.

And indeed when I consider seriously how the mercies of England are abused by
England, I am possessed with exceeding great fear, lest all our mercies should
be but forerunners of some greater miseries, and all our preservations,
reservations to some greater destruction. For though the times are changed, yet
our people are not changed; though the times be better, yet the men that live
in these times are not better.

The Sodomites were delivered by Abraham, but because they sinned Genesis 14.
after their deliverance, their preservation was but a reservation for a
greater destruction by fire and brimstone. Lots wife was delivered out of
Sodom, but because she looked back toward Sodom, her preservation was but a
reservation to be turned to a pillar of salt. Pharaoh was often delivered by
the prayer of Moses, but because he hardened his heart after deliverance, his
preservation was but a reservation, till he was drowned in the Red Sea. The
people of Israel had deliverance upon deliverance, but because they continued
to sin after deliverance, God at last destroyed them with a woeful destruction.
The Lord open our eyes to consider these things, and to be confounded and
ashamed for our evil doings, and to loath our selves for our former
abominations, and to be humbled exceedingly for our sins against mercy, that
God may continue his deliverances to us, and our posterity after us, as long as
the Sun and Moon endures.

Seeing God has done such rare things freely for this Nation, Let us be
exhorted to subscribe to the obedience of this Text, and not ^se 2.
only be humbled for what is past, but ashamed and confounded for the time to
come, to sin willingly against so merciful a God. Let an argument from mercy
prevail with you. It is a great objection against some kind of Preachers,
that they preach nothing but hell and damnation. This Objection cannot be
brought against me this day. Behold I come with an Olive branch of Peace in my
mouth. I come as a Barnabas, not as a Boanerges, as a Minister of the Gospel,
all apparelled with rich mercy. It is a great mercy that we have mercies to
break our hearts withal. What would Germany give, if they had these mercies?
What would Ireland do for God, if they had these mercies? O let mercy melt us.
This was Nathans argument to David, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I 2 Samuel
12 (...), 8, 9.
anointed thee King over Israel, and delivered thee out of the hand of Saul,
and I gave thee thy Masters house, and the house of Israel, and of Judah, and
if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and
such things. Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord to do
evil in his sight? Thou, for whom I have done so much: Wherefore have thou
despised the Commandment of the Lord? This made David cry out, I have sinned
against the Lord. Me thinks I hear God saying unto us here present, I have
delivered you from many dangers, I have recovered you from many sicknesses, I
have heaped many favors upon you, and if this had not been enough, I would
have done such and such things, wherefore have you rebelled against me? O that
this might affect our hearts. Observe how David's mercy wrought upon Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 16, 17, 18. David had gotten Saul at an advantage, and spared him when
he might have destroyed him, this did so work upon Saul, that he lift up his
voice and wept etc. Nothing ever moved Saul so much, as the kindness of David
toward him.

So when we consider how near we have been to destruction, and how often God
has spared us, when he might have destroyed us; let us lift up our voices and
weep for our sins against such a God. Observe how Mephibosheth was affected
with David's mercy, in 2 Samuel 9. David had cause to be revenged upon the house of
Saul, but he freely showed kindness to Mephibosheth, restoring him all his
fathers lands, and causing him to eat bread at his Table continually. And this
Mercy did so melt his heart, that he cries out, What is thy servant, that thou
should look upon such a dead Dog as I am? O let the contemplation of Gods
love toward us, make us to loath our selves for our abominations, and say,
What am I, a dead Dog, an impure Swine, an unclean Leper, that the Lord my God
should do so much for me! Beloved in the Lord, it is my comfort that I preach
this day to those that are Noble and ingenuous. My humble suite is, That you
would appear to be such indeed and in truth. An ingenuous spirit is more
wrought upon by love, than fear. This Fast might have been in blood, the Land
might have been in confusion this day. Let the goodness of God drive you to
repentance. Let the love of Jesus Christ constrain you to obedi^nce. There is
a constraining power in love. Though a stubborn and slavish spirit is more
wrought upon by judgments than mercies; yet a gracious and godly heart is more
wrought upon by mercies than judgments. And indeed in its own nature, Merry
works more powerfully, more kindly, more inwardly and deeply than judgments.

1. Mercy works more powerfully than judgments. And therefore Romans 12. 1
the Apostle Paul, beseeches us by the mercies of God; he does not say, I
beseech you by the judgments of God: And in 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having these
promises, let us cleanse our selves from all the defilements both of flesh and
spirit. He does not say, having these threatenings, let us cleanse our selves,
etc. Let a Cart loaded go over a River frozen with Ice, the Cart breaks the
Ice, but it remains Ice still; but let the sun shine upon the River, and it
will melt the Ice, and dissolve it into water, so as nothing of the Ice shall
remain. The Judgments of God may break a hard heart, but it will remain hard
still, as a Rock broken in pieces remains a Rock; But the Sunshine of Gods
mercy, and the consideration of Gods love to us in Christ will break the heart
to powder, and make it not only a broken heart, but a soft and contrite heart.
Have you not seen a Malefactor at his condemnation and place of execution,
when without hope of mercy, carrying himself desperately, and obdurately in
sin, and afterward, when informed that there was a pardon provided for him,
has been exceedingly melted and broken in heart, at the consideration of the
graciousnesse of the King toward him?

2. Mercy works more kindly and sweetly than judgments. As a thick Cl^ud
that is melted by the Suns shining upon it, distills down sweetly into a
fruitful shower, but the cloud that is broken with a thunderbolt makes a
mighty crack, and tears the cloud in pieces: So the mercies of the Gospel do
kindly work upon the heart, opening it, as it did the heart of Lydia, and
sweetly melting it into tears after a blessed and comfortable manner: But the
thunderbolt of Gods judgments makes an earthquake, and a heart-quake, as it
did upon the Jailer, Act. 16. As the blustering winds tear up the Trees by the
roots: So do the judgments of God rend and tear the heart quite in pieces,
but mercies will kindly dissolve it.

3. Mercies will work inwardly. Take a piece of gold, beat it with a hammer
never so much, and yet you shall never separate the dross from the gold by
beating of it; but put the gold into the furnace, and the fire will separate
the dross from it. The hammer of the Law will batter and bruise the soul, but
the dross still remains in it; but the fire of the Gospel, the furnace of
Gods love will separate a man and his lusts, and purge out the filth that is
inwardly got into the soul. The Sun by its hot beams made the Traveller, (as
it is in the Fable) put off his Cloak, when the blustering wind made him gird
his Cloak faster about him. Thus you see how mercy works more powerfully, more
kindly, more inwardly. Oh that it might appear in our hearts this day, that
this doctrine that I preach, is true. I read that Caesar upon a certain time
with a book in his hand was hearing of Cicero pleading, and was so taken with
his eloquence and listened so attentively, that he let fall his book.

Oh that the Lord would so affect you with the consideration of Englands
mercies, that your sins may fall away from you, as Caesar's book did from him.
That you that write, may blot your books with your tears, and you that look
upon me may look with tears in your eyes. Let us shed penitent tears this
day, for the sins of many years.

Let us study the duty of this Text, let us be ashamed and ashamed for our
sins. There be many men, says Chrysostom, that are ashamed of what they
should not be ashamed, and not ashamed of what they should be ashamed: are
ashamed to confess their sins, but not to act their sins, not ashamed to be
seen at a Playhouse, but ashamed to be seen at Gods House upon a week day,
ashamed of Christ and his cause, ashamed to be accounted precise, but not
ashamed to be wicked and ungodly. And as the same Author says, many men are
not ashamed to sin, but ashamed to be known to sin, not ashamed to commit
adultery, but to be known to commit it, not ashamed to be sinners, but to be
called sinners, not ashamed to be covetous, but ashamed to be called covetous.
This shame comes from the Devil, and will bring us to the Devil. Let us pitch
the act upon the right object. Let us be ashamed of our evil (and not of our
good) doings. Shame is the daughter of sin. If there had not been sin, there
never had been any shame. But God has appointed the daughter to devour the
mother. As the Worm eats up the tree that bred it, so let shame devour
sin. There is no creature capable of sh^me but man. Bruit beasts are capable
of fear and sorrow, but not of shame: God forbid any here present should be so
brutish as to be past shame. To sin and not to be ashamed of it, is Limen
inferni, the next door to damnation. The Heathen has a saying, Erubuit, salva
res est. As long as there is shame, there is hope. O let us be confound^d and
ashamed, and let Mercy be the Midwife to bring forth this shame and sorrow. The
Apostle commands us, That if our enemies hunger, we should feed them, if they
thirst, we Romans 1^. 20.
should give them drink, and in so doing we shall heap coals of fire upon
their heads. The meaning is, That this mercy will be like a heap of hot
coals, either to melt their hearts and make them our friends, or if they
persist in their enmity, to add fuel to their torments in hell. God has
heaped many hot coals of fire upon our heads, O let this fire burn up our
dross, and melt our hard hearts lest if we continue obstinate, these Coals of
fire serve to add to our burning in bell. I read in the ninth of Daniel: When
Daniel saw that Daniel 9.
the time was come wherein God had promised to deliver Israel out of Babylon,
this mercy made him fast, and mourn, and confess his sins with shame and
confusion of face, etc. We hope the time is come, yea the set time, wherein God
intends to show mercy to England; O let us pray, and mourn, and weep, and
take shame for our scarlet abominations.

If we were sure that God would perfect what he has begun Object.
and consummate our hopes, this would mightily dissuade us from ever sinning
against God.

It is an argument sufficient that there is a possibility, though not a Answ.
certainty. This was enough to work upon the Ninivites: Let us cry mightily to
God, and every man turn from his evil way. Who Jonah 3. 7 8, 9.
can tell if God will turn, and repent, etc.? Who knows but that God may
rear us up a glorious Church? E^ra blesses God, that Ezra 9. ^0
be had given them a little reviving in their bondage. We must do as the
servants of Benhadad: Bebold (say they) We have heard (...) Kings 20 31, 32, 33.
that the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings, let us put sackcloth upon our
loins, and ropes upon our heads, per adventure he will save thy life, etc. And
when they came to the King, they did diligently observe whether any thing would
come from him, and did hastily catch at it, etc. So must we diligently observe
and catch at the very first appearance of mercy, and lay hold upon the very
first opportunity; I read, Zach. 4. 10. Who has despised the day of small
things? The Prophet speaks of the rebuilding of Jerusalem, which at the first
was so small, that Sanballat, Tobiah, and the rest of the enemies of Gods
Church laughed them to scorn and said, What do these feeble Jews? will they
fortify themselves? will they make an end in a Neh. 4. 2, 3
day? will they revive the stones, out of the heaps of the rubbish which are
bu^nt? even that which they build, if a Fex come up, he shall even break down
their stone wall, etc. Yet notwithstanding they did go on, and build, and
finish the work, and all the mountains of opposition, became a plain before
them; And therefore let us not despise the day of small things. It is with the
friends of the Church as with the enemies of the Church, when the Churches
enemies begin to fall before Gods people, they shall certainly fall. As Hamans
wise men told him, if Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, Ester. 6. 13
before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but
shall surely fall before him. (Mark those words; if he be of the seed of the
Jews, that is, of the people of God.) And when they fall, they fall by
degrees, as it is, Exodus 14. First, God troubled the Egyptians, then he took
off their wheels from their Chariots, then he drowned them in the Red Sea. So
it is with the friends of the Church. If they begin to rise before the enemies
of the Church, they shall certainly rise, and be advanced higher and higher.
And therefore when a little crevice of light appears, when God does but begin
to look toward us, as he did upon Peter, let us weep bitterly, that ever we
should sin against such a God. When a Cart is in a quagmire, if the Horses find
it coming, they will pull the harder. God is now drawing near to us in mercy,
we have been in a deepe-quagmire, like Jeremy in his Dungeon, and God is
beginning to pull us out. O let the free mercy of God, and his unparalleld
love, break our hearts for, and from sin.

If this be true, then all our Ministers will be found liars, for Object. 2.
they have prophesied the certain ruin and desolation of England.

Jonah was no liar when he preached, Yet forty days and Niniveh Answ. 1.
shall be destroyed, because he was to be understood conditionally. So are all
our threatenings to be understood with an, If, etc.

We Ministers preach what God in his ordinary way is wont to do, Answ. 2
and what God in his word has threatened to a Nation guilty of such sins as
ours are. But God has dealt with England, not according to his ordinary rule,
but according to his Prerogative. England (if I may so speak with reverence)
is a Paradox to the Bible. The Bible tells us what sins will make a Nation
ripe for destruction, and we find these sins in our Nation. But if God will
leave his ordinary road, and except us from the general rule, and miraculously
save us by Prerogative, and free grace, who can hinder a free agent? This is a
rare act of his Prerogative, and the more mercy there is in it, the more ought
we to be confounded for our apostasies, whoredoms, abominations, and
rebellions against this God.

Men, brethren and fathers, if all that I have said this day, will not work
upon your hearts, give me leave to name some other kind of mercies unto you.
For I am all for mercy this day.

1. Consider, What a mercy it is for God to make you men, when he might have
made you toads. I doubt not but you have heard the story of the two Bishops,
that being riding to the Council of Constance, and espying by the way a poor
Country man weeping, turned toward him, and asked him, why he wept, he
answered, I weep to see t^is toad (that lay upon the ground before him)
because I never blessed God sufficiently, for that he made me a man and not a
toad. This answer made them go away astonished and ashamed for their own
unthankfulness. And it may justly work the like effect in us.

2. Consider, What a mercy it is to be not only a man, but a rich man, a
Gentleman, Knight, or Lord, etc. There is none here, but such whom God has
lifted up above thousands in outward mercies. What a shame is it for a poor
Cobbler to do more service for God, than it may be some of you do, that have
received so much from God. May not Christ say to you as he did to the Jews? I
have done many great works among you, for which of these do you stone me? I
have done many great things for you, I have given you health, wealth, credit,
wit, and honor, and for which of these is it that thou blasphemest my name,
and despisest my Sabbaths, and refusest to obey my Commandments? It is said of
Heliogabalus, that he provided silken halters to hang himself withal, and
ponds of sweet water to drown himself withal, gilded poisons to poison
himself withal. O let not your honors and riches, etc. be silken halters to
strangle your souls! let not your pleasures be ponds of sweet water to drown
your souls! let not your preferments be gilded poisons, to poison your souls!
Say as Nabal did (but in a better sense) shall I take my health which God has
given me, to sin against my God with it? God forbid. Shall I take the wit that
God has given me, to plot against God and his cause with it? God forbid.

3. Consider, the patience of God toward us. This is an argument that should
drive us to repentance, Romans 2. There is no sin, but it is committed in the
very bosom of God. For God fills Heaven and earth, and sees all your curtain
abominations. And he is able to destroy you, he is just, and must wound the
bairy scalpe of those that go on in their wickedness, and he is a holy and a
pure God, that hates your iniquities from his very heart. And yet behold how
patient this God is toward you! At such a time, when thou were in the act of
adultery, he might have sent thee to hell in the very act, he might have made
thy tongue to rot, the last oath thou sworest. Nothing withheld him but pure
mercy. O let this melt our hearts. What a mercy is it to be out of hell? Many
in hell have not sinned the sins that we have done. It is his free grace that
we are delivered. We might have been weeping in hell at this instant: And then
our tears should have been our hell, but now they will prove our heaven, if
God work them in us.

4. Consider, the Lord Jesus Christ, and his love in dying for thee. If thy
heart be as hard as an Adamant, the blood of this escape Goat will soften it.
There were five men met together, that asked one another what means they used
to abstain from sin. The first answered, That he continually thought upon
the certainty of death, and the uncertainty of the time of death, and that made
him live every day, as if it were his last day. The second meditated of the
severe account, he was to give at the day of judgment, and of the everlasting
torments of hell, and this kept him from sin. The third, of the vileness and
loathsomenesse of sin, and of the excellency and beauty of grace, and this made
him abhor sin. The fourth, of the everlasting rewards and pleasures
provided for those that abstain from sin, and this prevailed with him. The
fifth and the last, continually meditated of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of his
love, and this made him ashamed to sin against God. This last is the greatest
motive of all. If the pacification between the two Nations of England and
Scotland will not affect us, let the great pacification that Christ has made
for thee between God and thy soul move thy heart to be ashamed to offend God.
It is the greatest argument I can use, to say, For Jesus Christ his sake be
ashamed and confounded for your evil ways.

5. Consider, the long enjoyment of the Gospel, the powerful and plentiful
preaching of it, joined with peace and plenty. And let us mourn for our Gospel
sins for our unprofitablenes, and unfruitfulnesse under such fruitful means,
that we have been like a barren ground which no plowing will make good. Let us
mourn for our unbelief, and impenitency. Let Gospel sins produce Gospel
sorrow. Tears are made only for sin. If we mourn our eyes out for worldly
losses; we cannot profit our selves. But if we weep for sin, this will quench
the fire of hell. There are 2 sorts of sins, and 2 sorts of curses: legal sins
and Gospel sins, legal curses and Gospel curses: Legal sins will bring legal
curses; But Gospel sins (unless there be Gospel sorrow) will bring a Gospel
curse, which is above al legal curses. Of this curse the Apostle speaks 1 Cor.
16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha: that is, accursed for the present, and reserved for the vengeance
which Christ will render to all unbelievers, when he comes to judgment. This
is curse upon curse. And this is the curse due to them that abuse mercies. The
Lord deliver us from this curse.

6. Let every man consider the personal mercies that God has bestowed upon him
in particular, and take all these mercies, and lay them to his heart, and they
will dissolve the stone in his heart; let our hearts be as wax, and these
mercies as the sun to melt them into godly sorrow.

Make a double Catalogue: One of thy sins; The other of Gods mercies to thee,
and bind them about thy heart to bring it into a religious frame. Thus I have
named six other mercies. My humble suit is, That you would p^nder and consider
seriously what has been said unto you. Consider what I say, says the Apostle,
and the Lord give you understanding. The Thessalonians had never understood 2
These. 4.
what Paul had said, if they had not considred it. No more shall we profit by
this Sermon, if we do not consider what has bin said. And this consideration
must have four ingredients.

1. We must consider these mercies distinctly, and deliberately. If a man has
a sweet Cordial in his mouth and swallow it down whole, he will not taste the
sweetness of it, but if he chew it by degrees, it will be very pleasant to his
taste. So these mercies will do us no good, if we swallow them down without
serious meditation. But if we chew them and consider them distinctly and
deliberately, one mercy after another, they will exceedingly affect us.

2. We must consider them with reflection upon our selves, and application to
our selves. As it is reported of Plato that when he did walk in the streets, if
he saw any man disordred in his speech, or any other way he would say to
himself: Number ego talis? Am I such a one as this is? So must we say, Number ego
talis? Have I abused these mercies? Have I sinned with these mercies? And as
the Apostles severally asked Christ, Master, is it I? So m^t we ask our
hearts, Am not I the man that ought to be ashamed, and ^nfoundid for my sins
against mercies?

3. We must consider these mercies in as near a propinquity as we can
possible. It is a true saying of the Philosoper, Things that are seen far off,
are as if they were not: A great man a far off seems little or nothing: An
enemy a far off, or a serpent a far off, does litt^e trouble us. So it is
with mercies. If we look upon them at a distance they will seem little, and
little affect us, but if we take them near to us, they will seem (as they
are) very great, and will mightily work upon us.

4. Consider these mercies devoutly with prayer unto God to make them
heart-melting mercies. Pray to Christ to look upon thee, as he did on Peter;
The Cock crew once and Peter wept not, the Cock crew twice, and Peter wept not,
because (says Ambrose) Christ did not look upon him. But as soon as ever
Christ looked upon him, then he wept, Aspexit Christus and flevit. We Ministers
are as the crowing of Peter's Cock, we cannot make you ashamed and confounded
for your evil doings, unless Christ look upon you. The Lord Jesus in his
mercy cast his eye upon us this day, that we may all of us go out and weep
bitterly, as Peter did.

The very brute beasts have bin wrought upon by mercy. Some write (though
others contradict it) of the Elephant, that because it wants joints it cannot
kneel, and if it once fall it cannot rise, and therefore when it sleeps it
sleeps leaning upon a tree. Now the hunts-man observing upon what tree it
sleeps, desirous to take it, comes in the day time, and sawes that tree almost
asunder, and when the Elephant comes to lean upon it, the tree falls, and the
Elephant with it; Then comes the hunts-man, and lifts up the Elephant, which he
takes so kindly, that ever after he follows the hunts-man where ever be
pleases.

This story may be applied diverse ways. When we were all fallen in Adam by
eating the fruit of the forbidden tree, unable to rise again, Jesus has
lifted us up from hell: O let this mercy melt us into obedience. When we were
all fallen of late years in this Kingdom into a desperate condition: God by
the King and Parliamant has raised us up to a hope of better days. O let us
be ashamed to be disobedient to this God. There is another famous story of one
Androdus dwelling at Rome, that fled from his Master into the wilderness, and
took shelter in a Lions Den; The Lion came home with a thorn in his foot, and
seeing the man in the den reached out his foot, and the man pulled out the
thorn; which the Lion took so kindly, that for three years he sed the man in
his den. After three years the man stole out of the den, and returned back to
Rome, was apprehended by his Master and condemned to be devoured by a Lion. It
happened that this very Lion was designed to devour him; The Lion knows his old
friend, and would not hurt him. The People wondered at it, the man was saved,
and the Lion given to him, which he carried about with him in the streets of
Rome. From whence came that motto, Hic est homo medicus leonis: hic est leo
hospes hominis. Beloved in the Lord, the great God by the help of you, and the
House of the Lords has plucked many thorns out of our feet. O let us not now
bring forth thorns and briers. Let not our hearts be dry and barren as the
thorny ground. Let us not kick against God with our feet while be is plucking
out the thorns that trouble us. Let us not be worse than the brute beasts. But
if all this will not prevail, suffer me I beseech you to remind you under new
expressions of what has been before said, and to offer some new motives unto
you.

1. If the beginnings of hope that now appear, and these inclinings of better
days will not work upon us to bumble us for, and from sin: God will take away
all our hopes, and all his mercies from us, and give them to a Nation that will
make better use of them. And as I said in my last Sermon which I preached
before this Honorable assembly) he will repent of the good things which Jet.
18. 10
he intended to bestow upon us. Remember what I hinted before of Saul, that if
he had tarried for Samuel, God would have established 1 Samuel 13. 14.
the kingdom unto him, But now, says Samuel, thy Kingdom shall not continue.
How do we know but that if we humble our selves, and enter into covenant to be
G^ people, and seek the Lord with all our heart, but that God may establish us
to be his choice people for ever? But if we harden our hearts against God and
his ways, God will say unto us t^is day, I thought to have made you a happy
kingdom, but now your happiness shall not continue.

2. When God has done much for a Nation, and that Nation sins with his
^ercies, God will not only take away his mercies, but will send curses instead
of blessings. For so it is said, Josh. 24. 20. If ye seek the Lord, and serve
strange gods, then will he Josh. 24. 20.
turn and do you hurt and consume you, after he has done you good. God may
out of his free mercy prorogue, and demurre our ruin, but be will never remove
it, till our National sins be removed.

3. If God should heal us, help us, and lengthen out our tranquillity, and
make a reformation among us, yet it would be but a lame cure, if we be not
confounded and ashamed for our evil ways. It will be but a skinning over of
our disease, and a daubing of us up with untempered mortar, a smothering of the
fire, which will break out the more afterward. But a perfect cure can never
be expected from God, till th^re be a National humiliation, and refo^mation.

4. Add lastly, if God should show us mercy, this mercy will be accursed unto
us, if we be not humbled and reformed. A mercy abused is no mercy. Mercy turned
to sin, takes away the comfort of the mercy, and turns the mercy into a
curse; As the rain, that falls upon the Sea, is made salt by the salt water.
And that which falls upon moorish grounds, breeds Toads and Serpents: So all
the goodness and mercies of God falling upon wicked, impenitent, and
irreformed hearts, breed nothing but the ver^ ^f sin and iniquity. Mercy is
like the water of jealousy, of which ^e read Numbers the fifth: If the woman
was innocent, it made her fruitful, but if guilty it made her rot. So the
mercies of Number. 5.
God if we be good, make us more fruitful. It is Maximum and aptissimum
motivum and medium obedientiae. But when they fall upon a wicked spirit, they
make him the more rotten, and the more wicked. The Lord bless these
considerations unto you.

For the conclusion of all, I will do two things.

1. I will name some particular sins, which are most opposite to the mercies
God has done for England, and beseech the representative House of England, to
be confounded and ashamed to commit such sins any more.

2. I will name some special and heroical Uses which you are to make of Gods
mercies, besides this in the Text.

1. I will name some particular sins, etc.

1. Be ashamed, O house of Egland, to forget the mercies you have received from
God. It is a great mercy that we have mercies to remember, and if we refuse
to remember Gods mercies, God will take order that we shall have no mercies to
remember. Let not the brand of the chief Butler be justly fastened upon us, Yet
did not (...) ^0 23
the chief Butler remember Joseph, but forgot him.

2. Be ashamed, to contenme and despise the mercies you have received from God.
There are many like the Israelites in Babylon; that liked their habitations in
Babylon so well, that when Cyrus gave them leave to go to Jerusalem, they
would not leave Babylon to go to Jerusalem. So there are many that like their
former condition under the innovation so well, that they had rather continue in
Babylon still, than accept of the reformation offered. That begin to say of
Mannah, We have nothing but this Number. 14.
Mannah; and to wish for the Garlic and Onions of Egypt again. This is a
grievous abomination. God was very angry with the Israelites for this sin, he
sent plagues upon plagues among them for it. And when at last they brought an
evil report upon the land of Canaan, and (as David says, Psalm. 106) despised
the holy land, refusing to go into it, God was so provoked with this sin, Psalm.
106.
that he would not pardon it, but set them back again 40. years, and destroyed
their carcasses in the wilderness. Would to God I could not say, that there
are some among us, that raise up an ill report upon the reformation intended,
as if the Parliament had a purpose to bring in an Anarchie, to reduce every
thing into its first Chaos, to leave every man to do what is good in his own
eyes, as when there was no King in Israel: And upon this false rumor they
despise the blessed Canaan that we are going into. Oh let us be ashamed and
confounded to commit this sin. This will make God carry us back again to
the wilderness.

3. Be ashamed to distrust God and his power in time of great difficulty,
having received so many and so great deliverances. We are for the most part
like the children of Israel, who although they were by a mighty hand brought
out of Egypt, and through the red Sea, etc. yet upon every strait they began
presently to murmr, and to think of making a Captain to return to Egypt,
never considering the iron bondage they endured in Egypt. God has brought us
out of the Egyptian bondage, and carried us through a red sea of dangers, and
yet when we meet, though but with the news, of any Giants or Anakins, we
begin presently to distrust, and to say: Can God prepare a table in the
wilderness? can God make a way through the hoasts of the Phi^istines? And some
of us begin to wish that things had remained as at first. This is a horrible
sin after so many mercies. As Austin says of Jesus Christ, He that will not
believe in Christ after so many miracles, without a new miracle, he himself is
a great miracle. So he that will distrust God, after so many miraculous
mercies, is himself a miracle of unbelief. How often has God appeared in the
mount these two last years, as if he had resolved to take up his dwelling
there? How many mountains of opposition have melted before you, as mountains
of snow before the Sun? Be ashamed, be ashamed O house of England, to distrust
God after so many mercies.

4. Be ashamed to be cowardly and faint hearted in the cause of Neh. 6,
God, that has so mightily appeared for us. I remember the story of Nehemiah,
Chap. 6. It is there said, That when the enemies heard that the work of the
building of the Temple prospered beyond their expectations, they accused
Nehemiah of treason against the King, and when that plot did not succeed, they
bore him in hand as if some Assassinat had conspired his death. And all this
was done to make him afraid. But he was above all fear (shall such a man as I
fly? (says he) shall such a man as I fear?) and finished the work, insomuch
as that when the enemies heard thereof they were much cast down, for they
perceived that this work was wrought of God. Remember that the fearful are
Rev. 21. 8. Act. 12.
put, not only among unbeleevers, murderers, whoremongers, sorcerers,
Idolaters, etc. but in the forefront of them all. Be not afraid to encounter
difficulties. When Peter came up to the iron gate, it opened to him of its own
accord.

5. Be ashamed to abate and cool in the work of the Lord. God will spue out a
lukewarm Christian. When Moses let down his hands Amaleck prevailed; if you
cool but a little, the adversaries will wax hot. There are many that labor
to cast water upon your zeal, but remember the cause is Gods, and say with
David, It is before the Lord, I will be more vile still. The people of God will
honor you, though Michol scoff at you. It is a great mercy that God has
kept us from blood. God has left our blood in our veins, let it boil up in
the cause of God.

6. Be ashamed to injure the instruments by which God conveyes these mercies
unto us. When Corah and his company rebelled against Moses and Aaron, then came
the plague. As we must not idolize, so we must not injure the golden pipes,
through which these mercies flow unto us.

7. Take heed of being ashamed of the cause of Christ. God has not been
ashamed to appear for us, let us not be ashamed to appear for him. Remember
that thundering speech, Mark. 8. 38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my
words, in this adulterous Mat. 8 38.
and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he
comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. It is not enough not to
be ashamed of Christ in a good generation, but we must not be ashamed of him in
an adulterous and sinful generation.

8. Let us neither pride our selves in our mercies, nor wax wanton in our
mercies. It is recorded in the French History, that when the Protestants of
France began to grow wanton of their peace and prosperity, and began to affect
a vain and frothy way of preaching, the^ came the cruel massacre upon them.

2. I will briefly name some special and heroical Uses, which we are to make
of Gods mercies, besides this use in the Text.

1. Do something, O house of England, for the honor of the Lords day, which
has been much profaned, not only in our practices, but in our Doctrines.
Christ Jesus has two days, The day of the Lord, which is the day of
judgment, And the Lords day. If you look to appear with comfort at the day
of the Lord, honor the Lords day; There is a day of the Lord, for those that
abuse the Lords day. Do something to make this day more honorable by way of
spiritual satisfaction.

2. Do something to purge the Land more and more of the innocent blood of the
Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, by the Laws that were then established. Oh
that in our public Fasts a clause might be interlaced, To command the Land to
be humbled for that bloody sin, that so the Nation might be freed from the
guilt of that blood. This will be an heroical work, worthy of a people
endeared to God by such mercies.

3. Do something for the reformation of Gods house. Mistake me not, I do not
forget to remember with thankfulness, what you have already done, but go on,
I beseech you, to perfect what you have begun to do. And consider what some say
of Solomon, That it was his great fault, that he bestowed more time in building
of ^is own house, than he did in building the house of God. He was but seven
years in building the house of God, and thirteen years in building his own
house. And it is observed he never prospered after. The Scripture seems to give
a little hint of this. For it is said in the 1 King. 6. 38. So was he seven
years in building the house of the Lord. And in the next verse it is added, 1
King. 6. 38 1 King. 7. 1.
But Solomon was building his own house thirteen years. This (but) may seem
to be a secret kind of reproof. O let not the like blame be cast upon you!
Make haste to repair the ruins of Gods house. And be sure to repair it
according to the Word of God, not according to humane policy. Let me desire
you never to forget the story of David, who when he went to bring home the
Arc* with great joy, because he brought it not home in due order, but suffered
it to be carried in a Cart, when God had commanded it should be carried upon
the Priests shoulders, there was a great breach made, and a great stop of the
work. As it is expressly said, 1 Chr. 15. 13. Because he did it not at the
first, therefore 1 Chr. 15. 13.
the Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the
due order. A reformation made according to the rule will abide, when all others
will molder away, and the blessing of God will be upon it, and upon the maker
of it.

4. Do something for the setting up of a Preaching Ministry throughout the
Kingdom; That the light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ may shine in the dark
corners of the Land. And provide a competent maintenance for the Ministry, for
fear lest scandalo^us Livings, make scandalous Ministers.

5. Do something to purge out all the defilements that are in the pure worship
of God, that the pure and holy God may be worshipped with pure worship, purely,
by pure worshippers.

6. Do something for bleeding Ireland, Pity Ireland that (...) the mercies we
enjoy. Pray for Ireland. Underwrite for Ireland. This design now on foot is a
work of great piety, a means to root out Popery for ever out of Ireland, and
it may prove as profitable as pious. Send speedy aid, and the Lord bless it
when it is sent.

And thus I have finished my Sermon. It is reported of Ignatius, that when he
heard a clock strike, he would say, Here is one hour more now past, that I
have to answer for. Give me leave to tell you, you have heard a Sermon of two
hours, and therefore you have two hours more to answer for. The Lord enable
us to give up a good account of this days meeting. Let us pray down^ a
blessing from heaven upon what we have heard. For though the mercies of God be
most free, as I showed you in my third Doctrine, yet God must be enquired of by
the bouse of England, to do^ these mercies for them, as it is expressly set
down in the 3^. Ezekiel. 36. 37.
verse of this Chapter. Prayer does not merit mercy, but fits us for mercy.
If we will have mercy, we must bring vessels to hold it, and no vessels will
hold mercy but broken hearts. This is a Paradoxe in nature, but not in grace.
Deus non infundit oleum misericordi^, nisi in v^ contritun^. And where should
we go for a broken heart, but to the heart-maker? Let us pray unto God to fit
ou^ Nation for more mercies, and then to bestow them upon us.

FINIS.

