THE Poor Doubting CHRISTIAN Drawn to CHRIST. Plainly showing every poor Sinner
the miserableness of his Estate he is in, without Christ. With several sweet
Motives to Draw us to Christ, Also comfortable Directions how to live by Faith,
and so to attain unto Grace and Salvation. Being very useful for every poor
Sinner to practice and make use of, in these sinful, wicked, and backsliding
times. Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, drink of the waters of life;
and he that has no money, come, buy and eat freely. Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from before the foundation of the
World, Mat. 25. 32. BY E. C. The 4th Impression.

London, Printed for John Wright, at the Globe in Little-Brittain. 1669.

THE Poor Doubting Christian Drawn unto CHRIST.
THe great Design that the most Wise God Created Man for, was, that he (being
Obedient) might be happy to all Eternity; But Man being no sooner placed in
that most Beautiful (and Fruitful) Garden of Eden, but (by the instigation of
the Devil) he soon Rebelled against his Creator, (in breaking the Command) and
so Fell, and became wicked and sinful in all his Posterity (which was) That the
Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents Head; So that we being dead unto
sin, might live in Christ.

And the great Design of Christ coming (in he Flesh) into the World, was to
Draw poor Sinners unto him, that (thorough Faith) they might be Saved.

For whom did Crist come into the world and for whom did he dye when he was
come? Was it for the Righteous? such needed him not: It was for the poor Sinner
that judges himself, that condemns himself, and he that cannot save himself.
Paul says, Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the
chief, 1 Timothy 1. 15: and Zech. 13. 1. There is a Fountain opened for sin, and
for uncleanness; that is, for all sorts of sins, and kind of sinners: be their
iniquities never so great and never so vile, there is a Fountain set open for
them, come who will. There was never any saved or reeeived to mercy, that first
opposed not the mercies of God and his grace in Christ.

What Scripture ever said, that the greatness of man's sin could hinder the
greatness of Gods mercy? No Scripture says so; we see David prayed to the
contrary. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, and pardon my sins, for they be great,
Psalm 25. 11 Nay, God himself does the quite contrary. Isai. 43. 24. 25. Thou
have made me serve with thy sins, and wearied me with thine in quities, yet I
am He that blotteth out thy transgressions for my Names sake. When the Jews did
fire God with their distempered manners, and burdened him with their sinful
courses, then the Lord (for his own Name sake) would not so much as remember
their Iniquities against them.

Sins though they be never so heinous of themselves, yet if the soul can see
them. and the heart be burdened with them, they are so far from hindering the
work of faith, and from making thee incapable of mercy, that they fit thee the
rather to go to Christ. The truth is (which I pray you take notice of,) it is
not properly our unworthiness, but our pride and haughtiness that hinders us
from coming to Christ; for we would fain have something from our selves, and
no^ all from him but to the distressed soul, that sees the vileness of his
sins; the Lord will not cast thee away, if thou will come and seek him
earnestly, again, and again: The Lord said to Judah, I have seen his ways, and
will heal him, again, Thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet turn
again to me, says the Lord. So then, there is no time past, if a Man have but
a heart to return There is no limitation of the riches of Gods free grace,
except the sin against the Holy Ghost; therefore says Christ, I standing at
the door and knock, Revel. 3. 20. Though he cry till he be hoarse. and stand
till he be weary, yet he stands still: if any adulterous or deceitful wretch
will open, Christ will come in, and bring in store of comfort to him, and sup
with him.

Oh, all this is true, says the poor soul, had I but a heart to mourn for my
baseness. See my sins I do, but this is my misery, I cannot be burdened with
them; I have a heart that cannot break and mourn for dishonoring God, and
offending him so many ways, But I say.

This hurts not neither; provided that thy heart be weary of it self, because
it cannot be weary of sin. The Lord shows mercy, because he will show mercy:
It is not because thou can please him, but because mercy pleases him. When
did the Lord show mercy unto Paul? but even when Paul did express most malice
against him? Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? He persecutes Christ, and yet
Christ pitties him, and shows him mercy: and so the churlish Jailer, when he
was most opposite against the means of grace, the Lord even then showed most
comfortable upon him. He that (before) resisted the means of grace, was brought
home by those means that before he resisted.

Alas, (says the poor Sinner (I never knew what it was to have the assurance
of Gods love; I never received any evidence of Gods favor; and can I (then)
think that I have Faith? they that Believe have their hearts filled with Joy
unspeakable and glorious? the Scripture says as much. But I am a Stranger to
this Joy; how then can I think that I have any work of Faith wrought in me?

I answer; When a poor Sinner sees his sins, the number of them, that nature of
them, the vileness of them, the cursedness of his soul, that he can take no
rest; he sees no rest in the creature, nor in himself. Though he pray all day,
yet he cannot get the pardon of one sin: the soul is out of any expectation of
pardon, or power of mercy in any thing he has or does; Though all means, all
helps, all Men and Angels should join together, yet they cannot pardon one sin
of his. Now the LORD lifts up his voice, and says from Heaven, Thy sins are
pardonable. O the infiniteness of Gods power! though the guilt of sin is
powerful to condemn the soul; But when the infinite power of the Lord is
considered, as able to over power all his sins, this lifts up the heart in
some expectation that the Lord will show mercy to a man; though it is a hard
thing to hope, when the Soul is thus troubled.

Object. Can this heart be broke? can these sins be pardoned? can this Soul be
saved?

Ans. God can pardon them. Never measure the power of God by that shallow
conceit of thine. All things are possible to God, though not to men. And as it
is said of Abraham, He hoped above hope; he looked to the Lord that was able to
do what he had promised: he considered not that he had a dead body, but that he
had a living God to hope on. Justice cannot be so severe to revenge thee, as
mercy is gracious to do good unto thee. If thy sins be never so many, Gods
Justice never so great; yet mercy is above all thy sins. This may support thy
Soul; thy sins are pardonable. There is no more power in God to show mercy to
thee, then power in sin to destroy thee: The Lord Jesus Christ came to seek,
and to save that which was lost: it was the scope of his coming.

Now says the broken and humble sinner, Did Christ come to save sinners? my
sins are so many and great, can they be pardoned? Yet God says, Come to me all
ye that are heavy laden. I am weary and unless the Lord intended good to me,
Why did he invite me, and bid me come? Surely he means to show mercy to me.

O take heed! Question thy estate thou may but to cast away all hope, is very
heinous in the eyes of the Lord, Cast away all carnal confidence thou must, and
yet thou must hope; Let Israel hope in the Lord; for in the Lord, etc Thou
go to the deep Dungeon of thy corruption and there thou say: these sins
can never be pardoned. Is any thing too hard for the Lord? You wrong God
exceedingly: you think it is a matter of humility, to count your selves so vile.
Can God pardon such a wretches sin as mine: no, no, my sins are greater than
can be pardoned, says the dispairing Soul. Consider how injurious this is to
God, to make the power of sin greater to condemn thee, than the power of God to
save thee.

See now and consider what desperate danger Despair brings to a poor heart, and
carries him beyond the reach of mercy. That Is a sweet passage of David's, Psalm.
77. 7. Will the Lord cast me off for ever? I said this was my infirmity: What,
is mercy gone for ever? then is all my comfort gone: Therefore take heed of
this, it takes off the edge of all our endeavors and Gods Ordinances that
might do us good.

Therefore, let the soul in this case bear upon the Almightiness of the Power
of God, who said to Abraham, I am God All-sufficient. For if thou be persuaded
of the Al-suffciency of God, that assurence cannot but stay thee from falling:
and here remember that God can do more then thou can think. He is able, and
does the good, though thou know it not.

Measure not the riches of Gods love, and the sweetness of his saving grace
according to your own conceits: nor do you think that because you cannot
presently receive it, therefore God will not do it, for Isaiah says, Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, Isa. 55. 7, 8, 9.
that is, All you wicked ones, and you that have lived Lewdly, Return from your
wicked ways and vain thoughts; and God will abundantly show mercy.

Thou must in all things that concern thy Soul repair to the Scripture: so thou
must consider thine own uprightness by it, and see what work is in thy soul
that is able to answer the Word, and to testify that the work of grace is
there. And here be sure to take your soul at the best: do not always pore upon
the worst that is in it, nor upon thy failings, nor that, that can only accuse
thee; but if thou find any thing there that may justly speak for thee, neglect
not that. It is an injustice for any Court to hear one side and not the other,
The Scripture is a Text of Justice, and the Lord does not lie at catch with his
Children, but takes them at the best: as Romans 4. 22. it is there said of
Abraham that he believed the promise, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness Indeed, as in the 12. of Genesis he had some doubtings: but God took
him at the best: and speaks this of his faith. So Sarah is spoken of as a
gracious Woman, and of a pattern for women, by calling her Husband Lord; which
was a sign of reverence to her Husband; and an humble heart to the Lord, and
yet we read that she derided the Message of the Lord by the Angel: the Lord
buries that, and only speaks of that which was to her commendation, Genesis 12.
12. and so took her at her best too: Now as the Lord dealt with these so should
we with our selves? what soever is found sincere and upright in us, that should
we observe as well as that which is not so: So when men shall bring in so many
Indictments against themselves, and say, Oh what pride and stubborness is in my
heart! Oh how weak am I, and dull, and dead, and backwardness to holy duties! O
how careless of enjoying Communion with God! How negligent in sifting and
trying my own heart, in watching over my senses, and mourning in secret for my
own failings! Though this were so, yet if men will see no more (and these too
much) no marvel if they trouble their own house, or if Satan by their own
words Judge them. To such a one therefore I say, All that thou say may be
true; but art thou not troubled with these failings? and are they not the
greatest grief that thy soul has? Yea says the poor soul, I confess my heart
is vexed, and my soul grieved for them; and I could be content to be any thing
that I could be so.

Now labor to have thy Conscience settled and stablish'd in the truth, which
now thou have gotten to bear witness of the work of grace in thee. For if there
be any want of the assurance of Gods love, For if our Conscience condemn us
not, then we have boldness toward God. We must stop the mouth of Conscience;
that is, be convinced and agree, that it is a sin to say, God has not wrought
this work of grace in the heart, when it is so clear he has. For though sense
and feeling be as it sometimes will be) gone, yet Conscience remembers the day
and year, when the sinner had a clear evidence of Gods love, and therefore
says, Lord thou know it, and thou did say out of the Word at such a time,
that the heart of this poor soul was upright and sincere before thee.

You must therefore wait upon God, and the Spirit of God in the use of the
means for this matter, by believing rightly to your assurance: For so the Text
says, To you it is given to believe; it must be given therefore: and Faith is
the free gift of God. It is God then that must do it; who yet will not do it
without us, being reasonable men and women in the power of willing. Again, the
Lord affords us means; yet not so use them, and give him the slip. And here it
is a good saying; let the Lord do what he will, and let us do what we should.
We must not think when we have the means, that we can get Faith presently:
for, as Paul says, The same power that raised up Jesus from the dead, must
make us able to believe, Ephesians. 1. 20. or else all the Angels in Heaven, and all
the Ministers on Earth, and all help that Men and Means can give us, will do us
no good. Now the Means are of diverse kinds: as, Hearing, and Prayer, and
Sacraments, which are ye Conduits from which God communicats Faith,

Now Faith brings the Promises home to thee, and thou see the sufficiency of
it, then all thou have to do is this, in the stream of ye Promise, be carried
home to Christ, The Prodigal Luke 15. is said to be like a lost Sheep. Mark
this, for it concerns you, The poor Sheep is wandering up and down; now in the
mouth of the Lion, and then in the Briars, and sometimes in the Pit: The Text
says, He leaves ninty nine, to seek that. That is, in comparison of what care
he expresses to the Lost Sheep; He leaves a man regenerate not carel sly, but
he will not express so great love, as to a poor lost man: And though thou can
not find ye way to heaven, yet he will find it thee; lie thou upon the
shoulders of Christ. When thou find thy heart feeble and weak, and thy self
unable to believe, then the Lord Jesus Christ brings the Spirit of Grace, and
that comes to seek, and Jesus Christ lays that soul of thine upon his Soulders
(that is upon ye richness and freenses of his Grace) Therefore let thy heart be
transported by the Power of that Grace, and by the virtue of that Mercy that
God has made known to thee, for thy everlasting good.

Therefore rest thy self upon this Promise, and say; Lord, in the virtue of
that Grace, and in the power of that Spirit, carry me, and in the riches of
that mercy of thine. Lord, convey the heart of this poor Sinner, and make me
happy with thy self for ever. Remember what Christ says, Matthew. 25. 34. Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prpared for you. Then no more
tears, no more trouble, no more sorrow, no more sin; the day will come when ye
shall have happiness and joy, beyond all that the tongue of man can express, or
the heart conceive.

Though we are buffetted with many temptations, and waried with a world of
corruptions, yet we shall be saved, says Faith.

Remember what I speak now; and labor to fasten this truth upon thy heart;
that there is not only present good in thy self, but in another, and reserved
by anther for thy comfort, and be thou content it should be so, not only to
look what thou have; but consider that the greatest part of thy glory, is in
the glory of a Christ; and the greatest part of thy wisdom, is in the wisdom of
a Christ, and the greatest part of thy liberty, in the liberty of a Christ; and
thy riches, in the riches of a Christ: And know, what ever is in Christ, thou
have it all as thine; John 3. 12. Behold what love the Father has shown to us,
that we are now the Sons of God! I tell you Brethren, this is a marvelous
privilege, and if you had no more but this, you had a child's portion; but it
appears not what we shall have, we have but a glimps now; what think you will
the harvest be? Now we have but the sips of it, what shall then the full cups
be, when we shall see Christ as he is, Thus did Moses improve his estate, Heb.
11. 26. He bore all afflictions comfortably; yea, He esteemed the rebukes of
Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt; Why? because he had an eye
to the Recompense, of Reward.

What Moses did, do thou: Though thou have many corruptions; and many disgraces
cast upon thee, though thou have little strength, and art at a great loss in
point of comfort, yet there is enough in Heaven, enough in Christ, both of
riches and comfort: Let thy soul then be careful to make all these present with
thee for thine own good.

When the Husband man has sown his ground, and his fruit is ripe, and he has
reaped it, then he must gather in his Corn, that he may live upon it. So let us
gather in the Promises when we see the best advantage; now let us take the gain
and live by it, and that comfortably too, in the proof of Gods goodness
therein. For this end I shall give you some directions, how to live in, and by
faith.

First, Thou see what God is in the Promise; and thou expectest no more than
God there. Then look upon that particular good in the Promise, which thou
stand in need of; eye that good in Christ, and then set Gods power and
Faithfulness a work to bring that good, and his Wisdom to continue it. That
which thou see and needst in the Promise, that the Power and Wisdom of God
may communicate to thy soul. This is the meaning of that place, Psalm, 37. 5.
Commit thy ways unto the Lord; trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass.
Root thy self, and lay all thy occasions upon the Lord: Therefore the Apostle
says, 1 Pet. 5. Hurl your care upon the Lord, for he cares for you. It is
Gods proper office and work: he cares for thy soul, therefore lay it wholly
upon him, and put over all thy care into his hands: and set his power and
faithfulness a work. I speak not this, that we should take no care at all, but
I say, hang all the weight and burden upon the Lord.

Secondly, By Faith go to the promise again for help and power to wait on God
in that way, and to look toward God in the use of those means, that he has
appointed for the attaining of that good, which his power will work for thee:
God will certainly work it: and so thou must meet God in the course of his
providence, in the improvement of the means he has appointed for thy good:
Observe thou this providence, and do thou what God requires: for otherwise we
live not by Faith, but tempt God, and throw away the Promises and all, and
deprive our selves of that good which God would bestow: we not walking in that
way which he has appointed. Luke 24. 46. When our Savior was to go to Heaven,
he said, Behold I send the promise of my Father among you: but tarry you in the
City of Jerusalem, until you be endued with power from above. Christ would
indue them with the Spirit; but they must tarry at Jerusalem, and wait for it:
So I say. Would thou have Grace and the Spirit from above, and the wealth of
the world, then walk in that way God has appointed: stay at Jerusalem, meet
God in his providence, and then thou shall receive from his power and
faithfulness what thou need: thou would have God bless thee in thine
Estate, and yet thou would be idle and careless; but this will not do the
deed: God would give thee a blessing, but thou art not prepared to take it?
This is the excellency of the Promises of God; as they require conditions,
before they bestow mercies; so they make us able to be partakers of the
conditions: As for example, Ezekiel. 36. the Lord in the former part of yt
Chapter, promises to give them many things; but how? It must be by prayer, and
humbling themselves before him: he will give thee a family-blessing by prayer
in it; and a blessing is private, by prayer in private; and strength against
sin, and power against corruption: But I will be sought unto for all these
says the Lord: Blessed is the man that walks in his integrity, and his
children after him. Therefore walk thou in the integrity of thine heart, that is
the condition of a Christian in general. This the Lord requires: And the Lord
that requires the conditions, will help us to perform the conditions: and the
same Lord says, I will be entreated and sought too for all these. And Psalm.
10. 17. He prepares their hearts to pray: Go thou therefore to God to help
thee to pray, that he may bestow his blessing upon thee, which he has
promised, Eze. 26, 27. He will first give them a new heart, then teach them to
walk in his ways. So if thou will walk in his ways, thou shall have his
blessings; therefore go thou (by Faith) to God for Strength and Grace, and then
expects a Blessing from him.

Thirdly. We must believe that God will do it; so shall we receive in the ways
of his providence, whatever he has promised to give. This is the work of
faith. Hannah wept sore, and prayed to the Lord, and went away, and was no more
sorrowful 1 Samuel 1. 18. and she said, Lord, I believe that I shall either have
a child, or that which is as good or better: now Hannah's business was done.
But imagine the Lord delays, and does not suddenly accomplish what he intends,
and thou have used means to receive, he gives not, nor sends no succor
according to thy desire.

Fourthly, Then Faith is to stay till it come; as thou believe, so it will
be: We prevent Gods kindness, when we go away before he be willing to bestow it
on us. But Faith will not do so; he that believes does not make have away, but
stays, and resolves that it will come. The vision is for an appointed time,
Therefore wait for it. Perhaps thou art troubled with thy sins, and have
labored by Faith to subdue them, and looks for deliverance, and yet it comes
not: therefore stay till God sees it fit, and it will come, Psalm. 123. 2. As
the eyes of a servant look to the hands of his master, and the eyes of a maiden
to her mistress; so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy
upon us. It is not when I will, or according to my mind, but when the Lord
pleases.

Fifthly, Yet perhaps the Lord seems sometimes not only to delay his poor
servants, and to withhold his favor; but he seems to frown, and say, he will
not hear; and seems to be angry with the prayers of his servants, and as if he
would not succor or supply them. Thus he dealt with Jacob, Genesis 32. 26. there
the Lord says, Let me go, I care not what becomes of thee: But Jacob lays hold
upon him, and would not let him go. So the last work of Faith is this: In a
holy humility labor to contend with God, and by strong hand overcome the Lord;
for the Lord loves to be overcome thus; as it were, catch the Lord Jesus and
strive with him; leave him not till thou have these comforts he has promised,
and thou have begged.

This is the glorious victory and triumph of Faith, that gives thee the day
too, and yields himself conquered: As it was with Jacob, when God saw he could
not prevail, verse 28. Thy name shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel,
because thou have prevailed with God. God is ready to give what he has
promised: but he will have us try the mastery with him; we by faith in God,
overcome God: as James 2. 13: Mercy triumphs over Justice: You know what the
Lord did to the woman of Canaon, when she had striven with Christ a great
while, and would take no denial: at last he says, O woman, great is thy faith,
be it unto thee as thou will. Take what thou will, if thou will have life for
thy child, and peace for thine own conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost, take
it; for it is all thine. He, as it were, turns her loose to all his treasury.
If she had gone away at the first or second denial, she had found no help: but
because she held out, she had her hearts desire. God would have us wrestle with
his Majesty, that he may be overcome in mercy and goodness.

I might here have taken some of the most desperate cases that could be, that
you might have seen what Faith would have done in midst of the want of all
Means, and in the greatest extremity that would have befaln a poor Snner; but I
pass them all over. Now I beseech you, consider what has been said: lay these
things up by you; they will be an everlasting Treasury for you. Many people
live poorly, and make a poor shift to go to heaven: but I would have a
Christian to learn to live so, and use the means; that they may get the sap and
sweet of the Promises, and so go singing, rejoicing, and triumphing up to
Heaven.

To conclude, Thus we see the hindrances removed, and the means propounded:
and that we may be moved, and persuaded (for our souls sake; for Jesus Christ's
sake) to seek after this blessed Grace of Faith in Christ, let us further
consider thus much, that if we once get this Grace, we get all other Graces
with it; further, would you have the glory of God in sight, and be more
heavenly minded? then get it by the eye of Faith: look up to it in the face of
Jesus Christ, for there and there is only this vision of the Glory of God to be
seen, to your everlasting Peace, and endless Comfort.

Courteous People, I desire you (for Jesus Christ's sake) to buy this Book, and
read it seriously, end meditate upon it, hopeing it will prove an everlasting
Treasury, for your Souls good.

FINIS.

