royal blazon or coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


BY THE KING

A Proclamation for the redress of certain Grievances complained of by the
Inhabitants of the County of OXFORD.
WHEREAS Complaint has been made to His Majestic on the behalf of the
Inhabitants of this County of Oxford, that although they have agreed to a great
weekly Contribution by way of Loan toward the Provision of His Majesty's
Horse, yet in many parts of this County, they suffer in these particulars
following, wherein they humbly pray to be releived.

First, That the Soldiers do put their Horses into the standing-corne, and do
eat and spoil it, which will be an utter undoing to the owners, if it be not
remedied.

Secondly, They turn their Horses into their Meddowes, and mowing-grasse,
whereby they shall have no Hay to keep their Cattle the next winter, refusing
other grass fit for them.

Thirdly, Whereas there is 3s 6d by the week allowed for a Soldiers Diet, in
many places a Soldier, a Woman, and a Child, or a Boy, be all billetted and
dyeted at the same rate, as for one man.

Fourthly, Many of them refuse to give Tickets, when they have been billetted a
month, or six weeks in a place, and some who do give Tickets, will not make
them so perfect, as that the Master of the family can have allowance thereof,
when it is brought to the Sheriff or other Collectour.

Fifthly, Where Soldiers are quartered in a Parish, and sometimes one or a few
houses receive them, as the Quartermaster appoints it, they who receive them
can have no contribution from them of the same Parish or Liberty, who receive
either none, or a fewer number, whereas the charg being borne by all of ability
indifferently, it would be the easier, and the more equal.

His Majestic taking these things into His Princely consideration, does give
His approbation of the reasonableness of them all. And being willing to case
His good Subjects in all things which He can, and the necessity of the times
will permit Does now declare His Royal Pleasure and Command that these things
above written, and complained of, be from henceforth reformed. and does require
the Commanders and Officers of His Army, as much as in them lies, to see the
same observed, and that whosoever shall offend therein must expert to receive
punishment strictly, according to the quality of his offense, and that both the
Inhabitants of the County, and the Soldiers may take the better notice hereof
and observe it, His Majesty does command that this be forthwith Printed and
Published in every Church and Parochial Chapel within this County.

Given at His Majesty's Court in OXFORD, this third day of June, in the
nineteenth year of His Majesty's Reign.
God Save the KING.
Printed at Oxford by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1643.


