THE NOBLE-MANS PATTERN Of true and real Thankfulness. PRESENTED In a SERMON
Preached before the Right Honorable House of LORDS; At their late solemn day
of thanksgiving, June 15. 1643. For the discovery of a dangerous, desperate and
bloody design, tending to the utter subversion of the PARLIAMENT and of the
famous City of LONDON.

By EDMUND CALAMY, B.D. Pastor of Aldermanbury in LONDON.

Published by Order of that House.

LUKE 1. 74, 75. That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might
serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the
days of our life. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith at the
Sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, M.DC.XLIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE House of LORDS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IF all Noblemen were as good and religious as they are presented to the World
in the Epistles prefixed to the Books that are dedicated to them, we should not
have so much cause to complain of great men's Iniquities, or of poor men's
flatteries. S. Augustine in his Book of Retractations, Retracts it as a great
fault, that when he dedicated a Book to Mallius Theodorus, he praised him more
then he deserved, though he confesses that he was doctus vir and Christianus,
a Learned and Christian man: It is none of the least miseries of great men,
that they want faithful friends to tell them their vices as well as their
virtues. King Ahab had 400. flattering Prophets who were the cause of his
ruin. Hence is that old Proverb, that there are only two things that never
flatter great men, Death and Horses. For Death seizes upon great as well as
small. And a Horse will cast down a great man as well as any other, if he
rides not well. This Sermon speaks plain language, and this is the only
Reason (for ought I know) that it received such kind acceptance, for otherwise
it wants that neatness of phrase, and eloquence of speech which such Noble
Auditors are accustomed unto, I have often heard of Great men, that complained
upon their Death beds, that none would tell them of their faults, but never of
any that complained he was told too much. Theodosius the great Emperor
confesses of S. Ambrose, notwithstanding his severe carriage toward him,
Theod.
Solum novi Ambrosium dignum Episcopi nomine; That he knew none worthy of a
Bishopric but Ambrose.

It is a custom to send Sermons out unto public view under the Patronage of
some Nobleman or other. This Sermon has this pre-eminence, That it comes
forth under the Patronage, and by the commands not only of one Lord, but of a
House of Lords. The Lord make it to obtain that end for which it was preached!
That you (my Lords) may make Joshua's choice your choice. The subject matter of
the Sermon is very common and ordinary. But herein I follow the example of
Chrysostom, who when he was made Patriarch of Constantinople, the first Sermon
that he preached before the Emperor Arcadius and the great Courtiers, was a
Sermon of Repentance. This is the message that I have received (says
Chrysostom) from my Master Christ to deliver unto you. Repent for the Kingdom
of God is at hand. Haec autem non dubitabo vobis assidue revocare in memoriam.
Haec neminem reverentes neque potentes aut divites timentes ad vos loquemur.
The Lord bestow this great grace of Repentance upon you, and enable you to
serve God with all the ingredients mentioned in the following Sermon! Two
things I would desire your Lordships always to remember.

1. That the best way of thankfulness for mercies received, is to serve the
God of those mercies, and to serve him with the mercies we receive from him.

2. That the best way for the House of Lords to prosper, is to endeavor
earnestly and faithfully to reform the Lords House, your own houses, and first
your selves.

Some things I have added which were not preached, which relate to all men in
general as well as great men, which I then omitted for brevity sake, but have
here interserted I hope without offense, that so this Sermon which is printed
for a general good, might have somethings in it tending to the good of all men
as well as great men.

The Great God make the House of Lords as the House of the Lord wherein service
may be done to God, and for Gods cause. So prays

Your Honors much obliged Spiritual servant Edmund Calamy.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable the House of Lords.
Josh. 24. 15. But as for me and my house we will serve the Lord.
WE are here met this day to keep a day of Thanksgiving, to keep a Heaven
upon Earth, to do that for a day, which is the work of Angels and Archangels
to all eternity. We have had many days of Hosannah's and now we are to keep
one day of Hallelujah's. It has pleased God of his great goodness to discover
a dangerous and desperate Plot, tending to the utter subversion of the
Parliament, of the famous City of London, of the Army, of the whole Kingdom,
and which is above all to the utter ruin of the true reformed Protestant
Religion. We are here assembled to give God the praise of this Deliverance. Now
that this duty may be performed after a pious and Christian manner to the
praise of that God whom we come to praise, I have chosen this Text. For I am
clearly of this opinion, that as there is no duty more excellent then this of
Thanksgiving.

For it is the duty of Heaven, and not only so, but the preferment of Heaven.
Ps. 50. 23.
It is a duty that honors God, and it is the highest honor that God can put
upon us, to give us leave to perform this duty. It is a duty that Adam should
have performed, though he had never fallen. It is a duty that shall last for
ever and ever. It is a comely duty. It is a pleasant duty. Ps. 33. 1.
It is the highest expression of our love to God: Ps. 147. 1.
It is the surest evidence of our election (For that man that loves the work
of Heaven upon earth, shall certainly go to Heaven when he leaves the earth.
Now the work of Heaven is to praise God.) It is the only rent penny which God
requires for all the blessings he bestows upon us.

And yet notwithstanding all this, I conceive there is no one duty wherein God
is more dishonored, or his name more profaned then in this duty. The world is
full of Thanking of God, blessed be God, praised be God. But I beseech yetell
me. Are we not formal in this duty? Do we not content our selves with the
bare Carcass, and outside of praises? Do we not take Gods name in vain,
while we are blessing his name? Do we not content our selves with a drop of
praises for a sea of mercies? Do we not praise him with our lips, while we
dispraise him with our lives? Are we not like unto Actors upon a stage that now
play one part, and by and by act a quite contrary part? While we are at Church
we seem to cry Hallelujah, and with the Jews to sing Hosannah. But as soon as
ever we come out of the Church, are there not many that will with the Jews cry
Crucifige, acting the quite contrary part, and curse, and swear profanely by
that God whom they blessed at Church? The devil was the first that ever named
Gods name in Scripture, and one of the first that ever confessed Christ to be
the Son of God, and yet he was a devil for all that. It is a devilish thing
to praise God with our lips, and serve the devil with our lives. Now therefore
for the avoiding of this great sin, and for the raising up of your hearts to
praise God, not only with your lips, but with your lives, I have pitched upon
these words, which I may very well call, A rare plat-forme, and excellent
pattern of true and real thankfullnes. For this is to thank God as we ought
to do for his goodness, to become good our selves. Then we praise God aright,
when we dedicate our lives to his praise, and become a people of his praise.
Josiah did not only offer a thank-offering, but he commanded Judah to serve the
Lord God of Israel. It is not enough to thank God for a mercy, unless we
serve him with that mercy. 2 Chronicles. 33. 16.
It is not the singing of a thousand Psalms will praise God so much for this
Deliverance as the mortifying of one lust. Let the drunkard praise God this day
by sacrificing up his drunkenness as a Thank-offering. Let the swearer and the
Adulterer forsake his swearing and his Adultery, as a testimony of his
Thankfulness. God has bin real in his mercies to us, let us be real in our
thanks to him. Let us with this famous and noble Prince in my Text enter into
a solemn Covenant, and resolution for the time to come, in sense of Gods
goodness toward us for the time past, to become the true and faithful
servants of God, and though all the world should serve sin and the Devil,
but as for you and your house, you will serve the Lord.

In the words themselves we have two parts.

First, The substance of Joshuah's choice; and that is, To serve Jehovah.
Ioshuah does not only choose to be saved by Jehovah, but to serve Jehovah.
There is no man so wicked, but he would be glad to be saved by God, but you
must know that that man shall never have Christ for his Savior, that will not
have Christ for his Lord and Master. He that will not follow the example of
Christ's life, shall never be saved by the merit of his death. If Christ be not
thy Jacobs staff to guide thee to Heaven, he will never become as a Jacobs
ladder to carry thee up to Heaven.

2. We have six rare circumstances in Ioshuahs choice.

First, The person that made this choice, and that is Joshua the chief Ruler of
Israel.

2. The latitude and circumference of this choice, I and my house, not himself
without his Family, nor his Family without himself. But himself and his
Family. And first himself, and then his Family.

3. The firmness and stability of Ioshuah's choice, We will serve the Lord.
Not only we desire to do it. But we are fully resolved to do it.

4. The publicknesse of Ioshuah's resolution. Ioshuah does not only choose in
his heart to serve the Lord, but makes open protestation and profession of it,
before all the Lords and Commons of Israel. For these words were spoken in a
Parliamentary Assembly, when all the Tribes and Heads of the Tribes of Israel
and Judges and Officers were present, as you may read v. 1.

5. The speediness of Ioshuah's choice. Joshua puts the Israelites to choose.
Choose you this day whom ye will serve. But as for himself he was already
resolved. Ioshuah had not his Religion to choose as many have, he did not
demurre upon it, his choice was already made: Choose you; but as for me and my
house we will serve the Lord.

6. The singularity of Ioshuah's choice. This [But] is put down by way of
opposition, Choose you whither ye will serve the true God, or the gods of the
Amorites. But as for me I am resolved for my self and my Family to serve the
Lord, though all the Lords and Commons of Israel should renounce his service.

The time will not suffer me to speak distinctly of every one of these parts.
I will therefore sum them up for brevity sake into this one doctrinall
Conclusion.

That it is the duty of all men, but especially of such as are Joshuah's, Doctr.
such as are Rulers and Nobles, to engage themselves and their Families to
serve God resolutely, speedily and publicly, maugre all opposition to the
coutrary.

This is a Doctrine that needs Application rather then Explication. A Doctrine
that I have chosen, not to feed your heads with curious notions, but to feast
your hearts with solid nourishment. For the Explicatory part, I will only
propound 3 things.

First, I will show what it is to serve God.

Secondly, I will show the necessity that lies upon all men to serve God, and
to serve him with the golden circumstances of the Text.

Thirdly, I will show the necessity that lies upon great as well as others, and
rather then others to obey this Text.

First, What it is to serve God. The first part of the explication.


For this you must know that the service of God is not a natural action,
wherein the doing of the work is all that is required. As nothing is required
of the fire, but to burn, because it is a natural action. But it is an action
of Religion, wherein the manner of doing is the chief half of the duty, and
that which makes our serving of God to be a sweet perfume is not the serving,
but the right serving of God. Now the right serving of God is to serve him
according to his own Direction, both for the matter and the manner of his
service. It is a maxim in nature, Every master is to be served according as
himself commands, and if the servant prescribe to his master, how he will
serve him, he becomes his Masters Master. In the civil Law a servant is said
to be (...), such a one that sustaines no person, but is a dependant and
adjunct to his Master, to accommodate his will to the will of his Master. It is
a saying of Socrates, If there be a God he must be worshipped, and if he be
worshipped, he must be worshipped according to his own will, or else we do
not worship him at all. Moses built the Tabernacle according to the pattern in
the Mount. 1 Chro. 28 12, 19.
And David when he built the Temple, received a pattern of it from the Spirit
of God in writing. The nature of man is prone to worship God by Crucifixes and
Images, and by ways of our own devising. But this is not to serve God, but to
go a whoring after our own inventions, as the phrase is, Psalm. 106. 37. Mat.
15 9.
For indeed it is spiritual whoredom, and it is an exalting of our wisdom
above Gods. It is vaine-service, and therefore cannot please God. Col. 2 23.
It is will worship and of no account with God. It is a service that is so
far from bringing us to Heaven, that it will beguile us of Heaven. Col. 2. 18.
This then is to serve God, to serve him according to his own way, both for
matter and manner.

Now if you ask me; Quest.
What is that way wherein God would have us to serve him. I answer briefly.

He that would serve God so as to please him must mingle 10. Answ. 1.
Ingredients in his service. And indeed this very act of Ioshuah in choosing
such a master as Jehovah, and in choosing to stand under such a relation as a
servant unto Jehovah does necessarily imply.

First, That Ioshuah did not only choose to serve God, but to serve him
undividedly, to serve God and none but God. For in all Elections those whom we
do not choose we refuse. And therefore Joshua's choosing to serve the Lord does
imply, that he did refuse all other Lords and masters. This is plain in the
beginning of this verse. And if it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, choose
ye this day whom ye will serve, whether the gods, etc. As if he should have
said. Ye cannot serve the God of the Israelites, and the god of the Amorites
together. Ye cannot serve God and Idols. No man says Christ can serve two
Masters, etc.

2. Joshua did not only choose to serve God undividedly, Everlustingly. This
appears because he chose an everlasting Master. And for this purpose he tells
the Israelites, verses 19. 20. You cannot serve the Lord for he is a holy God
and a jealous God, etc. If ye forsake him he will consume you, etc. As if he
should have said, If you intend to serve God, you must never revolt, but keep
your selves constant for ever to his service, for else he will turn and do
you hurt and consume you after he has done you good.

3. Joshua did not only choose to serve God undividedly Faithfully and
sincerely. And this appears, because he chose such a Master, that is the heart
maker and the heart searcher. This is the difference between the serving of
God, and the serving of man; Man can but see the outside, and punish the
outside, and judges of the inside by the outside. But God is a Spirit, and
will be worshipped in spirit and in truth, and judges of the outside by the
inside. Ier. 17. 10.
And therefore Joshua tells the children of Israel, verse. 14. Now therefore
fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in truth. As if he should have
said, If you intend to serve him, you must serve him in uprightness, or else
ye do not serve him at all. For God requires good aims as well as good
actions, and he abhorres that service though never so good, if the aim of him
that serves him be not good. If a Wife should dress her self in fine apparel
to please an Adulterer, this aim of hers makes her action most abominable;
Even so all those that serve God, though never so exactly in outward show if
their aim be to please men, or to get their own ends, the Lord abhorres them
and their services. Mat. 14. 51.
God abhorres an hypocrite more then a Sodomite, and therefore Hell is provided
on purpose for hypocrites.

Joshua chose to serve God zealously; And this appears, because he chose to
serve the living God, he did not choose to serve Idols, but to turn from dead
Idols to serve the living God. Now the living God expects not only living but
lively service, 1 Pet. 2. 5. A man may be a living man and yet not lively, but
God expects lively service, and such as are active and lively in his service,
such as are fervent in spirit as serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11. As if he should
say; You are not fit to serve the Lord, unless you be fervent in spirit,
boiling hot in spirit, as the word signifies.

Joshua chose to serve God Reverently and respectfully. And this appears,
because he calls himself a servant of God, not a son, not a friend. Now you
know it is a necessary ingredient in a servant to keep his distance, and to
carry himself respectfull of his Master, to serve him with reverence and godly
fear, Heb. 12. 28.

Joshua chose to serve God Cheerfully and freely; For this is another property
of a good servant, Psalm. 100. 1. Serve the Lord with gladness, Deuteronomy. 28. 47,
48. We must make it our meat and drink, our Heaven upon Earth to serve God.

diligently and laboriously: This is another property of a good servant; It is
said of the 12. Tribes, That they served God instantly day and night. The word
in the Greek is, Act 16 7.
They served God with an outstretched neck. Deuteronomy. 29. 1


Universally in all things, At all times, and in all places, and with all our
faculties. First, In all things, though never so irrational to flesh and
blood, though never so dangerous, though never so costly. Such a servant was
David that fulfilled all the wills of God. Act. 13. 22. (...).
2. As in all things, so at all times; In time of prosperity as well as
adversity, and in time of adversity as well as prosperity. For the God whom
we serve is the same in all times, he alters not, no more must his servants. 3.
In all places, in private as well as public; For God is a Master that filles
all places. If thou can find out a place where God does not see thee, there
it shall be lawful for thee to serve the Devil. 4. With all the faculties of
thy soul and body. This note of universality though it be a plain one, yet is
of mavelous consequence, and it is both (...) and (...). It is the best
divisive difference to divide a Sheep from a Goat, And constitutive, to
constitute a faithful servant of God, who is one that in all things, at all
times, and in all places, with all his faculties gives up himself to Gods
service. That can say as that Dutch Minister Baldazzar did to Oecolampadius,
Veniat verbum Domini and submittemus ei sexcenta si nobis essent colla. Let God
speak, and though we had six hundred necks, yet we will make them all stoop
to the obedience of him.

Joshua chose to serve God Absolutely and Inconditionally. Sufficit pro
universis rationibus Deus vult. This is reason sufficient, the unerring God
will have it so. This is the best sighted obedience. Man may err in his
commands, and therefore is to be served with limitations and examinations. They
do befoole themselves (says Lactantius) that follow the judgment of their
leaders without judgment, which is the property of Sheep rather then of
reasonable men. It is a good saying of Sir THOMAS MORE, I will not pin my
salvation upon any man's sleeve, because I know not whither he will carry it.
But God must be obeyed without an If: with absolute, in conditional,
unexamined subjection, this is to serve God as God.

10. Joshua chose to serve God transcendently and Angelically. To do his will
on earth as it is done in Heaven. For he is Jehovah that gives being to all,
the great God of the whole earth, and therefore is to be served with super
superlative super transcendent service, (...).

These are the 10. Ingredients of Ioshuas choice, these are as a ten stringed
Instrument to make our services melodious harmony in Gods ears. Let us strive
to remember them, because they are the foundation to the building that
follows. We live in an age wherein every man will profess that he serves God.
But I beseech you remember that unless you add these 10. Ingredients, ye do
not serve him, but grieve him. Ye dee not serve him, but do him disservice,
unless ye serve him undividedly, everlastingly, sincerely, zealously, etc.

Before I leave this point I must add one thing, That there are 2. properties
of a servant that must not be in Gods servant. First, a servant serves his
Master with a slavish fear, but we must serve God with a godly fear, Heb. 12.
28. Secondly, a servant loves his Master with a mercenary love, he serves his
Master as a hireling for his wages. But Gods servant must serve God with a
filial love. He that serves God only for Heaven, fells his service to God, as
Parisiensis says, Et est inter illum and Deum negotiatio quaedam. Not but that
a true servant of God may have an eye to the recompense of reward, as Moses
had; but he must have but one eye upon the reward, not both, and the left eye
too; For our chief and last aim must be at Gods glory. And the reason is,
because Gods servants are also his sons and heirs, and therefore as we must
serve him with the subjection of servants, so we must serve him with the
affection of sons. Let us remember that we are his servants, that we may
serve him with reverence, diligence and exact subjection, but remember also
that we are his sons to serve him with filial fear, love, hope and faith.
And this is the right serving of God, to serve him with a servant-like
subjection, and with a sonnelike affection.

The second thing propounded in the Explication, The second part of the
Explication.
is to show the necessity that lies upon all men as well as great men to serve
God, and to serve him with all these Ingredients. For though Joshua did freely
choose to serve the Lord, yet it was not free for Joshua to choose whether he
would serve God or no. For we are all bound to do God homage and service. This
is primum and totum officium hominis, This is the chief and the whole of man,
Eccles. 12. last. We are all bound to this service by a 6. fold bond.

First, by the bond of Creation. It is a fundamental error workmanship, and
therefore it is our duty to improve all our parts and gifts to the service of
that God from whom we have received all. As all Rivers return to the Ocean
from which they first came. And as Aulius Fulvius said to his son when he
found him in the conspiracy of Catiline, Now ego te Catilinae genui sed
patria. So does God say to every man, I did not give thee a soul and body to
serve sin withal, but to serve me withal. Quot membra tot ora, so many
members of our bodies, so many faculties of our souls; so many mouths to call
upon us to serve God withal.

Secondly, It is our duty to serve God, not only for our creation of the whole
world. For God made all the world to serve man, and man to serve him with all
the world, and for all the world. He made the Sun, the Moon, the Fire and
the Water, etc. to be serviceable to man, and therefore man must serve God,
because he has given all these to his use, and he must serve God with all
these, improving them all to his service. Quot creaturae, tot ora, so many
creatures as there are in the world, so many mouths to call upon us to serve
God, and to serve him with all the Ingredients before named.

bond of Redemption. For we are therefore delivered out of the hands of our
enemies by Jesus Christ, Luke 1. 74, 75.
that we should serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
life. Quot inimici, tot ora. So many enemies as we are freed from by the death
of Christ, so many mouths to call upon us to serve Jesus Christ. And in this
sense the very Devil himself, and Hell it self (as we are redeemed from
them) do call upon us to serve God, and to serve him faithfully, etc.

bond of Sanctification. For this is the end of our sanctification, That we
might have grace to serve him so as to please him, Heb. 12. 28. Quot gratiae,
tot ora, so many graces as God has planted in thee, so many mouths to call
upon thee to serve God. For who goes to warfare at his own charge? says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 7.
Who planteth a Vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? Who feeds a
flock and eats not of the milk of the flock? If God has planted the graces
of his Spirit in thy soul, he looks to reap the fruit of his own plantation
and husbandry by thy holy serving of God.

bond of Gratitude. Quot beneficia, tot ora, so many mercies as we have
received from God, so many mouths to call upon us to serve God. For every
mercy is as a needle, says S. Austin, to sow God and Man together. Man and God
are separated by disobedience, but mercy is as a needle to sow God and Man
together again by obedience. And therefore God makes the deliverance out of
Egypt to be a forcible motive to the keeping of the ten Commandments. I am the
God that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, Therefore thou shall have none
other gods but me, Therefore thou shall keep holy the Sabbath day, etc. So
must the deliverance we celebrate this day. It must be as a golden Cord to tie
us to serve God more devoutly, more resolvedly then ever. Every Deliverance
binds the delivered according to the quantity and quality of the Deliverance.
God has given us Deliverances of all sorts, and of all sizes for to oblige us
to his service. We have had temporal and spiritual Deliverances, old and new
Deliverances. These two last years have been made up all of Deliverances. And
to sin willingly against God after such Deliverances as these, is a sin
that takes away all excuse, Ezra. 9. 10. What shall we say after this, for we
have sinned against thee, q. d. We have nothing to say. And it is a sin that
will bring universal and utter destruction, according to that Text, Ezra. 9.
13, 14. Seeing thou O God have given us such a Deliverance as this, should we
again break thy Commandments, would thou not be angry with us, till thou
had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping. He that
does not serve God the better for this Deliverance, it is pity he was
delivered.

6. We are bound by the bond of Covenant. Quot promissiones, So many Vows and
Covenants we have made with God, so many mouths to call upon us to serve him.
When we were baptized we entered into a solemn Covenant to renounce the Devil
and all his works, and to be Christ's faithful Soldiers unto our lives end.
And every time we receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, we
renew our vows and covenants. And it is not a week since Ye entered into into
a sacred and solemn Promise to amend your lives. The Vow of God is upon you.
And therefore I may say as Christ does, Give unto God the things which are
Gods. If service be not due do not give it him, but if it be due it is
injustice to deny it him. We are all servinati, servi empti, jurati, faederati,
consecrati, conducti. We are all the borne servants of God, and better we had
never been borne, if we do not serve him. We are all the bought Servants of
God, Phll. 2. 7.
Christ has bought us with a dear price, even with his own precious blood, he
became not only a man, but a servant, to buy us to be his servants. We are the
purchase of Jesus Christ, and it is a high act of Robbery to deprive him of
his purchase. We are the sworn Servants of God, and we are forsworn if we do
not serve him, and serve him aright as we ought to do. We have taken a
Covenant to serve him better, and we are Covenant-breakers, if we do not serve
him, which is one of the black-marks of a Reprobate. Romans 1. 31
We are consecrated to the service of God, and dedicated to him by our
baptism, and therefore it is a sin of sacrilege not to serve him. We are all
the hired servants of God. All the blessings and mercies we receive daily from
God are nothing else, but Gods presse-mony to hire us to serve him, and it is a
shame to receive such great wages and to do no service for it. And thus you
see what a great necessity lies upon all men, as well as great men to serve God.

The third thing propounded for Explication is, The third part of the
Explication Why great men are bound to serve God as well as others.
To show the necessity that lies upon great men in particular to serve God,
and to serve him with all those Ingredients, and with all the circumstances of
Ioshuah's choice. Great men are bound to serve God as well as others, and to
serve God rather then others. First as well as others.

First, Because they are Gods creatures as well as others. they are servinati,
serviempti, etc. and therefore unjust, perjured and sacrilegious, if they
withdraw themselves from his service.

Secondly, They must die as well as others, and death makes all equal.
Diogenes could find no difference in the grave, between the bones of King
Philip and other men, as he told Alexander the great.

Thirdly, They must appear and stand before God at the day of Judgment, to
give an account as well as others, Revel. 20. 12. I saw the dead great and
small standing before God.

Fourthly, There is no man great in comparison of God. Though a man may be said
to be great in comparison of his neighbor; Isa 40. 15.
yet in comparison of God all the world is but as the drop of a bucket. And if
all Asia, Africa, Europe and America be but as the drop of a Bucket in
comparison of God, Chrysostom.
what a little drop of this drop is one great man. There is a greater
nearenesse between a King and a toade then between a King and God. For Toades
are Gods creatures, and so are Kings, and both finite; but there is an infinite
distance between the great God, and the greatest King.

As great men are to serve God, as well as others. So also rather then others.
And that because,

First, They have more reason then others. God has advanced them above others
in dignity, Reasons why great men are to serve God rather the others.
honor and wealth, and therefore he expects they should bring more honor to
him then others. A King looks to be acknowledged by all, but especially by
those who are his Creatures. And therefore Caesar cried out to Brutus, and
tufili? What thou my son? So those whom God has exalted and made as it were
gods upon Earth, he looks that these gods should not serve the Devil, which
would be a paradox beyond expression. The higher the Elements are the purer
they are. Air is purer then water, and fire then air. The higher you are in
office and wealth, the holier and purer you ought to be. We do not expect as
much light from a candle as from the Sun. If God have made thee one of the
great lights of the world; he looks thou should shine and outshine others
in holiness and righteousness. It is a wicked opinion that is spread abroad
in the world, that the greater any man is, the less service he need do unto
God. Hence it is that if we observe any little spark of piety in great
persons, we are ready to behold it as a blazing Commet, and to cry it up in the
superlative degree. But the truth is, the golden Rule of Christ teaches us
otherwise, To whom much is given, (faith Christ, Luke 12. 47.) much is
required. And you your selves require most service of those servants to whom
you give most wages. God did not require tentallents of him to whom he gave but
five, but he required ten of him to whom he gave ten. All creatures the nearer
to God the more perfect they are, the Angels more excellent then men, and the
essence of men more excellent then beasts, and beasts then plants, etc. So the
nearer any man is to God in power and greatness, the better, purer and holier
he ought to be. Insomuch that it is reckoned as a great aggravation, That the
hands of the Princes and Rulers were the chief in a trespass, Ezra 9. 2.
Their being Rulers did not excuse, but increase their fault. And Jeremy tells
us, Jer. 5. 5. That he would go to the greatmen, to see if the way of the
Lord, as expecting more goodness from them then others. Of which when he
failed, he threatens greater judgments against them then others.

Secondly, As great men have greater reason then others. greater abilities and
opportunities to serve God then others. Now every ability and opportunity is a
talent with which we are betrusted, and for which we must be accountable. The
Wiseman tells us, Eccl. 7. 11.
Ecclesiast. 7. 11. That wisdom is good with an Inheritance. Wisdom is good
without an inheritance. But it cannot do so much good when it is seated in a
poor man, as when it is joined with an inheritance. When divine wisdom and
honors meet together, they are like apples of Gold in pictures of silver.
Riches and greatness have made many good men bad, but never any bad man good,
and yet they put a price in a good man's hand to do much good. As a good
musical Instrument does not make a skillfull Musician, but a skillful Musician
can play better upon a good instrument then upon a bad one. If the man be
gracious and religious that is great and rich, he will make sweeter harmony and
melody in Gods ears, then if he were poor and in a low estate. It is not to
be expressed what attractive power there is in the good examples of great men
to make others good. Great men are like unto looking-glasses, according to
which all the Country dress themselves, and if they be good lookingglasses
they do a world of good. When Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue
believed, many of the Corinthians hearing of it, believed also, Act. 18. 8.
When Shechem and Hamor were circumcised, they quickly persuaded their people to
be circumcised also. Ioshuah's example in my Text made all Israel enter into
Covenant to serve God. And if the great-men and the rich-men of the Kingdom
would appear in more number, and more courageously and resolutely in the great
cause of the war now undertaken by the Parliament, how quickly would the
whole Land arise as one man to take part with them. What mighty loadstones were
Nehemiah, Ezra and Zerubbabell to draw thousands of people to go with them
from Babylon to Jerusalem to rebuild the Temple. So much for the Explicatory
part.

Now for the Use and the Application. And here I will apply my self. First, To
all men in general, Use of Reprehensio^.
not excluding great-men. And secondly, To great-men in particular, and yet not
excluding other men.

First, First to all men not excluding great men.
To all in general.

This Text speaks a word of Reproof to all those that make a quite contrary
choice to Ioshuah's choice, that choose to serve other Masters and not the
Lord. And of these there are 4 sorts.

1. Such as choose to serve men and not the Lord. The Apostle faith, 1 Cor. 7.
23. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men; 1 Cor. 7. 23.
which words do not forbid the civil relation and subjection of a servant to
his Master, but they reproove two sorts of men. Thus Ambrose.
1. Such as subject their Consciences to the superstitious inventions of men in
Gods worship, that build their Religion upon man's bare authority. Such servants
are all the Papists that build their Religion upon the Popes infallibility:
these are servants of men. 2. Such as are servants to the lusts of wicked men,
Thus Chrysostone.
that serve men when they run in a cross line to Gods will. Such were the
Subjects of Nebuchadnezzar, that at the command of the King worshipped the
golden Image, and served the King and not the Lord. Such was Pilate that for
fear of displeasing Caesar, delivered up Christ to be crucified, Ioh. 18. 19
though he knew him to be innocent. And would to God we had not many amongst us
that sell their Consciences, their Religion, and their Salvation to be panders
to the lustful, covetous and ambitious desires of great men! Such were the
Nobles of Cambyses. Cambyses had a lust to marry his own sister, he sends for
all his council and asks, If they had any Law in Persia to allow him to
marry his sister? They answered, That there was no such Law. But yet there was
another Law, That the Kings of Persia might do what they list. These Nobles
were slaves to the lust of Cambyses. And if we had not such Nobles and
Gentlemen amongst us, these unhappy wars would quickly be at an end. Alexander
had two friends (...)
Hephaestion and Craterus. One loved him as a man, the other as a King. He that
loved him as a man, labored to satisfy the Kings lusts, and to please him as
a man in all his desires, whether lawful or unlawful. He that loved him as a
King, desired to please him in such things which were just, and which tended to
the Kings honor and the peoples safety. Now I demand which of these two were
Alexanders best friend? Our Sovereign King has two such kind of friends. Two
such kind of friends had Rehoboam, and by harkening to his Young Men and
refusing the council of his old and grave Councillors, he ruinated himself
and his posterity, which God forbid our King should do.

Secondly, I am to reprove such as chose to serve the times and not the Lord,
that change their Religion with the times; That will be superstitious, if the
times be superstitious, and devout or Atheistical, according to the times,
whose Religion is like a piece of wax to be molded into any frame, according
as the timesalter and change. Such were the Samaritans, that when the Jews
were in prosperity would profess themselves to be of the Jewish Religion, but
when the Jews were in adversity, they would disclaim them and their Religion.
Many such Samaritans amongst us, that in King Edward the sixt's days turned
Protestants, in Queen Mary's turned Papists, and in Queen Elizabeth's days
turned Protestants again. There are thousands in this age that are
Time-servers and not God-servers. Many such Ministers, and many such
Magistrates, many such people; I have much thought of two wicked speeches, too
too much practiced in these our days. The one is of a deep Politician. That
it was good to follow the truth, but not too near at the heels, least it dash
out our brains. There are many such that would be glad to seem to be
religious, and to own the cause of Religion, which is now asserted by the
Parliament, but they are afraid to own it too publicly or too zealously, for
fear it should hinder their preferment, and dash out the brains of their
promotions. Another speech is that of the King of Navarre to Beza, That he
would launch no farther into the Sea of Religion, then he might be sure to
return safe into the Haven. This is the true picture of a Time-server, to dive
no farther into the deepes of Religion, to appear no farther in this great
cause of Religion, then he can be sure to save his estate, and to save his
carcass. I read of the men of Issacar, That they were wise to understand the
times, to know what Israel ought to do. 1 Chronicles. 12. 31.
It is wisdom to observe times, so as to know our duty. But it is damnable
wickedness to serve the times and not the Lord, to ring changes as the times
change.

serve themselves and not the Lord. That set up themselves as God, and do
whatsoever is good in their own eyes, and make their wills their Scripture.
This is (...) and (...). This is self worship, and self Idolatry, which is
the greatest Idolatry of all. It is the greatest curse under Heaven for God to
give a man over to himself to live as he list, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. Romans 1. 26.
I have read of one given over to the Devil for his good, 1 Cor. 5. 5
but never of any given over to himself but for his damnation. And therefore
Austin prays, Lord deliver me from my self! Let it be our prayer, Libera me
Domine a me metipse.
Lord give me not over to my self!

serve sin and not the Lord. It is one thing to be a sinner, another thing to
be a servant of sin. A servant of sin, is one that gives himself over to
the service of sin, that is bound apprentise to sin. Observe the difference
between Paul and Ahab. Paul was sold under sin, Romans 7. 21.
but it was against his will. But Ahab sold himself willingly to work
wickedness. Many such Ahabs that serve sin as the Centurion servants served
him, If sin bid go they go. Such a slave was Herod to his Herodias, Felix
to his Drusilla. Such servants are swearers and drunkards, that are at the
service of their Oaths and Cups. There are many men that are slaves to the
Mammon of iniquity. That do not only possess money, but are possessed of
money, that are had of money, that with Judas will sell Jesus Christ himself
for 30. pieces of silver. There are many that are slaves to their preferments,
that say with Agrippina concerning Nero, Peream ego modo ille imperet. That
sell their part in Heaven to get a little honor here upon earth. And to speak
my mind plainly, there are two sins which are as two mighty Loadstones to
draw hundreds from the Parliaments side. Covetousness and Ambition. Could the
Parliament feed these sins as well as they are fed at Oxford, our miserable
distractions would quickly be at an end. What made Baalam go to Balak? At
first he said, Numb. 22. 18.
If Balak would give me his house full of gold and silver I cannot go beyond
the word of the Lord; 2 Pet. 2. 15.
but yet afterward being mad after the wages of iniquity, he went and did much
hurt to Gods people, but it was to his own ruin at last, and this will be the
end of all those that are the servants of sin. The Apostle speaks
excellently, For when ye were servants of sin, Romans 6. 10, 11.
ye were free from righteousness. What fruit had ye then in those things
whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death. In which
words the Apostle teaches us, that the service of sin is both shameful and
damnable. First, it is shameful. For to serve sin, is to serve the Devil,
Ioh. 8. 44. Oh that the world would believe this, that when they serve pride,
and covetousness, and ambition, etc. they serve the Devil, And therefore
Cyprian brings in the Devil upbraiding Christ, Ostende mihi tot servos qui
tibi, etc. Show me if thou can so many servants that have served them so
diligently and so willingly as I can show that have served me. If the Devil
should appear in humane shape, you would think it horrible Idolatry to adore
him, and yet when you obey sin, you do this and worser then this, for sin
is worser then the Devil; The Devil is Gods creature, but sin has nothing
of God in it. Sin is the Devils excrement, as Barnard says; And it must
needs be a loathsome service to be servant to so vile a thing. Secondly, It is
a cursed and damnable service, for the wages of sin is death.

How comes it then to pass that sin has so many servants? Object.


Because sin deals with sinners, Answ.
as the Philistims did with Sampson. First, it puts out our eyes, that we
should not see the vileness and cursednesse of sin, and then it puts us in
the mill to grind as sins slave. And therefore Christ sent Paul to the
Gentiles, to open their eyes, etc. Acts 26. 18. This was his first work. The
Lord open our eyes to see the shamefulnesse and damnablenesse of sins service.

2. To reproove those that make Ioshuas choice but not with Ioshuas
ingredients, Use 2. Of reprehension, directed to all sorts.
That choose to serve God, but do not serve him undividedly, everlastingly,
sincerely, zealously, reverently, etc. We live in an age wherein God had never
more servants, and yet never less service; as one says; There are many
Divines, but few that live like Divines. So God has many servants, but few
that do him service.

There are some that divide between the service of God and the service of
sin, like the false Mother that would have the child divided. As Cambden
reports of Redwald King of the East Saxons, the first Prince of this Nation
that was baptized, yet in the same Church he had one Altar for Christian
Religion, another Altar for Heathenish religion: So there are many such
false-worshippers of God, that divide the rooms of their souls between God
and the Devil, that swear by God, and by Malcham, Zeph. 1. 5. that sometimes
pray, and sometimes curse, that sometimes go to Gods house, sometimes to a
Playhouse; that are of a Mungrill-religion, halting between God and Baal,
Heteroclites in Religion, but God cannot endure this division. This is to set
thy threshold by Gods threshold, Ezekiel. 43. 8. This is to set the Arc and Dagon
together, which God will never endure, God cares not for one half of thy
heart, if sin and the Devil has the other half.

There are others that serve God, but their service is but as a morning cloud,
Hos. 6. 4.
and as an early dew it quickly vanishes, of whom I may say justly that which
Nabal did unjustly of David, 1 Samuel 25. 10.
There are many servants now a days that break away every man from his
Master. Many now a days, and more in our days then in former days. We live
in an Apostatizing age, wherein there are many falling Stars, but few fixed
Stars; Many that were once whiter then milk, as Rubies, and polished
Saphires in regard of their glorious profession, but now they are blacker then
acoale, Lam. 4. 8.
they are withered and become like a stick; That were yesterday Gods people,
but to day are turned enemies. Mica. 2. 8.
To these I say as S. Peter does, Better they had never known the way of
righteousness, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 20. This relapse makes thy condition the worse,
as relapses in all kinds are most dangerous. And it is also a sign thou
esteemest the service of sin better then the service of God. For he that
first served sin, and then turned to the service of God, and afterward falls
again to the service of sin, proclaims to all the world that he esteems
the service of sin, better then the service of God, which is an affront to
God of an high nature.

There are others serve God, but it is all in hypocr^sie. We live in a
complement all age, our mouths are full of service. It is an ordinary phrase,
Your humble servant, My humble service, and yet it may be we intend no service
at all, but hate them in our hearts. Even so we deal with God. Many like the
Soldiers that bowed to Christ and mocked him; That give their outsides to God,
and their insides to all uncleanness; That as Luther says of Cain, give opus
personae Deo, but not personam, their cap and knee to God, but themselves to
sin and iniquity. And indeed this is the capital and crying sin of this
age; Religion is that which is pretended on all hands: The defense of the
Protestant Religion, this news we hear daily from Oxford. And for this
purpose there is an Army of Papists raised to defend the Protestant Religion.
And in this horrid Conspiracy (for the discovery of which we are here met to
bless God,) there was a Declaration framed, to assure the people, that the
chief cause of their insurrection was to maintain the Protestant Religion.
Just as the Gunpouder Traitors, that would have blown up the Parliament for
the good of the Catholic Religion, Tantum Religio poterat suadere malorum; the
Lord lay not this great sin of hypocrisy to the charge of this Nation. For
my part I am confident that the Popish Army, and the plundering Army, will
fight no otherwise for the Protestant Religion, then a Thief does for a true
man's Purse, which is not to preserve it, but to take it away.

There are a fourth sort that serve God, but it is so coldly, as if God were a
dead Idol: Where shall we find a man fervent in spirit as serving the Lord?
Where is our ancient zeal? Oh the cold Prayers, frozen Sacraments, etc. It is
possible to find a living Christian, but where shall we find a Christian lively
and active in Gods service? Remember God will spue out of his mouth a lukewarm
Laodicean, Rev. 3.
which is a remarkable place: For that which we spue out, we do it with
delight; we choose some dirty corner to ease our stomachs in, and we never
reassume what we once spue out: And all this to signify; That God will for
ever cast off with delight, and with shame and confusion, a cold, dead,
lukewarm Christian, especially in these active times.

Others serve God, but it is with such horrible irreverence and negligence,
such sleepiness, such laziness, as that we would account it a great indignity
to be so served by any of our own servants. I read that Caesar spoke to one
that was afraid to give him too much respect, Hic homo timet timere Caesarem,
This man is afraid to be afraid of Caesar. So there are many that are afraid to
be too reverent in Gods service: And indeed a man may be too reverent with
superstitious reverence, which is irreverence in Gods esteem. But to be
Reverend with Scripture Reverence, both inward and outward, this is so
necessary, Heb. 1^. 28.
as that God will not accept of our service without it.

Augustus spoke to one that entertained him with homely entertainment, Who
made you and I so familiar? We must so serve God as to remember our distance;
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently.

There are others that serve God, and enter into Covenant to serve him, as you
have lately done; but it is with so many limitations, qualifications,
reservations and distinctions, that God connot but abhor it. Some will serve
God with an If: If they can keep their promotions. Some will serve God in some
things and not in others; such was Herod that did many things, Mark. 6. 20.
but still reserved his Herodias; Such was Ananias and Saphira, that kept back
half. Hundreds say with Naaman, In this the Lord pardon me. Some will serve
God at some times and not at others, in some places and not in others; But the
Lord abhominates all thy services if it be not universal in all things, at all
times, in all places, with all thy faculties.

Others serve God, but it is according to their own fancies, that are more
zealous for one superstitious invention, then for all Gods commandments: You
shall know such by this mark, They that are so much for superstitious forms
of godliness, do most hate those that have the true power of godliness. The
Pharisees were the deadliest enemies Christ had, And the Jews stirred up the
devout women to persecute Paul, Acts 13. 50.

By all this that has bin said, you may perceive the reason;

1. Why God has so many servants, and yet so few servants that he delights in;
because there are so few that serve him undividedly, everlastingly,
inconditionally, zealously. Or,

2. Why God abhors all our fastings, and prayers, and Sacraments; or why God
says to our services as he did to the Jews; To what purpose is the multitude
of your services? I am weary of them, Isa. 1. 12.
etc. Because we serve God with lip-service only, and knee service, we serve
him negligently, and partially, and coldly. Or,

3. Why so few go to Heaven? because so few make Ioshuas choice with Ioshuas
Ingredients; For unless we endeavor to serve him here with those forenamed
Ingredients, we shall never be saved hereafter.

But now I shall apply my self in particular to great men, and yet not
excluding others.

This Text reproves those that are advanced by God into great places of Honor
and wealth, Use of reprehension to great persons in particular.
and that think themselves privileged by their greatness, to be greater in
iniquity then in greatness, that make no other use of their greatness, but to
sin without control; That are Great men, and Great swearers, Great
adulterers, Great Atheists, Great scoffers and mockers at Godliness. Let these
men know (if any such here,) That the great God is greater then the greatest.
Gods laws are not like unto Cobwebs (as it is said of man's Laws) to catch
little flies, and let the great flies escape; but God will especially punish
great men if they be great transgressors. And therefore Elijah tells Ahab, The
dogs shall lick thy blood, thine even thine; 1 Kin. 2^. 19.
And Obed tells the Princes of Judah, Are there not with you, 2 Chro. 28 10.
even with you, sins against the Lord your God? God made great Nebuchadnezzar
to graze like an Ox. Great Agag was hewed in pieces. God has his handwriting
upon the wall, to make the great Belshazzars of the earth to tremble, whilst
they are carousing in their sacrilegious cupps: Great Herod to whom the people
cried, It is the voice of God not of man, Act. 12.
was eaten up of worms, repeating these words in the midst of his torments, as
Josephus reports, Behold ye me that seemed to you as a god, how miserably I am
enforced to depart from you all. In the Old World there were Giants and mighty
Anakims, men great in power, and greater in sin; Their sins were
Giant-like, and God sent a mighty flood to destroy them. The sins of
Superiors, as they are more visible then the sins of inferiors (as the
Eclipse of the Sun is sooner seen then the Eclipse of a Star; and a wart
upon the face is sooner seen then upon another part,) so also they do a great
deal more hurt, and therefore their condemnation shall be the greater.

They do more hurt two ways, by imitation, and by imputation.

1. By imitation; Therefore Jeroboam is said to make all Israel to sin,
because his Idolatrous example made all Israel to sin. When Saul fell upon
his Sword, his Armourbearer seeing the King to do so, 1 Samuel 31. 5.
fell also upon his Sword and killed himself. When great men fall into sin,
they fall as men that fall in a crowd, drawing many others down with them. The
Persians thought a crooked Nose to be a great ornament, because their Emperor
Cyrus had a crooked Nose. And because Alexander the Great had a wry Neck, his
Courtiers did all strive to go awry with their Necks. The bodies of men are
not so subject to be infected by the illness of the air, as the souls of men
by the vices of their Rulers.

Secondly, By imputation; For though it be a certain truth, That God never
punishes an innocent Nation, The soul that sins shall dye: Yet it is as
certain; That God does oftentimes take an occasion to punish a sinful
Nation, by imputing the punishment of the Rulers sin upon the people, or
rather by punishing the people for their sins, and the Ruler in the people.
Quicquid delirant Reges plectuntur Achivi. David had sinned in numbering the
people, and for this sin 70000. of his people must perish by the plague. No
doubt the Israelites were grievous sinners, and so it is expressly said, 2 Samuel
24. 1. But the most just God at the same time, punished the people and David
also in the loss of his subjects. As it is no wrong in a Judge to make the
back of a Thief pay for the sin which his hand has committed, no more is it
injustice in God to punish the members of a politic body when the head is in
fault; So near is the union between Prince and people, and so prone are the
people to follow the sins of their Princes, and so to partake of their
punishments. And therefore if the sins of great men bring poor people into
miseries, it is just and equal that great men should be brought into misery
for those sins for which they bring others into misery.

But besides this; There are two other reasons why God will be sure to punish
great men when they are great offenders.

1. Because the punishing of great men does a great deal more good then the
punishing of others. For hereby it appears, that God is no respecter of
persons: Tribulation and anguish upon every soul that does evil, and first
upon the Rulers and Nobles, and then upon others. And hereby also inferiors
and poor people are kept under subjection to Gods law, when they perceive that
their superiors cannot escape without Gods severe chastisement. As in a
School, when the Master picks out one of the greatest youths in the School
and whips him for a fault, all the little boys sit and tremble, and learn to
avoid those faults for which they see their betters punished. Thus when Goliath
the great was slain, all the Philistimes fled away presently. The beholding of
Gods severe punishments upon great ones, will be a notable Sermon to make
inferiors godly and religious.

2. Because unles God did punish great men they would escape altogether
unpunished. Great men by money, by might and authority, by friends, and through
fear for the most part are free from Civil and Ecclesiastical censures. And
therefore it behooves the high Jehovah to take them into his own hand, and to
bring great men into great pressures, if they sin greatly against him.

I have read a notable speech in a Popish writer, That few Confessors of rich
men are saved, that is in our English language, Few Noble-mens Chaplains are
saved. And the reason he gives, is, Because they are subject to flatter their
Lords and Masters for hope of preferment, and so to bring the guilt of the
blood of the souls of their Lords upon their own souls. Now that I may not
be guilty of this fault, let me speak my mind freely to you that are Gentlemen
and Noblemen here assembled this day.

First, let me tell you that great places, as they are great abilities and
opportunities to do God service and great blessings if improved accordingly.
So if they be not improoved for that end they are great curses, they are
soule-traps, silken-halters, golden damnations. And there cannot be a greater
sign of a man that has his Heaven in this life, then to be great and wicked,
rich and wicked. And therefore Abraham tells Dives, Luc. 16. 25. Remember son
that thou in thy life time have had thy good things, but now thou art
tormented. Gregory the great never read this Text, but it made him tremble, and
it may justly cause all such as are clothed in purple and fare deliciously
every day to tremble.

Consider further that Text, 1 Cor. 1. 26. You see your calling brethren, how
that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called. There are some noble men called, but not many. There are but few that
are great and rich here, and great and rich hereafter. A Text to be trembled at
by great men. The Ostrich is not able to fly high as the Lark, because her
wings are so big. The Moon is never in the eclipse, but when it is in the
full, and then it is most distant from the Sun. Fulness of outward
prosperity and happiness should indeed be maximum vinculum obedientiae, the
greatest bond of obedience; but yet it proves for the most part, maximus
laqueus Diaboli, the greatest snare the Devil has to entrap our souls. This
is the reason why so few of the Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Kingdom appear
on the Parliaments side in this great time of necessity. Not many mighty, not
many noble are called. Thus it was in Christ's time. The great men and the great
Scholars crucified Christ, and the poor received the Gospel. The followers
of Christ were a company of poor people and silly women: This made the chief
Priests say, Joh. 7. 48, 49. Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees
believed on him? But this people who knows not the Law are accursed. Thus it
was in Christ's time, and thus it is in ours. Poor Lazarus goes to Heaven,
when rich Dives is carried to Hell, Surgunt indocti and rapiunt coelum, and nos
cum nostra doctrina mergimur in profundum. It was the saying of a
Schoolmasters to a King that sent to see how he did when he was dying. The
Schoolmasters returned this answer. Tell the King I am going to a place where
few Kings come, meaning to Heaven.

Consider lastly those two places of Scripture, Re. 6. 15, 16, 17. The Kings
and the great men and rich men wish for the Mountains to hide them, etc. And
Isa. 30. 33. Tophet is prepared of old even for the King it is prepared. By
King is meant in all probability the great King of Assyria, as may appear by
the context.

The Lord give you hearts to consider these things.

Now I proceed to an Use of Exhortation. And here I will apply my self; first
to all men, as well as great men: Secondly, to great men especially, Use of
Exhortation.
and yet not excluding others.

First, To all men in general. To persuade all men to make Ioshuah's choice
their choice, First to all men not excluding great men.
to choose to serve the Lord, and not only so, but also to serve him with all
the Ingredients before mentioned; to serve him transcendently, inconditionally,
universally, undividedly, reverently, everlastingly, etc. For it is the manner
of serving of God, that is the distinguishing Character of a true servant. Cain
offered Sacrifice as well as Abell. The wicked worship God, pray and receive
Sacraments as well as the godly. But Abell offered in faith, so did not Cain.
The godly serve God in sincerity, with reverence, diligence and chearfullnes,
endeavoring in all things to keep a good conscience, so do not the wicked.
That Text which I have so often named, He. 12. 28. makes the acceptance of our
service to depend not upon our serving of God, but upon our serving of God with
reverence and godly fear. It is the right manner of serving of God, that makes
thy service a sweet perfume. And it is the right manner of worshipping also,
that makes thee a true worshipper, and that causes God to delight in thy
worship, and to desire to be worshipped by them, according to that excellent
place, Joh. 4. 23. But the hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeks such to
worship him. And therefore let me engage you all this day for God and his
services. Let us give up our names to God, and enter into a holy Covenant to
serve him with all the Ingredients. For mark what Moses says, Exodus 19. 5. If
ye will obey me indeed, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure, etc. He does not
say simply, If you will obey me, but if ye will obey me indeed. And so also,
Deuteronomy. 28. 1. If you will hearken diligently to do all his Commandments then
the Lord will bless thee, etc. He does not say simply, if you will hearken,
but if you will hearken diligently, and observe to do all my Commandments.
Let us serve God as God and for God. As a God transcendently, inconditionally;
For Gods sake sincerely, faithfully.

To persuade you to the practice of these things, Consider what has bin
already said concerning the necessity of this duty. I add further the
consideration of the excellency, profitablenesse, comfortablenesse and
easiness of this duty.

The excellency and honourablenesse of Joshuah's choice. For indeed it is not
only a duty, Motives to persuade us to serve God with all the Ingredients.
but a high Prerogative to be the servant of the high God, Deo servire regnare
est. And therefore whereas Mat. 13. 17. it is said, Many Prophets and Just men,
etc. In Luke 10. 24. It is said, Many Prophets and Kings, to note unto us, That
Just men are Kings, Rev. 1. 6. This was Moses his honor, and it is often
repeated, Moses my Servant, etc. This was Ioshuah's honor often repeated: My
servant Joshuah, etc. This was David's honor, I am thy servant O Lord, I am thy
servant. And it is prefixed as a Title to the 36. Psalm. A Psalm of David the
servant of the Lord. It is a great honor that God will think us worthy to be
his servants. And therefore Paul styles himself, Paul a servant of Jesus Christ.
It is the certainest sign of a reprobate to have much wages here, and to want
a heart to do service with it. It is a great happiness to be in place to do
service. It is the honor of our honors to be enabled by them to do God
service. Non est laboriosa sed amabilis and optanda haec servitus, says
Austin. It is no painful and laborious service, but a service to be loved and
longed for.

As it is honorable to be a servant of God, so also the services themselves
are honorable, Pretiosa haec servitus virtutum constat expensis. This precious
and honorable service stands in the practice of all virtues, in praying unto
God and praising of God, etc. O let this persuade us to begin this day to serve
God more strictly then ever.

Add secondly, The profitablenesse of this service. Motive 2.
There is no service any man does for God but God takes exact notice of it;
Thus God took notice of Abraham's willingness to offer Isaac, Genesis 22. 16. God
takes notice of every circumstance of that that we do for him. Thus Christ
took notice of Mary Magdalen and of every circumstance of her washing his feet,
etc. Luke 7. 44, 45, 46. And Mark. 4. 2, 3. Christ observes how far some came
to hear him, and how long they tarried, etc. And as God takes notice of these
things in his servants, so he commends them upon all occasions and highly
esteems of them and their services. Thus God boasted to Satan concerning his
servant Job, Job 1. 8. Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none
like him, etc. And as none observes, commends and prizeth his servants so much
as God, so none rewards his servants as God does. None more able and none more
willing. The service of God is perfect freedom, and it will free us from all
other services. As a man that buyeth freehold Land, though he pay dear for
it, yet it is accounted cheaper then coppy-hold, because it freeth him from
many services, vices, which the coppy-hold is obliged unto. If thou be a
servant of Gods indeed and in truth, this will free thee from the service of
sin and Satan. Whereas on the contrary; If we be not true servants to Christ,
we shall be slaves to every thing beside him. O quam multos habet Dominos, qui
unum non habet. O how many Lords has that man that has not Christ for his
Lord. Either thy belly will be thy god, or thy money, etc. The service of sin,
as it is shameful, so it is unfruitful. And it is called, The unfruitful
work of darkness. But the service of God, as it is honorable, so it ends in
everlasting life. No man ever kindled a fire upon Gods Altar for naught, Mal.
1. 9. In keeping of Gods Commandments there is great reward, Psalm. 10. And
indeed God himself is the exceeding great reward of his servants, Genesis 17. 1.
This is a service wherein the servant has all the profit and the Master none.

Object. If there be so much profit in Gods service, why are Gods servants so
much persecuted and afflicted in this life?

Answ. 1. This is part of their service to be persecuted, for we serve God by
suffering as well as by doing.

2. It is a great honor that God will account us worthy to suffer for him.
Act. 5. 41.
And therefore the Apostles rejoiced that they were accounted worthy to be
whipped for Christ sake. They did not rejoice in whipping as whipping, but
(flagella propter Christum) to be whipped for Christ's sake was matter of great
joy unto them. The Apostle tells us, That to us it is given, not only to
believe, but also to suffer. Phil. 1. 2^.
It is a great gift of God to give us opportunity to suffer for him. This is
that to which we are predestined, 1 These. 3. 3. Our Savior Christ reckons
it as part of our reward in this life, Mar. 10. 30. And he professes that it
will mightily increase our reward in Heaven, Luke 6. 22, 23. Mat. 5. 12.

Ob. But why are Gods servants so poor if his service be so profitable?

Answ. 1. God does as other masters that keep their wages till the work be
done. This life is the time of working, hereafter we shall have wages enough,
Psalm. 31. 19. O how great are the good things which thou have laid up, etc. 2.
Cor. 4. 17.

2. I answer that for the present even in this life, no servant of God is
poor, but so long and so much as God sees to be good for him, for if it were
good to be rich, he should be rich, Psa. 84. 10. No good thing would he
withold from him that lives a godly life. He that has given thee Christ,
will with him give thee all things. He that will give thee a Crown hereafter,
will not deny thee a crum here, if good for thee. There are many dear servants
of God, to whom God gives very little wages in this life, because he
fore-seeth that if they had a great part of their wages aforehand, they would
do but little work. As many workmen that are paid before their work be
done, when they have their pay, begin to slack their work. And indeed we see
it too too true in many great rich personages that have so much of their pay
before hand, that they do many of them but very little service, and some of
them think that they are privileged from doing much service, because they
have so much wages, whereas indeed it ought to be an obligation to greater
service, as I have already showed. O that the profitablenesse of this service
might engage us to serve him more faithfully and more diligently then every yet
we have done.

3. Consider the comfortablenesse of this service. Motive 3.
It is a service full of soule-satisfying and soule-ravishing joy, Psalm. etc.
How did Hannah rejoice after she had bin praying? How did the Eunuch rejoice
after he had bin baptized? O the pure and undefiled comfort that is to be found
in the Word! This made David say, That he had perished in his affliction had
not the Word been his comfort.

What ineffable comfort in a Sacrament rightly received, and after a few tears
shed for sin, after a prayer made with the 10. Ingredients formerly named. And
the reason why the service of God is so brim-full of comfort, is,

1. Because Gods service is a type of Heaven, wherein is fullness of joy.

2. Because in the service of God we have communion with God, who is the God of
all consolation, and with the Spirit of God, who is called the Comforter. And
as a man that walks amongst perfumes must needs smell of the perfume. So they
that converse with the God of all joy must needs be filled with all joy. And
therefore David calls God his exceeding joy, Ps. 43. 4.

If there be so much comfort in Gods service, Quest.
what is the reason that wicked men account it a wearisomnes and a burden, and
snuff at it, as it is, Mal. 1. 13.

You may as well ask, Answ.
why a Swine finds no delight in a green meadow? Even because it is a Swine.
Or why a horse takes no delight in reading? Even because it is above his
capacity. A wicked man is like a fish out of his element, when he is in Gods
service, he is all fleshly, worldly and natural, and the service is
spiritual, heavenly and supernatural. No wonder therefore he delights not in
it. But this is the wicked man's curse.

But what is the reason that many of Gods people do not find comfort in Gods
service? Quest. 2.


There are none of Gods people but they do sometime or other find comfort,
Answ. 1.
either in the ordinances, or from the ordinances.

2. If at any time they miss of comfort it is because they do not meet with
God, whom they came to converse withal. As when a man goes to meet with a
friend, and meets him not, he comes away sadded in his spirit. So when a child
of God comes to an ordinance, hoping to enjoy sweet communion with God in it,
and then fails of his expectation, this must needs fill him full of sadness.
And therefore Bernard has an excellent speech. Nunquam abs te recedo Domine
sine te. That he never went from God without God. Give me leave to add a
clause to Bernards speech. And happy is that Christian that when he goes to
converse with God in his ordinances can say. Nunquam ad te accedo sine te,
nunqum abs te recedo sine te. Oh Lord I never come to thee, but I meet thee,
and I never go from thee, but I carry thee with me.

But what is the reason that Gods people do sometimes miss of Gods
comfortable presence, Quest.
when they come to serve God?

Because they do not bring the Ingredients formerly named. Answ.
They do not serve God with reverence, diligence, zeal, chearfullnesse, etc.
Either they bring no vessels at all to hold the consolations of God, (I mean
no hunger after Gods presence in an ordinance.) Or else they bring vessels so
little and so narrow mouthed that will hold but very little water. (I mean
they bring so little hunger after God, that God will not vouchsafe to satisfy
it.) Or else it is because they bring their ordinary hearts, their carnal and
worldly hearts to heavenly, spiritual and extraordinary duties. Hearts
unsuitable to the duties, and hearts unsensible of the duties. Or else there is
some Achan unstoned, some sin unrepented on, that ecclipseth the light of Gods
countenance, some spiritual obstruction. These and such like are the causes
why Gods people miss sometimes of comfort in Gods service.

But the fault is never in the service, which is so brim-full of such rare and
ravishing comforts, that Bernard relates this Story of himself, That someties
when he went to his prayers he found himself dull and heavy, but after he had
strugled a little with his dullness, all on a sudden, he was visited with
the visitation of the Almighty, Beatum me praedicarem, etc. I should account my
self happy (says he) if these visitations would always last, Sed rara hora,
brevis mora, oh si duraret! But, o but it continues but for a while! And St.
Austin relates this Story of himself, That upon a time when he and his Mother
Monica were discoursing together about the joys of Heaven, and the comforts of
Gods Spirit, they were so filled with joy that Austin uses these words, Lord
thou know in that day, Quam mundus eviluit cum omnibus suis delectationibus,
etc. How vildly we did esteem of the world with all his delights. The comforts
of the world are not worthy to be named that day that we speak of these
comforts. Oh let the comfortablenesse of this service oblige you from
henceforth to serve God better then ever yet you have done.

Add fourthly and lastly, Motive
The easiness of this service, My yoke is easy and my burden is light.

How can the service of God be said to be easy? Ob.


To a fleshly carnal heart it is a burden intolerable. Answ.
But it may be said to be easy.

1. In regard of the service God required under the Covenant of works. For
there God required perfect obedience in our own persons, not admitting of
Repentance. But in the service required under the covenant of grace, we have a
Mediator to fly unto, and admittance unto favor upon Repentance.

2. It may be said to be easy, in regard of the service of sin and of the
Devil. There are many that take more pains to serve sin and money, then
those that go to Heaven do to serve God. Many take more pains to go to hell,
then others do to go to Heaven.

3. It may be said to be easy, in regard of the many services it frees us
from, as you heard even now. As Diogenes told Alexander, when he boasted that
he was Lord of the whole world. Tu servus servorum meorum es. Illis enim
cupiditatibus quibus ego impero tu mancipiumes. Thou art a servant to my
servants, a slave to those lusts over which I am Lord.

4. Easy to the new nature, Romans 7. 22. As the light of the Sun is
delightsome to those that have good eyes, so the service of God to those that
are new creatures. It is as natural to the new creature to pray, as it is to
the old-creature to be drunk.

5. Easy to those that have the aid of Gods Spirit. As it is easy for a child
to go up stairs when his father leads him up. So when led by the Spirit.

6. Easy to those that are in Christ. And therefore Christ says, Take up my
yoke. Christ calls it his yoke. Because he draws it with us, and he draws
all. As it is easy for a little child to life up a great weight, when a Giant
holds his hand, and lifts with him and for him.

7. Easy to those that love God, 1 John 5. 3. Jacob for the love of Rachell
accounted lightly of his service. Love adds wings to make our service easy.

8. Easy to those that have the right art of serving of God. As in all trades
almost there is an Art, which when we have once got the trade is easy. So
there is an art of praying and preaching, and hearing and receiving the
Sacrament, etc. An art taught us by the God of Heaven, which whosoever has,
accounts it not a burden, but a heaven, to be serving of God.

9. Easy to those that have the consolations of Gods Spirit in the service of
God. As Merchants do ordinarily give a taste of their wines to those to whom
they sell them, that so they may be invited to buy them. So God does give a
taste of Heaven to his servants in his service, a praelibamen of Heaven to
invite them to serve him more cheerfully. A Hound is never weary as long as he
has the sent of the Hare. No more is a servant of God, as long as he enjoys
God in his service.

10. Easy in regard of what it might have been. Thou might have bin in hell
at this instant, past worshipping God, suffering everlasting torments.

11. Easy to do what God for Christ sake in the Covenant of grace well
accept, though not to do what God requires.

12. Easy in regard of the great reward, the exceeding great reward that God
will give to his servant. Finis dat amabilitatem, and facilitatem medijs. The
end proposed to a work makes the work amiable and easy. Where the reward is
fulness and perpetuity of happiness, no service can be said to be hard, to
purchase such a reward.

All this is spoken that none might be deterred from the service of God upon a
false supposall of the difficulty and impossibility of it. And it is my earnest
prayer that these motives might persuade us, not only to serve God, but to
serve him with all the Ingredients.

Tertullian observes, God was never called Lord, till man was made. He is the
peculiar Lord of man. O let man be his chief servant. All creatures in their
course serve God. None but man and Devils deny it. And how just is it for God
to join him with the Devils in punishment, that joins with the Devil in
dishonouring of God. Remember when we come to judgment this will be the great
Question Christ will put to us, not to ask us, what money we have got, what
honors we have purchased? But what service have you done to me and for me?
This is the end for which thou were created. Christ will ask whether this be
done? And if not done, thou art undone. When Christ came to die he said, John
17. 3, 4. Father glorify me for I have glorified thee. Happy is that man that
when he comes to die can make this Argument. Father I have fought a good fight,
I have made it my work to do thee service, etc. There are many that can
plead, Father I have dishonored thy Name, and therefore glorify me! But this
is a false argument. Let us labor to make Christ's prayer in sincerity and
faithfulness. Use of Exhortation to Noblemen in particular.


But now I come to apply my self to great men, and noble men in particular. Let
me speak unto you in David's words, Psalm. 29. 1, 2. Give unto the Lord O ye
mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength, give unto the Lord the glory due
to his Name. And let me use David's reason, Psa. 29. 5. The voice of the Lord
breaks the Cedars, yea the Lord breaks the Codars of Lebanon. As the higher
the Tree is, the more it is exposed to the thunder of Heaven. So the greater
any man is, the sooner God will punish him if he be a Giant in iniquity. For he
binds Kings in chains, Ps. 149 8.
and Nobles in linkes of Iron. He touches the Mountains and they smoke. Ps.
104. 32
If thou be as a Mountain in greatness, and thy sins as Mountains in
greatness, God will make thee smoke, etc. Great men must labor to be like
the great God, who is as great in goodness, as in greatness. Deus optimus
maximus, like unto Job, who was the greatest man in the East, and the best man
in the East. O that I could engage great men this day in sense of Gods
goodness, expressed in this wonderful Deliverance (for which wear come to
bless God) to serve God with all the Ingredients for the time to come, better
then ever they have done for the time past. Oh that you would enter into a
solemn Covenant to swear no more, to commit adultery no more, to be
irreverent, negligent, cold, hypocritical in Gods service no more, to mock and
scoff at Gods servants no more. Greatness without goodness is like the
greatness of a dropsy man, it is thy disease, not thy ornament. Riches
without righteousness is like a golden ring in a Swines snout, like a Sword in
a mad man's hand, like an Unicorns horn, which while it is upon the head of the
Unicorne is hurtful and deadly, but when it is taken off, it is very useful
and medicinal. Honors and riches when in a wicked man's custody, they do much
hurt, but when bestowed upon good men, they do much good. It is a most blessed
conjunction, when Religion and Righteousness meet together. It is like a
precious Diamond in a gold-ring. Indeed Religion is good wheresoever it is. As
a pearl is good though it be in the dirt, it is a pearl, but it is obscured
by the dirt in which it is. When goodness is seated in a poor man, it is like
a jewel in a leaden ring, like a candle under a bushel. But when goodness
meets with greatness, it is like a Candle upon a hill that gives light, heat
and influence to all the Country round about.

Let no great man think it a disparagement to serve God, to wear his livery,
and to appear on his side. For it is Gods service only that can make you
truly honorable. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have bin
honorable, says the Prophet Isaiah 43. 4. The men of Beraea were more noble
then the men of Thessalonica, because they received the word with all
readiness of mind, and searched into the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were so, Act. 17. 11. This is the greatest Nobility to be a true servant
of the great God. A King may give great Titles to a great man, but he cannot
make a great man. A King may cause a man to be called noble, but he cannot make
a man truly noble. A King may command us to call a Lion a Lamb; but a King
cannot make a Lion a Lamb. It is the noble mind that makes a man truly noble.
This God only can give. To contemn the world and all worldly things, to mind
the things of eternity, to conquer our lusts, to have communion with the great
God, to stand for God when all the world opposes him, this is true nobility.
This will make thee noble in this world, and in the world that is to come.

I say again, Let no great man account it a disparagement to be Gods servant.
Let him not only consider the example of Joshua a Prince and Ruler, and of
David, and Paul before named, but also of Constantine the great, who was so
attentive to the word when it was preached and so reverent, as that he would
sometimes stand up (as Eusebius says) all the while. And when his Courtiers
rebuked him, saying, It would tend to his disparagement; He answered: That it
was in the service of the great God, who is no respecter of persons. Take the
example of Theodosius, who is reported to have written out the New Testament
with his own hand, accounting it as a special Jewel, and out of it, he read
every day praying with his Empress, and with his sister singing of Psalms,
etc.

Suffer me to add the third time, Let not great men think it a disparagement
to become Gods servants, and to serve him strictly and precisely. Revel. 19. 20.
If these examples will not move you, consider the Angels of Heaven, who are
our Fellow Servants, and are said by a kind of excellency, Psalm. 103. 20.
To do his Commandments, harkening to the voice of his word. The Angels serve
God with a great deal of alacrity and chearefullnesse, Rev. 15. 2.
and therefore they are said to have harpes, as a sign of their cheerful
mind. The Angels serve God with a great deal of diligence and sedulity. And
therefore they are said to have wings and to fly. They serve God with a great
deal of zeal and ardency, and therefore they are said to be a flaming fire.
And therefore also the title of a Seraphim is given unto them. The Angels serve
God universally. They follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes; They serve him
constantly, sincerely. Rev. 14. 4.
The Angels always behold his face, Mat. 18. 10. They serve him day and night,
Revel. 7. 15. Oh that the Lord would make you more and more Angelical in his
service, to do his will upon earth, as it is done in Heaven!

Let me add an example beyond all examples, even the example of Jesus Christ
himself, who is called Gods servant, Esa. 42. 1. And he was a worshipper of
God, Joh. 4. 22. A diligent keeper of Gods Sabbath, Luke 4. 16. He used Prayer
in his family, Luke 9. 18. He was wont to pray secretly by himself Luke 5.
16. And he used this custom of Prayer morning and evening. In the morning,
Mark. 1. 35. rising up a great while before day. And for evening, Mat. 14. 23.
And this was his custom to do, Luke 22. 39. He went as he was wont to the
Mount of Olives. And sometimes he would pray all night long, Luke 6. 12. And
this worship Christ did with as much submission and devotion as ever any
servant did, Luke 22. 41. Mat. 26. 39.

If Christ did all this, surely it is no dishonor for the greatest Emperor to
do that which Christ has done. As you are called Christians, so you must
imitate that Lord and Master, by whose name you are called.

Let no man wonder that I spend so much time to persuade great men to be
exemplary in Gods service, and to be diligent and zealous. For if I could
convert but one great man this day, Florus.
I should do a great deal of service by way of eminency. For as he said, In
uno Caesare multi insunt Marij, in one great man there are many inferiors
contained. As it is in Printing, the great difficulty is in printing the first
Sheets, and when one is printed, it is easy to print hundreds by that. So the
great work of our Ministry is to convert great-men, if they were once
converted, hundreds would follow their example; When the great wheel of a
Clock is set a moving all the inferior wheels will move of their own accord.
This was the reason why St. Paul was so zealous about the conversion of Sergius
Paulus, who was Deputy of the Country, and a prudent man, that when Elymas the
Sorcerer offered to withstand him, he burst out into such speeches with such
eagerness, as he never did at any time before, for ought we can read, Oh thou
child of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, etc. And some are of
opinion that Paul had his name changed from Saul to Paul, Act. 13. 10
because he converted Sergius Paulus. For indeed it is a matter of great
consequence to convert one Sergius Paulus, one Eunuch. To take one such great
fish is more then to take many little ones, though the least of all is not to
be despised.

There is one argument yet behind, the last, but not the least, and that is
from the holy and solemn Covenant you lately have taken to amend your lives.
The excellency of a Christian is not so much in taking a Covenant as in keeping
of it when taken. And therefore we read of Josiah, 2 Chro. 34. 31, 32. that he
did not only make a Covenant to walk after the Lord, and to keep his
Commandments with all his heart, etc. but he caused all that were present in
Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. For if that man shall never go to
Heaven that will not keep his promises though made to his hurt, how much more
shall they be barred from Heaven that break those promises that they have made
tending to their eternal good. To break Covenant is not only a brand of a
Reprobate, (as you have heard) but it is also a sin that God has a quarrel
against, and a sin for which he will be avenged, according to that Text,
Levit. 26. 25. And I will bring a Sword upon you, that shall avenge the
quarrel of my Covenant. And this is one great reason why the Sword is now
drawn in England, and has sucked so much blood, even to avenge the great
breach of Oaths and Covenants, which this Nation is deeply guilty of. Let me
make bold further to remind you, that in this Covenant you have also vowed, in
order to the preservation of them, to assist the forces raised by the
Parliament, according to your power and vocation, and not to assist the forces
raised by the King, neither directly nor indirectly. And I doubt not but you
will make conscience to satisfy these two clauses, and herein you shall
express the reality of your thanks for this great deliverance this day
celebrated. Now because the speedy, faithful and courageous appearance in this
great Cause of defensive Arms, is one of the highest expressions that you can
yield to the world of your love to God and his Gospel, and to his service;
Give me leave to speak something about it, not only by way of Exhortation, but
first by way of Commendation, then Exhortation, then by way of Encouragement,
and then I shall conclude.

Commendation.

Suffer me to speak that which is due to you, Commendation.
and not in mine own words, but to speak the sense of all the well-affected in
the Kingdom; We bless God, that though there are many fallen Stars, many
Lords that have deserted the Parliament, that yet you (Right Honorable) stand
firm like fixed Stars in your Orbs, and have taken unwearied pains for the
good of the Church and State, and have ventured all for your Religion and
Liberties, and many of you lost a great part of your revenewes for the present,
and have passed many Ordinances very advantageous to the Kingdom. Kingdom.
The Lord be blessed for all the good you have done! The Lord recompense it to
you and yours! The Lord grant you may find mercy from the Lord at that great
day! It is not the design of the well-affected party to take away Temporal
Lordships, or the distinction between Lords and Commons, and to bring all to a
popular equality. This is an Anabaptisticall fury. I protest against it in the
Name of all the Well-affected Ministers. Indeed we would be glad to be rid of
Spiritual Lords over our consciences. But as for Temporal Lords, we pray with
David, The Lord give you good success, Ride on and prosper. A sixe-fold
Exhortation to Noblemen in particular.
Thus much for commendation.

Now for Exhortation,

Let me exhort you not only to choose to serve God, and to serve his Church and
his Cause in this most just defensive War, but to do it with those rare and
remarkable circumstances formerly mentioned in Ioshuas choice.

First, Let me persuade you to appear more and more publicly in this Cause.
There are many that think it fit only for poor men that have nothing to
loose, to appear openly in a good Cause, but as for those that have great
Estates, it becomes them to be wary and circumspect, and to seek rather to
save their Estates then to hazard all. Such a one was Nicodemus that came to
Christ by night, though afterward he repented and amended, as you may read,
John 7. 50, Such were those chief Rulers, Ioh. 12. 42, That believed in
Christ, but durst not confess him so fear of the Pharisees, least they should
be put out of the Synagogue. And many such there are in our days. But a true
Christian is so far from being hindered by his riches and greatness from
appearing for God, Heb. 10. 37.
that he is glad that he has riches and Honors to loose for God, he receives
joyfully the spoiling of his goods. He willingly parts with all for Christ's
Cause. And if you ask him why he does so, he will answer with Paulinus
Nolanus, Vt levius ascenderet scalam Iacobi, That he might go the lighter to
Heaven. He says as that famous Nobleman Hormisdas did, who when he was
deposed from all his Honors because he would not forsake his Religion, and
afterward restored to his Honors again, and then commanded by the King of
Persia to renounce his profession. Answered, Si propter ista me denegaturum
Christum put as, is it a denuo acoipe. If you think I will deny Christ for to
keep my Honors, Lib. 8. Consess.
take them all back again. S. Austin in his Confessions relates an excellent
Story of one Victorinus a great man at Rome that had many great friends that
were Heathen, but it pleased God to convert him to the Christian Religion, and
he comes to one Simplicianus, and tells him secretly that he was a Christian.
Simplicianus answers, Non credam, nec deputabo te inter Christianos, nisi in
Ecclesia Christi te videro. I will not believe thee to be a Christian, till I
see you openly profess it in the Church. At first Victorinus derided his
answer, and said, Ergone parietes faciunt Christianum? Do the walls make a
Christian? But afterward remembering and often pondering that Text of our
Savior, He that is ashamed of me before men, Mark. 8. 38.
I will be ashamed of him before my Father, etc. he returns to Simplicianus,
and professes himself openly in the Church to be a Christian. Let this Text
of Christ always sound in our ears, He that is ashamed of me, etc. And that
Text, Revel. 21. 8. where the fearful are put in the forefront of those that
shall go to Hell, before murderers, whoremongers and Idolaters, etc. And
remember also the publikenesse of Ioshuas choice.

resolutely in this great Cause. Therefore my beloved brethren be ye steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. It is not enough to do the work
of the Lord, and to abound in it, but we must do it steadfastly and unmoveably,
steadfastly as a Tree fastened in the ground, that is not removed though the
winds blow never so much; unmovable as a Rock in the Sea, that stands fast
though the Sea rages and roareth round about it. For there are so many, and so
mighty Anakims and Zanzummims that are your enemies, so many temptations both
of the right hand and of the left, both flattering and frowning, fiery trials,
and golden Apples. So many mountains of opposition lying in your way, that
unless you be endued with this excellent grace of spiritual resolution, you
will never be able to do God any service in thesetimes. But this admirable
grace of divine fortitude and Christian resolution, will make you like a wall
of brass, to beat back all the arrows of strong persuasion, that are shot
against you. This is Armor of proof, against all kind of temptations. This is
as the ballast of a Ship, to keep you steady in this great Cause, without
which you will be (...), Iam. 1. 8.
men of double-minds unsettled and unstable in all your ways. This is like the
Angel that rouled away the stone from before the door of the Sepulcher, this
will enable you either to remove the great mountains that lie in your way,
Theod.
or to stride over them. Excellent is the Story of S. Basil. The Emperor sent
to him to subscribe to the Arrian Heresy. The Messenger at first gave him good
language, and promised him great preferment if he would turn Arrian. To which
Basil answered. Alas, these speeches are fit to catch little children withal
that look after such things; but we that are nourished and taught by the holy
Scriptures, are readier to suffer a 1000. deaths, then to suffer one syllable
or title of the Scripture to be altered. The Messenger offended with his
boldness, told him he was mad. He answered. Opto me in aeternum sic delirare,
I wish I were for ever thus mad! Here was a stout Cedar. Such another was
Luther, Vnus homo solus totius orbis impetum sustinuit, Luther alone opposed
all the world. Such another was Nehemiah, who met with so much opposition, that
had he not bin steeled by a strong and obstinate resolution, he could never
have rebuilded the Temple, but would have sunk in the midst of it. Such a one
was David, that would not be hindered from fighting with Goliath though he met
with many discouragements. The Lord make you such. It is resolution that will
make you valiant for the truth, Ier. 9. 2.
that will make Martyrdom as pleasing as a bed of Roses, that will make you
like men of fire, and all that oppose you as stubble, that will make you say
with that good Martyr, Though we had as many lives as hairs on our head, we
would loose them all rather then loose our Religion. The Lord fill your hearts
with this grace!

Thirdly, I am to beseech you that you would endeavor to approve your selves
more and more faithful to this Cause. It is with us as it was with Nehemiah
when he undertook the great work of rebuilding the Temple, he was opposed by
great men especially. The Nobles of Tekoah refused to put their necks to the
yoke of the Lord. This is an eternal brand upon them, Nehem. 3. 5. Many of
the Nobles of Judah, did seem to help Nehemiah, but they kept secret
correspondency with Tobiah, and tarried with Nehemiah only to give private
intelligence to the enemy, and to weaken his hands from going on in the work,
Neh. 6. 17. Thus it was in Nehemiah's days. And this is one of the miseries of
Civil War above all other kinds of War: For there are always some false
brethren, some Iudasses in civil War. But I believe better things of you.
The Lord make you more and more faithful to his Cause! Remember what became of
Judas for his treachery.

speediness of Joshuas choice. Joshua had not his Religion to choose, and
therefore he did not demurre upon his choice. Me thinks I hear the whole
Kingdom beseeching you greatly and saying as the Ruler did to Christ in
another case, Mark. 5. 23.
The Kingdom lies at the point of death, make haste, oh make haste to heal
us. The whole Kingdom is on fire, make haste to quench the flames that our
sins have kindled. Nothing will destroy England more then delay.

some extraordinary service for the Kingdom that is now in extraordinary
danger. Ioshuas choice was extraordinary. Though all Israel forsook God,
Joshua was resolved to serve God alone. God has done extraordinary things for
you, he has advanced you above thousands in outward mercies, he has done
extraordinary things for this Cause which you stand up for, he has given us an
extraordinary deliverance this day, and therefore he expects extraordinary
service from you. Esth. 4. 13, 14.
He looks you should say and do as Esther; If I perish I perish. And let that
Text I beseech you lie near your hearts, and read it again and again.
Think not with your selves that you shall escape in the Kings house, more then
all the Jews, for if you altogether hold your peace, enlargement and
deliverance shall arise to the Jews from another place, but you and your
fathers houses shall be destroyed, and who knows whether you are come to the
Kingdom for such a time as this? He looks you should venture your selves as
Joseph of Arimathea did, Mat. 27. 57. 58.
of whom it is related, that he was a rich man and yet was not afraid to own
the cause of Christ, when Christ was dead upon the Cross, He went to Pilate
and begged the body of Jesus. Ier 38. 7. Genesis 6.
He expects you should be like Ebedmelech that hazarded his life to help
Jeremiah out of prison, like to Noah who walked with God when all the world
walked with iniquity, and was like a spark of fire in a Sea of water, and yet
continued his heat. Like to David, 2 Samuel 6. 22.
who when Michal mocked him for dancing before the Arc, answered, It is before
the Lord, and I will yet be more vile then thus, etc. When you are derided for
hazarding lives and estates in this cause, you must reply. It is for God and
his Religion, I will yet be more vile then thus. Oh that the Lord would give
you a heart to study to do some singular thing for him!

Sixthly, You must do all this, not only in your own persons, you and your
houses, you and your Tenants, you and all that depend upon you. For every
Master of a family stands accountable to God for his family as well as for
himself; For these public relations, and subordinations of Master and
servant, Father and child, etc. are from Gods appointment, and are parts of our
Stewardship, for which we must give a severe account. And it is a certain
rule, That man is not a good man, that is not good in all his relations. For
there are duties required of us by God in every relation (as Masters, as
Fathers, as Magistrates, as Parliament Men, etc.) The same God that requires us
to serve him as private persons, requires us to serve him in our relations, and
though thou be never so careful of thy duty as a private person, yet thou
may go to Hell for neglecting thy duty as a Master, as a Magistrate, as a
Parliament Man. And although thou should be good in one relation, yet if
thou do not endeavor to be good in every relation, thou shall never go to
Heaven. For the same God that commands thee to serve him as a Master, commands
thee to serve him as a Parliament Man, etc. And he that keeps the whole Law,
and offends in one point is guilty of all. Iam. 2. 10.
Here is a Sea of matter offers it self, and matter of great concernement for
the regulating of Noble-mens families, which are in many places rather
Beth-avens then Bethels; houses of iniquity rather then houses of God. But I
must not launch into this Ocean; Only remember that in the New Testament, when
the Master of the Family was converted, all the family was baptized, and what
God says of Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. and what David says, Psalm. 181. 2, 3, 6, 7.
and what is said, Exodus 20. 11. Thou and thy servant. Thus much for the
Exhortations.

Now for Encouragement;

And there is great need to encourage Noblemen that set their faces to look
after Christ, and to serve him after a strict and holy manner, and that venture
all in this Cause, to go on maugre all opposition. For we live in times
wherein we may take up that complaint of Salvian, Si quis ex nobilitate
converti ceperit ad Deum, statim honorem Nobilitatis amittit: Oh quantus est in
populo Christiano honor Christi, ubi Religio ignobilem facit! and mali coguntur
esse nobiles ne viles habeantur. If any of the Nobility begin to be converted
to God, presently they begin to loose (in the eye of the wicked) all the honor
of their Nobility. How little is the Name of Christ esteemed amongst those
Christians where Religion makes a man ignoble, and men are compelled to be
wicked, that they may be accounted Noble. A true picture of our wicked times.
Suffer me therefore to offer unto you these following encouragements, as helps
against all the discouragements you meet withal in the zealous and resolute
prosecution of this great cause now in hand.

1. The cause you manage is an encouraging cause. It is the cause of God. And
let me say to you as Luther to Melancthon. If the cause be not Gods, why do ye
not wholly desert it, but if it be Gods cause, why do you not go through with
it. This is a Dilemma that cannot be evaded. The glory of God is embarked in
the same Ship in which this cause is in. And you may lawfully plead with God,
as Joshua does, Josh. 7. 9. and as Moses does, Numb. 14. 15, 16.

2. You have an encouraging God, me thinks I hear God say to you as he does
to Ioshuah 1. 6. Be strong and of a good courage, etc. and verse 7. Only be
thou strong and very courageous, etc. And verse 9. Have not I commanded thee,
Be strong and of a good courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for
the Lord thy God is with thee, whithersoever thou go. And as Ioshuah said to
the people of Israel, Numb. 14. 7. So does God to you. Fear not the people of
the Land, for they are bread for us, their defense is departed from them and
the Lord is with us, fear them not. And as Moses said, Exo. 14. 13, 14. So
says God, though your enemies be as tall as the Anakims: though the red Sea be
before you, and the Egyptians behind you, fear them not, for the Lord fights
for you. The God whose cause you manage is infinite in power, wisdom and
goodness, he has brought us into deeps, not to drown us, but to wash away
our spiritual filthiness; not to destroy us, but to manifest his power in our
deliverance; he will deliver us by weak means, and by contrary means, and he
will make use of the treachery of your enemies to be a means to deliver you,
as he has done this day. He will kill Goliath with his own Sword, and hang
Haman upon his own gallows. He will strike strait strokes with crooked
sticks; as he made the treachery of Joseph's brethren to be a means to advance
Joseph, and the falsenesse of Judas to be a way to save all his elect children.

3. You have encouraging Promises, Exodus 23. 22, 23. Levit. 26. 6, 7, 8. Deuteronomy.
28. 7. 1 Samuel 25. 28. Isa. 41. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Isa. 54. 17. A
Text common to all Gods people, because it is said to be the heritage of the
servants of the Lord. Here are six Texts like six pillars to undershore our
spirits from falling into discouragements. Cast your selves into the bosom of
these Promises.

4. You have encouraging examples. For we cannot be in a lower condition then
Jonah was, when he was in the Whales belly, tanquam vivus in sepulchro, and yet
God commanded the Whale to deliver him safe upon the shore. We cannot be in a
worser estate then Jeremy was when he was in the dungeon, and sanke in the mire
so deep, as that 30. men could hardly lift him up; or then Peter was when he
was ready to sink: or then Moses when put in an Arc of bull-rushes, etc. Or
then the children of Israel were in Babylon, who were like dry bones in the
grave, insomuch as Ezekiell himself could not tell whether they could live, or
as Peter when put in prison by Herod. And yet notwithstanding God sent a
blackmore to deliver Jeremy. Jesus Christ reached out his hand to keep Peter
from sinking. God sent Pharaohs daughter to preserve Moses: And Cyrus to
deliver Israel out of Babylon. And he sent his Angel to deliver Peter out of
prison. Indeed Peter himself did not believe it, no more did the Church that
was praying for him. God sent them a return of prayers, while they were
praying, but they believed it not. And thus God has often done for us. Comfort
one another with these examples, and carry this home for your everlasting
consolation. God never suffers his children to meet with a huge unremoveable
difficulty, like the stone before the door of the Sepulcher, but he sends some
Angel or other to remove it away.

5. You have an encouraging Captain, even the Lord Jesus, who is the great
Peacemaker, Who is our peace when the Assyrian is in the Land, Micah 7. 9. He
has taken down the partition wall, he has made our peace with God. Let the
deepes of our civil war call upon the deepes of peace that are in Christ.
Let us beseech the great Peacemaker to take down the great partition wall
between King and Parliament, to make Father and Son of one mind. If Christ
makes the peace, it must needs be good. Jesus Christ came into the world, when
the Jews were in the saddest condition, in the depth of slavery (for the
Scepter was departed from Judah) and in the depth of divisions, for they had so
many several Sects, as they could hardly tell what Religion they were off. In
this sad condition Shiloh came. Let us beseech Jesus Christ to come into
England in this low estate, and to bring peace with him, even that Christ who
descended into the lowest parts of the Earth for our sakes, and whose love is a
depth that cannot be fathomed, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18. The deepes of our misery call
upon the depth of his love and mercy, that God for Christ sake would pardon our
abyss of sins both personal and national, and bring us out of our abyss
of miseries, both personal and national.

6. You have encouraging company, you have the Lord of Hosts to accompany you,
and I may say without the least degree of uncharitablenes, you have the major
part of Gods people on your side.

7. You have encouraging weapons, prayers and tears, fasting and humiliation.
As Ambrose spoke to Austins mother by way of encouragement. That a Son of so
many tears could not miscarry. So may I say and I hope prove a true Prophet,
That a Nation of so many prayers and tears shall not be destroyed, God never
yet destroyed a Nation, wherein there were so many of his children praying,
fasting, humbling themselves, and especially at such a time, when they are
entering into a solemn Covenant of reforming their lives (as now we are) if
they endeavor to do these things with all their heart and soul.

8. You have encouraging threatenings against the enemies of Gods Church. God
has threatened, Zach. 12. 2, 3, 6. to make Jerusalem a cup of poison, and all
that offer to swallow Jerusalem shall be poisoned with it, to make Jerusalem a
burdensome stone, and all that think to crush Jerusalem shall be crushed by
Jerusalem; to make him like a fire, and all his enemies like wood to be
devoured by him. God has threatened concerning the plots of your enemies,
Psalm. 64. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. This Scripture is this day fulfilled in your
ears. The Lord give us grace to declare his works, and wisely to consider of
his doings. God has likewise accomplished those two rare Scriptures, Psalm. 7.
14, 15, 16, 17. Psalm. 9. 15, 16. Let us add our part, Let us praise the Lord
according to his righteousness, let us sing praise to the name of the Lord
most high, Higgaion, Selah.

9. You have the encouraging providence of God. The great and wise God, who is
our Father, has from all eternity decreed what shall be the issue of these
wars. There is nothing done in the lower House of Parliament upon earth, but
what is decreed in the higher House of Parliament in Heaven. All the lesser
wheels are ordered and overruled by the upper wheels. An excellent Story of
a Young Man that was at Sea in a mighty tempest, and when all the passengers
were at their wits end for fear, he only was merry, and when he was asked the
reason of his mirth; he answered, That the Pilot of the Ship was his Father,
and he knew his Father would have a care of him. Our heavenly Father is our
Pilot, he sits at the stern, and though the Ship of the Kingdom be ready to
finke, yet be of good comfort, Luke 12. 6.
Our Pilot will have a care of us. Are not five sparrowes (says Christ) sold
for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God. One sparrow is
not worth half a farthing: You shall not have half a farthings worth of
harm, more then God has from all eternity decreed. God has all ourenemies in
a chain. And if a child saw a Lion or a Bear in his dear Fathers hand
chained, so as he might be secure his Father could keep the chain from being
burst, he would not be afraid. And this we are sure God can do. A 1000000.
Cyphars stand for nothing, unless a figure be joined to them. All men and
devils are but cyphars without God. An host of men is nothing without the Lord
of host. The devil cannot go beyond his tedder.

Ob. This objection and answer was added to the Sermon, to comfort us in regard
of the death of M. Ha^pden, the news of whose death came just to me, as I was
transcribing the encouragements from Gods providence.
But God permits the enemy to exercise great cruelty upon his own people, and
to take away the lives of his choicest servants, witness the Noble Lord Brook,
and now lately that worthy Gentleman M. Hampden.

Answ. 1. Let us not be troubled that God permits our enemies to do us so much
hurt, but rather be comforted that they can do nothing, but what our wise and
most loving God permits, and fore-decrees for the good of his children.

2. I answer with our blessed Savior. Fear not them that can but kill the
body, and after that can do no more. It is no great matter (in Christ's opinion)
to have the body killed. The body is but the Cabinet, the Jewel is the soul.
And if the Jewel be safe in Heaven, no great matter to have the Cabinet
broken. It is said of King Josiah, that he should go to his grave in peace,
and yet he died in a battle. He that dies with the peace of a good
conscience, dies in peace, though he be killed in a battle. Blessed is the
man that breaths out his last breath in doing God service. He that dies
fighting the Lords battles dies a Martyr. An excellent thing for a Minister to
die preaching, and a soldier die fighting. It is but winking with our eyes (as
the Martyr said) and we are presently in Heaven. Blessed and twice blessed are
those that die in the Lord, and for the Lord.

3. God many times takes away his choicest servants, because we idolize them
too much, as he did the King of Sweden. And also because he would teach us to
trust only to his help, who will deliver us by weak instruments, when he
takes away strong and able Instruments, that he may have all the glory.

Lastly, You have encouraging experiments. And surely if any Nation under
Heaven may reason from experience, and rely upon experiences this Nation may.
God has delivered us from the Bear and the Lion, from the Spanish navy in
Eighty eight, and since from the Gun-pouder Treason, from Civil wars
between Scotland and England. And when there was a design to bring the Army
up against London, God did then deliver us. And when we were in the valley of
the red horse (as it is called) near Edgehill, where the Enemy thought to
have cast us down the Hill, as the Jews would have served Christ, then God
did also deliverus. And for this cause we are here this Day, to praise God for
a wonderful and miraculous Deliverance. And therefore we may confidently say
with the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 1. 10. Who delivered us this day from so great a
death and does deliver, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. It is
observable that when Moses went up to the Mount to pray, he took the Rod of
God in his hand. The reason is given, because, by that Rod God had formerly
done wonderful things for his people; and the very sight of that Rod did
encourage Moses to trust in God from the experience of his former goodness.
Let us never go to our prayers, but let us carry the Rod of God in our hand
and heart. I mean the solemn and serious contemplation of this days
Deliverance, and of Gods former wonderful goodness, and let us say with the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me and
strengthened me, etc. and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. And the
Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his
heavenly Kingdom; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

