C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE KING.
A Proclamation against the Oppression of the Clergy by the Intrusion of
Factious and Schismatic Persons into their Cures, and inverting and
detaining their Tithes and possessions by Orders of one or both Houses of
Parliament, contrary to all Law and Justice.
WHEREAS by the Great Charter of the Liberties of England it is provided, that
the Church should have all its Rights whole, and Liberties inviolable; and
amongst others the Church has these Privileges, That regularly no
Ecclesiastical Possessions may be extended, seized or sequestered but by the
Ordinary, And that Distresses may not be taken of Lands wherewith Churches have
been anciently endowed; And that Churches presentative cannot be filled, and
the Lawful Incumbents thereof removed but by the Ordinary, nor the Cure of the
Incumbents served by Curates, Lecturers or others, but by their own
appointment, or in their default by the appointment of the Ordinary; neither
are any of Our Subjects of the Laity by the Common Laws of Our Realm capable
to take or receive Tithes (which are the portion of the Clergy) unless by
demise from them, or such as are appropriate and made Lay-Fee: Nevertheless by
color of Orders or pretended Ordinances of one or both Houses of Parliament,
the Estates Real and Personal as well of Our Clergy as Laity have been and
are daily seized, sequestered and taken from them, and their Possessions
distrayned for illegal Taxes and Contributions for supporting the Rebellion
against Us; Which being clearly against Law and unwarrantable, We did forbid by
Our Proclamation of the seventh of April last, and do hereby forbid the same,
under the penalties in that Our Proclamation contained. And whereas diverse of
Our Clergy eminent for their Piety and Learning, because they publish Our
lawful and just Commands and Declarations, and will nor, against the known
Laws of the Land and their own Consciences, submit to Contributions, nor
publicly pray against Us and Our Assistants, but conform themselves to the
Book of Common Prayer established by Law, and Preach Gods Word according to the
purity thereof, and in their Sermons will not teach Sedition, nor will publish
illegal Commands and Orders for fomenting the unnatural War levied against
Us, are some of them (...) and found (...) their Cares and Habitat^^^^, (...)
the (...) and Persecuted, and their C(...) if O(...) ^ded and put in, to sow
Sedition^ (...) expressly contrary to the word of God, and the Laws of the Land
(...)of Right belonging to such Incumbents as (...) Parishes where such
Arbitray power prevails, and distributed part (...) the maintenance of this
War, against Law and the Liberties of the Ch^^ch (...) and the Ple^sure
therefore is, and We do hereby straightly charge and Command all Our Subject as
well Ecclesticall as Tempo^all, not to presume to intermeddle in discharging or
hindering any of Our said Clergy for the cause afores^^d


