ORDERS AND INSTITVTIONS OF WAR, Made and ordained by His MAJESTY, And by Him
delivered to His General His EXCELLENCE The Earl of NEWCASTLE.

With the said Earls Speech to the Army at the delivery and publishing the
said Orders prefixed.



Printed for J. Johnson. 1642.

Orders and Institutions of War.
INprimis, it is by us ordered, That no Colonel Captain or other Officer or
soldier, shall be admitted into our service, but such as shall take the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance. 2. No Papist of what degree or quality soever
shall be admitted to serve in our Army. 3. All Colonels are commanded to have a
special care that the due service of God be performed in their several
Regiments, by the Chaplains to each Regiment every Sunday twice, except some
contingent occasion of moment be a lawful impediment for their forbearance. 4.
All Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Captains and other inferior Officers are
commanded to repress all disorders in their several quarters, as they will
answer the contrary to our Council of War if the default be found in them. 5.
Whosoever shall presume to swear or blaspheme the name of God in our quarters;
for the first offense shall suffer twelve hours imprisonment; for the second,
he shall suffer four and twenty hours durance; and for the third he shall be
whipped and cashiered our Army. 6. Whatsoever soldier shall be found drunk and
so neglect his duty, shall be punished at the discretion of our Court of War,
according to the haynousnesse of the fact, and the detriment arrived by his
default to our service. 7. What Captain or other Officer that shall inflict
punishment, or strike any soldier without good cause of offense given; for
such punishment or blow shall upon complaint made receive censure from his
superiors. 8. What Captain or other superior Officer or inferior, that
shall detain the soldiers pay after it is delivered to him by our Treasurer or
his subordinate Officers, upon complaint made shall make full repayment of such
moneys and then be cashiered our service. 9. Whereas there is and has been in
most services diverse enormous abuses committed in Musters by Muster-Masters,
Commissaries and Officers for that purpose, making their Companies seem
complete by men hired out of other Companies: We do therefore command all
Colonels, Captains, and other Officers, to take especial care that their
Companies be full, and no such enormities committed: Every Muster-Master so
offending being liable to Capital punishment, and every man so hired shall
suffer death, for his second offense; for his first, lie in Irons during ours
or our Generals pleasure. 10. What soldier soever that shall presume to steal
from or plunder any of our good Subjects in his march, or in any Town where he
is billeted, shall suffer death, if the thing so stolen or taken be above the
value of twelve pence, if under, he shall be punished according to the
discretion of his Officers. 11. Whosoever shall wilfully act any murder upon
the persons of any of our good subjects, soldier or other shall suffer death.
12. Whosoever shall force or ravish any woman within our quarters, or any other
place, shall suffer death. 13. Whosoever draws any sword in the presence of
our General to do any harm with it, shall lose his hand. 14. Whosoever
draws his sword when his Colors are flying, or upon any march, he shall be
harquebuser'd: if it be done in the place where he is billeted, he shall only
lose his hand and be banished our quarters. 15. Whosoever draws his sword in
the quarters after the watch is set, with intention of mischief to any, shall
suffer death. 16. No man shall hinder our Provolt-Marshall or his inferior
Officers from execution of any charge given them by our General, who presumes
to do it shall suffer death. 17. All that is to be published and made known
to all men, shall be openly proclaimed by sound of Drum or Trumpet, that no man
plead ignorance for the neglect of his duty. Who so is found disobedient shall
be punished as the fault is of importance. 18. No man shall presume to make any
Alarm in the quarter, or shoot off his Musket in the quarter but shall be
severely punished. 19. After advertisement is given to set the watch, he that
shall absent himself without some lawful cause, shall be punished with Irons.
20. He that is found sleeping upon his watch in any place of danger shall be
harquebuser'd. 21. He who shall come off the watch where he is appointed to
stand, or he who shall drink himself drunk so long as he has the guard
shall be harquebuser'd. 23. Whosoever repaires not to his Colors when he
hears the Trumpet sound or Drum beat shall be punished with Irons. 24.
Whenever a march is beaten, every man shall follow his Colors, neither shall
any through presumption stay behind without leave, upon fear of punishment.
25. If any stay behind in a mutinous fashion he shall be punished with death.
27. He who does run from his Colors in the field, shall be punished with
death; and if any other soldiers kill him in the mean time, he shall be free.
28. When occasion of service is, he who does first run away, if any can kill
him he shall be free. 29. What Regiment or Company shall begin any mutiny, the
first beginner shall be punished with death, and the rest that consent to him
shall be punished according to the discretion of the Council of War. 30.
Whosoever soldier or other that shall directly or indirectly hold intelligence
with the enemy, or disclose any of our secrets to them or any of them, shall as
traitors be punished with death. 31. What Regiment of Horse or Foot shall treat
with the Enemy, or enter into any league with him without our leave or our
Generals, shall be punished with death. 32. Whosoever shall give over any of
our Towns to the Enemy that may be defended against them, unless in case of
necessity shall be punished with death. 33. No man shall presume to send any
challenge to any other of his fellows, nor to fight any duel in the quarters
or without, upon pain of death. 34. They who shall hold any manner of
conference with the Enemy, without license from our General, shall be
punished with death. 35. Every one that shall not be contented with that
quarter which is assigned him shall, be accounted a Mutiner. 36. If any cast
away any of his Arms, either in the field, or in the quarters, he shall be
whipped through the quarters, as an example to others. 37. He who does pawn any
of his Arms, or any Ammunition whatsoever, or any other necessaries whatsoever
used in the field, for the first and second offenses shall be whipped through the
quarters, for the third time he shall be punished as for other theft: Also he
that bought them, or took them to pawn, be he soldier or victualler, or
other, shall lose his money, or be punished as he who pawned or sold them. 37.
No man shall presume to set fire on any town, village, house, barn,
out-house, haystacke, or Mill of any of our Subjects, whoever shall be found
guilty of any such crime, shall suffer death without mercy. 38. No man shall
presume to wrong any who has our Warrant or our Generals for his safe
passage, be he friend or enemy, upon pain of death. 39. He who does beat his
Host or Hostis, or any of their servants, the first and second time, shall be
put in Irons; the third time he shall be punished at the discretion of our
Officers. 40. None shall presume to wrong any man that brings necessaries to
our quarters, nor take his horse from him by force, whosoever does, shall be
punished with death. 41. No soldiers shall come to the muster, but at what day
and hour they are commanded: no Colonel nor Captain shall presume to muster
his men without command from our General. 42. If any Horseman do borrow
either Horse, Pistol, Saddle or Sword to muster withal, so much as is
borrowed, shall be forfeited, and he that does it shall be put out of our
service, and he that lends them shall forfeit one half to the captain, the
other half to the Provost. 43. If it can be proved that any Horseman do
spoil his Horse willingly of purpose, to return home, he shall be held a
coward, lose his Horse, and be turned out of the service. 44. No soldier
whatsoever, Horse or Foot, shall be cast off by his Captain, or any inferior
Officer, without consent of the Colonel. 45. No Colonel nor Captain shall
license any soldier, either Horse or Foot, to depart the field without leave
of the General, as he will answer the same, and incur our displeasure. 46.
Any Soldier, Gentleman or other, that shall be maimed, or lose any limb in
this our present service, shall have a competent pension allowed him to subsist
upon during his life. 47. If any Captain, or other Commander, do lend his
soldiers to any other Captain, it shall be done in the presence of our
Muster-masters, that so our service be not neglected. 48. All our Soldiers We
do hereby strictly require to avoid all quarrels and offenses one to another,
to give due obedience and fit respects to their Captains, Lievtenants,
Ensigns and other inferior Officers. 49. We also require, and strictly
command all Ensigns, Lievtenants, Captains, to give the same respects to our
officers of the field; as Serjeant-Majors, Lievtenant-Colonells and Colonells.
50. As we expect they and all the rest of our Army by our express command, do
the right Honorable, Our trusty and welbeloved Cosen and Councellor, William
Earl of Newcastle, his Excellence, whom we have constituted and ordained
General of all our present Forces. 51. And we do hereby will and require our
said trusty and welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, William, Earl of Newcastle,
his Excellence, our General, so constituted and ordained, to see all these,
and all other our Ordinances of war whatsoever, put in execution by his
immediate officers, that so our Cause may succeed prosperously, and We, with
the Almighties assistance, be victorious over all our Enemies.
His Excellence, the Earl of Newcastle's SPEECH to his Colonels, and other
Commanders, at his receiving the charge of General, and the precedent Orders
from his Majesty.
LOrds and Gentlemen, my Noble Friends and fellow Soldiers, I could have
heartily wished, that either the Earl of Lindsey, who before commanded you,
had evaded his untimely destiny; or th^^ his sacred Majesty had been pleased
to have conferred the successive managing of this office to one of better
abilities then my self but since I am invested with this charge, I shall study
to demean my self like a faithful Subject to my Prince, a true legitimate
son to my mother the Commonwealth, and a just and loving Chief to you all;
to use incouragementss to men of fortitude, is an implicit diminution to their
valors. I shall not therefore so much undervalue yours, as to intrude an
exhortation upon your courages, only I shall desire you will keep those men
under your commands free from disordiers, performing with all care and
diligence, these Institutions which I now as your General am engaged to
deliver to you from his sacred Majesty: we are here in our own Country, a sad
and lamentable affair it is in Arms, and must employ our hands against our
selves, our brothers; if we must fight, I make no doubt of your deportement in
the affairs of war, but could heartily wish, and so I hope you do all wish
with me, that we might be happy in a fair and sudden atonement between his
Majesty and his high Court of Parliament; it is not improbable, but it may be
effected, if not, I hope you will all fight as valiantly as I shall lead you
on resolutely, and (if it so please God) bring you off with safety.

FINIS.

