HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
His Majesty's Speech: With Mr. SPEAKERS Speech, to both Houses of Parliament;
At the passing of the Bill for Tonnage and Poundage: Being an Answer to Mr.
SPEAKERS Speech at the presenting thereof, 22. June 1641.
THat policy, most gracious and dread Sovereign, which weighs the Prerogative
of the King and property of the Subject in the same Scales, and increases the
plenty of the Crown and government of the people; the even poysing of this
Beam enables both, the one being ordained for the preservation of the other.

This principle is so riveted into the hearts of your Subjects by the acts of
their Ancestors, and traditions of their forefathers, that it has created a
belief in them, that their wills are bound to a due allegiance, and their
fortunes and estates, as well as their duty and subjection, must bend to the
commands of that Sovereign power with which God has invested your sacred
Majesty.

Compulsary obedience, advanced by the transcendent power of Prerogative, is
too weak to support the right of government: It is the affections and estates
of your people, tied with the threads of obedience, by the rules of Law, that
fastens safety and prosperity to the Crown.

The experiment of elder times, in the reigns of the most valiant puissant
Princes, has concluded this the sovereign preservative against the diseases
of distraction and confusion, and makes it manifest to the world, that the
honor and glory of this Throne is to command the hearts of freemen.

This admitted, the permission of the least diminution, or any eclypsed
interposition between the honor and plenty of the Crown, contracts a scorn
upon the Nation.

Several Parliaments in former times have stamped the Caracter of a free gift
upon the forefront of this aid, still offered by the people as a sacrifice of
thankesgiving to the Crown, for the safe conduct of your Merchants, and
provision of the Navy, to strengthen your undoubted Dominion over the seas,
which has protected your Allies, and is a terror to your Enemies.

Our hopes were long since to have settled this for the measure and the time,
and with this to have presented to your sacred Majesty the triumphant palm of
Tranquillity in all your Kingdoms: But, as a ship floating upon a rough sea,
we have been cast upon the rock of fear and dangers, and tossed on the
billows of distraction and distrust of Church and Commonwealth, where we yet
remain hopeless ever to pass through that narrow channel which leads to the
Haven of peace, unless we be speedily steered on by the hand of your sacred
wisdom, care and providence.

In the midst of all these troubles, and the several opinions which have been
amongst us, no division had power to distract any one of us from the care and
duty we owe to your sacred person.

And, to that end am I now sent by the Commons of England, to present this as a
Mark only, whereby your sacred Majesty may view the inward duties of our
hearts, until time and opportunity will give leave for a further expression of
our duties and affections. The acceptance of this gift will glad the hearts of
your people, and the approbation by the royal assent of this Bill (being the
largest for the measure which was ever given) will join wings to our desires
and hopes, which shall never return without that Olive-leafe, which may
declare that the waters are abated, and your sacred Majesty may have full
assurance of the faith and loyalty of your subjects.

His Majesty's SPEECH.
I Do very willingly accept your offer made at this time, as a testimony of
your love, and beginning of your dutiful affections unto me; And I no way
doubt, but that you will perform that which you have intimated unto me, and
that in due time you will perform the rest, when you have leisure.

I do not doubt likewise, but that in passing this Bill you will see a
testimony of the trust and confidence I have in your affections, as also that I
omit no occasion whereby I may show that affection to my people, that I desire
my people would show to me, as in this Parliament hitherto no body can say but
that I have sought occasions both to show my affections unto them, and to
remove disputes.

And therefore in this particular Bill I hope you will know that I do freely
and frankly give over the right which my Predecessors have ever challenged
unto them (though I confess disputed, but yet they did never yield in their
times;) Therefore you will understand this but a mark of my confidence to put
my self wholly upon the love and affection of my people for my subsistence;
And therefore I hope that in prosecution of this, you will go on as you have
said, and that, though you have rumors of jealousies and suspicions, by flying
and idle discourses, that have come to my ears, concerning the ordinary way, I
confess I never understood otherwise then as having relation to the Scottish
army, and preventing insurrection; which vanished as soon as they were borne.

And therefore now you see my clearness, I will leave that to you, and will
not meddle with it one way or other, for I never had other design but to win
the affections of my people by my Justice in my Government.


