THE KINGS MAJESTY'S SPEECH, AS It was delivered the second of November before
the University and City of OXFORD. TOGETHER With a gratulatory Replication
expressed by that learned Man Doctor William Strode, Orator for the famou^
University of OXFORD.

First printed at Oxford, and now reprinted at London, 1642. November. 9.

The Kings Majesty's Speech. As it was delivered the second of November, before
the University of Oxford.
TOGETHER With a gratulatory Replication expressed by that learned Man Doctor
William Strode, Orator for the famous University of OXFORD.
IT brings great comfort unto me, that I am now almost in the heart of my
Kingdom; and it brings more comfort unto me, that I am now in the hearts of my
subjects. I would to God we had all one heart in earnest, that so neither my
Kingdoms should suffer, nor I complain. You see what is daily committed
against me (who am indeed the father of your Country) and I am most sorry, that
any par of my Kingdom should own those subjects (who in pretense of religion)
should lament it, and destroy it. I come not here as a Cunquerour but as your
Sovereign, and believe me, there is not a drop of blood has fallen from a
true royal subject, but I have symp^thized with it* All the blood is lost,
does but open my wounds the wider, and (...) sorry that you do not understand
it. Believe me on ^^e word of a Prince, on the word of your Sove^^igne, there
i^ nothing more dear unto me then Re^igion, the Religion of my father and the
Royal Queen his predecessor, a religion which ever from her own fl^me^ h^th
arised more pure, and multiplied. This is my business to you, in which I hope
I shall satisfy both God and you* And since I have left the war behind me,
take peace and the day while you see it* I see the clouds make have to overcome
it. The Scep^er is and must be mine, Unite your selves to maint^ine so
honorable, so just a cause, and what one hand cannot infringe, let many
maintain: You have God for your cause, you have me for hi^ second; and since
both are together, who can oppose us: You have seen the first and second
victory, which the justice and mercy of God has been pleased to bestow upon
me. In the first we have taken prisoners and slaughtered the chiefest of their
men, which was the sinews of victory. In the second, we have taken all their
treasure, which is the sinews of war. War and Victory, Victory and War
and since the first is come unto us by necessity, I hope the second will be
devolved to us and to ours by inheritance.

Gentlemen, my heart does bleed to see the loss of so many of my people, and
where war cannot prevail upon me, piety has done. I bleed in your wounds,
and am much overcome to hear my self a Conqueror. Give me your hearts, and
preserve your own bloods. The heart of a Prince is kept warm with the blood
of his subjects: the blood of the subjects being not to be preserved, were it
not loyally entertained into the heart of the Prince. The movings of my Lord of
Essex, did never trouble me, I have offered my self in a quiet and
inoffensive march, which I have found as open as it was in my progress.

I have endeavored after a desired reconciliation, and I hope ere many days
pass over, to see it accomplished. It shall be a great happiness unto me, if
through the many troubles and travails of my life, I can distill at last the
Sovereign Balm of peace into the desperate wounds of my distracted Kingdom.

The Speech of the University Orator to gratulate his Majesty's coming unto
Oxford.
HIgh words cannot reach the joy that your presence has created in our hearts,
which do bless our eyes for so desired an object. Learning does acknowledge
the mercy of Heaven in bringing your Majesty to give voice to the dumb
Academy, and renew the Muses, slain by that Briareus of ignorance, which
breathes nothing but Religions destruction. Our Oxford has now thrown off all
clouds of discontents, and stands clear, gilded by the beams of your
Majesty's Royal presence. The burden cast on me, is my joy, or rather the joy
of the Academy, extaside into a learned amazement, and raptured into speech to
see your Majesty. All gratulation cannot comply with our thoughts, to show the
pleasure our fancy takes to behold your Majesty. See Royal King, how Oxford,
beauteous in her age, does kneel, making tears of joy a Sacrifice, and
begging to be protected from threatened ruin. Shall the Spring of learning be
damned up? while ignorance does tear and rend the Muses Garlands, as would both
contemn and destroy Scholars: For no enemy can learning have, unless it be
the ignorant. Your Royal Majesty is by descent, a protector of learning, and
borne (as your Father was) to be the glory and defender of the Muses. This may
strongly invite your love, wherein we are already happy in some degrees. But
we fear a malignant enemy should violate our clear Minerva, and banish from
her both maintenance and glory. Pure zeal does make them seek with one blow
to destroy both learning and Religion, now bleeding and wounding by
schismatic heads, and expecting cure from your Royal Majesty. Yet our fears
are great, and grounded upon the unhappy fate of learning, which is despised of
precise Scholars that wear black only to mourn for the decease of learning.
But joy cannot imagine the time discreet for a just reproose, and therefore I
must tell what pleasure does refresh and water our thirsty Garden, rather then
complain of scorching heat of persecution. Our memory must not be active in
striving to manifest sorrow incompatible with our present joy. Enlarge rhy
self therefore Oxford: and let not any grief so blind thy heart to a stupid
peace, but let loud gratulations wound the air with reporting welcome to our
Gracious King CHARLES.


