TWO LETTERS Of His Majesty's Left upon the Table of Hampton Court the 11 of
November 1647.

The one to Colonel Whaley, the other to the Lord Mountague.

Also a Letter of Advice to his Majesty, subscribed by E. R.

DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENCE
royal blazon or coat of arms

Printed for Matthew Walbancke 1647.

Hampton Court, 11 November. 1647
Colonel Whaley; I have been so civilly used by you and Major Huntington, that
I cannot but by this parting farewell acknowledge it under my hand; as also to
desire the continuance of your courtesy, by your protecting of my
houshold-stuffs and Movables of all sorts which I leave behind me in this
House, that they be neither spoiled nor imbesled: Only there are three
Pictures here which are not mine, that I desire you to restore; to wit my wives
Picture in blew sitting in a Chair, you must send to Mistress Kirk; my eldest
daughters Picture copied by Belcam, to the Countess of Anglesey, and my Lady
Stannops Picture to Carry Rawley; there is a fourth which I had almost forgot,
it is the Original of my eldest daughter (it hangs in this Chamber over the
board next to the Chimney) which you must send to my Lady Aubigny. So being
confident that you wish my preservation and restitution, I rest

Your Friend, CHARLES R.
I Assure you it was not the Letter you showed me to day, that made me take
this resolution, nor any advertisement of that kind; But I confess that I am
loath to be made a close Prisoner, under pretense of securing my life. I had
almost forgot to desire you to send the black Grew Bitch to the Duke of
Richmond.



Hampton Court 11 Novem. 1647.
MOuntague, First I do hereby give you and the rest of your fellows thanks
for the civilities and good conversation that I have had from you; next I
command you to send this my Message (which you will find upon this Table) to
the two Houses of Parliament, and likewise to give a Copy of it to Colonel
Whaley, to be sent to send to the General: likewise I desire you to send all my
saddle-Horses to my Son the Duke of York; as for what concerns the resolution
that I have taken my declaratory Message says so much that I refer you to
it, and so I rest

Your assured friend CHARLES R.

May it please Your Majesty:
IN discharge of my duty I cannot omit to acquaint you that my brother was at a
meeting last night with eight or nine Agitators, who in debate of the obstacle
which did most hinder the speedy effecting of their designs, did conclude it
was Your Majesty, and as long as Your Majesty does live you would be so; and
therefore resolved, for the good of the Kingdom, to take your life away; and
that to that Action they were well assured that Master Dell and Mr. Peter's (two
of their preachers) would willingly bear them company, for they had often said
to these Agitators, Your Majesty is but a dead dog: My prayers are for Your
Majesty's safety; but do too much fear it cannot be whilst you are in those
hands.

I wish with my soul Your Majesty were at my house in Broadstreet, where I am
confident I could keep you private till this storm were over, but beg Your
Majesty's pardon, shall not presume to offer it as an advice; it is only my
constant zeal to Your Service, who am

Your Majesty's dutiful Subject, E. R.
November. 9. 1647.
FINIS.

