By Commission under the Great Seal of England, Dated 6th Decembris ann. 23.
Car. Sec^d.
directed to all Archbishops, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Bishops,
Barons, Baronets, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen within England and Wales,
(Reciting.)
THat whereas his Majesty's Servants the Kings Heralds and Pursuivands of Arms
by their humble Petition had represented unto his Majesty, That their late
College of Arms in London (given to their Corporation in perpetuity for their
residence and place of meeting, and for keeping the Records Rolls and Books of
their faculty) was consumed by the late fire there, but the said Records Rolls
and Books [which are of great use to the Nobility and Gentry] being preserved,
are in danger to be lost, and the Petitioners Employment [having relation to
matters of Honor and Arms only] the knowledge thereof will wear out and cease
for want of like Convenience for the future.

That there is no Revenue belonging to their Corporation whereby to enable them
to rebuild, and the time limited by the Act of Parliament for Rebuilding
London, near expiration; so as the ground whereon their said College stood
will be lost, and the inconveniences before mentioned inevitably follow,
unless His Majesty be graciously pleased to extend his Royal favor in that
behalf.

And mentioning that his Majesty had referred the said Petititon to his
Commissioners, for executing the Office of Earl Marshal of England to Consider
thereof, and certify some fit means or expedient to effect the said
Rebuilding, who had thereupon certified, That the charge thereof will amount to
5000 l. The most probable way for raising whereof, they conceived to be for his
Majesty by his Commission to recommend the same to his Nobility and Gentry for
their voluntary benevolence, who (as persons most concerned) would cheerfully
contribute thereunto.

That his Majesty approved of that expedient. And does recommend the same
accordingly, with this, that he does promise himself and expect the ready
compliance of his Nobility and Gentry as in a matter which he desires may have
effect and will be very acceptable to him.

And for the better effecting thereof Kings of Arms.
Sir Edward Walker Garter. Sir Edward Bish Clarenceux. William Dugdale Narroy.
Heralds of Arms
Elias Ashmole Windsor. Henry St. George Richmond. Thomas Lee Chester. Sir
Thomas St. George Sommerset. John Wingfeild Yo^k, and Robert Challoner
Lancester.
Pursuivands of Arms
Francis Sandford Roug^dragon. Thomas Holford Portcullis.
Of Arms for the time being.
And Garter Clarenceux and Norroy Kings And Wind for Richmond Chester Sommerset
York and Lancaster Heralds And Rouge Dragon and Portcullis Pursuivands And
ssuch other person and persons as the Earl Marshal of England or Commissioners
for that Office now and for the time being or any one or more of them shall
under their Hands and Seals appoint.

Are Constituted Authorized and appointed Commissioners To take and Receive the
Subscriptions of his Majesty's said Nobility and Gentry, which they or any of
them shall make toward rebuilding the said College.

With power for them or any one or more of them to take and receive such
Subscriptions. And command to make return of the Commission and their
proceeding hereon to the Earl Marshal or Commissioners for that Office before
Michaelmas 1677.

And Pursivands of Arms.
Henry Dethick Rouge Croix John Gibbons Blewmantle.
And Rouge Croix and Blewmantle for the time being, and such others as the said
Kings Heralds and Pursuivands under their common Seal shall appoint, As
Constituted Commissioners* For Collecting and Receiving the moneys arising by
such Subscriptions.

The said Collectors and Receivers are Commanded To pay all the ^^^ies by them
received To Two Treasurers named in the Commission. And to such others as shall
be appointed by the Earl Marshal or Commissioners for that Office now and for
the time being or any one of them.

And those Treasurers are to pay and dispose the moneys To and for the said
Rebuilding and not otherwise, in such manner and order as the Earl Marshal or
Commissioners for that Office now and for the time being shall appoint*

And in case the moneys arising by such Subscriptions exceed the charge of
Rebuilding such overplus to be employed In Ornament of The public Hall and the
places For Keeping the Records. For meeting in Chapter For books to be added to
the Library there.


The Officers of Arms are Commanded and Authorized In testimony of their
gratitude to their Benefactors here To Take and Register in books of Velome
Certificates of The Arms they bear Their Discents Matches and Issue Their
Liberality.


To the end the memory thereof may remain to after Ages.

And to deliver out Testimonials thereof under their common Seal to such of
their Benefactors who shall require the same.

The Commission to endure till Michaelmas 1677.


