The Kings Majesty's SPEECH To the LORDS for the raising of Forces, to preserve
the peace and safety of His Subjects. June. 29.

Likewise a Report of Mr. Hambden, and Mr. Fines, concerning a Conspiracy
intended against the Parliament.

Whereunto is annexed Joyful News from the Queen in Holland. Sent from Mr.
Cayne Her Majesty's Servant, to Mr. Sanders near Charing-Crosse.

Concerning fourteen Messengers which are gone from the States in Holland to
His Majesty at York, whose Names are expressed in this ensuing Relation.

Together with the Message the States sent to His Majesty.

With their Determination concerning the Lord Strange.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parl.

July, 5. London, Printed for I. H. and T. R. 1642.

The Kings Majesty's Speech to the LORDS for the raising of Forces to maintain
the peace and safety of His Subjects.
My Lords,
THe last time I was in this place I minded you to make what speed you could to
raise Forces to reduce the tyranising people, which will not obey my command to
a Loyal subjection, the same I shall now include, for I above all things in
the world prize the peace and safety of my good Subjects, and of all Rebellion
J hate that of the Popish Faction, I hear daily of the woeful estate of my
People, and do understand how my House of Commons have passed a Bill for the
raising of Forces, and that the Bill sticks with you my Lords, for whach I
give you no thanks, as to the Declaration, J have no pleasure in that, but that
Actions may be transacted, in matter of such consequence, this is the full
effect of the Speech.

The Roport made by Master Pym.
Still do the Protestants echo forth lameetable complaints, and as it were
despair of safety, for it was reported to the committee for Irish affairs,
that that more Counties have collected their Forces, and join with the Rebels,

They are marched within 4. Miles of Dublin, pillaging of Houses, and driving
away Cattle, and stop the passages from whence they received provision, to the
great grief and fear of his Majesty's good Subjects, the Protestants of
Ireland, the Rebels made public proclemation, and maintained it, with a
general Oath for to be all true to the Church of Rome. also they proclaim and
confess that King Charles is their lawful King and governor, making a Vow
and Protestation.

They took up Arms in defense of their Religion, not in contempt or malice
against his Majesty, to which intent they spoke to the Lord Dillon, to send
Letters to the Kings Majesty, but this can be no better dissemblation, for they
which love the King will not persecute his Loyal people by fire and Sword, as
they have and daily do, and yet will make us believe they love the King, from
their power Lord keep him for ever, and never let him be so unfortunate as to
fall into their hands, for then upon my life J am persuaded they would exile
from their hearts both duty, love, and mercy, two Suns must not shine in one
climate, Tyrone must have nothing to do where King Charles has Authority.

Although now he exalt himself as his Father did before him, let him quickly
return to his Spanish preferment, from England, Scotland, or Jreland.

Other Letters came that the Rebels expected Ammunition from foreign parts,
that the old Proverb maybe made true, the Devil helps his servants.

Wherefore the Lord chief Justices of Jreland, desired the Parliament to send
their poor Subjects and friends some relief of Men and Money, about which
there did arise some debate concerning sending of men out of this Kingdom, I
mean also concerning a press unless it was done by Act of Parliament, but
now it is resolved upon the Question that aid shall be speedily sent unto the
poor afflicted Protestants in JRELAND, the Commanders in London look every
day when their Commission should be sealed up, and then they enter into pay.

A Conspiracy discovered against the High Court of Parliament.
Upon the 17. of June, Mr. Fines made a Report to the Honorable Court, that
there was a great Treason discovered against them, the Plotters whereof were,
first. That Captain Goring should be a great Commander in the Army, and the
Lord of Newcastle to meet them in Nottinghamshire with 1000 Horse. In which
Conspiracy Sergeant Major Wallis says, That the French would assist them, and
the Clergy would at their own charge send 1000 horse, this Army was to be
brought from the North against the Honorable Houses of Parliament. As it was
Reported to both Houses by Mr. Hambden.

A Letter sent from the Queens Court in Holland, sent from Mr. Cayn her
Majesty's Servant, to Mr. Sanders near Cheering-Crosse.
SIR,
I Having such a fit opportunity to present my Service unto you not knowing
when to have the same again by reason of the great distempers which are with
you. Therefore J thought by this Messenger to certify you of the proceedings
betwixt the Queens Majesty, and her Royal Sovereign the King of great
Britain, Upon the 22. of June there went to the King at York P^^^ce Robert,
^rince Maurice, the Lord Dunby, Sir Edward Stradly, Sir Jews Dues, Mr. Smith,
Mr. Whalcy, Mr. Fox, Mr. Bacon, Mr. Grand, Mr. G^ffery, Captain Cade,
Captain Bankly, the which were commanded by the States of Holland to present a
Mess^ge to His Royal Majesty of great ^rittain, intimating the great danger
which is like to ensue* unless he be pleased to tecide to his Parliament, and
so agree in Concord, and unity together. So I rest.

From the Hague June, 28. 10^2. Your loving Friend, John Cayne. Servant to the
Queens most Excellent Majesty.

FINIS.

