THE Speeches Of the KINGS Most excellent Majesty in this GREAT COURT Of
PARLIAMENT.

^ Printed, Anno 1641.

His Majesty's first Speech in Parliament, the third of November, 1640.
My Lords,
THE knowledge I had of the desires of my Scottish Subjects, was the cause of
my calling the last Assembly of Parliament, wherein had I been believed, I
sincerely think, that things had not fallen out as now We see. But it is no
wonder that men are so slow to believe that so great a sedition should be
raised on so little ground. But now my Lords and Gentlemen, the honor and
safety of this Kingdom lying so nearly at the stake, I am resolved to put my
self freely and clearly on the love and affections of my English Subjects, as
these of my Lords that did wait on me at York, very well remember I there
declared. Therefore my Lords, I shall not mention mine own interest, or that
support I might justly expect from you, till the common safety be secured;
though I must tell you I am not ashamed to say, those charges I have been at,
have been merely for the securing and good of this Kingdom, though the
success has not been answerable to my desires. Therefore I shall only desire
you to consider the best way both for the safety and security of this Kingdom,
wherein there are two parts chiefly considerable. First, the chastising out of
the Rebels. And secondly, the other in satisying your just grievances, wherein
I shall promise you to concur so heartily and clearly with you, that all the
world may see my intentions have ever been, and shall be, to make this a
glorious and flourishing Kingdom. There are only two things that I shall
mention to you: First, the one is to tell you that the Loan of money which I
lately had from the City of London, wherein the Lords that waited upon me at
York assisted me, will only maintain my Army for two months from the
beginning of that time it was granted. Now my Lords and Gentlemen I leave it to
your considerations, what dishonor and mischief it might be, in case for want
of money my Army be disbanded, before the Rebels be put out of this Kingdom.
Secondly, the securing the calamities the Northern people endure at this time,
and so long as the treaty is on foot. And in this I may say not only they, but
all this Kingdom will suffer the harm; therefore J leave this also to your
consideration, for the ordering of these great affairs whereof you are to
treat at this time. J am so confident of your love to me, and that yor care is
for the honor and safety of the Kingdom, that I shall freely and willingly
leave to you where to begin: only this, that you may the better know the state
of all the affairs. J have commanded my L. Keeper to give you a short and free
account of these things that have happened in this interim, with this
protestation, that if this account be not satisfactory as it ought to be, J
shall whensover you desire, give you a full and perfect account of every
particular. One thing more J desire of you, as one of the greatest means to
make this a happy Parliament; That you on your parts, as J on mine, lay aside
all suspicion one of another, as J promised my Lords at York: It shall not be
my fault if this be not a happy and good Parliament.

His Majesty's second Speech in Parliament, Novem. 5. 1640.
My Lords,
I Do expect that you will hastily make relation to the House of Commons of
those great affairs for which I have called you hither at this time, and for
the trust I have reposed in them, and how freely I put my self on their love
and affections at that time; and that you may know the better how to do so, I
will explain my self concerning one thing I spoke the last day. I told you the
Rebels must be put out of this Kingdom; it is true, I must needs call them so,
so long as they have an Army that do invade us; and although I am under treaty
with them, and I under my great Seal do call them subjects, and so they are
too, but the state of my affairs in short, is this: it is true, I did expect
when I did will my Lords and great ones at York to have given a gracious answer
to all your grievances; for I was in good hope by their wisedoms and
assistances to have made an end of that business; but I must tell you, that my
subjects of Scotland did so delay them, that it was not possible to end there:
therefore J can no ways blame my Lords that were at Rippon, that the treaty
was not ended, but must thank them for their pain^ and industry; and certainly
had they as much power as affections, I should by that time have brought these
distempers to a happy period; so that now the treaty is transported from Rippon
to London, where J shall conclude nothing without your knowledge, and J doubt
not but by your appr^^^ation; for J do not desire to have this great work done
in a corner, for J shall lay open all the steps to this misunderstanding, and
causes of the great differences between Me and my Subjects of Scotland. And I
doubt not, but by your assistance to make them know their duty, and also by
your assistance to make them return whether they will or no.

His Majesty's Speech to both the Houses, January 25. 1640.
My Lords,
THe Knights, Citizens, Burgesses; the principal cause of my coming here at
this time, is, by reason of the slow proceedings in Parliament, touching which
is a great deal of inconvenience.

Therefore I think it very necessary to lay before you the state of my affairs
as now they stand, thereby to hasten (not interrupt) your proceedings.

First, I must remember you that there are two Armies in the Kingdom in a
manner maintained by you, the very naming of which, does more clearly show the
inconvenience thereof, then a better tongue then mine can express.

Therefore in the first place, I shall recommend unto you the quick dispatch
of that business, assuring you that it cannot rest upon me.

In the next place I must recommend unto you the state of my Navy and Forts;
the condition of both which is so well known unto you, that I need not tell you
the particulars, only thus much, they are the walls and defense of this
Kingdom, which if out of order, all men may easily judge what encouragement it
will be to our enemies, and what disheartning to our friends.

Last of all, (and not of the least to be considered) I must lay before you the
distractions that are at this present occasioned through the cause of
Parliament; for there are some men that more maliciously then ignorantly, will
put no difference between reformation and alteration of government.

Hence it comes that divine Service is irreverently interrupted, and
Petitions in an ^ll way given in, neither disputed nor denied. But I will enter
into no more particulars, but show you a way of remedy, by showing you my
clear intentions, and some mark that may hinder this good work.

I shall willingly and cheerfully concur with you for the reformation of all
innovations both in Church and Common wealth, and consequently that all Courts
of Justice may be reformed according to Law. For my intention is clearly to
reduce all things to the best and purest times, as they were in the time of Qu.
Elizabeth.

Moreover, whatsoever part of my revenue shall be found illegal or heavy to my
subjects, I shall be willing to lay down, trusting in their affections. Having
thus clearly and shortly set down my intentions, I will show you some rubs, and
must needs take notice of some very strange (I know not what term to give
them) Petitions given in the name of diverse Counties, against the established
government of the Church, and of the great threatenings against the Bishops,
that they will make them to be but a Cipher, or at least taken away.

If some of them have incroached too much upon the Temporalty (if it be so) I
shall not be unwilling these things should be redressed and reformed, as all
other abuses, according to the wisdom of former times; so far I shall go
with you, no farther.

If upon serious debate, you shall show, that Bishops have some temporal
authority, not so necessary for the government of the Church, and upholding
Episcopal jurisdiction, I shall not be unwilling to desire them to lay it
down; but this must not be understood, that I shall any way consent that
their voice in Parliamen should be taken away: for in all the times of my
predecessors since the Conquest, and before, they have enjoyed it; I am bound
to maintain them in it, as one of the fundamental institutions of this
Kingdom.

There is one other rock you are on not in substance but in service; and the
form is so essential, that unless it be reformed, will split you on that
rock.

There is a Bill lately put in concerning Parliaments. The thing I like well to
have frequent Parliaments, but for Sheriffs and Constables to use my
authority, I can no ways consent unto.

But to show that I defire to give you content in substance as well as in show,
that you shall have a Bill for doing thereof, so that it do not trench neither
against my Honor, neither against the ancient prerogatives of the Crowns
concerning Parliaments, ingeniously confess, often Parliaments is the fittest
means to keep correspondency between Me and my people, that I do so much
desire.

To conclude, now all that I have shown you, the state of my affairs, my own
clear intentions, and the rocks I would have you shun.

To give you all contentment, you shall likewise find by these Ministers, I
have or shall have about me for the effecting of these my good intentions,
which shall redouble the peace of the Kingdom, and content you all. Concerning
the conference you shall have a direct answer on Monday, which shall give you
satisfaction.

His Majesty's Speech to both Houses of Parliament in the Lords House, at the
passing of the Bill for a Trieniall Parliament, the sixteenth of November, 1640.
MY Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons; you may remember when both Houses were with me at the banqueting
House at Whitehall, I did declare unto you two rocks I wished you to eschew,
this is the one of them, and of that consequence, that I think never bill
passed here in this House of more favor to the Subjects then this is, and if
the other Rock be as happily passed over as this shall be at this time, I do
not know what you can ask, for ought I can see it this time, that I can make
any question to yield unto: Therefore I mention this to show unto you the sense
that I have of this Bill, and obligation, as I may say, that you have to me for
it, for hitherto, to speak freely, I have had no great encouragement to do
it; if I should look to the outward face of your actions or proceedings, and
not look to the inward intentions of your hearts, I might make question of
doing it.

Hitherto you have gone on in that which concerns your selves to amend, and
yet those things that merely concerns the strength of this Kingdom, neither
for the State nor my own particular.

This I mention, not to reproach you but to show you the state of things as
they are, you have taken the Government all in pieces, and I may say, it is
almost off the hinges.

A skillful Watchmaker to make clean his watch, he will take it a sunder, and
when it is put together, it will go the better, so that he leave not forth
not one pin in it.

Now as I have done all this on my part, you know what to do on your parts, and
I hope you shall see clearly that I have performed really what I expressed to
you at the beginning of this Parliament, of the great trust I have of your
affections to me, and this is the great expression of trust, that before you do
any thing for me, that I do put such a confidence in you.

His Majesty's Speech to both the Houses of Parliament, February 3. 1640.
HAving taken into my serious consideration, the late Remonstrance made unto me
by the House of Parliament, I give you this answer.

That I take in good part your care of the true Religion establish*d in this
Kingdom, from which I will never d^part, as also for the tenderness of my
safety, and security of this State and Government: It is against ^y mind, that
Popery or Superstition should any way increase within this Kingdom, and will
restrain the same by putting the Laws into execution.

I am resolved to provide against the Jesuits and Papists, by setting forth a
Proclamation with ^ll speed, commanding them to depart the Kingdom within one
month, which if they fail, or shall return, they shall be proceeded against
according to the Law^s

Concerning Rosettie: I give you to understand, that the Queen has always
assured me, that to her knowledge he has no Commission, but only to
entertain a personal correspondence, between her and the Pope, in things
requisite for the exercise of her Religion, which is warranted to her by the
Articles of Marriage, which give her a full Liberty of Conscience; yet I have
persuaded, that since the misunderstanding of the persons condition gives
offense, she will within a convenient time remove him.

Moreover, I will take a special care to rest^ne my Subjects from resorting to
Mass at Denmark house, Saint James, and the Chapel of Ambassadors.

Lastly, concerning John Goodman the Priest, I will let you know the reason why
I reprived him, that as I am informed, neither Queen Elizabeth, nor my Father
did ever avow, that any Priest in their times was executed merely for
Religion, which to me seems to be this particular case, yet seeing that I am
pressed by both Houses, to give way to his, because I will avoid the
inconveniency of giving so great discontent to my People, as I conceive this
Mercy may Produce, therefore I do remit this Particular Cause to both the
Houses: But I desire them to take into their Consideration, the inconveniences
(as I conceive) may upon this occasion fall upon my Subjects and other
Protestants abroad, especially since it may seem to other States to be a
severity, which Surprise having thus represented, I think my self discharged
from all ill consequence that may ensue upon the execution of this Person.

His Majesty's Letter to the Lords on the behalf of the Earl of Strafford,
sent by the PRINCE.
My Lords,
I Did yesterday satisfy the Justice of the Kingdom by passing of the Bill of
Attainder against the Earl of Strafford; but mercy being as inherent, and
inseparable to a King as Justice. I desire at this time in some measure to
show, that likewise by suffering that unfortunate man to fulfill the natural
course of his life in a close imprisonment; yet so, that if ever he make the
least offer to escape, or offer directly, or indirectly to meddle in any sort
of Public business; especially with me, either by Message, or Letter, it
shall cost him his life without further Process. This, if it may be done
without the coffeehouse of if People, will be an unspeakable contentment to
me.

To which end, as in the first place, I by this Letter do earnestly desire
your approbation, and to endeare it the more, have chosen him to carry it, that
of all your House is most dear to me. So I desire that by a conference, you
will endeavor to give the House of Commons contentment: Likewise assuring you,
that the excuse of mercy is no more pleasing to me, then to see both Houses of
Parliament consent for my sake, that I should moderate the severity of the Law,
in so important a case.

J will not say that your complying with me, in this my intended mercy, shall
make me more willing, but certainly 'twill make me more cheerful in granting
your just grievances. But if no less then his life can satisfi^ m^ People, I
must say fiat justitia. Thus again recommending the consideration of my
intentions to you, I rest.

Whitehall the 11. of May, 1641. Your unalterable and affectionate friend.
CHARLES, R.
If he must dye, it were charity to Reprieve him till Satterday.




May 11. 1641.
THis Letter all written with the Kings own hand, the Peers this day received
in Parliament, delivered by the hand of the Prince. It was twice read in the
House, and after serious and sad consideration, the House resolved presently to
send 12. of the Peers Messengers to the King; humbly to signify, that neither
of the two intentions expressed in the Letter, could with duty in them, or
without danger to himself, his dearest Consort, the Queen, and all the young
Princes their Children, possibly be advised: With all which being done
accordingly, and the reasons showed to his Majesty, He suffered no more words
to come from them, but often of the fullness of his heart to the observance of
Justice, and for the contentment of his people, told them, that what he
intended by his Letter was with an (if) if it may be done without
coffeehouse of his people; if that cannot be, I say again the same that J
writ, fiat justitia. My other intention proceeding out of charity for a few
days respite, was upon certain information that His Estate was so distracted,
that it necessarily required some few days for settlement thereof.

Whereunto the Lords answered, their purpose was to be Suitors to his Majesty
for favor to be showed to his innocent Children; and it himself had made any
provision for them, that the same might hold.

This was well liking to his Majesty, who thereupon departed from the Lords; at
His Majesty's parting they offered up into his hand the Letter it self which
he had sent; but He was pleased to say, my Lords, what I have written to you,
I (...) content it be Registered by you in your House. In it you may see my
mind, I hope you will use it to my honor.

This, upon return of the Lords from the King, was presently reported to the
House by the Lord Privy Seal, and ordered, that these Lines should go out
with the Kings Letter, if any Copy of the Letter were dispersed.

FINIS.

