Whitehall, April 13. 1679.
LET the following Capitulations made with the Grand Signor be Printed for the
use of the Turkey-Company.

Jo. Cook.

THE Capitulations AND ARTICLES OF PEACE BETWEEN The Majesty of the King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc. AND The SULTAN of the Ottoman Empire,
As they have been augmented and altered in the times of several Ambassadors:

And particularly as they have been renewed, augmented, and amplified at the
City of Adrianople in the Month of January 1661/2. by Heneage Earl of
Winchelsea, Ambassador Extraordinary from his Majesty: And also as they have
been since renewed in the Month of September 1675. with diverse additional
Articles and Privileges, by Sir John Finch, Knight, Ambassador in Ordinary
from his Majesty to Sultan Mahomet Han, the most puissant Prince and Emperor
of the Turks.

LONDON, Printed for J. S. MDCLXXIX.

The Articles of Peace, etc.
ACcording to my Imperial Command let it be observed, and let no Act be
permitted contrary hereunto.
MAHOMET.
THE Command of this Sublime, and Losty, and Imperial Signature, preserved and
exalted by Divine Providence, whose Triumph and Glory is renowned through all
the World.

By the favor of the Nourisher of all things, and mercy and grace of the
merciful, I that am the powerful Lord of Lords of the World, whose Name is
formidable upon Earth, giver of all Crowns of the Universe, Sultan Mahomet Han,
Son of Sultan Ibrahim Han, Son of Sultan Ahmet Han, Son of Sultan Mahomet Han,
Son of Sultan Murat Han, Son of Sultan Selim Han, Son of Sultan Suliman Han,
Son of Sultan Selim Han.

To the glorious amongst the great Princes of Jesus, reverenced by the high
Potentates of the people of the Messiah, sole Director of the important Affairs
of the Nazarene Nation, Lord of the limits of Decency, and honor of Greatness,
and Fame, Charles the Second, King of England and Scotland, that is of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, whose end and Enterprises may the Omnipotent God
conclude with bliss and favor, with the illumination of his holy will.

In times past the Queen of the aforesaid Kingdoms sent diverse of her esteemed
Gentlemen, and Persons of Quality, with Letters and Ships to this Imperial High
Port (the refuge of the Princes of the World, and the retreat of the Kings of
the whole Universe) in the happy times of famous memory of my Ancestors now
placed in Paradise, whose Souls be replenished with Divine Mercy; which
Gentlemen and Presents were gratefully accepted, making Declaration, and
offering, in the Name of the said Queen, an entire good Peace, and pure
Friendship, and demanding that their Subjects might have leave to come from
England into our Ports. Our said Ancestors of happy memory did then grant their
Imperial License, and gave into the hands of the English Nation diverse especial
and Imperial Commands, to the end that they might safely and securely come and
go into these Dominions, and in coming or returning either by Land or Sea in
their way and passage, that they should of no man be molested or hindered.
After which time in the days of our Grandfather Sultan Mahomet Han of famous
memory (unto whose Soul be granted Divine Absolution) it being anew desired,
That the Subjects, Merchants, and their Interpreters, might freely and securely
come, Merchandise, and Negotiate through all the parts of this Imperial
Dominion, and that such Capitulations, and other Privileges, and Imperial
Commands, as had been granted unto the Nation of the Kings and Princes in Peace
and Amity with this high Port, as France, Venice, Poland, and others, might
also be granted to the Subjects of the said Queen, and all others coming under
the English Banner; in confirmation of which request, were given and confirmed
by our Ancestors of famous memory, the Imperial Capitulations and Privileges
succeeding, to say, It is commanded, etc.

Our Ships may trade in all parts, etc.
I. First, That the said Nation, and the English Merchants, and any other Nation
or Merchants which are or shall come under the English Banner and Protection,
with their Ships small and great, Merchandise, Faculties, and all other their
Goods, may always pass safe in our Seas, and freely and in all security may
come and go into any part of the Imperial limits of our Dominions in such sort,
that neither any of the Nation, their Goods and Faculties shall receive any
hindrance or molestation from any person whatsoever.

Travel freely.
II. The said Nation shall and may in like manner freely and securely come and
go by Land through all the Imperial Limits of our Dominions, so that neither to
their Persons, Beasts, Goods, or Faculties, shall any trouble or Impediment be
given, nor any injury be done unto them, but they shall always at their own
pleasures safely and securely traffic in all parts of our Dominions.

The same.
III. And if it happen that any of the said Nation coming into our Dominions by
Land, or passing into any other Country shall be stayed or arrested by any of
our Ministers, such persons shall be set free and at liberty, and afterward
shall receive no hinderance in his Journey.

IV. All English Ships or Vessels, small or great, shall and may at any time
safely and securely come and harbor in any of the Scales and Ports of our
Dominions, and likewise may from thence depart at their pleasure, without
detention or hindrance of any man.

Distress of Ships
V. And if it shall happen that any English Vessel, great or small, fall into
any misfortune, danger of Sea, or any other necessity, all the Vessels, as well
Imperial, as belonging to private men, that shall be near or present, as also
all others that inhabit the Seas, shall give them help and succor; and being
come into our Ports or Scales, they shall freely stay in them as long as they
please, and for their money provide for them of all necessaries, and Provision,
Freedom to take Provisions.
and may take Water without the let or hindrance of any man.

VI. And if it shall happen that any of their Ships shall have suffered
Shipwreck, Cases of Shipwreck.
or been broken, or in distress, shall be cast upon any Coast of our Dominions;
in which case all Beglarbegs, Cadees, Governors, Ministers, and other our
Slaves, shall give them all assistance, succor and help; and whatsoever Goods,
and Faculties shall be saved or recovered in the said Ships, shall be restored
to the English, and if they shall be restored to the of their Goods and
Faculties shall be stole or taken away, our said Ministers, with all diligence,
shall make sufficient search and examination to find out and recover the Goods,
and restore them to the English.

The English and their Dependants to travel freely.
VII. The English Merchants, Interpreters, Brokers, and all other Subjects of
that Nation, whether by Sea or Land, may freely and safely come and go in all
the Ports of our Dominions, or returning into their own Country, all our
Beglerbegs, Ministers, Governors, and other Officers, Captains by Sea of
Ships, and others whomsoever our Slaves and Subjects, we command that none of
them do or shall lay hands upon their persons, or Faculties, or upon any
pretense shall do them any hinderance or injury.

One English man not to answer for the Debt of another, unless he be his Surety
by Hoget.
VIII. If any English man, either for his own Debt, or for Surety-ship, shall
absent himself, or make escape away, or shall be bankerupt, the Creditor shall
only pretend his Debt upon his own Debtor, and not of any other English; and if
the Creditor have not authentic Hoget or Bill of Surety-ship made by an
English man, he shall not pretend his Debt of any other English man.

IX. In all Causes, Businesses and Occasions which shall occur between the said
Nation, their Merchants, Interpreters and Brokers, or Servants, and any other
whatsoever, that is to say, In felling or buying, in paying or receiving, in
giving or taking security, or Pledge, Debt or Credit, and all other such things
which appertain to the Ministers of the Law and Justice, In all businesses
nothing of force without Hoget.
they may always (if they please) in such occasions go to the Caddee, who is
the Judge of the Law, and there make a Hoget, or public Authentic Act with
Witness, and Register the same, and take a Copy of the same to keep by them, to
the end that if in the future any difference or pretense shall arise between
the said Parties, they may both have a recourse to the said Hoget and Act. And
when the pretense shall be conformable to the tenor of the Hoget Registered;
then it shall be accordingly thereunto observed: And if the Plaintiff has not
in his hands any such Authentic Hoget, but only brings partial Witness which
makes Cavils or Pretenses, our Ministers shall not give ear to them, but
observe the written authentic Hoget.

No plea to be made against an English man without knowledge of the Embassad.
Or Consul
X. And if any one within our Dominions shall accuse any English man to have
done him wrong, and shall therefore raise any pretense upon him by violent or
partial Witness, our Ministers shall not give car unto them, nor accept them,
but the Cause shall be advised to the Ambassador or Consul Resident of the
English Nation, to the end that the business may be decided with his knowledge,
and in his presence, that the English may always have recourse to their defense
and protection.

XI. If any English man, having committed an offense, shall make his escape, No
English man to be molested for another without being pledge.
or absent himself, no other English man, not being pledge, shall be taken or
molested for him.

English men not to be Slaves.
XII. All English men, or Subjects of England, which be found Slaves in our
state, or shall be demanded by the Ambassador, or Consul, the cause shall be
duly examined, and such persons as are found truly to be Subjects of England
shall be set free, and delivered to the Ambassador, or Consul.

No Harach demanded.
XIII. All Englishmen, and all other Subjects of the Crown of England, which
shall dwell, or reside in our Dominions, whether they be married, or single;
may buy, sell, and traffic, and of them shall no Harach or Head-money be
demanded.

The Ambassador 's power to constitute Consuls.
XIV. The English Ambassador, Resident in Aleppo, Alexandria, Tripoli of Suria,
or Tunis; Algier, Tripoli of Barbary, in Smyrna, the Ports of Cairo, or any
other parts of our Dominions, may at their pleasure establish their Consuls,
and in like manner remove them, or change and appoint others in their places,
and none of our Ministers shall oppose, or refuse to accept them.

No Process without the Interpreter.
XV. In all Causes concerning Law and Justice between the English Nation, and
any other, in the absence of their Interpreters, the Judges, nor any other there
of our Ministers, shall not proceed to give Sentence.

The Turks not to meddle in differences between the English.
XVI. If there happen any Controversy amongst themselves, the decision thereof
shall be wholly left to their own Ambassador or Consul, according to their own
Right and Laws, and with no such Causes our Ministers shall intermeddle.

Our Ships not to be detained at Sea by the Turks Armada.
XVII. Our Armada of Galleys, Ships, or any other Vessels of our Empire, which
at Sea meet, or find any English Ship, they shall not do them, nor suffer to be
done to them the least injury, or trouble; nor shall they stay them, demand,
pretend, or take any thing from them, but shall salute, and show good and
mutual Friendship the one to the other, without offense.

All Privileges granted to other Nations, granted also to the English.
XVIII. All those particular Privileges and Capitulations, which in former
times have been granted to the French, Venetians, or any other Christian
Nation, whose King is in Peace and Friendship with this Port, in like manner,
the same were granted, and given to the said English Nation; to the end, that
in time to come, the Tenor of this our Imperial Capitulations may be always
observed by all men; and that none may, in any manner, upon any pretense,
presume to contradict, or violate it.

XIX. If the Pirates, or Levents, who infest the Seas with their Frigates,
Against Turkish Pirates.
shall be found to have taken any English Vessel, or to have robbed or spoiled
their Goods and Faculties: Also if it shall be found, that in any of our
Dominions, any shall have violently taken Goods of any English Man, our
Ministers shall with all diligence seek out such Offenders, and severely punish
them, and cause that all such Goods, Ships, Moneys, and whatsoever has been
taken away from the English Nation, shall be presently, justly, and absolutely
restored to them.

XX. All our Beglerbegs, Begs, Captains, Masters of Imperial Ships, and other
private Judges, Governors, Customers, Farmers, and all our Ministers, Subjects
and Slaves, shall always obey and keep the Tenor of these our Sworn
Capitulations, and shall with all observance respect the Friendship and good
Correspondence established on both Parties, every one in particular taking
especial care not to commit any Act contrary thereunto. And as long as the said
Queen of England, according to this present Agreement of sincere Friendship,
and good Correspondence, shall show her self, and remain with us in Peace,
Friendship, and League, firm, constant, and sincere; We do promise also on our
parts reciprocally, that this Peace, Friendship, Articles, Capitulations, and
Correspondence in the fore-written form, shall be for ever of us maintained,
observed, and respected; and of no man many part thereof shall be contradicted,
or infringed: All which abovementioned Articles of Peace and Friendship were
concluded signed, and an Imperial Capitulation granted and confirmed by our
Ancestors of happy Memory.

Since which time his Majesty of England, James deceased in the time of our
Grandfather of happy memory, Sultan Achmet Han, having sent unto our Imperial
Throne his Ambassadors, Letters, and Presents, which were most acceptable, and
desired that the already contracted Peace, and Friendship, and good
Correspondence made with our Grandfathers, and the Capitulations, Articles,
and Privileges above-written, should be again ratified, and the said Peace and
Friendship renewed; farther requesting, that certain Articles very necessary
should to the same Capitulations be added. The desire of his Majesty, being
declared in the Imperial Presence of our said Grandfather Sultan Achmet Han,
was presently granted: And he gave express Command and Order, that the said
Peace and Friendship should be renewed and fortified, and the Ancient
Capitulations and Privileges confirmed; and that the new desired Articles
should be inserted, and added to the Imperial Capitulations: Granting farther
to the English Nation, all those Articles and farther Privileges which were,
given, and written in any Capitulations with other, Nations, Potentates, or
Kings in Peace and Amity with this Imperial Port: And by this Imperial Command
he gave order, that these his Imperial Commands should be obeyed of all men,
and the Tenor of them duly observed. The Articles which then were granted, and
added to the Capitulations, were these following.

XXI. That our Ministers shall not demand, or take of the said English Nation
any Custom, No Custom to be taken on Moneys. None to force change of Moneys.
or other Duties, of all the Dollars and Chequeens, they, or an under their
Banner shall bring in, or transport from place to place, or carry out of our
Dominions; and that neither Beglerbegs, Begs, Caddees, Treasurers,
Mint-Masters, or other, shall take and demand either Dollars or Chequeens from
the said Nation, to change them into small Aspers; nor shall give or do them
any violence or trouble thereupon.

XXII. The English Nation, and all those that come under their Banner, their
Vessels, small and great, shall and may navigate, traffic, buy, sell, and
abide in all parts of our Dominions; No Ammunition to be carried in our Ships.
and excepting Arms, Gunpowder, and other such prohibited Commodities, they
may load, and carry away in their Ships, whatsoever of our Merchandises, at
their own pleasure, without the impeachment or trouble of any man; and their
Ships and Vessels may come safely and securely to Anchor at all times,
Provisions may be bought for our Ships.
and traffic at all times in every part of out Dominions, and with their Money
buy Victuals, and all other things, without any contradiction, or hinderance of
any man.

No Process to be made without presence of the Ambassador, etc.
XXIII. And if any difference shall happen with any of the said English Nation,
by Suit in Law, or any other Controversy, the Caddees, or any other Ministers
of our Justice, shall not hear nor decide the Cause, until the Ambassador,
Consul, or Drugger-man of the said Nation shall be present.

Suit of Law above 4000 Aspers to be heard above.
XXIV. All differences, or Suits of Law depending with the said Nation, which
shall exceed the value 4000 Aspers, shall always be heard and decided at our
Imperial Port.

No Consul to be imprisoned, nor dismissed, etc.
XXV. The English Nations Consul, or Resident in any Port of our Dominions,
being established by the Ambassador, Resident for the English Nation, our
Ministers shall have no power to imprison, or examine, or seal up their Houses,
nor to dismiss or displace them from their Charge and Office; but in case of
any difference, or Suit with the Consul, there shall he made a Certificate to
the Imperial Port, to the end that the Embasladour may protect and answer for
them.

The Goods of Englishmen dying, not to Eschent, etc.
XXVI. When any Englishman, or other under their Banner shall die in our
Dominions, with their Goods or Faculties, or any thing that belonged unto them,
our Escheators, Caddees, or other Ministers, upon pretense they are Goods of
the Dead, without any Owner, shall not meddle, take, or seize any part thereof,
but they shall always be consigned, and remaining to such other English, as the
Deceased shall by his Testament assign; and if he died intestate, then the
English Consul shall take and receive his, Faculties and Goods; and if there be
no Consul, the English Resident there shall take the Possession; and in case
there be neither Consul, nor English, the said Goods and Faculties whatsoever,
shall be received into the custody of the Caddee of that place; and having
advised the English Ambassador thereof, the said Caddee shall resign all the
said Goods unto such Persons as the Ambassador shall send with Commission to
receive them.

XXVII. All these Privileges, and other Liberties granted to the English
Nation, and those who come under their Protection, by diverse Imperial Commands,
whether before or after the date of these Imperial Capitulations, shall be
always obeyed and observed, and shall always be understood and interpreted in
favor of the English Nation, according to the Tenor and true Contents thereof.

In eases of Death, the Cadee not to meddle.
XXVIII. Neither the Officer, called the Cassam, or Gatherer of the Caddees
Duties, in case of death, nor the Caddee, shall pretend or take of the said
English Nation, any kind of Tenths, or Gasmets, or Fee of Division.

No Janizary, etc. to be imposed on us without our consent.
XXIX. The Ambassador of the King of England, or Consul residing in our
Dominion, shall and may take into their service any Janizary, or Interpreter,
at their own charge and choice; and no Janizary, nor other our Slaves, shall
put themselves, or intermeddle with their service against their liking or
consent.

XXX. The Ambassador of his Majesty of England, and Consul, and the English
Nation-residing in our Empire, for the use of their own Persons and Families,
making Must or Wine in their own Houses, none of our Ministers, Caddees, or
Janissaries, For making Wine.
shall molest or hinder them, or demand any Duties or Money, or do them any
violence or impediment.

Customs paid in one Port, are not to be demanded in another.
XXXI. In the Port of Constantinople, Aleppo, Alexandria, Scio, Smyrna, and in
other parts of our Dominions, the English Merchants having paid the Custom of
their Merchandise, according to the Tenor of the Imperial Capitulations, no
man shall molest, or trouble, or take from them any thing more; and whatsoever
Merchandise shall be laden upon their Ships, and brought in our Dominions, and
landed at any Scale, they being desirous to lade it again, and to transport it
to any other Scale, or Port, the same Goods arriving in the second place, and
Scale, and being there unladen, neither the Customer, nor Farmers, nor any
other our Officers, shall pretend or take again any Customs, or Gabels of the
said Merchandise; that the said Nation may always freely and securely trade,
and follow their business.

No Hassapie Duties.
XXXII. Neither of the English Nation, nor of any trading under their Banner,
there shall not be demanded nor gathered one Asper, nor any Money in the name
of Imposition Hassapie, or Compositions for Flesh for the Janissaries.

XXXIII. There having been in times past a difference between the Ambassador
of the Queen of England, and the French Ambassador, both resident in our Port,
about the Merchants of the Dutch Nation; both which Ambassadors sent their
Petitions to our Imperial Stirrup, and made request, that the said Dutch
Merchants, coming into our Dominions, should pass under their Banner; which
Request of both Ambassadors was granted under our Imperial Seal;
notwithstanding Sinan Bassa, the Son of Cigala, Captain of the Sea, now
deceased, as Admiral, and practiced in Maritime cases, having advised the
Imperial Majesty, that it was fit and convenient that the Dutch Nation should
be assigned to the Protection of the Ambassador of England, and that it should
be so written in their Capitulations: which Opinion being by all the Viziers
approved, by Express Order, and Imperial Authority it was commanded, that the
Dutch Merchants of the Provinces of Holland, Zealand, Freezeland, and
Gelderland; that is, the Merchants of those four Provinces, trading in our
Dominions, shall always come under the Banner of the Queen of England, as all
other English do; and that of all the Goods and Merchandise which they shall or
do import or export, All Straugers to come under the English Protection.
to and from our Dominions in their Vessels, they shall pay the Duties of
Consulage, and all other Duties, to the Ambassador or Consul of the Queen of
England; and that never hereafter the French Ambassador or Consul shall
insinuate nor intermeddle herein: And accordingly it was commanded, that for
the time to come it should be ruled and observed, according to this present
Capitulation.

After which, there being arrived an other Ambassador at this High Port, sent
from the King of England, with Letters and Presents, which were most
acceptable, the said Ambassador did make request, that certain other necessary
Articles should be added, and written in the Imperial Capitulations; of which
the first was, As in times past, in the days of one of our Forefathers of
famous memory, Sultan Soliman Han, there was granted a certain Capitulation and
Privilege, that the Merchants of the Spanish Nation, Portugal, Ancona,
Sevilla, Florence, Catalonia, and all sorts of Dutchmen, and other
Merchant-Strangers, might safely and securely go, and come through all the
places of our Dominions, and trade and traffic; granting unto them, moreover,
that in any part of our Empire they might establish their Consuls: But it being
that every Nation apart was not able to defray the Charges and Maintenance of a
Consul, it was then left to their will and choice, to come under the Banner of
such Ambassador or Consul as should best like them, provided that it were an
Ambassador or Consul of a King in Peace and Amity with our High Port; upon
which Grant, and other Privileges given them, there were often granted diverse
Imperial Commands and Constitutions, being so desired by Merchant-Strangers,
who of their own will elected to trade under the Banner and Protection of the
Ambassador and Consul of the King of England. And whilst in all Scales and
Ports in these parts, they had refuge to the Banner and Protection of the
English Consuls: It seems, that the French Ambassador by some means having a
new gotten into their Capitulations, that the said Merchant-Strangers should
come under their Banner, did endeavor to force them in all Scales to their
Protection; for which cause the Controversy was again renewed and referred to
our Divan, or Great Council, which after a due Examination, and a new Election,
permitted to the will and choice of the said Merchants, they again did desire
to be under the Protection of the Ambassador of the King of England,
notwithstanding it being made known to the Imperial Port, that as yet the
French Ambassador did not desire to molest the said Merchants, nor to force
them under his Protection, the first Article written in the French
Capitulations, that the Merchants-Strangers should come under their Protection,
was by the Imperial Command made void and annulled: And to the end, that
according to the ancient Custom of the said Merchant-Strangers, they should
always come under the Banner and Protection of the Ambassador or Consuls of
England; and that never hereafter they should be vexed or troubled by the
French Ambassador in this point, the said Ambassadors of his Majesty of
England having desired that this particular should be written, and enrolled in
this new Imperial Capitulation, this present Article was accordingly inserted,
and by the Imperial Authority it is commanded, that for ever in time to come,
Merchants of the said Princes, in the mentioned form, and according to this
Imperial Command in their hand, shall always be under the Banner and Protection
of the Ambassador and Consuls of England.

XXXIV. There shall never be permitted or granted any Imperial Commands
contrary to the Tenor and Articles of this Imperial Command or Capitulation,
No Imperial Command contrary to these Articles to be granted.
nor in prejudice of this our Peace and Amity, but in such occasion the cause
shall first be certified to the Ambassador of England residing at the Port; to
the end, that he may answer and object any scandalous action, or other
pretense, which might infringe the Peace and League.

For enforcing Consulage.
XXXV. The English Merchants of all the Merchandise which they shall bring or
transport in their Ships, having paid the Custom, they shall also pay the Right
of Consulage to the English Ambassador, or Consul.

XXXVI. The English Merchants, and all under their Banner, shall and may
safely, throughout our Dominion, trade, buy, sell, (except only Commodities
prohibited) all sorts of Merchandise; likewise either by Land or Sea they may
go and traffic, Permission to trade in all parts of the Turks Dominions.
or by the way of the River Tanais in Moscovia, or by Russia, and from thence
may bring their Merchandise into our Empire; also to and from Persia they may
go and trade, and through all that part newly by us conquered, and through
those Confines, without the impediment or molestation of any of our Ministers;
and they shall pay the Custom, and other Duties of that Country, and nothing
more.

XXXVII. The English Merchants, and all under their Banner, Three per cent.
Custom.
shall and may safely and freely trade and negotiate in Aleppo, Cairo, Scio,
Smyrna, and in all parts of our Dominions; and according to our ancient Customs
of all their Merchandise, they shall pay three in the hundred for Custom, and
nothing more.

Vessels forced by weather.
XXXVIII. The English Ships which shall come to this our City of Constantinople,
if by fortune of Seas, or ill weather, they shall be forced to Coffa, or to
such like Port, as long as the English will not unlade and sell their own
Merchandise and Goods, no man shall enforce them, nor give them any trouble or
annoyance; but in all places of danger, the Caddees, or other of our Ministers
shall always protect and defend the said English Ships, Men, and Goods, that no
damage may come unto them, and with their Money may buy Victuals, and other
necessaries; and desiring also with their Money to hire Carts, or Vessels,
which before were not hired by any other, to transport their Goods from place
to place; no man shall do them any hinderance, or trouble whatsoever.

XXXIX. The English Nation, of all the Merchandise which in their Ships shall
be brought to Constantinople, Goods not landed, to pay no Custom.
or to any other part of our Dominions, which they shall not desire of their
own accord to land, or sell, of such Goods there shall not be demanded or taken
any Custom at arrival at any Port; and having landed their Merchandise, and
paid their Customs, and other Duties, they may quietly and safely depart
without the molestation of any man.

XL. In regard English Ships coming into our Dominions, do use oftentimes to
touch in some part of Africa, and there take in Pilgrims, and Mohammedan
Passengers to transport them to Alexandria; Idem.
and arriving at that Port, it seems that the Customers and other Officers,
do pretend to take Custom of all Goods which are found in their Ships, before
the Merchants are willing to land any; by occasion of which molestation they
have forborne to transport any Pilgrim. And in like manner, their Ships which
come to Constantinople, and carry diverse Merchandise, to transport part thereof
to other places, the Customers and Farmers would enforce to land, and pretend
to take Custom thereof: Wherefore we do command, that all the English Ships
which with their Merchandise shall come into this Port of Constantinople,
Alexandria, Tripoli of Suria, Scanderoon, or into any Port whatsoever of our
Empire; according to use, they shall pay only Custom of such Goods, which with
their own will they shall design to sell, and such other Merchandise as they
discharge not from their Ships willingly our Customer shall not demand, nor
take Custom, nor other Duties, but they may transport them whithersoever they
please.

XLI. And if it shall happen, that any of the said English Nation, or any under
their Banner, Matters of Manslaughter.
shall commit Manslaughter, Bloodshed, or any other like of fence, or that
there shall happen any cause appertaining to the Law or Justice, until the
Ambassador or Consul shall be present to examine the Cause, the Judges, nor
other Ministers, shall not decide nor give any sentence, but such controversy
shall always be declared in the presence of the Ambassador or Consul, to the
end, that no man be judged or condemned contrary to the Law, and the
Capitulations.

XLII. Whereas it is written in the Imperial Capitulations, that the Goods
landed out of any English Ship, which shall come into our Dominions, and pay
Custom, ought also to pay the duty of Consulage to the English Ambassador or
Consul, Foreigners Consulage to be paid.
it seems, that diverse Mohammedan Merchants, Sciots, and other Merchants in
Peace and Amity with this Imperial Port, and other Merchant-Strangers, do deny
and refuse to pay the right of Consulage; wherefore it is commanded, that all
the Merchandise which shall be laden upon their Ships, and have paid custom, be
they goods of whomsoever, according to ancient Imperial Capitulations, they
shall pay the right of Consulage to the Ambassador or Consul of England
without any contradiction.

XLIII. That English Merchants which trade at Aleppo, and those under their
Banner, Silk to pay the Custom, as Venetians, and French.
of all the Silk which they shall buy, and lade upon their Ships, shall pay the
Custom, and other Duties, as the French and Venetian Merchants do pay, and not
one Asper or Farthing more.

XLIV. As the Ambassadors of the King of England, which shall be Resident in
this Imperial Court, are the Representatives and Commissioners of the Person of
his Majesty, so the Interpreters are to be esteemed the Commissioners of the
Ambassador: therefore for such matter as the Interpreters shall translate or
speak in the name, Interpreters to have license to speak the sense of the
Ambassador, or Consul.
or by the order of the Ambassador, it being found that that which they have
translated to be according to the will and order of the Ambassador, or Consul,
they shall be always free from any imputation, or punishment: And in case they
shall commit any offense, Drugger-men dying, etc.
our Ministers shall not put any of the said Interpreters in Prison, nor beat
them without knowledge of the Ambassador, or Consul. In case any of the
English Interpreters shall die, if he be an Englishman, all his Goods or
Faculties shall be possessed by the Ambassador, or Consul of England; but if
he shall be a Subject of our Dominion, they shall be consigned to his next
Heir, and having no Heir, they shall be taken into our Exchequer. And as in
this particular, so also in all other the abovementioned Articles and
Privileges granted by our Forefathers of happy memory, it is expressly
commanded and ordained, That all our Slaves shall ever obey and observe this
Imperial Capitulation, and that the Peace and Amity shall be respected and
maintained, without any violation whatsoever.

No command valid against the Capitulations.
XLV. Since which time of our Forefathers of famous memory, and the grant of
these abovementioned Capitulations, Articles, and Establishment of Peace and
Amity, the said King of England having in the time of our Grandfather of happy
memory, Sultan Mahomet Han, sent one his well desired Ambassador, a person of
Quality, to this high Port, to confirm this Peace, Articles and Capitulations:
which Ambassador did declare, That oftentimes there were to diverse persons
Imperial Commands granted, surreptitiously procured contrary to the tenor and
Articles of the Imperial Capitulations; which being without our knowledge
presented to our Judges and Governors, and the dates of such Commands being
more fresh than those of our Imperial Capitulations, the Judges and Ministers
do put in execution the private Commands prejudicial and contrary to these
Imperial. To the end therefore, that for the time to come, such Commands shall
not be accepted of any, but that the imperial Capitulations might be always
observed and maintained, according to the sincere meaning; the said Ambassador
demonstrating the sincerity of his Majesty and his request herein to our
Imperial knowledge, which was most acceptable: In conformity thereunto it was
expressly ordered, That all such Commands which already have been, or shall
hereafter be granted, which are or shall be repugnant to the tenor of this
Imperial Capitulation, whatsoever such Commands shall be, when presented before
our Caddees or other Ministers, should never be accepted or put into execution,
but that always the tenor of the Imperial Capitulations shall be observed: And
whosoever shall present such Command contrary to the Capitulations, Such
commands to be taken away.
they shall be taken from him, and in no wise be of any force or validity. In
which time also on the part of our said Grandfather, all the above-written
Privileges, Articles, and Capitulations, were accepted and ratified, and the
peace, amity, and good correspondence anciently contracted was anew of him
confirmed and established.

XLVI. In the time of the Inauguration of Sultan Osman Han in the Imperial and
high Throne, the King of England did again send a famous and Noble Gentleman,
his Ambassador, with Letters and Presents which were most acceptable. And the
said Ambassador desiring in the Name of his King and Lord, that the ancient
Capitulation, Articles, and Contracts, granted in the days of our Forefathers,
should be of him renewed and confirmed, and the ancient peace and amity anew
fortified and established, which his request was to the said Sultan Osman most
acceptable. And the ancient Capitulations, Articles, Privileges, herein
written and confirmed, and the long since contracted peace and amity by him
promised and accepted.

XLVII. After whom in like manner, in the days of Sultan Osman Han, the King of
England having again sent unto this high Port his Ambassador, the Excellent
and Honorable Sir Thomas Roe, Knight, with his Letters and Presents, which
were most acceptable; and proffering in the Name of the King his Lord, all good
terms of friendship and good correspondence: And desiring that the ancient
Capitulations, and all the Articles from his Ancestors, and from himself
formerly granted to the English Nation, might be anew confirmed, and the peace
and league long since between both Parties contracted and ratified; and that
some other Articles very necessary might be added to the Imperial
Capitulations, and diverse others already granted might be renewed, amended, and
in a better form explained, which his request and demand was very acceptable
unto him; and in conformity thereunto, the ancient Imperial Capitulations, and
all the Articles and other Privileges in them often confirmed, and the peace,
amity, and good correspondence contracted, in the times of his Ancestors,
Grandfather and Father, and himself confirmed, were again by Sultan Osman then
ratified, established, promised and accepted, whereupon by him there was
express command given, that for the time to come the tenor of his renewed
Capitulations should be of every one observed, and that all men should be
careful and respectful to the said peace and friendship established and
contracted on both parts, and that no man should presume to violate, or to do
any act contrary thereunto, which Ambassador did often declare that the
Caddees, and other of our Ministers, in many places and Provinces, contrary to
the Imperial Capitulations and will of the Imperial Majesty, have imposed and
laid diverse taxes, burdens, and moneys upon the said English Nation, and those
under their Banner, for which cause as it is above declared, it being found
necessary to make additions of some new Articles in the said Imperial
Capitulation, of which the said Ambassador made declaration in Writing, and
presented the same to the Imperial Presence: The said Sultan Osman Han with his
Imperial Hand and Seal did presently give express order and command, that in
the time to come all those Articles and Privileges which were already in the
Imperial Capitulations, and those Articles which now are therein by our order
newly added, shall be of all our Subjects and Slaves duly obeyed and observed,
according to the sincere meaning of this our Imperial Capitulations.

XLVIII. In as much as it is publicly known, That certain Pirates of Tunis and
Algier, contrary to our Imperial Capitulations, mind, and will, do take and rob
in the Seas the Ships, Merchandise, and men, Subjects to his Majesty of
England, and of other Kings and States in league with this our Imperial Port,
to the great damage and injury of the said English Nation, Against the Pirates
of Barbary.
We do command and by these Presents we do ordain, that several Imperial
Commands be given, for the entire restitution of all Goods and Merchandise to
the English Nation so taken away: And that all such English as have been taken
and made Slaves, or imprisoned by the said Pirates shall be immediately set
free. And after the date of this our Imperial Capitulations, if it shall be
known that the said Pirates of Tunis and Algier shall rob them again, and shall
use and continue their outrages, and will not restore their Goods and men, we
do command that the said Pirates be not received into any Port of our
Dominions, especially into the Scales of Tunis, Algier, Modon, or Coron. Our
Beglerbegs, and other Ministers, shall not suffer them to enter, nor harbor,
nor receive them, but the Beglerbegs, Caddees or other Ministers shall
persecute, banish and punish them.

XLIX. Being informed that in our Dominions many of our Customers and other
Officers in Aleppo contrary to the Imperial Capitulations, under color of
taking Custom and Rest upon Silk of the English Merchants, have violently taken
from the said Merchants a great sum of Money. No Rest to be taken.
And whereas in the Imperial Capitulations it is written, that for Silk which
the English shall buy in Aleppo, they shall pay as the French and Venetian
Merchants do, and no more; Notwithstanding the said Customers, besides the two
and half per cent. for Custom and Rest, have taken from that Nation a great
sum of Money lately under Name of Rest, wherefore We command that this Business
shall be examined, and that the said Money be restored back, and for the time to
come, the ancient Custom may be kept; and that this Nation shall only pay as
the French and Venetian do, and that never be taken one Asper by name of such
Imposition.

L Whereas the English Merchants Resident in Galata, ordinarily buy diverse
Goods and Merchandise before they can Lade or send them away upon their Ships,
and do pay unto the Customers the Custom of the said Goods, receiving a Bill,
The Discharge of one Customer a sufficient Acquittance against him that
succeeds.
or Acquittance to have paid the same, and after carry the same Merchandise to
their own Warehouses: In the mean time before they can Load and send away the
said Goods; it happens, that either the Customer dies, or is removed from his
Charge, and the new Customers will not accept of the said Acquittances, but
pretend another Custom, troubling and molesting of them many ways. Wherefore
We do Command, That of all the Merchandise which they shall buy, it appearing
really that he has paid once his Custom, the Customer shall accept of the
said Acquittances, and shall not demand of the Merchant a second Custom.

LI. It being usual to buy in Angora, Chamblets, Mohairs, Silks and other sorts
of Merchandise which they transport to Constantinople, and other places of our
Dominions, and pay their Customs, taking Acquittances for the same, and so put
the Goods into their own Warehouses; And after being desirous to Ship them
away, the Customers do demand again the Custom, No Custom to be paid twice.
Therefore for the time to come, when the said Merchants shall desire to lade
such Goods, and it be true that they have already paid their Custom of such
Merchandise, they shall not demand any second or new Customs, Provided that
the laid Merchants do not mingle their Goods, which have not paid Custom with
those which have already paid Custom.

LII. The English Merchants of all the Merchandise which they shall bring into
our Dominions, and of the Merchandise which they carry out of our Dominions, as
Silk, Chamblets and other Goods, having paid the Custom, and not sold the
Goods unto another; And being afterward to Ship it away for Scio, Smyrna, or
any other Scale, and the said Goods there arriving, the Customers, and
Officers, shall always accept of their Acquittances, which they have in their
hands, and shall not take other Custom of their Merchandise.

LIII. The English Merchants of all the Commodities which they shall bring to
Constantinople, or to any other Port of our Dominions, and of all such as they
shall transport, Mestaria to be paid at Galata.
the Mestaragi of Galata and Constantinople shall take their Mestaria or
Brokidge according to the ancient Canon and usance, that is of such Merchandise
as of old Custom was wont to pay it, of such they shall only take Mestaria,
but of such Merchandise as was not anciently accustomed to pay it shall not be
taken Mestaria contrary to the ancient Canon. Farther upon the English
Merchandise, there shall not be made or laid any Impositions, or other Duties,
No Duties to be raised above the accustomed usance.
nor from the said Nation shall not be taken one Asper, more, which shall be
contrary to the ancient Canon and accustomed usance.

LIVE. The English Nation shall and may freely come into all the Ports of our
Dominions to Negotiate and bring in Cloth, Kersie, Spice, Tin, Lead, and all
other Merchandise, and no man shall do them any hinderance or molestation. In
like manner, except only Goods prohibited, they shall and may buy, and export
all sort of Merchandise without the prohibition or molestation of any man; and
the Customers, and other Officers, the said Nation having paid their Custom
according to this Imperial Capitulation, and the ancient use, shall not demand
of them any thing more. In the time of the happy memory of my Uncle Sultan
Murat Han, the King of England sent his Ambassador Sir Sackville Crow, Baronet,
with his Present and Letter, which was received in good part; and the time of
his Embassy being expired, Sir Thomas Bendish arrived to reside at the Port
with his Present and courteous Letter, the which was in like manner well
accepted, And the said Ambassador having tendered the Imperial Capitulations
formerly granted, that according to the ancient Canon they might be renewed; It
is hereby again commanded, that all the points, and particular Articles therein
be observed and maintained.

No Goods to be forced violently out of the Ships.
LV. And because contrary to the fence and tenure of them, the Ships of the
English Merchants before they arrive at the Scale, several Officers did go upon
them, and violently force out of the Ships the Goods of the Merchants, taking
away the choice of them without agreeing for the Price, or making any account
with the Owners.

Abuses to be redressed in Customs.
LVI. And farthermore the said Merchants having once paid the Custom for their
Goods at the Customehouse, and being desirous to transport the same Goods into
another Scale, the Customers did hinder and detain them, until he received
another second Custom for them.

LVII. And whereas in the Imperial Capitulations it is expressed, that in all
the differences and Suits with the English Nation our Magistrates are not to
hear nor decide the Cause, unless their Ambassador or Consul be there present.
In hearing of Law Suits.
Of late our Judges without the knowledge of their Ambassador have condemned,
imprisoned, and taken Presents from the English Nation which is a great wrong
done to them.

No Customs upon Money
LVIII. Also whereas in the Imperial Capitulations, it is ordered, that the
Customers shall not take any Custom for such Gold and Dollars as by the
English Nation shall be brought in, or carried out of Our Imperial Dominions,
and that the Merchants are to give only three per cent. for the Custom of
their Goods, and no more; the Customers notwithstanding do pretend to take
Custom for their Chequeens, and Dollars; and to take more Custom then their due
for their Raw Silks, which they buy; Raw Silks.
and of the Goods which they land at Scanderoone to carry up to Aleppo, they
demand six per cent. which unjust exactions have been heretofore rectified and
redressed with an express Hattersheriffe. But being now again informed, that
the said English Merchants, are as before wronged, by reason that the Customers
do value and estimate the Goods of the English Merchants more then they are
worth; and though the Customers are to have but three per cent. yet by an over
valuation of the Goods, they take from them six per cent. And the Servants of
the Custom-house, under pretense of small Duties and Expenses, wrongfully take
great sums of Money from them; A greater number of Guardians not to be put
aboard our Ships then usual.
And a greater number of Waiters being put aboard the English Ships, then
heretofore have been used, the charges thereof are a great expense to the
Merchants and Masters of Ships that sustain it. To all which, we being
requested for a redress, do Command, that when the Customers do set great
values upon their Goods, the Merchant offering to them according to the rate of
three per cent. in specie, of the same Goods, the Customers shall not refuse
but accept the same. And being desired by the English Ambassador that the above
specified abuses and injustice should be rectified, We do Command, that
contrary to the Imperial Capitulations the English Merchants be neither in the
foregoing particulars, nor in any other manner troubled, nor their Privileges
unjustly infringed.

The Ambassador of the King of Great Britain Sir Heneage Finch, Knight, Earl of
Winchilsea, Viscount Maidston, Baron Fitzherbert of Eastwell, Lord of the Royal
Manor of Wye, and Lieutenant of the County of Kent, and City of Canterbury,
whose end may it terminate with bliss; did arrive with his Presents, and with
all sincerity, and affection was accompanied with Letters amply expressing the
good friendship, and correspondence; and that abovesaid Ambassador has
presented the Capitulations that they might be renewed according to the Canon.
And that some Articles of great consideration which were before in the
Capitulations may be more punctually observed, the said Ambassador did desine,
that they, might be again renewed, and more plainly expressed in the Imperial
Capitulations. His request was graciously accepted; one of which Points is this.

LIX. That the Galleys, and other Vessels of the Imperial Fleet departing the
Dominions of the Grand Signor, and meeting on the Sea with the Ships of
England, they shall in no wise give them molestation, nor detain them in their
Voyage, nor take from them any thing whatsoever, but ought always to show to
one another good friendship, without doing the least damage. And it being thus
declared in the Imperial Capitulations, The Pirates of Barbary not to search
our Ships for Strangers Goods.
Beyes and Captains, who Sail upon the Seas, and those of Algier, Tunis, and
Tripoli, meeting English Ships which Sail from one Port to another, ought not
to take from them any Money or goods, upon pretense that their Ships transport
Enemies Goods, and thereupon search them, and with this color molest, and
detain them from prosecution of their Voyage, so that only at the mouth of the
Castles, and in the Ports where the Searchers belonging to the Customs usually
come aboard, their Goods shall be examined, but on the Sea, they shall be
liable to no farther search or inquisition.

LX. And contrary to the Articles of the Imperial Capitulations, the Goods of
the English Nation ought to receive no molestation having once paid the Custom,
Customs being paid, the Customer not to deny the Teschere.
nor shall the Customers deny to give the Teschere, or Certificate, that the
Custom is paid for; upon complaint hereof, We strictly Command that the
aforesaid Customers do not defer immediately upon demand to give the Teschere
or Certificate.

A second Custom not to be demanded.
LXI. And the Custom being once paid of any sort of Merchandise not sold in
that Port, which is to be transported to another Scale, entire credit shall be
given to the Teschere, and a second Custom shall not be so much as farther
pretended.

LXII. In Aleppo, Cairo, and other parts of the Imperial Dominions, the English
Merchants and their Servants may freely and frankly trade, All Goods in English
Ships, as well as those of the growth and Manufacture of England, not to pay
above three per cent. Custom.
and for all their Goods and Merchandise pay only three per Cent. according to
the former Custom and the Imperial Capitulations, whether the Goods be brought
by Sea or by Land. And though the Customers and Farmers, upon the arrival of
the Goods at the Scale, to give molestation and trouble to the English Nation,
pretend that the Goods of the growth and manufacture of England ought only to
pay three per Cent. but Goods brought from Venice and other places are obliged
to pay more, and with this color and pretense occasion suits, and troubles to
the English; wherefore in this point let the Imperial Capitulations be observed
as in former times, and Our Officers ought in no wise to permit the contrary
hereunto.

Without Pledge or Suretyship one Englishman not to answer for another.
LXIII. An Englishman becoming indebted, or having made himself Pledge for
another, who is either failed, or run away; the Debt ought to be demanded of
the Debtor; And if the Creditor have no Hoget that such an one according to the
Law has made himself Pledge and security, the Debt shall not be demanded of
the other, which Article is already declared in the Capitulations.

Bill of Exchange not accepted, cannot be enforced.
LXIV. Whereas sometimes an Englishman living in a Country, to free himself from
a Debt draws a Bill of Exchange upon another Englishman who has no Effects of
his in his hands; and the person to whom the Money is payable being a man of
Power, and Authority, brings his Bill, and contrary to the Law, and the
Capitulations, demands and forces payment of the Bill. In which case the
Merchant accepting the Bill, shall be obliged to satisfy it, but not accepting
of it, he shall be liable to no farther trouble.

Drugermen free of all Angaria, and the Cassam.
LXV. And the Interpreters of the Ambassador of England being free by the
Articles, declared in the ancient Capitulations, of all Angaria, or Taxes; by
virtue also of this present Article, when any of the said Interpreters die,
their Goods, or Estate shall not be subject to the Custom, but shall be divided
amongst the Creditors, and Heirs.

LXVI. And the King of England being a true Friend to this Our happy Port, Ten
of the Ambassadors Servants free of Harach.
To his Ambassador who resides here ten Servants, of what Nation soever, shall
be allowed free from Harach or Taxes, or molestation of any man.

LXVII. An Englishman turning Mohammedan, and having Goods, or Estate in his
hands belonging to his English Principals, The Estate of Principals the hand of
a Renegado to be delivered to the Ambassador or Consul.
those goods or Estate shall be delivered into the hands of the Ambassador, or
Consul, that they may convey, and make them good to the true Owners.

The late Ambassador of the King of England who resided in our high Port being
dead, Sir John Finch, Knight, a prudent man, and one of the Council of Foreign
Trade, is appointed to succeed him in the Charge of the Embassy: And notice
being given to our Noble Presence, that the said Ambassador was arrived with
the Royal Letters and the usual Presents, they were acceptable to us. And the
aforesaid Ambassador having made known to us, that in the Capitulations already
granted, there were several expressions so full of ambiguity, that they needed
further explication; and to this end having requested of us, in the behalf of
the King his Master, that the Capitulations might be renewed, and that such
Explications and additional Articles as were necessary might be added to them;
the Request of the said Ambassador being made known to us, We have consented to
it: And We do command, and be it commanded, that the Additions desired be added
to the former Capitulations; of which one is,

I. The Nisani Sheriff (that is) the Imperial Command, upon which was put the
Hattersheriff (that is) the Hand of the Emperor Sultan Ibrahim Han (whose Soul
rest in glory) in the year 1053. which Command declares, that anciently the
English Ships that came to Scanderoon, did pay for every Cloth of London for
the Custom of Scanderoon forty Para's; and for a piece of Kersey six Para's;
and for every Bundle of Cony-Skins six Para's; and for Tin and Lead, for every
Quintal of Damascus or Cantaro fifty seven Para's and a half for Custom; which
Goods afterward arriving in Aleppo did pay for the Custom of Aleppo, for every
Cloth of London eight Para's, for a Piece of Kersey eight Para's and one sixth,
for every Bundle of Cony-Skins eight Para's and one sixth, for Tin and Lead for
every Battman of Aleppo one Para for Custom. And the said Nation buying Goods
and transporting them, for what they bought in Aleppo and exported, did pay for
raw Cloth of Linen or Chilis, for Cordovans, for Hora sani Hindi, for every
Bale of each two Dollars and a half; and for every Bale of Cotton Yarn a Dollar
and a quarter, and for a Bale of Gauls a quarter of a Dollar, and for every
Bale of Silk ten Osmani (of which fourteen makes a Dollar) for Rhubarb, and
such like Drugs, three Dollars for every hundred, according to the estimate of
the chief in that Art. The said Goods carried to Scanderoon, and there laden
upon their Ships, did pay for Raw Linen-cloth, or Chilis, for Cordovans, each a
Dollar and a half the Bale for the Custom of Scanderoon; for Hora sani Hindi
and Cotton Yarn, three quarters of a Dollar the Bale, for a Bale of Gauls one
quarter of a Dollar, for Rhubarb and like Drugs, according to the esteem of
Druggists, three quartes of a Dollar the Bale; and nothing more is to be, or
ought to be paid, according to the tenor of this sublime Command: And if the
Testerdar shall give any Command contrary to this, let it not be obeyed, but be
esteemed invalid: But let every thing be observed conformable to this Imperial
Command and Imperial Capitulations.

II. The English Merchants for all Goods exported or imported paid three per
cent. only, and never ought to pay an Asper more, it being so specified in the
Imperial Capitulations: But there having in the Scales of Constantinople and
Galata arose contrasts and differences with the Customers concerning the
Londra's, or Cloth brought from London, and other sorts of Cloth of the English
Manufacture, they shall pay according to the accustomed and ancient Canon, and
as they have always hitherto paid, that is to say of full Aspers, or short
money, of which Aspers eighty make a piece of eight, and seventy a Lion Dollar,
Aspers one hundred forty and four, for every piece of Cloth of English fabric,
whether sine or course, and of whatsoever price, and the Customer shall not
demand more, nor ought not to take more: But the Cloth that comes from Holland,
and other Countries, viz. Londrini, Says and Scarlets, and other sorts of Cloth
not English fabric, shall pay for the future that which hitherto has been the
accustomed Duty. And at the Scale of Smyrna shall be paid according to the
ancient Custom and Use of full Aspers, or short Money, of which Aspers eighty
make a piece of eight, and seventy a Lion Dollar; Aspers one hundred and twenty
for every piece of English Cloth, whether fine or course, whether Londra or
not, provided that it be of the fabric of England: And the Customer shall not
demand, nor ought not to take, one Asper more, and let no Innovation be made
upon the Custom of the said Cloths.

III. The Capitulations being known, which commands, that the English having a
Controversy, the import of which is above four thousand Aspers, that the Cause
shall be brought to the Porta, and tried no where else; if at any time the
Caddi or Ministers of any place would detain any Merchant, or hinder any
Englishman that comes upon a Ship, from prosecuting their Voyage by reason of
any Money imposed upon them, or pretended from them, if the Consul of the place
will be Security to answer the Pretensions made before the Porta, such Persons
shall be free and at liberty to prosecute their Voyage; and they that pretend
any thing of them, let them come to the Divan for to be judged, and let the
Ambassador defend them from these that come to demand; but if the Consul will
not, be Security, then let the Judge of the place give Sentence.

In Constantinople, Scanderone, Smyrna, and Cyprus, and all other Ports and
Scales of my Empire, whatsoever English Ships shall arrive, they shall pay
three hundred Aspers for Anchorage or Port Charges, and there shall not, nor
ought not to be taken or paid one Asper more.

V. An Englishman coming with Effects and turning Mussulman, the Ambassador
or Consul knowing that such Effects do belong to other English Merchants, let
all the Money and other Effects be taken out of the hand of such a Mussulman,
and consigned to the Ambassador; to the end that he may transmit them to whom
they do belong, that by this means no Goods of other men may remain in the
hands of such a Mussulman; and let not this be hindered by the means of any
Caddi, or other Judges or Ministers.

VI. Any of the aforesaid English Nation buying Chambelets, Mochairs, or
Grogran-yarne in Angora, or Begbazar, if they will export the said Goods from
those places, after having paid three per cent. for the Custom of such Goods
they export, let them not be molested for Skraz Batch, that is, for Passage or
Exportation; and there neither shall nor ought to be taken upon the account of
any such Them and one Asper.

VII. Any English Merchant being to receive from his Debtor any sum of Money,
if the said Debt be recovered by the means and help of an Assistant or Chiaus,
he that recovers the Debt shall pay no more than what is paid to other Caddi's,
which is two Aspers only, and not one Asper more.

VIII. There passing good correspondence between Us and the King of England;
out of regard of this good Friendship, We do grant that two Ships lading of
Figs, Raisins or Currants may be yearly Exported for the use of his Majesty's
Kitchen, if there be not a dearth and scarcity of such Fruit in the Country;
which we allow to be bought with their Money that Export them at the Scale of
Smyrna, Salonica, or any other Scale or Port of our Empire, paying three per
Cent. Custom, which being paid no person shall give to them that lade them any
molestation or hindrance.

IX. It being represented to Us, that the English have been accustomed hitherto
to pay no Custom nor Mezan for any Silk they bought in Smyrna. (that of Prussia
and Constantinople excepted) viz* for the Silk of Giorgia, Persia, or Armenia;
if really there is any such Use and Custom, and the thing is not of prejudice
to the Empire, let there in Smyrna for the future be demanded neither Custom
nor Mezan for the said Silk, but. to the English Merchants let all kindness be
used and shown. And the Ambassador having made instance to Us that the
foregoing Articles might be put into the Capitulations, his Request is granted,
and conformable to the former Imperial Sign and Capitulation, let now in
conformity of what was passed, and of my Imperial Command, be renewed and
granted this present Imperial Capitulation: which We command so long as Charles
the Second King of England (whose end may it terminate in happiness) maintains
good Friendship and Correspondence with Us, according to what has been
maintained with our Ancestors, and to which We on our part are not wanting,
with all tenderness entertaining this Friendship.

And we do swear and promise by him that has Created the Heaven and the Earth,
and all the Creatures; by the Creator the one God We do promise, that nothing
shall be done contrary to this Imperial Capitulation; and accordingly every one
is to obey our Imperial Sign.

Given in the middle of the Moon Gemaziel Akir 1086. in the Imperial City of
Adrianople, being in the Month of September 1675. The Grand Signor writes above
with his own hand as follows. Let every thing be observed in Conformity to our
IMPERIAL COMMAND, and contrary to it let nothing be done.

FINIS.

