His Majesty's SPEECH On the Scaffold at WHITE HALL On Tuesday last, Jan. 30.

Before the time of His coming to the Block of Execution; And a Declaration of
the Deportment of the said Charles Stuart, before He was executed, to the great
admiration of the People.

AND A Proclamation of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, to be
published throughout the Kingdom; prohibiting the proclaiming of any person to
be King of England, Ireland, or the Dominions thereof.

ALSO A Letter from the North, to a member of the Army; containing the
Declaration and Resolutions of the Northern Army, touching the late King of
England, and the lofty Cedars of the City of London.

Imprimatur THEODORE JENNINGS:

Printed for R.W. for general satisfaction of the people.

A Letter from the North, containing the Declaration and Resolutions of the
Northern Army, and the Inhabitants of Yorkshire, concerning the executing of
Justice upon Charles Stuart, late King of England, and the cutting off the
lofty Cedars within the City of London, and elsewhere, who have been promoters
of the bloody and tyrannical design of the Royal party, against the
freeborn people of England.
Endeared Sir,
Yours of the 6. instant I received (together with your papers therein
enclosed) and according to your ardent expressly intimated, I shall here
endeavor to satisfy your expectation, in communicating those particulars,
which are most observable in these parts, viz. As for your present proceedings,
in order to the executing of Justice, it is the object whereon our eyes are
fixed, our hearts thirsting after Justice and Righteousness; considering, that
Judgment truly denounced, is as a Crown of glory to all those who endeavor to
walk in the direct path of Truth and Holiness; And seeing that God has bin
pleased (out of the abundance of his love) to open a door of deliverance to
his people on earth, for the bringing them out of the snare of tyranny, and
Norman oppression.

We do therebore beseech our noble Se^ars in the South to use their utmost
endeavors, in carrying on this great work of Liberty and Freedom, for the true
and impartial executing of Justice, and establishing of Peace and
Righteousness.

For, we are confident, that if Justice be not speedily executed, that both
you and we shall perish, the wrath of the Almighty Jehovah, being ready to
issue forth in streams of Vengeance from the Canopy of Heaven against the
unrighteousness of Heaven, for acting against the known Laws and Will of God,
and standing in opposition against the most glorious splendour of the true light
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

In consideration whereof, We the Officers and Soldiery in the Northern
Brigade, do unanimously desire (even from the superior to the inferior) that
Justice may be speedily executed, and that the tottering and corrupted pillars
of the Commonwealth of England, may be immediately cut off and hewn down, as
well ^he persons of Princes, as either Lords or Commoners* In order thereunto,
and for the impartial executing thereof, it is the sense of the Officers and
Soldiery in these parts, to live and dye, aad stand and fall with you for the
performance thereof, protesting to leave no means unassayed, for the clearing
of Englands putrified channel, which ebbes and flows (in a prerogative and
usurping way) both in Church and State: And not only we alone, but the honest
and free born Denizons in the East and West-Ridinr of this County, have
mutually resolved to live and dye with us in prosecution of the same; who upon
a meeting near Leeds, on tee 19 of this instr. declared their Resolutions, and
entered into protest^tion, to sacrifice lives and fortunes in the defense of
Parliament and Army, for the obtaining of Justice, Liberty, and Freedom,
together with the common Rights of the people of England.

And do desire, that impartial Justice may (without detraction of time) be
forthwith executed upon the person of the King, and that the lofty Cedars of
the City of London, and elsewhere, may be lopt and taken down, wdo have aided
and assisted him in this unnatural tyrannical, and bloody war, and promoted
the Designs of the adverse party, against the well-affected of this Kingdom.

Since which Declaratory Expressions from the said well-affected party, the
spirits of malignancy have been much abated in these parts: But in Lancashire,
Westmerland, and Cumberland, the Coals of Enmity are a kindling, and ready to
break forth into n^w flames of Discord and Contention, the Clergy stirring up
the people in their pulpits, and using all means possible to incite them to an
Engagement against the Parliament and Army, declaring, That all their Actions
and Designs tends only to the extirpation of Religion and Government, and to
erect a new Government, according to the will of their own hearts, telling
them; that they shall not only be deprived of their most lawful and dread
Sovereign, but also of their just Rights, Liberties, and Estates: But (we doubt
not) but a speedy Glister will be administered to these inveterate and putrified
Caterpillars, and to give them a strong purgation and Vomit, in recompense of
all their infective Language, and quack-salving Cordials to the people.

We hear that diverse Agents from Scotland have dispiersed themselves throughout
several counties in these parts, agitating with the Royal party for a new
commotion, telling them, that 40000. horse and foot will be ready before the
16. of Feb. to make an inrode into England, in behalf of their King and
Covenant; but its believed, a second English storm (if a fourth invasion be
made) will soon expiate all their Scottish Mists, which is all at present, from

Your obliged, and most fervent friend, Peter Michael
Wakefield 24 Ian. 1648.
An Act or Proclamation, prohibiting the proclaiming of any person to be King
of England or Ireland, or the Dominions thereof.
WHereas Charles Stuart King of England, being for the notorious Treasons,
Tyrannies, and Murders committed by him in the late and unnatural and cruel
wars condemned to death; whereupon, after execution of the same, several
pretenses may be made, and Title set on foot unto the Kingly Office, of the
apparent hazard of the public peace: For prevention thereof, Be it Enacted and
Ordained by this present Parl* and by authority of the same, That no person or
persons whatsoever de presume to proclaim, declare, publish, or any way promote
Charles Stuart, Son of the said Charles, commonly called the Prince of Wales,
or any other person to be King, or chief Magistrate of England, Ireland, or of
any the Dominions belonging to them, or either of them, by color of
inheritance, succession, election, or any other claim whatsoever, without the
free consent of the people in Parl. first had, and signified by a particular
Act or Ordinance for that purpose, any Statute, Law, Usage, or Custom to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted and ordained, and it is hereby enacted and ordained,
That whosoever shall contrary to this Act, proclaim, declare, publish, or any
way promote the said Charles Stuart the Son, or any other person to be King or
chief Magistrate of England, Ireland, or of any the Dominions belonging to
them, or to either of them, without the said consent in Parliament signed as
aforesaid, shall be deemed and adjudged a traitor to the Commonwealth, and
shall suffer pains of death, and such other punishments, as belong to the Crime
of high Treason.

And all Officers, as well Civil as Military, and all other well affected
persons, are hereby authorized and required forthwith to apprehend all such
Offenders, and to bring them in safe custody to the next Justice of peace, that
they may be proceeded against accordingly.

H. Scobel, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

The substance of his Majesty's Speech, to the Officers of the Army, at the
place of Execution, on the Scaffold at White Hall, on Tuesday Ian. 30. 1649.
HIs Majesty having received Sentence of Death from the High Court of Justice
sitting in Westminster Hall, a Scaffold was ordered to be forthwith erected and
set up against White Hall, one end thereof adjoining to the said Banqueting
house at White Hall, being the place appointed for execution; and upon Tuesday
being the 30. of Jan. (about one of the clock in the afternoon) his Majesty was
guarded from his Palace to the said place of execution, by diverse Officers of
the Army, who came with a most pleasant, and undanted courage to the Scaffold,
being attyred in a black Suit and Clo^k, with his blew Ribbon and a george over
his shoulders attended by Dr. Juxson, late Bishop of London; and upon his
Majesty's coming toward the Block, He fixed his eyes thereon, not seeming to
be danted in the least; saying, That He was willing to sacrifice His life, for
the liberty and freedom of His people, and to dye as a Martyr of the people of
England, by changing this corruptible C^owne of Misery, to an incorruptible
Crown of Glory, and that He was never guilty of the spilling of any blood,
except the E. of Straffords; which done, His Majesty kneeled down upon the
Scaffold, and went to prayers with the Bishop, and having prepared himself for
death, he cast off his Cloak, giving his George and Ribbin to Dr. Juxson, and
stripped himself of his Dublit, who being in his Skey-colour wastcoat, the
Executioner came unto him, and folded up the hair of his head under his white
cap; after which, his Majesty came to the block, and casting his eyes to
Heaven, kneeled down, the Executioner immediately doing his office, who severed
his head from his shoulders at one blow; which being taken up into a Scarf, the
Body and it was both carried off from the Scaffold to White Hall.

FINIS.

