royal blazon or coat of arms C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
At the Court at Whitehall, the Eleventh of December, 1672.
Present,
The Kings most Excellent Majesty. His Royal Highness Prince Rupert Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury Lord Chancellor Lord Treasurer Lord Duke of Bucks.
Duke of Lauderdaill Lord Marquess of Worcester Lord Marquess Dorchester Earl of
Ogle Earl of Ossory Earl of Bridgwater Earl of Bathe Earl of Anglesey Earl of
Craven Earl of Arlington Earl of Carbury Viscount Fauconberge Viscount Halifax
Lord Bishop of London Lord Newport Lord Holles Lord Berkley Mr. Secretary
Coventry Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer Sir Robert Long Master of the
Ordnance Sir Thomas Osborne.


HIS Majesty is pleased to Declare in Council, That being mindful of his former
Declaration, bearing Date January the Second 1671/2 by which His Majesty caused
a Stop to be made of the Payment of any Moneys then being, or to be brought
into the Exchequer, for the space of One whole Year, ending the Last Day of
December instant; And did then also Require and Command Sir Heneage Finch
Knight and Baronet, His Attorney General, to prepare a Bill for His Royal
Signature to Pass the Great Seal, in pursuance of the said Declaration: Which
was accordingly done.

And His Majesty having also considered, that the said Last Day of December is
near approaching, longer then which time His Majesty did by His said Declaration
Declare the said Stop of Payments should not continue,

But notwithstanding His Majesty has not been wanting on His part to comply
with all honorable ways and means that might operate such happy Effects; Yet
the Continuance of those inevitable Necessities which first enforced His
Majesty (contrary to His own Inclinations) to cause a Stop to be made of
Payment of Moneys, compells him at this present to continue the same Stop of
Payments of any Moneys now being, or to be brought into the Exchequer, until
the First Day of May next ensuing; with such Directions to the Lord High
Treasurer, and other Officers and Persons concerned, and with such Limitations
and Distinctions, as by His said Declaration abovementioned was directed and
enjoined.

And that this His Majesty's Pleasure and Declaration may be speedily and
effectually put in Execution, His Majesty is pleased to Order, and does hereby
Require and Command Sir Heneage Finch Knight and Baronet, His Attorney
General, forthwith to prepare a Bill for His Royal Signature to Pass the Great
Seal; Thereby commanding the Lord High Treasurer of England immediately to
Order and Direct all and every the Officers of His Majesty's Exchequer, to
Post-pone all Warrants and Orders, whether Registered or not Registered; And
other Securities and Payments whatsoever, except such as are excepted in the
above mentioned Declaration and Letters Patents, until the First Day of May
next ensuing, with such other Directions and Clauses as shall be necessary for
the pursuance of this His Majesty's Declaration.

And His Majesty doubts not but that all His Loving Subjects have such Trust
and Confidence in His Justice, that it will take away all apprehensions of
their being in the least defrauded of any thing that is justly due to them.

And His Majesty is graciously pleased farther to Declare, That He continued
this Stop of Payments to so short a time as the First of May next; to show His
intentions of taking the first opportunity that any way or means shall offer to
him; to restore to His good Subjects all that is justly due to them, and render
them under His Government both safe and happy.

Joseph Williamson.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1672.


