C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
His Majesty's Speech to the Gentlemen at York; on Thursday last, being the
12. of May, 1642.
Gentlemen,
I Have cause of adding, not altering what I meant to say, when I gave out the
summons for this days appearance, I little thought of these messengers or of
such a message as they brought; the which because it concerns me in what I
intend to speak, and that I desire you should be truly informed of all
passages between me and the Parliament: you shall hear read, First my Answer
to their Declaration of both Houses concerning Hull: The Answer of the
Parliament to my Two Messages concerning Hull; together with my reply to the
same; and my Message to both Houses, declaring the Reasons why I refused to
pass the Bill concerning the Militia. All which being read His Majesty
proceeded.

I will make no paraphrases upon what ye have heard it were more befitting a
Lawyer then a King only this observation, since Treason is countenanced so
near Me it is time to look to my safety, I avow it was part of my wonder, that
men (whom I thought heretofore discreet and moderate should have undertaken
this Employment, and that since they came (I have delivered them the Answer you
have heard and commanded them to return personally with it to the Parliament:)
should have flatly disobeyed me upon pretense of the Parliament Command. My end
in telling you this, is to warn you of them: For since these men have brought
me such a Message; and disobeyed, so lawful a Command I will not say what
their intend of saying here is, only I did you take heed, not knowing what
Doctrine of disobedience they may preach to you, under color of obeying the
Parliament. Hitherto I have found and kept you quiet, the enoying of which was
a chief cause of my coming hither. (Tumults and ^isorders having made me leave
the South) and not to make this a seat of War, as malice would (but I hope in
vain) make you believe. Now if disturbances do come I know whom I have reason
to suspect.

To be short, you see that my Magazin is going to be taken away from me (being
mine own proper goods) directly against my will, the ^^litia (against Law and
my Consent) is going to be put in execution: And lastly Sir John Hotham,
Treason is countenanced; all this considered, none can blame me to apprehend
dangers. Therefore, I have thought fit, (upon these real grounds) to tell you
That I am resolved to have a Guard, (the Parliament having had one all this
white upon imaginary Iealousies) only to secure my person, in which I desire
your concurrence and assistance and that I may be able to protect you, the
Laws and the true Protestant profession from any affront or injury that may be
offered, which I mean to maintain my self, Without charge to the Country
intending no longer to Keep them on foot, then I shall be secured of my
apprehensions; by having satisfaction in the particulars before mentioned.

First Printed at York, and now Reprinted at London, Maij 16, 1642.


