His Maties Speech, and The Queens Speech,
Concerning the Reasons of the House of Commons, to stay the Queens going into
Holland.






The Kings Speech.
MY Lords, and Gentlemen; nothing but extreme necessity shall make me willing
at this time for to give consent unto the Queens going out of the Land; and I
shall be very sorry if the case stand so, that she should be forced to go to
preserve her health, and I give unto both Houses many thanks, for the care they
have of my Wives health and contentment: therefore I desire there may be a
Committee of both Houses here to morrow, at three a clock, to attend my Wife,
with these Reasons which have now been read to me.

The Reasons of the House of Commons, to stay the Queens going into Holland:
Delivered to the Lords, at a Conference the 14. of July, By John Pym Esquire;
And Delivered the 15. to his Majesty, in presence of both Houses by my Lord
BANKS.
THere is great cause to doubt, lest the Papists have some design upon her
Majesty's Journey, because the House has been informed, that diverse of them
have sold off their Lands to a good value, and used other means to get ready
money.

2. It is observed some of them have been very diligent, gathering great
quantities of Gold.

3. It is informed, that more than an ordinary number of Papists are gone
beyond Sea already, and those of the better sort.

II. The great number of English fugitives now beyond the Seas, who by their
late designs and practices, are known to be full of malice to the State, and
will no doubt, seek all opportunities of access to, her Majesty; and as much
as they can labor to infuse into her such evil Counsels, as may trouble the
peace of the Kingdom, whereof at this time there is more danger, because the
affairs of the Kingdom are not yet fully settled, and upon disbanding of the
Army, all parts are like to abound with Soldiers, and such others as will be
apt to be provoked to tumults and seditions; especially in the time of the
Kings absence in Scotland.

III. That the House of Commons have received information of great quantity of
Treasure in Jewels, Plate, and ready Money, packt up to be conveyed away with
the Queen, not only in such a proportion, as the present occasions with due
respect to her Majesty's Honor, may seem to require, but a far greater
quantity, and that diverse Papists and others, under pretense of her Majesty's
goods, are like to convey great sums of money, and other Treasures beyond the
Seas, which will not only impoverish the State, but may be employed to the
fomenting some mischievous attempts, to the trouble, of the public peace.

IV. That as it will be a great dishonor to the State, if her Majesty should
not be attended and furnished sutably to her quality, so it will be a very
heavy burden in this time of great necessity and occasions of other public
charges, if she shall be provided in so Royal a manner, as shall be fit for
her Majesty, and the honor of the King and Kingdom.

V. That because we understand by Sir Theodore Mayerne, that the chief cause
of her Majesties-sicknesse, and distempers, proceed from some discontent of her
mind; the House of Commons have thought good to declare, that if any thing
within the power of Parliament may give her Majesty contentment, they are so
tender of her health, both in due respect to his most Excellent Majesty, and
her self, that they will be ready to further her satisfaction in all things,
so far as may stand with that public, to which they are obliged.

VI. That the Commons conceive it will be some dishonor to this Nation if her
Mtie. should at this unseasonable time go out of the Kingdom, upon any grief
or discontent received here, and therefore we shall labor by all good means
to take away, and prevent all just occasions of her Majesty's trouble, in such
manner, as may further her content, and therein her health, which will be a
very great comfort, and joy to our selves, and the rest of his Majesty's loving
Subjects.

The Queens Speech, July 21. 1641.
When the Parliament did the other day express their Affections to me, in
taking into consideration the journey which I had resolved on for the recovery
of my health, and represented a desire of my stay, with a tender care of
removing all occasions of my indisposition, I could not then give a positive
answer, such as I desired for their satisfaction, because I knew not that my
health would give way unto it; but since that time I have resolved to venture
my health, and (for complying with their desires) not to go, since my presence
here, will be acceptable unto them; and that they conceive it will be for the
good of the Kingdom: For I desire nothing more, than to let you see, that I
shall in all things be ready to gratify them, and to serve the State, though
(as I then said) with the hazard of my life.

Printed in the year 1641.


