HIS MAJESTY'S ROYAL DECLARATION AND PROTEST^TION, TO all his loving Subjects
in England.

BEING A full satisfaction to all the whole world, against all aspersions which
have lately been cast upon His Majesty, that he is Popishly affected, to the
great dishonor of his Majesty, and the withdrawing His loving Subjects from
him.

TOGETHER, With His Gracious Resolution for the maintenance of the true
Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Subject, with the just
Privileges of Parliament.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the famous University.

His Majestyes Royal Declaration, and Protestation to all his Loving Subjects
in England.
IT is a wonder that We so just, so pious, and mercicifull in our words and
intentions should not be believed in all our Declarations and Protestations:
certainly it is impiety to be so full of infidelity toward the words of a
King, some whereof we have here drawn out of our own several writings, that
all the world may see Our fair expressions, of our self and the just end of
all Our actions, and how unjustly both have been interpreted. First concerning
Our being affected to Popery, We protest in the word of a King, and call the
searcher of all hearts to record, that We intend not the alteration of the true
professed and established Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Kingdom, the
know^e liberty of the Subject, the right and just Privileges of Parliament.
Of the Laws his Majesty says thus: A new power has been assumed to interpret
and declare Laws without Us, by extemporary votes, tending to a pure arbitrary
power: Ordinances, and Orders were pressed upon the people as Laws, and their
obedience required to them. His Majesty says further, We do believe, and
accordingly profess to all the world, that the malignity of this design (as
dangerous to the Laws of this Kingdom, the power of the same, and the
Liberties of all Our good Subjects, as to Our self, and Our just Prerogative)
has proceeded from the subtle informations and evil Counsels of ambitious
turbulent Spirits, disaffected to Gods true Religion, and the unity of the
Professors thereof, Our Honor and safety, and the public peace and
prosperity of our people. His Majesty adds further: But how fautly soever
others are, we shall (with Gods assistance) endeavor to discharge Our duty in
the uprightness of heart. The King goes on further in declaring his own candor
and uprightness, together with affronts offered unto Him, saying thus they
endeavor to turn this government into a new Eutopia of Religion, and therefore
We are resolved to change none of Our trusty Officers, till they appear to have
behaved themselves otherwise then they ought to have done, and be evicted by
legal proceedings to have done so. We were ever willing that Our Parliament
should debate, resolve, and transact such matters as are now proper for them,
and we heartily wish that the course of Law be no ways diverted, much less
disturbed. Moreover we call God to witness that as for our Subjects sakes all
rights are vested in Us, so for their sakes as well as for Our own, we are
resolved not to quit them, nor to subvert (though in a Parliamentary way) the
ancient, just constitution of the Government of this Kingdom, nor to make Our
self of a King of England, a Duke of Venice, and this of a Kingdom, a
Republic. Besides the Kings Majesty says further, Nolumus leges Angliae
mutari, We promise that We will be as careful of preserving the Laws in what
does concern Our subjects, as in what most concerns our self, for We profess
to believe that the preservation of every Law concerns Us. We have by many of
Our messages to you by Our voluntary promise to you, so solemnly made never to
pardon any popish Priest by Our strict Proclamation which lately published in
this point, sufficiently expressed Our zeal herein. We will also with constancy
maintain (while We live) The Protestant Religion in its purity and glory, not
only against all invasions of Popery, but also from the irreverence of
Schismatics, and Separatists, wherewith this Kingdom of late, and Our City of
London abounds, to the great dishonor and hazard, both of Church and State.
To conclude, We conjure you, and all men to rest satisfied with the truth of
Our professions and the reality of Our intentions. And then We shall receive
much more in the hope of a full and constant happiness of our people in the true
Religion, and under the protection of the same by a blessed union between Us
and Our Parliament, and so much desired by Us, then in any increase of Our own
Revenue, which beyond former grants of Our Subjects when most wealthy, could by
our Parliament be settled upon Us. Thus We in all our Protestations and
Messages desire the good of the Kingdom, before Our own private interest.

His Majesty says further, We profess before and declare to all the world,
that we always have and did abhor all such designs, but that all Our
endeavous (according to Our many Professions) did and shall ever tend to the
firm and constant settlement of the true Protestant Religion, the just
Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, the Laws, Peace and
prosperity of this Kingdom.

In a Letter from His Majesty to both Houses of Parliament, the conclusion you
may read thus.
If all these present distractions (which so apparently threaten the ruin of
this Kingdom) do not (by the blessing of almighty God) end in a happy and
blessed accommodation, his Majesty will then be ready to call heaven and earth,
God and man to witness, that it has not failed on his part.

I am confident that you expect not I should give a speedy answer to this
strange and unexpected Declaration, that in the distraction of this Kingdom,
you should think this way of address more convenient, then that proposed by my
message the 20 of January last to both houses: as concerning the grounds of
your fears and jealousies, I will take time to answer particularly, and doubt
not but I shall do it to the satisfaction of the whole world. God in his good
time will discover the secrets and bottomes of all plots and treasons; and then
I shall stand right in the eyes of my people. God so deal with me and mine, as
all my thoughts and intentions are upright, for the maintenance of the true
Protestant profession, and for the observation, and preservation of the Laws
of this Land, and I hope God will bless and assist those Laws for my
preservation.

When we duly weigh the dishonor which will perpetually lie upon this
Kingdom, if full and speedy relief be not dispatched, We could not, nor cannot
think of a better way to discharge Our duty to Almighty God, for the defense of
the true Protestant Profession, or to manifest Our affection to Our three
Kingdoms, then by engaging Our Person in this Expedition, as many of Our
royal Progenitors have done even in Foreign parts, upon causes of less
importance and piety, with great honor to themselves, and advantage to this
Kingdom.

For the danger of Our Person, We conceive it necessary and Worthy of a King,
to adventure his life to preserve his Kingdom, neither can it be imagined,
that We will fit still, and suffer Our Kingdom to be lost, and Our good
Protestant Subjects to be massacred, without exposing Our Person to the utmost
hazard for their relief and preservation.

God, in his good time, We hope, will so inform the hearts of all Our good
Subjects, that We shall recover from the mischief and danger of this
distemper, on whose good pleasure We will wait with patience and humility.

For the bringing up of the Army to London, as we have heretofore (by no other
direction then the testimony of a good conscience) called God to witness we
never had or knew of any such resolution; so upon the view of the Depositions
now published with that Declaration, it is not evident to Us, there was ever
such a design, unless very loose discourse or argument be instance enough of
such a design.

And if no better effects then loss of time, and hindrance of the public
affairs have been found by Our Answers and Replies, let all good men judge,
by whose default, and whose want of duty such effects have been.

And We call Almighty God to witness, all Our complaints and jealousies, which
have never been causeless, nor of Our Houses of Parliament, but of some few
schismatic, factious, and ambitious spirits: Our denial of the Militia, Our
absenting Our Self from London, have been the effects of an upright and
faithful affection to Our English Subjects, that We may be able, through all
the inconveniences We are compelled to wrestle with, at last to restore their
Religion, Laws, and Liberties unto them.

We desire Our actions may no longer prosper, or have a blessing from God upon
them and Us, then they shall be directed to the glory of God in the maintenance
of the true Protestant profession, to the preservation of the property and
liberty of the subjects in the observation of the Laws, and the maintenance of
the Rights and Freedom of Parliament, in the allowance and protection of all
their just privileges.

We would have you to be assured, that We never intended the least neglect unto
you in any former Summons of the county, Our love, as well as Our protection,
extending to all Our Subjects; but as you are a great body, time and
convenience must be observed in your assembling.

That you may know the general reasons of Our being here, you must understand,
that when We found it neither safe nor honourabl^ to expose Our Person to the
tumultuous and licentious proceedings of many (which to this day are
unpunished) who did disorderly approach near Our Court at White Hall, We
trusted this part of Our dominions chiefly to reside in, where, as most of the
Gentry already have, so We assure Our Self, the rest of you will give Us
clear testimony of your service and obedience, which We will never use
otherwise then for the defense of Our orthodox Religion, professed and settled
in Queen Elizabeth's time, and confirmed by the authority of the Statutes of
this Realm, the defense of the Laws and fundamental Constitutions of the
Kingdom (as the justest measure and rule for Our Prerogative, your Liberties
and Rights) and lastly, for the preservation of the peace of this Kingdom.

As for Our own zeal to the Protestant profession, we refer all the world to
Our daily exercise of, and Our Declarations concerning it, and execution of the
Laws against the Papists, so likewise We cannot but declare Our Self most
heartily sorry to find such Separatists and Schismatics, who presume against
Law, to foment new doctrines and disciplines, to the disturbance of Church and
State. For the Law, it being the common inheritance of Our people, We shall
never enforce any Prerogative of Ours beyond it, but submit Our Self to it,
and give you and all Our Subjects the fullest latitude of it, both for the
liberty of your persons, and the propriety of your estates, and for an
inviolable confidence and assurance hereof, as We take God (the searcher of all
hearts) to witness Our real intention herein, so We shall no longer desire
you to stand for the defense of Our Person, Honor, and just Prerogatives, then
We shall maintain the Laws of the Land, the liberty of your persons, and
propriety of your goods.

For the resort of Papists to the Court, His Majesty's great care for the
prevention thereof, is notoriously known, that when he was informed two or
three of his Guard were of that Religion, he gave special direction, with
expressions of his displeasure, that they should be immediately discharged,
and provided, that no person should attend on him under that relation, but such
as took the oath of Allegiance and Supremacy.

There having been many rumors spread, and informations given, which may have
induced many to believe, that We intend to make war against Our Parliament.

We profess before God, and declare to all the world, that we always have and
do abhor all such designs, and desire all Our Nob^^^ and Council, who are
(...) place, to declare whether they have not been witnesses of Our frequent
and earnest Declarations and Professions to this purpose, whether they see any
color of Preparations or Counsels that might reasonably beget a belief of any
such design; and whether they be not fully persuaded, that We have no such
intention, but that all Our endeavors (according to Our many professions) tend
to the firm and constant settlement of the true Protestant Religigion, the just
privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, Peace and prosperity of
this Kingdom.

The God of heaven direct you, and in mercy divert those judgments which hang
over this Nation, and so deal with Us and Our posterity, as We desire the
preservation and advancement of the true Protestant Religion, the Law, and the
Liberty of the Subject, the just Rights of Parliament, and the peace of the
Kingdom.

FINIS.

