HIS MAJESTY'S Special Command under the great Seal of ENGLAND.

To the Lord Major of the Honorable City of London, dated December. 9. 1641.

For the speedy sending of Precepts into several wards of the City.

To suppress the Tumultuous and unlawful Assemblies, and Riotous disorders
both in the City of London and Westminster.

With a Relation of the Riotous Assemblies, Mutinous Vproares, and disorders,
made and committed by a company, of Brownists or Seperatists within the City of
London and Westminster.

Also, in what manner they entered into St. Georges Church, where one of them
made a Sermon, on Sunday December. 12.

Whereunto is added the Riotous Insurrection and Rebellion of some Prisoners
in Newgate condemned to dye, on Monday December 13. 1641.

LONDON, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

By the Major.
WHereas our Sovereign Lord the King having received information that many
Riots and unlaw full assemblies are daily made at the City of Westminster and
within the City of London, against his Majesty's peace and quiet of his people
for repressing and punishing whereof has directed his writ under the great
Seal of England, dated the 9. of this instant December unto the Justices of
peace within this City, and Sheriffs of the same thereby strictly commanding
them to put in execution according to the duty of their places, the Statute
made and provided against such Riots, Routs, and unlawful assembly; Therefore
for the better prevention and timely repressing of any tumults, Riots, Routs,
or unlawful assemblies that may at any time hereafter be attempted, made or
committed within this City or the Liberties thereof, These are in his Majesty's
name to charge and command you that forthwith upon receipt hereof, you cause
his Majesty's command aforesaid to be notified by some of your common Council
men, Constables or other discreet persons unto every householder within your
Ward, charging every of them at their uttermost peril from henceforth not to
permit any of their Apprentises or servants to have the Liberty of going abroad
to make any Tumults or unlawful meetings and assemblies within this City or
elsewhere upon any pretense whatsoever, and by themselves to the uttermost of
their power and best endeavor to hinder and let the committing of any such
offenses for the preservation of his Majesty's peace and the quiet government
of this City, which at this present does suffer much reproach through the great
disorder, tumults, and unlawful assemblies daily made and committed within
that same. And further that you make known unto the Masters and servants, that
if they or any of them shall be found to offend in the premises. Then they are
to be proceeded with according to the Laws in this case made, as you will
answer the contrary at your perils.

This 9. of December. 1641. Michell.

A Relation of the disorders, mutinous assemblies, vprores, and distractions,
committed by many Schismatic people, but especially by the Brownists or
Separatists of this Kingdom.
HOw many Sects, and Schisms, are lately sprung up here in this Kingdom,
that they (like the plagues of Egypt) have overrunne the Land, but namely the
Brownists or Seperatists, bear the greatest sway, to what a height of
impudency, and Insolency, have they aspired unto, being upheld by too many of
that sect, they like the Philistines bring their, Goliath to fight their
Battles, but there is no doubt but there will arise a David of truth, to bear
down their violent and Fantastical Doctrine, by which so many people are
seduced, these are those Sectarists that will abide no degrees in Schools, all
humane Learning must be laid by, Accademies are to them abominable.

Hence come those violent outrages, and sacrilegious disorders committed in the
Church, even in time of Divine service, and the hubbubs, and strange Tumults
raised, where reverend silence ought to be used, by laying violent hands upon
the Ministers in diverse places and Parishes within this City, impudently
ascending into their Pulpits, assuming to themselves the power of preaching,
others rending the Surplices from their backs, they hardly escaping in their
persons from being torn in pieces, and that when the Psalm has been
singing, and the Preacher ready to go up into the Pulpit, to deliver his
Sermon, likewise by rending of the Rayles about the Communion Table chopping
them in pieces, and burning them in Churchyard, and this to be done without
Commission or order, in a rude and riotous manner, as if we lived under no
government; how many Riotous assemblies and Routs by their concourse and
disorderly meetings in several places of the Cities of London and Westminster,
committing such insolences and outrages at several times, as if Justice and
authority had no power over them, to the great scandal and defamation of the
Government of this City and Kingdom.

Witness their tumultuous assembling and flocking to the Parliament at diverse
times, with their indecent gestures and irreverent speeches in Westminster
Hall, and other places, for which to instance, there was 4. men brought before
the House of Commons Nov. 30. 1641. for making a hubbub in the Hall, crying
down Antichrist and the Bishops, and saying, if they could not be heard, they
would have a far greater number the next day to back them, and the like.

Likewise the next day many hundred of Citizens flocking to the houses of
Parliament, and called upon the members, as they passed from their houses, to
suppress Bishops, crying aloud, no Bishops, no Bishops, calling them the
limbs of Antichrist.

On Wednesday Sir John Strangwaies made a complaint that he was assaulted by
100 in the streets, and had received offensive words, whereupon the House fell
into consideration for suppressing and repelling of tumults, and disorders of
that nature.

This evening the Citizens begun to raise the like clamor again, but being
entreated to forbear, and depart home to their houses, the tumult ceased for
that time.

Again, on Friday December. 4. many hundred of Citizens and Brownists flocked to
Westminster armed with Swords and staves, as if they came to besiege the
Parliament House, whereupon the Trained Bands was raised, and ceazed upon them,
not knowing otherwise, but that they came against the Parliament House, to that
their plea was, they came to defend the truth, but it was very true, that many
of them were committed to prison.

Upon Friday notice was given to the Parliament, how that their number was so
great, so that instantly there was warrants sent unto each Constahle, to
command sufficient men with Swords and Halberds, to guard the Parliament House.

On Sunday last December. 12. was a great assembly of these Brownists gathered
about St. Georges Church in Southwarke, and one of their Preachers a Cobbler by
profession violently went up into the Pulpit, and made a Sermon above an hour
long, whom they assisted, until all the Constables thereabouts had raised aid
to suppress these tumultuous outrages.

After this he went from thence to St. Olaves Church near the Bridge, with all
his illitterate audience after him, thinking to make another Sermon there also,
but being prevented, and that they could not get into the Church, this
Preaching Cobbler stood up in the Church Porch, and made a Sermon to them all.

These and the like disturbances and distractions I hope the King and
Parliament will take into their grave considerations and pious care, that the
peace of this Church and State, may not be clowded nor eclipsed by these mists
and errors of darkness and ignorance, and let it be the Prayer of all good
Christians, that these Egyptian Locusts, that swarm in every corner of this
City and Kingdom, may be expelled, that we may enjoy the light of the Gospel.

The Riotous insurrection and Rebellion of the condemned Prisoners which was to
suffer on Monday the 13. of December.
THe Sessions of Goal delivery being finished upon Friday last, the parties
Delinquent were sent (according to their several offenses) back again to the
place of imprisonment from whence they came, with the 7. several Jesuits, who
were accordingly condemned for their several Treasons, according to the
Statute thereupon provided, where till Sunday after dinner they were all
reasonably quiet, but afterward they grew tumultuous by throwing of stones and
other like stuff, upon the Passengers in the streets, who in great multitudes
were then gaping up at the Prison, and after a Sermon that night, all departed.
On the next morning early Mr. Maccalee the new visitor of the said prison came
to them, with an earnest request to know whether they were prepared to dye and
also to receive the Sacrament, which they all did really confess, so that the
said Jesuits might suffer with them, who after some admonitions to them, he
expected their appearance in the Chapel, but presently they stood upon their
guard, and would not dye without them, upon which they having got strength and
stood in defiance, till Captain Geeres with his Trained Band came to suppress
them, then the Sheriffs resolved to smother them, and provided a quantity of
wet Hay, which being fired did smoke them up, after that the Armed men entered
the prison and they were all taken and bound in chains and lie ready to suffer
according to their demerits, and wait the time of their execution.

FINIS.

