HIS MAJESTY'S SPEECH, To both houses of PARLIAMENT, JULY the 5th 1641.

WITH Mr SPEAKERS SPEECH, Before the KING, in the Upper House of PARLIAMENT,
July the 3d, 1641.

Concerning the passing of three Bills, Viz. 1 Poll-Money. 2 Star Chamber. 3
High Commission.


London Printed 1641.

THF KINGS SPEECH To both Houses of Parliament, the fifth of July, 1641.
I Come to do that office which I did on Saturday last, to give determination
to these two Bills: But before I do it, I must tell you that I cannot but be
very sensible of those reports of discontent, that I hear some have taken, for
not giving my Assent on Saturday last.

Me thinks it seems strange that any one should think I could pass two
Bills of that importance as these were, without taking some fit time to
consider of them, for it is no less then to alter in a great measure, those
fundamental Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, which many of my Predecessors
have established, etc.

If you consider what I have done this Parliament, discontent will not sit in
your hearts; for I hope you remember that I have granted that the Judges
hereafter shall hold their places, Quam diu been se gesserint.

I have bounded the Forest, not according to my right, but according to the
late Customs, I have established the property of the Subject, as witness the
free giving, not taking away the Ship Money.

I have establishing by Act in Parliament the property of the subject in
Tunnage and Poundage, which never which never was done in any my Predecessors
times, I have granted a Law for a Trienniall Parliament, and given way to an
Act for the securing of moneys advanced for the disbanding of the Armies, I
have given free Course of Justice against Delinquents, I have put the Law in
Execution against Papists.

Nay, I have given way to every thing that you have asked of me, and therefore
me thinks you should not wonder if in some thing I begin to refuse, but I hope
it shall not hinder your Progress in your great Affairs. And I will not
stick upon trivial matters to give you Content, I hope you are sensible of
these beneficial favors bestowed upon you at this time.

To conclude, you know (by your consent) there is a prefixed time set for my
going into Scotland, and there is an absolute necessity for it, I do not know
but that things may so fall out, that it may be shortened; Therefore I hope you
will hasten the dispatch of those great businesses that now is necessary to be
done, and leave trivial and superficial matters to another meeting.

For my part I shall omit nothing that may give you just contentment, and study
nothing more then your happiness, and therefore I hope you shall see a very
good Testimony of it by the passing these two Bills.

Le Roy Le veult.

This done, his Majesty said as follows: viz. I have one word more to speak
unto you, and take now an occasion to present to both Houses, that whereby I
hope all the world shall see that there is a good understanding between me and
my people.

It is concerning my Nephew, the Prince Elector Palatine, who having me and the
King of Denmark to give to a writing concerning the Diet at Ratisbone with the
Emperor, I could not but send my Ambassador to Assist him, though I am afraid
I shall not have so good an answer as I expect, which my Newphew foreseeing,
has desired me, for the better countenancing of the same, to make a Manefesto
in my name, which is a thing of great consequence, and if I should do it
alone, without the advice of my Parliament, it would rather be a scorn then
otherwise; Therefore I do propose it unto you, that if you should advise me to
it, I do think it were very fit to be published in my name.

Mr. SPEAKERS SPEECH.
THe Government of a Commonwealth rests in the Rules of order, and has so much
affinity and consent with the Rules of Nature, in the government of the World,
that the first copy and mutation of the one may seem to be taken from the
original and first model of the other.

This contemplation (most excellent and gracious Sovereign) casts our eyes
upon your Sacred Majesty, as that Celestial Orb, which never resting without
the office of perpetual motion, to cherish the lower bodies, not enriching it
self with any treasures drawn from below, exhales in vapors from the
inferior Elements, what indue season it returns in showers.

The application makes us consider our selves, those sublunary creatures which
having their essence and being from the influence of those beams (as the
flowers of the field) open to receive the glory of the Sun.

In this relation both contribute to the common good, your sacred Majesty as a
Nursing Father designed to bestow on your people, the blessing of peace and
unity, and we as the children of obedience return our duties and affections in
Aids and Tributes. And this compacted in one body by the ligaments of Religion
and Laws, has been the object of admiration to the whole world.

Amidst the distraction of foreign Nations, we only have sat under the
shadow of our Vines, and drank the wines of our own Vintage.

But your crafty adversaries, perceiving that the fervent profession of your
own Religion and firm observation of our Laws, have been the pillars of our
prosperity, By subtle insinuations, pretending a Politic necessity to admit
of moderation in our Religion, to comply with foreign Princes, and suggesting
it a principal in the rule of Sovereignty, to require and take into, ask and
have, that it must be postulare by power, not petere by Laws, and keep this
misery of war and calamity, between Nation and Nation, and put us in the
posture of gaze to the whole world.

But when we behold your sacred Majesty descended from the Royal loins of
that glorious King, which by his wisdom and Policy, first ingrafted the white
Rose and the Red, upon the same stock, and sheithed the sword that had pierced
the bowels of so much Nobility, glutted with the blood of people, and then
laid the first hopes of the happy union between the Nations.

When our thoughts refresh themselves with that happy memory of that religious
King your gracious Father, on whose sacred Temples both Diadems were placed,
wrethed about with this motto, Faciam eos ingentem unam, we cannot but believe
that God and Nature (by a lineall succession from those Fathers of peace) has
ordained you that lapis Angularis upon which the whole frame settles, and put
into the hands of you sacred Majesty, the possibility and power to firm and
stablish this happy union between your Kingdoms, and so raise your memory a
Statue of glory and wisdom from generation to generation.

In all this length of time, the assurance of this Union and peace has been
the chief object of our desires, Our Purses have been as open as our hearts,
both contributing to this great work, manifested by so many Subsidies already
presented, sufficient in our first hopes for the full perfection.

But finding that fail, have again adventured upon your peoples property, and
in an old and absolute way, new burnisht by the hand of instant necessity,
expressed to the World the heart of a loyal people, and howsoever guided with
a new name of tranquillity and peace to your Kingdom, that with more case the
people may digest the bitterness of this Pill, yet still our hearts had the
same aim and object.

A gift suitable to the necessity of such vast extent that time cannot parallel
it by any example.

And by which, if your sacred Majesty vouchsafe your Royal assent, we shall
not doubt you may soon accomplish those happy effects that may present your
wisdom the object of wonder, and your policy to be admired amongst the
Nations.

FINIS.

