Two Speeches, The first spoken by the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

At a general Council held at OXFORD, December 29.

Wherein his Majesty declares his inability to maintain the War any longer.
without the Lords shall raise present supply of Money, for the maintenance of
the said ARMY.

The second, spoken by the Earl of Northampton, in answer to his Majesty's
Demands.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MALl Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

January, 2, Printed for I. H. and W. Whightfield. 1643.

A SPEECH Spoken by the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY.
At a General Council held at Oxford December 29. 1642.
MY Lords, and Gentlemen which are here assembled according to Our Command,
We in Our tender care of the General good, have thought it necessary to
declare unto you the truth of Our present estate and condition, which I believe
will appear very deplorable to you, and all other Our loving and loyal
Subjects.

The great summe^ which We have received from every one of you, (We willingly
and gratefully acknowledge) toward the maintenance of these wars, in which
you are jointly engaged with us, for the maintaining our Regal and Royal
Prerogative, and the support of the true Protestant Religion Professed by
Queen Elizabeth and maintained by our Royal father under whose government
this Kingdom enjoyed so many years of Peace and plenty.

But having by your assistance gone thus far, and brought this glorious
structure to the height and view of foreign Princes, who with Avaritious
longings wait to see the end of our proceedings, let us not now for want of
your assistance let fall the work, and make our selves a scorn and byword to
all Nations.

Therefore in these two heads consists the crown of all our actions.

Either you must advance some present moneys, whereby our Army may be
maintained and kept from mutining till such time as we shall gain power to
enlarge our quarters, and by that means, our men be enabled to supply their
wants, or on the contrary to endeavor to gain an honorable accommodation of
peace, before our exigences are discovered or made known to the adverse party.

For common reason tells us that our excursions being stopped and our dragooners
so far impoverished, it will be a means to increase mutines, which mutines
will easily be discovered and the enemy take advantage of them, and should they
find so fair an oppertunity they would not easily be won to an
accommodation, except it were very advantageous on their party, and very
preiudicicall to us.

So that now consider whether you think your selves able to maintain the
cause which you have undertook or embrace an accommodation as is proffered

For since We cannot perform with Honor what We have undertaken, let your
present moderation, cure the malladie your former rashness has made, let us not
proceed, but with all possible expedition, endeavor to obtain^ an Honorable
accommodation.

Hi^ Majesty having ended his Speech, after some Consultation had among
themselves, the Earl of Northampton returned this Answer, in the name of all
the Lords.

MAy it please your Majesty
We your most Loyal Subjects have seriously weighed the tennour and extent of
your Majesty's desires and in Answer to your Majesty's Propositions, we have
thought it requisite to return this Answer.

1. For your Majesty's Proposition that we should raise a present sum of
money, to defray the charge of the Army, it is not unknown to your Majesty, with
what willingness and allacrity we have exhausted our Treasure to the ruin of
our present Estates, having disbursed all the Coin that we could raise upon
our Lands or credits, it is not unknown likewise, that since the beginning of
these VVarres between your Majesty and your Parliament, we have received no
Rents, our Tennants being enjoined the contrary, by which means we are so
necessitated, that we have hardly means to defray our present necessities, and
being so, how far unable we are to raise such a considerable sum, your
Majesty may easily conceive.

2. As touching an Honorable Accommodation, so it might be procured with
Honor to your Majesty, and security to us your Majesty's Servants, J verily
believe that no true Subject but would willingly and joyfully embrace it; but
on the contrary, if a Peace cannot be obtained, without the exposall of our
lives to the censure of the Law, (as Delinquents) for our Loyalty to your
Majesty, we hope your Majesty will not condescend to, and we would rather
hazard our lives to the last minute, and dye with Honor, then submit our lives
and honors to the censure of the Law, and at so dear a rate as the loss of
both, purchase a brand of dishonor to our Posterities forever.

This we leave to your Majesty's Royal consideration, promising to be
assistant to your Royal Majesty, to the hazard of our lives, so far as our
Honors will permit, either in Peace or War, according as your Majesty in
your Royal wisdom shall think fit.

FINIS

