His Majesty's Speech to the Committee, the 9th of March, 1641. when they
presented the Declaration of both Houses of Parliament at New Market.
I Am confident that you expect not I should give you a speedy Answer to this
strange and unexpected Declaration; And I am sorry (in the Distraction of this
Kingdom) you should think this way of Address to be more convenient, then that
proposed by my Message of the 20th of January last to both Houses.

As concerning the grounds of your Fears and Iealousies, I will take time to
answer particularly, and doubt not but I shall do it to the satisfaction of all
the World. God, in his good time, will, I hope, discover the secrets and
bottoms of all Plots and Treasons; and then I shall stand right in the eyes of
all my People. In the mean time, I must tell you, that I rather expected a
Vindication for the Imputation laid on me in Master Pims Speech, then that any
more general Rumors and Discourses should get credit with you.

For my Fears and Doubts, I did not think they should have been thought so
groundless or trivial, while so many Seditious Pamphlets and Sermons are
looked upon, and so great Tumults are remembered, unpunished, uninquired into: I
still confess my Fears, and call God to Witness, That they are greater for
true Protestant Profession, my People and Laws, then for my own Rights or
Safety; though I must tell you, I conceive that none of these are free from
danger.

What would you have? Have I violated your Laws? Have I denied to pass any one
Bill for the ease and security of my Subjects? I do not ask you what you have
done for Me.

Have any of my People been transport with Fears and Apprehensions? I have
offered as free and general a Pardon, as your selves can devise. All this
considered, There is a Judgment from Heaven upon this Nation, if these
Distractions continue.

God so deal with Me and Mine, as all my Thoughts and Intentions are upright
for the maintenance of the true Protestant Profession, and for the Observation
and Preservation of the Laws of this Land: And, I hope, God will bless and
assist those Laws for my Preservation.

As for the Additionall Declaration, you are to expect an Answer to it, when
you shall receive the Answer to the Declaration it self.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of John Bill. 1641.


