THE Case and Argument against SIR IGNORAMVS OF CAMBRIDG BY ROBERT CALLIS Of
GRAIES-INNE Esquire, Afterward Sergeant at LAW, in his Reading at STAPLS-INN
in LENT 14. Ia. R.

LONDON Printed for Matthew Walbancke at Graies-Inne Gate: Anno Dom. 1648.

THE CASE
MOnsieur Avidus in le droit de Madame Parcella sa feme fuit sesie del Manor
in Wrangle and Jars in Countee de Cumberland, a que l' advowson d' Eglise in L.
fuit appt. il g^ant son manor in Wrangle and Jars cum pert. al Sir Simon
Magus; le eglise devient void Monsieur Avidus present. B tunc devient recusant
convict and mort. sa feme present D, Sir Simon present E, le University de
Cambridge presents Sir Ignor. le agard. Jure patronat, Levisque eslie le Jury
trov^ tout le matter avandit and que B. ad primer benefice, feme fuit
schismatique, E, ad contract ove Sir Simon de further-son institution, Sir
Ignoramus fuit egregie illiteratus, 6 mois pass, Roy present Do Apollos le
Levisque eslie collate M. Grace son Chapleine demesne a que le avoydance
pertain. hac vice. Quere

IN THE CASE
Intentio Nominum, and Interpetatio eorum.
1. MOnsieur Avidus is the greedy gripeing patron who will not part with the
Benefice, but with a Si quis plus dare voluerit.

2. Sir Simon Magus is the Simoniacall patron* Nota, He is descended of no
great Gentry, but ascended from a Kna. to a Kni. He lately made two purchases,
the one of his Knighthood, the other of his advowson.

3. B. the Cleark of Monsieur Avidus is noted for an engrossing Benificer, who
though he had not passed one degree in the University, yet boldly enterprized
to set upon two Benifices in the Country, Audaces fortuna juvat.

4. The University of Cambridg are patrons by the law of 3. Jacobi, but
bestowed the Benefice on a sot without, reason, Sapiunt generaliter, in^ipi^nt
particulariter.

5. Sir Ignoramus intended for the Universities Catacoustichon a general noted
Coxcomb, a resemblance of the Actor which they bestowed on the Innes of Court,
Ignoramus.

5. The Evesque Eslie, in English, signifies a Bishop Elect, but not sacred; I
will say no more to but Nolo se vlterius tangere.

7. The Four presentations coming so near together, show to us that many
Clerks at some times ride poast* for one Benefice, Poast for a Benefice.

8. The awarding of the Jure patronatus, presents unto us pretty device to set
many Clarks together by the ears whilst a third person get it from them all.

9. Doctor Apollos is a grave and learned Divine, the Kings Chaplain, to
demonstrate, that though there be many Knaves and fools, yet there be some
wise learned men also.

10. Master Grace is intended the flourishing ignorant favorite, who by his
friend or his purse (and not for his desert in Learning) attaineth a Benefice:
he is a resemblance of the Law-favourite, who for his Learning deserves rather
to be an Auditor, then an ignorant Orator; Sed fortuna favet fatuis, Insomuch
that he is a Preacher or Practiser of Fortune; the truth whereof is, that the
decease of his friend is the end of his practice, Amicus Usque ad mortem: And
of this Ignoramus, and Sir Ignoramus I motto thus: Pari jugo sociantur asini.

11. I Called the Woman Parcella, and set her out for a Schismatique, to this
end, because a certain woman (I will not name) but one professing to be a
Brownist, took a Journey to Amsterdam; and after 2 years stay she returned
again with Child to her husband, which shows though she be a weak vessel to
graft Religion on, yet she is a strong stock to get a Religious child on, vera
filia Matris.

In all these, I only aimed at the iniquity of the time, and by their Names to
demonstrate their qualities; I suppose that no Man or Woman can religiously
find themselves grieved at me, If they do, I say no more to them, but Adsum
qui dixi, In me convertite tela.

THE CASE
MOnsieur Avidus in the right of Parcella his wife was seized of a Manor in
wrangle and jars in the County of Cumberl: To the which the advowson of the
Church of L. was appendant. He grants his Manor in wrangle and jars Cum
Pert. to Sir Simon Magus; the Church became void, and Monsieur Avidus presented
thereto B. and then became a Recusant convict, and died. His Wife presented D.
Sir Simon Magus presented E. The University of Cambridg presents Sir Ignoramus:
The Bishop elect awards a Jury Patronatus. The Jury finds all the former
matter, and that B. had a former benifice; the Wife was a Schismatique, and had
contracted with Sir Simon to further his institution. Sir Ignoramus was Egregie
Illiteratus. The elect refuses them all. The Six months pass, the King
presents Doctor Apollos, The Bishop elect collates Mr. Grace his own Chaplin.

To which of these the avoydance of this Church appertains for this turn,
Quere There be in this case six Patrons. 1. Monsieur Avidus, In iure ux^ris,
the greedy patron. 2. Parcella his Wife, In Jure suo proprio, the Schismatique.
3. Sir Simon Magus the Grauntee, a Simoniacall patron. 4. The University of C.
by the Statute of 3tio Iacobi Regis, of Recusants. 5. The King by the Statute
of 23. Eliz. of Symonie. 6. The Bishop elect by lapse.
There be 6 Clarks which stand for this Church. 1. B. The Clark of Monsieur
Avidus, double-beneficed. 2. D. The Clark of Parcella, blotted with Schism. 3.
E. The Clark of Sir Simon Magus, guilty of Symony. 4. Sir Ignoramus the
illiterate Clark of the Vnivetsity. 5. Doctor Apollos, the great and learned
Divine. 6. The Chaplain of the Bishop, Fortunes favorite.



So that there be twelve persons in the case, which strive for this Church, and
every one of their parts has been taken, either by one Gentleman, or by
another, which have argued the same before me. So that now (I am sure) there is
some expectation of the Gentlemen Auditors, (which be many) which part I shall
take in this case: but before I shall tell you, with whom I mean to take part,
I shall expound unto you, the pretty tale of a merry host. For when once I
traveled over the River of Trent, and Owse from Lincoln toward York, I
lodged at the house of a merry host, and being many of us guests at supper, our
host told us of diverse men of their Town had been fishing in the River of
Trent, where were good store of Salmons, and he asked his guests how many
Salmons we thought they had got that day, where-upon some of us said twenty,
others fifteen, others ten, and some more, some less, every one according to
his own conceit and humor; and when every guest, had said by guess how many
Salmons were caught, we were all of us desirous to know of him, how many they
had got, who very wittily, and unexpectedly told us, that they had got, never a
one. So I may apply this jest to our case. Here be twelve persons in the case
pretend right to the avoydance of this Church, and every one of the Gentlemen
by great and strange chance, have taken several courses, and also have held
with a several party; so that now (I am assured) it is much expected, which of
the parties I shall hold to have right to the said avodyance, whereupon (with
the merry host) I do hold, that never a one of the parties in the case; has
right to the Church for this time, but that there is a person no named in the
cause, has right to the presentment, whose name I mean to conceal till I grow
toward the end of my argument; and therefore now I mean to distinguish and
divide my case into these several points, which be as follows.

The points intended in my case be,
1. What a Manor is, and whether a Manor may be divided, and that two Manors
may be made of one. 2. Whether the advowson does pass with the Manor granted,
or does remain with the thing ungranted. 3. Because the Advowson lies in
another Town, then where the Manor lay, whether it did pass or not, by words
Cum Pertin. 4. When Monsieur Avidus did present and dye, whether the wi^e
should not have her Clark advanced to the benefice, and the rather because the
Clark presented was after refused by the Bishops elect. 5. If after that Sir
Monsieur Avidus became a recusant convict, whether the presentment be
transferred over to the University of Cambridg by the statute of 3 Jacobi and
so ought to be conferred upon their Clark Sir Ignoramus, or that he must be put
to seek out a benefice in some other place. 6. Whether the Jure Patronatus be
well awarded by the Bishop elect or not, and whether the verdict of the Jury
nas according to Law or no. 7. If the refusal of the Clerks was done upon a
just ground or no, and whether notice was necessary or not. 8. If it be such a
Simony committed by and between Sir Simon and his Clark, as that thereby the
Clark lost his benefice and Sir Simon his presentment hac vice, and whether the
King may present by the statute XXXI Eliz, or not. 9. Whether the levesque
eslie might present by laps. 10. What is the preson to whom the presentment
does belong if none of the parties aforesaid have right according as I hold
And for the Argument of the first point, what a Manor is. 1 Point Bracton
Plow* Co^^. 170.
Mr. Bracton says, quod est Capitale mesuagium ad quod possint diversa
pertinere, Master Plowden in Hill and Graunges case defines a Manor to be
quoddam Compositum of demesnes and services: and I do hold that a Manor iss a
little Commonwealth, and is compounded of necessity, as things and causes
without the which it cannot be nor have perfect essence.

which three things be,
1. Scitum pro habitatione Domini pourson delight and demesnes for his profit.
2. Services to be done by the Tennants testifying obedience. 3. And a Court
Baron for the execution of justice amongst the Tennants.
And these be all the things which be of necessity required in the essence of a
perfect Manor. For if any of these be wanting, there is but an Nuncupative
Manor as it is termed in Sir Moyle Finches case in the Lord Cooks rep: Cook.
rep. 6.
or rather (as I may more fitly term it) And imaginary Manor Nomini and
vulgari appellatione and non in re and in opinione Jurisperitorum.

There be diverse things which be not required, ex rei necessitate to the making
of a Manor, and yet for diverse respects and considerations they be necessary
to appertain thereunto, as warrens of Counyes, Chases and Parkes for the Lord
to use for his deletation, villenes regardants to do the Lords works,
piscaries for provision in his House, and advowsons for the advancement of men
skillful in Religion and many other things of the like nature, but all these be
but isntrumental adjuvants and supplements, and are nothing to the essence of
a Manor, and yet they be necessary to be had therewithal, either for the
profit or pleasure they do bring in their several kinds: So that it is holden
in our books that by the grant of a Manor the S^ite, demesnes, services, and
Court Baron do pass, but the Warrens, Parkes, Chases, Piscaries, and things
appendant do not pass to the Grauntee by the grant of the Manor, without the
words cum pertin. 8. H. 7.
as appears in 8. Hen. 7. sol. 4. b. But whether or no an advowson appendant
will pass without the words cum pertin. by the grant of the Manor; has been
questioned in our books, and Mr. Pa^k. 44. B. 3. 8. H. 7.
Perkins* title grants fol. and in 44. Edw. 3. fol. 40. and many other books
be, that will pass without the words cum pertin: But 8. Hen. 7. aforesaid is
to the contrary, and surely I can see no perfect reason wherefore it should
pass per-Nomen Manerii without the words cum pertin. more then other
appendants and appurtenants will do, considering it has always the word
appendant with it, supposing it to depend and belong to a Manor and not to be
parcel, and it is also in pleading said Pertinere, unless the old conceit
has wrought the opinion of men to be, that it is parcel of the Manor,
because Livery and seisin might have been made of it, but the Law in that case
being altered, I see no reason but that may stand in equipage and equal terms
with a villeine regardant, which will not pass without the words cum pertin.
But general opinion does sway the other way, and therefore I leave it where I
found it, and yet I intend to prove hereafter, that (as this case is) these
words cum pertin. must be material to pass the advowson or else the word
Manor will fail. Sir Simon the wicked grauntee when he should stand most need
of it.

It is fit in the handling of this point, to dispute whether a Manor may be
made at this day or not, and I hold it cannot, the reasons whereof are fit to
be set forth and declared. I confess that the Law is taken in 33. H. 8. in
Brooks Cases, pl. 2 10. and in 35. H. 8. plac. 274. in the same Book and in
Sir Moyle Finches Case. 33. H. 8. 35. H. 8. Sir Moy^^ Finches C^se.
That a Manor cannot be made at this day, Although a man gives diverse parcells
of Land, Seperaliter in tail Tenandum of his chief Mansion House, and some
men have been of opinion that Manors might have been made until the Statute
of Westminster. the third of Quia Emplores terrarum did take place, because that
Statute took away the Fesans of tenures, Iator very seigniour, and very
tenants, which must be, and concur where there shall be a Manor; but I do
hold [for mine own part] that there be two material causes, wherefore a
Manor cannot be made De novo at this day; The first, because all this Realm
soon after the conquest theroof by William the Conqueror, was divided into
Manors: So that al lands, and every Land was put within one Manor or other,
and therefore the Law was so satisfied in that, as there was an end of making
of Manors when the cause ceased. 2ly. This word Manor implies in it self, A
being time out of memory, which we call prescription, and this appears to be
so by the said books of 33. H. and 35. H. 8. which are, That a Manor must be
De tempore cuius memoria hominum non existit in contrarium: 33. and 35* H. 8.
So that for these two reasons, I am of opinion, That neither a Subject nor the
King can make a new Manor at this day, Also, for the absurdity, It were
unfitting that every petty Freeholder by giving several parcells of his
Grounds to diverse several persons, should make himself Lord of a Manor at
this day.

But the question and point in my case is not whether one might make a Manor
de novo at this day, But whether, of one old and perfect Manor two Manors may
be made, and whether one Manor may be divided into two or not?

It is true that our Law loves entierties, and rejects fraction, Quar union
fait unity and fraction fist division, Come garranty per le Ley est entter and
pur ceo le party, que ad ceo ne puit, ceo pur son act demesne devider, as
appears by Morices case in the 6. Rep* of the Lord Cook, and by Mr.
Litleton; Morices Case.
If one have a Rent charge, and purchase parcel of the tennancy or grant part
of the Rent to another: All the Rent is extinct in the one case, and the
distress is lost in the other; For as the Rent was an entire thing, so was the
distress, and Lex non patitur fractiones, So in E. 4. The Office of the Chief
Prothonotary could not be granted to two, to make two several Officers of
them: Curles case.
Quia sic centum, but as Auditor Curles Case in the 11. Rep. Two Persons may be
made one Officer, 3. E. 4. Dyer Fol.
Sed hoc per statutum: So by 3. E. 4. and Dyer fol. Two Joyn-tennants cannot
make partition without a Deed, because it is contrary to the nature of
Joyn-tennancy, to have a division or partition, So that we may collect, that
where the Law has made an union, it dislikes the contrary, and so it may be
well held in argumentt that one Manor cannot be divided into two: yet, in 9.
9. E. 4.
E. 4. fol. 17. If the Manor of Dale be held of the Manor of Sale and
Escheat, that is parcel of the Manor of Sale; So here is two Manors made
into one, which proves the one derived out of the other in principio, sed non
licet arguere principia, But that is by act in Law. And so is 26. 26. H. 8* 4
H. 8. fol. 4. that if a Manor descend to two Coparceners, and they do make
partition so that either has demesnes and services, here either of them has a
Manor, 12. H. 4.
Et cum hoc concordat 12. H. 4* For Coperceners are by Law compellable to make
partition, and then the Law which does compel the doing of the act does never
work any injury to either party, For that were torcious which cannot be
presumed in the Law which in it self is right and justice; 9. E. 4.
And although that 9. E. 4. aforesaid seems to sway that two Manors may be
made one by act in Law, yet by the act of the parties, 2. E. 2. Perkins.
I find the Law contrary. As in 2. E. 2. and Mr. Perkins, where a man had two
Manors and he for ease of his tennants caused all his tennants to come to one
Manor to do their suit and service, and that for along time, yet that did not
make the tennants of the other Manor, in right tennants to that Manor, they
did their suit unto, neither did it make both the said manor one entire
Manor: 9 E 4.
In 9. E. 4 fol. 17. It is said by Catesby that if I have a Manor which lies
in Dale, and Sale, and I grant my Manor in Dale, the Grauntee has a Manor,
and yet it shall extend but only into Dale; Finches.
And in Sir Moyle Finches case, it is said for Law, That if I have a Manor and
grant part of the demesnes and services to I. S. yet by this grant the Grauntee
shall not have a Manor. Out of which two books I gather this conceit; That if
I have a Manor, which does extend into Dale, and Sale, and there be demesnes
and services in either Town, and I grant my Manor in Dale, that the Grauntee
has a Manor there, and that which remains in Sale, shall be but as things
in gross and no Manor; Sic e^converso, If I grant all my Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments in Sale, the Grauntee shall not have a Manor, but the
demesnes and services as things in gross, and the Manor shall remain with me
in Dale.

So I may conclude that Sir Simon the Grauntee, has a Manor in Wrangle, and
Jars passed unto him.

But now whether the Advowson does pass to him in some question, 2 point.
For things appendant or appurtenant are rather inclinable to remain, 33. H. 8.
then to pass by grant; Dyer Fol. 43. 44. E. 3 F^tz. H Impt. Q 137.
Forin 33. H. 8. in Dyer fol. 48. and 44. E. 3. Fitzh: quare imp: plac. 137. If
one have an advowson appendant to a Manor, he may by express words make that
appendant to one acre parcel of the manor, but not by these words cum
pertinentiis; but if these cases hereafter ensuingbe well noted and weighed,
they will make he Law to appear, where these words, Cum pertin., be requisite
to be used to make the advowson pass, and where not. The first case is in 6. 1
6. E. 3.
E. 3. 44. Fitz. h. title quare imp. pla. 40. Fitz. Q.
which is, that if the third part of a Manor with th'appurtinances, Impr. 44.
be assigned in dower to a Feme, the third part of the Advowson will pass to
her without naming of it in expressis verbis etc. 9: E* 2, Fitz Bre. 844*
So is 9. E. 2. Fitzh. Title Breife pla. 844. That if one bring a formedon of
the moety of a manor, Cum pertin. he by that shall recover the moety of the
Advowson; and the reason thereof (as I conceive) is, because the Feme in the
first case, comes in upon the best possession of her Husband, and in her case,
and in the case of the Recoveror they both come in upon an ancient right, which
is as well to the advowson as to the Land. And these be the reasons (as I
conceive) wherefore the part of the Advowson was to come to them by virtue of
the said words, Cum pertineniiis, but without the said words, (as I conceive by
the said cases) no part of the advowson had come to them. There is one other
pretty case in 17. 17. E 3. 2. H. 7.
E 3. Fol. 38. and in 2. H. 7. Fol. 4. and 5. If there be three Coparceners of
a Manor, and of an Advowson appendant, and they make partition of the Manor
and say nothing of the Advowson, the Advowson remains in common undivided as
it did before; and the reason (as I conceive) is this, because it stands as a
thing indifferent, whether partition be made of it or not, and there is neither
profit nor prejudice comes by the not dividing of it, more then if it had been
divided in the intendment of the Law: But Master Stamford in his prerogative
Fol. 4. Stamfords prerog. 43
43. 8 has the case thus, That if I. S. be seized of a Manor to the which
there is an Advowson appendent, and I. S. grants the moity of the said
Manor Cum pertinentijs, that does not pass the moity of the Advowson without
express mentioning of it; and the reason (as I conceive the case) is, because
by way of grant, the part of the Advowson will not pass being the only act of
the party, and it will rather remain then pass in a case indifferent, quia
potest facilius remanere quam removeri. Yet all these cases differ from my case
in words, for that the Manor in Law is transferred to Sir Simon the grauntee,
and that which remained in Monsieur Avidus was but demesnes and services in
gross, (if the Law be as I have taken it to be) and then I take the Law to be,
that the Advowson will rather pass with the Manor, as cum re digniori, then
stay with the rest of the Demesnes and Services in gross, being in gradu
inferiori. So that, if the rest of the matter of the case ensuing do not
hinder it, then (in my opinion) the said Advowson were well transfered to the
Grauntee.

But now the point will be, ^ Point
whither the said Advowson will pass to the Grauntee, because it lies not in
wrangle and Jars, to the which the Grant is stinted, but in L. being another
distinct Town per se. And I do think that notwithstanding, the Advowson will
pass to the Grauntee, for that it is an hereditament as well where the Manor
is whereto it is appendent, as also in the Town where the Church lies; 2 H, 7,
like to the case of 21. H. 7 Fol. 6. land in Sussex is heid of a Manor in
Essex; it is an hereditament in either County, and the distress taken where
the land lies may be driven into the County where the Manor is, as appears
by 1. ^. H. 6. 3, 2 Eliz, Dyer* 168
H. 6. 3. and 1. Eliz. Dyer Fol. 168. And the Advowson is there more properly
where the Manor is, then where the Church is, because the Advowson is one
thing, and the Church another, and it is moved for a question; Dyer. 32* 3
in 15. Eliz, in Dyer Fol. 323. That if a man grant his hereditaments in D.
where the vicaridg is which was appendent to the College at Westminster,
whither that pass the Advowson; so that the doubt was rather held, whither the
Advowson was an hereditament where the Church lay, then where the College was,
to the which it was appendant; yet it was there resolved that it did pass,
because the view in a writ of right of an Advowson, was there to be had, where
the Church was. Dyer. 194*
And again in Dyer 2. and 3. Eliz. fol. 194. The Bishop of Lincoln, was patron
of a prebend in the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, and the body of the prebend
lay in the County of Bedford, and it was held that the quare impedit should be
brought in the County where the Cathedral Church was, and not in the County of
Bedford where the corpse of the prebend lay, because the Installation, which is
properly recovered in this action, must be in the cathedral Church, where the
Clark is to have Locum and Stallum in choro. But in a grant, which sounds in
point of profit, there it is properly an hereditament; also where the profit
lies, that is, where the parsonage is: So that I suppose the Advowson did
pass to Sir Simon. But (to make the case more perspicuous) it appears by my
case, that although the grant to Sr. Simon be stinted, and tied only to
Wrangle and Jars as to the Manor, yet the Advowson is at liberty, because it
is carried by the words Cum pertinentijs, which come after the Town in the
case, and so is not stinted to the Town of Wrangle and Jars, but is left at
larg.

And so my conceit in the case appears concerning the grant of the Manor,
and the Advowson, and therefore I will say no more thereof, but will proceed to
the other points of the case.

And now the next point of the case is, 4 Point.
when the Church did become void, and the Husband presented a Clark thereunto,
and dyed before his Clark was received, whether now the Wife, whose inheritance
it was and is, shall or may present her Clark, and have it from the Clark of
her Husband, as also from the Grauntee, and the rather, because that upon the
refusal of the Husbands Clerk, it stands in case now, as if no presentment at
all had been made thereto.

A Feme covert in four several cases is in the life time of her husband
reputed in the law as a Feme sole.

As in 2. 1 2 H 7.
H. 7. If she be an executrix, she may pay debts and discharge Legacies.

And in 10. H. 7. 20. a. A man being Cestuy que use of Land, 2 10 H 7
devised the same to be sold by the Executrix, and made his Wife Executrix, and
adjudged that she might sell the same to her other Husband after the death of
her first Husband.

And in 31. E. 1 Fitz. Cui in vita. Plac. 31. The Wife of a man abjured might
make alienation of her Lands, 3. 3 E 1.
or bring her cui in vita.

Feme Covert, 4 L^^don, Custom.
Sole Merchant, by the Custom of London.

But these cases extend to prove what a Feme covert may have or do in the
lifetime of her Husband. But my my case tends to what a Feme shall have
after the death of her Husband, which in his lifetime he had power of, and is
now the question.

In the which I do observe a quadri partite.

Diversity.
1. That some things the Wife, after the death of her Husband, without doubt
shall have. 2. Some things she cannot have. 3. Other things she shall have, Sub
modo. 4. Other things shall go to her or to the Husbands Executors, which can
first obtain them.
1. And as to the first of these, a Woman after the death of her husband, shall
have such bonds and bills for debts as were made to her before coverture, and
which be not recovered or received by the husband in his life time, and she
shall have such debts and goods remaining unaltered as she brought with her as
Executrix to any person: And by 7. H. 6. 1. and 9. H. 6. 52. If she brought a
Lease for years with her, 7. H. 6*
and the husband dies without altering the property of it; 9. H. 6.
it shall remain to the wife; yet in the life time of the Husband, he had
potestatem alienandi, relaxandi, vel aliter disponendi, of, and over all the
said matters.

2dly; It is clear that all Chattells personal, as ready Money, Plate, Jewels,
Apparel, Horses, Kine and other goods of like nature, which a woman brings
with her in marriage, or which she has given to her during coverture, the
absolute property thereof is vested in the Baron, and though he dye they shall go
to his Executors and Administrators, as appears by Fitzh. Not. br: fol. 69.
and many other books.

3dly; If a trespass be made upon he Lands of the Wife, in the life of her
Husband, as by breaking of his close, destroying of the Grass and Corn, the
wife, after the death of her husband, shall have no action for the punishing of
these torts, for these were trespasses done to such things as the Baron sole
should or might take the profit of during coverture; but such torts, trespasses
and injuries which extend to the hurt and damage of the wives inheritance, as
pulling down of her houses, cutting up and destroying the Trees, of these, the
wife shall join in the action with her husband in his life time, and shall and
may maintain an action thereof, after the death of her husband. And this
diversity I collect out of the books of 50. 50. H. 3
E. 3. 13. 43. E. 3. 16. 21. R. 2. title brief, 43. E. 3.
933. But in this part another matter arises, which is, 21. R. 2.
whether the wife shall have the avoydance, and the presentment to a Church
which voydeth in the life time of her husband, being her inheritance, and he
dye before he have presented: And I suppose she shall; and so of a Ward which
happens in the life time of the husband, by reason of the death of a
free-tenant of the wife, for these be Chattells real. And yet if the Ward be
seized by the husband in his life time, or if he has presented to the Church
before his death, these acts do so vest the same in the husband, as that they
do wholly deprive the wife thereof. I grant that the husband and wife may join
in the presentment, or join in the quare impedit, which if they do so, then that
will reserve the same unto the wife after the death of the husband. And I find
by 15. E. 4. 9. that they may join in the quare impedit, or the Baron may, if
he will, bring it alone; but in our case, because the Baron has presented to
the Church, sole without his wife, that thereby such an interest of the present
avoydance is vested in the Baron; as, though the Bishop after refuse his Clark,
yet the presentment shall go to his Executors, and not to the wife; And
herewithall I intend to dismiss Mistress Parcella, and her Clarke, from the
preferment of this Church, at this time.

4thly But to make good the fourth part of my diversity, which between the
Executors of the Husband and the wife, is a plain Capiat qui capere possit, I
find by 3. H. 3. H. 6.
6. 37. and 43. E. 3. 10. That if an Obligation be made to the Baron and feme,
43. E, 3.
and the Baron dies, that the Executors or the wife, which may get the
Obligation, may sue it, and recover the money.

And herewithall I end these distinctions.

And will now proceed to the title of the University of Cambridge, ^. Point.
and of their inglorious Clark Sir Ignoramus, which is the fifth point of my
case.

No Inn of Court or Chancery-man need wonder, (...)fore I styled the
Universities Clark, by the name of Sir Ignoramus; For it is to be conceived
that he had commenced Batchelour of Art in ignorance; and the late skirmish he
made with Ignoramus of the Innes of Court (being both of one blood and kindred)
may put us all in perfect remembrance of him; yet both these kinsmen in
ignorance wanted not their favoring friends to help the one of them into
practice, and the other of them to a Benefice, when many a Learned and a
studious Gentleman (wanting help of friends) might sit without both: So much is
this froward age, we live in, to be condemned, the more we see ignorance
preferred before learning and virtuous qualities; and dull-pated Jobber-noles
unworthily advanced to places of profit and dignity, when many a learned Muse
sits in his Study, destitute of either; Herein I taxed only the Time of
partiality, that preferred an ignorant Ass, before a Learned Schoolman, a
fault too common in the University, and not without blame in the Inns of Court
and Chancery.

But seeing we have Sir Ignoramus amongst us in the Schools of Law, let us now
see if we can toss him like a dog in a blanket, and make him vomit out his
Nonsense, and rid him of his ignorance; But shall we strive with an
impossibility? Quia ignorantia sua hoeret in nomine, in capite, and in cute?
Yes, and thrust him into the said Litigious Rectory; a fit Chapleine for such a
Church; Besides, it may well be found out in the case, that I intended not to
spend much labor to reform Sir Ignoramus, (counting the labor as endless as
the Maids in the Strand, which endeavored by washing the Black-a-More, to
make him white:) But to vent our some passion against Sir Simon Magus for his
Simony, and one that was a Magitian from his infancy; I mean not that person
named in the 8th of the Acts of the Apostles, for he offered to give money to
buy the bestowing of the Holy Ghost; ^his refused not to take money to bestow a
Benefice, so they were of kin, this was a Knight without living he was a
Knave without grace.

For Monsieur Avidus, I set down his name so, because it best suited to his
condition; for he was so far from covetousness, as that he sold the Advowson to
Sir Simon whom he knew was a person likely to give most money for it, and yet
according to the text of Fallere fallentem non est fraus, h cold have found in
his heart to have cunningly defeated him of it, forgetting the old reperte,
quod fallere quenquam non est laus.

The Seditious Schismatique woman, though her effeminacy should have innated in
her mildness, peace and concord, yet having layen with her old cankered
husband, he ingrafted in her seditious frowardness, seeming religious forwards,
being irreligious backwards in all her actions; for now adays women grow so
seeming religious as that they have found a back way to Heaven, which men never
knew of; well, let her trot thither as fast as she can, I mean to set both her
and her Clark besides the Cushion, least she should bring as troublesome a
Clark to the Church, as she her self is a cumbersome huswife in her House.

And seeing I had framed my case upon such a confused Chaos of
non-conformities, I thought Master Plurality, the engrossing Beneficer, should
be one of the actors in this comudy; he is a person compounded out of many
particularities into a qualification dispensation, and non-residence be the
only liberal sciences in his study. Ever when he talks of the Law he
exagainst clames against the statute of 21 H 8. 21 H 8.
which opposes pluralities unless sometims he casts outsome fo his foam
prohibitions, which be Fulmina Jovis or rather Fulmina Regis to repress the
greedy appetites of such of the coveting prelacy as cannot content themselves
with their old duties and customs.

But let all this confused Chaos of non ordered persons sleep a while and dream
of some metamorphosis, to change them from their several Leprosies, while I
pass into the argument of the fifth point of my case, and that is, whether the
University of Cambridge have title to the Church, K. J^^
to present hac vice, by the Statute of 3. Ia. R. For if the Law prove so, then
it will make well for their Clark Sir Ignoramus (according to the old Proverb)
The more fool the better luck. But I am of opinion that the University has
no right by the said Statute; for it does differ much from the Universitie of
Oxford, C(...)
in my Lord Cooks Xth rep: For there in that case although the grant of the
next avoydance was made before the conviction of the Grauntor. Yet it was after
such time as he became a Recusant, and also the church became void after the
conviction.

But in my case the Church became void before the Grauntor became a Recusant,
when he stood rectus in Ecclesia, and he presented his Clarke to the said
Church when he stood clear, before he was spott^d with any irreligious
quality, and after presentment; the Clarke had that interest in the Church
against his Patron, that the Patron could not revoke or repeal his
presentation,as it appear^ the cases of 12. Elizabeth, Dyer: fol. 292. and 18.
Eliz. 348. and Fitz. Not. br. fol. 34. and some other books; And although the
Patron, after became a Recusant, and was convict, yet that does not vitiate the
presentment which he made in pura vita ^^^a; For if a good Protestant grant the
next avoydance to a Church, and after become a Recusant, yet that shall not
avoid the Grauntee of his Interest which was made, when the Grauntors was
clear and void of that Leprosy; contrary it is, if the Grauntor were a
Recusant, when he made the grant (though he was not convicted til after) for
after the conviction the forfeiture of the statute had a reach back to the
Commencement of his offense, which was, when he first became a Recusant: But
now I shall put you a short case, which falls between the Lord Cooks case and
mine, and that is; If one become a Recusant, and then grant the next avoydance
to a Church, and after is indicted for a Recusant, but the indictment extends
in time after the grant of the avoydance, I might make some question whether
the grant of the avoydance should be avoided; And I think it shall, and the
University should have the presentment in that case: but the forfeiture of xxl.
a month were clear (in the case) out of the Statute; For admitting he were a
Recusant four months, and he is indicted but for the 3 last months, the King
cannot not have xxl. Le case de Sir Chris. Hatton.
for the fourth month not found in the indictment* The case of Sir Christopher
Hatton might be strongly urged against me, which is, that Sir Christopher
became Officer to Queen Elizabeth in Anno xx. of her Reign, (and he owed
nothing) quo anno, he purchased land, and then conveyed the land away, bona
fide, when he stood clear and unindebted; and long after, in the 32. year of
Queen Elizabeth, he became indebted, and not before, yet that land or Lease
conveyed away, stood chargable with the debt; which case I grant, because he
became accomptant when he first became Officer; and although the grew not
indebted till after, yet the cause the Land was bound, was when he first became
an Officer; but if, before he became an Officer, he had passed away any Lands,
or made away any Leases, those Lands or Leases should not be charged; And so is
the Law and Reason in my case, that because the Church fell void when the
Patron was not any Recusant, and the presentment was then also made, that is
the cause the Statute never could take hold of this presentment: but if (as in
the Lord Cooks said case) he had been a Recusant when the Church became first
void, or before he had presented, then (I think) it would have vested in the
University, and Sir Ignoramus had had a fair pull at it.

But seeing the presentment which Monsieur Avidus made, saved the Church for
the time: yet (considering the Clarke was after refused by the elect) whether
now the University shall have the presentment or not, is the question.

If the Patron Recusant could have repealed his presentment, then the question
will arise, whether the same shall be trasferred over to the University by the
said Statute of tertio Iacobi or not.

And as I have formerly said, so I hold still that the Patron could not repeal
or call back his presentation; For it is more then a mere power that he gives
to the Clarke; for it is an interest for his preferment, especially being made
to the party self; I grant the case of 1. E. 5. fol. (...). (...)
where one delivers money to I. S. to pay to I. D. Or where I deliver a horse
to I. S. to deliver to I. D. The money in the one case, and the horse in the
other, may be countermaunded before they be paid, or delivered over to the
party, because the Bayliffe is but my servant in these cases: Bat put the case
a little further, that I give a horse to I. S. to the use of I. D. or I enter
into an obligation to the use of another, here, because I make the Byaliffe a
party, I cannot in these cases make any countermaund of the things delivered:
So, because (in the principal case in question) the Clark has a kind of
interest in the Church by the presentation; In that respect therefore it cannot
be repealed by the Patron: Yet (on the otherside) I am of opinion, that if I
have the nomination of a Clark, and I. S. the presentation of him, that I may
repeal my nomination, for I. S. is (in this case) but merely my servant to
present my Clark to the Bishop: And I am of opinion also, that if the Patron
Monsieur Avidus could have recalled his presentation, that then that power had
been transferred over to the University by the said Statute; In the argument of
which said point, I may aptly put the case of Sir Francis Englefeild, The case
of Sr Fra Englefield.
in Cooks 7. Rep. where not only the condition, but also the performance of it
was transferred over by Act of Parliament to the King, because the party might
have taken advantage and benefit of it himself, and therefore the same
advantage by the Statute was transferred over to the King: wherein also I take
a difference between that case, F. ^. 8.
and the case in Fitz. N. Br. fol. ^^ 8. I. That an assignee cannot have a writ
of admeasurement of dower, where the woman dowager had more assigned to her in
dower then she ought to have, but the heir the assignor might himself so, if
an Infant alien and dye without heir, the Lord by escheat cannot enter, for
the Law does not transfer such titles over, yet an assignee in Law may take
advantage of a condition or covenant; 8 Eliz Dyer 252.
Quia fortior and potentior est dispositio legis quam hominis: But the case in
8. Eliz. in Dyer, fol. 252. comes fittest to this purpose, which is that there
was a donative Chauntry, and the Priest made a Lease for years, 1 E. 6.
and the Patron in tail confirmed the same, and after, the Chauntry was given
to the King by 1. E. 6. of Chauntries; And whether the King might avoid the
said Lease, and that such title of avoiding the same be transferred over to the
King by the said Statute of Chaunteries or not, was the point: And it was
holden that it was; but because there was a Fine with Proclamation after shown
forth, which did bar the said entaile, It therefore was holden that the King
was barred, as the issue of the Tenant in tail, the confirmer, was: which
comes directly to my purpose; For(...) Statute which is the act of the whole
Realm, may and will set the party, to whom the thing is assigned, in as good
plight as the party was in from whom the same was taken: So in our case, when
as Monsieur Avidus had presented to the Church, and that he could not repeal
his presentation, but that he was bound thereby, The revocation and repeal of
this presentation could never by the act of 3. the King, be transferred over to
the University, because the Act of Parliament does settle the same no otherwise
in them then it was in the party selse, from whom it was taken* And so the
presentment remaining in force till the death of Monsieur Avidus the Recusant,
when the Elect after refused the person presented, because, as then, the
Recusant was dead, It could not vest in the University of Cambridge, but rather
in the Executors of Monsieur Avidus.

And so, for these causes, I take it, that the University have no right to the
said avoydance, and that they could not confer the same upon their Clark, Sir
Ignoramus, if so be there had been no defect in the Clark himself, which after
shall be found to be manifest against him, notwithstanding it were admitted
that the University had a good title.

And so I will now pass over to the other points in the case which I intend to
handle, as shortly as I can.

The next thing to be handled in my case is, 6. Point.
whether the awarding of the Iure patronatus be well or not, and what nature
the same is of, and what points be enquirable thereby; and what manner of men
the Jurors should be which are to be used therein.

In the handling whereof I must use practice with Law, and where one serves me
not, I shall make use of the other.

A jure patronatus is properly to be awarded, where the Church is litigious
between diverse Patrons, and the Bishop stands in doubt which of them has the
true right, and so cannot tell (without some peril to himself) which of their
Clarks he should receive and admit of: 22 H. 6.
Then he may (to save himself free from being a disturber) award a Commission
of a jure patronatus; 33 H. 6
And I do find in our books, 32 H. 6
as in 22. 34 H. 6
H. 6. 44. and 33. H. 6. fol. 12. and 32. and 34. H. 6.

That a Church may be litigious
Before the awarding of the jure patronatus. As also after the awarding thereof
And it may be made litigious by the awarding thereof.
1. Before, as where diverse and sundry Clarks be presented by diverse and
several Patrons (as it is in my case) there the Church is litigious.

2. So is it, if two Commissions be awarded at the suite of two several
Patrons, and in the one it is found for the one party, and in the other for the
other party, here the Church rests litigious by this uncertain verdict, and
by these several presentiments.

3. Also, if in a jure patronatus, it be found for one, and before the Bishop
be requested by the Clark for whom it is found to admit him, another does
present, here the Church is litigious after the jure patronatus awarded.

And I collect by the book of 21. H. 6. 44. That if I. S. present his Clarke to
the Bishop, that if the Bishop doubt of his title, he may award a Commission of
jure patronatus, notwithstanding that, not any other Patron does present; And
this I collect by the said books, for that it is there said, That if two
Patrons present severally, the Bishop shall award two Commissions of jure
patronatus, that is, one for either party; And it is said in the said books,
that the Bishop is bound to admit the Clark of him, for whom it is found; If
the Clark so require him, which he must do or otherwise the Bishop is not
bound to admit him, but may suffer the laps to incur and take advantage of
it: But howsoever, I hold it plainly, the Church in my case was litigious, and
a jure patronatus was to be awarded: Now then to declare the nature of a jure
patronatus, and the points of it, come justly into our consideration. It is
therefore to be understood that a jure patronatus, is a Commission awarded by
the Bishop, and under his seal directed to some expert in the civil Law to
summon a Jury, to enquire of these five points.

The points enquiorable in a jure patronatus be
1. Si Ecclesiam vacat and quomodo vacavit. 2. Quis Patronus ultime
presentavit. 3. Quis est verus and indubitatus Patronus. 4. Quis nunc debet
presentare ad Ecclesiam nunc vacantem. 5. De idonitate personarum presentat.
And the Jurors which are to be sworn upon this, are the one half of them
Clergy men, Ministers: and the other half be Lay men: And a Minister must be
the Foreman: And so they are to be sworn alternatim, One Minister, and then a
Layman, and ^o till twelve or above be sworn on the Jury, for (being but an
enquest of Office) above twelve may be of the Jury. I have seen sixteen of the
Jury, viz. eight Clerks, and eight Laymen; But, as they were divided in their
habit and profession, so they were divided in their opinions for their verdict,
Clerici contra La^cos, and Laici contra ^leric^s: I do find in this case that
the verdict which finds the special matter is superius patronatus, which is
effectual in that point, but whether this special matter leave it so at
large, (...)as that the Church remain litigious still or no, is a question of
some moment: It is clear by 21. 21 H. 6*
H. 6. That if two commissions be awarded, and the one finds for the one
party, and the other for the other party, here the Church remains litigious
still, so that the Bishop may well refuse them both: but before the jure
patronatus awarded, if it had bin his chance to have taken the wrong clark, and
have refused the other which had right the Bishop had then been a disturber,
quod nota pro different. But here is a special verdict which in judgment of
the Law, is found for him that has right; Then, whether the Bishop (at his
peril) ought to take notice of the Law in this case, I hold it very
disputable: But yet, because he is Judge in that case, I do think it is at his
peril to know the Law, and to present a right person upon the penalty of being
a disturber: And I have observed it in all enquiries of office, a verdict at
large might be given by the Jury super veritatem facti, as in a Mandamus, and
Diem clausit extremum, and so in this case; For, here be no issues joined as in
oother Trials be, for there the verdict must be according to the point of the
issue; but in commissions awarded ex officio, the enquiry may be, and ought to
be, as large and special as the commission is.

But whether the particular finding of the disabilities of the Clerks by the
Jury, be within the said five points of the commission, is now to be handled;
And therefore first concerning the clark of Monsieur Avidus, where the Jury
finds he had a former Benefice, whether that be a sufficient cause to disable
the Clark, 14 H. 7
or not, I find by 14 H. 7. fol. 28. that it is no sufficient cause for the
Bishop to refuse the clark because he had a former Benefice, Hollands case. Co.
4. 10. E. 3.
yet it appears in Hollands case, and in 10. E. 3. 1. Parnings opinion, that
by the acceptance of a second Benefice the Clark may be deprived of both by the
spiritual Law: And then in Sp^cots case in Seigniour Cooks 5. Sp^cots case.
rep. fol. 58. It was resolved, that in all cases which be sufficient causes to
deprive a clark, they be sufficient for, the Bishop to refuse the clark; So
that ex consequenti, It follows, that if it be a sufficient cause of
deprivation, because the clark had a former Benefice, then by Specots case, it
a good cause of refusal: And this is within the 5th Article de idonitate
personarum, inquiorable by the said commission: But for my own opinion, if that
Monsieur Avidus had right to the presentment, I should have held the having of
a former Benefice, to be a sufficient cause to refuse his clark, because (at
the least) the clark is deprivable for it, for the last Benefice, if not for
the first also and even as one which has a wife and takes a second, Fitzh: N.
b. fol. 34. l.
he is by the Law to be divorced from them. I do not in any sort bear with
pluralities, but because it is against the Law civil; I therefore would gladly
be resolved by some honest, single-beneficed Divine, whether it be not in some
sort against the Law of God, and then I should more resolutely have delivered
my opinion against him.

But to pass this matter over, I must now enter into the causes, which be, and
be not, in Law sufficient to refuse a clark presented.

If a clark be criminosus, then he may be refused, as if he be prejured; 38. E.
3. 3.
as it appears in 38. E. 3. 3. although he were not convict of the offense;
quod dubito, because in that case, he confessed himself to be perjured, before
the Bishop upon his examination; which was in effect a conviction, being in a
cause Ecclesiastical, wherein the Bishop was Judge.

Occasion of a man is a cause to refuse a clark, for that is crimen by the same
book, Hollands case.
by Hollands case, in the fourth Rep. of Seigniour Cook.

Bastardy, Villeinage and Nonage, be causes to refuse a clark, and herewithall
agrees* 5. H. 7. 19. 5. H. 7.
Kebl^, in Specots case aforesaid.

If the presented be a Schhismatick, it is a sufficient cause to refuse the
clark; And I have observed that the difference between a Schismatic, and an
Heretic, is this, that a Schismatic differs from us in manner, the Heretic
in matter of Religion.

To refuse an Heretic or a Papisticall clark in my opinion be sufficient
causes; For, for these offenses the clark is deprivable.

So is nonability a sufficient cause, 5. R. 2.
and to be illiterate by 5. R. 2. and Specots case: For the Statute of Articuli
Cleri* cap. 13. is, que idonitatem presentati, ad beneficium pertinet ad
Iudicem Ecclesiasticum ut propter defectum scientie and aliarum causarum
rationabilium. So that Sir Ignoramus is disabled by Act of Parliament, and he
being found by a Jury of clarks to be egregie illiteratus, I shall so hold him
still till he shall improve his Learning better: (...) case 114.
In little Broke fol. 114. I find a case, that where a man is attaint of
Heresy, or that he is a Jew or Turk, he cannot have his clergy, wherein I
do conclude, that these be sufficient causes to refuse a clark: But I do not
mean to include Sir Ignoramus in that case, to make it questionable whether he
could have his clergy, because (as I have heard) the grand Inquest already at
Newgate, did in favorem inscientie sue, grant him the benefit of his name, and
indorsed upon the indictment Ignoramus, and so was discharged.

But, 9 Eliz.
to proceed, in 9. Eliz. in Dyer, a Bishop refused a clark, for that he was a
haunter of Tavernes, and unlawful games: and was taken for a disturber; yet I
shall never commend that Patron that shall make choice of a drunken clark.

I hold it a sufficient cause to refuse a clark, which has committed Simony, 8
Acts.
because the Apostles Peter and Paul pronounced sentence, and in the 8th of
Acts against that offense, and the offender therein. So that my opinion
concerning B. and Sir Ignoramus two of the conformed clarks does appear.

But now the matter of greater difficulty is, whether the offense in the woman
Patroness, because she was a Schismaticke were a good cause to refuse her
clark or not For although she was to be censured an ill member of the church,
yet if her clark were a competent person as he was (for ought that appears to
the contrary) in my case, I then do think, that the Bishop could in no sort
justly refuse him: But I am of opinion, that in some cases the offense of the
Patron shall be a cause sufficient to refuse his clark, 15 H. 7.
as in 15. H. 7. where the Bishop refused the clark, because the Patron was
excommunicate, and had so remained forty days: For there (by the Law) no man
under pain of Excommunication could communicate with him: But I am of opinion
that in cases where the Patron is disabled in the point of Patronage, 3 H. 5. 3.
that there his clarke may be refused; As, if he be outlawed, 14 H. 6. 56
for then the King ought to have the Presentment. So where three joyntenants
be, and they vary in presentment, here the parties have not presented according
to their interest, and therefore the Bishop may refuse their clerks. So (I
take it) if I. S. present, and it appear to the Bishop that he have no right
to the presentment; The Bishop may refuse his clark; And because this kind of
Learning comes often in practice, and yet is difficult; I shall therefore set
down two or three cases to instruct a Bishop now and then how to get a laps by
a strain of wit; For I am of opinion (at this time) that if the Presentor have
no right, the Bishop may refuse his Clarke, and in a quare impedit he may well
excuse himself, and may (in some sort) plead in chief to the right of the
patronage: And this opinion I do both gather and maintain by the cases
ensuing, and that is by 5. H. 7. fol. 34. where in a quare impedit, brought
against the Bishop, 5. H. 7.
the plaintiff declared that he was seized of the advowson in Fee, and
presented on E. who was received, instituted and inducted: and that after, the
church became void by the death of E. and remained void by the space of 6.
months, and the defendant collated C. who was inducted thereunto, and after,
the said church became void by the death of C. And that therefore now it
appertains to him to present, and the defendant did disturb him: The defendant
pleaded, that one I. S. did present the said C. unto him as ordinary, and he
did admit him, and he was instituted and inducted into the church at the
presentment of the same, I. S. and traversed, Absque hoc, that C. was collated
by him. And this plea by the better opinion of the book was good, and yet it
does entitle I. S. by the presentment which was by disturbance, and did disable
the Plaintiff thereby: And thus the plaintiff is disabled by the plea of the
Bishop in point of right.

And, 22. H. 6.
In 22. H. 6 fol. 28. Sir John Denhams case, which is, that one brought a Quare
imp. against the Bishop and one R. Chanon of St. Needs and declared that W. his
Father was seized in fee of the Manor of Hatland, to the which the advowson of
the Abbathy of St. Needs was appendent, and that the Abbey* voyded by the death
of A. and his Father presented B. who was admitted, instituted and inducted at
his presentation, and that his Father dyed, whereby the manor and advowson
descended to the Plaintiff as next Heir, and that the Abbey became void by
the death of B. and so it belongs to him to present, and he presented his
covenable Clark to the Bishop defendent, and he refused him.

The Bishop pleaded that the Abbey of Saint Needs, time out of memory, had been
a House of Abbot Prior and covent, and that the Prior and covent have used,
when the Abbey became void, to elect one to be Abbot, and to present him to the
Bishop, and if he found him a covenable clark* then he received him, and caused
him to be installed: And he said, that the Abbey became void, and the Prior and
Covent did elect the other defendant and presented him to the Defendant the
Bishop, and he found him covenable, by reason whereof, he admitted of him and
caused him to be installed, and so claims nothing but as Ordinary: and by the
direction of the Court he traversed the appendancy, which is an excellent case
for my purpose: For hereby it appears that the Bishop pleaded an Issuable plea
to the Droit of the church.

And there is another case in 13. 13. H. 7.
H. 7. fol the 18. where the Lord Hastings, and the Lady Mary his Wife, brought
a quare Imp. against Sir Walter Hungerford, and declared how Mompesson and
others were seized of the advowson in gross to the use of the Plaintiffs, and
they being so thereof seized, granted the Adowson to R. who regraunted the
same to them, and shows a presentment, and that the church became void etc.
now apperteineth for them to present, and they presented their Clark, And the
Bishop one of the Defendants, refused to rereceive him: The patron, the Bishop,
and the Incumbent, joined in a plea, and pleaded and set forth, that Mompesson,
and his other co-Feoffees were, and stood seized of the Advowson to the use of
Sir Walter Hungerford one of the Defendants, and of his Heirs Males of his
body, and he presented, Absque hoc, that the said Mompesson and other his
Co-feoffees were seized to the use of the Plaintiffs: which Plea (no doubt) was
a good Plea for the Patron, and also for the inducted incumbent, since the
statute of 25. 25. E. 3
E. 3. Cap. 7. And I suppose that the Ordinary has such an interest in the
Church, as that he may also plead thereunto, For, (as it appears) the Patron
and Ordinary in the vacancy may actually charge the church, with a perpetual
rent-charg, but not with annuity (as I take it.) And althoughsome have held
before me, that he shall be but in case as a dissei for which can plead no plea
to the tenancy, 26. Ass.
as 26. Assis. 49. and 35 H. 35. H. 6.
6. 13. is The reason there is, because he is taken in the Law to have no
interest in the tennancy: but an Ordinary surely has some interest in the
Church, considering he and the Patron may charg the Church in the time of
Uacation, and he shall set Clark therein if a lapss come: yet I am of opinion,
that if I. S. disseise I. D. of a Manor, to the which the Advowson of L. is
belonging, that if I. S. present to that Church, the Bishop cannot (upon
penalty to be taken a disturber) refuse the Clarke of I. S. unless that I D.
do also present. for then he ought to receive his Clarke; and my reason is,
because I. S. had right to the Advowson against all others but against the
Disseisee, by reason of the possession, which is sufficient to close the hands
of the Ordinary.

These cases I have put purposely to maintain the title of the Bishop, because
I hold, that the refusal of the Clarke of the Feme Schismatique, is not any
sufficient cause, but that she failed in point of right, which by these cases,
is proved, that, the Ordinary might plead and justify against her.

But, to proceed a little further in this learning, It is requisite for me to
declare, how and in what manner these causes of refusals ought to be shown by
the Bishop, and how and before whom they shall be tried, Specots casc.
It is plain by Specotts case aforesaid, that, for the Bishop to excuse
himself in a quare imp: for refusing of a Clarke, quia fuit Schismaticus
inveteratus was no sufficient cause, but he ought to have shown in q' o and
quomodo: 9. Eliz Dyer.
and so by 9. of Eliz. in Dyer aforesaid, that the Clarke was Criminosus,
without showing certainly, in what, was insufficiently pleaded, and the reason
is, because the Patron may take issue thereupon: and if it be in cases of
Schism, Heresy, or other offenses Ecclesiastical, the issue shall be tried by
the ArchBishop of the Province, And this I have observed out of 39. 39 E. 3.
E 3. 1. and 40. E. 3. 20. Where, a clark was refused by reason of nonability
and tried by the garden of the spiritualities Sede vacant Archiep: 40. E 3^ 20.
But if the Clarke had been dead it should have been tried per patriam: 5. ^. 2.
and by 5. ^. 2. A clark was deprived by sentence given at Rome, because he was
a miscreant, and that was tried per patriam, because the Judges could not write
to any to try that issue: So, Outlawry, death of a man, and perjury, in a
temporal cause shall be tried by Jury, but perjury in an Ecclesiastical cause
shall be tried by the Bishop, 38. E. 3
ut constat, per 38. E. 3. 3.

Let these cases suffice for this matter, because I would not be more tedious
then my case does afford me occasion.

Yet because, some of the Gentlemen of the Bench, and especially those of
Lincolnes-Inne, have argued much against the Bishops Title, because he refused
B. the Clark of Monsieur Avidus, by reason he had a former benefice, and Sir
Ignoramus because he was illiterate; and gave no notice thereof to the Patrons
which presented them: But I shall give them a full answer thereunto; which is,
First by the book of That if the Bishop refuse a Clark for nonability of
literature, if the Patron be a spiritual man which presented him, the Bishop
need not to give him notice thereof: contrary; if the Patron thereof be a
Layman: And the University is a learned Corporation which can of themselves, as
well take notice of the learning of the Clark, as of his person, which I take
to be a sufficient answer to Sir Ignoramus and his Patron: And the next reason
shall extend to all the Clarks and Patrons also in my case (except the King and
his Clark) and that I ground upon the said books of 22: 22. H. 6.
H. 6. 8. 34. H. 6. which is, that where diverse persons do present severally
their Clarks to the Bishop, 34. H. 6.
and he awardeth a Iure patronatus which is not determined, but by reason
thereof, the 6. months pass, (as in our case,) yet in a quare impedit, it
shall be a sufficient plea, for him, to plead that the Church was litigious by
reason of the several clarks presented and so remained until the 6 months
were passed, whereby he collated his clark: And this shall be a good plea
without setting forth the proceedings in the Iure patronatus, and the spesciall
verdict thereupon given.

So that I hope those Gentlemen which have argued for Monsieur plurality, and
for Sir Ignoramus, will rest satisfied with this answer, till I come near the
end of my case, and then I hope I shall more fully resolve them, that the Law
is against their Clyents, howsoever the exceptions were wittily and pertinently
taken; and so, now I intend to proceed to the handling of the 8 point of my
case.

The eight point of my case, 8 Point.
is, whether the contract which E. made with Sir Simon Magus* to further his
institution be such a simony as shall cause E. if he had come in upon a good
title to forfeit the Church as also to cause the said Sir Simon to loose his,
presentation hac vice, and to forfeit the same to the crown or not, 31. Eliz.
which is grounded upon the Statute of 31. Eliz.

But this Statute seems plainly to distinguish betwixt Simony given; or
contracted for, for and concerning the presentment and where it is concerning
the Institution and Induction, for where the Patron contracteth to have or take
for the presentation, he loses his presentment, and it is forfeit to the
crown: But if the Clark contract, or give any thing for to further his
Institution, he does only loose the preferment of that Church, and the Patron
is to have the presentation, and does not forfeit it for the abuse of his
Clark: I grant, that Simonicall contracts are detestable, before God and man,
yet being so penal an offense; It is fit it should be well proved, ere the
offender be punished: And I cannot perceive but that the presentment stood
clear without any touch of Simony.

And although Sir Simon was particeps criminis, yet the crimen was only in the
contracting for, and concerning the Institution and not concerning the
presentation, and if it were agreed colourably before the presentation that Sir
Simon should have nor take any thing for the presentation, but only to further
the Institution, then I should take this concerning a Simony against Sir Simon
upon this statute, for many of the Gentlemen which argued the case, doubted,
Sir Simon intended to defraud the Statute, fearing (because he was a branch
sprung from so bad a Tree) he could bring forth no better fruit.

Therefore I will defend his act no further, but judging upon matters no
otherwise then I see, I cannot find any just cause, in Law to entitle the King
to the presentation, nor to excuse Sir Simon of his unlawful contract
concerning the institution, whereby the Clark did forfeit his preferment to the
benefice; If so be that the party, with whom the Clark did contract, had had
power in the Institution as Sir Simon had not, yet to further it with the
Archdeacon may be Simony.

But now all this serves well for the Eslie, 9. Point.
to maintain his title by the lapse: for seeing the Advowson passed from the
Grauntor, by his grant, and then the University could not have it by his
recusancy, nor the woman, because if it had not passed, yet it was settled in
the Husband, and if it were well transferred away by him, then it vested in the
Grauntee, and that the multitude of presentiments made the Church litigious,
even against him that had the very right; and that there was no such simony in
the case as might forfeit the presentment to the King, then were the Bishops
title, by lapse the best; but yet because I intend to bid them all to one self
banquet, I mean they shall all taste of the like cheer; And therefore I
plainly do hold, the Eslie, which is the Bishop Elect, to have no right nor
title to collate by lapse; and the reason is, because he is not sacred, and so
wants that perfection which a Bishop ought to have, that is, to collate to a
Benefice.

And in the handling of this point, I must ground my argument upon the statute
of 25. H. 8. cap 20. Whereby I do gather that five things are requisite to the
perfection of a Bishop.

1. The first is a Conge de Eslier, directed from the King to the Deane and
Chapter by Letters patents, giving them leave thereby, to proceed to the
Election of a Bishop.

2ly, The Election of the deane and chapter, which is pro forma tantum, for
they are directed, whom they must choose.

3ly Then The certifying of their Election, and the mandate directed to the
Archbishop and two other Bishops, to proceed to consecration.

4ly The consecration, by the which he received the pall, Benediction, and
Church ceremonies, which enabled him in rebus spirituabitus, and made him
capable thereof.

5ly Instaltation and inthronization, by the which he was entitled to the
temporalties of his Bishopric, and thereby was enabled to sue the same out of
the Kings hands; by the which it appears, that, till consecration, he is not
capable of the spiritualities, and then, Ex consequenti, it follows, that all
the said patrons were mistaken, to present their clarks to the wrong Ordinary;
and the Bishop Elect was somewhat too hasty to take upon him power in those
cases, to play the part of a perfect Ordinary before he was a consecrated
Bishop. And for the case put in Fitzh. F. N. B. 2.
Not. Br. Fol. 2. E. which is, That if in temps of vacation, and after such
time as there is a Bishop elect, a man have cause to sue a writ of right, he
may have it directed to the bailiffs of the elect Bishop; which I do not think
to be law, under favor of that Book, because, till he be installed, he has no
possession of his temporalties, nor then neither till he have sued the same out
of the Kings hands, as by common experience is manifest. And the suing of a
writ of right concerns his temporal estate, and it appears in Fitzh. Not.
Br. Fol. 169 that till a Bishop be sacred he cannot have a writ, F. N. B. 169.
De restitutione temporalium. And therefore before then I suppose he has not
any power in his temporalities, nor in the spiritualities till his consecration
be finished. And by 21 E. 21. E. 3.
3. 39. and 40. That from the consecration the Bishop shall have his
temporalities and not before, and from thence he shall in writs and commissions
be named Bishop; and before he shall only be named the Elect Bishop,
Notwithstanding, In

case in Co. 8. Trollopps case 69. it is said, that a Bishop Elect, before he
be sacred, may certify an excommunication; which may be law, because the
certification is only a ministerial act; but I suppose he cannot pronounce
sentance of excommunication. which is a juditiall act: For therein it is
requisite, he should be a Bishop sacred though not inthorized.

So that now that I have destroyed the title of Monsieur Avidus because I hold
the advowson passed away to the grauntee Sir Simon Magus; and hereby also the
pretended title of the University falls to the ground, because the Grant was
made before the Grauntor became a Recusant, when he stood Rectus in Ecclesia,
and the title of the Feme was not sufficient to vest this avoydance in her,
because it fell in the life time of her husband and so was lawfully passed away
to the Grauntee, and the title of the King fails in point of Simony, and that
Sir Simon presented to a wrong person, because the Bishop was not sacred, and
if it were made to a right Bishop, yet the church was litigious and so remained
6 months and that the lapse could not apperteine to the Bishop elect, for the
causes and reasons aforesaid.

Therefore, it appears, that not any of the persons in the case have right to
the said presentment:

Then, 10 point.
Now for the conclusion of my last point; It comes most fitly to be shown,
what person has the best right thereunto.

And that (I hold) is the garden of the spiritualities, which most commonly is
the Dean and Chapter, during the vacancy of the Bishopric, because the Bishop
is to present by Lapss, ratione Spiritualium.

But, If a Bishop have an Advowson belonging to a Manor, or to his
temporalities, which voydeth during the vacancy, there the King shall have the
presentation, for that comes to him, ratione temporalium, as it appears in
Fitzh Not. Br. fol. 34. K. F. N. B. 34.
44. E. 3. 3. 50. E. 3. 25. which be in the Kings hands. But in 31 H. 44. E. 3.
3.
fol. 16, during the vacancy of a Bishop; the garden of the spiritualities
shall have the spiritualities, 50. E. 3. 25
and he shall have the lapse to whom the presentment ought to be made, (...) H.
6. 10
which is, The garden of the spiritualties.

And so I do conclude against all the said parties, and am of opinion that the
garden of the spiritualities ought to have the presentment of the Church, hac
vice, by the lapse.

Finis, Fustis, Funis,
Sir JGNORAMVS.


