Charles R.

HIs Majesty in his princely compassion and very tender care, taking into
consideration the distressed condition of many his good Subjects, whom the late
dreadful and dismal fire has made destitute of habitations, and exposed to
many exigencies and necessities; For present remedy and redress whereof, his
majesty, intending to give further testimony and evidences of his grace and
favor toward them as occasion shall arise, has thought fit to declare and
publish his royal pleasure, That as great proportions of bread and all other
provisions as can possibly be furnished, shall be daily and constantly brought,
not only to the Markets formerly in use; but also to such Markets as by his
Majesty's late Order and Declaration to the Lord Mayor and Sherifs of London
and Middlesex have been appointed and orained, viz. Clerkenwell, Islington,
Finsbury-fields, Mile-end-Green, and Ratclif: his majesty being sensible that
this will be for the benefit also of the Towns and Places adjoining; as being
the best expedient to prevent the resort of such persons thereunto as may
pilfer and disturb them. And whereas also diverse of the said distressed persons
have saved and preserved their Goods, which nevertheless they know not how to
dispose of: It is his majesty's pleasure, That all Churches, Chapels, Schools,
and other like Public Places, shall be free and open to receive the said
Goods, when they shall be brought to be there laid. And all Justices of the
Peace within the several Counties of middlesex, Essex, and Surry, are to see
the same to be done accordingly. And likewise that all Cities and Towns
whatsoever shall without any contradiction receive the said distressed persons,
and permit them the free exercise of their manual Trades; his majesty resolving
and promising, that when the present exigent shall be passed over, he will take
such Care and Order, that the said persons shall be no burden to their Towns
or Parishes. And it is his majesty's Pleasure, That this his Declaration be
forthwith published, not only by the Sherifs of London and middlesex, but also
by all other Sherifs, mayors* and other Chief Officers in their respective
Precincts and Limits, and by the Constables in every Parish. And of this his
majesty's pleasure all persons concerned are to take notice, and thereunto to
give due obedience to the utmost of their power, as they will answer the
contrary at their peril.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, this Fifth Day of September, in the
Eighteenth year of Our Reign, One thousand six hundred sixty six.
London, Printed by John Fill and Christopher Farker, printers to the Kings
most excellent majesty.


