His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, At their
Prorogation, On Wednesday the 9th of June, 1675.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1675.

His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, June 9. 1675.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Think I have given sufficient Evidence to the World, that I have not been
wanting on My part in My Endeavors to procure the full satisfaction of all my
Subjects, in the matters both of Religion and Property. I have not only
invited you to those Considerations at Our first Meeting, but I have been
careful through this whole Session, that no Concern of My Own should divert you
from them.

Besides, as I had only designed the matter of it to be the procuring of good
Laws, so, for the gaining of them, I have already waited much longer than I
intended, and should have been contented still to have continued My
Expectation, had there any hopes remained of a good Conclusion: But I must
confess the ill designs of Our Enemies have been too prevalent against those
good ones I had proposed to My Self, in behalf of My People: And those unhappy
differences between My Two Houses are grown to such an height, that I find no
possible means of putting an end to them, but by a Prorogation. It is with
great unwillingness that I make use of this Expedient, having always intended
an Adjournment for the preserving of such Bills as were unfinished: But my
hopes are, that, by this means, the present Occasion of Differences being taken
away, you will be so careful hereafter of the Public, as not to seek new
ones, nor to revive the old.

I intend to meet you here again in Winter, and have directed My Lord Keeper to
Prorogue you till the Thirteenth of October next.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1675.


