A Pindarique ODE, ON THE BIRTH Of the YOUNG PRINCE OF WALES.

By CALEB CALL, Gent.

Licensed July 9th. 1688.

R. P.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1688.

A PINDARIQUE ODE, On the BIRTH of the Young PRINCE.
I.
IT IS come, the Mighty Blessing's come,
Heaven heard the Prayers of our Isle:
And now both Heaven and Earth-together Smile,
And sent the beneficial Blessing home.
Some Angel with Triumphant Wings,
To the whole Nation Joyful Requiems sings,
And to far distant Shores the Message brings.
Happy those Lands whose Sacred Monarchs are
The Favorites of Heavens peculiar Care:
All things on Earth do to their Scepters bow,
And Gods above smile on their Wills below!
Some mighty business must (say they) be done,
We must our Choicest Moulds prepare
To cast some Demi-God, some wondrous Son
To be (almost like Jove) three Kingdoms Heir.
A Princely HERO must be Born
The Ancient British Line to adorn,
To prop and spread the Royal Name;
In Lands remote, to advance its Fame
As far as Ganges is beyond the Them.
May peaceful thoughts Lodge in the Mothers Breast,
Thoughts Still, and Calm, as an Helcyons Nest,
And when her Eyes her Princely Babe shall View,
May all surprising Joys ensue;
Joys more than humane, and for ever New.
II.
May all the auspicious marks of Gallantry
Imprinted on his Royal Outside be;
Then, let a beautiful, and comely Grace,
Shine through each Feature of his Face,
To manifest he is more than humane Race:
A sweet, yet a Majestic Mien,
That, as a Prince, his Subjects should outshine;
So should his make, and shape be all Divine:
Minevva too, shall shower down
Her Blessing on his budding Crown,
To his sweet Looks she shall impart
A Valiant and Heroic Heart,
That at the Face of Danger scorns to start:
Renowned and famous shall he be,
For Arts of Arms, and Chivalry:
His Fathers Banners he shall soon advance,
With thundering music and a martial Dance,
Fearing no frowns, nor need the help of chance.
III.
He like another Hercules with ease
To death, shall all unnatural Serpents squeeze;
In vain they hiss, in vain they Roar;
Their Venom they shall shed no more;
His Conquering Arm shall soon subdue
Teckelite Turks, and homebred Jews,
Such as our Great forefathers never knew.
In his victorious Ensigns shall he wear
The Cross, the Sacred Badge of Christendom,
The Cross, that all our Battles past has won,
The Earnest of our Victories to come.
Worse Dragons shall that Mystic Trophee quell,
Than by St. George e're fell,
Passions, and Lusts, and Sparks of Hell,
That against the Nobler Part Rebel.
His Glory like the unwearied Sun;
From Pole to Pole shall Run:
And Tributary Kings shall Come,
With Gold, and Incense, and Arabian Gum,
And to his Royal Scepter bow,
And dazzled with his Glory, Vow;
They n'ere beheld a Prince so rare,
So like the Second James for War,
For Wisdom James the First, the Second Solomon.
IV.
Who then can say that Wonders are no more,
And Miracles long since given over;
What Chains of Wonders have we seen,
What Miracles have lately been
On that for ever Lamentable Day
When at the stake three helpless Kingdoms lay,
When the whole Isle with storms was tossed,
When it the best of Kings, and Fathers lost,
What Plagues, what Desolation did ensue,
What dire confusions did we view!
Triumphant Babel then bore sway,
Men knew not how, nor whom to obey.
How did the trembling Nation Lie,
In a Convulsive Agony,
Quite senceless, and about to expire?
And it had died, had not the Royal Line
Been kept alive by Power Divine,
And Phaenix-Charles and James Rofe from their Fathers Pyre.
V.
When Sons of Belial do combine
In some tremendous black design,
Deeper than Hell, and think to overthrow
Kings, and Kingdoms at a blow;
Heaven then prepares a Countermine:
A sure, though unexpected providence
Hovering waits for their Defense,
The happy Monument Newmarket stands,
A Sacred, and Prophetic Flame!
Traitors had Royal Blood prepared,
But Heaven the Royal Victim spared;
Mercy their Cursed Design o'recame,
Heaven spared the Isaac and prepared a Ram.
The guiltless Town in ashes lies
And falls the unthought on Sacrifice;
VI.
So Heaven the same Face of Mercy wore.
When on the treacherous Leman-Our,
The unhappy Gloucester struck,
Long did she with the waves contend,
But they proved Victors in the end:
The Mariners distracted Cries
Rend the Melancholy Skies:
In have their trembling knees they bend,
And hearty, tho confused Prayers send
For some Angelick friend
The Royal Cargo to defend,
Heaven heard,
And though each Object horror showed,
Great James with a Celestial Guard,
Bold and undaunted stood
And braved the fury of the flood:
Troops of Hero's by his side,
Like lesser Stars dropped down and died,
Whiles he a Tear or two let fall
To mourn, and to Enrich their Funeral.
VII.
Return my Muse, and once more strike thy Lyre,
Kindle a soft, and peaceful fire,
Let Plots and dangers for a while retire:
Welcome Illustrious Infant; now we View
The Joy of Men, and Angels too;
Welcome as is to Misers wealth,
Or to despairing Sinners health,
As Life to men raised from the Dead,
As Heaven to a Soul just fled.
How much admired shall Albion be,
When other Nations shall her blessing see!
What props are to the Royal Cedar reared,
To render it at once beloved and feared!
No more shall sactious discords sway,
Nor Point to Anarchy the unhappy way;
Peace shall her beauteous face put on,
And Unity once more ascend the Throne;
Since all are blessings in such a Prince as he,
May all in an united Love agree;
Oh may the happy Reformation come,
That those that would exclude the Father, now may love the Son.
FINIS.

