C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
His Majesty's Declaration.
WHereas upon Complaint of the several Injuries, Affronts and Spoils done by
the East and West-India-Companies, and other the Subjects of the United
Provinces, unto and upon the Ships, Goods and Persons of Our Subjects, to their
grievous Damages, and amounting to Vast Sums; Instead of Reparation and
Satisfaction which has been by Us frequently demanded, We found that Orders
had been given to de Ruyter not only to abandon the Consortship against the
Pirates of the Mediterranean Seas (to which the States General had invited Us)
but also to use all Acts of Depredation and Hostility against Our Subjects in
Africa.

We thereupon gave Order for the deteining of the Ships belonging to the States
of the United Provinces, their Subjects and Inhabitants; yet notwithstanding,
We did not give any Commission for Letters of Marque, nor were there any
Proceedings against the Ships detained, until we had a clear and undeniable
Evidence that de Ruyter had put the said Orders in Execution, by seizing
several of Our Subjects Ships and Goods.

But now since finding by these fresh Injuries and Actings of theirs, and the
intelligence We have had of their great Preparations for War, and their
Granting of Letters of Marque against Our People, that both Our Forbearance,
and the other Remedies We have used to bring them to a compliance with Us, have
proved ineffectual, and that they are Resolved what they have done by Wrong, to
maintain by Arms and War against Us;

We have thought fit, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Declare,
and do hereby Declare to all the World, That the said States are the
Aggressors, and that they ought in Justice to be so looked upon by all Men; so
that as well Our Fleets and Ships, as also all other Ships and Vessels that
shall be Commissionated by Letters of Marque from Our dear Brother the Duke of
York, Lord High Admiral of England, shall and may lawfully fight with, subdue,
seize, and take all Ships, Vessels and Goods belonging to the said States of
the United Provinces, or any of their subjects or Inhabitants, within any their
Territories.

And We do hereby Command, as well all Our Own Subjects, as advertise all other
persons, of what Nation soever, not to transport or carry any Soldiers, Arms,
Powder, Ammunition, or any other Contraband Goods, to any of the Territories,
Lands, Plantations or Countries of the said States of the United Provinces;
Declaring, That whatsoever Ship or Vessel shall be met withal, Transporting or
carrying any Soldiers, Arms, Powder, Ammunition, or other Contraband Goods, to
any of the Territories. Lands, Plantations or Countries of the said States of
the United Provinces, the same being taken, shall be Condemned as good and
lawful Prize.

And We do further Declare, That whatsoever Ship or Vessel, of what Nation
soever, shall be met withal, having any Goods, Merchandises, or any number of
Persons in her belonging to the said States of the United Provinces, or any of
their Subjects or Inhabitants, the whole, being taken, shall be adjudged as
good and lawful Prize. As likewise all Goods and Merchandises, of what Nation
soever, whether of Our Own, or of Foreigners, that shall be Laden aboard any
Ship or Vessel, that shall belong to States of the United Provinces, or any of
their Subjects, or any inhabiting with them, and shall be taken, the whole
shall be Condemned as good and lawful Prize; Except the said Ship or Vessel has
Ours, or Our dear Brothers Letters of Safe Conduct granted to them.

And to the end that due Intimation and Publication of this Our Declaration may
be made, and Public Notice thereof be taken; It is our Will Pleasure, That
this Our present Declaration shall be published in due and usual Form.

At the Court at Whitehall, February 22. 1664.
Richard Brown, Clerk of the Council.
London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.


