THE READING OF That Famous and Learned Gentleman, Robert Callis Esquire Sergeant
at Law, Upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. Cap. 5. OF SEWERS: As it was delivered by
him at Gray's Inn, in AUGUST, 1622.

Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus supportari debet. LONDON: Printed for William
Leak, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Crown in Fleetstreet,
between the Temple-Gates, MDCXLVII.

READER,
AMongst other Decays in the Commonwealth, those of Bridges, Calceys, Havens
and Ports are not of the least Consideration, as the Gates that open and let in
Commerce, and the ways that convey and lead it through the Kingdom: And it
seemed to me to be of so Public a Necessity, that I did conceive this Learned
Piece upon the Laws of Sewers would come seasonably abroad, and find an
Entertainment suitable to the usefulness of it at this time, when the Country
is almost become Impassable by the late Troubles; wherein the endeavor was more
to be secured at home from them that were abroad, then to Traffic with them.
If you can sit down to a cold Reading, here is one served out to you at my
cost; all that I shall add to your Cheer is, That I had public allowance to
make the Invitation: If the Printer have committed Infanticidium, lay the blame
upon him; but if he have delivered the press of it so imperfectly, that it will
be only fit to move Pity, and to Beg withal, the misfortune is mine, and I
must Keep it.

Farewell.
The chiefest matters in this Book, as they lie disposed in each days work of
the Reading.
In the first Lecture,
THe Readers grave Speech. The Causes wherefore he read on this Statute.
Antiquity of the Laws of Sewers. The Extent of this Law. The necessary use of
this Law. The Division of this Law. The first Case put for tbe first Lecture.
The Points of the first Case. The Readers Argument upon the first Case. The
Readers Argument upon this Statute and Commission. The Definition of Islands,
etc. What grounds shall be said to be left by the Sea. The Readers Tenets
thereupon. The Shore what. Seacoasts what. Creeks what. Arm of the Sea what.
Diversity between a Shore, Coast and Creek. Bay, Fleet and Mere, what. A Port
what. Diversity between Creek, Haven and Port. Diversity between grounds gained
and grounds left. The Conclusion of the Reader upon his first Lecture.
In the second Lecture,
What businesses on Land this Law does Defend, and what Offenses it Reformeth.
The Case for the second Lecture. The Points thereof both at the Common Law, and
on the Statute. The Argument on the second Case. Two Conceits of the Readers.
Bank what. Wall what. River what. The property of running waters, in whom. A
Sewer what. A Gutter what. Ditches, Pools, Ponds, what. Streams, Conduits,
Springs, what. Cases put by the Reader upon them. Bridges, and provision for
them. Calcey what- Goats, for what use. New Defenses. Arguments pro and con for
New Defenses. The Kings Councels Order. What View and Survey is. What may be
done by Officers of Sewers by Survey only. What may be done by Jury. What may
be done by their Discretion. The several degrees of Discretion. In what things
Commissioners are to be ruled by good Discretion. Nine several ways for keeping
and repairing Defenses, 1. Frontage. 2. Ownership. 3. Prescription. 4. Custom.
5. Tenure. 6. Covenant. 7. Vsus rei. 8. Township. 9. This Law of Sewers.
Whether one may be Taxed for Tithes by the Law of Sewers, or not. Whether a
Copyholder for his Copyhold, and a Lord for his Freehold of that Soil, shall be
assessed. Four tenets concerning Copyholders. What Lands and other things, and
what persons, and in what degree they are to be assessed toward Repairs by
this Law in this case. 1. High Mountainous grounds by Prescription Custom and
Tenure. 2. Dean and Chapter, etc. for an Annuity 3. For Common of Pischary in
Fens, etc. 4. For a Ferry. 5. For Herbage. 6. For free passage on a River.
Parks, Warrens, cum multis aliis. The large Extent of the word Tenement.
Charge on the Level by Commissioners of Sewers nine several ways. The Readers
Conclusion of the second Lecture.
In the third Lecture,
What Law is. The Case for the third Lecture. This Case divided into three
Points at the Common Law, and five upon the Statute. 1. Point, Whether an
Office may be Intailed, or not. 2. Whether it be an ordinary Intail or
franck-Mariage; and what things incident to franck-Mariage. 3. How a Bastard
may inherit Land.
The Sewers a Court of Justice. How Courts had their beginning. The Reasons
that Sewers are a Count. Imprisonment by Commissioners of Sewers. In what case
Commissioners may Imprison, Fine and Amerce. The qualities of a Fine.
Amerciaments what. A Distress, and the several kinds of it. In what place a
Distress may be taken. Whose goods may be distrained. Where property of Goods
is alterable without consent. Sale of Goods by the Law of Sewers. Whose Goods
may be sold by this Law. Where a Replevin lies, and where not. Cases
reconciled concerning Replevins. A perpetual charge upon Land. Sales of Lands.
For what cause Lands may be sold. What Lands are to be sold. What Persons and
Estates are bound hereby. To whom Lands may be decreed by this Law. Legal
proceedings, where Traversable, and where not. Whether the Laws of Sewers will
permit any Exemptions. The Readers Conclusion on the third Lecture.
In the fourth Lecture,
THree Points at the Common Law, and four upon the Statute. How a competent
Commissioner must be qualified; and if not, how punished. What qualities makes
a free Citizen a competent Commissioner. The Punishment the Roman Laws did
inflict upon Strangers. Exile described. Abjuration a legal Exile. What a man
Exiled forfeiteth. How many ways a Freeman of a City or Borough may be made.
What kinds of Habitation the Freeman should be of. What be, and what be not
valueable Substance. What Goods will enable one to be a Commissioner, and what
not. What are Hereditaments in this Law. An utter Barrister is a fit
Comissioner. Whether a Woman may be a competent Commissioner within this
Statute. An Infant above Fourteen, and under Twenty one years, a Commissioner.
Whether Laws and Ordinances made by a disabled Commissioner be void, or not.
Ten Impediments or Annoyances this Statute speaks of, viz. 1. Streams. 2.
Mills. 4. Bridges. 3. Ponds 5. Fishgarths. 6. Mildams. 7. Locks. 8.
Hebbingweres. 9. Hecks: and 10. Floodgates.
These Impediments and Annoyances discoursed of. To make a Stream Navigable.
The Readers Conclusion on the fourth Lecture.
In the fifth Lecture,
A Short Speech of the Readers. A brief Repetition what is handled in the four
former Lectures. Commissioners of Sewers have power to make, constitute and
ordain Laws, Ordinances and Decrees, and the same to amend, or make new. Things
considerable in making new Laws and Ordinances. A Law, Ordinance and Decree,
what they are, and their difference. Laws and Ordinances for sale of Lands, how
to be perfected, and in what manner. Repealing of Laws. What grounds to be
observed in Repealing of Laws. How far the power of Commissioners extends
therein. The Readers Conclusion of all his Labors.
Lectura prima.
MY most worthy Fellows and Companions of this noble and renowned Society, the
Hourglass of my puisne time is run, and I am now come to take possession of
your Readers place; wherein I must hazard to your censures the fortunes of my
inability: These Twenty and six years complete I have had continuance here, and
in that time I have only taken the measure and length of your Hall: And herein
I acknowledge Grayes-Inn to be the Patron of my best fortunes, and your selves
the best Companions of my forepast and present life. I made a question, when it
came to my turn to read, Whether I should turn therefrom or not, being then
troubled about Two things, Charge and Care, both which I put into a pair of
Scales, wherein I thought Charge weighed heavy and solid (for ibi ponebantur
solidi) Care notwithstanding had his equal weight with the other, and poised
the Scales even: Yet I considered the small Substance I had got came by my
Profession, I therefore took my self both in Credit and Conscience bound to
undertake this burdensome place, for the maintenance and preservation of the
honor of this house; and with that I put Charge and Care in one Scale, and
Resolution in the other, which scaled them both up. Twenty years likewise of my
last past time, I have in the practice of my Profession spent, but, I hope,
little consumed thereof; In which time I lanched forth my Ship (In profundum
maris) for a Voyage to the Sea, and now she is returned to your Shores,
furnished and ballist with Merchandise of several estimates: By my Ship I mean
my Statute which I read on, which be the Laws of Sewers; the Merchandise be the
weighty matters therein contained: By the Governors and Rulers of this Ship, I
mean the grave and prudent Commissioners who are put in charge and trust with
the execution of these Laws: By the Mariners, I intend the Officers of this
Law; the Merchants place I reserve unto my self: The Wares brought home be of
diverse sorts, some only fit for the Imperial Majesty of a King, and these be
Royal Prerogatives, showing forth their splendour like the Flower de Lice in the
Crown; others belong to high Nobility, and some be useful for the homely
Commonalty; the rest which shall remain, I have cast under Hatches for my last
days Mart, when I mean to make chaffer on them all. But though I seem to make
these Markets of my Legal Merchandise, yet I do not mean to set such Rates upon
them as Merchants use to do, which be all for (utile dulce) for I only set one
price upon all, which is your kind acceptance. Marvel not, I pray you, at
these my Sea-like salutations, for this day I am become god Neptunes Orator,
and I mean to display the power of his Empire; for my Statute, my Cases, and my
Argument, will all depend upon the Element of Water, over which, as Poets
feign, Neptune has chief predominance. Well, now my Ship is at shore, and I
have cast Anchor there, and to my great comfort I see many Chapmen attending
the Market, and therefore now presently I will unlock, and set open the closet
of my Store, which be contained in the fair Volumns of the Law, and especially
in that Law made and Enacted in the Parliament held in the 23. year of Hen. the
8. Chapt. 5. which is A general Act concerning the Commissioners of Sewers for
all the Realm of England.

The causes wherefore I made choice to read upon this Law, be five in number;
Viz.

Henry 8.

appears in the style of this Statute, and there termed, A general Act for all
the Realm of England.



Lincolnshire, and other Maritine places of this Kingdom, then this is.



And upon due consideration taken of all these Cases, I resolved to proceed in
the Exposition of this Statute, being made perpetual by the Statute of 3.
Edward 6. cap. 8.

And to speak something of the three first causes, I am of Antiquity of these
Laws.
Opinion for the Reasons and Authorities ensuing, That the Laws of Sewers have
been and be of great Antiquity, and have told over as much time and as many
years as any other Laws of this Realm have done: For as Mr. Cambden in his
Cambden.
Britannia says, Quod insula Britannia avida in mare omni ex part se
projecit; Therefore this Realm adjoining on every side upon the Sea, could not
be safe without those provident Laws made and used for the defense thereof.

And although it is said in Scripture, That Almighty God In Manasses Prayer
King of Judah.
has bound the Seas by the word of his Commandment, and had shut up the Deep,
and sealed it with his terrible and glorious Name; yet God, who bestowed
wisdom on man, it was his pleasure he should providently use it over the rest
of the Creatures, not giving way that he should be remiss or presumptuous in
any thing, which by his foresight or judgment might be prevented, helped and
relieved.

It is true, that at the Flood, Cum cateracta Coeli fuerint Genesis cap. 7.
operta, when the windows of Heaven were by Gods determinate will set open, and
that the Seas did Suum excedere modum, no power of man's hand could stay the
swallowing and devouring surges of the Seas and Waters; yet then
notwithstanding had God appointed that his Servant Noah and his Children, and
such Creatures as he appointed, should be preserved by the Ark, which was a
work of their own hands; Therefore the Laws of God and Nature have appointed
man to make provision for the necessary defense and safety of himself and of
his Country; And the Laws of this Realm, most of which have received their
primam essentiam from the Divine Laws of the Almighty, and have fetched their
Pedigree from the Law of Nature, have a principio been so predominant in this
Kingdom of England, that they have never been wanting at any time, to provide
for the safety thereof.

And if the Register be so ancient a Book as Sir Edward Cook in one of his
Epistles has there declared it to be, then it may give satisfaction in this
kind, that these Laws of Sewers were in these times of great iminency and
authority; For there I find two several Writs or Commissions of that nature,
The one authorizing certain persons to survey the defenses in the parts of
Holland in the County of Lincoln; The other for the viewing and surveying of
the Register in Oyer and Terminer.
surrounded grounds lying between the two Rivers Humber and Auckholin in the
said County of Lincoln; And the first of the said Commissions is set down
verbatim in Fitz. not. bre. fo. 113. Yet the first Statute which appears to us
Fitz. Not. bre. fol. 113.
in Print, wherein the frame of a Commission of Sewers is set down, is the
Statute of 6. Henry 6. Chapt. 5. Yet I make no question but the said
Commissions expressed in the Rigister, 6. H. 6. cap. 5.
and Fitz. na. bre. were in their forms long before Henry the 6. time; and that
the Statute of Hen. 6. adds some more power and strength thereto then was
before, having backed them with the power of the Parliament; and it is something
additional in matter, as it was in power, as by both the Commissions compared
together is apparent.

I do likewise find in the 38. Edw. 3. Lib. Ass. plac. 15. That 38. Ed. 3.
lib. Ass. pl. 15.
a Commission was awarded to inquire of Bridges, and of the repairs thereof,
which is a branch of these Laws: And Sir Edward Cook in his 10. Report in the
Case of the Isle of Ely, says, That the Kings of this Realm, before the making
of any Statute of Sewers, might grant Commissions for the surveying and
repairing of Walls, Banks and Rivers, and other defenses. And of the same
opinion is the books of Sir John Davies in his Irish Reports, in the Case of
the Royal Pischary of the Banne. And Sir Edward Cook has in Sir John Davies
Reports.
his first Case set the first Statute of Sewers to be in time the 9. H. 3.
which is in Magna Charta the first volumn of of Statutes, and the most ancient
that be extant in our 9. H. 3.
Laws.

By all which is manifest, that these Laws have been received into the
government of this Realm, in time as ancient as any other were; And I am the
rather herein confirmed, for that in the ancient Commission expressed in the
Register aforesaid, there be these words, That the King Ratione dignitatis suae
regiae ad providendum salvationi regni sui circumquaque fuit astrictus: Wherein
it is hereby made plain, That the King by the Tenure and Prerogative of His
Crown, was bound to see and foresee the safety of this Realm; and so this Law
is a Prerogative Law, and seems to be as ancient as any Laws of this Realm, and
all Prerogatives be without limitations of time; Neither can it be presumed,
that all or any Kings till the time of Hen. 6. were so improvident as to want
these Laws, without the which the Realm could not be defended from the violence
of that unmerciful enemy the Sea; wherein I do conclude, That these Laws of
Sewers be as ancient as any other Laws of this Kingdom be.

The extent of this Law.
For the extent of this Law, the Title of this Statute shows it, viz, A general
Act for granting Commissions of Sewers within the Realm, without any word of
Restraint, other then these (where need should require) And although Expounders
of the Laws be not tied to make the Title their Text, either for the body or
the bounds of it, yet it may serve to give some direction in the Exposition
thereof: But to make the Title to be the ground in the material Exposition of
the Law, may lead the Expositor many times into error: For in Stradling and
Morgans Case in Plo. Com. the Stradling and Morgan.
Title of the Statute was, For the true answering for the Revenues of the King,
and the words in the body did extend the same to the Receivers of Subjects; but
there the Judges and Expounders of that Law went with the Title in a Statute
made in 23. Eliz. the Title of the Statute was For Politic 23. Eliz.
Constitutions for the Navy; and in that Statute there was a new Fish day
provided, which no man would have looked for under such a Title.

And Lucian an ancient Greek Poet compiled a Book, and in the Frontispiece
thereof Entitled the same A Book of True Reports; where looking into it, there
was not any thing true therein: So it appears though in Acts and Books the
Titles and Styles may give help in the Exposition, and may serve as an Index or
Table to find out the matter, yet it is not fit to rely upon them, but that
they may be used or refused as occasion shall serve.

Howsoever there is better concord betwixt the Title and the Body of my
Statute, for the corpse of the Act perform as much as the Title promised,
whereby the Inland Countries of Notingham, Northampton, Huntington, Bedford and
the like, may have the use of this Statute as well as the Maritine Countries of
Lincoln, York, Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk, Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, Devon,
Cornwall, Gloucester, Chester and Lancashire, if not in all, yet in part, as
hereafter I shall make it appear in my second Lecture upon this Law.

And although both the Statute of 6. Hen. 8. and the Register, and Fitz. Not.
Brev. make all of them mention in those Commissions of the County of Lincoln
and of no other County, yet doubtless the Lawmakers and Judges of this Realm,
and the Expositors did intend then, and did extend them to all the Parts and
Counties of the Realm. And yet I take it, that the first Original and the chief
use of these Laws, was in the said Maritine Countries, which stood in most need
thereof, and especially Lincolnshire, where be the huge great and vast Fens and
Marshes: But yet notwithstanding they may serve generally for all the Realm of
England, as the extent of this Statute I read on has bounded them.

So herein my conclusion is, That the extent of this Statute is as large as the
Realm of England.

The necessary use of it.
From the Title I am now come to the Preamble of this Statute, where the words
be very solid and weighty; that is, That the King nothing earthly so highly
weighing as the advancing the common Profit, Wealth and Commodity of this
Realm: By the which it may appear, That the making of this Law was of all other
thought to be most necessary, and of greatest consequence, when the King
preferred the same before any earthly thing: And the Kings care herein became
his Royal Person very worthily, because by this Statute Safety was brought to
the Realm, and Wealth and Profit to the People thereof; greater and better
fruits then which, no humane Law can produce: And the chief execution of this
Law was most aptly left to the King, Ratione regiae dignitatis suae, whose
Office does, as the Philosopher truly says, contain in it great Virtue, high
Understanding, and Divine Wisdom, to whose high Government, as well our
Persons as our Laws be committed, and the defense thereof is applied to his
grave foresight.

And truly I have taken upon me to read on those Laws of Sewers, as Mr. Marrow
did in former times take upon him to Expound in his reading the Laws of the
Justices of Peace, hoping this work of mine may prove as acceptable to the
Commissioners of Sewers, as that of his was beneficial to the Justices of
Peace; the use whereof being no less commodious to the Commonwealth then that
of the Peace, being both general Laws of great use and esteem, and my self
being for many years past a Commissioner in the County of Lincoln, I found that
these Laws were dark and intricate, and came not usually within the reach and
understanding of such as were not well seen and studied in the Laws.

And because I found the use of them to be wondrous necessary, I did intend,
when occasion served me, to break the Ice, and enter seriously into the
Exposition of them. And therefore seeing these Laws being in time most ancient,
in extent most large, and for the use most necessary, I have, with your kind
favor, made choice of them to frame my Reading upon; wherein, if upon your
perusal you find any scapes or errors, which may soon fall from Opinion, haec
amice corrige, and such of them as you shall bestow your liking upon, hiis
utere mecum; and this shall suffice touching my choice made of this Statute.

And as I have formerly declared and delivered the causes which stirred me up,
and the reasons which confirmed me to read upon this Statute; Now I do intend
to break it up, and I do divide it into these several branches or parts:





Foraign Merchandises is the chief enriching of this Nation, therefore Ports,
Havens, Rivers, and other Navigable Streams and their dependencies, be put
within the defense of this Law, being Ostia and janua Regni, for that by the
maintenance of these the wealth of the Realm is increased, and the Inland
Cities, Boroughs and Towns are made partakers with ease and small cost of the
Seas Commodities.



Salvum and securum conductum.

In these five parts be all the whole materials of this great and worthy Law
contained; and therefore according to the said division I have framed a Case
for the first Lecture upon this Law.

The first Case.
A. Leaseth to B. a Manor on the Sea Coasts for years, which has incrementum
and decrementum maris by prescription in the County of Chester, and the City
there, (where a Commission of Sewers is) remainder to C. in Fee, Livery is
given and taken by Attorneys at full Sea within the view; the Sea then leaves
One hundred Acres of Land with the Shore divided in part from the continent by
a Navigable Haven; The Lease expired, C. enters, the Prince ejects him, and the
King seizes this Relinquished ground.

My Opinion is, That the King has a part, the Prince a part, and the Subject a
part of this ground; and that it is all within this Statute, but no part
thereof within this Commission.

Points of the Common Law.
The Points of this Case be three at the Common Law, and five by this Statute.





C. the Subject cannot have any Lands at all.

Points on this Statute.
England, and what Interest the King has there, and what Interest a Subject
may have therein by custom and prescription, and what is meant by the said
words, Incrementum and Decrementum maris?









The Readers Argument.
And as it comes to my turn, I intend to maintain the conclusion of my Case:
And first of the first Point.

Livery and Seisin is one of the most ancient approved Ceremonies of the Law
which has been used for conveying of Lands; and the Law has a more respect
thereto then to any other: And it cannot be denied, but that it is the most
perfect form of any, by the which the Freehold and Inheritance of Lands is
transferred from one to another, and all Subjects may give and take Lands by
this Ceremony; but the King only is excepted, whose Prerogative is such, That
as Lands cannot be taken from him, as King, but by Record; so Lands cannot be
given or granted to him, as King, but by Record: And in the same degree is a
County Palatine in his County, because he has there Jura Regalis: And this
Livery and Seisin may be actually and really done and performed, or else it may
be done within the view of the Lands intended to be conveyed.

And as touching Livery and Seisin to be actually effected if the Feoffment
contain Lands in two several Counties, and Livery and Seisin be made in one
County in name of both, this will not pass the Lands in another county, because
the Land passes by the Livery, which is local, and not by the Deed.

But in an exchange of Land in two several Counties by Deed, the same is good,
for there the Land passes by the Deed.

But if one make a Feoffment of a Manor lying in Demesne in the County of L.
and in services in the County of M. these services, and so Rents, will pass by
attornment of the Tenants, though they lie in a foraign County; and so of an
Advowson appendant, and such like, because those rents and services pass not by
the local ceremony of Livery and Seisin, but by the ceremony of Attornment,
which is personal, and depends upon the person which is transitory; wherein I
take this difference, That if a Feoffment be made of a Manor by Parol, the
Advowson appendant, Villains Regardant, and Rents and Services by Attornment of
Tenants, will not pass to the Feoffee, till the demesns and Lands be first
conveyed.

But if the Feoffment be by Deed, then the Rents and Services will pass by
Attornment of the Tenants, and delivery of the Deeds, before Livery and Seisin
be made to pass the demesns.

Then seeing that Land in one County will not pass by Feoffment, by express
Livery made in an other County; if then the same may be passed and conveyed by
Livery within the view, is the question of our Case: And in my opinion they
may, because it is a ceremony performed by the eye, which is a member or
instrument which has his operation by aspect, Tam procul quam prope.

But express Livery and Seisin, which is done by the hand, cannot in reason be
extended to another place then where the body is: And although the eye be fixed
in the head, annexed to the body, yet like the Sun, his beams are carried afar
of.

And this Livery by the view, is not a Livery in the County where the body is,
but properly in the County where the Land lay, which was the object of the eye;
and in this case it is said to be Livery only, and not Livery and Seisin,
because the Seisin is properly when the party enters, and the entry of the
party is that which perfects the work, which is in proprio commitatu. And for
authority in the point, 28. Ed. 3. fo. 11. there is a Case according to my
opinion, where the Husband at the Church door, when 18. E. 3. fo. 11.
he was to take one to wife, he made a Deed of Feoffment of Lands lying in
another County to the said woman, and then delivered the Deed to her, and
showed her the Land, then they married, and he entered in claiming to her use;
and these Lands were thereby well conveyed to the said woman by this Livery
within the veiw, in another County.

Now it is fit to be declared, what view is sufficient, for there be two manner
of views, The one general, the other special: In the special view, every
particular piece of ground is to be seen; but in the general view it suffices
to take notice of the grounds by the place they lie in: and in my opinion. The
general view in my Case will suffice. For if one make a Feoffment in Fee of a
whole Island, or of a whole Manor or Town, and make Livery thereof within the
view, this is good; and yet it is not possible to view every particular piece
of ground at once, for Trees, Houses and Hills might so be interposed, that the
view could not be taken of some part thereof, yet notwithstanding veiw of the
rest will pass.

Also if Lands be covered with Water, Ice or Snow, these will pass well in a
Feoffment or Livery in the veiw.

In Brook Title View plac. 101. the Case there may give Brook 101.
the rule to our Case; for there it is said in a Writ of view, It is not
necessary that all particulars in Specie should be put in view, but to see the
fields where the grounds lie promiscuously it will suffice, and is a good and
perfect veiw.

Sed est un auter diversity concernant veiwe Carsi un fait Feoffment de B.
acre que gist del auter part dam Mountain tout horse del veiwe, la Liuerey de
ceo nest bone sans expres veiwe tamen tout voile passer per veiwe de part and
sic in mon case on part' gist south le flood del mere ceo non obstant pass vt
parcel del manor.

Ascuns aver teneus and ceo Knightley pur un in 28. H. 8. in 28. H. 8.
Dier que Liuercy deins le veiwe doit touts foits este fait in cases de
necessity ceo urging in respect del chose ou del person, del chose quia leterre
gist del further side dun grand ewe ou in le ewe ou ne puit oste facile access
del person, quia que le Feoffor ou Feoffee soit lame ou infirm, and detraher
ceo in question Jeo aye mist mon case quia le Feoffment and Liuerey fuit ad
plenitudinem maris tamen Jeo sue de opinion que Liuerey deins le veiwe puit
este fait sans ascun matter de necessity ceo urging and ceo Jeo collect per le
liver de 42. Ed. 3. Fitz. Feoffments 54. when the Son did give back the Lands
to his Father as freely as his Father had 42. Ed. 3.
formerly given the same to him; and this was within the view: and it does not
appear that either this Livery or the other made to the said woman in 28. Ed.
3. were made of any necessity urging the same.

And there be some persons which can neither give nor take by Livery within the
view, and that is where the Feoffor or Feoffee is blind: So a Major and
Commonalty, Dean and Chapter, or other corporate and politic capacities
cannot give or take within the view. Some have held a difference, that a Parson
of a Church might not take by Livery within the view to him and his Successors,
because that came to him in his politic capacity, which had no Eyes; but if
he were seized in the right of his Church, that he might infeoff I. S. thereof
by Livery within the view, because this was a wrong to the Church, and
therefore A Conceit.
was in the power of his natural capacity, which had Eyes.

But the main Point in my Case is, Whether Livery within the view may be given
and taken by Attorneys; and whether the view is so incident to the person, that
it cannot be imparted to another.

It is true, that the personal view cannot be lent to another, or divided from
the person, no more can the personal touch or act of my hand be imparted to
another; and yet express Livery, which is the deed and act of the hand, may be
done per auter maine.

Sir Francis Englefields Case in the seventh Report of Sir 7. Reports.
Englefields Case.
Edward Cook, gives us a pretty difference, where the act to be done is
unseparably tied to ones person, and where not; as in the Case of Thomas Duke
of Norfolk, where upon conveyance of diverse Manors to Philip Earl of Arundel
his Son, there was a Proviso, That the Duke might revoke the same upon
signifying of his mind under his own proper hand in writing, etc. This power
of Revocation was not transferred to the Queen by the Attainder of the Duke,
because it was inseparably tied to his own proper hand: But the principal Case
there of Englefield, where the Canc. in Combs Case.
Lands were settled upon his Kinsman, with power, That upon tender of a Ring by
him he might revoke the uses, and this was forfeit by his attainder, and the
Queen by a Letter of Attorney made to two, did tender the Ring; for this was
not precisely or literally tied to Englefields person, no more then payment of
Money, or such like.

And so in our Case, though by the Law I take it that Livery within the view
must be in the view of both the parties, yet this may be done by Attorneys; for
as my own hand is not precisely tied by the Law to an express Livery, no more
is my own eye expressly tied to this view.

And we see in views in an Assize, the under Sheriff, or 36. H. 8. Dier.
the Sheriffs Bailiffs, by his direction, may make the view; and yet the Writ
is direct to the Sheriff to do the same; Morse and Penningtons Case.
and in those Cases an intellectual view will serve, as if the Jurors know the
Land; but such an intellectual view will not serve in a Feoffment, but there
the view must be actual.

Yet I take this difference, that if a Letter of Attorney be directed to A. B.
to make Livery and Seisin, he cannot do the same within the view, for therein
he does not pursue his warrant; but if the Letter of Attorney be special, to
give or take Livery within the view, I am of Opinion, then the Livery may in
such a Case be given and taken by Attorneys within the view, as well as in
Combs Case in Sir Edwards Cooks 9. Report, where it is affirmed that a
surrender of a Copyhold may be given and taken by Attorneys, which is as
personal as this is in the taking part, because Fealty ought to be made.

Some things may in this Case be further aleaged in this third point, which I
now have in hand, that is, Who must make the Letter of Attorney on the Feoffees
part, whether the Lessee for years, or he in the remainder, or both of them:
For Lessee for years, it is to be noted, that his Estate has not any
perfection thereby, and he seems himself but a Deputy, and if so, then a Deputy
cannot make a Deputy; but yet he is not merely a Deputy, for if there be two
Lessees, the Remainder in Fee to I. S. one of the Lessees may take the Livery
and Seisin; yet if a letter of Attorney be made to two jointly, one of them
cannot take it; and if in our Case the Lessee had dyed before entry, the Livery
might have been made to his Executors, and powers and authorities cannot be
apportioned and come to Executors in such manner; Ergo, It is more then a power
of a Letter of Attorney for the reasons aforesaid, and for these ensuing: For
the Lessee for years cannot be prohibited from taking his Livery by the Lessor,
but a Letter of Attorney may be countermanded; yet the Lessee alone cannot make
this Letter of Attorney, neither can he in the remainder make the same, because
he could not himself accept of the present Livery, neither can he meddle with
the present possession which a Livery and Scisin yields.

But I am of Opinion, That Lessee for years, and he in remainder, must join in
the Letter of Attorney, for these Reasons:





Thirdly, they should join in Advoury.



Therefore my conclusion is, that they shall join in this Letter of Attorney;
and hereby I suppose I have conveyed a good Estate in the manner to I. S. in the
remainder, to maintain my position for him in the end of my Case, and here I
end my three Common Law points, and now am come to the Statute.

The Readers Argument upon the Statute and Commission.
The Sea within the Realm of England.
FIrst, touching our Mare Anglicum, in whom the interest therein is, and by
what Law the Government thereof is, is a fit question and worth the handling.
And in my Argument therein, I hope to make it manifest by many proofs and
precidents of great worth and esteem, that the King has therein these powers
and properties, videlicet.

1. Imperium Regale. 2. Potestatem legalem. 3. Proprietatem tam soli quam
aquae. 4. Possessionem and Proficuum tam Reale quam Personale.
And all these he has by the Common Laws of England: in the 6. R. 2. Fitz.
Prot. 46. it is said, That the Sea is within 6. R. 2.
the Legiance of the King, as of his Crown of England; This proves that on the
Seas the King has Dominationem and Imperium ut Rex Angliae, and this by the
Common Law of England.

The Charter of the Admiral of England has these words Admirals Charter.
in it, Quod habeat potestatem in causis maritimis ac omnia bona waviata
Flotsan Ietsan and Lagan ac omnia bona Mercimonia and catalla in mare depordita
seu extra mare projecta ac omnia and singula casualia tam in vel super mare vel
littora crecas vel coster as maris quam in vel super aquas dulces portus
flumina rivos aut alios locos superinundatos quoscunque inter Fluxum and
refluxum maris ceu aquae ad plenitudinem a quibuscunque primis pontibus versus
Mare per totum Regnum Angliae.

Imprimis, this Charter is under the great Seal of England, quod est Lex
Angliae.



bona in mare deperdita super mare emergentia and extra mare projecta, which be
Profits arising on the Sea.

per totum Regnum Angliae; Ergo, the Seas be infra Regnum Angliae.

In the Eleventh Chapt. de Prerogativa Regis it is declared, Quod Rex habebit
wreccum Maris per totum Regnum and Prerogativa Regis, cap. 11.
Balenas and Sturgiones captos in Mari vel alibi infra Regnum Angliae: and this
was by the Common Laws before ever this Statute was made; for as the King was
and is the most Excellent Creature within his Realm, so the most Excellent
things which Land and Sea afford are appropriate unto him. And this Statute
also proves the Sea to be infra Regnum Angliae, and that the profits therein,
and thereon arising belong to the King by the temporal Laws of England.

In the Case of Sir Henry Constable in the Fifth Report of Sir E. Cook, it is
said, That Flotsan, Jetsan and Lagan are goods Sir Henry Constables Case.
on or in the Sea, and that they belong to the King, and the King by his
Charter granted them to the Admiral.

The Statute of the 18. Edward 3. Let the Sea be open to all Stat: 18. E. 3.
28. H. 8.
Strangers: and the Statute of 28. H. 8. Chapt. 15. If any Treason, Murder, or
other Felony be done on the sea coast, the Offenders shall be tried in such
county as the King shall appoint by Commission to be directed to the Admiral
and others, to try the same per Sacramentum duodecem, which is by Jury.

And the Statute 31. H. 6. Chapt. 4. there is a Restraint, 31. H. 6.
That no Subject do attache any Stranger in amity within this Realm on the Sea.

Here the Statute Laws are in force on the Seas, as appears by the examples;
but these seem to tie the person only. Sir John Davies.


And in the Irish Reports of Sir John Davies, in the Case of the Royal Pischary
of the Banne, it is said, That the Sea is the Kings proper Inheritance.

And Mr. Bracton lib. 2. Chap. 12. in his Title de acquirendo Bracton. L. 2.
Chapter 12.
rexum dominio, sets forth a prescription in these words, Quod I. S. and
antecessores sui fuerunt quiet' de Theolonio and aliis consuetudinibus dandis
per totum Regnum Angliae tam per terram quam per mare; and many times in that
Chapter he reiterates the same words; which is a strong proof that the Sea is
infra Regnum Angliae, and that the King Governs there by his Common Laws of
England; for that prescription is a main and material point of the Common Law:
And the like is alleged in Sir Henry Constables Case by way of Custom in the
Citizens, as of Bristol, to have Flotsan on the Seas between the high water and
the low water marks.

So I take it I have proved the King full Lord and owner of the Seas, and that
the Seas be within the Realm of England; and that I have also proved it by
Ancient Books and Authorities of the Laws, and by Charters, Statutes, Customs
and Prescriptions, that the Government therein is by the Common Laws of this
Realm.

One Case and one Statute seem to sway to the contrary, Lacies Case.
and that is Lacyes Case, where one was stricken on the Seas, and dyed on the
Land, that the Common Law could not try this murder: It is true, because that
trial was to be by Jury, which must come out of a proper county, which could
not in this case, because the Sea was not within county ground, and so no Jury
could be summoned there.

And I acknowledge that the King rules on the Sea by the Laws Imperial, as by
the Roll of Oleron and other; but that Le Roll de Oleron.
is only in the particular Case of Shipping, and for Merchants and Mariners:
But the King has neither the properties of the Sea, nor the real and personal
profits there arising, but by the Common Laws of England, and in proof thereof
the Book 15. and 16. Eliz. in Dyer, where the grounds gained from the Sea
pertained to the Queen, which must 15. 16. Eliz. Dyer.
needs be by the Common Law of England; for no Law gives the King any soil but
only the Common Laws of England; so this is sufficient proof for the real
profits, and for the personal profit the Charter of the Admiralty and other
Cases aforesaid make it manifest.

And there is a Statute made in 1. R. 2. Chapt. which restrains 1 R. 2. Rast.
Admiralty.
the Admiral that he do not meddle with any thing done within the Realm but on
the Seas; by which it may be collected, that the Seas be not within the Realm
of England: But in my opinion the intent of that Statute did rather limit the
Admiral how far he should extend his Jurisdiction, then any way to set forth
the bounds of this Realm: wherein my conclusion herein is, That my Statute has
his extent within all the Realm of England; and that English Seas being within
the Realm, be within the bounds of my said Statute of Sewers, and that Statute
Law is in full power on the Seas, as by the Cases and Statutes mentioned
formerly does appear.

Of Islands.
BEcause in my Case in matter, though not in express De Insulis.
words there is an Island, therefore it comes now fitly in turn to declare
whose the same is in ownership, and what Laws the same is to be governed by:
And first, of the definition thereof: Justinian in Suis Institutionibus says,
that Difinitio Insule.
Insula est locus undique circumdatus aquis, page 153. And with this agrees
Britton, in his Title of Purchase, England of Anglia
it self is not Insula, because it is not undique circumdatus aquis. But
England and Scotland be one entire Island, and the most Scotia.
famous in the whole world; England, take it per se est peninsula, that is pene
Insula, almost an Island; for on all parts it Peninsula.
joins to the Sea, but toward some parts of Scotland.

Gernsey and Jernsey be Islands on the Sea, but it seems by the Resolutions in
Calvin's Case 7. Report, That they be Gernsey. Jernsey.
not within the Realm, nor governed by these Laws, because the King has them
by His Title of France.

The Isle of Man was in times past a petty Kingdom, and had a King, but he was
only as a Viceroy, and under the Man.
King of England as by a Record.

Where Artold King of Man made suit to the King of England to come into
England; but whether Man be within the Realm or not, seems to be put without
question in Sir Edward Cooks Case of Calvin, and by Kelwayes Reports, 11. H. 8.
that it is not, for there an office found after the death of the Earl of Darby
by a Writ out of the Chancery 11. H. 8. Kelwayes R.
of England was avoided, because as the said books do affirm Man was not within
the Realm of England; but under the favor of these books, that is, no necessary
cause to avoid that Office; for in my Opinion the said Office of the Earl of
Darby was void, quia in Man breve Domini regis non Currebat, and so in the
county of Palatine of Chester, breve Domini regis non Currit, 161. tamen
Committatus Cestriae est infra Regnum Angliae. Mr. Cambden in his History de
Insulis is Cambden.
of Opinion, that Man was a Member of the Realm of England: and therein he has
these words, That Man is an Island situate in the midway between England and
Ireland. Sed de qua utrique terrarum applicari de Jure debuerat ab antiquis non
ambigebatur demum in hunc modum lis ista quievit quoniam advectos perculi Causa
venemosos haec terra vermes admisit ergo Eam Britannis applicandum Censura
Communis dictavit, by which it may appear, that the Isle of Man was within the
Realm of England; or at the least a member thereof.

But I do take the Isle of Wight Originally to be parcel of England, and is a
part of the County of Hampshire, and was Wight.
as it were divorced from the continent as was Cecily from Italy; the one, as
Poets feign, was parted from the continent or main Land by an Earthquake; the
other, as is imagined, by the rage and violence of the Sea: Insula vectis
inquit Cambdenus in suis insultis Britannicis, Fol. 707. est pars Commitatus
Cambden 707.
Hamtoniae and a Continente Britanniae avulsa est ut Cohaesisse uvidebatur, for
many do imagine that it was torn from the main Land by the violence of waters,
as of late years parcel of the Spurnhead in Yorkshire, which before did adhere
to the continent was torn therefrom by the Sea, and is now in the nature of
Island: Yet the same is within the Realm of England, and remains parcel of
Yorkshire; and the like is said of the Island called Silly, situate Many other
ancient Islands there be, which being in the English Seas be parcel of this
Realm, which I will pass over to avoid prolixity.

But in our Case a new Island is risen up in the English Seas, to whom the same
in point of property and ownership Nova. Insula.
shall belong, and what Laws the same shall be governed by, comes now justly to
be disputed of. Justinian in his Institutes, De rerum Divisione, says, Quod
insula in mari nata Justinian.
(ut Delos) est primi occupantis. And Britton, one of our ancient Britton 86.
Writers in his book Titulo Purchase, fol. 86. says, That if a new Island rise
up in the Sea, datur primo occupanti, and agrees fully with Justinian therein;
but says he, If it be taken or divorced from the continent, then it continues
to the former owner; but clearly our Law of England does not agree with either
of those Authors in the point of ownership. For if as I have formerly delivered
it, the Sea in property, possession and profit, tam in aqua quam in solo,
belongs to the King in the right of His Crown of England, as I take the Law
clearly to be, then it follows as a consequent, That the grounds which was
the Kings when it was covered with waters, is His also when the waters have
left it; For our Law admits not any thing, either real or personal to go primo
occupanti; but when an owner cannot be found, the Common Law gives it Domino
Regi, as Waifs, Strays, Wreck of the Sea, Treasure found, Escheated lands, and
such like; so that my opinion is conceived in this, that in point of ownership
and property, the said new Island is the Kings.

But yet I am likewise of opinion, That a new Island risen from the bottom of
the Sea, although it be within the Realm, yet it is neither within county,
Parish nor Town of this Realm, till the King by his Edict or Proclamation have
so declared it.

There may be Islands also within the Land compassed about with fresh Rivers,
as the Isle of Axholm in the county of Lincoln, and Sheppey in the county of
Kent, and diverse others. But Mr. Bracton in his Book de acquirende rerum
Bracton. Liber. 1. cap. 2.
dominio, does very well deliver the Law concerning his new Islands which arise
in great Rivers; his words be these, Habet etiam locum eadem species
accessionis Insula nata in flumine quod si quidem medeam partem teneat Communis
est eorum qui pro indiviso ab utraque part fluminis prope ripam praedia
possident pro modo latitudinis cujuscunque fundi que latitudo prope ripam sit
que si alteri parti proximior sit, eorum est tanta qui abea part prope ripam
praedia possident: Si autem insula in Mari nata sit quod raro accidit
occupantis fit. Domini Regis non tamen credas proprium alicujus agrum informam
insulae redact insulam esse ut ecce flumen dividatur in superiori part and
circuit agrum alicujus and demum infra in quo casu ejus erit ager cujus prius
fuerat: Cavendum quoque erit in metienda vicinitate insularum quia potest quis
in hoc de facili decipi ponatur igitur punctus quod in medio inter utrumque
agrum and secundum hoc si insula Citra, punctum sit vel hujus tant' vel illius
tant' erit si autem sit and citra punctum and in ipso puncto and ultra tunc
proindiviso: Communis erit ut tantam mihi de ipso insula cedat qua continentur
in medietate puncti usque ad agrum meum. Si autem insula rotunda inveniatur hoc
observetur quod omne quod propinquius est mihi cedat, and ita vicino cedat quod
ei vicinius erit.

But whether the Laws of this Realm be of force in the said new sprung up Sea
Islands, or not, is a question: It appears in Calvin's Case, and in the Case of
the Tanistry in the Irish Reports, That if the King conquer an Island or
Nation, the same is no part of England, nor the Laws of England there in force,
till the King shall so declare the same, but the own proper Laws seem to be in
force there; but if the King conquer a Nation from an Infidel, there the
ancient Laws of that Nation upon the conquest are extinct; but the Law is not
so of another Christian Region, as Callis, Callis. Guyen. Bulloign. Ireland.
Guyen, Bulloign and the like. And although Ireland was under the obeisance of
the King, yet the Laws of England were not there in force, till the King so
declared the same.

And although Wales before the Reign of E. 1. was within the Fee of the King of
England, yet was it not parcel Wales.
thereof, till the Statute of 12. E. 1. so made it; and although that Statute
so annexed Wales to England, yet being but by the word or figure adjuncta, the
Laws of England were not totally in force there till the Statute 27. H. 8. so
declared them, as is holden in Rice Thomas Case in Plo. Com. but
notwithstanding whether Wales be within my Statute, or not, is questionable,
for these Reasons following: First, it is clear that a general Law unstinted
and unbounded shall extend to Wales as well as to England; but our Law grants
Commissions within the Realm of England, and so precisely prescribes it to
bounds, and it may seem that the Parliament took it so in 1. Mar. Cap. 11.
where Commissioners of Sewers were authorized in the county of Glamorgan,
which, as may be objected, need not, if Wales had bin formerly comprised: and
some new Statutes, as that of Alehouses in 1. Ja. Cap. 9. and that of Rogues,
1. Ja. Cap. 7. extend the same to the Realm of England and Dominion of Wales,
as if Wales should not be contained in the words (the Realm of England) yet
notwithstanding in my opinion this Statute of 23. H. 8. extends to Wales; for
although the Statute of the 1. Mar. gave power to Commissioners in
Glamorganshire, that was for a special purpose, which, as was conceived, the
Statute of 23. H. 8. did not in England extend thereunto, that as for the
carrying away of the sand which was thrown upon their grounds; but in that
Statute it may well be perceived, that the Statute of 23. H. 8. was of force
there; and inserting the words, Dominion of Wales, in the said Statute of Poor
and Rogues, was rather of superabundance to satisfy some which might nodum in
scirpo querere, make a doubt where none was, then that they were there put for
any necessity requiring the same: But I am of opinion, that in this new sprung
up Island the Laws of England are there in force, because when it was Sea the
same was under the Government of these Laws; and although the nature and
quality thereof be changed, viz. Dry Land for full sea, yet the same Laws and
Government remain in force; so that I hold this new Island within the Statute,
and that the property thereof is the Kings.

Now occasion and time gives me fit opportunity to treat of Grounds which be
newly gained from the Seas. If as I have formerly declared, the Grounds be the
Kings when they be covered with Waters, it must needs be held an infallible
ground, that they be also the Kings when the Waters have left them dry; and
when the Waters had their being on the same, the whole Profit there arising did
appertain to the King; yet I have known in some Countries where the Frontagers
have claimed those grounds so left, by a pretended Custom of Frontagers, and
some probable reason might be shown, wherefore they should have the same, for
as their grounds was nearest the Sea, and so next to the charge to repair the
defense, and next to the loss where any overflow happened, it might therefore
seem reasonable, that as they were put to the greatest charge, and in peril of
the loss of their Lands, that so if Lands were left by the Sea affront them,
that these Lands might accrue unto them as a reciprocal consideration for their
charge and loss; but I take it that of late the Law has in these Cases been
oftentimes ruled for the King against the Subject; for at Crossed in the county
of Lincoln, 1600. Acres were gained from the Sea, affront the Manor of sir
Valentine Brown there, yet he was put to obtain a grant from the King thereof:
and one Bushey of St. Kegneys claimed grounds left by the Sea, by the said
pretended Custom of Frontage, but they were decreed against him in the Court
of Wards, in 12. Jac. R. in which Case I was of Counsel: For it were
inconvenient that the subject should have Frontage, and yet no bounds
prescribed thereto; so that Ten thousand Acres might be left affront a man's
Manor, which were not fit a subject should have this large Inheritance by
pretense of such allowed Custom; and I suppose I may herein say in this Case,
as Mr. Plowden does of his silver Mines, That it is inconvenient a subject
should have the silver Mines in his grounds, for so might he become richer then
the King.

So it is not fitting that a subject should have the grounds left by the Sea,
when so much may happen to be left as the Kings own Lands in the Realm come to;
and so because nimium se exaltat in prerogativam Regis, I am of opinion the new
gained grounds from the Sea appertain to the King as a Royal Escheat, and not
to the subject; but in my Case here is a prescription where the owner of the
Manor has Incrementum and decrementum Maris; of what force this is of, is now
to be argued; therefore I will now declare what interest a subject can or may
challenge in the seas, in grounds gained therefrom.

Personal profits arising on the sea, subjects may have and challenge by custom
and prescription, as to have free Pischary on the sea; and a Parson had Tithes
of Fish gotten in the sea by the inhabitants of his parish; and yet the sea,
nor any part thereof is not in any Parish, but it followed the person.

In Sir Henry Constables Case, the Citizens of Bristol Sir Henry Constables
Case.
claimed Flotsan (which be goods floating in the sea) by custom, in Bracton
Chap. 12. one aleaged to be discharged Bracton.
of Toll or Custom on the seas by prescription, in the Case of the Swans; in
Sir Edward Cooks 7. Report, one prescribed to have a game of wild Swans at
Abbotberry, in a Creek of the sea, which is a member or arm of Case of Swans.
the sea: and in Sir Henry Constables aforesaid, it is taken and received for
Law, that a Subjects Manor may extend to the low water-mark by prescription;
and seeing all these a subject may have in and on the Sea, wherefore then
should he not have all the grounds left by the Sea by prescription? To that I
answer, That he cannot have claim in any thing by prescription and custom, but
that which lies in use, which is the life of them both; but lands and grounds
which have always been Sea, could not be nor lie in use, and therefore they
cannot be claimed, nor the same can be bounded out by prescription or custom;
yet lands between the high water mark and low water mark the bounds thereof may
be prescribed to belong to, or to be parcel of the Manor, because in every
twelve hours, or in every day they lie dry, and so a Subject all that time may
have use of them, and so of all the rest of the said things, but in that which
never lay in use, no custom or prescription could take hold on, insomuch that
in my Opinion, no prescription or custom can fetch lands further then the low
water-mark.

Grounds left.
But now what grounds shall be said a leaving by the Sea, is a point in my Case
also, for it is certain that at springtides the Sea uses to overflow the
Marshes in Lincolnshire and Norfolk, and returns within a short space again;
these being usual and annual, be not accounted grounds left or gained from the
sea; so because the Marshes in Lincolnshire and the Sands in Lincolnshire be
overflown every twelve hours, and then dry again, are not accounted grounds
left or gained from the sea, because the sea has daily her recourse thereon:
and therefore in 15 and 16 Eliz. in Dier fo. 326. 15. Eliz. Dyer 326.
in the Case there was a quantity of ground was left by the Sea, and whether
the King, or he whose grounds were adjoining should have them, was there made a
question; but in that Case there is an excellent president set down, very apt
for the handling of this point, put in 43 E. 3. Contra 43. E. 3.
Abbot'de Ramsey de quodam processu in Scacario facto versus dict' Abbot ad
ostendendum quare Sexagint' acrae marisci in manus dom' Regis non debent sesiri
quas predict' Abbas appropriavit sibi and domui suae sine licentia Regis super
quandam presentation virtute cujusdam generalis Commission' de terris a Rege
detentis and concelatis. Abbas respondit quod ipse tenet maner' de Brauncest
quod scituatum est juxta mare et quod est ibid quidam mariscus qui aliquando
per fluxum maris minoratur and aliquando per de fluxum maris augetur absque hoc
quod appropriavit sibi prout per presentation' predic' supponebatur. And the
Attorney of the King maintained the contrary, and thereupon the King and the
Abbot were at an issue; so by the Case I gather these matters:

First, That if by little the Sea sometimes decrease and leave some parcel to
the Land, and some other times run over the same again, this ground belongs not
to the King; for these be grounds whereto the subject may have a property, as
in the grounds of the shore, but otherwise it is where great quantity of ground
which had always been drowned before is left, that belongs to the King.

Also by this president the Law was taken to be, that these grounds left by the
Sea to the Land, were in the County of Norffolk, whereto they did adjoyn, and
in my opinion within that Parish whereto they lay; for there was a Presentment,
which was by a Jury of Nofolk, and the Jury taken to try an Issue must be de
viceneto ejusdem commitatus: but note there, the Presentment was by a Jury de
Corpore Commitatus, in 22. lib. Assis. pl. 93. The Case was, That 22. lib. Ass.
pl. 93.
a River of water did run between two Lordships, and the soil of one side,
together with the River of water, did wholly belong to one of the said
Lordships, and the River by little and little did gather upon the soil of the
other Lord, but so slowly, that if one had fixed his eye a whole day thereon
together, it could not be perceived; by this petty and unperceivable increase,
the increasement was got to the owner of the River; but if the River by a
sudden and unusual flood had gained hastily a great parcel of the other Lords
ground, he should not thereby have lost the same: and so of petty and
unperceivable increasements from the sea, the King gains no property, for De
minimis non Curat Rex; but put the case the sea overflow a field where diverse
men's gounds lie promiscuously, and there continues so long, that the same is
accounted parcel of the sea, and then after many years the sea goes back and
leaves the same, but the grounds are so defaced, as the bounds thereof be clean
extinct and grown out of knowledge, it may be the King shall have those
grounds; yet in Histories I find that Nilus every year so overflows the
grounds adjoining, that their bounds are defaced thereby; yet they are able to
set them out by the Art of Geometry.

These grounds in my Case which are left by the sea, and The Prince count
Palatine of Chester.
lie from the haven next to the shore, are as I have formerly delivered it,
within the county Palatine of Chester; and therefore, whether the Prince or the
King shall have them, is now my question: The Prince has not only Jura
Regalia, but also Escheta Regalia within his said Palatinate, and so in my
opinion is not only owner of the county, but Lord of the Prerogatives there,
and all Jurisdiction is to the Prince, only a Writ of Error lies in the Kings
Bench of a Judgment there, like an Appeal to Caesar, then he is Lord of those
Laws by which the Freehold and Inheritance of those lands be ruled, wherefore
then should not these lands belong to his Grace? And first it is usual to have
a Commission directed to enquire of these Lands ut de terris concelatis, and
this inquiry shall be by Commission; if that Commission be to issue out of the
county Palatine of Chester, then the Lands would questionless fall to the
Prince, and the inquiry to be made of the Freeholders of the said county
Palatine. The Case put in Barkleys Case in the Comment. of Mr. Plowden, fo.
129. does force much against the Princes Title; for there it is put, that the
Bishop of Durham had Liberties and Privileges in Terris suis inter Fluvios de
Tyne de Tese, and afterward purchased more Lands between these two Rivers, the
said Liberties and Privileges shall not extend thereto; and so if one have a
Warren in his Lands in Dayle, and he purchases other Lands there, his Warren
cannot be extended upon these new purchased Lands, for says the Book, Things
or Privileges confined to certain Precincts or Dominions, cannot be extended
further, though the Dominion be enlarged, and that they shall not be enlarged
with the enlargement; but the County Palatine vested in the Prince, is
prescribed within no other bounds then the word County does confine it; and
therefore this falling to be within the county, should be properly his, and as
I am imformed, the Prince has special words therefore in his Charters, if it
were granted that these grounds could be claimed by Charters; but I am clear of
Opinion, That no increase of the new left grounds can possibly become within
the county of the city of Chester; for the bounds thereof cannot extend over
that circle which their Charter has confined them to: and so for the causes
and reasons formerly declared, I take it, That the said Island is the Kings,
the ground left between the haven and the ancient shore, belongs to the Prince
as Earl of Chester; and the shore because of the said prescription appertains
to C. the Subject as parcel of the said Manor; and so according to my said
conclusion of my Case, here the King has a part, the Prince a part, and the
Subject a part of the grounds left by the Sea.

My Tenets therefore be these:




incrementum and decrementum maris are fully described by the said Record of 43
E. 3. of the Abbot of Ramsey: that is, That if the decrease of the Sea be by
little and unperceiveable means, and grown only in long tract of time, whereby
some addition is made to the Frontagers grounds, these by these words may
appertain to the subject; and herein the said words have no other operation,
but Lands left to the shore by great quantities, and by a sudden occasion and
perceiveable means, accrue wholly to the King.

Chester.

The Shore.
BUt now I am arrived at the continent, and the first ground I set my foot on
is the shore, which in Latin is called Littus Maris, it takes the name wholly
from the sea, as partaking most with her nature, and so Ex digniori part
appellatur; yet it is not all one with the Sea, nor with the Land, but
participates with them both: And Mr. Bracton in his second Book, Chap. 12.
says, That Littora Maris Bracton.
accessoria, what the shore is appears by Justinian the Emperor in his
Institutes, lib. 2. page 141. and is there thus defined, Justinian.
Littus Maris est quousque maximus Hibernicus, and jus fluctus eluderet and
quousque fluctus Maris in estate longius exestuat; and with this agrees Cicero
Topicorum, The shore is not counted for lands or grounds gained from the Sea,
or left by it, because at Cicero.
every full Sea it is covered with the waters thereof. In the 13. Chapter of
St. Matthews Gospel, ver. 2, 3. it is said, That Mat. 13. 2, 3.
our Savior Jesus went into a ship and sat there, and the whole multitude
stood on the shore, and he spoke unto them: Hereby it appears, that the shore
was the dry land, because they stood thereon; and it was a great quantity of
ground, for thereon stood a multitude, and it was near the brink of the water,
because they heard Jesus speak unto them out of the ship. In point of property
and ownership it is the Kings, as Lord of the seas; but as Sir Henry Constables
Case is, a subject may have the same, as belonging to his Manor by
prescription. In the Imperial Law which the Civilians use, the sea shore is
held to be common to all, and that it is as lawful for Diogenes the poor
Cinick, as Cressus the rich King, Casam. 161. Ponere and retia siccare; but our
Common Law of England does in reason much surpass either the Imperial Law or
the Civil Law, in distinguishing upon these; for it is said, Rex in ca habit
proprietatem sed populus habet usum ibidem necessarium: so that as to the
lading and unlading of ships, and for drying of Nets there, and for other
necessary businesses, the subjects have these uses therein, but the soil and
grounds thereof belong properly dom' Regi. And a subject may have the same by
prescription, and therefore such as hold the shore to be the extreme point both
of land and water be in a great error, for as Justinian says in his
Institutes, Quod gemmae and lapilli praeciosi inveniuntur, which can be taken
no otherwise sed super terram aqua relictam: so that this shall suffice to have
said concerning the sea shore.

Sea Coasts.
THe coasts of the sea come next in order to be treated of: Costera maris be
words well known, but their confined definition is hard to be found out; yet
certainly they contain the shore and banks, for by the Statute of 27. Eliz.
Chap. 24. an Act was made for the mending of the banks and 27 Eliz. 24.
sea works on the sea coasts; but in the 7. Chap. of Maccabees coasts have a
larger extent, for there Demetrius Son of Seleucus departed from Rome, and came
to a city of the sea Maccabees 7.
coasts: here a whole city is set on the sea coasts, and in Iustine treating of
Alexander the great, it is reported of him, that he entered into Licia and
Pamphilia, and won and conquered all Justine.
the sea coasts; this could be taken for no less then whole countries; for
Alexanders great mind and huge Army, could not march on a molehil, or small
tract of ground: In St. Mark, Chap. 7. it is thus written, That Jesus departing
from the Coasts of Tire and Sydon, came to Galile, so that it may thereby be
gathered, That these coasts were near the sea, for our Savior was no sooner out
of the coasts but he was on the sea, which shows that sea and coasts be
contigue Iacentia, yet no certain definition can I find of the words Coasts of
the Sea, but by these and such like descriptions; yet this I gather and collect
thereby, that in respect of the whole World, a whole Kingdom lying next may be
said to be a sea coast, and a whole county in respect of a Kingdom; and in my
opinion the next town and territories thereof lying next to the seas, be in our
Law taken to be the sea coasts and no other; and therefore some do much err
which take coast to be the edge of Land next the water, and shore to be the
brinks of the water next the Land quasi duo opposita.

And because Creeks, Havens and Ports be all of them within the charge of this
Law, and this Statute was materially made in defense thereof, and as they
differ in appellation, so they vary in definition, yet they do in some things
agree in the material; I will therefore deliver my opinion of them.

Creeks.
CReeks of the sea is an Inlet of sea cornered into the main Land, shooting
with a narrow passage into some Angle of the Land, and therein stretching it
self more then ordinary into the Land, and so holds not even quarter with the
Levant sea; and such Creeks or Inlets we commonly term in the Law to be arms of
the sea: for like as the arm of a man shoots out from the body, so by a
metaphor the inlet or corner of the sea let into the Land, is called an arm of
the sea; and although it go far into the land, yet the points of land on both
sides may well be discovered: and this appears in that great arm of the sea on
Humber, where it runs betwixt Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, the points of either
county may be seen at once, and seem to stand even over the one to the other.

Arm of the Sea.
ANd an arm of the Sea is said to extend into the Land so far as the flow and
reflow goes: In the Patent of the Admiral of England I find this word Creek
used; for there the King grants to him omnia bona mercimonia and Catalla in
vel super Mare littora crecas and Costeras Maris, but it differs much both from
the shore and coast; for a shore is sometimes dry Land, and sometimes water, a
coast is always dry land, but the Creek is always sea and new land: In the
Statute 28 H. 8. Chap. 15. Rastals trial, A. It is that all felonies, etc. done
upon the Sea, Haven or Creek, where the Admiral has Jurisdiction, shall be
tried in such county which the King shall appoint; by the Statute it is
manifest that the Creek is not all one with the sea, nor the same that a Haven
is, by the Statute made in the 4 H. 8. Chap. 20. Rastal ships, 5. appoints 4 H.
8. cap. 20.
that all Merchandizers entering in or going out of the Realm of England, should
be charged and discharged in Diversity between the shore.
great Ports, and not in Creeks or small arrivals; by which A Coast.
Statute it is apparent that a Creek is not all one that a Port is: A Creek.
But yet here it seems to be an Inlet of the sea where ships may have their
arrivals, as at Fosdyke, Stow, Wainflet, and Creek.
such like; and I take it that a Bay and a Creek be all one, Bay.
and that a Mere and a Fleet be also of that nature, and that all these rather
vary in words then in matter. Fleet and Mere.


A Port.
A Port is a harbor and safe arrival for ships, boats, and ballengers of
burden, to fraught and unfraught them at, as by the said Statute of 4 H. 4.
appears: In the Irish Reports, Fol. 56. Ports be said to be Ostia and Ianuae
Regni; I take a Port to be some special place in some great Borough, where
arrival of ships be, as the Cinque Ports, which be Dover, Sandwich, Rye,
Rumney, and Winchesley, the most famous in this Realm, and these be places of
great privileges: and Boston, Hull, Lyn and Plymouth, be also Ports and Port
Towns, where special offices and officers belonging to them, touching Merchants
and Merchandizers. And the said Statute of 4 H. 4. directed that Merchants
should be charged and discharged at great Ports, was for that there were
Officers for the King, deputed to receive His Highness customs and profits
thereupon arising; hereupon came that Officer called Portgreve, Hollingshead.
which signifies the Governor of the Port, as Mr. Cambden Cro: p. 120. 6.
notes page 244. the difference between a Creek, a Haven Cambden 244.
and a Port, be these;

Diversity between a Creek, Haven and Port.
A Creek is a corner of the sea let into the land farther then ordinary, and
more then the sea is, but it is no usual or accustomed place of arrival for
ships; and commonly it has neither safe harbor nor legal privilege.

A Haven is properly a safe place of harbor for ships, but may be without any
privilege at all, of which kind I know some.

And a Port is not only a safe harbor for ships of the greatest burden, but
it is also always graced with legal privileges; and this appears so by the
Statute of Magna Charta, Magna Charta, cap. 9.
cap. 9. Quod omnes Communitates and Barons dequinque portibus and omnes alii
portus habeant omnes libertates and liberas Consuetudines, which proves my
former difinition of Ports to be true.

After all these difinitions and distinctions, I have now prepared my Case
ready to receive his censure upon the last conclusion; that is, That all the
said grounds were within this Statute, but no part thereof within this
Commission of Sewers: and therefore it is first to be noted, That these grounds
were left by the sea since the awarding of this Commission, and the words of
the Preamble of this Statute speaks of grounds heretofore won; which word
(Heretofore won) seems to tie the Statute and Commission, both to grounds
left or won before the said Statute, and not such as be won after, like to the
Statute of West. 2. de Donis conditionalibus quod ad dona prius facta non
extenditur, which excludes out of that Statute all gifts made before. And the
words (Heretofore and hereafter) are words of consequence in point of time; and
wheresoever they are spoken, they come with an Emphasis, as if they required
express observance; and so is the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 28. of Leases, that
Statute is of all Leases hereafter to be made by Covenant in tail, with such
cautions and proviso's as be limited and set down in that Statute, should be
good Leases formerly made, though all the proviso's in the said Statute were
observed, were notwithstanding by reason of the said word Hereafter out of the
relief of that Statute.

And so in the Statute of Wills 32. H. 8. which had these words in it, All
persons having Lands, or which hereafter should have, might devise; this did
not make good any devises of Lands made before: but if this should pass for
current, then I should not perform my word in my conclusion, which puts it all
within the Statute; and this exception, if it were material, would not put it
only out of the Commission, but the Statute also; yet notwithstanding though
the construction made of all the said former Statutes, stand with Law, by
reason of the said words (Heretofore and hereafter) yet in this Statute of
Sewers, the same be not material, neither be the said words (Heretofore won) to
be precisely observed, because they be placed in the Preamble of the Statute,
and not in the enacting part of the Law, as in the said former Statute they
were: And Expositions are not tied to Titles and Preambles, which many times
comes short of the parts of the Law, but to the body and enacting part of the
Statute, which is the matter and substance: And hereupon the Statute of 21 H.
8. cap. 15. of Leases recites in the Preamble thereof, That whereas diverse
Leases had aforetime been made for Incomes and great Fines, and yet after the
Lessors did suffer Recoveries, if at this day a Lease be made, and that without
Fine or Income, yet such a Lessee shall be received to falsify the recovery
had against his Lessor notwithstanding: The Preamble of that Statute seems to
remedy no Lessees, but such as made Fines and were made before that Statute,
but the said words were not put in the body or enacted part of the Statute: and
so it is in our Statute; the words (Heretofore won) be only put in the preamble
and not in the material part of the Law, and so the Exposition is not to be
tied hereto; so notwithstanding this exception, these grounds though gained
since the Statute, are within the relief thereof.

The second cause wherefore these new grounds should not be within this Law,
is, Because these Lands be increased beyond the bounds since the making of
these Laws, and so it may be alleged that they cannot extend to the new
enlargement: for Mr. Plow. in his Com. fol. 129. says, That Laws Plow. Com.
and Privileges tied to a certain Place or Precinct, cannot be fol. 129.
extended or enlarged beyond the ancient Bounds, although the Predinct be
enlarged. As the Case in 7 H. 6. fol. 32. 7 H 6. fol. 32.
where in a Nativo habendo, a Villain had remained a year and a day in London,
which was ancient Demesne, and there was a privilege, that every Villain and
Bondslave which had remained a day and a year in London, the Lord might not
seize him; and the Villain pleaded that he had remained a year and a day there,
and so took himself to be within that privilege; but because since the said
liberty granted the bounds of London were much increased, therefore it was
there held, that the said liberty and privilege did not extend to the new
enlargement. And the Case is also put in the said Coment. that the Bishop of
Durham had diverse liberties in his Lands lying between the two Rivers of Tyne
and Tese, and after he purchased other Lands there, the said liberties did not
extend to the said new purchased Lands; and the like Law is if one have a
Warren in his Manor and Lands in Dale, after he purchase more grounds there,
his Warren does not extend unto them. And so where one had by Charter the Lands
of persons forfeited for Treason, he could not have by the said ancient
Charter, Lands forfeited for Treason by Tenants in Tail, because the forfeiture
of them was given by a late Statute since the Charter, but his non obstantibus:
I am of Opinion, That this Statute I now treat on extends to these new gained
grounds: and I take a difference between a special Law of Privileges, and
Liberties which is stinted or bounded either by Statute, Charter or Custom, the
same can by no construction be made to exceed the bounds; but the general Law
of this Kingdom, as this Law of ours is, the extents thereof be as large as the
whole Realm is, and they be not tied to stinted limits, as particular private
Charters and Customs be; and so I conclude, That in point of extent, this
Statute of 23 H. 8. is tied to no other bounds then to the Kingdom of England.

Diversity between grounds gained and grounds left.
THe third matter is that which I have grounded the conclusion of my Case upon,
and that is, Whether the grounds in my Case newly left by the sea to the shore,
and the shore be such grounds as be within this Commission? And in my opinion
they be not: And therefore to maintain my opinion herein, I take a difference
between grounds left by the Sea, and grounds gained from the sea; for grounds
left are of no value, and bring forth no fruit or increase at all, but the
uppermost part thereof are sand, which these Laws take no hold of; for the
Commission extends only to grounds won and made profitable for the Commonwealth
of this Realm, which Terra relicta yield not, for no profit at all thereof
arises, till the sand be inned and gained; and these Laws made the
Commissioners Savers and not Gainers, and therefore did extend the Commission
but to the utttermost banks and walls, and left the shore as grounds possessed
by the sea, and so be put pro in defenso by this Law; and therefore I do make
my conclusion as follows:







Lincoln and elsewhere in this Realm, yet that was done at the labor of private
men, and not by the Commission of Sewers, which aims at the general good, and
not at private Commodities.

So that Super totam materiam, I am of opinion with the conclusion of my Case,
that is, That the said new Island is the Kings, the grounds left to the shore
pertains to C. the subject; and that because they are all of them within the
Realm of England, they are therefore within the extent of this Statute: But in
regard they are grounds left only, and not gained nor made profitable for the
Commonwealth of this Realm, they are not therefore within this Commission. And
so I conclude my Argument as I did my Case: in which, I hope, I have neither
injured the Subject in his private Inheritance, nor wronged Prerogative in any
point.

Finis primae Lecturae.
Initium secundae Lecturae.
FOrasmuch as the first day I went perambulation about the Sea, and of all
which belong to her Empire and Dominion; wherein I did survey her bounds, her
qualities and her government: Now I do intend to go a progress through the
Land, and to take a view of the fair goodly Rivers which make their voyage to
the Sea, for these my Statute has taken into her protection. And this second
day I purpose to call a Court of Oyer and Terminer: And I do intend, with your
gentle patience, to examine all the particulars there arising. And because the
said Statute of 23 H. 8. must be my chief guide to direct my fairest passage
through these uncouth ways, I will pray aid thereon; and I will now proceed to
declare what business on Land this Law has undertaken to defend, and what
offenses it purposes to reform: And accordingly the said Law does distribute
it self into these particular Branches:

I.
First, Into matters of defense this Statute maintains, are these following,
viz. 1. Walls. 2. Banks. 3. Ditches. 4. Gutters. 5. Sewers. 6. Goats. 7.
Calceys. 8. Bridges.


Secondly, Into matters of Offense which this Statute terms Lets, Impediments
and Annoyances which are to be put down or reformed, as cause shall require; 1.
Streams. 2. Mills. 3. Ponds. 4. Fishgarths. 5. Mildams. 6. Locks. 7.
Hebbingwers 8. Hecks. 9. Floodgates. 10. Other like Lets and Impediments.


And to the end I might fully examine this part of the Statute which produces
these matters, I have framed a Case, which does give occasion in this days
exercise to dispute of all them.

The Case for the second Lecture.
A. Leaseth his Manor in the county of Lincoln, in which Second Case.
be Copyholds, to B. a younger Son for his life, upon condition to have it for
the life of C. upon condition to have it to him and the heirs of the body of
his Father. A Copyhold is forfeit, the first Condition is performed, the
Commissioners of Sewers in that county upon view survey, and by their
discretion decree a new bank where none was before to resist the Sea, and a new
River to be cut to drain the superfluous waters in S. and an old Sewer in D. to
be repaired; and by inquisition assesses B. the Lessee for the Manor, the
Copyholder for the Copyhold Land, and the Town of S. and also the Parson there
for his Tithes, because they lie all in the Level; the second condition is
performed, B. enters in the Copyhold.

My conclusion is, That this new Bank, new River, and old Sewer be well
decreed, but the said sesse is void in toto and in qualibet part.

Points at the Common Law.
The Points of this Case are three at the Common Law, and three upon this
Statute; but all of them are so woven within another, that every one of them go
hand in hand from the beginning to the end of the Case.

Imprimis, Whether the Duplicate Condition be good, or not?

B. the younger Son has by the first Condition, and what Estate he has got by
the second?



Points upon the Statute.
Imprimis, Whether Commissioners have power to decree a new bank, a new drain,
and other new defenses, or not? And herein the qualities and properties of
Rivers, Streams and Banks, and their dependants, are to be treated of.





Argumentum Lectoris.
Seeing it has been the ancient order for the Reader of this place to maintain
the Conclusions of his Case, I shall therefore endeavor my self to perform that
order which Custom has imposed upon me; and accordingly as I have concluded,
so I take the Law to be.

And touching the first Point, it has been challenged and drawn in question
upon some Opinion delivered in the Rector of Cheddingtons Case in Sir Edward
Cooks first Report; where it said, That one contingent cannot depend upon
another: Sir Ed. Cooks 1 Report.
But more strictly it is called to an account in the Lord Staffords Case in Sir
Edward Cooks eighth Report; for there it is Cook, Rep. 8.
held, That one possibility cannot depend upon another possibility; and this
Case is there put, That if A. let Lands to B. for years, upon condition to have
it for life, and upon condition to have Fee, that the Fee simple can never
increase by the second condition; but as he says in another Case, Amicus Plato
Amicus Socrates sed magis amica veritas, his rule taken in the first Case is
very general, and the Lord Staffords Case admits distinctions, which in my
Argument I shall apply my self unto.

And some differences I shall take in this Point in question; therefore I shall
thus distinguish, That if upon performance of the first Condition, the Original
Estate be determined upon which both the first and second Condition were built
and grounded, the second Condition and increase thereupon is utterly void; but
if the first Estate be not destroyed nor confounded upon the first Condition
performed, the second Condition and Estate thereof which shall be gotten
thereby, may then well grow upon the old stock. To explain this by Example, If
A. give Land to B. in Fee simple, upon condition to have the Land in Tail, upon
condition to have for Life; here because the first Estate and Livery by the
first Condition is not destroyed, therefore the second Condition should well
stand in force. So I do make a Lease to A. for twenty years, upon condition to
have the Land for forty years, upon condition to have Fee; this first Condition
and second Condition may have both their full operations: for by the
performance of the first Condition, the lease of twenty years is not destroyed,
but stands on foot; and therefore the original Estate remaining unconfounded,
the Fee simple may well increase by the performance of the second Condition:
But if a Lease be made to A. for his life, upon condition to have in Tail, upon
condition to have Fee; the second Condition here is utterly void, because by
the performance of the first Condition, A. had an Estate in Tail, which drowned
and destroyed his Estate for life; and so because every decreasing and
increasing Estate is to depend upon the first Estate which receives the Livery,
which is the life of all, therefore the second Estate can never accrue in this
case: and this is true reason, as I take it, of the said Case put in the Lord
Staffords Case; for there the Case for years was destroyed by the Lease for
life, which came by the first Lord Staffords Case.
Condition, and so the Fee simple there could never accrue by the second
Condition. And in answer to the said general ground taken in the Rector of
Cheddingtons Case, That one Rector de Cheddingtons Case.
contingent or possibility cannot depend upon another; under favor I take it,
not that I am bound thereby, neither was it the meaning of Sir Edward Cook, as
I take it, to extend the same so largely as they are there put, because I find
many Authorities of great account which are against the said general position.

And first in the 38 H. 8. Br. Feoffments, pl. 71. a Feoffment 38 H. S.
was made to the use of A. and his heirs, until I. S. paid him Ten pounds, and
then to I. S. and his heirs, and so to the third person; and what is this but
one condition, contingent and possibility to depend upon another, for these
contingents there were held good, and were built upon a sure foundation.

And so in Digs Case in Sir Edward Cooks Reports, where a Feoffment is made to
the use of A. and his heirs, with Digs Case.
power of Revocation, and after of new Limitation of Estates; these be also
contingents and possibilities depending upon others, and many such double
contingents may be put.

The Case of Sir Edward Cook put in the end of the Rector of Cheddingtons Case
out of 12 Lib. Ass. pl. 5. in my 12 lib. Assize
opinion does not disalow the second Condition; for there the Case is, That A.
Leased to B. upon condition, That if A. or his heirs pay to B. Ten pounds
within a certain day, that they might re-enter; and if A. nor his heirs should
not pay the Ten pounds within the time; Then if B. paid to A. Ten pounds at
another day, that he should have Fee: Both A. and B. failed in payment, and A.
entered, and being put out, brought an Assize, and nihil Caepit per breve; this
does not prove that one condition cannot depend upon another, neither can I see
well what Exposition to make of so uncertain a Case, so that I take this Case
to be no evidence against mine.

But in the 14 H. 8. fol. 15. there is a Case which in my 14 H. 8. fol. 15.
opinion makes more against my double condition then any other, which is put by
Brudnel Chief Justice; that is, If A. be bound in an Obligation to B. upon
condition to infeoff I. S. before Easter ensuing, then the Obligation to be
void; and if he do not infeoff him, then to pay Ten pounds at Pentecost, then
the Obligation to be void: The Feoffment is not made before Easter, therefore
Brudnel held the Obligation was forfeit, and that the second Condition was not
good: But there is a (Quaere) set upon that Case, and so it may well be, for I
see it commonly done, that if a defesans be made of a Statute which is broken,
and so the Statute becomes forfeit, yet a new defesans may defeat it; and so in
my opinion may the second Condition in this Case avoid the Obligation, if the
first conclusion had not been in the Case.

I shall add this Case also as a conceit; that is, A. infeoffs B. upon
condition, if A. go to Lincoln he shall have the A Conceit.
Lands to him and the heirs of his body, and if he go to Boston he shall have
it for Ten years; and he goes first to Boston.

I do here hold these Conditions being put promiscuously, without distinction
of the times of the Conditions which shall be first performed, and which the
second, that the Fee is decreased into an Estate for years, and can never
increase into an Estate in tail by performing of the second Condition, because
the Livery out of which it should grow was quite destroyed by the first
decreaser. So that my intent S^^ond Point.
appears, that one Condition may depend upon another upon the said distinction;
but whether by the performance of the first Condition in my Case there will an
Estate come to B. or not, I meant it for a question: for B. had before an
Estate for his own life; then is it not possible that his Estate can hereby be
increased by having the Land also for the life of C. if it be admitted
argumenti gratia, that B. shall or may have both these Estates stand in him
both at one time: for if C. dyed first, then is B. never like to have any
benefit thereof: And if B. himself should dye before C. then also were it
impossible for B. to make any use of this Estate for the life of C. unless it
were in him to grant away to another, as in the Case of the Office in the 1 H.
7. where an Office 1 H. 7. 29. Crofts Case.
is granted to the King, the King could not have the Office himself; and so in
that point for the King to take by the grant, he could not, yet by that book it
was in him to grant over to another which might have it. And like to this is
the Case where I. S. is Parson of the Church of Dale, and the Patron grants the
next avoidance, this grant can he himself take no benefit by, unless he resign,
yet if he dye it shall come to his Executors.

But I take the Law to be in my Case, that B. shall not by the first Condition
have both the Estates in him at once, that is, for his own life, and after for
the life of C. but that the Estate of B. by the first Condition, shall be
decreased or changed from his own life into the life of C. and shall be melted
and newly molded by this Condition; for an Estate may as well decrease as
increase by a Condition: and yet the Lord Staffords principal Case was, That
Queen Elizabeth did grant the Manor to Tindal and the heirs of his body, upon
condition upon payment of Twenty shillings to her by Tindal, that he should
have the Reversion to him and his heirs; and there it is holden for Law, that
by the payment of Twenty shillings, the Reversion in Fee simple shall increase
to Tindal, and shall not alter or drown the Estate Tail, which is an excellent
Case, but alter the putting of that Case, and then it may alter the Law also;
that is, I give Land to I. S. and the heirs of his body, upon condition A
Conceit.
if he pay me Twenty shillings, that he shall have the said Lands to him and
his heirs: In my conceit by the performance of this condition, the Estate Tail,
is by increase changed into a Fee simple; in which, note the difference between
Tindals Case and this, where upon payment of 20. s. the reversion is granted to
him and his heirs: and where the words be, That upon payment of Twenty
shillings he shall have the Lands to him and his heirs: In the first Case, the
Fee-simple accrewing shall not alter the Estate Tail, but in the second Case,
by the Fee increasing, the Estate Tail is determined and changed into a Fee
simple, quod quaere.

Admitting the first condition did increase the Estate of B. from his own life
to the life of C. and the second condition is performed, by the which another
Estate will accrue to B. as I take it will, because an Estate decreased, is
parcel of the first Estate; then what Estate B. has got by this new
Limitation, is the question: And in my Opinion, he has at the most but gotten
an Estate again for his own life, and that the Limitation to the heirs of the
body of his father is utterly void, be his father dead or alive; for if his
father be dead, his elder brother is the heir of his body, within these words
of Limitation, who cannot take the Lands by descent Littleton estate Tail.
from B. his Brother, or from his Father; but as the Case is put in Littletons
Title Tail, and in the 4 and 5 Ma. in Dier Ereswoulds 4 and 5 Ma. Dier.
Case, where Lands were given to the eldest son, and the heirs of the body of
his father; this is a good Estate in Tail, being made to the eldest son,
because he is capable to take the Lands in both degrees. And in 2 E. 3. the
Case 2 E. 3.
is famous, and is known by the name of Roberges Case, where Lands were given
to her and to the heirs of the husband of her body begotten; and it was there
held, That if her husband were then dead, and left any heir which he had by
her, they might take jointly with her; for that it was not possible to take by
descent from the said Roberges, because he which takes it must not be heir to
her, but to the husband, who never held any Estate therein: And so to be short,
I am of Opinion, That no estate of inheritance be gained by B. by these words,
The heirs of the body of his father.

The Case upon the third Point is this, a Manor is granted Third Point.
to one for his life, upon condition to have it for the life of C. then a
Copyhold, is forfeit, and before the Lord seize, his Estate is altered or
changed; if now he can take advantage of this forfeiture or not, wherein the
altering of the Estate of one to another is of like force, as where it alters
in the parties self, against which it may be said, That if Tenant for life make
waste, and then he in the reversion grant over the reversion, the Grantee shall
not now punish this waste; and so Mr. Perkins, fol. 20. If a Tenant alien in
Mortmain, and Perkins, so. 20.
then the Lord grant away his Signiory, the Grantee shall not enter for this
Mortmain: so by Fitz. in his Not. bre. in his admeasurement Fitz. Har. Not. brc.
of Dower, If a Garden assign to a woman more dower then she ought to have, and
then grant his Gardenship over, the Grantee cannot have an admeasurement of
Dower against her: and so Binghams Case in Sir Edward Cook 2. Rep. where there
was Tenant for life, remainder in Fee of a Tenancy holden Binghams Case, Cook 2
Rep.
by Knights service, and he in remainder died, his heirs within age, and then
the Lord granted away his Signiory, and then Tenant for life dyed, by which the
said heir was to have been in ward; yet because the Signiory was granted away
after the inception of the Wardship, before it was perfectly due, it was there
held, that neither the grant nor the grantee should have the same: So Lessee
for life without impeachment Bokenhams Case in Dicr.
of wast, remainder for his own life, the privilege is lost; but yet
notwithstanding, I do hold that in this Case B. after he has by the
performance of the Condition altered his Estate which he had when the
forfeiture was committed; yet shall he afterward take advantage thereof well
enough: As if there be Tenant for life, the Remainder for life to I. S. and the
first Tenant for life commit waste or forfeiture, he in the reversion cannot
punish this during the life of him in the remainder for life, but after his
death he may: also if one make a Lease for years, upon Condition to be void,
and the Lessor grant away his reversion, the Grantee may enter for breach of
this Condition by 11 H. 7. 17. and yet here the Estate in reversion is altered
from 11 H. 7. 17.
one to another; and I doubt not, but if a Tenant for life be the remainder in
Fee to another of a Manor, and a Copyhold is forfeit, and then Tenant for life
dyed, that he in remainder may enter into this Copyhold; and yet this Estate is
altered into a possession from a remainder; and in the Case, although the
Estate in B. be altered, yet it is by decreaser, and so thereby it is parcel of
the old Estate he had before: and therefore it is like to a Case where the
husband and wife were Tenants in special Tail, and they recovered by Assize,
and then the husband dyed, and after his death without issue, the wives Estate
being altered from an Estate Tail, into an Estate of possibility of issue
extinct, was again put out and disseized, and she brought a Writ of
Redisseisin, 2 H. 4. 17. and 26 H. 6. title Aid pl. 77.
which will not lie but on the first Estate, and against the first parties, and
yet it was maintained, because it was parcel of her former Estate: And so in
this Case, although the Estate of B. was altered from his own life into the
life of C. yet I am of Opinion, That he might take advantage of this
forfeiture, because the Customary Estate is utterly void thereby.

Points upon the Statute.
I am determined before I enter into the discourse of new defenses in my Case,
to deliver my Opinion touching the Walls, Banks and other ancient defenses,
which have had their being time out of memory, and in truth be the very
materials and memorials of Antiquity: And because Banks and Walls be the first
named in the Commission, they shall therefore have the first place in my
argument, being the most ancient and approved defenses, as well against the
rage of the Seas, as against the violence of fresh waters, that either Art or
Nature have produced.

Bank.
THe Bank of the sea is the utmost border of dry land, and is of the same
materials with the grounds wherein and whereon it stands; it is sometimes
natural, and in some places artificial: Natural, as Mountains raised higher
then other grounds adjoining as it pleased the Creator, when the first huge
Chaos was separated, divided and distributed; Artificial, when it is cast by
man's hand. Justinian the Emperor treating of these in his Institutes, and his
title de rerum divisione describes them in this manner, Riparum usus est
publicus illar' vero domin' ad eos pertinet qui proximior praediis domini sunt,
itaque naves ad eas appellere funes arboribus ibi natis Religare onus aliquod,
in his Reponere cuilibet liberum est, by which authority it appears, that the
ownership and property of the sea bank and banks of great Rivers, be to them
whose grounds are next thereto adjoining, and the Trees, Grass and other things
thereon growing, belong to the owner of the soil, but the use of the banks is
common to all the Kings liege people, as to tie the ships and boats to the
Trees, and to tow them to and fro, and to lade and unlade their Merchandises
thereon, and for fishers to dry their nets on. And as the owner of the soil and
proprietor of the grounds, cannot justify the digging or casting of them down,
whereby the people shall be hindered of their necessary use thereof, no more can
the people which have but necessarium usum, fell up the Trees, or mow the grass
thereon growing, neither ought they to dig ballast there, but every one, as
well owner as user, Sic uti suo ut alienum non laedat. I cannot more aptly
compare a Bank of the Sea, or of a navigable River, then to a Highway, for that
the property thereof is to him whose ground is next adjoining, and the use
thereof is common to all men, and the power thereof the King has by His Laws,
Proprietas Domino, usus populo, potestas Regi: wherein for more clear
Illustration of this matter, I put this Case, Proprietas Domo usus populo.
That I. S. does cut the Sea bank, or the bank of a great Potestas Regi.
River; and I. B. which has occasion to pass thereby, falls unawares into
the cut, and is hurt in body or goods, the party which cutteth this Bank
incureth these mulcts: For first, the owner of the soil may have his Action of
Trespass, quare solum fodit, and he which fell therein may have his Action upon
the Case against the digger of that cut, for to 8 E 4 9. 27 H. 8. 27. 2 E. 4. 9.
recover his damage for his special hurt, and the offender may also be indicted
at the Kings suit for the general wrong done to the Kings people: And the like
Law is of highway.

A Wall does differ in point of ownershhip from a Bank, first, in respect of
the materials the same is made on, for a Bank is made Ex solo and fundo qua ex
suis propriis naturis sunt cadem cum terra super qua edificatur, but so is not
a Wall, for it is an artificial edifice, not of the materials arising of the
place where it stands, but which be brought thither and built there, ad
propria onera and costagia partis; so that the ownership and property of a Wall
does appertain to him who is bound to repair the same, though his ground lie
not next thereto; but of a Bank the property and ownership is his whose grounds
adjoyn thereto: And this shall, I hope, suffice to have said of Banks and
Walls, the two first defenses nominated in the Commission of Sewers.

The letter of this Statute and Commission, seem to extend only to Banks,
Walls, and other defenses standing and being by the coasts of the sea and
Marish grounds thereto adjoining; but whether the Banks and Walls of fresh
Rivers which have their courses to the sea be within this statute or not, has
heretofore bred some question; but for my own part, I am clear of opinion that
they be within the provision of these Laws, for there be two mischiefs recited
in the Statute; the first is, for not maintaining the Walls and Banks against
the sea, by reason whereof great hurt has happened thereby, by the overflowing
thereof: and the other, by the inundation of fresh watercourse through
Landfloods, which have done some damage to the grounds next adjoining; and
these Laws apply a remedy to both these grievances, that is, by repairing the
Walls and Banks next the sea, and by maintaining of the defenses of the fresh
Inland Rivers, to cause them keep their waters within their Channels. And I
take it there be words in the Statute that will bear this construction, viz.
That by the rage of the sea, flowing and reflowing, and by means of the
Trenches of fresh waters descending, and having their courses to the sea, by
diverse ways be so dirupt, lacerate and broken, etc. And also in the preamble of
the Statute the words there be, that by reason of the outrageous flowing surges
and course of the sea in and upon Marsh grounds, and other low places
heretofore through politic wisdom won and made profitable for the great
Commonwealth of this Realm, as also by occasion of Lands, waters, and other
outrageous springs, in and upon Meadows, Pastures and low grounds adjoining to
Rivers, Streams, and Currents, wherein the waters are to have their courses.
And what keeps the fresh waters within this Channel but good and serviceable
Walls and Banks, and what things does this Law intend to be dirupt, lacerate
and broken, but the Walls, Banks and other defenses which pent up their waters;
and these words extend more properly to the Walls and Banks of fresh Inland
Rivers then to sea coasts. And I do find some ancient Authority in the point
out of the Charter of Romney Marsh, page where the words be, Ad distriction'
Romney Marsh.
faciend' ad reparand' Wallia and watergaugia ejusdem marisei contra maris
impetum inundationem aliarum aquar' dulcium; which last words can have no other
construction or interpretation, but to extend the same to the Banks and and
Walls of Navigable, and other fresh Rivers and watergauges of fresh streams.
And the Statute of 1 H. 4. Cap. 12. makes the scruple clear wherein the words
be, that the common 1 H. 4. cap. 12.
passage of ships and boats in great Rivers of England, were oftentimes
disturbed by leaving of weres, etc. and provided a remedy therein; so hereby it
is manifest that fresh Navigable streams are within these Laws.

Private Walls and Banks.
BUt all Banks and Walls wherein waters be pent are not within the provision of
these Laws, but only such as belong to common and public Rivers and ditches,
Sewers and streams: for Walls and Banks made and erected as fences to men's
private grounds, and there set or made to ditches, gutters and streams, for the
drayning and watering of men's private grounds are not within these Laws, for
these Laws take cognizance and notice of none but of such as tend to the good
service of the Commonwealth, and therefore whereas in the Ports of Holland in
the county of Lincoln, and in other parts of this Realm, diverse private persons
have for inning and safety of their Marshes and Marsh grounds, cast great banks
for those private uses: these banks are not within the protection and defense
of these Laws to be maintained; but I am of opinion, That they may be extirped
if they be letting and a hinderance to the common good of the country where
they be erected.

Forasmuch as I am now in hand with Walls and Banks, the defenses to Rivers,
Sewers, Ditches and Gutters, I therefore take it, that it will hold good
correspondency here in this place, to treat of them and of their dependencies.
A River therefore is a running Stream, pent in on either side with Walls and
Banks, and bears that name as well where the waters flow and reflow, as where
the waters have their current one way, as is expressed in the Case of the
Pischary of the Banne in Ireland: In the Statute of 4 H. 7. Cap. 15. 4 H. 7. 23
H. 8 ^^. l. Ass. pl. 11
Thames is termed a River: In 34 Lib. Ass. pl. 11. and in Plow. Com. fol. 129.
Tyne and Tese be both named Rivers: and in 19 H. 7. Cap. 18. Severn is said to
be a River; Trent, Humber, Boston Haven, Lyn Haven, and Tyber, Orontes,
Euphrates 19 H 7.
and Anfidies, near which Hanibal the Carthaginean General struck the Battle of
Canna, be all of them in Histories of great authority named Rivers.

Rennatus Choppinus in his Treatise de Dominio Franciae, Choppinus.
Lib. 1. Tit. 16. de fluminibus, says, That Fluminum duo sunt genera Regalia
quaedam, alia Bannalia sive privata, Regalia dicuntur ex quibus principes Jure
patrimoniali vectigall capit in quibus modum and tempus piscationis constituit:
and Sir John Davies in his Irish Reports in the said Case of Banne, says, That
so far as the Sea does flow and reflow, it is a Royal Stream, and the fishings
therein belong to the Crown; but where the same does not flow and reflow,
Tertennants of both sides, de Communi Jure, have the Pischary; yet a Subject
may have the free fishing in the Royal streams by custom and prescription: And
in the River of Thames tam aqua quam solum pertinuit Dom' Regi, and by Charter
they were conveyed to the Lord Major of London, and Citizens of the same. In
Lib. Intrac. fol. 666. In veteri lib. Int. fol. 666.
there is a president put in this manner, That an Action of Trespass was brought
Quare le defend' piscat'est in sua separali pischaria and pisces inde,
videlicet, duos Salmones caepit; the Defendant justified, and said, That he was
seized of the Manor of Dale, which does extend it self usque ad medium aquae
de V. quae est eadem pischaria in qua supponitur pischationem predict', fieri
exaustriali part, and that the Plaintiff eodem tempore quo, fuit sesitus de
manerio de Sale quod se extendit usque ad medium fili aquae predic' ex boreali
part ejusdem aquae and quod ipse defendens and omnes quorum statum ipse habet
in predic' manerio de Dale, a tempore quo non extat memoria hominum in
contrario seisit' fuerant de predic' australi part de predic' aquae ut de
separali pischaria sua: in which pleading it appears, That the Lords on either
side the River, owe the River by several moyeties, and the several moyeties and
the several parts of the fishing as incident thereto.

It may also here, as I take it, be moved for an apt question, In whom the
property of running waters was; for Not. br. fo. 123 P. C. 164.
in Natura Brevium, fol. 123. there is a quod permitt' habere liberam
pischariam in aquae ipsius L. whereby it appears, That the Plaintiff had
property in those waters; and in Plo. Com. 154. one granted aquam suam in L.
and the Pischary passed thereby, and so did the soil also in my opinion: for in
12 H. 7. fol. 4. a precipe quod reddat is brought de una 12 H. 7. fol. 4.
acra terrae Cu' aqua Cooperta. In my conceit the Civil Law makes prettier and
neater distinctions of these then our Common Law does; for there it is said,
That naturali ratione quaedam sunt Communia ut Aer. Aqua profluens, mare and
littora maris: I concur in opinion with them, that the air is common to all;
and I hold my former definitions touching the properties of the sea and the sea
shores: But that there should be a property fixed in running waters, I cannot
be drawn to that opinion; for the Civil Law says further, quod aqua profluens
non manet in certo loco sed procul fuit extra ditione in Ejus cujus flumen est
ut ad mare tandem perveniat; for in my opinion it should be strange that the
Law of property should be fixed upon such uncertainties, as to be altered into
Meam, Tuam, Suam, before these words can be spoken, and to be changed in every
twinkling of an eye, and to be more uncertain in the proprietor, then a
Camelion of his Colors. Our Common Law, which of all others is the most
certain, did not set his property upon a Dear in Parks, Conneys or Hares in
Warrens, nor on Fishes in running Streams; all which be more permanent then
running waters be: And therefore I am of opinion, that taking this word Aqua
for the bare running water, there can be no property therein, but as the same
is incident to the soil, taking them two for one, it is drawn with the property
thereof: and this difference is apparent by 12 H. 7. aforesaid; And Mr. Lyuwood
puts a difference inter Fluvium and flumen; for says he, Est perennis decursus
aquar' sed flumen est propria ipsa aqua.

Let it not be held Questionable, whether Rivers of both kinds be within these
Laws or not, though they be not put among the defenses which this Statute
speaks of; for that expressly those things which are termed Lets and
Impediments, are commanded by this Statute to be removed out of the Rivers and
Streams for hindering the waters; and Navigation being so carefully provided for
cannot be supported, unless Rivers Navigable be maintained: and these Rivers
are like the veins of a man's body, by means whereof the increase of the grounds
near thereunto adjoining are abundantly multiplied, and the waters which
trouble the Level are conveyed away thereby: so that I am clear of Opinion,
that Rivers and their Channels, Waters and Banks, are all of them fully within
the defense of these Laws, howsoever some which would have no new Rivers cast
by the power of these Laws, would extend the words but to the repairs, and not
to the River it self.

Sewer.
A Sewer, whereupon these Laws took their name, has been no great stranger to
our Common Laws of this Realm, being perfectly described, though not precisely
defined in our Law; some mincing the word, compound it of two words, Sea and
were, saying, that nomina sunt consonantia rebus; and there is some coherence
between the name and the nature of the thing. Authorities in Law will best
decide the question, and therefore 20 H. 6. fol. 1. an action of waste 20 H. 6.
fol. 1.
is brought there against Tenant by the courtesy, for suffering a Sewer in
part of the grounds to be unrepaired, by reason whereof his grounds in L. which
the Defendent held by the courtesy of England, were sorrounded; so that by
this book it is made manifest, that the Sewer is a fresh water trench compassed
in on both sides with a bank, and is a small current or little River. And in 12
H. 4. fol. 7. an Action of the Case was brought for stopping of a Sewer in 12
H. 4. fol. 7.
Dale, by reason whereof the waters did overflow the banks, and drown the
Plantiffs Meadow grounds: So these two Cases sufficiently declare what a Sewer
is; and Hollingshead in his Chronicle terms the Fleet Dike in London a Sewer;
and I am of opinion, That it is a diminutive of a River, and by express words
Sewers be within these Laws and sic est in 39 H. 6. 31.

Gutter.
A Gutter is of a less size, and of a narrower passage and current then a Sewer
is; and as I take it, a Gutter is the diminutive of a Sewer: and the difference
between them is, That a Sewer is a common public stream, and a Gutter is a
straight private running water; and the use of a Sewer is common, and of a
Gutter peculiar, and by express words also a Gutter is within these Laws and
ceo est sic mention' 39 H. 6. 31.

Ditches.
A Ditch Fossa is also described in our Books, as in 12 H. 4. 7. where an
Action upon the Case was brought against the Mr. of S. Marks in Bristol, for
that he was bound by the tenure of his Land to cleanse a Ditch there; he did
neglect to do the same, by means whereof the waters therein were stopped, and
did thereby surround the Plaintiffs grounds; so that hereby it is apparent,
That a Ditch is a kind of current of waters in infimo gradu. And Mr. Cambden
in Sua Lincolniensi Historia does there describe Fosdyke to be Fossa incibis
Cambden.
quam Henricus Prinus per septem miliaria a Withania in Trentum perduxit ut
Lincolniensibus ad subvehenda necessaria usui esset; this Ditch is at this day
a current and passage for Boats of small burden in Winter, but in Summer none
at all; though of late great sums of money has been expended thereupon Sed
tamen ad huc nihil inde boni venit: at the best it is the worst in all that
country, and is of so slow a current ut non videtur currere omnino: It serves
in many places for a fence to divide Lordships, and is a great trough to
swallow up waters thereabouts, which otherwise would lie upon the Level, and of
it I say no more, but Spero meliora and expecto.

Other famous Ditches there be, as that in the North-East part of the city of
York, which is in a manner a standing Water: And there is an old forlorn Dike on
the Fen sides in the county of Lincoln, called Caredike, more ancient then
profitable, for it does, as many other of those unusual Ditches do, run cross
to the ordinary currents of waters in those parts: For where the Seas (for
example) stand East from the main Land, and so the ordinary currents run all
from West to East directly toward the Sea, this runs North and South, obvious
and cross to the natural current of the waters, which is the true cause
wherefore their currents be so slow, small or none at all. There is another of
them on Newmarket Heath quae admiranda Fossa vocat' the Devils Dike: and in
Wiltshire there is a Ditch famous, called Wansdike, or Mercurii Fossa, which
serves for a division of countries, and so be Fossa Limitania, and are either
altogether dry Dikes, and contain commonly no more waters then those that fall
into them: None of these Ditches be within these Laws, but such of them which
have a kind of current, and which in some sort partake with the Rivers.

Pools.
A Pool is a mere standing water, without any current at all, and has seldom
or never any issue to convey away the waters; but a Ditch has no constant
standing, nor any apparent current: A Pool is properly the Inheritance of some
private, but a Fosse or Ditch is in use common. Pools be not within this Law
for two causes; the one, Because both in property and use they be private and
peculiar: The other is, Because these Laws seem to extend to grounds casually,
and not continually drowned and ad eaquae frequentius accidunt Jura ad
aptantur; yet all Pools be not excluded from the helps of these Laws: for such
as adjoyn to great Rivers, and lie upon the sides thereof without division,
they are in a manner part of the Rivers; and of their kind is the two famous
Pools called Brayford and Swanpool, both near unto the city of Lincoln.

Ponds.
A Pond is a standing Ditch cast by labor of man's hand in his private grounds
for his private use, to serve his house and household with necessary waters; but
a Pool is a low plat of ground by nature, and is not cast by man's hand. I find
a Pond within my Law I read on in expressis terminis, not as a thing defended
thereby, but as a Let and Impediment: And had I not found him therein named, I
should not by any Exposition have here brought it in amongst the water
Instruments; for I much marvel what impediment a Pond can be at all, unless by
casting of Trenches from the River to the same, it shall be a means to take
thereinto some of the waters of the River, and may thereby hinder Navigation;
but this is far fetched.

Streams.
STreams be not any of these, for all these have their proper peculiar Banks,
Bounds and Channels, and are put in amongst them; but a Stream is properly a
current of waters running over the Level at random, and be not kept in with
Banks or Walls, and so Linwood says, that Flumen which is a Stream nihil aliud
est quam ipsa aqua.

Conduits.
A Conduit or ought thereto belonging is not within these Laws in any sort,
whether it pertain to a private person, or to a Town or Corporation.

Springs.
SPrings I find within this Statute, but coupled with such a word, that they
thereby seem to be excluded and exiled quite from claiming any privilege of
defense by these Laws; for the word (Outrageous) being joined therewith, does
signify the meaning of these Laws to take them to be hurtful, and not helpful;
but all this comes of the word Outrageous, which being but a quality annexed
upon accident, may upon just occasion be taken away. And the word Springs of it
self is both in appellation and operation, very beneficial for the
Commonwealth: for I may justly term them the vital Spirits of many the great
and Royal Rivers of this Kingdom, as of Thames, Trent, and such like: And
therefore I am willing to let such of them as be not outrageous and hurtful, to
take up a place of defense within these Laws; for the Trent at the head is
derived from Springs, as many other Rivers be: and I give both the essence and
assistance to them, and so in my opinion they are worthy the protection of
these Laws: and I doubt not but the waters issuing and gushing from the
outrageous Springs, may by the provident and discreet care of the Commissioners
be so ordered, as the same may be applied and employed to necessary uses.

So now I have run through, like a swift stream, the qualities of these Rivers,
Gutters, Sewers and Ditches, and of all their dependancies, and wherein they
are to have aid and assistance of these Laws of Sewers, being in truth the very
materials of these Laws: yet for a little better explanation of their several
natures and kinds, I shall therefore put these Cases;

A. want water by the dryness of the season for the use of their cattle, or for
other household affairs, as for brewing, washing and such like; and in the Town
of B. which does adjoyn thereto, there is plenty of waters, more perhaps then
is necessary for use there, the Commissioners of Sewers have no power by any of
these Laws, for any of the said purposes, to make any order or decree to
relieve the Town of A. with waters from B. for this Statute makes but two uses
of Rivers, Sewers and Streams, the one for draining, the other for sailing; and
being for neither of these purposes, the Commissioners have no power to deal
therein.



I. S. keeps Boats for his own necessary uses and occasions, and for no other
purpose, the Commissioners have no warrant by their Commission to relieve I. S.
with waters for this his own private use, for that their power is the
Republike; Yet if I. S. has used with his Boats to carry and recarry for the
common use of the people in general, then he is within the relief of these Laws.

Middleton from Ware to London, could not have been done by the power of these
Laws, because it was not made for the draining or sailing, but for household
affairs, and therefore special Statutes were enacted to begin, continue and
perfect that work in 3, 4 Jac. Regis; and after the stream was effected, these
two Statutes brought the same within 3, 4 Jac. Reg.
the power of these Laws.

And now seeing my Law has brought me in my argument and discourse among the
things defended by these Laws; I shall now make a little digression from my
Case, to treat of Bridges, and Calceys and Goats, the proper inventions and
works of men's hands, and pertinent to this place to be treated of by the order
of this Statute; and they be three material instruments which this Statute by
name has been careful to take order for.

Bridges.
BRidges are diversely taken in these Statutes, for some are thereby to be
maintained, and other some are to be extirped or reformed as lets and
impediments; wherein I think it not amiss for instruction, to open some other
leading Statutes which have provided for them.

The first Statute of Bridges is in Magna Charta, cap. 15. Magna Charta, cap.
15.
nulla villa nec liber homo distringatur facere pontes nisi qui ab antiquo and
de jure facere Consueverant tempore Henrici Aui' nostr' this word (facere) is
to be construed in the sense of Reparareor Manutenere, for other construction
it cannot have. And if this Statute should be in force, I take it that it would
abate much the power of the Commissioners of Sewers; for it seems by the
letter of it, that either no Bridges were to be repaired, but such as were made
in the time of H. 2. and before; H. 2.
neither should any be bound to repair them, but such as in His time had then
used, and were bound to repair them: but this Statute is neither repealed, nor
must be abridged, as not to extend to Bridges made sithence; and I take it,
under favor, that it stands on surrounded grounds, which this Statute has to
do with; as also for such Bridges as the Statute of 22 H. 8. cap. has power
over, which are Bridges 22 H. 8.
standing on High ways, for both these Statutes do in my Opinion oppose the
said Statute of Magna Charta: Howsoever Sir Edward Cook in his Cases of the
Isle of Ely Case of the Isle of Ely.
recites the said Statute as it were in force at this day; and if so, then the
exposition must be made, as I take it, that all Bridges made and erected since
are out of the inhibition of that Statute, or else that Statute is totally
repealed: For otherwise all Bridges builded since should not be repaired,
because no person or town should be obliged to do them: And then were the power
of Commissioners of Sewers almost altogether inhibited, touching Bridges, and
their hands closed up for meddling therewithal; but I take this Statute of
Sewers in full strength to deal with such Bridges as come within the reach of
it.

Bridges within the Law of Sewers, are such as lie on or near surrounded
grounds, especially if they be not only placed there for free passage, but also
for strength, to defend the violence of the waters, as many of this kind be;
viz. London Bridge, Rochester Bridge, the great Bridges at Lincoln, Boston
Bridge, and the like; and such as lie on Inland and high countries, over high
ways, as Burton, Trent, Ware, Wainsford, Huntington and such like, be within
the said Statute of 22 H. 8. and I make little doubt of it, but all the said
last mentioned Bridges are also within the provision of the said Laws of
Sewers, for they lie and are built over such Rivers as be all of them within
these Laws.

The Statute of 22 H. 8. extends not to Bridges lying out 22 H. 8.
of highways; but the Statute of Sewers does extend to such also: And therefore
if a Bridge stand on a common Sewer, Ditch or Gutter which has his current to
the Sea, or to some River, the Commissioners of Sewers has power over such,
either to repair the same, or to extirp it, as just cause and occasion shall
require.

Also private Bridges are within these Laws, as if I. S. and his Ancestors,
owners of such a House, have had and used to have a Bridge over a greater or
less River to the Church, and to his Pasture Grounds, or to his Common, this
Bridge, and all other of this kind, are within this Statute of Sewers; viz. to
be put down or reformed if they be impediments to the Commonwealth, and also
to be maintained, if thereby the same be any material defense against the rage
and violence of the waters, otherwise not, but for putting down such Bridges
which have been by prescription. I hope the Commissioners of Sewers will be
well advised therein, seeing time has given great approbation of them, and
therefore I shall handle this point more fully, when I come to treat of Lets
and Impediments, where that part of this Statute comes most fit to be handled.

The Statute of 22 H. 8. extends to the repairing and amending of Bridges
only, but if it be fit to take an Arch away, or to add a new Arch thereto, or
to erect and build a new Bridge where none was before, this is most fit to be
done by the Commissioners of Sewers, whose power may be extended thereto.

All Bridges set upon Rivers by persons without authority, may be pulled down
by the Commissioners of Sewers, and the parties punished; for no man ought of
his own authority to be so bold with the common and high ways or streams, as to
erect Bridges or other Engines thereon without lawful Warrant.

Bridges in highways, where there is no stream under, but only some petty Land
stream at rain and wet seasons, these be dry Bridges, and be not within this
Statute of Sewers, but yet they be within the Statute of 22 H. 8. if they stand
on highways: In 14 Jacobi Regis it was found by inquisition taken at the city
of Lincoln in the Guild Hall there, 14 Jac.
before Sir Thomas Grantham Knight, and my self, and other Commissioners of the
Sewers, that the great Bridge at Bracebridge near the city of Lincoln, and
standing upon the River of Wytham thirty miles from the Sea, was fallen into
great decay, whereby carts, carriages and men on horseback could not pass over
the same, as in times past had been used, in defect of Hen. Sapcots Esquire who
ought to repair a part thereof, by reason of his Manor of Bracebridge; and of
Bartholmew Gregge, who by reason of his house standing at the Bridge foot,
called the Hermitage, on the North side of the River, ought to repair another
part; and of the Corporation of Lincoln, who was to repair a part thereof; and
of the country of Moreland, who used to repair another part: And the same was
decreed accordingly. But Mr. Sapcot without cause finding himself grieved
thereat, preferred his Bill into the Exchequer Chamber against Sir Thomas
Grantham and others, to be relieved therein; and did allege, That the same
stood far from the sea, pretending thereby that the Commissioners of Sewers had
no power to deal with the same: but at the hearing of the Cause in Anno 16.
Jac. he was overruled in that and all other parts of this Suit.

A Calcey.
A Calcey or Calsway is a passage made by art of Earth, Gravel, Stones and such
like, on or over some high or Common way leading through surrounded grounds for
the safe passage of the Kings liege people, and these Calceys have always been
expressed in the ancient Commissions of the Sewers in the Register, Fitz. not.
bre. and in the Statute of 6 H. 6. cap 5. but not any Calceys be in these Laws,
but Register F. H. N. B. 6. H. 6.
such as be over surrounded and low grounds, as that of Barston Bank, Southy
Bank, and such like: but touching Calceys lying in Towns and Villages which be
in the high uplandish Countries, this Law does not in any sort extend unto
them, but all Calceys leading over the said Bridges, and near unto them, are
provided for by this Law; yet no private Calceys are to be dealt withal by the
said Commissioners.

Goats.
GOats be usual Engines erected and built with Percullesses and doors of
timber, stone or brick, invented first in Lower Germany, and after brought into
England, and used here by imitation and experience, has given so great
approbation of them, as they are now, and that with good reason and cause
inducing the same, accounted the most useful instruments for draining the
waters out of the Land into the Sea: There is a twofold use made of them, the
one when fresh waters flows and descends upon the low grounds where these
Engines are always placed, and whereto all the channels where they stand have
their currents and drains directed, the same is let out by these into some
creek of the Sea; and if at some great floods the Seas break into the Lands,
the salt water usually have their returns through these back to the Sea: Many
of these Goats which are placed on highways, serve also for Bridges. This Goat
is no such imaginary Engine as the Mills be which some rare wise men of late
have invented, but this Invention is warranted by experience, the other is
rejected as altogether chargeable and illusory: Yet these Engines seems to me
not to be very ancient here in this Kingdom, for that I do not find them
mentioned in any of the ancient Co^missions granted, before this statute did
express the same; and surely this Statute was so curious in the special
repetition of such defenses in specie as it intended to defend and maintain,
that I am of Opinion, it can scarce be drawn to extend to any other: And
therefore I do agree with the Opinion of Sir Edward Cook in his Case of the
Isle of Ely, that an artificial Mill, and such like new invented Engines, are
not to be erected by the power of these Laws, but being once erected and proved
by experience to be beneficial to the public State, they may be continued and
maintained by the authority of this Statute.

New defenses.
HItherto I have proceeded only in the handling and discoursing of the old and
ancient defenses which be helpful both to Sea and Land: And therefore I am now
desirous to enter into the argument of new defenses, being a matter very fit
and apt to be disputed on: And to give some warrant to my argument therein, I
have so composed my Case, as both old and new be therein contained, wherein the
point will be shortly this, Whether the new River and new Bank mentioned in my
Case, could be ordered to be made by the power and authority of these Laws: And
those which would take a part to argue on the contrary, may allege much
matter, and many reasons to make good their arguments; first, out of the words
of the Law it self, for thereby it seems, that this Statute can bear no such
exposition by reason; the words thereof literally taken, seem to extend only
to the old and ancient defenses, and not to the erecting of new: And the words
thereof in this point be these;

Forasmuch as the Walls, Banks, Ditches, etc. by the rage of the Seas, and by
the fresh waters descending, be so lacerate, dirupt and broken, the Commission
therefore does authorize the Earls of Lincoln, Rutland and Exeter; Robert Lord
Willoughby of Grimsthrop, Sir William Welby, Sir Thomas Grantham, and Sir John
Hatcher, Knights, whereof three to be of the Quorum, to survey and amend the
said Walls, and Banks, Ditches, etc. in all places necessary, and the same as
often as need shall be to make new: Upon these words of the Statute, do those
which argue against the new Defenses infer, That the Commissioners have not any
power to cause new Banks, new Walls, or other defenses to be erected; and so
take a difference between the words nova construere, and de novo construere,
the first extending to erect new ones where none were before, and the other
purporting the erecting of a new one where before an old one stood: and the
words which enforce this exposition, be penned strongly to that purpose; for
first, they have power to repair and amend, What? such Walls and Banks as were
before, and the same to build new; which words, The same, literally taken, must
needs extend to such old fences as were before; and the construction being so
made, excludes clearly the power to make new ones where none was before: and
this exposition may be exampled in other Cases of like quality, as in 22 H. 6.
fo. 18. where it is said, 2^. H. 6.
That if Lessee for years suffer a house to fall down, and before an Action of
Waste be brought against him, he builds another in the same place where the
former stood, of the same quality and quantity, that shall excuse him in the
Action of Waste: but so would it not have done if he had builded the same in
all points answerable in another place, for the one is renewed, the other a new
one: and in the 10 H. 7. fol. 18. in the 10. H. 7. fol. 18.
Abbot of Thorntons Case, the words in a Lease were, That the Lessee should
repair a Chapel leased to him, and the same de novo construere and constructam
curare, which words there bear the same sense in exposition: And the Statute of
Magna Charta cap. 16. seems, touching Banks, to sway Magna Charta Cap. 16.
the same way; for there the Statute is, Quod nullae repariae defendantur nisi
illae quae fuerunt in defenso tempore Henrici Regis avi nostri and per eosdem
locos and eosdem terminos sicut esse consueverunt tempore suo; this makes much
against erecting of new Banks, if it be in force: for if no person should be
bound to repair such as were built since that time, then were it vain to build
new ones. Sir Edward Cook in his Case of the Isle of Ely, is strongly of the
same opinion, Case of the Isle of Ely.
That no new River should be made and cast by the power of this Commission; for
the case there is, That the Commissioners of Sewers in those parts made an
order and decree, That a new River should be cut out of the old River there
called Owse, through the main Land seven Miles unto another part of the said
River: And the question there was, Whether the Commissioners of Sewers had any
such power or not? and he there delivered his opinion expressly, That they had
not; and affirms it, That it was dangerous and incovenient that Commissioners
of Sewers should have any such Power and Authority, for then they might thereby
stop up the Havens, which are the Ports of the Realm: And for the justifying of
this opinion therein, he alleges Fitzher. Na. Bre. fol. 225. and the
Register, fol. Fitz. Na. 13. Fol. 225. Regist. 252.
252. that in case where a new River or Stream was desired to be made, the Writ
of Ad quod damn' was to be awarded, which should first be directed to the
Escheator of that county, to the end he must enquire and certify what damage
it might be if such a cut should be made, or a new Trench cast; and so
concluded directly against the making of new Rivers and drains by the
Commissioners of Sewers. And truly there is one thing more which makes strong
on that side, which is, That a new River, drain or cut, cannot be made but
through some man's private Inheritance, and to the prejudice thereof, which is a
matter very considerable: So that all these things laid together, might very
well move Sir Edward Cook to be of the said opinion, That no such new River or
drain could be made by the Commissioners of Sewers by the power of these Laws.

Argumentum in contrarium.
The reasons and authorities put on the other part are weighty and ponderous,
and require a very good answer; which I shall endeavor to give thereto: It is
true, that the words of this Statute and Commission bear much with the said
former exposition; So I hope to find words in this The Law it self in words
extend to it.
Statute also, which will tend as much the other way: And they be in the
forepart thereof, viz. That daily considering the great damages and losses
which have happened in many and diverse parts of this Realm, as well by the
contagious flowing surges and course of the sea, in and upon Marsh grounds, and
other low places heretofore through politic wisdom won and made profitable
for the Commonwealth of this Realm, etc. And these grounds which have been so
won, could not be so kept and preserved, but by banking and new fencing in;
which proves directly, that the said new Banks and new fencing might be made
for the inning and keeping of the said new won grounds: And also the Statute
The expired Law of H. 6. gives aid to this exposition.
of 6 Hen. 6. Cap. 5. gave the Commissioners of Sewers power to repair the
ancient Banks, and Walls and fences and eadem, and alia de novo construere; by
which words the Commissioners which had their power from that Statute, might
make new defenses, as Banks, Walls and such like: And so is the opinion of Sir
Edward Cook delivered upon the said Statute of H. 6. in his Case of the Isle of
Ely, which being observed and granted, makes strongly for this part; for that
the Statute of 23 H. 8. does not only confirm all former Statutes of the Sewers
then in Esse, but also gives authority to the Commissioners to do after the
Tenure and effect of all and singular the Statutes and Ordinances before that
time made: And although the said Statute of H. 6. was in time then expired, yet
the form and effect of it may be followed and observed: And to that end I take
this diversity between a Law repealed and a Law expired, for a repealed Law is
made void and frustrate, as either unworthy or unnecessary for some respects to
be any longer continued or put in execution, and therefore was forbidden to be
used or practiced; but a Law expired in time, though it has lost his vigor and
force, yet it is like a virtuous man deceased, his life and actions may be
worthy imitation, though the date of days be at an end; but a Law repealed is
like a man condemned for some offense, whose life and actions are neither of
them worthy imitation, unless it be to do the contrary: And the said Statute of
H. 6. was a worthy Law, which this Statute intended not to come short on, but
to extend further then the Limits of that Law did reach unto: also the said
Statute of H. 6. is used by Sir Edward Cook in the pleading of Rooks Case in
his 15. Rep. where he could Rooks Case.
make there no other use of it, seeing it was in time expired, then only by way
of imitation.

Also we must conceive, that these Laws of Sewers are of great and urgent
necessity and use for the good of the whole The equity of this Law will help
this exposition.
Commonwealth of the Realm, and therefore the intent thereof may be extended in
exposition beyond the letter of the words; for the words be (and the same to
make new) which according to the bare words in a literal construction, cannot
extend to new ones where none was before, but to the reedifying of the decayed
old ones; but the learned expositor, whose constructions be not so much
grounded upon the letter as upon the sense, may in equal justice extend the
sense to new making, as well as to renewing of defenses; for Mr. Bract. Bracton.
li. 1. Cap. 3. defines equity to be Rerum convenientia quae in paribus causis
paria desider at jura and omnia been coequiper at and dicitur equitas quasi
equalitas: And if the grave and learned Judges have in private affairs
introduced this equity to direct, enlarge or diminish the letter of the Laws in
the sense of construction, as by many presidents we find in Mr. Plow. Com. in
Hill and Granges Case, fol. 178. and in many other authorities a forciori shall
this Statute of 23 H. 8. be expounded Hill and Granges Case.
with as much favorable equity as can be, to enlarge the letter of the Law in
the sense of construction, because it tends so much to the advancement of the
Commonwealth, Et qui heret in littera heret in cortice. And if the makers of
the Law, when this Statute was put into the frame, had been demanded, whether
their meaning was to have it extended to the making of these new defenses where
either just occasion or necessity did enforce it; they would have answered,
That they so intended it; for the soul and life of the Law lies in the
sensible exposition thereof, and not in the bare letter, as Mr. Plow. also
fully demonstrates in his Com. in Easton and Studs Case.

And whereas it is formerly alleged, that the wariness of the Common Law was
such in these Cases, that it admitted not one such new Trench, River or new cut
to be made, without the awarding out of the writ of Ad quod dam' directed to
the Escheator, an Officer sworn to enquire, first, what damage it might be if
such a new cut or drain were made? and then upon his inquisition returned,
there might be one made, if by the inquisition it were found convenient, else
not to be proceeded further in: But in answer thereto, being the argument set
down in the said Case of the Isle of Ely, I am of Opinion, That there may be
more wary and circumspect proceedings by this Commission, then in the Ad quod
damn' by the Escheator; for there be many Commissioners which be all sworn, and
in the Ad quod damn' there is but one, the Escheator, plus vident oculi quam
oculus and tutius est rem' committere pluribus, quam uni, and in my Opinion, it
is much better to commit this weighty business to many Commissioners of great
gravity, experince, learning, wisdom and integrity, then to one Escheator, who
may perhaps want all those virtues: And further, whereas in the said Case of
the Isle of Ely, it is inferred, or rather feared, that by giving this power to
the Commissioners of Sewers, they may thereby stop up the havens of this
Kingdom; that fear is needles, for I find, that neither by the letter nor the
sense of these Laws, any such exposition can be made, either to the stopping up
or hindering of their currents and passages. But to proceed in my former
discourse in making new defenses: I know that in the 43, and 44 Eliz. a great
controversy did arise in the county of Lincoln, about the building and
erecting of two new Goats at 43 and 44 Eliz.
Skirbeck and Langrate, for the draining of the waters out of South Holland
Fens into Boston Haven; which work Sir Edward Dymock Knight, did further what
he might, by the strength of himself and his friends; and it was opposed by the
Country of Kesteven: and the very exception thereto taken, was, That the
Commissioners of Sewers could not by the power of their Commission make a Law
for the erecting of these new Goats where never any stood there before: And
that Case proceeded so far, as the same came in the end before the two chief
Justices, Popham and Anderson, who both delivered their opinions, that the said
new Goats, if they were found to be profitable for the good and safety of the
county, might be erected by the power of this Statute; but they then wished and
advised, that the Commissioners should be wary, provident and circumspect to
advise deliberately before hand, that they by the opinion of experienced
persons in those affairs, the said new works should in all appearance seem to
be profitable to the Common weal, if they were effected; and that Commissioners
should not in any sort make such devices at the suit, prosecution and request
of private persons for their private and peculiar good, who many times sought
their own ends under pretense of the public good. And a like great
controversy did arise in 12 Jac. in the counties of Cambridge, Huntington and
Northampton, about the making of new cuts and drains in the Isle of Ely by the
power of the Commissioners of Sewers, which being much opposed, the same came
in the end to be heard before the King and Council, wherein this Order was
conceived as follows.

The Kings Councels Order.
HIs Majesty's Attorney General having according to an Order of this Board of
the Thirteenth of October last, called unto him the Kings learned Council; and
taking Information of such Complaints as were first exhibited unto this Board,
touching sundry Suits and Vexations moved of late by certain obstinate and
ill-disposed persons, against His Majesty's Commissioners of Sewers, for the
counties of Lincoln, Huntington, Northampton and Cambridge, and their Officers
and Ministers, for executing the Orders and Decrees of the Commissioners, to
the manifest destruction and inundations of many large Levels and parts of the
said counties: And having by their Lordships like Directions, upon advised
consideration, weighed and compared the said late and undue proceeding with
ancient Laws of this Realm, appearing in diverse notable Records in the point
now questioned, with the continual and concurrent practice of ancient and later
times; and also the Opinions of the Lord Popham, late Chief Justice, delivered
in writing very exactly and fully upon the said Questions, touching the Power
and Authority of the said Commission; and thereupon making Report at large unto
their Lordships this day in full Counsel, of the whole state of the cause;
Forasmuch as thereby it appeared, That these Inventions and Disturbances
consist upon Four heads, wherein the extent of the Commission was questioned,
upon pretext and conceit of Law: First, that the Commissioners of Sewers had
not Authority to cause new Banks, Drains or Sluices to be made where there had
not been any before. Secondly, that they might not lay the Tax or Rate upon
Hundreds, Towns or Inhabitants thereof in general, but upon the first
Presentment or Judgment to charge every man in particular, according to the
quantity of his Land or Common. Thirdly, that they had not power sufficient to
commit to prison persons refractory and disobedient to their Orders, Warrants
and Decrees. And lastly, that Actions of Trespass, False Imprisonment, and
other Process at the Common Law, have been brought against some of their
Officers and Ministers for executing their Decrees and Warrants; Their
Lordships finding in their wisdoms, that it can neither stand with Law, nor
with common Sense or Reason, that in a cause of so great consequent the Law can
be so void of Providence, as to restrain the Commissioners of Sewers from
making new works to restrain the fury of the Waters, as well as to repair the old
where necessity does require it for the safety of the country, or to cause a
charge upon the Towns or Hundreds in general that are interessed in the benefit
or loss, without attending particular Survey or Admeasurement of Acres, when
the service is to have speedy and sudden execution, or that a Commission of so
high a nature, and of so great use to the Commonwealth, and evident necessity,
and of so ancient jurisdiction, both before the Statute and since, should want
means of coertion for obedience to their Orders, Warrants and Decrees, when as
the performance of them, the preservation of many Thousands of His MAJESTY'S
Subjects Lives, Goods and Lands does depend; It plainly appearing, That it will
be a direct frustrating and overthrow of the authority of the said Commission
of Sewers, if the Commissioners, their Officers and Ministers should be subject
to every Suit at the pleasure of the Delinquent in His Majesty's Court of the
Common Law, and so to weary and discourage all men from doing their duties in
that behalf: For the Reason aforesaid, and for the supreme Reason above all
reasons, which is the salvation of the Kings Land and People, Their Lordships
did Order, That the persons formerly Committed by this Board for their contempt
concerning this cause, shall stand Committed until they release or sufficiently
discharge such Actions, Suits and Demands as they have brought at the Common
Law against the Commissioners of Sewers, or any the Ministers or Officers of
the said Commission; saving unto them nevertheless any Complaint or Suit for
any Oppression or Grievance before the Court of Sewers, or this Table, if they
receive not Justice at the Commissioners hands. And their Lordships further
Order, That Letters from the Table shall be written to the Commissioners of
Decrees of like nature, when it should be found needful, requiring, encouraging
and warranting them to proceed in the execution of their several Commissions,
according unto former practice and usuage, Any late disturbance, opposition or
conceit of Law whereupon the said disturbance has been grounded
notwithstanding; with admonition nevertheless, That care be taken that there be
no just cause of complaint given by any abuse of the said Commission.

Examinat' per Edmunds Cleric' Consilii.

Present at this Order making, were,

1. The Kings Majesty in Person. 2. The Archbishop of Canterbury. 3. L.
Chancellor Elsmeare. 4. L. Treasure Earl of Suffolk. 5. L. Steward D. de Lenox.
6. L. Admiral Howard Earl of Notingham. 7. L. Chamberlain Earl of Pembroke. 8.
E. of Arundel, Howard. 9. Viscount Wallingford. 10. Viscount Fenton. 11.
Andrews Bishop of Ely. 12. Lord Wotton. 13. Lord Carry. 14. Secretary Winwood.
15. Secretary Lake. 16. Sir Foulk Grevil Chancellor of the Exchequer. 17. Master
of the Rolls Caesar. 18. Sir Francis Bacon Attorney General.
All of them of the Privy-Councel.

This Order is in some points legal, and may stand for a direction in matters
of Law, and the other parts thereof may stand for a president of State; and it
thereby plainly appears, that the Kings learned Counsel were of Opinion, That
the said new works might be Ordered and Decreed to be done by the Commissioners
of Sewers, and that the same had warrant from former presidents.

But the last allegation on the contrary party is very forcible against this
argument, That by the making and erecting of these new Defenses, the
inheritance of private persons are thereby prejudiced whereon they be built;
yet as Cato says, Vix ulla Lex fieri potest quae omnibus utilis sit sed si
majori Cato.
parti proficiat sufficit; and therefore this Objection I thus Answer, That
these new works are not to be undertaken but upon urgent necessity in defense
of the country, or for the safety thereof, so that the Commonwealth be therein
deeply interessed and engaged; and things which concern the Commonweal are of
greater account in the Law, then the interest of private persons.

And so it is 13 H. 8. fol. 16. That the Commonwealth 13. H. 8.
shall be preferred before the private Estate, and for the good of the
Commonwealth a private person shall receive damage, if otherwise it cannot be
eschewed; as a private man's house shall be pulled down, if the next house
thereto be on fire to save the Town; and the Suburbs of a City may be pulled
down in time of War, to save the City; and Bulwarks may be raised on private
men's grounds for defense of the Realm: And what greater enemy can there be then
the Sea, who threatens with his merciless waves to swallow up all before it,
but that the hand of the Almighty has tied Pro chapter 8. ver. 27.
and bound him in the fetters of his eternal decree, and given policy and means
to man to keep him from invading the Land by artificial works, proper for such
services: Therefore in my Opinion, by the very true intent and meaning of the
said Statute, and by a just, equal and reasonable construction, it should lie
in the power of the Commissioners of Sewers, upon just and urgent occasions and
considerations, to make Orders and Decrees for erecting and making of new
Banks, new Walls, Goats, Streams, Sluices, and other necessary Defenses against
the overflowing of the Sea; For Ubi nova fit maris incursio ibi novum est
apponendum remedium, with this caution, That under the pretense of the
Commonweal a private man's welfare be not intended to the charge, trouble and
burden of the country: And with this also, That where any man's particular
interest and inheritance is prejudiced for the Commonwealths cause, by any such
new erected works, That that part of the country be ordered to recompense the
same which have good thereby, according as is wisely and discreetly Ordered by
two several Statutes, the one made in Anno 27 Eliz. cap. 22. 27 El. c. 22.
Rastal Havens and Rivers, is where the Commissioners have power to compound
and agree with the Lords and owners of the grounds through which the new cuts
are to be made; And the other 3 Jac. Reg. cap. for bringing the new stream 3
Jac.
to London: and although these Statutes hold not in the general Cases of
Sewers, but are applied to the said particular matters therein expressed, yet
they may serve as good Rules to direct our Commissioners to imitate upon like
occasion happening.

The second Point upon this Statute.
It appears by my Case, That the Commissioners of Sewers did decree a new
Bank to be raised, and a new River to be cast, and an old Sewer to be repaired
upon their view, survey and discretion. The words of this Commission upon which
I framed this part of the Case be these (videlicet) We have assigned you
Theophilus Earl of Lincoln, Robert Lord Willoughby of Earsby, Sir George
Manners Knight, Sir Philip Tyrwhit, and Sir John Wray, Knights and Baronets,
Sir William Pelham, Sir John Read, Sir Edward Ascough, Sir Hamond Knights,
Anthony Erby Esquire Quor'; the said Earl, Lord, and Sir George Manners, we will to
be three to survey the Walls, Banks, Drains, Sewers, etc. and the same to cause
to be repaired, amended or put down as cause shall require, after your wisdom
and discretions, and to do after our Statutes; as also to inquire by the oaths
of lawful and honest men of those places where such default be. By the Tenor of
which words I conceive, That Commissioners of Sewers have power by their
Commission to proceed three manner of ways; (viz.) first, By Survey: 2. By Jury:
3. By discretion; wherein it behooves Commissioners of Sewers to know
perfectly, how to use and dispose of their powers with due understanding of
these parts of this Commission and Law: And the better to prepare them herein,
I shall take some pains to declare unto them what they may do by survey without
a Jury, and what by Jury, and what by their discretion, without both Survey and
Jury.

View and Survey.
VIew is the primary part of Survey, and Survey is much, but not altogether
directed by view. It is true, that view is of great use in the Common Law, and
it is to be done and performed in person, and such views are taken in Trials of
Assizes; yet by the 36 Hen. 8. in Dyer fol. 61. Peningtons Case.
a very personal view needs not in an Assize, if upon examination of the
Jurors it may appear, that a competent number of them know the grounds in
question, in such sort as they can put the party in possession if he recover;
but in an Action of Waste, an express personal view is both required and
requisite, for the words of that Writ directs the Sheriff Accedere ad locum
vastatum; In a word, there is a diversity between a view and a survey, for by
the view one is to take notice only by the eye, but to survey is not only to
take notice of a thing by the eye, but also by using other ceremonies and
circumstances, as the hand to measure, and the foot to pace the distances.

And the Commissioners Surveyors have power to take information by examination
of others: And although Judge Fitz. in 27 H. 8. fol. 27. holds a Surveyor of
very small esteem in his power and authority, that is, That he may hear, see
and say nothing Oier voier and rien dier: Yet under the favor of that book, I
take a Surveyor to be of more esteem and authority; for by an old Statute made
in 4 Edw. 1. Rastal Surveyors, first, he is there described to be a man which
is to view the work, and to make inquity, 4 Ed. 1.
and to set down which be Copyholds, which be Freeholds, etc. whereby it
appears, that a Surveyor is an actor, and not a looker on, as Mr. Fitzherbert
would have him; so by these descriptions the Commissioners may inform
themselves what is meant by the word Survey, put in the Statute: And many of
our Statutes take notice of such an Officer as a Surveyor; For in the Statute
of Bridges and highways, there be such Officers appointed; and in the Statute
made for the erection of the Court of Wards and Liveries, there is a grave
Officer appointed, who is called the Surveyor general of that Court, and he is
a Judge in matters there handled.

And there is also an Officer in this Statute of Sewers, called a Surveyor, who
has no judicial power, but is merely an Officer.

What things Officers of Sewers may do by Survey only.
EVery thing which Commissioners of Sewers are to do, must be by true
understanding of their authorities; and this must be so done, that they make
such distinctions, differences and applications as may stand with knowledge,
skill and learning; or otherwise their proceedings will prove irregular: And
therefore it is not only meet to describe the Officer Surveyor as formerly I
have done, but also his Office, which I now mean to do.









These things I have produced as proper to be performed by view and survey of
the Commissioners; and now I shall proceed to the rest.

Things to be done by a Jury.
And also to inquire by the oaths of good and lawful men of the said shire or
shires, place or places, where such defaults or annoyances be, as well within
liberties as without, by whom the truth may rather be known through whose
default the said hurts and damages have happend, or who has, or holds any
Lands or Tenements, or Common of pasture, or profit of fishing, or has or may
have any hurt, loss or disadvantage by any manner of means in the said places,
as well near to the said Dangers, Lets or Impediments, as inhabit or dwell
thereabouts, by the said Walls, Ditches, etc. So that the first Article is full
within the words of this Statute; and therefore it must be done by Jury, and no
other accusation is of sufficient strength in the Law to put a man to his
answer. And herein the makers of these Laws did sagely, for how should
Commissioners of Sewers take notice by view or survey of such things as are
done or committed in their absence?









Et hoc per statutum de Magna Charta, cap. 14. nulla miserecord' ponatur nisi
per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum de viceneto, etc.

Surveyors presentment.
BUt it has been used, that Surveyors of the Sewers have made presentiments of
defaults of things governed by these Laws; but whether such a presentment be
binding or not, is a good point. It is clear in my opinion, that they can make
no presentment, but such as happens within their view and survey, and what
those things be they formerly appeared. They cannot present that I. S. is bound
by prescription, custom, covenant or otherwise, to repair such a Wall, Bank or
Sewer, for this is not within their Office. In Kelloways Reports fol. 141.
there is a custom alleged, that Kelloways Rep. fol. 141.
two men within the provost might present the Articles of the Leet, But I doubt
of such Presentment, though it have a custom to strengthen it: I take this
difference, that an Original Presentment Surveyors cannot make, as to present
I. S. that by the Tenure of his Lands he ought to repair such a Bridge, Wall,
Bank or other Defense; But the Surveyors may make a supplemental Presentment;
as for example, if it has been presented before by a Jury, that I. S. ought to
have repaired such a Ditch, and has not done the same, and day is given him by
the Commissioners of Sewers to do the same, if the same be not repaired at the
day, the Surveyor may present in this case the not repairing, because this is
but an Oath of assistance, ad informandum conscientiam Judicis, for the
Amerciament shall be imposed by the force of the said former Presentment; and
this latter Presentment by the Surveyors, is only to give the Justices notice
of the parties farther neglect, to the end they may impose the greater
Amerciament: And a Presentment by Surveyors is not traversable, being of so
small esteem in Law, as our Law will not vouchsafe to take an issue upon it, for
their act herein is not in the ordinary legal form.

What Commissioners of Sewers may do by Discretion.
DIscretion is the herb of grace that I could wish every Commissioner of Sewers
well stored withal, for the makers of this Statute had an intention to make it
of great use, being literally nominated nine or ten times in this Law, and for
this cause I have inserted in my Case; but note, that the word Wisdom is
coupled with it, and the word (Good) is annexed to them both, as best showing
of what pure metal they should be made of, After your good wisdom and
discretion.

There be three several degrees of discretion, Discretio generalis, Discretio
legalis, Discretio specialis.

Discretio generalis is required of every one in every thing that he is to do
or attempt.

Legalis discretio is that which Sir Edward Cook means and sets forth in
Rooks and Keighlies Cases, Hoc est scire pro legem quod sit justum; and this is
merely to administer Justice according to the prescribed rules of the Law; and
herein is this discretion limited, that it go not beyond or besides those Laws
which are to be executed: And this discretion is to be governed by the Laws,
for Cicero says, Sapientis est judicis cogitare tantum sibi esse permissum
quantum Cicero.
sit Commissum aut creditum.

secundum aequum and bonum; and herein discretion is the absolute Judge of the
Cause, and gives the rule: But in the case of Legal discretion, there
discretion is but a servant, and is tied to attend upon the Law; and there the
Law directs the censure, and discretion is but to do the same wisely and
temporally; for ipsae etenim leges cupiunt ut jure regantur. Sir Ed. Cook in
Book Case 5 Report, gives this rule to the Cato.
Commissioners, That although the words of the Commission be, That they should
do according to their discretions, yet their proceedings ought to be limited
and bounded within the Rules of Law and Reason; for that discretion is a
Science to discern betwixt falsity and truth, between right and wrong, between
shadows and substance, betwixt equity and colorable glosses, and the
Commissioners ought not to follow their wills and private affections; for, That
talis discretio discretionem confundit: And therefore now I will declare in few
words, in what things these Commissioners are to be ruled by good discretion.



Item, Imprisonment of the bodies of the offenders when they deserve, and the
time how long, lies much in their discretion.

Item, it lies in their grave wisdoms and discretions, when and where to erect
new Walls, Banks and other Defenses, and what sums of Money to Raise and Levy
therefore.





Discretion used in the Statute, gives power to the Commissioners to order
businesses there arising in course of equity, for hoc nihil aliud est, but to
proceed secundum aequum and bonum.

I have put these few Cases as examples to direct and instruct what may be done
by discretion, omitting many other, because I had rather trust to the worst
certain Law, then to give too much way to the uncertain discretion of the
Commissioners, according to the old saying, Quoad fieri possit quam plurima
legibus ipsis definiantur Aristotle Ret.
quam paucissima vero judicis arbitrio relinquantur; and herein I suppose I
have made good my word in this, that I have proved by my Argument, That the
said new Bank and new River might well be decreed by the view and survey of the
Commissioners, and by their good discretion, and so might the said old Sewer be
repaired; and therefore these being ended, I will now proceed to the handling
of the rest remaining.

My former labor has been to expound and declare what defenses, as well
against the overflowing of the sea, as against the inundation of fresh waters,
were and be to be maintained, and also new erected by the Tenor and power of
these Laws: So that now it comes very aptly to be handled, for what causes,
considerations and matters one shall or may be tied to the repairing and
keeping thereof, which I take to be these nine several ways.

1. By Frontage. 2. By Ownership. 3. By Prescription. 4. By Custom. 5. By
Tenure. 6. By Covenant. 7. Per usum rei. 8. A Township. 9. By these Laws of
Sewers.

I suppose I shall produce sufficient Warrant and Authorities for to maintain
all these distinctions, wherein I am desirous that Commissioners of Sewers, for
whose learning and instruction I have taken these pains, would apply themselves
to do their duties and service herein carefully and advisedly, and like to
skilful Physicians, would apply fitting Medicines to the curing of every
disease, else shall they oftentimes Opprimere insontes and dimittere reos: But
if they will seriously cast their eyes upon these ensuing Cases, they will be
very helpful to them in their proceedings.

Frontage.
FRontage is where the grounds of any man do join with the brow or front
thereof to the Sea, or to great or royal streams; and in case of the sea or
royal River, the property of the Banks and grounds adjoining are and belong to
the subject, whose lands do but and bound thereon, but the soil of the sea and
royal Rivers do appertain to the King, as formerly in my Tractate of Rivers may
appear. But in case of petty and mean Rivers and streams, the soil of them, as
well as the banks thereof, do appertain to them whose grounds adjoyn thereto;
so that Frontage and Ownership in base inferior Rivers do not differ, but in
great streams and the sea they do vary as aforesaid: And in 37 lib. Assiz.
plac. 10. it seems that the Frontagers are bound to 37 assiz. pl. 10.
the repairs; and in 8 H. 7. he whose grounds are next adjoining to a Highway,
is bound to repair the same. And by 8 H. 7.
these cases there is no difference touching repairs of the High streams and
the highways in my opinion.

Ownership.
THe Ownership of a Bank, Wall or other Defense is a sufficient warrrant to
impose the charge of the repairs thereof upon him, without being tied thereto
by prescription, as appears in 8 H. 7. fol. 5. and it stands with 8 H. 7.
reason, that every man should be bound to repair his own; and the
consideration is also moving, for that his grounds which lie nearest the waters
are soonest subject to drowning, and if any increase be upon the small Rivers
it falls to his share.

Prescription and Custom.
PRescription and Custom are much of one quality, for in both of them the
efficient matter is (use to repair) and the Law has taken notice of them in
many of our books: Prescription does not bind or tie one to the repair of any
thing, unless it be ratione terrae; and in this it does differ from Custom: for
if it be presented that A. B. and his Ancestors have time out of memory used to
repair such a Bank, Wall or other Defense, this Presentment is void, and does
not bind the party pro ut constat in 21 E. 4. 38. 21 Ed. 4. 7 H. 4. 19 H. 7.
45 E. 3.
7 H. 4. 31. 19 H. 7. Kelwey fol. 52. and 45 E. 3. But bodies politic or
coprorate may be by Custom bound to repairs, without making mention in the
Presentment or Indictment that they are to do the same ratione talis Messuagii
terrae aut tenementi; And to that purpose be the books of 21 E. 4. 38 and 44
Ed. 3. Fitzherb. Title Bar. plac. 103. for 21. E. 4. 44 E. 3.
there a Prior was presented, that he and his Predecessors had used time out of
memory to repair such a Bridge, which was in decay, and this presentment,
though it charged no Land, was good: And in 19 Hen. 7. aforesaid, it is 19 H. 7.
said, that one might be bound to repair a Bank or Wall ratione Resiantiae, but
this could not be otherwise taken but that he was charged to do the same for
the house he dwelt in, for Resiantia imports so much.

Also if a man and his Ancestors have voluntarily made a defense for a long
season, this will not bind his Heir thereto, though he have assets descended
to him in Fee-simple, for descending charges will not bind the Heirs, unless
he descending have assets, as an equal consideration to bind him thereto;
neither will descending assets of Land bind an Heir in this case, unless the
Land it self be really tied and charged.

Tenure.
A Man by the Tenure of his Land may be bound to repair a Wall, Bank or other
Defense mentioned in this 11 H. 7.
Law, and in proof thereof the Book Case of 11 H. 7. fol. 12. is full in the
point; where it is said, That if before the Statute of Westminster the Third, a
man had made a Feoffment in Fee; or if since that Statute one had made a Gift
in Tail, to hold the same by repairing a Bridge, the said Feoffee and Donee and
his heirs should have been bound by the said Tenure to repair the said 12 H. 7.
Bridge; and with this agree the books of 12 H. 7. 18. and 24 H. 8.
24 H. Br. Case fell. 9. and in Porters Case in Sir Edward Cooks Porters Case.
first Report, it is said, That if Lands were given to repair Ways, Bridges,
Calceys or such like, this does bind the Owners of those Lands to do those
repairs in perpetuity: And in the Case of 12 H. 4. fol. 7. the Prior of St.
Marks in Bristol was obliged and bound by the tenor of his Land to repair a
common Sewer: and this enough to satisfy this point.

Covenant.
SO likewise a man may be bound by his Covenant to repair a Wall, Bank, Sewer
or other such like matter, and he may bind himself and his heirs to do the
same; but yet this Covenant will not bind his heirs after his death, unless
there be left assets in Fee simple to descend to the said heir from the said
Ancestor which made the Covenant. 28 and 29 H. 8. Dier. fol. 33.


Wherein I take this difference between a Covenant to bind an Heir, and a
Prescription; for by Covenant the Heir shall be bound to the repairs, if he
have assets descended to him from that Ancestor; but the Heir shall not be
bound by prescription to repair, though he have assets descended from his
Ancestor who repaired the said defenses: But if Land be charged therewithal by
Tenure or otherwise, as a charge imposed upon Land by prescription, then the
said Lands are therewithal chargeable in cujuscunque manus devenerint, quod
nota.

It appears by the Statute of 43 El. cap. 4. That if Lands, Rents, Annuities,
Goods or Chattels, be given toward 43 El. 4.
the repairing of Bridges, Ports, Havens, Calceys or Sea banks, that the same
shall be so employed by that Statute: So that Goods, Chattels and Annuities, be
chargeable to these repairs by the force of that Statute, as well as Lands,
Houses and Grounds, in case any such thing shall happen to come before the
Commissioners of Sewers.

But note besides all the former matter, That an Heir shall not be bound by the
Covenant of his Ancestor, though he have assets descended, unless he be bound
expressly by the word Heirs in the Covenant.

Vsus rei.
I Now intend to declare where use shall tie one to the repairs of the defenses
mentioned in this Law (I do not hereby mean that use which I have formerly
mentioned in Prescription and Custom, which is use to repair) but the use I
intend in this place, is, the use which one is to have of the defense or thing
which is to be repaired: As where one and his Ancestors have used to have the
use of the River or waters by sailing up and down the same, or have used to
have a Ferry on or over them, or a Staith to go up and down, or a Crane to draw
up waters, or some other Engine to draw up the waters for the use of their
houses; These uses which men have of these things may be causes and
considerations sufficient to tie them to the repairs of the Walls, Banks and
Rivers: 37 lib. Assiz.
And for warrant in this learning is the Book of 37 lib. Assiz. plac. 10. for
there were some persons which were bound to repair the River, because they had
passage on it with their boats, and others were charged because they had free
fishing in the River; and in my opinion it stands with good reason, and
agreeable to Law, That those persons, before others, should be bound and tied
to the repairs of such things whereof they have peculiar and several profits
and use of more then others have: And it is manifest, that this very Statute
aims full at this point, when it directed that such persons should be rated,
taxed and sessed toward the repairs, which had profit of fishing and other
commodities in the Rivers.

But least some may mistake my meaning and learning also in the said former
Cases, I will therefore make the same plain by distinction, which is this, That
Frontage, Ownership, and this use I last spoke of, do not bind any to the
repairing and maintaining of Walls, Banks, Bridges, Sewers or other Defenses,
when and where any other man or Corporation be bound to do the same by
Prescription, Custom, Tenure or Covenant: For the said three parts, Frontage,
Ownership and Usus rei, be but implicit ties only in construction of Laws,
and serve the turn only when no other person or persons are bound expressly
thereunto; and this distinction may be maintained by the Book of 8 H. 7. 8. H.
7.
fol. 5. and other Books, where it is said, That he whose grounds is next
adjoining is bound to repair, unless some other be bound to do the same by
Tenure or Prescription: Whereby it follows, that if one be bound to do the
same by special Tenure or Prescription, it freeth the Frontager.

Note also another difference, that in cases where a Frontager and one who has
liberum passagium on the River, and a man which has a free Pischary there, are
not any one of them bound to make the repairs alone, but all alike together:
and so is the Book of 37 Assiz. plac. 10. and I suppose the Book of 38 Assiz.
plac. 15. maintains this point with me; for there the Law is declared to be,
That he which 37, 38 Assiz.
is bound by prescription to repair, is bound peremptorily alone to do the
work, and not any other; and if no such person can be found, then the parties
whose grounds do adjoyn, and those which have free fishing in the River, and
free passage thereon, be all of them to do and perform the same jointly, and no
one of them is a discharge for the other, because they shall be in consimili
casu. So by this which has been said touching these matters, the Commissioners
may see and behold how carefully and understandingly the Laws of this Realm
have indeavored to do equal Justice; and my desire is, that they would as
carefully put them in execution.

A Township Assessed.
IT has been held for a great question, Whether a Township or Hundred in
general might be assessed and taxed to the Sewers, without imposing the same on
particular persons? And Sir Edward Cook in the Case of the Isle of Ely, is of
opinion directly, That a Tax, Rate or a Sesse Case of the Isle of Ely.
could not nay might not be set or imposed upon a Town, or upon the Inhabitants
of a Town; for says he, The taxation, sessment or charge ought to have these
qualities; It ought to be according to the quantity of their lands by number of
Acres and Pearches, or by the tenor of profit of fishing and Common of pasture,
which if it should be laid upon a Town, it would hold none of those
proportions: and his opinion is not alone in this very point, for in the
ancient Charter of Rumney Marsh, Rumney Marsh Case.
page 50. it is said, Quod unusquisque proportione, ac periculo incumbentium
aequae contribuat; And page 12 and 39 of the same Charter, the Taxations is
expressed to be Acres, Perches and Carucates; and our Statute in express
wordsis, And all those persons and every of them to tax and assess, charge,
distrain and punish, as well within the Limits, Leets and Bounds of old time
accustomed, or otherwise, or elsewhere within this Realm of England, after the
quantities of their Lands, Tenements and Rents, and by the number of Acres and
Perches, and after the rate of every persons portion, tenure or profit, or
after the quantity of their Common of pasture, or fishing, by such ways and
means as you the Lord Fitz williams, Sir Francis Vane, and Sir Thomas Mounson
Knight and Baronet, Sir Edward Dimock, Sir William Armin, Sir Thomas Grantham,
Sir George Ftiz williams, Knights, Richard Totheby and Edward King, Esquires,
whereof three to be of the Quorum, shall seem most convenient: These words
literally taken, afford the construction to be according to the opinion of Sir
Edward Cook.

But on the other part I find by many ancient Book; and Authorities of the
Law, that Taxations and Charges have been generally laid upon Townships and
Hundreds in matters of this kind, as in the 37 lib. Assize plac. 10. Four
several Townships were charged with the repairs of a River, because they had
passage thereon with Boats; and in 38 lib. Assiz. plac. 15. a Township was
there charged with 37 and 38. assiz.
the repair of a Bridge: And the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 15. quod nulla
villa nec liber homo distringatur facere pontes nisi qui ab antiquo facere
consueverunt; so that if ab antiquo a Township had used to repair Bridges, it
was tied thereunto by the employed construction of this Statute: And the Statute
of 22 H. 8. cap. 5. gave authority to Justices of Peace to charge a County,
Hundred or Town with the repair of Bridges, if no certain person were specially
tied to the repair thereof: and many times in ancient Statutes and Books of our
Law, we shall find Townships and Hundreds charged generally, as in Doctor and
Student, fol. 74. a Township was amerced; and by the ancient and famous Statute
of Winchester a Township shall be amerced for the escape of a Robber by the
highway: And 3 Ed. 3. Title Corone in Fitz. pl. 293. a Township was amerced for
the escape of a Murderer; and in 11 H. 4. 2. Brook 94. a Town was sessed for
the expenses for the Knight of the Parliament and might be levied on any
persons goods of the town; and this was for the uncertainty of the persons, and
for the infiniteness of the number of them, as it is said in Richard Godfreys
Case.

But it may haps be objected on the other part, That if a Town or Hundred may
be jointly taxed, then it might so come to pass, that one man's goods which had
no grounds subject to the charge, and which could reap nor take any hurt
thereby, might come to be distrained for the whole tax, rate or sess of the
Town; and another man which had great quantities of grounds there subject to
danger might escape free; and therefore such exposition to be made of the said
Law, were not within the rule and compass of equality.

And another objection may also be made, That it is true, that by an express
Statute or Custom, an assess, rate or tax may be laid upon a Town or Hundred,
as was done by the said Statute of the 22 H. 8. and others formerly mentioned;
but such exposition were contrary to the letter of this Statute of 23 H. 8. of
Sewers.

I do confess, that if these two objections could not be answered, I should
change my opinion: It is true, That if a tax or sess had been set upon a
Hundred by the said Stature of Winchester, for the escape of a Robber, and that
charge had been levied upon one man's goods of the Town, as it might have been,
he had had no remedy to cause his fellow Townsmen to be contributers to him to
bear equal share with him; and so if the party robbed had recovered by Action
against the Hundred, and the goods of one in the Hundred had been taken in
execution, he had no means to get contribution: And yet that Law carried that
defect with it Three hundred years, or thereabouts, till in the 27 year of
Queen Eliz. cap. 13. wherein Order was taken, that if some one or few men's
goods were taken in execution upon the Recovery in an Action taken against the
Hundred by the party Robbed, he or they should have contribution, which before
that Statute of 27 of Elizabeth could not be had.

But to give answer to the two objections: First, if in our case of the Sewers,
a Township should be Taxed, yet this Tax could not be taken or Levied, but only
of such as had grounds within the charge, which had good by the repair, or
might have hurt by the neglect thereof; for in 11 H. 4. fol. 35. it is said for
Law, That if a town be assessed in the Tax, and the Collector does distrain the
goods of a man of the town who was not chargeable thereto, that party may have
and take his Action of Trespass against the Distrainer and Collector, for that
he at his peril must look well to it, that he whose goods were taken were
subject to the charge.

So in our case of the Sewers, if the goods of one which was not subject to the
Tax or Assess imposed were taken, he might have his Action of Trespass against
the distrainer, and should recover his damages thereby; so this salve cures one
of the said maladies.

But then the case goes further, That if the goods of one man of the town
should be taken for the whole Sesse of the Town, and he is such a person as in
truth is chargeable thereunto, he can have no Action against the distrainer for
taking his Cattle, for he is such a person as cannot excuse himself but that he
is chargeable: This indeed draws the Case to a desperate issue, for this seems
to be as great a mischief as ever the Statute of Winchester did ever suffer,
which was remedied by the said Statute of 27 Eliz. but our Case has not such a
Cure provided; Therefore it puts me to the old adage of Law, Better it is to
suffer a mischief to one or more particular persons, then to permit an
inconvenience to the whole Commonwealth which concerns a multitude: But yet I
shall give this objection a better answer, I hope, then with an old adage; for
in our Case the party whose goods are taken for the whole town, is not without
a fitting and convenient remedy; for when his goods be taken and he is
constrained to pay the whose sessment of the Town, he may make his complaint to
the Commissioners of Sewers, and may give in the particular names of every
Townsman, and the quantity of each man's Estate which be charged thereto, or the
true value of their Lands, and may crave of the Commissioners of Sewers for to
make a Law to make them all to contribute, every one according to his portion
of Land: And in my opinion the Commissioners of Sewers have power to impose a
proportionable rate upon every of them, according to the quantity and quality
of his ground, by way of contribution, and may award Process to force and
compel them to pay the same to the said party; whereby it plainly appears, that
the party so distrained has a direct remedy to come by his losses. In Doctor
and Student a whole town was amerced, and they met together by common consent,
and Assessed and Rated every man equally according to his ability, and allowed
of as a good cause.

But Commissioners of Sewers may if they can come to the knowledge of the
certainty of every man's Estate, rate in the primary and original Sesse every
person according to his several quantity of Estate, which may be done in this
manner, when the Commissioners be agreed how much to lay upon such a town, then
to send for three or four of the Inhabitants, and cause them to give in every
man's Estate; and to make and appoint them Sessors to rate every man, or else
the Commissioners themselves, having true intelligence of every man's Land, may
easily set the rate and charge upon every particular person in an even and
proportionable sum; and thus every man at the first shall know his own rate, as
in the assessing of the Subsidy, and no man shall be burdened with his
Neighbors charge; and these were good courses to be used within both the letter
and sense of these Laws: And this course was used by the Four and twenty
Jurators in Kent in Rumney Marsh, who always upon their Oaths set Chart. of
Rumney.
down every particular man's ground in certain, and their just page 50.
quantities, and accordingly were the parties severally taxed.

Howsoever the Tax in my opinion generally imposed upon the town is good, as
appears by many Authorities and Books before remembered, even by this Statute,
as well as by Custom; for in the said Book of the 37 and 38 lib. Assiz. 37 and
31 lib. Assiz.
it does not appear that the Townships there rated were so taxed by any Custom,
but merely by the Law of the Land; and so is the learning delivered to be in
the Councels Order aforesaid.

And I do remember, that at the Assizes held at Lincoln in Anno 12. Jacobi, in
a Trial before Sir Edward Cook then Judge of Assize, in the Case of Sir Philip
Conisby Knight, the town of Mauton was assessed five pounds, and Twigmore as
much, and a distress was taken for non-payment thereof, and was justified in a
Replevin, and the verdict passed for the distrainer, and no great scruple was
then made of the said Assess laid and imposed generally upon the towns; which
Case I specially noted, because it was tried and passed for current before the
said Sir Edward Cook, who had the year before reported the Law in his Tenth
Report to the contrary. And I am also of Opinion, that if a new defense be
agreed to be made, as a Wall, Bank, Sewer or any other, and a Sesse is
appointed for this work, and laid upon a town, That the same is a good Sesse
and well laid, as well as in the Case of old repairs, where Custom may give
Warrant unto it, and the Commissioners in their discretion may so do in
imitation of the said former rules and presidents, and it stands with good
wisdom and discretion to imitate and follow ancient and approved Laws and
Statutes made in Parliament, which are done by the wisdom of the whole Realm:
And in my conceit a decree made which has no reference or dependency to former
presidents, may be doubted whether it be legitimate or not, having no ancient
Laws to patronize it. And thus I conclude my third point of my Case, That a
Township may be taxed by the Laws of Sewers.

Tithes.
HEre is likewise in my Case a Parson Rated and Sessed for his Tithes, and is
now to be put to the question, whether by these Laws he may be taxed for them,
or not. The ancient Commissions of this kind have very strict words in them to
tie every one to the charge of these defenses, being for the preservation of
the Commonweal; and this Statute extends it self with a long and large arm to
fetch and reach every man that has grounds lying within the Level, and which
partake of the good which the defenses brings to them, to be contributory to
the charge.

It is true that Ecclesiastical and Spiritual persons, as Parsons and Vicars
hold their Ecclesiastical living exempt ab omni onere seculari, for they do not
hold their Churches of any Lord, but of the Lord of Heaven, in respect of the
spiritual service they do therefore: And I take it, that Parsons and Vicars
hold not their Churches in free alms, for then the Founder should be their Lord
in point of Tenure and service, which I have not observed to be so in any: And
in our Law Books it appears, that Spiritual persons were exempted from Lay and
Temporal charges, as in Magna Charta, cap. 14. A Spiritual person shall not be
amerced according to his Spiritual living: In Fitz. Not. bre. fol. 228. there
Fitz. Not. bre.
is a Writ directed by the King to his Officers and Ministers, forbidding them
that they take not any Toll, Murage or Pontage of Ecclesiastical Parsons,
Vicars and such like; and the said Writ shows, that by the Custom of the
Realm no such exactions ought to be taken of them: And there is another Writ
there to discharge them for paying Customs de bonis suis Ecclesiasticis vel de
aliis pro sustentatione sua emptis; And also they have this privilege, That
the Sheriff nor any Lay-Officer are not permitted to meddle with their
Ecclesiastical possessions; for in 20 H. 6. fol. 20. and in many other Books,
it is held, that in a Writ of Summons the Sheriff may not Summon a Spiritual
person on his Spiritualities, but he must rather that he is Clericus
beneficiatus non habens laicum feodum; and upon this return the party is to
take a Writ directed to the Bishop, to Summon him on his Spiritualties: And
therefore if the possessions of Spiritual persons are had in such great esteem
in our Law, what then shall be done with Tithes which are said to be due Iure
Divine, I have not read that they shall be charged to any thing but to the
repair of the Temple in the 18 chapt. of Numbers the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, and 28, verses, The Lord said, I have given to the Children of Levi all 18
chapt Numbers.
the Tenth in Israel for an Inheritance; and yet the Levites paid a Tenth
thereout to the Priests; and so Clergymen in times past paid a Tenth to the
Pope; and in imitation, or rather in reformation thereof by the Statute of 26
H. cap. 3. the 26 H. 8.
like is now paid to the King, as Supreme head and Governor of the Church here
on earth: So here be charges paid out of the Tithes, but they be Spiritual
charges. And in Mr. Seldens History of Tithe page 13. it appears by Collection
and Connection of Stories divine, That the first or Seldom.
the first year Tithe was paid to the Levite, The second to Feast at Jerusalem,
and the third to the Poor: And had not the Statute of 43 of Eliz. cap. 2. made
the Parson and the Vicar liable and chargeable to the relief of the Poor, which
was in imitation as it seems of the Mosaical Law, they had not been bound or
tied to do the same; for it is held to be more charity to relieve the Church
then the Poor: And in payment of Taxes and Subsidies they are granted in their
Convocation house, a Council merely consisting of the Clergy, and then are
confirmed in Parliament, of which house also they are a Member. And therefore
in my opinion, seeing Tithes are so sacred a duty, that a Layman could not
have any help for at the Common Law, and were exempt from temporal and profane
uses, I am therefore of opinion, That they are not to be rated or taxed by the
general words of these Laws; Yet I am of opinion, that Tithes in the hand of a
Temporal or Layman are to be rated by these Laws, for when they are come into
his hands Tunc res spirituales fiunt temporales and transeunt decimae in
Catalla.

But I must here leave these Ecclesiastical persons and their Church livings:
There is another point of this Law will reach unto some of their possessions,
as to their Gleab Lands which belong to their Churches, and their Meadow and
Pasture grounds, for these be not sacred, as Tithes be, But came to them by the
benevolent gifts of Laymen, and not ex duo dei and evangelii as Tithes did; and
so they took that burden with them from the Lay-donor, which after may be
imposed upon them: And therefore such Parsons, Vicars or other Spiritual
persons which hold a plough Land in Culture, are chargable by the Statute of 2
Mar. toward the repair of the highways, as other Lay men be: But in that
Statute there be Ecclesiastical Officers used, as Churchwardens, whereby it was
conceived, that that Statute had an eye to bring Ecclesiastical persons within
the reach of it: And so for their houses and grounds I take them to be within
these Laws of the Sewers, for the own Lands are also chargeable thereunto, and
yet on earth within His Dominions He is said to be caput Ecclesiae, and as much
reason were it to exempt His possessions as theris, if the respect of the
person should bear any such sway in the Case.

Also I do find by diverse ancient Records, That Abbeys, Priories, and other
Spiritual possessions, have been chargeable to the repair of Bridges, Calceys,
Banks and Highways, by Custom and Prescription,, as appears also by the Books
of 11 H. 4. fol. 82, 83. and 44 Ed. 3. Fitz. 11 H 4. 44. E. 3.
Title Bar. pl. 301. and I take it, that by a very express and special Custom
or Prescription, a portion of Tithes in a Clergy man's hand may be charged with
the the repairs of Bridges, Ways, Walls or Sea Banks, but not without a direct
affirmative Custom; for I suppose that they may as well endure a charge in this
kind, as a charge in a Modus decimandi.

And so I conclude this part of the Case, That the person was not to be sessed
for his Tithes by the general words of of this Law.

A Copyholder.
HEre is also a Copyholder taxed within my Case for his Copyhold Land, and
whether he for his Copyhold, and the Lord for the Freehold of that soil, shall
be assessed therefore, is another question.

A Copyhold by the Custom of the Manor yields and affords to the Lord
Seigniory Rent, Fines due upon admittances, and such like duties; but the
Copyholder has the real and visible profits of the soil, and therefore both
Lord and Copyholder receive Et commodum and salvationem, by the said defenses:
And therefore the words of this Law be exceeding copious and full in this point
of sesse (viz.) To inquire who has and holds any Lands or Tenements, or
Common of pasture, or fishing, or has or may have any hurt, or damage or loss
by any means, in or near the said places; and in this case the Lord holds the
said Land in Tenure, though not in Culture, and many ways may have hurt and
damage; As if the Copyhold were overflowed by the Sea, the Lord should lose his
Freehold of the soil, his Seigniory, yearly Rents and Fines for admittances,
and all other perquesites: So that the said words of this Stature beat mainly
upon him. But as there be reasons to be urged against him, so there be matters
to exempt him from this charge, and to lay the burden on the Copyholder.

seized of the Freehold thereof, but in Imagination and construction of the
Law, for the Copyholder is pernor and taker of the visible and substantial
profits.

in presenti, which is easy to be found out, and not imaginary owners as the
Lord is.

pro una eademque re, which the Law does never permit, for this is not like the
Case of Lord and Commoner, they there shall be charged, the one for his Soil,
and the other for his Common; for in this case the Lord is the immediate
proprietor of the Soil, and he has the present and real occupation thereof, as
well as the Commoner has the use of his Common; and therefore they shall both
be taxed to these repairs diversis tamen respectis.

But for the Copyholder it may be objected, that he is not within this Statute;
for in Heidons Case in Sir Edward Hcidons Case.
Cooks 3 Report, it is truly said, That a Copyholder is not within the Laws and
Statutes which alter the Service, Tenure, Interest of the Land, or other thing
in prejudice of the Lord; and this is the cause that a Copyholders Lands cannot
be extended or put in execution upon the Statute of Westminster the Second, nor
in extent upon the Statute of Acton Burnel and De mercatoribus, for if they
should, then might the Sheriff make the Lord new Tenants, without surrender and
admittances, which is contrary to Custom, the life and essence of all
Copyholds; yet there is another good rule put in the said Case of Heidon, that
is, That where a Statute is made for the general good and wealth of the Realm,
and that no prejudice can come to the Lord by alteration of Tenure, Service,
Estate or Custom, there Copyholds may well be within those Statutes; Therefore
now it is to be considered, whether this Statute of Sewers will in any sort
hurt or prejudice the Lord or no; for it is certain, that these Laws tend as
much to the wealth and welfare of this Realm, as any can do; and in rating and
assessing these Copyholds to the repairs of Banks, Walls and Sewers, etc. it
alters neither the Copyholders interest, nor the Lords Tenure, nor does it in
any sort prejudice the custom of the Manor.

But then it may be objected, That if sesse be imposed upon a Copyholder for
his Land, and be not paid, these Laws gives sale of Lands, which indeed is the
only clause of this Statute which is material, to exempt a Copyholder out of
these Laws; for clearly I take it, That Commissioners of Sewers have no power
to decree the Copyhold Land away for non-payment of the sesse: Yet I am of
opinion, that a Copyholder, though he be not within that part of the Statute
which gives sale of Lands, yet he is within the other part thereof, for diverse
Reasons.

One I find by experience, and in diverse presidents, that many Copyholds have
been and be charged with repairs of Bridges and other defenses in diverse parts
of this Realm by customs: Also if a Lord grant a Copyhold to I.S. and his heir
by Copy Tenendum by the repairs of such a Wall, Bank or Bridge, this binds
this Copyhold thereto in point of charge.

And lastly, this Statute binds such to the repairs which may have good by the
doing, or hurt by the neglect: And it is apparent, that by over flowing or
inundation, a Copyholders Land sustains equal damage with other Lands; and for
these Reasons I resolve that a Copyhold is within these Laws: And shortly
touching Copyholds, I do confine them to these four heads.

My four Tenants concerning Copyholds.




and rents be within the express letter of this Statute, and because his rents
by the overflowing of the Sea be lost, therefore the Lord shall be assessed for
it if it be of value.



Now because it is a high point in this Statute, in what manner to rate, tax and
assesse by the judicious power of these Laws: and in regard my Case touches
all manner of Sesses and Rates which be or may be imposed by these Laws, I will
therefore spread it abroad: and I do intend to treat of what Lands and other
things are to be assessed, toward the repairs in my Case, and what persons to
be assessed, and in what degree.

Wherein first I am of opinion, that one is not to be assessed for his high and
descending grounds, for so it appears Register.
was the opinion of Brudnel in the 12 H. 8. fol. 3. where he says, That if a
man's ground be surrounded with waters, he may make a trench in his own grounds
to let the waters run downwards, and to descend upon his neighbors grounds, for
water is an element descendable (jure naturae) And also high descending grounds
can have no such use of Walls and Banks, as other grounds situate lower may
have, for the waters can have no force against them, and therefore the owner is
not chargeable therefore; and the words of the Commission expressed in the
Register be, Qui defentionem Commodum and salvationem per Predict as Wallias,
Guttur as, pontes, Calceta and gurgites habere poterint nullatenus parcantur.
And the Charter of Rumney Marsh seems to bear the same sense (viz.) Quod pro
securitate dicti Marisci districtiones fiant ita quod aeque fiant secundum
portiones majores and minores quas homines habent in eodem Marisco; But high
grounds by nature need not Engines of art to defend them: And in Rooks case in
Sir Rooks Case.
Edward Cooks 5. Report, and Keighleys Case, it is truly declared, That the
grounds lying on the Level which are in apparent danger subject to surrounder,
are only chargeable to repairs by this Law; But yet grounds lying on high
Mountainous places may be by Custom, Prescription or Tenure liable and stand
chargeable to repairs of Walls, Banks, Sewers, Goats and other Defenses: And in
such cases though they be never so high, yet these Laws will reach unto them,
but no charge is to be imposed on them by this Statute, and by force thereof
only without a special Custom or Prescription to warrant the same.

Annuity.
IF a Dean and Chapter or other Corporate persons or Body Politic be by
Prescription to pay a yearly Annuity to I. S. and his Heirs, I. S. is not
sessable for his Annuity, yet the said Corporate or Politic persons pay the
same in respect of their Lands which lie in danger of surrounding, and so the
grounds be subject to these Laws, but it issues not thereout: And the said
Corporate and Politic persons are not charged in their Lands, but in respect
of their Lands to pay the same.

Commons.
THose persons which have Common of Pischary, Turbary, or of Pasture in great
Fens, Marshes and Wastes, may be charged, but Commoners in agris seminatis
after the corn severed, as stock Commons which be of a small value, are not to
be charged for their Commons, but for their Lands.

Ferry.
HE which had a Ferry over a River was in 37 lib. Assiz. pl. 10. charged to
repair the River, and so for a Ferry one may be charged by this Law.

Herbage.
HE which has the Vesture or Herbage of grounds, as Prima tonsura vel vestura
terrae, may be charged to the repairs.

Free passage.
IT appears likewise, that those persons which had passage for their Boats on
the River, were to be rated toward the repairs in 37 Lib. Assiz. pl. 10. but
this is to be intended of those persons which had free and customary passage
thereon, as a liberty and inheritance, and was not meant nor intended of poor
Boatmen which come thereon with their Boats accidentally, by the general Custom
of the Realm.

Parks, Warrens, Chases.
A Man for his Park of Dear, and Warren of Conies, shall be charged if these
liberties lie within the Level; but for Chases I suppose one is not chargeable
only, for Dear which be ferae naturae not bound to certain precincts, but in
that case the owner is only to be taxed for the Soil.

Mart, Fair or Market.
ALso if one have only the liberty of a Mart, Fair or Market to be kept in a
place which is subject to surrounder, In my Opinion because they are but casual
in their profits, and not continual in their being, although they be
conscribed to place and circuit, yet being no part of the Soil, nor of the
issues and profits thereof, they are not taxable within these Laws.

Offices.
THe Office of the Clerk of the Market, Town Clerk, or such like, although
these Officers be confined to a certain place and precincts within the Level
which is subject to surrounder, are notwithstanding exempt from these taxations.

Proxies, Synods.
HE which has Proxies or Synods of Annual sums of money, such as was in the
Case of Proxies in the Irish Reports, is not sessable within this Law; for
although the person is charged therefore in respect of the grounds, yet the
same does not issue thereout.

The Morgager for the Title he has by the Condition to reduce the Lands back
again to him, or he which has title to Land by Action, Condition or Entry, or
he which has a contingent use shall not be taxed for them.

Neither was Cestui que use at the Common Law before the Statute of 27 H. 8. of
uses, nor is the Bargainee of Land before the Deed be enrolled sessable by this
Law.

Neither is one who has the presentation or nomination to a Church as Patron,
or he which is Founder for his foundership, Taxable within this Statute, yet
they be Tenements, the largest words of charge within this Law; but the Law
intends the immediate possession of such Tenements which be proficuous, and not
these things which be Tenements in Law, and which be but conveyances, and their
fruit is Ceremony without Substance.

This Law sets down such things for the which one is chargeable, viz. (He
which has Lands, Tenements, Rents Commons of Pasture, Profit of Fishing or
other Commodities and such as have Safety, Profit, Defense or any other
Commodity These be the words of charge recited by this Law: This word Land is
of large extent, for it reaches to house Arrable, Pasture, Meadow, Mills,
Tofts, and to all other Edifices, Moors, Marishs, Woods, Wood grounds, for all
these the earth is the substance Et omne solo cedet, and the several increases
thereof be but qualities.

The word Tenements is of larger extent then Lands; for it contains all which
the word Lands does, and all things else which lies in Tenure: so that I think
it shall be but labor lost to enter further into the particulars thereof.

Lord and Tenant.
IF there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant holds of the Lord by yearly Rent
services, the Lord may be rated as well for his Rent, as the Tenant for his
Land, to Annual repairs, as well as to accidental, by reason of these words in
the Statute (that is, That every one be rated and taxed according to the rate
of every persons Rent, Tenure or profit) here be full words to charge the Lord
for his Rent; and so Rent charges, and Rent seck shall be subject to sesses in
this kind: for otherwise the Tenant of the grounds may be undone thereby, in
regard the Rents going and issuing out of the grounds may amount to as much
almost as the yearly value of the grounds do: But if the Rents be so small as
they are scarce worth the gathering, then in discretion the Commissioners may
spare them, for De minimis non Curat Lex.

Also whether the remainder man, and he in Reversion depending upon an Estate
in Tail, shall be rated and taxed, or not, by the power of these Laws, is an
apt question for this place; and therein my opinion is, That being dry and
fruitless Remainders and Reversions, they shall not be sessed to the repairs,
but the Tenant in Tail in possession shall be solely charged: for it is more to
be feared, that Tenant in Tail will cut off the Remainder and Reversion by a
Recovery, then that the Sea shall drown his Estate by an overflow.

Lessee for years, and he in Reversion.
IN the Case of the Lessee for years and for life, and those in Reversion and
Remainder, there is a greater cause of dispute then between Tenant in Tail, and
he in the Reversion: And because it is an often Case, I have therefore taken
the more pains to resolve the same.

First, the Lessee is in the present possession, and so is subject to all
ordinary charges; and with this agrees Jeffrays Jeffrays Case.
Case in Sir Edwards Cook 5 Report; for there the Case was resolved, that where
the Inhabitants of a Town were assessed toward the repair of a Church, there
the Lessee for years was charged, and not the Lessor, though he had a yearly
Rent reserved: For in point of the Rent this Case and that will differ, by
reason Rents be expressly within this Law; but I now speak of a Lessee where no
Rent is reserved: In 17 Ed. 4. fol. 6, a Tenth was granted to the 17 Ed. 4.
King by Parliament, of the value of their Lands, and the Lessee for years was
charged therewithal, and so was the Law there taken, if the Parliament had
given the Tenth part of the issues and profits of the Lands.

The Case of the Proxies in the Irish Reports does in my Opinion in reason
resemble this Case; for the Case was Case of Proxies.
there, That the Bishop of Mead in Ireland had a Proxy of fifteen shillings
payable out of the Commandry of Kells, then parcel of the possessions of St.
John's, all which came to the Crown by the dissolution of Monasteries in that
Kingdom; and after the said Bishop granted the said Proxies to Queen Elizabeth,
and after Q. Elizabeth made a Lease of the Commandry to Dr. Forth, reserving a
yearly Rent, without mentioning the Proxy; And it was there resolved, That
Doctor Forth the Lessee for years should be at the charge to pay the said
Proxy, with all the arrerages thereof which did incur in his time: And so in
the case of a Rent charge, the Lessee is chargeable, and he is to pay the
Tithes, and the Composition money due therefore: So that these Cases sway
strongly against the Lessee for years, to lay the whole charge upon him, and to
exempt the Lessor.

But yet we must here distinguish and make a difference between Annual repairs
in ordinary things, and extraordinary repairs for to furnish the defense with
petty reparations, they shall be laid only upon the Lessee for years or for
life; but if a new Wall, Bank or Goat, or Sewer be to be built new, and
erected; or if the ancient defenses be decayed in the main timber, or in the
principal parts thereof, here as well the Lessor as the Lessee shall be put to
the charge, for these things be not ordinary and annual charges, but do reach
from the beginning of the Lease to the top of the Inheritance: as for petty
reparations they are by intendment to continue but for a short time, which are
likely to be spent during the term and lease; but these new defenses are
apparently done to save the Inheritance: And this difference holds good
correspondency with other Cases in our Law, as in 49 Ed. 3. fol. 1. and 3 Eliz.
in Dyer fol. 198. and in 49 Ed. 3. 3 Eliz. Dier.
that Book again fol. 134. and in diverse other Books it is holden for Law, That
if a house in Lease decay in the Groundsels, Post or Balk, in the great timber,
in direct wearing by tract of time, and not in default of the Lessee; the
Lessee may take and cut up timber growing on the grounds leased to repair the
same, and the Lessee shall be at charges of workmanship, for the repairs are in
matter of right, and do the Lessee good during his Lease, and the Lessor after
the expiration thereof: And because these great repairs extend to both their
goods, therefore they shall both be contributory thereto: But if a house be
decayed in splinting, thack, walling, or in such petty matters, the Lessee for
years shall be at the sole charge, for these may be spent in his own time.

So I suppose my meaning is herein well perceived, which is, That in petty,
annual and ordinary repairs, the Lessee alone shall do the same; but where the
same wants in great timber, or when a new defense is to be built, they shall
both be at the charge: And with this the Statute of 7 Jac. cap. 20. does
directly in reason agree withal; out of 7 Jac. cap. 20.
which Statute it is plainly to be observed, that in the great repairs, as also
in the new building, as well the Lessor as the Lessee shall be both at the
charge: Yet in the Statute of 3 Ed. 6. cap. 8. there is a clause in effect,
That all Lots, Scots and sums of money hereafter to be rated by the
Commissioners of Sewers upon the Kings Lands, shall be gathered or levied by
distress on those grounds as in case of other persons; and that all Bills of
acquittance signed with the hand of such Receiver or Collector, shall be a
sufficient Warrant to the Auditors and Receivers, and other the Kings Officers,
for allowance to the Farmer or Tenant to the Kings Majesty; Whereby it
appears, that the Farmer of the King shall not be at the charge, but His
Majesty; yet by the Statute 13 Eliz. cap. 9. it may be collected, that the
Lessor for years shall be charged, but all 13 Eliz cap. 9.
these are to be reconciled with my said diversity.

But now it may be objected to me; Sir do you think it reasonable or possible
for Commissioners of Sewers to take notice at the Nota.
first of every private man's inheritance, and the several Estates which the
parties have therein, when it will scarce be possible by private search to
find them out?

To this I answer, That it is not reasonable to tie the Commissioners to such
difficult and obscure businesses; but it is sufficient for the Commissioners to
impose or lay the rate, tax or sesse on the grounds, or on the visible
possessors thereof: and if the money so rated be demanded on the Lessee for
years, or for life; or if the goods be distrained therefore, or they be
compelled to pay the same, then they may come before the Commissioners, and
show forth their lease, and make it appear, that I. S. has the Reversion, and
as the case is, to be charged as well as himself; and upon due proof thereon
made, the Commissioners upon hearing the parties on both sides may apportion
the tax on either of them, as in Justice, Discretion and true Judgment is
requisite. And so if a tax be set upon Land, the owner may come in before the
Commissioners, and make it to appear before them, that I. D. has a common, and
Rent thereout; and upon proof thereof made, the Commissioners are to lay the
charge accordingly: And so it shall not tie the Commissioners at the first to
lay the charge upon every particular person, for that were opus in finitum and
impossible, but to relieve the parties upon their complaint; and this may be
easily done, and it stands with the Justice of these Laws so to do: And if the
parties grieved will not complain for relief, let it be justly accounted their
own folly, and no injustice of the Commissioners; for the very Statute directs,
that such as are 1 H. 4. chapter 12.
grieved shall have relief upon their complaints, which confirms my opinion in
this point.

Taxes, Rates and Sessments imposed merely by the Laws of Sewers.
I Have formerly put nine several matters to tie men to the repairs, and this,
by the Laws of Sewers is the last, but not the least of them: I propose these
to be by the Laws of Sewers, because they be not backed, helped, aided or
assisted by Customs, Prescriptions Common right, or by any other Rule of the
Common Law, or by Tenure or Covenant, or any act of the party, as all the rest
be, but are only composed, made, ordered and directed by the sole power and
authority of these Laws of Sewers: and these are such as fall out of all the
fomer rules, and therefore in nova causa novum remedium est adhibendum: But yet
before I enter into my own works, I will set down and declare the opinions
delivered in Rooks and Keighleys Case, which seemed one of them opposite to the
other: for in Rooks Case it is said, That if one be bound in respect of his
Lands to repair a Wall or Bank by Tenure, Prescription or otherwise, that yet
the Commissioners of Sewers could not assess the said party alone to repair the
same; and said, that the Commissioners were not tied to the Rules of
Prescription, Tenure, Custom or otherwise, but ought to assess all the Level to
do the same, which are to have good thereby: But this being mistaken, is very
justly and discreetly altered in the said Case of Keighley by the Author
himself; for how could it be presumed, that the learned makers of this worthy
Law would have stricken down at one blow so many thousand Prescriptions,
Customs, Tenures, Covenants and uses, as be within this Realm, which be tied
and bound to do and make the repairs in this kind, some in consideration of
houses and land, others for yearly Rents, and for other causes, which to have
set at liberty, and to have imposed the charge on the Levellers, would have
wrought and brought a wondrous innovation, change and alteration in these
works; all which by this exposition are freed and saved: But yet there be
certain Cases which of mere necessity lay the charge upon the Level, which are
as follows:

The charge upon the Level.


A. B. be bound by the Tenure of his land to repair a Bridge, Calcey or Bank,
and he dies without heirs, whereby the Land escheateth to the Lord of the Fee,
in this Case the Tenure is ended, and the chief Lord is not bound to the
repairs, and therefore now the charge must lie on the the Level, and so is the
Law if this Tenure had been in other sort extinguished.



John a Style be chargeable to make the repairs and be not able to do the same,
here the Level are to be charged to assist him therein, as appears in Keighleys
Case.

I. S. by reason of his Lands or otherwise be tied to repair the Sea bank, but
the hazard is so apparent dangerous to the country, that I. S. in all
likelihood cannot repair the same: and so the country might be in danger to be
overflown ere I. S. alone could do it, here also the country on that Level are
to be rated and taxed toward the same: Keighleys Case.

H. 8. Dier fol. 33. is much to this purpose, where one 28 H. 8. Dier.
made a Lease for years of grounds to I. S. lying near the River of Eye, and
the Lessee covenanted to repair the Banks of the River to preserve the Meadow
from surrounder; yet after an extraordinary flood, the Banks were broken down,
and the Meadows were surrounded, and it was there holden to be no breach of
Covenant. Nota, this was in
the Case of a fresh River, whereby in this Case the Law must lay the charge of
the Level, if any danger be likely to ensue by the protracting of time.

money will not defray the charge, the rest must be laid on the Level.



Ostia and januae Regni, and are the defenses to the whole country tempore
pacis and tempore belli, and are these places, by means whereof the upland
countries be made partakers of the sea Commodities; therefore in my opinion,
the extraordinary repairs of these be not altogether tied to the Level, as in
other cases, nor to Prescription or Custom of repairing, which extends but to
ordinary defects, but upon great and urgent necessities: for the safety of the
Port, upon the welfare whereof the safety of the country does depend, the whole
country are obliged and bound to contribute toward the repairs, for these
reasons following:







which the waters which drown the grounds of the countries adjoining are
conveyed.

Eliz. in Holingshead Chronicles, it appears what great care the Queen and
the Lords of the Privy Counsel, and the Hol. Cron.
Knights and Gentlemen of Kent took for the repairing of Dover Haven, what
preparation was made for it, what moneys Levied, and how forward all the
country was to effect that work, may be a Spectacle to others for to lend their
helping hands to the maintaining of such worthy works, being of all other the
most Honorable to our Nation, and the most useful to the enriching thereof; for
which causes in my opinion, because the Mountains as well as the Valleys have
both Salvationem defentionem and commodum thereby, therefore in time of need
the one as well as the other should be charged by the power of this Commission,
to contribute to the extraordinary repairing of the same.

I have now proceeded in this point of Sess so far, that I take it, I may
justly here make my full period of this days exercise; and I have taken up the
more time herein, because thereupon a main part and strength of this Law
consists: And therefore I will now apply my self to my conclusion, in the which
I have already proceeded so far, that I have made it in some sort to appear,
that some of the Sesses in particular are not well imposed, as the Lessee in
case of the new defenses was not alone chargeable, for that he in the reversion
was to contribute thereto, and that no imposition ought to have been laid upon,
the Parson for his Tithes, but the owner of the Soil was to be charged for all;
so that these two be already ruled for me: But yet if any of the Sesses should
be good, then I should fail in my conclusion; I shall therefore set forth in
few words, that all the Sesses are void.

And the cause is this, That the draining of the superfluous waters in S.
appears by my Case to be only commodious for S. and that D. the other town
had no good thereby: And it appears also, that by the repairing of the ancient
Sewer in D. that town only had benefit thereby, therefore to assess S. to
repair in D. and D. to contribute to S. where in those Cases there could be no
benefit, is directly against the letter and sense of these Laws; but herein
either of them ought to have been at charge with that, by the which it took
benefit, and that not otherwise; and therefore the mixture marred all the
matter: And so upon all this I conclude my Arguments as I did my Case, that the
new Bank, new River, and old Sewer were well decreed, but that the assess is
void in toto and in qualibet part.

Finis secundae Lecturae.
Lectura tertia.
IN my two preceding Cases; the main body of this great Law were contrived, and
therefore I took a greater and larger compass in my Arguments therein, then
otherwise I would have done; and I am now come to the execution of these Laws;
wherein the life and livelihood of all Laws consist: And it may well be said of
execution, as Mr. Plowden in Zouch and Stowels Case, Plow. com.
in his Commentaries, fol. 358. says of a fine, that it is finis fructus
exitus and effectus Legis; so is execution the fruit, issue and end of the Law,
and without it nothing is effectual, and till it come nothing is material; for
to begin a Suit and stay at the declaration, were a fruitless enterprise; and
to proceed on to Judgment, and to go no further, were like a Traveller which
undertook a journey, and returns or sits down without further moving, before he
came at the end of his intended progress.

Law, as Cicero says, is but mutus Magistratus, the Magistrate is Lex loquens;
but I shall add something, which Cicero.
upon the matter is the sum of all things, that is, That executio est Lex
agens: And because I esteem the time to be almost lost or misspent which is
prologued out in preambles, I will therefore now briefly divide this part of
this Statute into these ensuing heads:

Imprisonment, Fine, or Amerciament.


Or in doing execution upon the offenders goods By distress, or by the Absolute
sale thereof.



The true and due execution of all these in a just, legal, equal and qualified
decree, requires of all other parts of Law this greatest and truest
discretion, consideration, wisdom and judgment of the Commissioners: And I
take it, it may stand as a ground infallible, that there be as many degrees of
punishments, as there be offenses; It behooveth therefore the Commissioners to
be circumspect, that they apply to every offense his due punishment; for it is
injustice to punish the offense committed in a wrong degree, to pronounce a
Traitors judgment upon a Fellon, or a Fellons judgment upon a Traitor, is
grand misprision; to imprison the body, or to fine the person, where an
Amerciament is only due, is not only injustice in the Commissioners, but
thereby also their discretions are to be drawn in question and censured.

And seeing the Statute does so much lie upon discretion of the Commissioners,
as in many parts of this Law it is mentioned; It seems the Parliament did
give them to understand, That such as were to meddle in those affairs, should
be both discreet and wise, and should strive to become learned in those affairs.

And therefore for the better furnishing of them with the true understanding of
the said parts of this Statute, I have framed a Case thereupon, which does give
just occasion to treat fully of them all.

The third Case.
A. Gave the Office of a Ranger of a Forest, to which a Manor is belonging to
I. S. and Abnepti, and to the heirs, males and females, of their bodies in
Franck marriage, and dies: B. and C. their legitimate son and daughter, and D.
their bastard daughter enter, and dies in seisin, and E. her daughter enters:
The Commissioners of Sewers at a Court make a Law, That a Goat shall be
repaired, and assesse severally A. B. C. and E. to do it, upon surmise, that
they all had benefit: B. and C. refuse to obey, for which B. is imprisoned, and
C. is fined; A. and E. tender pleas of discharge, which are refused, and they
are severally amerced, and a Law made, that A. should be distrained, and for
non-payment the distress to be sold, without alowance of Replevin, and the
interest of E. should be also sold, because she has nothing to be distrained
by.

I conclude, the Commissioners of Sewers have done due Justice upon the
Offenders in every part of this Law.

Argumentum Lectoris.
The passages of this Case are both at the Common Law and by this Statute; The
Common Law is the means, but the Statute is the matter I must insist upon: But
seeing the Statute Law can receive no due construction, but by the rules of the
Common Law, I have therefore made a harmonial composition of them both in my
Case, and I do distinguish and branch out my Case into these ensuing points.

Points at the Common Law.
Imprimis, Whether this Office may be intailed or not?
Points upon the Statute.
prima facie to oppose a main point of the Common Law, in denying of Replevins?
These be the materials of this Case, wherein you may perceive by the
beginning, what you are to expect in the sequel and conclusion of my argument.

These Points upon the Statute are of great consequence and importance, and
tend much into the powers of these Laws: In the handling whereof, according to
my wonted fashion, I intend to maintain the Affirmatives of my Case.

First Point.
I did not intend it a point of any importance in my Case, Whether Land might
belong to an Office; for that in the 1 H. 7. fol. 28. in Sir Robert Crofts
Case, it is resolved it might: For there Land did belong to the Office 1 H. 7.
of a Forester, and might belong to the Office of the Warden of the Fleet, and
also to a Corody which was no Office, and these, as well as to a spiritual
Office, Parson, Vicar, Prebend or such like; but whether or no these Lands
might be parted from the office by alienation, I thought that an argumentable
point: in 6 H. 8. Dyer f. 2. Empsons case it is said, 6 H. 8.
if the King create a Duke, and grant to him an anuity to maintain his Dignity,
that Annuity was so incident to his Dignity as it could not be severed
therefrom; and so of Lands belonging to a Parson, Vicar, Bishop or such like,
because they were given to the maintenance of them in their places, and
therefore if these were severed, they might be recontinued again to their
Successors.

And in the Case of Sir Henry Nevil in Plo. Com. an Office of a Parker was
granted to two, and an Annuity for the exercise of it; and it is there
resolved, that the Annuity might not be severed from the Office: and so it
might be said in my Case, That the Manor which belongs to the Office was at
the first laid thereto, or given therewithal for the maintenance of the Officer
in his place by the Founder, and so may not be severed therefrom without his
consent. And touching the intailing of the Office of the Ranger of a Forest, it
is held in Mancels Case in the Comment of Mr. Plowden, that the Office of a
Bailiff or Receiver of the Rents of a Manor may be intailed; So an use and a
Copyhold, because these concerned and depended upon Land. But the Office of the
Master of the Hawks, or the Mastership of the Horse could not be given in Tail
within the Statute of West. 2. de donis conditionalibus, nor an Annuity which
charge the person; Yet all these may be given or granted within these
intailed limitations, but yet they are no intails within that Statute.

I am of opinion, That the Office of a Ranger of a Forest cannot of it self be
given in Tail, but having a Manor belonging to it, make the question of more
moment; For as the Office Dese is not intailable, so the Land per se may be
intailed: But Land in our case is not the principal, but the accessory and
accessorium sequitur suum principale; and therefore seeing the Land follows the
Office, as the shadow does the body, and passes out of his own kind by the
ceremony belonging to the Office, and not by the ceremony by which Land is
transferred and passed, I should therefore take it, that the Estate of the Land
should be such as the Office of it self might bear, which could not be
intailed; yet because in the said Case of the Forester, with Land belonging to
it, is taken to be in Tail in 1 H. 7. aforesaid, with a remainder 1 H. 7.
thereof over in Fee, I am therefore concluded to make any further question of
it, and so I leave it as I found it, and do pass to the argument of the other
points.

Second Point.
The second Common Law Point is, Whether this gift in my Case be a
Frank-mariage or another intail; I have observed in Books that there be five
things incident to a gift in Frank-mariage (viz.)



Frank-mariage must be literally expressed.







And the want of these or any of these in the creation does destroy that Estate
in the conception.

Here seems to be two Impediments in my Case to hinder this gift to take root
as a Frank marriage; It is made abnepti, which is the Cousin in the fourth
degree, and the last in those gifts, whereby the gift that way cannot have his
full operation, for that the first Heir of their bodies is out of the former
privileges: But in regard I take it that a Frank marriage does more respect his
original creation In incepto then the descent of the privileges to the Heirs
In suo progressu, I take this to be no impediment to hinder this from being a
gift in Frank marriage. But here the words in the gift preceding the words Frank
marriage do differ much from it, for by the special limitation the Heirs Females
shall inherit with the Heirs Males, Simul and Semel as Heirs in common; But in
the Case of the Frank marriage Heirs Males shall first inherit single, and for
want of them then the Females.

I do agree the Law, that in cases where the special words of limitation may in
construction be made to agree with the word, and limitation of Art contained in
Frank marriage, the gift shall be taken a Frank marriage, as in the Case of 2 H.
3. It. suff. Fitz. Mordanc. plac. 52. where Lands were given 2 H. 3.
in Frank marriage to R. S. cum Alicia sorore le donor it a quod post mortem
dictae Aliciae and puerorum suorum, the Land should revert to the donor; and
this was adjudged a Gift in Frank marriage, and the words It a quod were holden
of no validity; neither will the words of Reservandum Redendum Tenendum or
Warrantizandum; though they vary from the nature of a Frank marriage, yet they
shall not destroy the same as an Habendum may do, which is the word whose
proper place is to create the Estate: and therefore if any thing come therein,
which is repugnant thereunto, the same will alter the quality of the gift: And
with this agrees the Case in 45 Edward the 3. Title Tail 14 and 31. where
Lands were given to I. S. in Frank marriage with B. the daughter 45 E. 3.
of the donor Habendum to them and their heirs, and this was held a Fee simple,
and no Frank marriage. And the like Law is where Lands are granted in Frank
marriage, the remainder in Fee to I. S. and his heirs; the Frank marriage is
defeated by the opinion in Br. Cases and so in my Case, because there can be no
reconciliation between the special words of limitation in my Case, and the word
Frank marriage: I am therefore of opinion, that this gift is an Estate in Tail,
according to the special limitation, and no Frank marriage.

Third Point.
Whether the Bastard shall inherit to have an Estate in Tail, is the third
Common Law question; for I am clear of opinion, that a Bastard cannot inherit
to a gift in Frank marriage, because adultery and fornication, which is the seed
of every Bastard is opposite to marriage, and in breach of that powerful link
and knot of Matrimony, which is an Ordinance derived from the Divine power of
the Almighty: And therefore seeing marriage is the material consideration of
such a gift, Bastardy the opposite can never (being out of the consideration)
come within the privileges to inherit this Estate.

So if I give Lands to I. and S. and to the heirs of their two bodies lawfully
begotten, their Bastard cannot inherit to this gift, because he is not heir of
their two bodies lawfully begotten; But if the word Lawfully had been out of
the limitation, then I see no reason but that a Bastard may inherit to an
Estate in Tail, as to a Fee simple conditional, which he might have done at the
Common Law, seeing an Estate Tail may be made before marriage, as expecting to
be confirmed thereby; and so a Bastard born before marriage is by the
consummation of a succeeding Marriage made capable to inherit to them, if his
possession continue without disturbance to his death: Yet in Plow. Com. fol.
57. in Winbish and Tailboys Case, it is said, That if there be a Bastard, Eigne
and Mulier puisne, and the Bastard after the death of the Ancestor enters into
intailed Lands, and dies seized, this does not bind the Mulier in case of
Estates Tail, as it does in an Estate of Fee simple: and voucheth for Authority
in the point, 39 Ed. 3. plac. ultimo, where the Case is, That Lands were given
in Tail to I. S. the Remainder 39 Ed. 3.
in Tail to C. and I. S. has Issue by a woman a Bastard, and dies seized, and
then the Bastard dies seized, having Issue, he in the Remainder may recover
the Land against the Issue of the Bastard; affirming, That the continuance of
possession in the Bastard shall not be prejudicial to him in Remainder: To
which Opinion I do subscribe, because he in the Remainder is a stranger in
blood, and so cannot be concluded as the Mulier shall be; for a Mulier indeed
is like a graft drawn out of both the bloods of Father and Mother: so the
Bastard is a slip which is derived from the same Stock, and had his being
therefrom.

And for my own Opinion, considering the Statute of Westminster 2. de Donis
does accept of Gifts in Tail made before Marriage, upon the hope and expectation
of a succeeding Marriage to perfect the same, even so the Marriage succeeding to
a Bastards birth gives him and his Issue a privilege in these cases of
descent, which is denied to other Bastards or mere Strangers. And I see no
reason wherefore that maxim and principle of Law should be altered by the said
Statute of West. 2. but because Mountagues Opinion in Mr. Plow. Com. sways the
other way; I will therefore submit this Point to men of greater judgment then
my own: So that if the Law fall out for the Bastard Issue, then she should have
title to the half part belonging to the Females, and to no part belonging to
the heirs Males: And with this Conclusion I do here end my Common Law Points,
and will now resort to the handling of my Statute Points.

The Sewers are a Court of Justice.
I Am desirous to attribute to this Law all the honor and dignity which may in
any sort belong to it; and therefore I am unwilling to forget any thing which
may materially tend to the upholding and maintaining thereof: wherein amongst
the rest, and the chiefest of them all, it is, To prove the Commissioners of
Sewers a Court of Justice: I know some Opinion has been to the contrary, and
held, That the Commissioners had only the power of a Commission, and not any
Court; and I suppose much may be said to maintain that opinion,

expressis terminis there is no Court ordained by this Statute, or by any
other, and without words express in the point, they can have no Court.

London, in Sir Edward Cooks 8 Report, The King granted to the Major and
Commonalty Plenum and integrum scrutinium gubernationem The Case of the City of
London.
and correctionem omnium and singularum misteriarum, and it was resolved, That
they had no Court in this case, because no Court was granted to them by the
Patent, as it is holden in Doctor Bonhams Case, fol. 119 in the same Report,
wherein the principal Case there put sways the same ways; for there the
Physicians had power to imprison, and to fine offenders, yet they had not any
Court thereby.

And so if a Commission issue out of the Chancery to examine matters in a Suit
there depending, and to Oyer and Terminer the same, yet hereby these
Commissioners have not any Court; for in that case the Commission is derived
out of the proper power of the Chancery, which is the Court, for that cause eo
instante when it is in Commission: And one Cause cannot uno eodemque tempore
depend in several Courts; neither have the Commissioners upon the Statutes of
Bankrupts and charitable uses any Courts: nor the Commissioners in the Case of
1 and 2 Eliz. Dier fol. 175. which had power to hear and determine the Office
of the Exigenter, had not any Court, but only the power of a Commission: For in
truth these are all of them rather Ministerial then Judicial Commissions, and
so a Court is not proper to them.

Yet I am of Opinion, That the Commissioners of Sewers have an eminent Court of
Record: It is true, that Courts had their beginnings in three sorts;







1. The Courts, Hundred and Leet began by custom, and so did the eminent Courts
of Westminster Hall.

2. Courts in Corporations most of them took their beginnings by Charters. And,

3. The Courts of first Fruits and Tenths, and the Court of Wards and Liveries
were erected by Act of Parliament, the one in 32, the other in 33 Hen. 8. But
to bring the question nearer home to our Statute of Sewers, which is but
additamentum legibus antiquis Sewerarum, for they have been used from the
beginning of Laws, though perhaps not known by that name: And yet before the 6
H. 6. they were known by that name, as by the perusal of that Statute may be
collected: And therefore for the causes and reasons hereafter ensuing, I hold
the same to be a Court.

Ed. 4. cap. 7. and our very Statute of 23 H. 8. calls the Commissioners of
Sewers 12 Ed. 4.
Justices, and one cannot properly be a Justice or a Judge but in a Court.

That the Commissioners may make and direct all Writs, Precepts, Warrants, and
other Commandments, to all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Ministers, etc. And
the Statute of 1 H. 4. cap. 12. has these words in it (That he that thinks 1
H. 4.
himself grieved may pursue and he shall have right) and where there be legal
proceedings, and where parties grieved may come in and have remedies for the
wrongs and injuries done to them, there is properly a Court of Justice to have
them in: But in Doctor Bonhams Case the Physicians had no legal proceedings,
and therefore parties grieved could have no remedy, which was the reason they
had not a Court.

Oyer and Terminer, which was and is a Court of great esteem, power and
authority; and so it was needless to erect a new Court in this case, as it was
needful to erect and found the Court of Wards and first Fruits, the first would
else have remained in the Chancery, to the which primarily it did belong, and
the other was a new revenue, and wanted a Court to direct or dispose of them.







For all which causes I do conclude, That the Commissioners of Sewers have a
Court of Record, although it be not holden in aliquo loco certo: So was the
Kings Bench a Court of more Eminency then this; But ubicunque fuerimus in
Angliae, and for express Authority in the point of Gregory's Case in the 6
Report of Cook chief Justice, that the Sewers is a Court of Record.

Imprisonment imposed by the Commissioners of Sewers.
IT is a point of high consequence, whether Commissioners of Sewers have power
by these Laws to Imprison the body of a man for any thing touching the same,
for that Imprisonment of the body seems to sway somewhat against the grand
Charter of England, and against the liberty of a freeborn Subject; and it is
said in Bonhams case, 28 H. 8. in Dyer, that liberty is a thing which the Law
much favoreth: and I find in our Books of Law, That the Judges have been very
careful and curious, in not extending words contained in Charters to the
Imprisonment of men's bodies, unless they were express in the point: And
therefore in Clerks case in Sir Ed. Cooks 5 Report, fol. 64. Clarks Case.
The case is, That the Term was to be kept at St. Albans, and the Major there
and his brethren did assess every townsman toward erecting and building of the
Courts of Justice, and made an Order, That he which should refuse to assist and
pay should be imprisoned; and one being Arrested and imprisoned, brought his
Action of false imprisonment against the Major, who pleaded in effect, That
they were incorporate by King Edward 6. and had power granted to them in their
Major of St. Albans.
Charters to make Ordinances, by reason whereof they made the said Order, and
so justified the imprisonment: But it was adjudged against the Major, for that
by the said Charter they had not any power to make an Ordinance to imprison a
man's body, for that were against the grand Charter in Magna Charta, cap. 29.
Quod nullus liber homo imprisonetur Magna Charta.
nisi per legem terrae: But by that Book they might have inflicted a penalty,
and have distrained, or brought an Action of Debt for it. In Doctor Bonhams
case in the 8. Report, King Hen. 8. incorporated the Physicians of London, and
gave them power by Charter to examine the Imperites, and to find out the
defects Et pro delictis suis in non been exequendo faciendo and utendo illos
per punitionem eorum delinquentium per fines amerciamentum and imprisonomentum
corporum suorum: So hereby it appears, that by the Kings Letters Patents they
had power to imprison the Body; but I find their Charters confirmed by Act of
Parliament: Yet in 2 Eliz. Dier fol. 175. the Case is, That the Queen did award
a Commission directed to certain Commissioners, to Hear and Determine the
controversies betwixt Scrogs and Colshil touching the Office of the Exigenter,
and that if Scrogs should refuse to obey to make answer before them, they
should commit him to Prison; but the validity of this last Commission I much
doubt of. I am of Opinion, That the Commissioners of Bankrupts and charitable
uses, have no power to commit any man; but if any abuse or misdemeanor be
committed in contempt or derogation of their Authorities, they may make
Certificate thereof into the Chancery, and refer the punishment thereof to the
will and discretion of the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper for the time being.

In Godfreys Case in the 11 Report, there is a discourse what Godfreys Case.
Courts have power to Imprison, and which not, and there it is said, Some
Courts may Fine, but not Imprison, as the Courts Leet and Sheriff turn; some
others could neither Fine nor Imprison, as Courts Baron and County Courts; and
some could neither Fine, Imprison nor Amerce, as Ecclesiastical Courts; And
some may Imprison and not Fine, as chief Constables at their Petty Sessions for
an affray done in disturbance of them; And other Courts there were which might
Fine, Imprison and Amerce, as the eminent Courts of Westminster.

So that Imprisonment is not incident to every Court, nor to every offense; Yet
I am of opinion that the Commissioners of Sewers may Imprison the body, for it
is not only a Court of Record, but is authorized by Act of Parliament; and I
suppose that there be words in the Commission and Statute which will bear this
construction, which are as follow, viz. And all such as ye shall find
negligent, gainsaying or rebelling in the works, reparation or reformation of
the premises, or negligent in the due execution of the Commissioners, That ye
Compel them by Distress, Fines and Amerciaments, and by other Punishments, ways
or means, etc. Which words are strong, and large enough to authorize the
Commissioners of Sewers upon just Cause to Imprison the body; But here they are
to be careful, and not to think that they may Imprison, Fine or Amerce in any
case, because the words be generally put together: But this construction must
be thereof made, That they may Imprison where Imprisonment is due, and Fine in
cases Fineable, and Amerce in cases Amerciable, and Distrain where a Distress
properly lies by the Rules of Law; and they may not Imprison, where by the
Laws Imprisonment is not due, but every one of the said punnishments is to be
used in its proper kind; for these words promiscuously put together, must be
ordered by a just and legal construction, according to the Rules of Law and
Reason.

And I have known the words of a Statute generally and promiscuously put
together, have been marshalled according to their distributive operations, as
the Statute of 1 Rich. 3. which is, That all Feoffments, Gifts, Grants,
Releases and Confirmations of Lands made by Cestui que use should be good; Yet
though these words were generally put together, notwithstanding the wise and
discreet Sages and Expositors of our Laws have so Marshalled the words of this
Statute, that they made construction thereof according to the Rules and reason
of the Laws, That is, That Cestui que use in Possession might make a Feoffment;
and that Cestui que use in Reversion or Remainder might grant the Land, and
Cestui que use of a discontinued Estate might release or confirm: and yet the
words of this Statute were general, howsoever Reason must be the Expositor,
that every thing be done in due form of Law, and not in preposterous manner.

And these matters being thus passed over, I shall endeavor my self to declare
in what cases Commissioners of Sewers may Imprison, Fine and Amerce, and where
not.

Imprisonment, Fine and Amerciament.
Fines.
IF one give evil Language to Commissioners in Court, or disturb the peace
there, or hinder the business of the Court in a Turbulent fashion, he may be by
them Fined or committed to Prison, or both, at the discretion of the
Commissioners; for by 34 H. 6. fol. 24. in every case when a man is fined, he
may be imprisoned; and by 19 H. 6. fol. 67 in every case where one is
Imprisoned he may be Fined; and 34 H. 6.
our Law in express words gives the Commissioners power 19 H. 6.
to set fines: and then by the opinion of the said Books ex consequenti they
may Imprison.

If one oppose against a Law of Sewers not legally in questioning the same, but
refractory contemning thereof, or by dissuading persons assessed not to pay
such, or not to obey the Law, I am of opinion that a person is both Fineable
and Imprisonable; and if this be done in facie Curiae, it aggravates the
contempt; and this is the Rebelling which this Statute speaks of.

If one do refuse to obey the Decree, Rule, Order of the Court, especially if
it be done in affront of the Commissioners, when they be in execution of their
Commission, This is a contempt, and he is to be imprisoned for such his
disobedience, and this agrees with 37 H. 6. fol. 14.

In Termino Pasche 12 Jac. in the Kings Bench, the Case 37. H. 6.
there was in debate between Hitley and Carier, where certain 12 Jac.
Commissioners of Sewers in the counties of Huntington and Northampton made a
Law, That certain Townships in those counties were assessed to a work of
Sewers, and one town was rated to Five pounds; and because the same was not
paid, the Commissioners caused a Warrant to be directed to the said Carier, to
distrain for it, and he distrained the cattle of Hetley one of the Inhabitants,
and Hetley brought an Action of Trespass in the Kings Bench against Carier and
arrested him thereupon, and upon complaint made to Sir Anthony Mildmay, and Sir
John Boyer Knights, and other the Commissioners of Sewers, they caused Hetley
to be attached by their Warrant, and committed him till he should release his
Actions brought against Carier, and until he should be delivered out of the
Prison by Warrant to be granted by them: But afterward Hetley procured a
Habeas corpus cum causa out of the Kings Bench, and was removed, where all the
said matter appeared; and thereupon Attachments were awarded against the said
Commissioners; and Sir John Boyer appearing, was by Cook chief Justice, Crook,
Dodderidg and Houghton, Justices, committed to the Kings Bench Prison, and was
fined Two hundred pounds; but was after delivered Ex favore Regis sed non ex
Rigore Legis.

And in my opinion, The said Commissioners in this case in making a Warrant to
attache Hetley, and in imprisoning of him for the said causes did exceedingly
err, and the rather, because they took upon them to overrule the Justices of
the Kings Bench, being of a higher and greater authority then they were of; But
this is no president to impeach the power of the Commissioners of Sewers for
committing persons offending their authorities to Prison, if their proceedings
therein be consonant to the Laws of this Realm; but they were punished in this
Case, not for executing their power, but for exceeding their limits, and the
bounds of their Commission.

If a Collector, or Expenditor, or other Officer of Sewers have been negligent
in the execution of his Office and place, he his fineable therefore, though his
offense be but neglect, because he was an Officer, and was also sworn to
execute the same duly.

But I take it, a neglect in another ordinary person is not to be punished.

And if one be rated to pay toward repairs, and he neglect to pay the same at
the days and times appointed, he is not fineable therefore, but is to be
Amerced in this Case.

If a Collector or Officer of Sewers do distrain a man, or do any other act
contrary to an Inhibition of Sewers to him directed by the Commissioners of
Sewers, he may be fined and imprisoned and simile factum fuit in 7 H. 4. fol.
33. 7 H. 4.


If a Purpresture be committed in the Kings streams, as in fixing Piles or
Stakes therein, or in stopping, straitning or diverting the course of the
waters from their ancient channels or courses, these offenses being presented,
the offenders are fineable therefore, if in the Presentment they be found to be
done vi and armis, or be presented by the name of Purprestures; for by 19 H. 6.
fol. 8. if the offense be done 19 H. 6.
with force, and so presented, then the offender is fineable, Beechers Case
but otherwise it is if the offense be not found, but omitted, for then an
Amerciament is only due. And it is said in Dier 7 Eliz. fol. 240. That for a
Purpresture one is fineable, and a Purpresture may be committed in aquis Regiis
as well 1 Eliz. fol. 240.
as in viis Regiis, by the opinion of Glanvil: And in Keleways Report, fol. 141.

And a Purpresture is taken to be an offense done to the King imediately, or to
His possessions; But if the like offense Purpresture.
be done to a Subject or to his Lands, it is termed a Nusans. Nusans.


The Abbot of Mellefont was fined for erecting a Were in the royal River of
Boyne in Ireland, which is expressed in the Irish Reports in the Case of the
Royal Pischary of the Ban in Ireland, and this was a Purpresture.

If one do refuse to accept an Office of Sewers, being thereto duly elected by
the Commissioners, he is fineable therefore, for in Greslies Case 8. Report,
One being elected Greslies Case.
and chosen Constable, did refuse to take the Office, and he was fined.

And if an Officer do misdemean himself in his Office he is fineable, for in 10
H. 6. fol. 6. A Tythingman did refuse 10. H. 6.
to make Presentment being thereto required, and he was fined therefore. So in
case of the Sewers, if one of the Jury, or which is a Surveyor, refuse to make
Presentment when he is required by the Commissioners, he is to be fined. So if
a Juror depart after he is sworn on the Jury, or before he be sworn, after his
appearance be recorded, he is to be fined; And if an Expenditor or Collector,
Officers of Sewers, be required by the Court to account for the moneys received
and laid out by them, and they refuse, they may be punished by fines.

And if the Sheriff upon Writ or Warrant directed to him to return a Jury
before the Commissioners, and he make no return thereof, nor does not attend
when he is required, he is to be fined by the Commissioners.

Also an Officer of this Court is fineable for falsities done by him in his
Office, for these are a violation of his Oath, and is a breach of that trust
which the Court reposed in him at his election and entrance into his Office,
and therefore the Offense is greater in him then in another man.

I have learned in Books that a Fine has these qualities with it:





Plena curia, and not elsewhere.

Fourthly, every Fine ought to be reasonable.

Ed. 3. cap 1. did the Justices of Peace, that those Fines that they should
impose for any 34 Ed. 3.
offense coming before them should be reasonable, having respect to the
quantity and quallity of the offense, for Excessus in re qualibit jure
reprobatur communi.

But because in Godfries Case it is said, that Commitment of the body to Prison
is incident to a Fine, as by a Gapias pro Fine also may be collected; Yet I
hold it questionable, whether the Fine shall precede the commitment, or the
commitment the Fine. But for my own opinion, I hold that this lies much in the
discretion of the Justices, and I find cases and presidents both ways; for in
41 Assiz. plac. 12. an Officer was imprisoned quousque finem fecerit, where the
Imprisonment preceded the fine: and with this agrees 7 H. 6. fol. 25. 7 H. 6.
and in 33 H. 6. fol. 21. one was fined, and after Imprisoned for it, and there
the fine did precede the Imprisonment. 33 H. 6.


But upon all these I take the Law to be, that if one be fined, and this Fine
may be levied by the Justices, as Justices of the Peace may do (but not
Justices of Sewers) there the Imprisonment may be quousque finem fecit, because
the Fine is leviable by them: But the Law is not so of Commissioners of Sewers,
because they have no power to Levy but to extreat the Fines into the Kings
Exchequer. Howsoever one before them may be both imprisoned and fined Diversis
tamen respectibus, The one for the wrong done, the other for the contempt or
disobedience to the Court; As for example, if one refuse to be a Collector, he
is finable to the King, because hereby the Commonweal is without an Officer;
and he may also be imprisoned for disobeying the Justices command: and yet in
my opinion it lies much, if not altogether in the discretion of the
Commissioners to impose or inflict both the said punishments, or one of them,
at their pleasures, being not therein precisely limited by this Statute.

Amerciaments.
AMerciaments be not so grievous as Fines be, for they be derived of the word
Miserecordia which signifies moderation and mercy; and to that end was the
Writ in the Register Moderata miserecordia devised, where one is outragiously
amereed he might be relieved by suing forth that writ, which writ and the Law
in that case is grounded upon the grand Charter Magna Charta.
cap 14. Quod nullus liber homo amercietur nisi secundum quantitatem delicti:
And that none of the said Amerciaments be imposed Sed per Juramentum legalium
hominum de viceneto.

Glanvil in his Book says, Est autem miserecordia Domini Glauvil.
Regis qua quis per Juramentum legalium hominum de viceneto eatenus amerciand'
est: And Fleta lib. 1. cap. 48. says, Quod Fleta.
liber home non amercietur nisi per sacramentum parium suorum. And with these
agrees Bracton lib. 3. cap. 1. and Fitz. Not. bre. fol. 72. and if the Steward
set an Amerciament upon a Bracton.
man on his own head it is void.

By which authorities it plainly appears, that Amerciaments are to be imposed
by a Jury, or by the Oaths of good and lawful men; and therefore I have
heretofore much marvelled, when sometimes I have seen Justices of Sewers take
upon them to set down Amerciaments, without assistance of the Jury, which act
of theirs was directly against the said great Charter of England, and contrary
to the said authorities of Law.

So that there is a difference between the imposing of Fines which are done by
the Justices, and Amerciaments which be by Jury, or otherwise, per sacramentum
parium: So is there great diversity between the offenses of the one kind, and
the other; For if one do suffer a Wall, Bank, or other work of Sewers to fall
into decay for want of repairing, which he was bound to maintain by Frontage,
Tenure, Custom or Covenant, he is in this case to be Amerced therefore: And so
if one be bound by any of the said ties to repair a Bridge, Calcey, Goat,
Getty, Sluice, or to Cleanse a River, if the same by his neglect be left undone
or unrepaired, he is therefore amerceable. So if one be presented for casting
Dirt, Sand, Ballast, or other anoyance into the Rivers or Streams, or for
digging down the Banks, or for pulling down the Walls thereof; if the
presentment do not express the same to be done with force, or therein be
wanting the word Purpresture, the party presented is then but amerceable
therefore: So when one is tied to cleanse the Rivers for passage of Boats and
Ballangers, or for the draining of the waters, if he suffer Sandbeds to lie and
choke up the Channel, he is Amerceable, and not Fineable therefore; for no
permission, sufferance, neglect or Nonfeasans can be found to be by force,
because they consist not in Agendo, and sic in similibus casibus; Yet some
cases following fall out of these rules pro ut sequuntur. As if the violence of
waters was so great, either by breaking in of the sea in an extraordinary
manner, or by a sudden flood or inundation of fresh waters after a Rain, that
thereby the defenses are broken down, or caused Sandbeds or other Nusances to
be, these being presented, no man is Amerceable therefore, because the same
could not have been prevented by policy, nor resisted by strength.

In 42 lib. Assiz. plac. 15. a Presentment was, That I. S. 42 lib. Ass.
had suffered trees to grow into the water, and lay in the Stream, by reason
whereof ships were hindered in their passage; and there was a Writ awarded
directed to the Sheriff to remove the Nusans: but Knivet Justice said there,
That I. S. should not be Amerced, because the Nusans was no act of his, but the
Trees grew so naturally of themselves.

But perhaps it will be objected to me, Can no Amerciaments be set but by a
Jury, or by the Oaths of twelve men?

Yes, I am opinion it may be done by the presentment of the Surveyors of the
Sewers, for that is per Sacramentum parium as the Law appoints; and in a
Nonsuit we see daily that in such case the Plaintiff is to be amerced, and this
Amerciament shall be assessed by the Coroners of the county, as appears in
Greisleys case; and so the words of the Statute and of the Law may herein be
satisfied.

Now I hope I have fully instructed the Commissioners, wherein they may learn
whom to Imprison, when to Fine, and how to Amerce in a legal and orderly sort,
and according to the ancient and approved Rules of Law, and of the grand
Charter; for in those things they are to direct their discretions by the said
Rules, and they are to be guided thereby, and are not to proceed therein
according to their own wills.

And herein I shall conclude the second point of this part of the Law, that is,
That Commissioners of Sewers have power to Imprison, to Fine, and to Amerce;
And that B. for refusing to obey their Order was justly imprisoned, and C. was
as justly fined: And for the reasons and causes aforesaid, the Commissioners in
their discretions, though the offenses of both were alike, yet they had power
to imprison the one and to fine the other. And now I do intend to proceed to
the fourth point of my Case, and the third point I intend to handle in a more
convenient place.

Distress.
THe point of Distress in my Case is grounded upon these 4 Point.
words of this Law, viz. And all those persons and every of them to tax,
assess, distrain and punish, as well within the metes, limits and bounds of old
time accustomed, or otherwise, or elsewhere within the Realm of England.

Three sorts of Distresses.
First, there be diverse kinds of Distresses (viz.) Judicial, which always
issues out of the Rolls of the Court.

Secondly, Ministerial, and such Distress is to be performed by the Officers
of these Laws, without any judgment directing the same.

Thirdly, and there is a Distress of Common right, not given nor awarded by
Judgment in Court, or by Warrant of the Commissioners, but incident to the
thing it self.

And first of the Judicial Distress which is awarded by the Court upon a
presentment found of a Nusans, or in the recovery of an assize of Nusans, or in
an Action of the case, as it appears by the 42 Assiz. plac. 15. 32 Ed. 3. 23.
and 7 H. 4. 8. there a Distringas ad Amovendum shall be 32 Ed. 3. 7 H. 4.
awarded to remove the Nusans; and so in case of a decay presented; As if I. S.
suffer a Bank or Wall to decay, and that be presented, a Distringas ad
reparandum shall be directed to the Sheriff to distrain I. S. to repair the
same.

Secondly, a Distress Ministerial is where one is assessed or rated to pay a
certain sum of money toward the repairing of a Wall, Bank, Sewer or Goat; here
upon Warrant from the Commissioners of Sewers, the Officer expressed in that
Warrant may distrain the cattle of the party which ought to pay the said Rate
and Sess, and which did neglect to pay the same: And yet where there is a Rate
and Sess imposed upon one by the Commissioners of Sewers, I am of opinion that
the Collector or Officer may distrain therefore without any express Warrant
from the Commissioners so to do; and my reason is grounded upon the Statute,
which is this, because the Statute and Commission which be the general Laws, do
of themselves in this case give a distress. And therefore in these cases, the
Warrant of the Commissioners is superfluous, like to the Case in 20 Eliz. Dyer.
20 Eliz.
fol. 362. where a Fine was levied of Lands, to the intent that I. S. should
have and receive a yearly Rent thereout, although in the conveyances there was
no mention made that the party might distrain for the same: Yet in that Book it
is mentioned to be adjudged, That the owner of that Rent might distrain for the
same, because the Statute of 27 H. 8. in 27 H. 8.
that Case gave a distress. Upon which Statute the said conveyance was
grounded. So if their be two coparceners to whom Land does descend, and they
make partition, and for more equality she that has the better part does grant
to the other and her Heirs a yearly Rent out of her Land, but limits no clause
or power of distress, she to whom this yearly Rent is granted may distrain
therefore; And so may a Bailiff distrain for an Amerciament in a Leet without a
Warrant, because the general Law gives a Distress in these cases.

Thirdly, and as touching a Distress of common right, It is in case where one
does hold his Land of his Lord as of his Manor, to repair a Bank, Wall or
other work of Sewers; the Lord of whom these Lands be holden may distrain his
Tenant of common right to compel him to make these repairs; and the Distress
given in the said Case of the coparceners, and in the said Case of Amerciament
in a Court of Leet, seem both to be Distresses of Common right: And that the
Law is, that a Distress lies for a Rate, Lot or Tax imposed by the
Commissioners of Sewers, it is manifest by the Case of Rooks in Cooks 5 Report,
which is full and direct authority in the point.

In what place a Distress is to be taken.
NOw touching the place where these distresses are to be taken, comes next into
our consideration, wherein the quality of the matter distrained for, and the
power from whence the distresses are derived, are to be considered of.

And therefore if a Lord do distrain his Tenant Ratione tenurae, for to repair
a Wall, Bank or other defense, this Distress must be taken on the Ground holden
by this Tenure and not elsewhere, for these grounds are chargeable therewithal,
as the opinion of Justice Sylliard is 21 Ed. 4. fol. 38. But, not as that Case
is, but in point of Tenure; 21 Ed. 4.
for there the Case was, That a presentment was found in hec verba videlicet
Iuratores present' quod est communis Regia via in Parochia Sancti Martini in
Campis in Com' Middlesex inter Hospitia Epis' Dunelmensis and Epis' Norwich
totalitur superundat' aquis and quod tam domini spirituales quam temporales and
Justiciarii domini Regis and Servientes ad legem and omnes alii Legis ministri
and omnes alii per viam illam versus Westmonaster' itinerantes pro legibus
domini Regis ibidem ministrandis and observandis sepius impediuntur per quod
via illa totalliter superinundata existit excessu emanationis aquae pluvialis
ibidem remanent' quam quidem aquam Episcopus Norwicensis rationae tenurae suae
ibidem evacuaere debuit and quod ipse and omnes predecessores sui ratione
Tenurae suae ibidem evacuaere debent: And in this case I take it the Land was
charged, not as in respect the Bishop of Norwich did hold the same of some Lord
by the Tenure, to repair the Sewer to avoid the water; but his Land stood
charged with the same as a charge imposed thereon by Custom or Prescription, as
by the president it self appears; for if the Bishop of Norwich had been by
the Tenure of his house or lands bound to avoid the waters, there needed no
Prescription to have been alleged.

Also in 5 H. 7. fol. 3. there is a like Presentment made 5 H. 7.
against an Abbot, Quod ipse and predecessores sui, ought to repair a gutter
ratione tenurae terrar' suar'; but because in that case the Presentment did not
set forth where those Lands lay which were charged, the Presentment for that
cause was holden to be void: So that there is a great difference between a
Tenure charge, and a charge imposed upon Land by Prescription; For in the case
where a Tenant holds his Land to repair a Bridge, Wall or Bank of the Lord of
the Fee, The Lord in this case may distrain the Tenant of Common right by the
Common Laws of England: But where ones Land is charged by Prescription and
Custom, there is no remedy to force and compel the Tenant to do the repairs but
by Presentment, and upon a Presentment process may be awarded against him to
distrain him to make the repairs.

And if upon a Presentment made by the Laws of Sewers, I. S. is charged to
repair a Sewer, and a Distringas ad reparandum be awarded against him, the
Sheriff may distrain the party in any place within the power of the Commission
of Sewers. But this being a judicial Distress which issues out of the Rolls,
the Justices are tied to the limits and bounds of the Commission; Yet in 19 H.
6. fol. 7. the 19 H. 6.
Case was, That the Admiral of England has jurisdiction in causes arising
only on the Seas, and he has no jurisdiction or power to meddle with any
thing done upon the Land: Yet upon a Presentment made in the Admiral Court one
was Presented and Amerced, and a Distress for this Amerciament was taken on the
Land, and exception was thereto taken, that the Distress was taken out of the
jurisdiction of that Court: But there Newton chief Justice and the rest of the
Justices said, That the power of the Admiral to hold plea was restrained by
Statute to matters arising on the Seas, but Executions were not so.

And I have further observed by the Book of 8. R. 2. Fitzher. 8. R. 2.
Avoury 253. that where no place is certainly prescribed to distrain in, that
in such a case the Distress may be taken in any place within the power and
jurisdiction of the Court, out of which the Writ or Warrant of Distress does
issue: As if one be amerced in a Court Leet or in a Court Baron, he may be
distrained for these Amerciaments in any place within the jurisdiction of these
Courts; and for an Amerciament set and imposed in the Sheriffs Turn a Distress
may be taken for it in any place of the county; for so far the power of that
Court does extend it self.

But in the case of a sess, rate or tax imposed by the Commissioners of Sewers,
a Distress for any of those may be taken in any place within the Realm of
England; for in this case the Distress is merely grounded upon the Statute, and
is bounded by the same limits, which is as large as the Realm of England: And
hereupon by this construction made in this legal manner, all the words in the
said clause of this Statute have their full operation.

And although in Rooks case the Distress was there taken on the ground charged,
yet that does not prove but that a Distress might have been taken in any other
place; for I verily take it, that the place where the distress was taken, in
that case was not intended any material point, though in my succeeding argument
for another purpose I shall make it one. So that my opinion touching distresses
to be taken in cases of Sewers, appears to stand upon these three distinctions.



Distringas ad reparandum or Amovendum upon a Presentment, which issues out of
the Rolls of that Court, and is a judicial process, a Distress must thereupon
be taken within the bounds of the Commission of Sewers Ex congruitate.

England; for this is a Distress grounded upon the Statute, and is as large as
the extent thereof. And so the difference appears where the Distress is guided
by the Commission, and where by the Statute.

Whose goods may be distrained.
IT comes now in turn to be handled, whose goods may be distrained and taken
within these Laws; For the words of Distress be put so generally in this
Statute, that they must receive their exposition by the Rules of the Common
Law, in regard these Laws do give no special direction therein; and therefore
the Distress mentioned in Rooks case may in this place be questioned: For there
Carter was assessed, but the goods of Rooks were distrained and taken for the
said Assess, and no challenge or exception was there made of it; and no marvel,
for it was specially found that the goods were taken and distrained on the
grounds charged, for otherwise that Distress had been tortious; wherein I take
this diversity, That where grounds are chargeable to repairs of defenses, and a
Sess is thereon imposed by the Commissioners of Sewers, the goods of a Stranger
may be taken therefore on the grounds Sessed; and this is warranted by Rooks
Case. But Rooks being a Stranger, his goods could not in any sort have been
taken for the Sess imposed upon Carter, but on the grounds charged: and the
like Law for Rents and Services issuing out of Lands, the goods of a Stranger
Levant and Couchant on the grounds so holden may be distrained for Rents and
Services, by 7 H. 7. 2. and 11 H. 7. 4. 7 H. 7. 11 H. 7.


But put the case a little further, that in the Sessions Court of the Sewers,
A. B. is amerced for Non-payment of his Sesse toward the repairs of a work of
Sewers; and in this case I am of opinion, that the proper goods of A. B. are to
be distrained for this Amerciament, and not the goods of a stranger going on
his grounds charged to the said assess, because this Amerciament is a
collateral charge, which falls on the person of the offender who was to pay the
Assels, and does not in any sort charge the grounds: and this opinion has
warrant from the Case in 41 Ed. 3. fol. 26. Br. Leet 4. for there A. B. was
amerced in a 41 Ed. 3.
Court of Leet, for receiving and keeping one in his house which was not sworn
to the King; in which Case it was holden, that no goods could be distrained for
this Amerciament, but only the proper goods of the party amerced, although the
goods of others were Levant and Couchant on his ground: And further in proof of
my said opinion, the Case of the Lord Cromwell in 15 El. in Dier, fol. 322. does
come fully thereto, which is, That a Replevin in an Avowry was made for a pain
and forfeiture of Ten shillings, due for the breach of a By-law, Contra ordinem
Curiae, and alleged to make Bylaws within the Manor by the Custom thereof: In
which Case it is apparent, that the proper goods of the party are to be
distrained therefore, and not the goods of a Stranger Levant and Couchant on
the grounds.

And in the 47 Ed. 3. fol. 12. the Prior of Tindals Case, 47 Ed. 3.
where the Prior was amerced, and another man's goods were taken and distrained
on the grounds of the Prior for the said Amerciament, and the Distress was not
well taken; and so my opinion may be conceived, that for an assess the goods of
a Stranger may be distrained on the grounds charged, but may not there be taken
for a Fine or Amerciament, which be collateral duties, and attends upon the
person and do not charge the Soil.

This discourse being thus ended, I shall now enter into a matter of greater
moment; and yet because these matters be frequent in businesses of the Sewers,
that which I shall here pretermit I will in some other place more fully
discourse of.

Goods sold.
THe further matter of this point will rest upon this, whether goods distrained
and taken for a Sess and Rate of Sewers may be sold, or not; which point has
been oftener practiced then the Law truly decided: But before I shall touch upon
the main, I will make an Ingresse to treat of such matters whereby the property
of a man's goods may be altered without his consent.



London upon a Foraign attachment goods may be attached and sold to another:
and in 10 El. Dyer, fol. 279. B. a Custom is alleged to be in York of Foraign
goods there bought and sold are seizeable by the Corporation, and so in case of
a Heriot Custom.

London Cooks Rep. the Case of Austen and Waltham, where King Henry the 6.
granted to the Corporation of Dyers there by Charter, That if upon search they
should find any Clothes died with Logwood, that they seized them as forfeit;
but resolved, that this Grant was in that point void.





These five grounds being first taken, I shall now examine the particular of
our Case in question touching the Law made by the Commissioners for sale of
goods; and against this sale many things may be alleged.

he cannot sell the Distress: And although in 10 and 11 El. Dier, fol. 280. a
return irreplevisable was awarded to the Lord or Avowant, yet he cannot sell
this Distress, nor work them by the opinion of that Book.

Jac. cap. 20. Rastal Marshes and Fens does enact, that a Commission in the
nature of this of ours should be directed to the Bishop of Norwich, and others
for the Recovery of Fen-grounds; where for an assess imposed, and for Fines and
Amerciaments, express power is given by that Statute to sell the parties goods
which does refuse to pay, Ergo, without such an express clause a sale of goods
could not have been lawful.

And by the Statute of 1 and 3 Jac. the forfeitures of Alehousekeepers 1 and 3
Jac.
may be levied by sale of their goods, by the express letter of these Laws:
and so it may be inferred, that our Statute wanting such an express clause to
authorize a sale, therefore no sale can be.

But much may be said to the contrary; for although in cases of sale the Laws
be tender, yet it is plain, that both our Common Law, Customs and Courts of
Justice daily use them, and are frequent in those sales: And we know that a
Distress is properly a pledge to be detained till satisfaction be made, and
then to be restored, and is not to be sold: Yet in 3 H. 7. fol. 4. a Distress
taken for an Amerciament 3. H. 7.
in a Leet or Law-day may be sold as well in the case where the Subject has by
Charter or Prescription the profits of the said Courts, as where the King
himself has them; and all the reason which that Book yields for it, is,
because they be the Kings Courts: But a Distress taken for an Americament in a
Court Baron cannot be sold, and in 22 Assiz. plac. 72. it is said, That if one
recover a Debt in a Court Baron, the goods of the Debtor could not be sold
therefore: 22 Assiz.
Yet I have seen always in practice, that for Debts and Damages recovered in
the County Courts, the goods of the Debtors have and be usually sold for them
by Levarifacias; and in my opinion this is used per totam Angliam: and a sale
in such a case in a Court Baron by Custom is good; and with this agrees the
Book of 7 H. 4. fol. 27. and 21 H. 7. fo. 40. in a Leet Court one prescribed
and alleged a Custom to 7 H. 4. 21 H. 7.
have of every one which made an affray within his Liberty, a certain sum of
money, and prescribed also to distrain for it, and to sell the Distress: and
with this agrees 11 H. 4. 14. and 11 H. 4. fol. 2. A Distress taken for the
Knights Fees of the Parliament was sold. Therefore now let us see and examine
well by what authority our Officers of Sewers may sell the Distresses taken.
The words in our Statute which are most powerful in this point, be these (viz.)
To depute and assign diligent, faithful and true Keepers, Bailiffs, Surveyors,
Collectors, Expenditors, and other Officers for the safety, conservation,
reparation, and making, repairing, reforming and amending of the Premises and
every of them, and to hear the account of the Collectors and other Ministers,
of and for the receipt and laying out of the money that shall be levied and
paid in and about the same: Here is the word (Levy) used, and money levied is
properly upon a Sale, Execution or Forfeiture; And the words of our Statute go
furthet (viz.) And to distrain, or otherwise to punish the debtors and
distrainers of the same by Fines, Amerciaments, Pains, or other like means
after their good discretious; and no likelier means to these is there any, then
to make sale of the debtors goods for non-payment of his sesse, and it is
consonant to other Laws: also in another part of this Statute are used these
words, And the Clerk by the Commissioners to be assigned to have Two shillings
per diem of the Rates, Taxes, Lots and Waives as shall be assessed or lost by
authority of the said Commission, to be levied or paid by their discretions:
And so it seems by the very express letter of this Law, the Taxes, Sesses
and Rates may be levied by the discretion of the Commissioners, which if they
please may be by sale of the offenders goods: And in many parts of this
Starute, the Justices of Sewers have power to make Laws, Ordinances and
Decrees, which being done according to reason, shall be held for firm and
inviolable: And therefore upon just cause in my opinion, the Commissioners may
make a Law or Ordinance for the sale of goods in furtherance of this service;
and this being a Law which tends so much to the service of the Commonwealth,
and is so profitable and commodious for the same, it is therefore good reason
to extend the same, and the exposition thereof, as far as the letter and intent
of the letter shall reach; which may be as far as shall stand with reason, and
rules of other Laws, Statutes, Customs and Usages of other Courts which have
power in sale of goods in causes of this nature, is not altogether without
president: For in the Charter of Romney Marsh, page 36 and 37. Chapter Romney Marsh.
It is said in these words in a debate between Hamo and Godfrey, Et predictus
Hamo concessit prose and aliis quod computabit cor' vigint' quatuor Jurat'
elect' de patria super districtionibus and averiis capt' predicti Godfredi pro
predict' Walliis and watergangiis repar' ab initio istius placiti usque nunc
etc. and districtiones illas secundum quantitatem portionis sibi contingent
interim pro predict' Walliis and watergangiis reparandum sicut predict' est per
predict' districtiones quod idem Hamo and alii satisfacient in omnibus quod
injunctum fuerit per predicti comput' inter eos de surplusagio recepto de
averiis venditis predict' Godfredi occasion praedict'. Hereby it is manifest,
that Hamo the Bailiff sold the cattle of Godfrey to make the repairs of the
Walls and the Waterganges; and our Statute gives power to the Commissioners of
Sewers to do after the customs of Romney Marsh, which by this president
formerly vouched, warrants the sale of goods: yet herein I am of opinion, that
the Bailiffs which distrain cannot Ex osficio without a special Warrant first
directed to them for that purpose from the Commissioners, make sale of goods
distrained for a Lay, Tax or a Sesse of Sewers; And I take it, it were a good
Warrant for the Commissioners to make an advised special Law of Sewers for sale
of goods distrained upon a just occasion, before they direct any Warrant Ex
subito to the Bailiffs, or for any such purpose.

But now herein follows a matter of some consequence, and worthy the handling,
That if by the Laws of Sewers goods may be sold toward the repairs of these
works, as in my opinion they may, Then whose goods may be sold is the question
next to be decided; wherein to be brief, I am firm of opinion, That no goods
can or ought to be sold by the power of these Laws of Sewers, but only the
proper goods of the party Sessed and Taxed, though the goods and chattels of
other men be Levant and Couchant on the grounds Sessed to the repairs: For I
hold it not consonant to reason, nor that it stands with any rule of Law, That
the goods and chattels of a stranger should be absolutely taken away from him,
and sold for the debt and default of another man. And to this purpose the Case
put in the 3 Eliz. Dier fol. 199. may fitly be applied to this point, where 3
Eliz.
a Custom is alleged for a Lord of a Manor to have and take the best which his
Tenant had at his death; and if such best beast should be esloyned, that then
he might have and take the best beast of any other Levant and Couchant upon the
Land; and this was adjudged a void custom, as to the goods of a stranger to be
made subject to such a forfeiture.

Thus far I have pursued my Argument in discoursing upon these Distresses, and
touching such matters as do depend thereon, because in my experience I have
found them the readiest part of the execution of these Laws; and I have
heretofore beheld much enormious proceedings therein, both in the Commissioners
and in their Officers, and therefore I thought it very needful to have treated
thereon for their better directions in these affairs hereafter.

Replevins.
YEt as I find Distress to be the most useful execution of these Laws of
Sewers, so I have seen the proceedings therein much stayed and interrupted by
the usual suing of Replevins, by which means the said Distresses taken by the
authority of these Laws have been set at liberty, and the works of Sewers have
been much let and hindered thereby: And therefore the fifth point in my Case
does minister a good occasion to enter into the serious examination of them.

And now my intent is, to declare in what case a Replevin does lie, and where
not; and surely this point has heretofore been much stirred in, and not
without some cause, for the very Statute seems to allow of Replevins in these
words, (viz.) That if any Action of Trespass, or any other Action shall be
attempted against any person for taking any Distress, or for any other thing
concerning the Law of Sewers, that the Defendant in such Action may make
Avowry, cognizance or justification, for the taking of the said Distress,
Trespass or other Act, whereof the Plaintiff complained was done by the
authority of the Commission of Sewers, for a Lot or Tax assessed by the said
Commission, or for other such act or cause as the Defendant did by the said
Commission: And in what action can a man so properly make his Avowry,
Cognizance or Justification as in a Replevin, being a word only apt for that
action; and a Distress is de sua natura, properly replevisable by the Common
Law: and for direct authority in the point, it appears in Rooks Case, that a
Replevin was there sued for the delivery of the Distress taken by the power of
these Laws of Sewers: But I must here distinguish, for I am of opinion a
Replevin does not lie, nor ought not to be granted from the Sheriff, or any of
his Deputies, for that the Sewer is a Judicial Court of Record, and of greater
authority then the power of the Sheriff, which in these cases was but
Ministerial; and the highest authority that he has is but vicontiel, which is
much inferior to the power of this Commission; and therefore the Sheriff is not
of sufficient power to supercede a Court of higher power. Yet if one sue a
Replevin, which afterward in Bank was abated, and a return of the Cattle there
awarded, another Replevin did lie by the opinion of the Book of 34 H. 6. fol.
37. and so it appears by the Statute of Westminster, cap. 2. but these new
Replevins came out of the 34 H. 6.
said Courts where the former was, for it is not likely, that the Sheriff could
make deliverance by his warrant of Cattle, contrary to the award and return of
a Court of Justice in a Retorno habendo; and therefore by the same Statute of
Secunda deliberatione, is now to be awarded out of the Rolls of the Court
whence the Retorno habendo came: And if one would resemble this case with other
authorities, and with the reason of other Book cases of the Law, it will be
made thereby apparent, that the higher Court may take or remove a cause out of
the inferior Court, but not Econtra, neither can the inferior Court supersede
the superior: For if one be impleaded in the Kings Court at Westminster, and in
coming toward London he is arrested in a Corporation Court, he may be
delivered thence by the power of the superior Court to the which he was
attendant, and the power of the inferior Court shall be superceded thereby, as
the Law is declared in diverse of our Books; By the which it is plain, that ones
person being in the privilege and protection of the Kings Court, could not
justly be Imprisoned by the power of an inferior Court: And in Stringfellows
Case in 3 Ed. 6. Dier fol. 67. The goods of one were seized by the 3 Ed. 6.
Sheriff by process out of the Chancery for a Subject, and after seizure, and
before delivery thereof was made, a Writ of Prerogative came out of the
Exchequer, rehearsing thereby, that the King was to be served before any other,
and command the Sheriff to levy the same on the goods of the same Debtor; And
whether these goods that lay under the power of a Process in one Court might
be taken from thence by the power of another Court, was the question; and the
better opinion therein, as I take it was, that they could not, for that by the
former Process they were privileged from all other Jurisdictions, Powers and
Authorities, especially if they were of an inferior degree: Yet there be two
cases which not being curiously looked into make show as if the Law were
otherwise; the one is in the 11 H. 4. fol. 2. where the goods of I. S. were
taken in Execution by the Sheriff by a fieri facias which came out of 11 H. 4.
the Kings Court of Westminster, and the Sheriff sold them to I. D. and there
was a Replevin sued in that case, but no deliverance made of the Cattle in
Court: and the other case is in 7 H. 4. fol. 28. goods were taken by a Levy
which issued out of a Court Baron, and they were sold by the 7 H. 4.
Bailiff, and there was also a Replevin sued, but no deliverance made of the
Cattle in Court, neither would the Court order the Defendant to gage
deliverance: so that by these two cases it may seem what a Replevin did lie
though another Court had formerly the Jurisdiction of the Cattle taken by the
Distress: But, under favor, I hope I shall easily reconcile these books, and
shall make it to appear that they do not make against my opinion formerly
delivered upon this diversity, That when the goods were seized or taken by
Process, and remained by the virtue thereof in the hands of the Sheriff or of
his Bailiffs, during that time no Replevin did lie in the Case; but after such
time as the goods or cattle were sold away, as in the said two Cases formerly
alleged they were, then against the party that bought them, or any other, a
Replevin did lie in the Case; for after the sale they were out of the
protection of the former parties, and then a Replevin might well take hold of
them, being out of all other Jurisdiction. And the same difference I take in
this Case of the Sewers, that is, That so long as goods distrained by Warrant
and Process out of this Court of Sewers remain in the custody thereof, they be
not replevisable by the Warrant of the Sheriff or of his Deputies, but after
they be sold away, then by the sale thereof they are out of the protection and
privilege of the Court of Sewers, and then the Sheriff may cause them to be
delivered by Replevin. Yet it may be objected unto me, that in Rooks case a
Replevin was taken against him which detained the distress by Warrant of the
Commissioners of Sewers; it is true, the Book is so, which case I admit, and
that the Replevin was well granted there; yet I take it, it does not contradict
my said opinion, because there Carter was assessed, but the goods of Rooks were
taken and detained for the Sesse, and Rooks did sue the Replevin, which he
might well do, because against him or his goods there was not any Law of Sewers
extant or in force, neither was he or his goods within the privilege or
jurisdiction of these Laws of Sewers: But if Carters Cattle had been taken, who
was the very party sessed, he could have had no Replevin from the Sheriff or
his Deputies to deliver his Cattle.

But although a Replevin does not lie in the case aforesaid from the Sheriff or
his Deputies, Ex officio to deliver a Distress of Sewers, yet out of the Kings
Courts at Westminster a Replevin does lie in those cases: And the Charter of
Romney Marsh page 18. does afford us in this Ch Romney Marsh.
case a very good president; for there complaint was made to the King, setting
forth thereby, That whereas his Highness had appointed and authorized Henry de
Bathonia to be his Justice, and to determine the differences depending and
touching the repairing of the defenses of the said Marsh, he had ordained, that
Distresses might be taken according to the 24. Jurators, It a quod nullus
vicecomes aut alius balivus noster intromittat in districtionibus illis, tu
tamen (meaning the Sheriff of Kent) nihilominus districtiones illas propter hoc
factum per vigint quatuor Juratores in prejudicio considerationis eorundem
reluxasti, tibi igitur precipimus quod districtionibus illis in nullo te
intromittas; and in the same Charter the like matter is there also so
determined of, page 7. By the which may be collected, that the Sheriff Ex
officio might not meddle with such Distresses: and in the same Charter, page 8.
the words be further, Quod siquis de consideratione predict' districtionis se
injuste gravat' sentiret and inde conqueri vellet ad ipsum Dominum Regem
querelam suam deferret and ipse in Curia sua justiciam fieri facere
reservasset; whereby it is manifest, that a Replevin lay for a Distress taken
in the Kings Court, for that they be of a superior authority and jurisdiction
to these inferior Courts of Sewers: And therefore the Replevins which our
Statute aims to give way to, are intended to be taken out of the Kings Courts,
which in Law and Justice ought to be obeyed, and not from the Sheriff or his
Officers by virtue of their Office only.

But in my case the Commissioners made a Law, that the goods of A. should be
sold without allowance of Replevin, which is a good Law upon the distinctions
and diversities aforesaid; that is, that A. who was the person assessed might
not have or take a Replevin because he was a person bound expressly by the Law,
nor that the Sheriff or his Officers Ex Officio might grant a Replevin to
deliver the same, being under the power of this Law of Sewers.

But the Kings Courts at Westminster may in those cases of Sewers deliver the
Distresses; and this construction made of this Statute, as I take it, stands
with Law and reason: And in the 31 Ed. 3. Brook, Replevin, plac. 60. the Case
is put, a man did grant to A. B. a rent out of his grounds, 13 Ed. 3.
with power that if it were behind that he might distrain therefore, and
detain the Distress against gages and pledges; and yes it was adjudged, that
if the Rent were behind and the grantor distrained, he could not detain this
Distress against the Replevin: Yet here were the direct words of the party
himself to the contrary, but his words could not overrule the Law: So that upon
all these matters, I hold these Tenants following:

Imprimis, To make a general Law to restrain all Replevins, granted either from
the Sheriff or the Kings Courts, is no good Law or Ordinance of Sewers; for
that Replevins de jure are in such cases grantable out of the Kings Courts, and
such a general Law savors too much of oppression, in stopping up the Gates of
Justice.

Ex officio, to deliver goods or cattle distrained, and detained for a Tax and
Law of Sewers, is in my opinion against Law, and need not to be obeyed, for
that the Distres was Sub protectione superioris Curiae, which is of a higher
degree then a Sheriffs Ministerial Warrant.



I. S. and the goods of John a Downs be taken therefore on the ground of I. S.
which were charged, I. D. may sue a Replevin of his said cattle from the
Sheriff, for that he nor his goods were not expressly bound by the Laws of
Sewers.

Westminster, to deliver a Distress taken and detained by the Laws of Sewers,
for that they be Courts de altiore natura.

Ex officio to deliver the Distress, for that this Distress was not taken or
detained by Warrant, Judgment or Decree of Sewers.

Distringas ad Reparandum, or of that nature be awarded, and the parties goods
be thereby taken, these goods ought not to be delivered by Replevin to be taken
either out of this Court, or out of any other Court of the Kings, because it is
an Execution out of a Judgment.



A perpetual charge.
SO now I have fully and: at large declared my opinion touching Distresses and
Replevins; wherein, I hope, I have fully satisfied the first point of my Case:
I intend therefore now to proceed to the sixth point, which concerns charges
and sales of Lands to be made by the Commissioners of Sewers by the power and
authority of this Law.

And, first I suppose the question may be extended to this, that is, Whether
the Commissioners of Sewers can impose a perpetual charge upon Land to repair a
work of Sewers for ever by the power of these Laws.

I do here acknowledge, that this is a knotty Point, yet something may be
alleged in maintenance of this Opinion Affirmatively: For in the parts of
Holland in the County of Lincoln, almost every one knows which part he is to
repair and maintain in perpetuity; And Experientia est optima interpres rerum;
And it appears by the Charter of Romney Marsh, page 12. That the use there
was to impose perpetual charges on singular persons; Char. Romney Marsh, page
12.
For the words there be these, Juratores per eor' sacrament' mensur abunt per
perticam omnes terr as and Tenementa quae infra dictum Mariscum periculo
subiacent quibus mensueration' factis viginti quatuor per communitatem prius
electi and jurati habito respectu ad quantitatem Walliar' terrar' and Tenement'
quae periculo subiacent per eor' Sacramentum ordinabunt quantum ad predictarum
Walliar' sustentationem and reperationem faciend' and sustinend' ad quemlibet
pertineat, ita quod proportion' acrar' terrar' periculo subiacent' singulis
assignetur sua portio perticar' and predict' assignatio fiat per locos certos
ita ut scietur ubi and per quae loca; ad quantum, singuli defendere teneantur.
These words in this Charter seem to be plain, That by the Laws established in
Romney Marsh, the Commissioners had power to assign to every man his portion to
repair in perpetuity; but I find no such words in our Statute: And whereas it
may be said, that our Commissioners have power to make sale of the Lands; Ergo,
They may charge them perpetually; but this is a non sequitur for that, for the
sale they have express Warrant, but not so for the charge: And powers and
authorities must be duly pursued, and are not to be taken by equitable or
argumentable collections or implications, so that it may seem the Laws of
Sewers were never held so perdurable as to bind men's Lands with perpetual
charges: And therefore this difference I take, That by the Custom of a town or
country, every one may know his particular portion, which the owners of grounds
are obliged and bound to repair perpetually; but without such a Custom it has
been held, That the Commissioners of Sewers cannot bind any man's inheritance
to a perpetual charge, by any power or authority given by this Statute; but in
the said case of Romney Marsh, the Custom there maintained this point: yet Not
a been verba hujus Statuti, which be these (viz.) And to make and ordain
Statutes, Ordinances and Provisions from time to time as the case shall
require, for the safeguard, conservation, redress, correction or reformation of
the Premises and every of them, and the parties liable to the same, necessary
and behoofful after the Laws and Customs of Romney Marsh in the county of Kent,
or otherwise, by any ways or means after their own wisdoms and discretions:
These be the words, and this is the clause which must make good this perpetual
charge, for that it does formerly appear, that such like Laws and Customs there
were in Romney Marsh as this is; and therefore I may conclude this point, that
the Commissioners in imitation of the said Ordinance of Romney Marsh, may make
Decrees to bind Lands to perpetual charges: Yet Sir Edward Cook in Keighlies
case sets it down as resolved, That the several Commissioners of Sewers
throughout all England, are not bound to pursue the Laws and Customs of Romney
Marsh; but in case where some particular place within their Commission have
such Laws and Customs as Romney Marsh has, there they might pursue them. But
in my own opinion, the Commissioners may, if they please, make Ordinances and
Laws like to those of Romney Marsh, where there has not been any such use; and
the words of the Statute, as I take it, will bear that construction; and the
said opinion of Sir Edward Cook, is not directly against this. And upon Decrees
for sales of Land, it is usual in these Decrees to bind those Lands to the
perpetual repairs.

Sales of Lands.
THe words of the Statute which be made for sales of Lands be these, Provided
always, That if any person or persons being assessed or taxed to any lot or
charge for any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments within the Limits of any
Commission hereafter to be directed, do not pay the said lot and charge
according to the Order and Assignment of the Commissioners, having power of the
execution of the said Commission, etc. by reason whereof if it shall happen,
the said Commissioners for lack of payment of such lot and charge, to Decree
and Ordain the said Lands and Tenements from the owner or owners thereof, and
their heirs, and the heirs of every of them, to any person or persons for term
of years, term of life, Fee simple, or Fee tail, for payment of the same lot
and charge: Then every such Decree and Ordinance so by them engrossed into
Parchment, and certified under their seals into the Kings Court of Chancery,
with the Kings royal assent had to the same, shall bind al and every person and
persons that at the making of the same Decree had any interest in such Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments in use, posession, reversion or remainder, their
heirs and Feoffee and every of them, and not to be in any wise reformed, unless
it were by authority in Parliament hereafter to be summoned and holden within
the Realm.

And also that the same Laws, Ordinances and Decrees to be made and ordained by
the Commissioners, or any six of them, by authority of the said Commission,
shall bind as well the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of our Sovereign the
King, as all and every other person and persons, and their heirs, and such
their interest as they shall fortune to have in any Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, or other casual profit, advantage or commodity whatsoever they
be, whereunto the said Laws, Ordinances and Decrees shall in any wise extend,
according to the true purport, meaning and intent of the said Laws.

This Clause or Proviso was strangely placed in this Statute, as if this
Statute had not been the first Father of it, and as if this Law had made some
addition to a former Law: But I take it, that this Statute was, and is, the
first and only Law which gave sale of Lands in cases of Sewers, and this Clause
stands upon these four pillars.

Imprimis, for what cause Lands may be sold by the Commissioners of Sewers.







The Statute is, If any person sessed do not pay; whereby it is manifest, that
the Lands are to be sold for sesses and charges imposed by the Commissioners
which lies in payment only, and they may not be decreed away for any other
cause or matter: And therefore if one hold his Land to repair a Wall, Bank,
Sewers or other work of Sewers, and he neglect to repair the same, the
Commissioners of Sewers cannot for this cause decree the Lands away from the
owner, because this charge lay not in payment: And I cannot gather out of the
words of this Statute, that Lands can be decreed for any cause then for
Non-payment of a Lot, Sess or Charge, by reason this word Payment is reiterated
three or four times in this branch of the Statute, and no other words be
coupled with it to infer any other or larger exposition.

If I. S. do hold his Lands of the Lord of a Manor by the payment of Twenty
shillings yearly or other sum, toward the repairs of a work of Sewers, and he
do neglect to pay the same, whereby the work is unrepaired, although this is a
charge which lies in payment, yet because it grows due by Tenure by the Common
Law, and was not imposed by the force of this Statute, therefore the Lands of
I. S. cannot be decreed from him by the Non-payment thereof, by the tenor and
virtue of this Law of Sewers.

But if the Lands of one be generally charged to repair such a Wall or other
work of Sewers by Prescription, Covenant or otherwise, and the Commissioners
impose a sesse and rate upon him to repair it, and he do not, there in this
case, although the charge was by the rules of the Common Laws, yet because the
sesse and rate was set upon him by the power of this Statute, I am of opinion,
that for neglect of payment the said Lands may be sold by the decree of the
Commissioners of Sewers.

So if one do hold his Lands for the payment of Twenty shillings to repair a
Bank, and the Commissioners of Sewers do order the party to pay the Twenty
shillings at a time by them prescribed (not being contrary to the usual days of
payment) and he do neglect to pay, The Commissioners may decree his Lands from
him, because this charge, by reason of the said Order, had got the force and
power of this Statute.

If a charge be generally laid upon a Township, Hundred or Rape, which is not
paid according to the Commissioners Order, no Lands can be decreed in this
case, because no persons or Lands be in this case particularly charged, and the
decree of the sale must be directed by, and depend upon the sesse: But if after
the general sesse be laid, the same be after assessed upon particular persons
by particular sums by the said Commissioners, then upon default of payment,
their Lands making default may be decreed from them by the power of this
Statute.

If an assesse or charge of payment be laid upon certain Lands without
mentioning the Owner, the Lands cannot be decreed from him by this Law; for the
words of the Statute be (That if any person or persons assessed to any Lot or
Charge do not pay) So that I shall take it, that no decree for sale of Land can
be made but where there is a person certainly assessed by name.

Lands cannot be decreed away from the owners for default of payment of Fines,
Amerciaments or Pains; for though these be sums of money or charges imposed by
the Commissioners of Sewers of persons certain for matters touching these Laws,
yet because they were not sessed or rated toward the repairs of any works of
Sewers, but be set upon the parties as mulcts and punishments, and be due to
the King, therefore no decree of Lands can be made for any of them.

the power of this Commission of Sewers; and herein rests a difference between
the case of a Distress for a sesse which may be taken in any place within this
Realm, and the decree of sale of Lands for Non-payment of a sesse which must
lie within the bounds and extent of the Commission; for this Distress is
circumscribed to the extent of the Statute, which is over the whole Realm, and
the sale is tied to the limits of the Commission: And I am also of opinion,
that no Land can be sold away by the decree of the Commissioners of Sewers, but
such as were charged with the sesse.

If one hold his Lands in Comitat' Eborum to repair a Seabank in the County of
Lincoln, and the Owner is assessed therefore, and makes default of payment, the
Commissioners of Sewers in the county of Lincoln may give warrant to distrain
for this sesse in the county of York; but they cannot decree away by sale those
Lands lying there which were charged with the sesse.

A Copyholders Land cannot be decreed against him by this Law, for if it might,
then these customary Lands should be transferred from one to another, contrary
to the Customs of the Manors whereof they be parcel; and it would infringe that
rule which is delivered in Heidons Case Heidons Case.
in Cooks 3 Report, which is when an Act of Parliament does alter the service,
Tenure and interest of the Land or other thing, in prejudice of the Lord, or of
the Custom of the Manor, or of the Tenant, there the general words of such a
Statute does not extend to Copyholds: And in this case if any sale should be
made by the Commissioners, all the said rules should be infringed, for it were
contrary to the Custom to pass these Lands without surrender; it were in
prejudice of the Lord to have Copyhold-land passed, and he to have no Fine: And
I am likewise of opinion, that the Freehold of these Lands could not be passed
away for a sesse or a lay, because the Lord has but the shadow, and the
Copyholder has the substance; But if the Lords Rents of Assize should be
assessed as they ought to be, and he do neglect to pay, then these Rents might
be decreed from him; and so may all other Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
decreed, in respect whereof one is sessable and sessed by the Laws.

(viz.) What persons and what estates be bound by these decrees? And first of
the Heirs in Tail, whether they be bound by a decree made against the Donees in
Tail their Ancestors, is the question; In the handling whereof I hold it
sitting, to show in what cases the Heirs in Tail have been bound by the act of
their Ancestors, and the reasons and causes thereof.

And therefore if a Disseisor make a Gift in Tail, and the Donee in Tail grant
a Rent to the Dissessee for release of his right, this will bind the Heir in
Tail, for that by this release his Estate which before was defeisable is now
confirmed, as by the Books of 44 Ed. 3. 22. and 20 Ed. 4. 13. 44 Ed. 3. 20 Ed.
4. 46 Ed. 3.
appears: and so in 46 Ed. 3. a gift in Tail was made Ita quod the Donee
might alien to the benefit of the Heirs in Tail; and and this by Judge Welbey
was held a condition which bound the Heir in Tail for his benefit: And in 12.
Ed. 4. 1. Tregouse and Taltarms Case was, That a recovery against Tenant 12 Ed.
4.
in Tail, with a Voucher by him over, did bind the heirs in Tail, by the
Common Law, by reason of the intended recompense which was to come to him by
the Voucher; and so a lineal warranty with assets, and a collateral warranty
without assets, were and be both of them bars to the Issues, by reason also of
the intended recompenses; and these are things which were originally tied to
those Estates, and were incidents to them ab initio: And therefore this shall
suffice to treat of bars to the Issues in Tail by the Common Laws; and now I
shall proceed to show in what cases they were barred of their Estates by the
Statutes of this Realm.

By the Statute of 16 R. 2. cap. 5. The Lands and Tenements 16 R. 2.
of one attaint in a Praemunire are to be forfeited to the King; and in 21 Eliz.
one Trudgin was Tenant in Tail, 11 El.
and was attainted in a Praemunire, and the question was, Whether Intailed Lands
were forfeited against the Issues in Tail, or not? And in Doctor Forsters case
in Cooks 11 Report, C. 11 Rep.
it is there said to be resolved, that the general words of that Statute did
not repeal the Statute of Westminster 2. of Intails, and so the forfeiture was
there resolved to continue but for the life of Trudgin, and did not bind the
Issues in Tail.

A Judgment in Debt against Tenant in Tail, or if he be bound in a Statute or
in a Recognizance in the nature of a Statute, the Lands Intailed were not
extendable nor to be held in extent by the Statutes of Westminster 2. Acton
Burnel, or by the Statute de Mercatoribus by any of the general words of these
Laws; but the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 39. by express words binds the heir
in Tail, for their Lands 23 H. 8.
whose Ancestors stood indebted to the King by Judgment, Recognizance,
Obligation or other specialty.

But the Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. Enacts, That every 26 H. 8.
one which shall be attainted of Treason, shall forfeit the Lands whereof he is
seized of any Estate of Inheritance; and by this Statute Intailed Lands were
forfeited; and the words (Of any Estate of Inheritance) were the words which
gave that forfeiture, the one in Fee simple, the other in Fee tail; and the
word (any) presupposes more Estates of Inheritance then one.

But whether a Decree of sale of Lands made by Commissioners of Sewers shall
bind the heirs in Tail, is the point of my case; and in my opinion I think
they shall be barred, for the causes and reasons following:

First, the words of the Statute of Sewers be, That such a Decree shall bind
all and every person and persons that at the making of the same Decree had any
interest in such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in Uso, Possession,
Remainder or Reversion, their heirs and assigns: So that by express words it
binds the heirs; and it would have bound the heirs of a Tenant in Fee simple,
without the word (Heirs) expressed in the Statute; therefore the word (Heirs)
needed not, but only for the binding of the heirs in Tail.

Also if these Lands were charged by Prescription, as many Lands be, then were
the Lands originally bound, and the heirs in Tail stand charged with these
sesses, as well as Land in Fee simple.

And lastly, this is a Law enacted for the preservation of the Commonweal, and
is more to be favored then particular Estates of heirs in Tail: But the case of
the Praemunire was penal in point of a forfeiture, which is to be strictly taken
for the King, and favorably for the subject; and therefore in my opinion, the
heirs in Tail shall be bound in these cases of sale, and the rather because
they be within the words of the Statute, videlicet, Heirs generally put, which
extends to heirs in Tail, as well as to heirs in Fee simple; and because the
sesse and charge shall bind both alike, so in my opinion the sale shall bind
both, in regard the sale depends upon the charge and sesse.

If a Prebend, Parson or Vicar, Dean, Bishop or such like, which be seized of
Lands in their politic capacity be sessed to repairs of works of Sewers,
their Lands cannot be decreed away from them in such sort as to bind their
successors; for as this Statute of Sewers extend to bind Lands by decrees in
perpetuity, so the Statute of 1 and 13 and 14 Eliz. restrain Alienations, and
where those Statutes restrain them, I am of opinion, that this general Statute
of Sewers does not dispense with those Statutes. In Croft Crofts and Howels
Case.
and Howels Case in Plow. Comment. a fine with Proclamations and non-claim by
five years did bind the Corporation of the Mystery of the Cooks in London for
their right in Lands, and so all other Corporations which are absolute of
themselves, and needed not the assent of any other, as Majors and Commonalties,
Deans and Chapters, Master and Fellows of Colleges: But the Law is otherwise
of Parsons, Vicars, Prebends, and such like; And the like exposition do I make
of them in this Statute of Sewers. But I will here make a distinction; I am
notwithstanding of opinion, That the Parsons, Vicars, Prebends, and such like,
for their own neglect, are bound during their times, but not their successors
after them; And note, this Statute though it mention heirs, yet it does not at
all mention successors, which is worthy of consideration also: And in my
opinion this Statute as to Decrees to be made of Lands will bind women, Covert
Baron, Infants, persons that be non sanae mentis and such like, because it is a
Law made for the safety of the Commonwealth: And so it is held in Zouches case
in the Com. That the Statute of 4 H. 7. of fines had bound Infants, Idiots and
Women Court Baron, had they not been excepted in that Statute; A forciori
Zouches Case.
shall they be comprised in this Statute, for the Statute of fines was made for
the peace of the Weal-publique, but the Statute of Sewers was made for the
safety thereof.

If there be two Tenants in Common which be sessed toward the repairs of a
Wall, Bank or such like work of Sewers, and one of them do neglect to pay his
proportionable part, Whether Commissioners may decree a moiety without
partition both of the sesse and Land, is a question; for their Estates are
several, though there be a community in taking of the profits: And therefore
the matter is, whether the assesse shall attend upon the possession which is in
Common, or upon their Estates which be several: And although Commissioners in
assesse be not bound to take notice of their Estate, yet if they take upon them
to decree a man's Lands from him, they are then to take notice of his Estate,
and of all other circumstances necessarily depending thereupon: In 22 H. 6.
fol. 12. if a Trespass be done upon Lands which are held in Common, they are
to join in an Action, but if one of them die that Action shall survive, for
though they were joint in the personalty, yet they disjoined in the realty; And
if two Tenants in Common of Land join in a grant of Ten pounds rent charge out
of their Lands, the Grantee shall have Ten pounds yearly of either by the
opinion of Mr. Perkins: But if a sesse of Ten pounds be laid and imposed upon
them by this Law of Sewers, this sesse shall not double as the Rent should; yet
in this case of a joint assess imposed upon Tenants in Common, and one would
pay his moiety, and his companion refuses, the Commissioners of Sewers cannot
sell a moiety of the Land, for that it is a joint sess, and was not imposed by
moyeties, and the sale does depend upon the sess, and all may not be sold; for
that one Tenant in Common cannot prejudice his companion in things of Realty.



And I am of opinion, that this decree does make the Estate, with the help of
this Statute, according to the limitation which should therein be declared, and
that the party shall have Estate according as the same is thereby limited unto
him; and this is no equitable decree which binds the person only, as Chancery
decrees be, but it binds the Land; and therefore the Commissioners may not
decree Lands to a Corporation, as to a Major and Commonalty, Dean and Chapter
or such like, which be Mortmain, for the general words of this Statute do not
repeal the Statute of Mortmain in my opinion.

And herein I shall end my Argument touching decrees; and I take it, though the
interest of E. was intail, yet the sale thereof might be made by this Statute
for the causes and reasons aforesaid: And now only remains under my censure to
declare my opinion, whether the Commissioners of Sewers did Justice, in
refusing to admit of Pleas of discharge which were tendered to them by A. and E.
wherein may come justly into our considerations these things, (viz.) Whether
Traverses, Pleas of Exemptions, and other legal proceedings, may be had in this
Court of Sewers, or not; saving I add this, that these decrees of sale being
binding, must be certified into the Chancery, with the Kings Royal assent had
thereto.

Legal proceedings.
Traverse.
TO enter into these parts of my Law, I think it fit to begin with Traverse,
and to deliver my opinion, whether such Pleas and Proceedings are to be
admitted into this Court; for a Traverse is a Plea of the party, containing
matter to the contrary of that that the party stands accused of, or which is
laid to his charge: And in some cases our books and authorities of Law admit
the party to a Traverse, and in other cases the same is to be denied; for in
the 5 H. 7. fol. 9. and 45 Ed. 3. fol. and 28 H. 8. in Dier, fol. 13. if one be
presented in a Leet Court for a Blowipe or any other personal 5 H. 7. 45 Ed. 3.
28 H. 8.
wrong, this Presentment is not Traversable, but the party is without remedy
therein, though the Presentment be false and the matter of it untrue; and the
Law is so also of such a Presentment made in a Sheriffs Turn: and herewithall
agrees the books of 2 R. 3. 11. and 19 H. 8. 11. 2 R. 3 19 H. 8. 5 H. 7. 8 Ed.
4.
Fitz, Assiz. plac. 442. and 8 Ed. 4. 5. and the reason thereof is delivered in
5 H. 7. because no Process is there awardable against the party to call him to
answer: Yet in the same Book of 5 H. 7. it is said, That if a Presentment be
made which touches a man's Freehold, he may there Traverse the same. But I take
it the party must first remove the Presentment into the Kings Bench, and there
Traverse it; for in the Court Leet, in my opinion, there can be no Traverse
taken or tried, no more where the Presentment touches Freehold, then where it
only concerns a personal wrong: Therefore the reason alleged in 5 H. 7.
cannot be the true cause wherefore in personal wrongs the Presentiments cannot
be traversed; but the very true reason therein is, as I take it, because these
petty Presentiments be of such petty trifling matters, that in avoidance of
trouble the Law esteemed them not worthy of Traverse and Trial; and Justice
Fairfax in 5 H. 7. is of opinion, That a Presentment made before Justices of
Peace in a Sessions is traversable: and with this agrees Stanford, fol. 183.
and in other Courts of Law there oftentimes fall out matters which one shall
not be admitted to take a Traverse unto, and in some other cases he shall, as
by these succeeding authorities may appear. In the 37 Assiz. plac. 7. a
Presentment was taken before Green and Ingham, Justices of the Kings Bench,
That I. S. who had killed A. had goods to the value of Eighty pounds in the
hands of one John Lombard; and upon this Presentment a Scire-facias was awarded
against John Lombard, to show cause wherefore these goods should not be seized
to the Kings use: John Lombard came in and tendered a Plea to the Presentment,
that these goods were not the felons, but that they were delivered to him to
keep to the use of a Cardinal of Rome, and he was there admitted to this Plea;
and with this agrees 45 Ed. 3. fol. 26. expressly: Yet in that book and Mr.
Stanford, fol. 185. it is holden for Law, That if it be presented before a
Coroner that I. S. killed A. B. and fled for the same fact, and after upon his
trial he is acquit, yet he shall forfeit his goods upon the Fugam fecit before
the Coroner, and he shall not be received to take any traverse to the said
Presentment in that point. The difference in which two cases is this in my
opinion, that a stranger, as John Lombard was, in the the first Case, shall not
be peremptorily concluded; for it were no reason one man's goods should be
forfeited in another man's default, and he should have no answer thereunto: But
in the other Case, in Terror of Felons, though he be acquitted of the Felony,
yet he is not acquitted of the flying, and he may be guilty notwithstanding his
acquittal. There be other cases in the Law which admit no Traverse, as in James
Bags case Cook 11. Rep. James Bag^ Case.
where a Writ was directed to the Major and Burgesses of Plymouth to restore
Bag to his Aldermans place there, which they had put him from, and they return
a cause sufficient to bar him, which notwithstanding is false; yet he shall not
be received to his Traverse therein; neither could a Traverse be admitted in
the Certificate of the Bishop, wherein was contained, that I. A. Parson of Dle
had refused to pay his dismes to the King, by means whereof the Parson lost his
benefice, which case is in Br. cases, temp. He. 8. pl. 332. Br. Case. 7 H. 4.
21 H. 7.
and Dier, fol. 116. and 7 H. 4. fol. 4. and 21 H. 7. 8. and many other Books
be, that no Averments shall be taken to the returns of Sheriffs to take any
Issue thereupon.

And in Dr Bonhams case upon a Habeas corpus the Physicians returned the cause
of his imprisonment, which was false; yet he could not be admitted to traverse
the same. But yet by the opinion of these Books, an Action upon the case lies
against the Major and Aldermen, and against the Bishop, for their certificates,
and against the Sheriff for their false returns; and if Justifications be made
by them they may be traversed: But these will not reduce the parties to their
former liberties (viz) not the Alderman to his place, nor the Parson to his
Church, but damages in those cases are only recoverable.

These cases I have put as Reasons and Arguments against our Case of Sewers;
But yet I am of opinion, that a Traverse may be taken to a Presentment made in
this Court of Sewers, and herein this Court may be resembled to a Sessions of
the peace: And this Commission of Sewers gives the Commissioners of Sewers
power to hear and to determine at the Kings suit, as well as at the suit of the
party; and a Traverse lies of a Presentment found before Commissioners of Oyer
and Terminer, and is triable before them by the Books of 29 Assiz. pl. 33. and
12. lib. Assiz. 21. and 29 Assiz. 12 Assiz. pl. Com.
the Earl of Leicesters Case in Plow. Com. fol. 397. and the words of this
Statute are sufficient to yield the party the benefit of a Traverse if there be
cause; and for president in the point, Chart. of Romney Marsh page 23, and 24.
one Godfrey To. Marsh.
being presented that he ought to repair a Bank or Wall, and that he did
neglect to do the same, and he came in and pleaded a Plea thereto before the
said Commissioners, and in 19 lib. Assiz. plac. 6. there were diverse
Presentiments before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer for Nusances done in the
River of Lee, and the same were there traversed and tried: And the Statute of 1
H. 4. cap. 12. 1 H. 4.
does plainly admit of a Traverse, wherein the words be, That in case if any
feel himself greived by execution or otherwise against right and reason, let
him pursue and he shall have right: But I verily suppose, that those things
which the Justices of Sewers do by their view, or by survey and discretion, are
so binding as in those cases no Traverses are to be admitted, because these
things are merely the acts of the Court, and of the Justices themselves: and if
they Fine a man for his contempt in Court by a Record of their own view, and
not upon a Presentment, the party shall not be received to Traverse this: and
in Doctor Bonhams Case it is said, That the act of a Judge is not Traversable,
if he be the absolute Judge of the Cause; But in cases done or certified by
such as be no absolute Judges of the Cause, as Commissioners of Bankrupts,
which certify one a Bankrupt he may Traverse this in an action brought, as was
done in the Case of Cut and Delaber in 7 Jac. in the Cut and Delaber. 7 Jac.
common place; and Vernies Case 1 Mar. Dier, fol. 89. no Averment could be
taken to the certificate of a Judge; and with this agrees 7 H. 7. fol. 4. 7 H.
7.


But although a Traverse may be taken to a Presentment in the Court of Sewers,
yet times and seasons must be observed; for if a Presentment be there made, it
may be Traversed for the reasons, cause and presidents formerly mentioned; Yet
if the cause have been there so far proceeded in as the Commissioners make a
decree thereupon, I take it then no Traverse at all can be taken, because a
decree is the final Judgment of the Court, and is an act Judicial which cannot
be traversed and tried by a Jury, for that were to refer the Judgment of the
Court to be examined by a Jury, which may not be admitted; and at the Common
Law, after Judgment no Traverse can be taken: And if one be Indicted at the
general Session of the Peace, this is traversable; but if the party suffer
himself to be Outlawed upon the said Indictment there, no Traverse lies, but a
Writ of Error: So if in our Sessions of the Sewers, the cause proceed to a
decree, the party grieved is to take his way by preferring a Bill of Reversal
in manner as is done in the High Court of Chancery, and so he may have the cause
here thoroughly examined.

Other legal proceedings.
THe words of the Statute which give the legal proceedings be these (viz.) That
the Commissioners of Sewers may hear and determine all and singular the
Premises, as well at our suit, as at the suit of any other complaining before
them, after the Laws and Customs aforesaid, or otherwise, by any other ways or
means; these words give the party remedy to sue before the Justices of Sewers
for such things as are contained within these Laws, and which have their
dependency thereon: In Colshils case in Dier, fol. 175. the party preferred his
Colshils case.
Bill of complaint to the Commissioners, containing the effect of his Title to
the Office in question, and these were special Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer: Justices of the general Oyer and Terminer, may hear and determine
Usury by the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 8. yet if I. S. be bound 13 Eliz.
in a Bond of Ten pounds principal debt, and for Forty shillings for Interest,
although this Bond be for payment for usury, yet an Action of Debt does not lie
thereupon before the said Commissioners, but an information may be preferred
against the lender there to punish him.

So by our Statute of Sewers an Action of Trespass lies not for a Trespass
done within the reach of this Commission, yet Distinguendum est; for put the
case a sesse is laid upon a man, and the goods of I. S. not chargeable thereto
be taken and distrained, who is not chargeable to the payment thereof, I. S. in
my opnion (though this case have but the countenance of this Commission) may
have his Action or prefer his complaint before the Commissioners in this Court
of Sewers for the recovery of his damages: And although this be but a private
Action, yet the Distress being taken by an authority drawn from the power of
this Commission, the party distrained may have his remedy in this Court by his
private Action, because it sprung by the color of the general power of this
Court.

If A. B. have a several Pischary in the River of Witham, which is a River
within the Commission of Sewers, and the said Pischary by these Laws is
chargeable to the repairs thereof, if C. D. disseiz him thereof, or commit a
Trespass by Fishing therein, A. B. can neither have an Assize nor Action of
Trespass within this Court.

So if a Royal or common River has his current through the town of Dale, and
one A. B. is tied to repair the Banks there by Tenure, Prescription or
otherwise, which notwithstanding in his default are broken down, and the waters
breaking out overflow the grounds of C. D. thereto adjoining, yet C. D. has
not any remedy to recover his damages against A. B. in this Court for the loss
of his grounds, but he is put to his private Action therefore at the Common
Law; and with this agrees the Case of Keighley: But if A. B. be presented
therefore before our Commissioners of Sewers, they may order A. B. to repair
the breach, but cannot award damages to C. D. for our Commissioners of Sewers
are herein like to Justices of Peace, and to Stewards of Leets and Law-days,
which have power originally to meddle only with the public wrong; Yet by the
power of their Commission, and of this Statute, they many times accidentally
meet with private injuries, as by the ensuing cases may appear.

If a Township be assessed by a Law of Sewers, and the goods of one of the
Inhabitants be taken for the sesse, that party upon his complaint to these
Justices of Sewers may have process out of this Court to call before them the
rest of the Inhabitants which were subject to the said sess, to cause them to
contribute toward the parties damage who was solely distrained for them all,
for otherwise this Court should fail of justice in his own proper materials;
and the Statute of 1 H. 4. c. 12. says, That he which is grieved, let him have
remedy: And if the goods of a man taken for his tax or 1 H. 4.
sess be sold for the payment thereof, for more moneys then his sess came to,
the Justices of Sewers have power to cause the Officer to restore the overplus
Et cum hoc concordat the Charter of Romans Marsh.

If the Commissioners of Sewers appoint the Officers to take so many trees of
I. S. at such a price, for the repairing of a defense against the sea, or to
make a trench over the grounds of I. D. and thereto erect something toward
these actions, I. S. has remedy to come by his moneys in this Court, and the
other party over whose grounds this trench is made, may be relieved in
recompense to be made to him for the hurt in his grounds.

If Laborers or Workmen, as Carpenters, Masons, Smiths, Dikers, or other
persons be set on work by the power of these Laws, they may by the same power
recover their wages before the Justices of Sewers; for the original cause
sprung out of the power of this Commission, and this is there determinable, as
incident to the authority of that Court: But if the original cause did not
arise out of this Commission, as in some of the preceding cases they did not,
then has this Court no Jurisdiction of the matters depending thereon: And I do
ground this diversity upon the reason of the Book case put in 1 R. 3. fol. 4.
where it is said, 1 R. 3.
That if the original cause do belong to the Court Christian, although in the
proceedings therein some matters happen which depend on the principal, which do
belong to the Temporal Court, Yet Accessarium sequitur suum principale, and
these matters shall also be determined in the Court Christian: And so if in a
cause at the Temporal Law, as in a Quare impedit, and in the proceedings
therein, some matter do arise depending on the principal cause, which belongs
to the Court Christian, yet the Temporal Court shall continue his Jurisdiction
thereof: And with this diversity agrees Kelleways Kelleways Rep.
Report, fol. 110. so in our Court of Sewers, although a thing happen in the
proceedings, which if it stood merely of it self would not pertain ad eor'
examen, notwithstanding if it be but a matter accidental, and have his
dependence upon a principal matter which is determinable in this Court, the
other also sh a be here determinable.

Exemptions.
IT may be a grand question, Whether these Laws of Sewers will permit any
Exemptions to any person or persons, and by the strict penning of the words of
this Commission it seems to oppose all such privileges and discharges, as
Exemptions be; The ancient Commission which is in the Register, and in Fitz.
Not. Br. are exceeding strict; for the words therein be, Ita quod aliquibus
tenentibus terrarum seu Tenementum seu communiam pasturae seu Pischariae
habentibus diviti vel pauperi vel alteri cujuscunque fuerit conditionis Status
aut dignitatis qui defension' habere potuerint per predict' Wallias Guttur as
Fossata sueras ports calceta and gurgites seu etiam damnum per trencheas
predict' sustinent vel poterint sustinere sive fuerint infra libertates sive
extra non parcantur in hac part; And the words in our Statute be in effect,
And all such which reap profit or sustain damage, shall be assessed; which
words seem not to admit of discharges: Yet in my opinion out of the strict
words of these Commissions there be some Exemptions, though not expressed in
words, yet supplied in reason, and are to be added in construction.









Quod nullus in hac part parcatur seem to Toll all Prescriptions and Customs
of discharge, and to admit of none of them: And the Charter of Romney Marsh
page 31, 32, and 33. bears the same exposition; for there Godfrey pleaded a
Plea to discharge him of the repairs of the Walls and Watergauges, because he
claims his Lands by Charter from the King, and also prescribed generally in non
reparando, but he durst not abide his Plea; for there page 39. it is said, That
all having Lands should contribute, and that none might be spared; and also
page 53. be these words, Quod starent ordinationi Jurator' predictor' nulla
consuetudine resistente; which words be direct in the point against such
general discharges claimed by blind customs: Yet I have been credibly
informed, that Sir George Fitzwilliams Knight, had a Custom in his Town and
Manor of Mabblethorp in the County of Lincoln, called Swiftage, whereby he
challenged to be freed from being charged to the repairs of the Seabanks,
because in consideration thereof he and his Ancestors have used in regard of
their Manor there to do some other repairs as beneficial for the Commonwealth;
and in my opinion, in such a special Custom one may be exempted; like to the
case of Tithes, wherein one could not by the Common Laws prescribe in a non
decimando, yet in a modus decimandi he may, because there is some competent
consideration given in lieu thereof; And so in my opinion one cannot generally
prescribe or allege a Custom to be freed and clearly exempted from the repairs
of Sewers, but by special Custom he may, as in the said case of sir George
Fitzwilliams.

And therefore the Commissioners of Sewers in my case did very justly and
discreetly refuse the said general pleas of discharge tendered to them by A. and
E. and so I super totam materiam conclude my Argument as I did my Case, That
the Commissioners of Sewers did administer true Justice in all the parts of
these Laws.

Finis hujus tertiae Lecturae.
Lectura quarta.
IT appears by this Statute I read on, that the Law makers made it not the
least part of their care to have such persons put in trust with the execution
thereof, as should be of great wisdom and approved experience. And because that
persons of profound wisdoms, deep Experience, tried Learning, generous
Disposition, and of good Estate, should be put into these Commissions of
Sewers, the Statute did make choice of four Honorable persons to have and take
the nomination of such as should for their Integrity, Learning, Wealth, Wisdom
and Experience, be worthy to be put into this Commission. And therefore the
Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, and the two Lord chief Justices for the time
being, have by this Statute the nomination of our Commissioners; But as these
great persons of Honor by their high places are most commonly busied in matters
of great importance, they many times refer these matters to others, by means
whereof diverse persons in some countries have of late years crept into
Commission, which this Statute does not allow of, which do not only want
knowledge and experience, but which are also transported and carried away with
selfwill, and serve most commonly to make a faction of the greater number to
carry away businesses, when the graver and wiser sort are forced (being
overladen with popular voices) to give way to run into contrary courses, and
are made to surcease from making good and wholesome Laws and Ordinances, and
sometimes are as it were forced to agree to those which are whose; even as the
Roman Dictator Fabius having joined to him the froward Minutius, was by the
violent stream of his colleague so crossed and overswayed, not out of
judgment, but selfwill, that he was forced to give way to Minutius
frowardness, though it tended almost to the hazard and the overthrow of the
whole Roman Army: And because the Commissioners are the persons through whose
hands the execution of all these Laws must pass, I thought it therefore very
convenient to take into examination this part of the Statute which touch and
concern them: And I intend to purge the Commission of such of them as these
Laws have disalowed, and to that purpose I have framed this ensuing case, which
I take it will give us occasion to call them all into question, and to sever
the just from the unjust, the sufficient from the unsufficient, and the learned
from the illiterate.

The Case.
A. demiseth to B. and C. Land of the yearly value of Sixty pounds cum stauro
of the value of Two hundred pounds for their lives, the Remainder to D. a free
Citizen of Lincoln, B. and D. disseise C. of the Land and take the stock, C.
releaseth to D. the goods absolutely, and the Land upon Condition; D. dies in
Exile, E. his son and heir enters, B. and C. who enter for the Condition
broken, E and Francis Countes Dowager of Warwick, and three other Commissioners
of the Quorum of Sewers, make a Law to raise a Were, erected upon a River
navigable at the costs of the party, because it hindered the current of waters.

My conclusion is, That here be competent Commissioners in number and in Estate
which made this Law, and that this Law is well decreed within this Statute.

The case I do distribute in these points, viz. Three at the Common Law, and
four upon this Statute; the points I intend by the Common Law are these:



B. and C. be two Joyntenants in possession, whether one of the Joyntenants and
a stranger can so disseise the other Ioyntenant as to transfer thereby an
interest and Estate to the stranger.

B. out of that moiety, because it is made to the stranger; and then what is
reduced by the Condition, whether a possession, action, or a right.

Points upon this Statute.








And hereupon I intend to lay open the whole division, touching the Lets,
Impediments and Annoyances which this Statute speaks of.

Argumentum Lectoris.
I meant it not for a point in this case, whether goods might be let with Land,
nor whether a stock might be leased with a Farm, because I find the Books of 1
H. 6. 1. and many others full in the point that they may. And although by the
taking of them back again by the Lessor they will thereby suspend no rent, yet
in the original demise they may be a cause to increase the rent: but my point
herein is double.



B. and C. to be Commissioners of Sewers allowed by this Statute.

I do not only find stock let with Farms, but also joined in Real actions
with Land: for in the Writ of Assize the words be, Quod vicecomes faciat
Tenement' illud reseisiri de catallis quae in ipso capta fuerint and ipsum
Tenement' cum catallis esse in pace usque, etc. These doubtless were such goods
as stocked the grounds, and which usually went with the same, for in ancient
times when any farmed grounds, they usually farmed the stock thereon going, and
this appears by ancient presidents; Sed nunc aliud tempus.

In the Writ of Ejectione firmae in the Register be contained these words,
Ostensum quare vi and armis manerium de Dale quod C. prefat' A. dimisit ad
terminum qui nondum preteriit intravit and bona and catalla ejusdem A. ad
valentiam, etc. in eodem manerio inventa caepit and asportavit. So that in
those Writs of Assize and Exjectione firmae, the one to recover the Freehold,
the other the Leasehold: We find goods which went with the Manor or Farm made
parcel of the plaint; and I take it, damages shall be increased therefore; for
these were such goods as stockt the Farms. And in Wrotsly and Adams Case in
Plo. Com. Exception was Wrotsley and Adams Case.
taken in abatement of the Writ, because the words (bona and Catalla) were left
out of the same: Yet in my opinion, no estate, neither in presenti nor in
remainder can be made of Goods or Cattle, neither shall they go with the Land
in point of Estate, but shall pass to the Lessee, and after to him in the
remainder, as a dependancy upon the Farm: And the Heir shall have Heir-looms,
together with the Mansion House, as things necessary concurrent therewithal,
yet the Heir-looms have no descending qualities, but they do go with and wait
upon the house, as necessary Instruments fitting to be used therewith; neither
can it be gathered by the Book of 37 H. 6. fol. 30. that the Book called The
Grail (which was devised by will to A. one of the executors 37 H. 6.
to have the occupation during his life, the remainder thereof in like manner to
B. for his life, and after to be disposed by the executors to the Churchwardens
of Dale) that it did pass to A. and B. in point of Estate, but only the use
and occupation thereof was disposed to be ruled according to the said
Limitations, but the property remained in the executors.

So in Paramore and Yardleys Case in the Com. and Paramore. Yardleys case.
Mannnings case.
in Matthew Mannings Case in Cooks Reports, a Term of years could not be
devised to A. for life, the Remainder thereof to B. for his life, to pass in
this manner in point of Estate; neither could these Estates be made thereof, but
by construction the same was disposed of to go by way of executory devise; and
so the stock in my case was not transferred in point of Estate with the Land,
but in point of executory disposition of the Occupation and use thereof only;
and therefore if one let a stock of cattle or sheep with grounds at the end of
the Term, the goods as accessory with the Land as principal shall return to the
Lessor, and during the Term the Lessor has the property of them, and the
Lessee the possession thereof, and the Lessee shall have the yearly profits
thereof for his Rent; and here I do end this first point, and will proceed to
the rest.

The second Point.
There be two Joyntenants, and one of them and an estranger do disseise the
other; what interest the stranger gains thereby is the question.

I am clear of Opinion, as many books be, That one Joyntenant may disseise his
companion by an express Ouster, but when a stranger joyneth therein, in what
part that does alter the case is the matter; for if the stranger should get a
joint Estate in possession with the Joyntenant whom he joined withal, that were
to make a double Joynttenancy in uno eodemque gradu: for the Joyntenant which
committed the disseisin, which has the possession, and the Joyntenant which
was disseised and which has the right, do hold Joyntenancy still; for by 36
Ed. 3. right may hold 36 Ed. 3.
Ioyntenancy with a possession, and the one may take by survivor from the
other, in 9 H. 7. fol. 23. That he in Remainder and a stranger may disseise
Tenant for life, and shall be both disseisors; but in that case they were both
strangers to the particular Estate: Also it is manifest that one Ioyntenancy
may be built upon another, As if two Joyntenants be disseised by other two
Joyntenants of the right semel, but not simul: But in our principal case,
Whether one Ioyntenant might hold the possession of a Moiety with his first
companion in Ioynture, with his moiety in right, and can also uno tempore hold
Ioyntenancy in possession with a stranger, of the moiety upon which the
disseisin was committed, I suppose he cannot, because then he should hold
partnership with both of one thing: And therefore in my opinion the stranger
gets nothing in my case, but is only a Coadjutor, and no Disseisor, which
gets the Tenancy.

The third Point.
But admit the stranger did get a moiety of a moiety by joining in the
disseisin, then what alteration this release will work in my case is the next
question.

It is true as Mr. Littelton says, That if there be two Littleton.
Disseisors, and the Disseisee release to one of them, he shall hold his
companion out of all; the like Law is in my case of two abaters and two
intruders: but if two disseisors be, and they make a Lease for years, rendering
Rent, and then the Disseisee releaseth to one of the Disseisors; I suppose this
release shall inure to both, because the Lessee for years, whose Estate shall
be strengthened by this release, is in by the Title under both of them, and now
they are Tenants of a Reversion only, and of a Rent thereto incident, which
was not got by the disseisin, but was composed by the Legal contract of the
parties.

So if two be admitted to a Copyhold by Tort, or to an Office in a Court of
Justice unlawfully, though their entry be unlawful, yet because they came in by
admittance, which is at the door of Justice; I suppose therefore, that if a
release be made to one of them by the disseisee, it shall inure to both,
because they had some color and countenance to enter, more then express
disseisors or intrudors have.

But if a Son and a Stranger disseise the Father, and after the Father dies,
and the right descend to the son, by this release in Law, and by the accession
of the right by descent to the tortious possession, it does inure only to the
son; and although this release was upon condition, which by the breach thereof
seems to set the Relessor in the same state he was before, yet it does not
admit the Joint disseisor which was expelled thereby to become a copartner
again with his fellow: As if the son and a stranger disseise the father, and
the father dies, the stranger hereby is expelled by the descent of this right
to the son; yet if after a more near Heir is born, as the Elder brother dyed
his wife Einsent with a son, which after the decease of the Grandfather is
born, whereby the Inheritance of this Land is his; yet the other Joint
disseisor which was expelled by the descent of the right of his fellow
disseisor, by the departure of the right with the possession, cannot enter upon
his fellow disseisor, in my opinion.

But now the question is further, what is reduced by this condition, the right
only which was released, or the possession together with this right; for if but
a right be reduced, then a descent happening may perchance Toll the entry of the
Relessor, and so he may be put to his Writ of right in Fee: And if it be a
right of an inferior degree; as in our case it was but for life, then he should
be with out remedy.

But in my opinion where the release does inure by way of 17 Assiz. pl. 2. 17.
Ed. 3.
entry and Feoffment being upon condition, it may in that case by the breach of
the condition reduce the possession, and give the Relessor a Re-entry, because
in Intelligenti a legis the Land was passed thereby, and not a right only; But
if it had inuted by way of Mitter le droit only, I take it Bevils Case 4 Report.
then it would reduce but a right; But in our case I suppose if it had had any
working at all, it was by Entry and Feoffment; yet I think nothing did inure
thereby to the stranger, which in my case is called D. because he wanted the
Freehold whereupon it should inure.

And so I end my Common Law points, and I will now in hand with my Statute.

The parts of the Statute whereupon I do ground my subsequent matters, does
contain in it these words (viz.) That if any person or persons of what Estate
or Degree soever he or they be of, that from henceforth do take upon him or
them to sit by virtue of the said Commissions, not being first sworn according
to the Tenor of the Oath expressed in the Statute; or if any person so named
and sworn do sit, not having Lands, Tenements or other Hereditaments in
Fee-simple, Fee tail, or for term of life, to the clear yearly value of Forty
Marks above all charges to his own use, Except he be Resciant and Free of any
City, Borough or Town Corporate, have moveable substance of the clear value of
One hundred pounds, or else be learned in the Laws of this Realm, in and
concerning the same; That is to say, admitted in one of the principal Inns of
Court for an utter Barrister, shall forfeit Forty pounds for every time that he
shall attempt so to do, the one moiety to the King, the other moiety to the
party that will sue therefore, etc.

So that by this clause it is manifest, that every one that is not qualified in
one of these degrees, is no competent Commissioner within this Statute.







And that person which is not within one of the said three parts, and yet does
take upon him to sit in the execution of this Commission, incurs two penalties:





And therefore for the more clear examination of these things, I will observe
that method in my Argument, which my Case has formerly prescribed to me.

Lincoln, I am of opinion, that every Commissioner of this kind must be
endowed with these three qualities.

etc. If he want any of these, then he is out of this Branch of this Statute.
Therefore what person is such a Freeman, is now to be handled.

I am of opinion, that every Subject born within the Kings Dominion is a
Freeman of this Realm, as appears by the Grand Charter, cap. 14. yea though
he be a Bondslave to a Subject; but a stranger born is no Freeman of the
Kingdom, till the King have made him Denizen, in whose power alone, without the
help of any other, one may be made free: And to be a Freeman of the Realm, the
place of his birth is held more material then the quality of his Parents; for
if Aliens have a child in England it is free of the Kingdom: yet by the
Opinion of Hussy Chief Justice in 1 R. 3. fol. 4. and in Calvin's case of the
Post Nati, it is holden for Law, That if Ambassadors of this Realm have
children born in France, or elsewhere where the Father and Mother be natural
born Subjects, the children are free of the Realm of England; but if either the
Father or the Mother of such children were an Alien, then are not those
children free. One out of the Kings protection, is, as I take it, for that time
no Freeman of the Realm: But in what case a man Exiled is in, sorteth the
nearest to our question.

Exile is one of the Eight Punishments which the Roman Laws did inflict upon
Strangers, which be videlicet, 1. Damnum. 2. Imprisonamentum. 3. Plagae. 4.
Compensatio. 5. Ignominia. 6. Exilium. 7. Servitudo. 8. Mors.


Mr. Bracton does in this manner describe Exile, that is, Certi loci
interdictio, and does distribute it into Four heads; That is to say,

1. Specialis, hoc est interdictio talis provinciae Civitatis Burgi aut villae.

2. Generalie, Interdictio totius Regni and aliquando est.

3. Temporaria, pro duobus tribus quatuor aut pluribus annis aut, etc.

4. Perpetua, pro termino vitae and Exilium est aliquando ex arbitrio principis
sicut in exiliando Duces Hertferdiae and Norfolciae per Regem Richardum
secundum, Et aliquando per Judicium terra ut sit in casu Piers de Gaveston and
etiam in casu Hugonis de le Spencer junioris qui ambo fuorunt exilit' per
Judicium in Parliamento.

Abjuration also was a legal Exile by the Judgment of the Common Law, as also
by the Statute Law; and in the Statute of Westminster the Second, Cap. 35. He
which ravisheth a Ward, and cannot render the Ward unmarried, or the value of
his Marriage, must abjure the Realm; and this is a general Abjuration: And by a
Statute made in 31 Ed. 1. 31 Ed. 1.
Butchers are to be abjured the Town, if they offend the fourth time in selling
measled flesh; and this is a special Abjuration.

But I must put this Case to a further question, which is, What a man Exiled
does forfeit thereby? And in my opinion he forfeits these things following;





Ed. 1. and 1 H. 4. 31 Ed. 1. 1 H. 4. 1.


qued vide 15 Ed. 3. Fitz. Petition' plac. 2. But there in that case Hugh
Spencer was banished by a Judgment in Parliament, which gave a forfeiture of
his Lands; howsoever I take him as strongly barred from purchasing in the Realm
during his Banishment, as an Alien is, for fit alienigina by his Banishment,
and he is in a worse case then an Alien, because he takes with him Indignatio
principis: But a banished man forfeits neither Title of Honor, as Knighthood,
which is de jure gentium, nor the Lands he had before he was Exiled, unless by
special Judgment given in a legal course they be so decreed.

Then our case goes further, That E. is not Exiled himself, but D. his Father
was Exiled, whose Heir E. is: now whether by the Exilement of the Father, the
liberty and freedom which E. might claim in the City of Lincoln by being the
Son and Heir of a Freeman, be forfeit for his Fathers Banishment, or not, is
the matter of my Case.

A Freeman of a City or Borough may be made diverse manner of ways, as appears
in the Case of the City of London in Sir Edward Cooks 8 Report, fol. 126. That
is to say,





Bristol by Marriage.

In the Chronicles in the Reign of Richard the 2. it is said, Freedom was
obtained but by two means, videlicet, By Service, and by Birth; yet it seems it
may be obtained by purchase, because the Centurion claimed his Freedom thereby
in the 22 Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. In the Irish Reports, Acts 22. 8.
fol. 12. it is said, That one may be a Freeman by Birth, Marriage and Service:
Saint Paul indeed was born at Tarsus in Cicilia which was under the obedience
of the Romans, he challenged therefore to be a citizen of Rome; but I take it
the text there took it but to be National Freedom, which is such a general
Freedom, as Calvin being born in Scotland claimed and had in England, because
he was born under the obedience of the King of England; But that made not Saint
Paul Free of the private Customs, Privileges and Franchises of Rome, no more
then Calvin's birth made him a free Citizen of Lincoln to the peculiar Customs
of that City.

If one be born in a City of Parents that are not free, the child hereby is no
Citizen by birth; and if one be born of Free Parents out of the place of
Privileges, as out of Lincoln, he yet is a Freeman by Birth: Yet in the
Charter Grant of Yarmouth the words were, Concessimus Burgensibus de Magna
Yermutha de villa predict' oriundis, that they should have such Liberties and
such; so that it may be the special words of the Charter may alter the case:
yet in the case of the City of London, Cooks 8. Report, the King Cooks 8 Rep.
by his Letters Patents could not make one a Freeman of London, yet he may
thereby make him a Freeman of the Kingdom.

But whether those that are Free by Birth, Service or Marriage be Freemen within
my Statute, or not, is a question; because the words thereof be absolute posita
to all purposes: And therefore I take it, that this Statute intends it of such
as have challenged their Freedom, and which have taken the Freemans Oath, and
are admitted into the Society and fellowship of the Freemen, Citizens and
Burgesses; for in James Bags Case in the 11 Rep. such a one is taken for a
perfect Freeman, and no other: So in my opinion E. the son of D. is no
competent Freeman of the City of Lincoln within the branch of this Statute; But
admit he were, then it may be objected to me, that by the Exilement of the
father the Freedom of the son was forfeit, by reason he was by this Exilement
become no free Citizen. But in answer thereunto I say briefly, That if theson
had attained this Freedom by the death of his father, as a thing descendible,
then it had been forfeit by his fathers Banishment, but the son had this
Freedom by his own birth, as a purchase, and not by the death of his father by
descent, Ergo, it was not forfeited by his fathers Exilement. Like to the case
where I. S. has many children, and then he confesses himself Villain to I. D.
in a Court of Record, yet his children formerly born are Freemen and no
Villains, because they were free by their own births, but the Inheritance is
inthralled, because it is to come to the Heir by descent: So that I am of
opinion, that if E. had otherwise been a competent Freeman, as he was not, then
the Exilement of his father could not have disabled him.

Our Freeman which this Statute speaks of, must not only be Free of the City
or Borough, but he must also there be resciant; for these words are materially
placed in the said Law, and here E. was the son of D. a Free Citizen of
Lincoln, who did there reside and dwell, and every child is part of the
fathers family, for the Husband and Wife, Father and Children, Master and
Servant are of a Family; and a Ward is part of his Gardians family: But in our
case when D. was Banished, he then forewent his local Habitation, and so his
said son could not then be of his family, nor could be intended to dwell with
him who had no Habitation in the Realm: And I am of opinion, that this Statute
requires an actual habitation or resciancy, and not a Mathematical or
Imaginary resciancy, such a one as was in Geffries Case in Cooks 5 Report; for
there the case was, That one did personally and locally dwell and reside at
Dale Jeffreys Case.
and occupied Lands in Sale; here the party was in Law, but not in fact, an
Inhabitant in Sale, and was there assessed as an Inhabitant to the repair of
that Church; But this Commissioner of ours is bound to such resciancy as a
Minister is to his resciancy, which in Butler and Goodhals Case in Cooks Report
ought to be locally and personally abiding in the Parish where his Parsonage or
Vicarage house is, for resciancy or residency have a like signification, and be
both of them words of that efficacy, as they tie a man to his personal and
actual abode and habitation with their family: But put the case that in Lincoln
there be places exempt out of the Freedom of the City, and yet within the
Circle of the Walls, as Saint Martins does in London, I take it if a Freeman
dwell there, this is no resciancy intended within this Statute, because the
words of our Law be, That he be Resciant and Free of the City, which going
together draws his Habitation to the place where his Freedom is: And with
this agrees the Decree made for London touching Tithes in Anno Dom. 1535.
which did not extend to Saint Martins, because it was In but not Of London,
Doctor Graunts Case, Cooks 11 Report.

Our Freeman must also have in clear moveable substance to the value of a
hundred pounds; this word (Substance) would have extended as well to ones real
Estate as to his personal, if it had gone alone; but being coupled with the
word Moveable, declares plainly that it only extends to the personal Estate:
And I take it, that these words (Moveable substance) does not only contain and
extend to such things Quae dese movere possint, as live goods, Horses, Oxen,
Sheep, and such like, but also to such things quae de se movere non possint, as
Plate, Jewels, ready money, Utensils of house, Mercery, Drapery, and other
wares and goods of value, Hay, Corn, goods of Husbandry, and Housewifery; but
Birds and Beasts of Parks and Warrens, and Doves in Dovehouses, be not
valueable sustance; a Hive of Bees, and a Villain for years, and a Captive
taken in the Wars be, for there shall be paid for him a Ransom, as is mentioned
in the Register, fol. 102. Moneys due upon Statutes, Judgments, Recognizances,
Bonds, Bills or Contracts, be not valueable substances within this Statute; for
by this Statute it must be clear, and not doubtful or accidental, as Moneys out
of hand be, which is like to a Bird in the Bush; yet these be all valueable,
and are valued in Inventories taken in the Ecclesiastical Courts: But yet the
Executors or Administrators shall not be charged for assets for them, till they
have received them: And in 25 H. 8. in Dier, fol. 5. Obligations are not held
valueable, but things in action; and if one 25 H. 8.
have got goods by tort and wrong to the value of One hundred pounds, yet this
is clear valueable substance within this Law; for although the word clear be
inserted into the Statute, yet that relates to the value, and not to the title
of those goods: And if one have goods as Executor or Administrator, these are
not his own, and therefore do not enable him to be a Commissioner within this
Law.

Neither do the goods of the Church enable the Parson, Vicar or Curate, nor the
goods of a Corporation do not enable the Major and Aldermen, or Citizens of a
City, or Town Corporate, for these do not belong to their particular persons,
neither did this stock in my case, which is demised to B. and C. make them
competent Commissioners within this Statute, because they had not the property
therein, but only the use and occupation thereof.

And although in this Statute it is not declared in what place these goods
which should enable a man to be a Commissioner of Sewers should be in, it will
suffice if the party have them in any place within the Realm, for this very Law
calls them Moveable substance: And herein I end my Free Citizen, and in my
opinion E. had neither Freedom in his person, nor real Estate in Land, nor
moveable substance in any sort to make him a competent Commissioner within this
Law; yet if a Freeman be destitute of goods, or want perfection in his Freedom,
if notwithstanding he have Lands to the value of forty Marks per annum, then he
shall be allowed a Commissioner within this Statute: Touching which point of
Lands I now intend to proceed in.

In the handling of this matter it is to be considered, which be Hereditaments
within this Law; for the other two words Lands and Tenements need no
exposition; wherein I am of opinion, That Messuages, Cortages, To^^s, Crofts,
Houses, Land, Meadow, Pasture, Feedings, Moors, Marshes, Heaths, Furs, Mills,
Orchards, Gardens, Hopyards, Rents of Annuities, Prima vestura terrae,
Pischaries, Tithes, Pensions, Portions, Proxies, Parks, Warrens are all of them
Hereditaments within this part of this Law, for the word Hereditament is a word
of the larger size and largest extent in our Law, being Omne quod Haereditari
potest; and yet every Hereditament is not within this branch, for it has two
other words joined therewithal (videlicet) yearly value: And therefore
Franchises and Liberties, as Waifs, Strayes, Felons goods, Deodans, Fines,
Amerciament, Profits of Courts, Fairs, Markets, Ferries, Hundreds, Leets, and
such like, are all of them out of this Statute in this point, because they be
not of a certain yearly value, but be accidental and depend in contingency, by
the opinion in Butler and Bakers Case Cooks 3 Report; But as it is there said,
If these things have heretofore been usually letten and demised for certain
yearly Rents, then they may be Hereditaments of clear yearly value within this
Law. All Offices and Vocations, as Physicians, Chyrurgions or Trades, as
Merchants, Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, and such like, be neither Hereditary, nor
of certain yearly value, and therefore they be not within this Law, though
perhaps one gain thereby Five hundred pounds per annum. Also dry reversions or
remainders depending upon Estates for lives are out of this branch, for the
words of the Statute be (having) which is in praesenti and not futuro.

Neither is an Advowson of force in this point, though it be assets in a
Formdon, yet it is no assets in an Action of debt brought against Executors;
Homages, Fealties, Escuages, Heriots, Reliefs, Nomine paenes, and such like, be
Hereditaments, but because they are not of yearly value, they are not therefore
within this Law.

Also if a Commissioner of Sewers be seized of a Rent or Annuity payable every
second year, it does not enable him to sit because it is not Annual, which is
intended yearly, and every year, as the Pryor of Plymptons Case in Dier, fol.
133. is, but if one do grant to I. S. an Annuity or Rent of Forty Marks in Fee,
payable at the feast of Easter yearly, if the grantee will then come for it to
such a place, is of certain yearly value within this Law.

But put the case that A. is seized of Land in Fee, and grant to B. Forty Marks
per annum for his life only; I am of opinion that B. is no sufficient qualified
Commissioner within this Law.

But if A. be seized of a Rent of Forty Marks per annum in Fee, and he grant
the same to B. for his life, he is a competent Commissioner within this Law
differentia apparet.

Our Statute goes on in these words, That the Commissioner which would sit
without exception, must have in Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of the clear
yearly value of Forty Marks to his own use; Therefore a man seized of Lands to
that value in the right of his wife, although he take the Rents and Profits to
his own use, yet this will not enable him to be a Commissioner within this Law,
but he must have them in ejus usu and ad ejus usum.

A Feoffee to a use before the Statute of 27 H. 8. of uses, was no competent
Commissioner within our Statute, for he had the Land then to another man's use;
Neither was Cestui que use sufficiently qualified to be a Commissioner.

Two Tenants in common, or coparceners of Forty pounds Lands per annum are
neither of them of sufficient ability to be Commissioners within this Law.

And the like Law is of two Joyntenants of Land of that yearly value, for
though they be seized per my and per tout, yet in truth, and in a legal
construction, either of them be seized but of a moiety: So that if two
Joyntenants, Tenants in common, or coparceners be seized of Lands of the yearly
value of Threescore pounds, either of them may sit by this Commission.

A Dean and Chapter, Major and Commonalty, Master of a College and Fellows,
which be seized of Lands and Tenements of the yearly value of a Hundred pounds
per annum are not in respect thereof to sit.

If a Bishop, Dean, Chancellor, Archdeacon, Prebend, Parson or Vicar be seized
of Lands in Jure Ecclesiae of the clear yearly value of Forty Marks, I suppose
these may sit Commissioners by this Statute, for they have these Lands in eorum
usu during the time they continue in their places, which in intendment of Law
is for their lives; but yet by the intendment of Law they are not to sit in the
execution of any humane affairs, and therefore seeing their persons are out of
the intendment of this Law, so likewise should their Church livings be: but
this is but a conceit, for although they be not persons having these Lands
within the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Wills, which is a having to dispose, yet they
may be within our Statute, which is a having to retain.

If an Executor have a Villain for years which purchases Land of Forty Marks
per annum, he may sit in the execution of this Commission, for till his Lord
enter he has them to his own use; but if the Executor enter, then neither the
Villain nor Executor can sit a Commissioner by this Law.

If an Alien purchase Lands of sufficient value in Fee, he in respect of his
person is a disabled person to sit, neither is he a person having Lands,
because he is not seized thereof to his own use, but to the use of the King;
But if he be made a Denizen, then in his person he is made capable.

The Warden of the Fleet who has Lands belonging to his Office, may in respect
thereof sit a Commissioner by this Law.

But shall a Termor or Lessee for years of Land of good value be thrust out of
Commission, and be counted neither a sufficient Landed man, nor his Term and
Lease to be accepted moveable substance, and not only so, but that his Farm
shall be a further disablement unto him, as the Statute of 13 El. cap. 9.
seems to purport; the words of which Statute be, That no Farmer or Farmers
for Term of years, of any Manners, Lands or Tenements, lying or being within the
Precincts or Limits of any such Commission of Sewers, which be or which
hereafter may be ordered and chargeable by any Laws, Ordinances and
Constructions made or to be made by virtue of any such Commission wherein he or
they shall be named or appointed Commissioner or Commissioners, not having
Estate in Freehold within the Realm, of or in Manors, Lands or Tenements of the
yearly value of Forty pounds, shall any time hereafter have power to sit, or in
any wise intermeddle with the execution of such Commission or Commissions,
during the time he or they shall continue or be such Farmer or Farmers of any
such Manner, Lands and Tenements, and shall not have Estate of Freehold as
aforesaid; but that every such Commission having respect only to every such
person or persons for such and so long time as he or they shall be or continue
Farmer or Farmers of any such Manors, Lands or Tenements, shall be denied and
judged in Law as void.

But yet in the closing up of that Statute of 13 El. there is a Proviso to this
effect, Provided always, that it shall be lawful for any Commissioner, being
also a Farmer, and not having Lands or Tenements to the clear yearly value of
Forty pounds of Freehold, to sit by virtue of the said Commission, and have his
voice and full authority with others to make and establish Ordinances for
Sewers, according to the Tenure of the Commission touching and concerning all
Lands and Tenements within the Precinct of every such Commission, other then
such Lands and Tenements as he or they for the time hold and enjoy as Farmer,
as he or they might have done before the making of that Statute; but he could
not have sitten in execution of this Commission before the making of this
Statute, unless he had besides his lease Lands to the value of Forty Marks per
annum: And therefore a Lease for years is no inablement at all, but a
disablement, as this Statute declares.

But the times when this having of Lands, etc. will suffice to qualify a
Commissioner to sit within this Law, is now to be considered of, wherein I am
opinion, that the When having must be referred to the Then sitting: For the
words of the Statute be, That none take upon him to sit, not having Lands to
the yearly value of Forty Marks; so that if he have not Lands of that value
when he is first made a Commissioner, yet if he have so much when he sits
upon the Commission it will satisfy this Law; and if once he have Land of that
value and sits, and after sell the Land away, or if they be evicted from
him, he is then disabled to sit as a Commissioner by this Statute: And so if he
were but Tenant for the life of I. S. and I. S. dies, he ought not to sit: In
12 H. 7. 7. a Juror which was to pass upon trial of Land was to have Forty
shillings per annum of Freehold, and 12 H. 7. 7.
after he was impanelled, and before he was sworn, he sold away his Land, and
when he came to be sworn, he was challenged for want of Freehold, but the
challenge was disalow'd, for after he was impanelled, his land (though after
sold away) was chargeable with the issues which he after might lose in that
matter; and with this agrees 14 H. 7. 2. by Frowick: But our Statute is more
precisely penned, which is, That none do presume to sit, unless he have Lands
of that value, or be, etc. therefore when he sits he must have the Lands.

And if A. do bargain and sell his Lands to B. by Deed intended of that value,
and before the Inrolment of the Deed B. do sit as Commissioner, and after the
Deed is Enrolled, yet this does not qualify his offense, and the relation of
the working of this Deed does not assist him to take off the penalty of this
Law.

Also a man disseised is during the Disseisin disabled to sit, for he had not
then power to devise the Lands by the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Wills, for that
Statute does as ours does, use the word Having in presenti, and not in futuro.

And thus much I thought convenient upon this occasion to deliver my opinion,
when the Commissioner must have his Lands of Forty Marks per annum to enable
him to sit as a Commissioner within this Statute.

To Treat of the utter Barister I need not, for when he has taken the Oath
mentioned in the Statute, he is an absolute and complete Commissioner within
this Law, to all purposes, although he have neither Lands or Goods, according
as the Statute appoints others to have.

The second question.
The second question in my case touching this Statute, is, Whether the Countess
of Warwick be a compatible Commissioner within this Statute.

Although it is uncouth in our Law to have women Justices and Commissioners,
and to sit in places of Judicature, yet by the Authorities ensuing you shall
find this a point worth insisting upon, both in Humane and in Divine learning;
for in Genesis, Chapter the first, after the creation Genesis cap. 1.
of all other creatures being finished, the Heavens adorned, and the Earth
replenished, God said, Let us make man in our own Image, after our likeness,
and let him have Dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over all the Earth, and
every creeping thing that creeps upon the Earth: So God Created man in his
own Image, in the Image of God Created he him, Male and Female Created he them;
and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and
subdue it, and have Dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the foul of
Heaven, and over every living thing that moves upon the earth: This was the
first Commission that ever was granted, and it passed under the Divine
immediate Seal of the Almighty, and extended over the whole world; and by the
virtue of the word Dominamini in the Plural number, God coupled the woman in
Commission with the man. But in the 18 Chapter of Exodus, Verse 21. Jethro
advises and counsels Exodus 18.
Moses his Son in law to provide out of all the people men of truth, hating
covetousness, and place such over them to be Rulers of Thousands, Rulers of
Hundreds and over Fifties and Tens; where by the word Men twice repeated by
Jethro, and this place of Scripture seemed to exclude wholly from Government,
and the former Commission extended over Fishes, Birds and Beasts, and neither
over men nor women: And in the first of the Corinthians, Chapter 14. it is said
by Saint Paul, Let the women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not
permitted to them 1 Cor. 14.
to speak. And in Grendons Case in the Comment. fol. 497. Dyer says, That
women could not administer the Sacraments, nor were they permitted to say
Divine Service. And in the second Chapter of Timothy, Verse 12. he says, We
suffer not the woman 2 Timothy
to rule over the man; but this last of Timothy may be most aptly applied to
husband and wife.

I remember out of the Abbey Book of Evesham this Note worthy of observation,
Quod Alicia Peers Regis miniona supra modum mulierum nimis supergressa, sui
etiam sexus and fragilitatis feminiae Immemor, nunc Justiciarios Regis, nunc in
foro ecclesiastico juxta doctores sedendo, and pro defensione causarum suadere
and etiam contra jus postulare minime verebatur, unde propter scandalum
petierunt a rege in Parliament' tent' An. 50. Ed. 3. penitus amoveri; but
hereby I collect, that she was not in Commission with the Judges Temporal or
Spiritual, but was a favorite of the Kings, and took upon her to intermeddle in
businesses nothing concerning her: But whether the Text meant it for a woman to
sit Judge in a Court of Justice, was contra modum mulierum, or because she sat
there to wrest righteous Judgment, I refer to the readers of that History; For
Debora was Judge of Israel, and Judged the people as the fourth of Judges has
it. Dyer indeed says in Grendons Case, That diverse Churches were appropriated
to Prioresses and Nanneries, whereof women were the Governesses; whereby and by
the said Chapter of the Corinthians it appears, that women might be admitted to
have Rule and Government over the possessions and persons Temporal and
Ecclesiastical, but were not admitted to have curam animarum, nor to meddle
with the administration of the Service or Sacraments.

And for Temporal Governments, I have observed women to have from time to time
been admitted to the highest places; For in ancient Roman Histories I find
Endochia and Theodora admitted at several times into the sole Government of the
Empire: and here in England our late famous Queen Elizabeth whose Government
was most renowned: And Semiramis governed Syria; and the Queen of the South
which came to visit Solomon, for any thing that appears to the contrary, was a
sole Queen: And to fall a degree lower, we have presidents that King Richard
the first, and King Henry the fifth appointed and deputed by Commissions their
Mothers to be Regents of this Realm in their absence in France: And the wise
and renowned Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond was put in Commission, and
Humfrey de Bohune Earl of Hereford was by Tenure Constable of England, which is
a Judge in Martial affairs, and he died without issue Male, by reason whereof
the Office (amongst other things) descended to his two Daughters and Coheirs:
And in the 12 of Elizabeth, in Dier, it is holden for Law, That although this
was an Office of Justice, yet they might execute the same by deputy; for in
truth women were unfit Martialists to judge of matters of that nature; and yet
it is clear, a deputy does nothing in his own name, but in the name of his
Master or Mistress, therefore the Martial Court was to be kept in their names:
But yet I will descend a step lower; does not our Law Temporal and Spiritual
admit of women to be Executrixes and Administratrixes? and hereby they have the
rule or ordering of great Estates, and many times they are Gardianesses in
Chivalry, and have thereby also the government of many great Heirs in the
Kingdom, and of their Estates.

And in 10 H. 7. a man devised his Lands to be sold by a 10 H. 7
woman, and died, and she sold the same to her husband: So by these Cases it
appears, that the Common Law of this Kingdom submitted and committed many
things to their government; yet the Statute of Justices of the Peace is like to
Jethroes counsel to Moses, for there they speak of men to be Justices, and
seems thereby to exclude women: But our Statute of Sewers is, Commission of
Sewers shall be granted by the King to such person and persons as the said
Lords should appoint; So the words persons stands indifferently for either Sex;
And therefore although by the weakness of their Sex they are unfit to travel,
and they be for the most part incapable of learning to direct in matters of
Judicature, for which causes they have been discreetly spared, yet I am of
opinion, for the authorities, reasons and causes aforesaid, that this honorable
Countess being put into Commission of the Sewers, the same is warrantable by
the Law; and the Ordinances and Decrees of Sewers made by her and the other
Commissioners of Sewers, are not to be impeached for that cause of her Sex.

And I conclude here, that although in discretion women have been secluded as
unfit, yet they are not in Law to be excluded as incapable.

If an Infant above the age of Fourteen, and under the age of One and twenty be
made a Commissioner, his infancy shall be no cause to disable the Laws made by
him; young Daniel was Judge over both the Elders. And in Little Brook, fol. The
case is, a Parson or Prebend being within age made a Lease for years of his
benefice, and would but could not after avoid it for his Nonage, for seeing the
Church had made him of full age to discharge the spiritual Office, our Common
Law thought it fit to enable him to dispose of his Temporalties: and in 21 H.
7. fol. 12 and 13. 11 H. 7.
the case is put by Bridges, and confirmed by Justice Sylliard, and was not
denied by any, that an Obligation made by a Major and Commonalty, Dean and
Chapter, Abbot and Covent, shall not be avoided for the Nonage of the Major,
Dean or Abbot; yet all these serve in place of government, howbeit in the said
matters their Nonages shall not impeach them: And in the third of Isaiah it is
said, I will give them 3 Isa.
children to their Princes, and babes to rule over them; noting thereby an
unfitness in them to govern, but debarred them not of the place: and of this
matter this shall suffice.

But now admit, as oftentimes it falls out, that Commissioners shall sit in the
execution of this Commission of Sewers, which have not taken the Oath, which
have not Lands of value, or which is not a free Citizen, and yet there be
Ordinances, Decrees, and Laws made at those times; Now whether those Laws and
Ordinances so made by a disabled Commissioner be void or not, is the question;
or whether the disabled Commissioner shall only undergo the penalty of Forty
pounds.

There was a Statute made in 6 H. 8. cap. 10. whereby it 6. H. 8.
was Enacted, That the Chancellor of England for the time being should make no
Commission to any person or persons (except he had Lands and Tenements of
Estate of Freehold to the yearly value of Twenty pounds, or else be Justice of
the Quorum) within any of the shires where he should be made a Commissioner;
and if any such Commission were directed to any person or persons not having
Lands or Tenements to the yearly value of Twenty pounds, or not being one of
the Justices learned of the Quorum, as aforesaid, That then every such
Commission, and all Presentiments and Accusations had and presented before any
such Commissioners, be utterly void and of none effect.

But this Statute is in time expired long ago, and therefore it is no
interruption to our Commissioner; for although the Statute of 23 H. 8. which I
read on has a Clause in it in effect, That all and every Statute and Ordinance
heretofore made concerning the Premises, made in the time of the said King, or
of any of his Progenitors, not being contrary to that Statute, should stand in
force; yet these words do not set on foot a Statute expired in time, as that of
6 H. 8. is: Also in the said Statute of 13 Eliz. if a Termor or Lessee for
years be in Commission, all Laws made which concern Lands whereof he is a
Farmer are void as to him vide antea.

But to rely on our Statute of 23 H. 8. in my opinion it 23 H. 8.
does not avoid any of the Laws and Ordinances made by disabled Commissioners,
but does only inflict the punishment and penalty of Forty pounds a piece upon
every of them, for every time they and every of them shall sit in or about the
execution of this Commission; yet it seemed in the case de Jure Regis
Ecclesiastico, That whereas the Statute of first of Elizabeth which authorized
the Queen to grant Commissions to natural born subjects, that if she had
granted the same to an Alien, that acts done by him had been void.

But now my case proceeds to the next point or step, and that is touching the
Law and Ordinance made to race the said Were; I inferred this clause in my
case, because I had not formerly occasion or fit opportunity to treat of the
Lets, Impediments and Annoyances which be contained within this Statute of 23
H. 8. and therefore I took this occasion to close up this days exercise with
the discourse of them.

These by name are such Impediments and Annoyances as this Statute speaks of,
1. Streams. 2. Mills. 3. Bridges. 4. Ponds. 5. Fishgarths. 6. Mildams. 7.
Locks. 8. Hebbingweres. 9. Hecks, and 10. Floodgates.
And the rest must be comprised within these general words (videlicet) Other
like Lets and Impediments.

And the discourse upon all these will rest most upon the Statutes heretofore
made touching the same.

And the first Statute thereof made is in Magna Charta, Mag. Chart. cap. 23.
cap. 23. Omnes kidelli deponantur de cetero penitus per Thamesiam and Medweyam
and per totam Angliam nisi per costeram maris; This extends not to the Kings,
keddles per keble in 13 H. 7. 35.
what this word kidellum signifies, appeareh by the title of that Statute,
which is Weres.

The next Statute to this is, 25 Ed 3. cap. 4. which does Enact, That all
Mills, Weres, Stanks, Stakes and Kiddels were levied 25. E. 3.
and set in the time of King Edward (that Kings Grandfather) and after, whereby
Ships and Boats were disturbed, that they might not pass the Rivers as they
were wont, should be cut and pulled down without being relieved.

The said first Statute is general, that all Weres should be put down but by
the Seacosts, yet this word (All) are intended of such only as were erected
without lawful Warrant; and the said Statute of 25 Ed. 3. does explain the
generality of the said former Statute; For thereby it appears, That Weres
erected in Navigable Rivers where Ships and Boats were wont to sail, should be
extirped, because they were a hinderance to Navigation; but this extends only
to Navigable Streams which have been Navigable by use and Custom; and it is
manifest by this Statute, that these Weres which were so to be put down must be
only such as were erected in the time of Ed. the first and sithence, because
those seemed to be erected without lawful authority, and being but erected in
those times, they had not the countenance of Custom and Prescription to
strengthen them.

The next Statute in time is that of 45 Ed. 3. cap. 2. which confirms the said
Statute of 25. Ed. 3. and then adding thereto, that if any such annoyance be
done, it shall be pulled down, and that he which shall relevy such annoyance,
and be thereof duly attainted, he shall incur the penalty of One hundred Marks
to the King, to be levied by the Estreats of the Exchequer; and the penalty is
thereby given for the inhauncing of such Weres, Mills, Stanks, Stakes and
Kiddels: This Statute is in part a confirmation of the said Statute of 25 Ed.
3. and in other part thereof it is a new 45 Ed. 3.
Act in these points.





Ed. 3. it extends therefore but to Navigable Streams.

The Statute of 1 H. 4. cap. 12. is a Statute in these points of great
consequence, and it does also confirm the said two former Statutes of Ed. 3.
and does thereto also make additions in these ensuing points:



Ed. the first, and them which they should find too much inhaunced or
straightened, to correct, pull down and amend; saving always a reasonable
substance of Weres, Mills, Stanks, Stakes and Kiddels so in old time made and
levied.









be, That there be reserved always the reasonable substance thereof in old
times accustomed.

And in my opinion the generality of the said Statute of Magna Chart. cap. 23.
is restrained by the succeeding Statutes, if the exposition should have been as
large as the letter is.

And these three distinctions do fully declare the true effect of the said
preceding Statutes.

Then next in Order of time is the Statute of 4 H. 4. 4 H. 4.
cap. 11. which recites, That by Weres, Stakes and Kiddels in the water of
Thames, and in other great Rivers through the Realm, the common passage of
Ships and Boats be disturbed, and much people perished; and also the young fry
of fish destroyed, and against reason wasted and given to swine to eat;
Therefore this Statute Enacts, That all former Statutes thereof made be holden,
kept and put in execution.

Here be two things which none of the former Statutes took order for;



etc. Yet these are businesses which are otherwise provided for, and be not
pertinent to these Laws of Sewers: And therefore I shall pass them over
without any other further explanation thereof.

The Statute of 12 H. 4. cap. 7. does confirm all the said former Statutes made
against Lets, Impediments and Annoyances; 12 H. 4.
And does further Enact, That if contrary to the Award, Rule or Judgment of
the Commissioners made according to the Statute of 1 H. 4. it be found, that
any Weres, Fishgarths, Mills, Mildams, Locks, Hebbingweres, Stakes, Kiddels,
Hecks or Floodgates be made, levied, inhaunced, straightened or enlarged against
the said Statute, the offenders therein contrary to the aforesaid Award, Rule
and Judgment being warned by the Sheriff or under Sheriff of the County upon a
Scire facias to that purpose directed where those annoyances be, and within
three Months after such garnishment do not wholly amend, break down and avoid
the said making, levying and inhauncing, straitning or enlarging, That the
party being defective in that behalf shall forfeit One hundred Marks to the
King, to be levied by Estreats out of the Exchequer; and if the Offender, his
Heirs, Assignee or Assigns, or any of them do defer or continue the same
default, contrary to the Award, Rule and Judgment of the Commissioners, he or
they shall forfeit One hundred Marks, the one moiety to the King, the other
moiety to the party that will sue for the same.

And also it was further enacted, That if any person or persons, other then
such against whom such Award, Rule or Judgment was made, or any of them, do
presume to occupy or continue any of the Weres, Fishgarths and Impediments
aforesaid, or other encumbrances, he shall forfeit for every default for every
Month One hundred Marks, the one half to the King, the other half to the party
that will sue.

It appears, that this Statute speaks of Milldams, Locks, Hebbingweres,
Hecks and Floodgates, which the other Statute never speaks of; so in extent
thereof it has more enlargement: And in my opinion all the foresaid Statutes
did extend only to Navigable Streams and Rivers, with ships and Boats.

In the Tenth Report of Sir Edward Cook, the case of Chester Mills upon the
River of Dee, was as insueth, That a Causey or Milstank of stone in the River
of Dee, in the City of Chester, was made and erected for the necessary
maintenance of certain Mills, some of the Kings, others of the Subjects, which
stood at the end of the Causey; were of late by the Decree of the Commissioners
of Sewers Ordered, That a breach therein of ten Roods or Pearches should be
made, which Causey or Milstank was by the agreement of all parties erected
before the time of Edw. the first, and so had continuance without any
inhauncing or exaltation: And whether this Decree was warranted by any of the
said Statutes or not, was the question, which was referred by the Lords of the
Counsel to the two Chief Justices, Fleming and Cook, and to Tanfield the Lord
Chief Baron, to be considered on; and the said Chief Justices and chief Baron
declared their opinion, That the said decree was not warranted by any of the
said Statutes; for they said that the two Statutes of 25 Ed. 3. and 45 Ed. 3.
extended but to such impediments as were set up and erected in the time of Ed.
1. and after; and that the generality of the Statute of Mag. Char., cap. 23.
was restrained by these two Statutes; And that the Statute of 1 H. 4. extended
to such Weres, Kiddels, etc. and other lets as were erected before the Reign of
King Ed. the first, and which have been inhanuced and exalted sithence, and so
was out of all those Laws, because there was no such inhauncing.

And the Statute of 23 H. 8. which I now read on, did not alter the former
Statutes in these points; But provided, That all and every Statute, Act and
Ordinance heretofore made concerning the Premises in that Act recited, not
being contrary nor before then repealed, should stand then in force: But the
said Judges did hold opinion, that all the said Statutes stood unrepealed, and
acordingly made their Report to the Lords of the Council.

There be many private Statutes made for the abating private Weres in some
Streams which are not within my intent to recite, further then by naming of
them, because I take it they are not confirmed by the Statute I read on; As 11
H. 7. cap. 5. Southampton: 14 H. 8. cap. 13. 23 H. 8. cap. 18. Havens: 25 H. 8.
cap. 7. for killing Fry of Salmons, 27 H. 8. Rastal Havens 9, 10, 11.

In 19 Jacobi Regis there was a great Cause depending in the Court of the
Duchy at Westminster, between Benedict Hall Esquire, Plaintiff, and John
Mason, George Worral, and Thomas Powel, Defendants; which was in effect as
follows, That Queen Mary was seized of the Manor of Monmouth, with the
Appurtenances in that County, and of a Free fishing in the River of Wye, and of
a Were and a Fish yard there, which were erected in the time of the said Queen,
in the place where an old Foundation of an ancient Were did stand: This Were
had been letten by the said Queen, and also by Queen Elizabeth, under the Seal
of the said Duchy by yearly Rents, and so there were ancient presidents shown
in that Court, whereby it appeared, that the ancient Were there had been letten
to Farm by the Earls and Dukes of Lancaster, and by the Kings and Dukes for a
long time for yearly Rents: So that it was manifest that it was an ancient Were
time out of memory: And this Were and Fishyard, and the Profits of Fishing were
letten by the Kings Majesty that now is, under the Seal of the Duchy of
Lancaster, in the Tenth year of his Reign, to one John Abrahall Esquire, for
One and thirty years, for and under the yearly Rent of Six pounds thirteen
shillings and four pence payable to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors; And
the said Abrahal being so thereof possessed, did afterward in the Tenth year
assign the same to one William Hall Esquire, by reason whereof the said William
Hall was thereof possessed; and in the 12. year of this King, made his last
Will and Testament, and did thereby ordain the complainant his Executor, and
after dyed; by and after whose decease the Complainant came to be possessed of
the said Lease and Term therein to come; and in the Nineteenth Jacobi Regis,
the Commissioners of Sewers in those parts caused a Jury to be impanelled and
sworn; touching this Were and Fishyard, and gave therein a Verdict to this
effect; that is, That Benedict Hall the complainant was possessed of the said
Were, called Monmouth Were, upon the River of Wye, which was excessive high and
hurtful, and was an impediment to the common passage of Boats, Barks and
Ballangers up and down the said River, and by means thereof they could not
pass but in great danger, which if the said Were were not, Boats of two or
three Tuns might pass the River; and that the said Were had been the death and
drowning of one of the Kings Subjects, and is the cause of the scarcity,
dearness and want of Salmons, and other fish within the said River, by reason
many of them were taken in gins of the said Were, when they were out of season,
and that the same was a great abuse, wrong, enormity and annoyance to the whole
Country.

Whereupon the said Commissioners made an Ordinance or Decree, setting forth
thereby in effect as follows, That whereas it did appear to them, as well by
the examination of Witnesses, as by the said Verdict of the Jurors, and by
their view, that the said Were was a great let and hinderance to the common
passage of Boats and Ballangers up and down the River, indangering of the lives
of the Kings Subjects, and to the destruction of Fish, as the Salmons and Fry
thereof; They therefore Ordered, That the said Were should be overthrown, and
that the Timber and Stone thereof should be removed, whereby the Channel should
be cleared for passage of Boats; And accordingly did direct their Warrant under
their Hands and Seals to the defendants, Authorizing them thereby to overthrow
the said Were, which they performed accordingly: And all this matter of the
verdict of the Jury, and Decree of the Commissioners were set forth at large in
the Defendants answers; and after examination and publication of witnesses, the
Cause came to be heard in the said Duchy Court before Sir Humfrey May Knight,
Chancellor of the Duchy, Sir John Denham Knight, one of his Highness Barons of
the Exchequer, an assistant to that Court, and Sir Tho: Chamber lain Knight,
one of the Kings Justices of his Bench, another assistant of the said Court,
and Sir Edward Mosley Knight, Attorney of the said Court, who were of opinion,
That the said Were being an anclent Were by Prescription and Custom, it ought
not to have been overthrown by the Decree of the Commissioners of Sewers, and
that the said verdict of the Jurors was defective, because though they
presented the said Were to be over high and inhaunced, yet in regard they did
not present in quanto nor in qua part, the said Were was inhaunced above the
ancient assize, therefore they esteemed the said Verdict of no validity.

But now it comes next in time and turn to declare my opinion touching and
concerning Bridges, Mills, Mil-Dams, Milstanks, Floodgates, Hecks, Locks and
Hebbingweres, which in the said Statutes be set forth for Lets, Impediments and
Annoyances, wherein they are to receive their exposition according to the said
cases of Weres, without other distinctions; for if they have had continuance
time out of memory, then are they the proper and peculiar inheritances of the
King, or of his Subjects, allowed by ancient Custom, confirmed by long use, and
to remain established without overthrowing or destroying: But if they have been
inhaunced or enlarged over their ancient and accustomed assize, then the
enlargement and excess is only to be abated, and no more; for the Statute of 1
H. 4. says, That there must be left sufficient substance of the ancient: And
if any new Were, Stank, Stake, Floodgate, Kiddel, or other thing have of late
been erected on the Rivers, which is an annoyance or hurtful, then the same may
be ordered by the Commissioners to be abated, overthrown, destroyed and pulled
down, because the same was erected without lawful warrant or authority: And so
as I take it, these few distinctions do fully declare my opinion touching those
matters.

The Statute of 23 H. 8. which I read on touching and concerning Lets,
Impediments and Annoyances, has these words in it in effect, And the
Commission gives Authority to Edmond Lord Sheffield, Sir Philip Tyrwhit, Sir
Nicholas Sanderson, Knights and Baronets, Sir Richard Aurcots, Sir John
Thorold, Sir John Read, Sir Charles Bouls, Sir Ralph Maddison, Sir William
Hansord, Sir Francis South, Knights, Thomas Tyrwhit, John Bolles, and Nicholas
Hamerton, Esquires, whereof the said Baronet and Baronets were of the Quorum,
to survey the Walls, Streams, Ditches, Banks, Gutters, Sewers, Goats, Calceys,
Bridges, Trenches, Mills, Mildams, Floodgates, Ponds, Locks, Hebbingweres, and
other Impediments, Lets and Annoyances, and the same to cause to be made,
corrected, repaired, amended, put down or reformed, as cause shall require,
after their wisdoms and discretions; and therein to ordain and do after the
form, tenor and effect of all and singular the Statutes or Ordinances made
before the first day of March, in the 23 year of H 8. touching the Premises, or
any of them; as also to inquire by the Oaths of honest and lawful men of the
said shire or shires, place or places, where such defaults or annoyances be, as
well within liberties as without, by whom the truth may rather be known through
whose default the said hurt and damages have happened; and who has or holds
any Lands or Tenements, or Common of Pasture, or profit of fishing, or has or
may have any hurt, loss or disadvantage by any manner of means in the said
places, as well near to the said Dangers, Lets and Impediments, as inhabiting
or dwelling near about the said Walls, etc. and Impediments aforesaid, and all
those persons to tax, assess and distrain.

In a former clause of this Statute, the Commission gives power to survey the
Walls, Banks, Ditches, Gutters, Sewers, Goats, Calceys, Bridges, Streams; In
which clause these as necessary Defenses are ordered to be repaired.

Then comes another clause, wherein these things are recited as Lets and
Impediments, videlicet, Streams, Mills, Bridges, Ponds, Fishgarths Mildams,
Locks, Hebbingweres, Hecks and Floodgates; So that by these two clauses, the
first sort were to be maintained and not destroyed, and the second sort should
have been destroyed and not repaired.

And if these two first clauses had been alone, then the Commissioners had been
bound to maintain the one and destroy the other, without any toleration; but
then came in the said third clause, which is the clause of moderation, and
therein as well the Defenses, as the Lets and Impediments, come all in one
clause promiscuously put together; and so the words (amend, correct, repair and
put down) is therein referred to them all: so as in my opinion all defenses, as
Walls, Banks, Sewers, Calceys, Goats, etc. be not to be maintained, because in
tract of time some may prove unnecessary and unuseful, which for that cause may
be pulled down: so all Mills, Mildams, Floodgates, Weres, Stanks, Stakes,
Kiddels, and such like, are not to be put down and overthrown, but such as are
ancient and are thereby grown to be the proper inheritances of men, and such
also which are useful and necessary are to be maintained, kept and repaired;
for in some great Havens and Ports, great abundance of Piles and Timberposts
are set in the waters to stay the rage, force and violence of the waters for
the safeguard of the Port and Haven.

It were a very ridiculous exposition of this Law, to urge the Commissioners to
overthrow those things which are helpful; and not hurful; for this Statute did
foresee, that these Mildams, Stakes, Stanks, Floodgates, Weres, etc. were not
at all times and in all places hurtful, and therefore was the said clause of
the Statute inserted, which gave the Commissioners power to put down such as
were Lets and Annoyances in truth, and where they were used for strengths and
were of good use to maintain the same: And this construction I take it is fully
maintained by this Statute, but more especially by the Statute of 7 Jacobi,
cap. 20. where Peers, Piles, Jetties, and the like, set for fortifications 7
Jac. Reg. cap 20.
and strengths, are expressly ordered to be maintained.

And upon this part of this Law I do collect these ensuing matters:

H. 4. and 12 H. 4. formerly appears.

And if one which is a stranger of his mere malice or own 1 H. 4. 12 H. 4.
wrong does pitch down Piles, or set down Stakes in the Rivers and Streams, he
is to be fined or amerced for this offense, as the case shall require, and he
is to be ordered to remove the Nusans at his own costs and charges; and if it
cannot be found out who did the Nusans, then the Commissioners of Sewers are to
order those to remove that annoyance which in all likelihood are to sustain
most damage thereby, Et ita factum fuit, in 42 lib. Assiz. plac. 15. and 42
lib. Assiz.
this Statute extends to Rivers and Streams Navigable, as well as to such as
be not Navigable.

And touching the removing of Nusances, I shall put the Commissioners some
presidents ruled and adjudged in our Books of Law which come fully to the
purpose of the matters and things I now treat of.

In 32 Ed. 3. fol. 8. an assize of Nusans was brought by A. against B. for that
B. had made a Trench over a River, 32 Ed. 3.
and drew away thereby part of the waters and stream another way then that
which it did formerly use to run, and thereby surrounded the grounds of A. and
the assize passed for the Plaintiff; and it was adjudged, that the waters
should be removed into the ancient current and channel at the costs of the
Defendant, and the Plaintiff recovered his damages Et quod defendens capiatur;
out of which case I observe these things:

First, though an assize was a private Action, yet the Nusans was tam querenti
quam populo to the Plaintiff, for drowning and surrounding of his grounds; to
the people, in changing or diverting the ancient course of the waters, so that
for the people the offender was ordered to reform the Nusans, to the King he
was fined, and the Plaintiff for his own private wrong recovered his damages.

In 19 Ed. 3. lib. Assize, plac. 6. A presentment was found by Jury before
Commissioners, that certain persons by 19 Ed. 3.
name had turned the course of the River of Lee, which is there termed the
Kings Stream, and runs from Ware to Waltham, and so to London, and had fixed
and pitched Piles and Stakes therein, by means whereof Boats and Ballangers
were hindered in their passages up and down the River, and upon this Presentment
it was awarded, that those persons which were presented by name, and which had
done part of the Nusans, should reform the same; and because some of the
parties names could not be discovered which had done other part of the said
Nusans, It was Ordered, That the Sheriff should be commanded by Writ to him to
be directed to reform that part of the Nusans, taking therein to his assistance
those persons who had grounds next adjoining; And quod defendentes sint in
miserecordia dom' Regit, because the Nusans was not found to be done by force.

In 19 Ed. 3. fol. 23. in the Action upon the Case for a Nusans done, the
judgment in part was, That the Nusans should be removed and cum hoc concordat,
7 H. 4. 8. upon these three cases I observe, 7 H. 4.


That be the Action private or popular, always one part of Judgment was, That
the Nusans should be removed at the costs and charges of him or them which did
it.

Therefore these cases do fully maintain my opinion formerly delivered: And
although in all the said cases it appears, that there was a legal course
taken to remove the Nusances, yet there is another course allowed of by the Law,
and that is by abating of the Nusans, in pulling or cutting the same down; and
the Law is express so in the point in 9 Ed. 4. fol. 35. as if it be a Nusans
done to I. S. he or some 9 Ed. 4.
other by his directions may overthrow the Nusans; but if it be done ad
nocumentum populi, as in the high or royal streams, then any person prejudiced
thereby may abate the same.

To make a stream navigable.
BUt it has been objected to me by way of Interogation, Can the Commissioners
of Sewers make an unnavigable River or Stream to become or to be made Navigable
by these Laws of Sewers, yea or no? Touching which I shall deliver my opinion
as follows:

If this could have been done by the Commissioners of Sewers, then what should
it have needed to have procured Acts of Parliament for the doing thereof, as 9
H. 6. cap. 9. to make the River of Lee Navigable, and 6 H. 8. cap. 17. a
Statute to make the River at Canterbury Navigable; and and in 31 H. 8. cap. 4.
to make the River of Ex near Exeter Navigable: and 27 Eliz. cap. 20. to make a
River Navigable at Plymouth; and in 3 Jac. 10. cap. for making Thames Navigable
in the Counties of Oxford, Berks, Wilts, and Gloucester: These in truth are good
Arguments, but not convincing Proofs; for I am of opinion, that if Streams
cannot be made Navigable unless there were certain Mills, Weres, Stanks or
Kiddels removed which be the Inheritances of private persons, and have had
continuance time out of memory, then directly the Commissioners of Sewers have
not power to raze or impair these by the removing thereof, to make the Stream
Navigable: But in these cases a new private Act of Parliament must be obtained
for the effecting thereof, which was the occasion many of the said private
Statutes were obtained: But if none of these Inheritable encumbrances stand in
the way, but that by the cleansing or deeper casting of the Channel the same
may be made Navigable, Then I am of opinion, the Commissioners of Sewers have
power to do the same, and there be words in our Statute will bear this
Exposition (videlicet) And to cleanse and purge the Trenches, Streams, Sewers,
Gutters and Ditches, in all places necessary.

And herewithal I intend to close up this days exercise with this short
conclusion; that is, That E. was no sufficient Freeman, nor was resciant, nor
had goods of value to make him a competent Commissioner; That notwithstanding
B. and C. and the Countess of Warwick were competent Commissioners, and they
joining with Three of the Quorum had power to make and ordain Laws of Sewers;
and because this Were was newly erected, therefore the Law and Ordinance made
to raze it and to pull it down was a good Law, and warranted by this Statute,
etc.

Finis hujus quartae Lecturae.
Quinta Lectura.
GEnerous Auditors, my fellows and friends of this most famous and renowned
Inns of Court, I have sailed so far within the Land, that my ship has taken up
her harbor in the Inland streams, and I my self am got up to the highest
Mountains, to the end I might take the view and survey of all my former days
labors; and this being the last day of my reading, I must now make my account
to you of my Stewardship: The Talent which was delivered me when I entered upon
my first days Exercise, was this worthy Statute of Sewers, which I have put
forth to the best use I could in my poor skill and understanding; But in the
casting up of my Accounts, it may be it will come short of your exctations; if
it do, I pray you help to increase it out of your abundant store; and consider
with your selves, that your Reader took in hand to read upon a Maiden-law,
which never before this time abide his Exposition in any Inns of Court, and our
Law Books are exceeding scarce in the handling of matters of this kind and
nature; and so I wanted those means and helps which many other Readers have
had, who have taken upon them to make their readings of Statutes formerly read
on, and which have received a more plentiful Exposition in our Books and Terms
of the Law then this of mine has done.

It has been the ancient custom of this house, for the Reader in his last days
Exercise to make a brief repetition in the manner of an Index, of the most
substantial heads of his Statute, and of his divisions: And because every
profession is most graced when it is followed and trod out in the steps of
learned Predecessors, I intend therefore to be no changling, nor mean I to
produce or bring up new usages, least old Custom should forget what her self
had been: In this manner therefore do I make my Repetition;

First, I delivered my opinion touching the extent of this Statute, which was
as large as the Realm of England; and that the English seas were within the
Realm.

I made it to appear, that the Dominion and Empire of these seas, The legal
power of Administration of Justice, The property, profit and possession
thereof, does appertain to the King.

And that these profits were of two kinds, Real and Personal.


The Real profits were the grounds relinquished by the sea, which were always
such grounds as had been always before covered with waters: But shores and such
grounds which Alternis vicibus, were wet and dry, were not accounted
relinquished grounds, and that relinquished grounds belonged to the King; but
the shore and casual drowned grounds might belong to a subject.

The Personal Profits of the Sea did consist in Wreck. Flotsan. Jetfan. Ligan;
and
great fishes, which are due to the King by the Royal Prerogative of his Crown;
But subjects might have the Inheritance of the first four by Prescription, and
of the last by Charter from the King.

Then I descended into Islands; Which are of two sorts:

First, on the sea, old ones and new ones, That both were within the Kings
power, and the new ones His in property.

Fresh Islands in the Land might belong to subjects; The nature of them all
were, that they were undique circumdatae aquis.

I then landed at the shore, which in definition contains those grounds which
extend from the lowest Ebb to the highest Flood; That the King had the property
thereof de Jure, a subject might have it ex perquisito, and the people had
their usum necessarium.

I proceeded further to the Coasts, whose content and contingent I described so
near as by Histories I could inform my self; And shores and coasts I held them
to be Maris accessoria.

From these I proceeded to Creeks, Havens and Ports, and these I set forth in
their several kinds.

And I concluded with the compass of my Statute and my Commission, and with the
diversity thereof, That within the circle of my Statute, Seas, Isses, Shores,
Coasts, Ports, Havens, Creeks gained, and relinquished grounds were
comprehended, because that might depend (in posse) but yet the Commissioners
which was (in presenti operative) did extend but to the utmost Banks and Walls
toward the seas: And I concluded the points of my Case with the difference
between grounds left and grounds gained from the seas; and thus I ended my
first Lecture.

The second Lecture.
IN my second Lecture I came on Land, and took upon me to set forth her friends
from her foes; her friends I counted such as had defended her from the violence
of the seas, and from inundation of salt waters.

And these were her friends (viz.) Banks, Sewers, Goats, Calceys and Bridges;
these are to be maintained and repaired, and are the Defenses which I fully
treated of.

And these were the enemies, Streams, Mills, Ponds, Fishgarths, Mildams, Locks,
Hebbingweres, Hecks and Floodgates.

These are Lets and Impediments which this Statute speaks of, and are to be
corrected, reformed or put down as cause shall require.

I showed then that Rivers were of two kinds, Royal and Common Rivers; That
there were other inferior kinds of those watery instruments which might take
place after Rivers, as Ditches, Gutters, Sewers, Pools, Ponds, Springs.

That water is the substantive of all these, and if it be a running water at
random, then it is a stream; if it be a running water, and pent within Walls or
Banks, then it is a River, Gutter, Ditch or Sewer; These in their several
kinds I did distinguish; And Springs I held to be the vital spirit of them all.

I then described the Commissioners manner of proceedings, which might be three
manner of ways; By view and survey, and wherein they consisted. By Jury, and on
what parts that stood. By discretion, and the diversities and definition
thereof.


After these I took upon me, by how many several ways the defenses might be
maintained, which were nine in in number, 1. Frontage. 2. Ownership. 3.
Prescription, 4. Custom. 5. Tenure. 6. Covenant. 7. Usus Rei. 8. A Township;
and 9. By the Laws of Sewers.


All these I proved by Reasons, Presidents and Authorities, and did at large
discourse of them.

Then I came by the course of this Case to treat of Sesses, Taxes and Lays set
by Commissioners of Sewers, whereby I found some Inheritances there were which
were subject to these sesses; as those that follow Houses, Land, Meadow,
Pasture, Woods, Heaths, Furs, Moors, Marshes, Rents, Ferries, Pischaries,
Commons, Free passage, Parks, Warrens.

And many Inheritances I found in reason freed from these Taxes and Lays, as
Tithes in Spiritual hands, Annuities, Chases, Pensions, Proxies, Portions,
Marts, Fairs, Markets, Offices, things in Action, Conditions, Contingents,
Uses, Presentations, Founderships.

I also found these Sesses of three kinds, viz. Customary, and then they may
bind the Mountains as well as the Valleys. Hereditary, and then the particular
Tenant and the Reversion must both contribute. Temporary, which bound the
Possessor.


And here I ended my second days Lecture.

The third Lecture.
MY third Lecture I did distribute into three general heads, which were merely
the grounds of the execution of these Laws.

1. Imprisonment. 2. Fine: and 3. Amerciament.


1. By Distress: or 2. By sale thereof.


Or otherwise in extending it upon a man's personal Estate, by 1. Charging of
the Land perpetually: or 2. By the absolute sale thereof.


And under these general Rules I comprised these particulars which follow:

First, for the Honor of this Commission, and for the more necessary execution
of these Laws, I found them out a Court, wherein I set forth in what cases
Commissioners might Imprison the Bodies of Delinquents, and in what cases they
might impose a fine, and when Amerciaments be due; and then I showed that for
some transgressions neither Imprisonment, Fine nor Amerciament was to be
imposed.

I then came to Distresses, and held a treble distinction of them (videlicet)
that some were 1. Judicial, and issued out of the Judicial Records of this
Court. 2. Other Ministerial. 3. The third Legal; wherein all these Diversities
I screwed out by proved Authorities.


Then I showed in what places these Distresses might be taken, when upon the
Land charged, when within any place within the extent of this Commission, and
sometimes within any place of this Realm; And when the proper goods of the
party might be taken, and when the goods of strangers, and when goods may be
sold by this Law.

Afterward according to the order prescribed me by my Case, I declared that
there were some Interrupters to the Execution of these Distresses.

The one was by suing Replevins, wherein I took these diversities:

That a Sheriff being an inferior Officer could not of his own power deliver a
distress taken by warrant of Sewers; But that the Commissioners of Sewers are
bound to obey a Replevin coming out of the Kings Courts at Westminster, Quia de
altiori natura; Thus yet notwithstanding goods taken by a Judgment were
exempted from that Replevin.

Then I proceeded to the charge of Lands, whether a perpetual charge might be
imposed, or not.

And from thence I came to Sales, and those I distributed into four points;
First, for what cause. 2. What Lands. 3. Whose Lands. 4. To whom these Lands
might be sold.


I after came into the Tractate of Legal proceedings, which may be used in our
Court of Sewers; and first when and which presentiments of Sewers are
traversable, and which not.

And then wherein a party wronged may have his justice in this Court, and in
what cases not.

And whether the strict words of the Statute would admit of Exemptions, and the
difference of them, that some were general, others special; and therein I ended
the Third days Exercise.

The fourth Lecture.
THe fourth day I treated of the Ability and Non-ability of the Commissioners,
either by reason of some personal defect, whether it consisted in Sex, Exile or
other impediment that way.

And what Estate and value of Lands made one a competent Commissioner, and what
did the contrary; and the times when the Commissioner must have this Estate.

Then I delivered my opinion upon the words of the Statute, which be valuable
Hereditaments to enable a Commissioner, and which were not.

Then I proceeded to entreat of a Commissioners Ability in goods and moveable
substance, and which were moveable substances within this Statute, and which
not.

And because in the Citizen-Commissioner Three things were required to make him
able (viz.) Freedom, Estate in goods, and Resciancy, I therefore handled fully
all these parts thereof.

After all which, because I had before this time no fitting opportunity to
treat of Lets and Impediments, I therefore in this Lecture disposed my case in
such sort as it took hold of them all.

And first, because the Statute I read on confirmed all other former Laws
concerning the same, I therefore repeated them all from Magna Charta to this
very time, and gave an explanation or declaration of them all.

I then distributed the learning of these Laws into 3 heads:







Then came I to our Statute I read on, and therein I took new diversities that
was upon the Three Clauses of my Statute.







Wherein I published this learning thereupon, That if an old Wall, Bank, Bridge
or other Defenses, were found to be out of use, it might be extirped.

And if a Were, Mill, Mildam, Stanks, Stakes, Piles or Floodgates were found
beneficial to the public good, they might be preserved and maintained.

And I vouched some presidents, at whose charges the said Lets and Impediments
should be removed, and I ended my Argument with this, In what cases
Commissioners of Sewers might make unnavigable Rivers navigable, and and where
not; and in that I concluded my fourth Exercise.

This is the extent of my account, wherein I think I have done my self some
wrong in making so short a Breviate, in omitting many things which I truly took
pains in; but because you were all present and privy to my layings out, I hope
though I have omitted them in my extreats, you will allow me them in Summa
totalis.

But by your good favors I intend not to break Custom or Promise in any thing;
for I have some stock more left, which I told you when I began I had cast under
hatches, which now also I mean to distribute amongst you; And because there is
some part of this as yet left untreated of, I will now therefore proceed to the
unfolding thereof.

And the same consists in these words of the Law, That the Commissioners
hereafter named in any Commission, according to the purport of the same, have
full power and authority to make, constitute and ordain Laws, Ordinances and
Decrees, and the same Laws and Ordinances so made to repeal, reform, amend and
make new, as the cases necessary shall require in that behalf.

So that whereas other Judges have power only Jus dicere, these Commissioners
have also power Jus facere; yet this Statute gives not the Commissioners of
Sewers absolute power and authority to make and ordain Laws but secundum quid;
for these Laws which they are to make, must be for the safeguard, conservation,
redress, correction and reformation, and more then these, they must be
necessary and behoofful; so they must not be made out of self-will, and
affection, but after their Wisdoms and Discretions.

Wherein I conceive, that never a sentence in this Statute is seasoned with
more variety of caveats and grave directions then this Statute is in this very
clause of making new Laws; so that these Laws ought to be made to amend, not to
make worse; they must be necessary, not nugatory, they are to be composed with
wisdom, and disposed of with good discretion, and they ought chiefly to be made
Pro bono publico, and not Pro privato alicujus.

New Laws are to be ordained for these purposes only, that is, either for
making and erecting of new necessary defenses, or for the overthrowing of some
unnecessary Lets and Annoyances, or for the continuance of the ancient.

And in alteration, new addition, or diminution of a Wall, Bank, Sewer, Goat,
Calcey or other Engine, a new Law is to be made for the effecting thereof.

Also if an ancient Wall, Bank or other Defense be worn out of use, and is
altogether unnecessary; but in the Wisdom and Discretion of the Commissioners,
and that a new one in another place were more convenient for the safety of the
country; this must be all done by a new Law.

But here a matter of Law will arise, and another matter of great caution: The
matter of Law will rest in this, Whether an ancient Wall, Bank or other Defense
which is grown out of use, may be overthrown and pulled down; and in my opinion
it may, by the said third clause of the Statu^e, wherein power is given either
to maintain them or to put them down.

But because I have formerly handled this point, I will therefore proceed to
the caution, which is of great weight and importance; for whereas one or more
persons are by Tenure, Covenant, Custom, Prescription or otherwise bound and
tied to repair and maintain the said ancient Bank, Wall, Sewer, or other
Defense at their several and peculiar charges; if then the Commissioners of
Sewers should make a Law to overthrow or remove the same, and should execute
the same accordingly; and then should make a Law to erect and build a new Wall,
Bank or other defense in another place more convenient, yet the parties which
were bound to maintain and repair the former old Defenses, should not so be
tied and bound to repair and maintain these new erected ones, because by the
destroying of the ancient Walls and Banks, the Prescriptions, Customs, Tenures
and Covenants were either utterly dissolved, or otherwise suspended; and the
charge for the erecting and maintaining of the new ones are to be laid on the
Level: So that it behooves Commissioners to be careful in these affairs, else
things in the conclusion may fall out contrary to their expectations; for it is
well said, That Rerum progressus ostendunt multa quae in initio nec praecaveri
aut praevideri possunt.

In making new Laws and Ordinanes these things are also considerable;









I observe also that this Statute uses three words, which are all powerful in
signification and operation, videlicet, Laws, Ordinances and Decrees; and I
think it fitting for me, so near as I can, both to deliver the definitions of
them, and the differences between them.

A Law.
A Law is properly a matter which has taken his essence and power by a Custom
time out of memory, as the Common Laws have done; Or else is a matter Acted and
Enacted in Parliament by the King and the great Counsel of the Realm, and by
the Authority thereof, for the ordering of men's Bodies, Lands and Goods; and
such a Law is hereby intended, because the Laws which the Commissioners shall
make have the power of an Act of Parliament to strengthen and assist them, and
they are to receive life and perfection from this Statute I read on.

Ordinance.
AN Ordinance is a word having a more private and less powerful signification
then the word Law has; for it is a Law but of a secundary power, enacted by a
Corporation, Company or Commission, proceeding merely out of the Power and
Prerogative of the King by Charter, Grant or Commission warranting the same, as
those Corporations, Societies and Companies which have power by Charters or
Patents to make the same; as is set forth in the cases of the City of London,
and of the Chamberlain of Londons Case in Sir Edward Cooks Reports.

Also Ordinances may be made by the power of a Court, as in a Court Baron to
make Orders, or by the Inhabitants of a Town by Custom, for the ordering of
their Commons, Repairing of their Churches and Highways: And these are more
properly Bylaws then Laws; for a Law is either the Common Law, Customary Law,
or an Act of Parliament; all which are of greater force then any Laws made by
these secundary means, which of themselves are of little or no strength but as
they are assisted by other primary powers.

Decree.
A Decree is neither a Law nor Ordinance in proper definition, but is only a
Sentence or Judgment in a Court of Justice, delivered or declared by the
Judges there, by and through the power and strength of a general former Law,
for Decretum est Sententia lata super Legem.

So that a Law is a general direction for a multitude.

An Ordinance is a subordinate direction, proceeding out of a more general
power.

And a Decree is a Sentence delivered for or against a particular person,
grounded upon the said Laws and Ordinances.

Continuance of Laws.
IT comes now fitly for me in turn and course to declare the continuance of
these Laws, Ordinances and Decrees; for it is to be observed, that some of them
be but temporary, though others perpetual.

The words in our Statute are, That every Statute and Ordinance made before the
Statute of 23 H. 8. concerning the things and matters therein mentioned, as
well in the time of H. 8. as of any of his Progenitors, not being contrary to
this Statute, or heretofore repealed, shall stand in force for ever, and are
commanded to be put in due Execution: But this clause is intended of all Acts
of Parliament made touching the Sewers, and be not intended or meant of Laws
and Ordinances made by the Commissioners of Sewers themselves.

Laws and Decrees made for sale of Lands by the Powers and Authorities of this
Statute, are to be made and engrossed into Parchment, and certified under the
Seals of the Commissioners into the Chancery, and the Kings Royal assent had
thereto, under the Privy Seal, shall also stand good and effectual.

And all Laws and Ordinances written in parchment, and indented, and under the
Seals of the Commissioners, whereof the one part shall remain with the Clerk of
the Sewers, and the other part to remain in such places as the Commissioners
should appoint (notwithstanding the same be not certified into the Chancery,
nor the Kings Royal assent be had thereto) shall continue in force till the
same shall be altered, 13 Eliz. cap. 9.
repealed or made void by another Commission of Sewers, although the former
Commission by the which these Laws were made were determined by Supersedeas.

The Commission is to continue for ten years from the date thereof by force of
the Statute of 13 Eliz. yet notwithstanding 13 El.
all Laws and Ordinances which are written in parchment, indented and sealed by
the Commissioners of Sewers, without certifying into the Chancery, or the Kings
Royal assent had thereto, shall notwithstanding the determination of the
Commission by the expiration of the said ten years, continue in force for one
whole year next ensuing, to be put in execution for that time by six Justices
of the Peace, whereof two to be of the Quorum, but then the power of the
Justices of the Peace is ceased by the corning of a new Commission of Sewers.

All other Laws and Ordinnces of Sewers which are but made and writ in paper,
or which be but in parchment, and not Indented, or which be indented also, if
not sealed, continue in force no longer then that Commission continues by the
power whereof they were made.

And so by this short declaration I have made, the Commissioners may the better
observe how long time Laws and Ordinances of Sewers are to continue in force;
yet though they lose their vigor they may notwithstanding be revived by the
power of a new Commission, or remain for presidents for after ages to imitate.

Repealing of Laws.
IN this last place I intend to deliver my opinion, what Laws, Ordinances and
Decrees may be repealed, altered or made void by the Commissioners of Sewers.

Therefore it is first to be considered, what grounds are to be observed in
repealing or altering former Laws.

It appears in Esther, that the Laws of the Medes and Persians were so
perdurable, as they could never be changed: And in my opinion there is required
as great foresight, judgment, and as sound discretion and mature deliberation
in repealing of old Laws, as in making new ones; For Quae preter consuetudinem
and morem major' fiunt neque placent neque recta videmur.

I have noted how carefully and constant the Lords of the Parliament House were
in the 20 year of H. 3. when they all cried out aloud Nolumus leges Angliae
mutare.

Seeing therefore there ought to be great care in making Laws, so must there be
great heed taken in repealing of Laws.

And because Commissioners of Sewers have power herein, I will therefore
deliver my opinion how far that power will extend: And if one note this Branch
of the Statute well, he shall well perceive the Judicious care taken by the
Parliament in penning of it; For the words be, That the Commissioners of Sewers
should have Power and Authority to make, constitute and ordain Laws, Ordinances
and Decrees, and the same Laws and Ordinances (omitting the word Decrees) to
alter, repeal and make void; for a Decree is a Judgment, and is Finis operis,
and a Judgment cannot be reversed without a Writ of Error: Neither can a
Sentence or a Decree in Chancery be reversed without a Bill of Review; neither
can the Commissioners of Sewers reverse a Judgment or Decree of Sewers
Judiciously pronounced, which is a Judgment upon a Trial betwixt the King and
the party, or betwixt party and party, without a Bill of Reversal; for it is
truly said, Quod natural est unum quod^ dissolvi eo ligamine quo ligatum est.

A Writ of Error lay at the Common Law for to reverse a Judgment given by
Commissioners of Sewers when the Commission was in Latin, as is set forth in
the Register, being then one of the special Commissions of Oyer and Terminer;
but since the Commission was put into the English frame, the Writs of Error
ceased.

A Law for sale of Lands engrossed into parchment, and certified into the Kings
Court of Chancery, with the Kings Royal assent had thereto, is not reversable
without an Act of Parliament; but then the said sale must be made according to
the form, frame and power of this Statute.

For put the Case that A. B. holds his Lands of I. S. by the payment of
Twenty shillings yearly toward the repair of such a Bridge, Bank or Wall, it
fortuneth that A. B. paid the Twenty shillings yearly to his Lord for that
purpose, who neglects to pay it, though he be thereto Ordered and Assessed to
pay the same to the said repairs by the Commissioners of Sewers, the seigniory
of Twenty shillings yearly is to be decreed, and not the Land, for that the
fault was in I. S. and not in A. B. the owner of the Land.

If any persons be by Prescription, Custom, Tenure, Covenant or otherwise,
bound to repair Walls, Banks or other defenses of Sewers, the Commissioners
have not any power by their Commission to repeal, alter or make void any of
these, because these are established by the Common Law, and Customs of the
Realm, and not by the power of the Commission of Sewers: But their power is to
repeal, alter or make void Laws and Ordinances made by themselves, or by the
power of their Commission: And so the words of their Commission plainly
describe it; For thereby they have power to make Laws and Ordinances, and the
same to repeal, alter and make void, so they must be the same and no other: And
herein I end all my Arguments and discourse upon this Statute, for I account
all the rest which remains unspoken of not to be worthy of a Readers dialect,
because I have fully handled all the materials of this worthy Law; And
therefore I may justly ^^^clude my Argument with this, That Finitum est hoc
opus ^ consumatum.

FINIS.

