His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Monday the 28th
of January, 1677/8.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

C R
HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBV^^H, by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Sacred
Majesty. 1678,

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Monday, the
28th of January, 1677/8.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WHen We parted last, I told you, That before We met again, I would do that
which should be to your Satisfaction; I have accordingly made such Alliances
with Holland, as are for the Preservation of Flanders, and which cannot fail of
tha^ ^^d, unless prevented either by the want of due Ass^^^^^es to support
those Alliances, or by the small regar^ (...) Spaniards themselves must have to
their own pres^^^^^ion.

The first of these I cannot suspect, by reason of your repeated Engagements to
maintain them: and I know you are so wise, as to consider, That a War, which
must be the necessary Consequence of them, ought neither to be prosecuted by
halves, nor to want such assurances of Perseverance as may give Me
encouragement to pursue it; besides, it will not be less necessary, to let Our
Enemies have such a prospect of Our Resolutions, as may let them see certainly,
That we shall not be weary of Our Arms, till Christendom be restored to such a
Peace, as shall not be in the power of any Prince alone to disturb.

I do acknowledge to you, That I have used all the means possible, by a
Mediation, to have procured an Honorable and Safe Peace for Christendom;
knowing how preserable such a Peace would have been to any War, and especially
to this Kingdom, which must necessarily own the vast Benefits it has received
by Peace, whilst its Neighbors only have yet smarted by the War: But finding
it no longer to be hoped for by fair means, it shall not be My fault if that be
not obtained by Force, which cannot be had otherwise.

For this Reason I have recalled My Troops from France, and have considered,
That although the Dutch shall do their parts, We cannot have less on Ours, then
Ninety Sail of Capital Ships constantly maintained; nor less then Thirty or
Forty thousand Land-men, (with their Dependencies) to be employed upon Our
Fleets, and elsewhere. And because there shall be no fear of Mis-employing what
you shall give to these Uses, I am contented that such Money be appropriated to
those Ends, as strictly as you can desire. I have given Testimony enough of My
Care in that kind, by the progress I have made in Building the New Ships,
wherein, for the making them more useful, I have Directed such larger
Dimensions, as will cost Me above one hundred thousand pounds more then the Act
allows. I have gone as far as I could in Repairing the Old Fleet, and in buying
of necessary stores for the Navy, and Ordnance; And in this and other
Provisions, for better Securing both My Foreign Plantations, and the Mands
nearer home, I have expended a great deal more then the Two hundred thousand
pounds you enabled me to Borrow upon the Excise, although I have not found such
a Credit as I expected upon that Security. I have born the Charge both of a
Rebellion in Virginia, and a new War with Algiers: I stand Engaged to the
Prince of Orange for My Nieces Portion; and I shall not be able to Maintain My
constant necessary Establishments, unless the New Impost upon Wines, etc. be
continued to Me, which would otherwise turn only to their Profit, to whom We
least intend it.

I hope these things will need little Recommendation to you, when you consider
your Promises in some, and the Necessity of the rest; and to let you see that I
have not only employed My T^^^ and Treasure for your Safety, but done all I
could to remove all sorts of ^^^^usies, I have married my Niece to the Prince
of Orange, by which I hope (...) ^^ve given full Assurances, that I shall never
suffer his Interest to be ruined, i^^^^^an be assisted, as I ought to be to
preserve them.

Having done all this, I expect from you a plentiful Supply, suitable to such
great Occasions, whereon depends not only the Honor, but (for ought I know)
the Being of an English Nation, which will not be saved by finding faults
afterward, but may be prevented by avoiding the chief Fault of doing weakly
and by halves, what can only be hoped from a vigorous and through prosecution
of what We undertake.

These considerations are of the greatest Importance that ever concerned this
Kingdom; and therefore I would have you enter immediately upon them, without
suffering any other Business whatsoever to divert you from bringing them to
good Resolutions.

FINIS.

