His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH, Together with the LORD KEEPERS, To both Houses
of PARLIAMENT, January 7. 1673/4.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

C R
HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by His MAJESTY'S Printers: Anno DOM. 1674.

HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, January 7. 1673/4.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WHen I parted with you last, it was but for a little time, and with a
resolution of meeting suddenly again. That alone was enough to satisfy My
Friends that they need not fear, and My Enemies that they could not hope for a
Breach between Us. I then told you, that the time of this short Recess should
be employed in doing such things as might add to your Satisfaction. I hope I
have done My part toward it: And if there be any thing else which you think
wanting to secure Religion or Property, there is nothing which you shall
reasonably propose, but I shall be ready to receive it. I do now expect you
should do your parts too, for Our Enemies make vigorous preparations for War,
and yet their chief hopes are to disunite us at home; it is their Common
Discourse, and yet they reckon upon it as their best Relief.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

It is not possible for Me to doubt your Affections at any time, much less at
such a time as this, when the Evidences of your Affections are become so
necessary to us all. I desire you to consider, that as the War cannot be well
made without a Supply, so neither can a good Peace be had without being in a
posture of War. I am very far from being in love with War, for Wars sake; But
if I saw and likelihood of Peace without dishonor to My Self, and damage to
You, I would soon embrace it. But no proposals of Peace have yet been offered,
which can be imagined with intent to conclude, but only to amuse. Therefore the
way to a good Peace is to set out a good Fleet, which We have time enough to do
very effectually, if the Supply be not delayed. If after this a Peace should
follow, yet the Supply would be well given, for what ever remains of it, I am
willing should be appropriated for building more Ships.

To conclude, a speedy, a proportionable, and above all a cheerful Aid is now
more necessary then ever, and I rely upon you for it.

I lately put you in mind of my Debt to the Goldsmiths; I hope a fit time will
come to take that into consideration.

I cannot conclude without showing the entire Confidence I have in you. I know
you have heard much of My Alliance with France, and I believe it has been very
strangely misrepresented to you, as if there were certain secret Articles of
dangerous Consequence; I will make no difficulty of letting the Treaties and
all the Articles of them, without any the least reserve, to be seen by a small
Commitee of both Houses, who may Report to you the true scope of them; And I
assure you there is no other Treaty with France, either before or since, not
already Printed, which shall not be made known. And having this freely trusted
you, I do not doubt but you will have a care of My Honor, and the good of the
Kingdom.

The rest I refer to My Lord Keeper.

THE LORD KEEPERS SPEECH.
My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons
THe King has already in Part, told you, What he has done for you since the
last Recess, What he is still ready to do, and What it is he does now expect
from you.

And this in Terms so full, and so Obliging, so Generous, and so Satisfactory,
That he whose Affections are not raised by that Discourse, He who cannot
Acquiesce in the fullness of this Assurance, He whose Heart is not Established by
it in such a Belief as may entirely Dispose him to the Service of the Crown,
will hardly be recovered to a better Disposition by any other Expedient.

For indeed what better way can be found to undeceive those who have been
abused, The King refers you to the Time past, not to his Promises, but to his
Performances, Gives men leave to Judge by what they See, of what they Hear, By
what has been done since the Last Session, of what is offered you Now, and
what is likely to be done for the time to come.

And does not every man See that the King has given New life and motion to
such Laws as were long dead, or fast asleep? That he has once more repaired
the Hedge about our Vineyard, and made it a Fence indeed, Against all those who
are Enemies to the Planting of it, who would be glad to see it Trodden down, or
Rooted up, and study how to Sap and undermine our very Foundations.

Do we not see that the King has made it his care and his business to do all
that is possible to preserve us in our Civil Rights too, That He makes the Laws
of His Kingdom the measures not only of his Power but his Prudence, That he
suffers no man to be Wiser then the Law, That He thinks he cannot Judge of the
Health or Sickness of his State by any better Indication, then the Current of
his Laws, and suffers nothing to remain that may in the Least measure hinder
Justice from flowing in its due and proper Channels?

A very few instances, of many that might be used, will serve to Demonstrate it.

If the Convictions of all Recusants and bringing them under the the Penal
Laws, can suppress Popery.

If without staying for the Forms of Law in Points of Conviction, The present
forbidding all Papists, or reputed Papists to come to Court, and the Extending
this Prohibition to his Royal Palace at St. James's be enough to Discountenance
them,

If the not extending his Prerogative beyond its due Limits can secure your
Liberties,

If his Majesty's lessening and reducing all his Land forces, and maintaining
so few Extraordinary, that they will scarce be enough to help to Mann his Fleet
this Summer, can Extinguish the Fears of a Standing Army,

If a Rigorous and Severe prosecution at Law, of all the Officers and Soldiers
in his Majesty's Ordinary Guards when they misbehave themselves toward the
meanest Subject, can secure your Properties,

If the Abrogation of all the Privileges from Arrests which were claimed by
his Majesty's Servants Extraordinary, who are very Numerous, can prevent the
Delays, and Obstructions of Justice.

Then surely his Majesty has reason to believe, that nothing is wanting which
can Lawfully be done, or modestly be Wished, either for your Satisfaction or
your Security.

These are not single and Transient Acts, but such Acts as flow from Habits,
These are not Leaves and Blossoms, but true, solid, and Lasting Fruits, Long!
Long! may that Royal Tree Live and Flourish, upon which these Fruits do Grow.

And yet His Majesty's Indulgence to you rests not here, He gives you leave to
study and contrive your own assurance, And if you think you want any further
security, If any thing have escaped His Majesty's care, who meditates nothing
more then your Preservation, you see you have free Leave to make any Reasonable
Proposition, and His Gracious Promise that he will receive it.

This is a Satisfaction Equal to all your wishes. Now if ever your Joys are
full, There wants no more to the improvement of this happiness, but the wisdom
of the Parliament to use these Advantages with a due moderation.

If therefore upon Enquiry you shall think it needful to apply any other
Remedies, It is extremely to be wished that those Remedies may be few, And
withal, that they may be Gentle and Easy too.

For they that are sick perish as often by too many Remedies as by none at all,
But none fall so fatally and so finally, as they who being entered into some
Degrees of Convalescence, Resolve to recover in an Instant, and had rather make
some great Effort, or try some bold Experiment upon themselves, then observe
the methods, or attend those Gradual progressions which are necessary to
perfect that Health, and complete that Recovery.

I must not omit one instance more of His Majesty's Care for you, and that it
is the great Industry and Application of mind which His Majesty has used all
along, in hopes to have obtained by this time, if it had been possible, an
Honorable and a Just Peace.

A very few words will serve to give you the whole Deduction of it from the
first original, to this present moment.

Much time was spent in agreeing the Place of Treaty, wherein the Dutch were
gratified in their desires, and the City of Cologne is accepted for the Place.

When His Majesty's Ambassadors arrived there, the very first meeting with
those from the States General made it Evident that their Plenipotentiaries came
not with any Intention to Enter upon a Serious Treaty, But only to draw the
matter out into Length until their affairs might meet with a better and more
pleasing Conjecture.

For their very Credentialls or Plenipotencies were so penned, That there were
no less then four gross Equivocations in the body of them, which was so
manifest, and without all reply, that they were fain to send to their Masters
at the Hague to get them Amended.

But that which gave greatest offense of all, and was purposely done for that
end, was the Preamble, wherein they take upon them to beg the Question, to
Decide the Justice of the Cause, and to affirm such matters of Fact, as they
had reason to believe would never be admitted.

No Arguments of Our Ambassadors, No instances of the Mediators, though never
so importunate, could prevail then, or yet can prevail, to have it altered.

The Treaty should Naturally have stopped here, But that His Majesty was resolved
to Give a beginning to it, and (which was all that could be done) suffered His
Ambassadors to enter upon it with a Protestaion.

Our Demands are no sooner given in, But presently two of the Dutch
Ambassadors go away to the Hague on pretense to consult their Masters, where
they staid a full Month without any kind of Answer given, or Exceptions taken
to His Majesty's Demands, or any the Least Stepp made in this Negotiation.

When they came back, their Answer was a Remonstrance rather then an Answer,
and such a Remonstrance, as was fitter for a Rupture then a Treaty, There was
scarce one Period in it which did not rather give Occasion of new offense, then
any Satisfaction for what was past.

Their very Conversation from that time forward wanted much of its former
Civility.

They waited for the Conclusion of a Treaty with Spain, wherein one Article
was, that as soon as Spain had broke with France, they would presently break
off the Treaty at Cologne.

And now this Article is in effect performed, For two of their Principal
Ambassadors are actually gone away from Cologne, as they long threatened they
would do, leaving only two other for Forms sake, who in all probability either
must not, or will not Conclude without their Colleagues.

His Majesty notwithstanding has not suffered himself to be Diverted from
using all the ways and means that were possible to Facilitate a Peace. To this
End he directed His Ambassadors from time to time, to Moderate their demands in
such Particulars as were capable of it, And wholly relaxes some Points which
were of highest importance to the Dutch to gain, and very Considerable
Abatements of His Majesty's just Satisfaction.

A Condescension well received and Esteemed by the Mediators, though it have
not yet found any suitable Reception from the Duch Ministers, or their Superior
Lords.

By this time they began to hope that the Subjects of England would grow weary
of the War, and that they should be able to profit themselves very much by our
Impatience.

To Increase this as much as was possible, they prepare a Letter which they
send by a Trumpeter, sitting the Parliament, or very near it, and Cause it to
be given out that nothing could be more desired, then they had offered.

His Majesty quickly made that Letter and His Answer to it, public, and for
that time defeated the Design of this Paper Stratagem.

Their next Recourse was to such Proposals as they could procure the Spanish
Ambassadors to deliver on their behalfs.

Wherein besides the Demands of Restitution of Prizes which was wholly
impracticable, There was a Total Omission of any Regulation of Trade in the
Indies, No mention made of Releasing His Majesty's Subjects at Suriuam, whete
they remain in a State of Bondage, No recompense offered, nor so much as Leave
asked for the Libety of Fishing upon Our Coasts.

And yet the Right of our Sole Fishing is so clear, That we find in our Ancient
Rolls of Parliament in time of Richard the Second, a Tax laid upon all
strangers who Fish in our Seas, and this not by way of Custom when they come
into our Ports, but by way of Tribute for Fishing in Our Seas: And this
Evidence of His Majesty's Dominion within his own Seas, has been in all Ages
downward preserved in some measure, until the Time of the late Usurper, who for
private reasons first abandoned it.

As for that Satisfaction in the matter of the Flagg, which the Proposals
mention, it is but reasonable to understand it in that sense wherein they
sometimes used to express themseleves at Cologne.

That is the thing shall be done, whole Fleets shall strike their Sayls to
Single Ships, and they shall do it out of His Majesty's Seas too, But that of
Right they ought so to do, will never be acknowledged.

So they desire to change the Ancient inheritance of the Crown into a New
purchase, and to Turn that Purchase into a Matter of Civility, which they may
Equally pay to all crowned Heads, and Equally resume according to their good
pleasure and Occasions.

Now though these Proposals have been backed with some kind of Intimation of a
War with Spain in case of a Refusal, Yet His Majesty who Knows the Articles of
Peace between himself and that King, and His own care to preserve them, Who
knows the usefulness of His Allience to that King, and the many good Offices he
has always been ready to do for him, and withal considers the great Wisdom
and Prudence of that Council, and how carefully they use to Deliberate before
they come to Great and important Resolutions, will not Easily believe it
possible for that King to proceed to such Extremities.

The rather because the Dutch themselves have since Departed from those very
Proposals which they procured the Spanish Ambassador so earnestly to recommend.

For they afterward sent the Ambassador a Reply to His Majesty's Answer to
their Letter, wherein they abate much of what the Ambassador had offered, and
seek to reduce things to the State they were in at Breda.

So that it is hard to know by what kind of Proposals they intend to be bound,
But it is most Reasonable to believe they intend those made by themselves,
rather then those made for them.

And yet this Reply, besides the disrespect it Carried to Spain, whose
Proposals it shrunk from, was so offensive to His Majesty, that the Ambassador
like a wise and great Minister, that is, like himself, thought it became him to
send it back again without offering to present it.

Nevertheless this Paper has since stolen into the Press, and is Printed at
the Hague as a Letter delivered, and has been sent hither under Covers to
several members of the House of Commons, of that House of Commons whom they
Libelled in the former War for their Zeal, and now Pretend to Reverence for
their Deliberation.

And all this in hopes you will not think them obstinate, who refuse to Treat
at the Place of their Own Appointment, or to be well understood any were else.
How is it possible to understand these Proceedings to be Real, and with a true
desire of Peace, And if they should yet send during this Session any New
Proposal, for who Knows the Designs of an Enemy; what form soever those
Overtures may be dressed in, we may justly suspect that their End is, if they
cannot Divide us, at least to Amuse us and lessen our Care is Providing for the
War.

Perhaps it is more then an Honorable War does allow to go about to raise
Sedition, though in the Country of an Enemy, But surely the Artifice of
Appealing in a Manner to the people, and making them the Judges of Peace and
War, is a little too plain and open to take any Effect here.

I have done with these few Instances of His Majesty's care, those of His
kindness are infinite, That which you have heard this morning is of a
Transcendent, and indeed a very surprising Nature, It Is an Act of so Entire a
Confidence on His Majesty's part, that it can never be repayed by any other
Tribute on your part, but that of a True and Humble Assiance in Him.

I must now proceed to put you in mind That There are some other things which
His Majesty with Great Justice and Great assurance does Expect from you again.

The first is a speedy and a Proportionable Supply, and this is of absolute
necessity both for War and Peace.

Hs Majesty is well assured His Fleet is in such a forwardness, that if the
Supply come in any reasonable Time, you will find no Time has been lost in
preparation; And it was no small matter to bring it to, pass that we may be as
forward as our Enemies that if we please, or very near it.

If the Supply be at all Delayed, it will have as ill effect almost as if it
were denied, For We may chance to be found like Archimedes, drawing Lines in
the Dust while the Enemy is entering into our Ports. And if the further Progess
of this Fleet be stopped for want your Concurrence, make Account all hopes of
Peace are stopped too: For, though the Fruit of War be Peace, Yet its such a
Fruit as we must not Hope to gather without our Arms, in our Hands.

It Is not the way to have a brave Peace, to show our selves weary of the War;
who ever Trusted to the good Nature of their Enemies; It Is a vigorous assistance
of the Crown that must make not only your Arms considerable, but your Treaties
too.

One the other side, if the putting your selves in a good Posture of War should
produce a Peace, as possibly it may do, Yet you will have the best Account of
your Supply your Hearts can Will, For His Majesty is content, it be
appropriated to the building of more Ships.

Therefore if the Discourse upon this Subject be a little more Pressing then
Ordinary, you may be sure the Occasion is so too.

There cannot be a Higher Gratification of your Enemies then to be backward in
this Point; The very Opinion they have that you would be so, has already done
us so much harm, that perhaps it is one great Cause of the Continuance of the
War.

Had the Enemy despaired of any Division here, it is likely his Proceedings had
been more Sincere, and our Peace had not been so far off as now it seems to be.

There is one thing more the King has mentioned, and only mentioned to you,
that is the Consideration of the Goldsmiths, which involves so many Persons and
Families, that the Concern is little les then National, It Is an affair the King
lays very much to Heart, and hopes a Proper time will come when a favorable
Regard may be had of it.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

The King does not only assure himself of your Affections to him at this time,
But from such Affections so Known and so Tri^d as yours, he does yet Expect far
greater things then these.

He does Expect that you should do your Endeavors to restore and improve the
mutual confidence between him and his People, and that you should do it to such
a Degree that it may recover its full strength, and quite Extinguish all their
Fears, and Jealousies.

For the King takes Notice that the malice of his Enemies has been very Active
in Sowing so many Tares, as are almost enough to Spoil that Harvest of Love,
and Duty which His Majesty may justly Expect to reap from the good seed which
He Himself had Sown.

Among the many Venomous Insinuations which have been made use of, the Fears
and Jealousies of Religion and Liberty, are of the worst sort, and the most
Dangerous Impressions.

Cetainly Malice was never more busy then it has been in these Reports, and
it has been assisted by a great Deal of Invention.

But it is to be hoped that no Man's Judgment or affections will be either
missed or Disturbed by such Reports.

For Calumnies and Slanders of this Nature are like Comets in the Air, they may
seem perhaps, Especially to the fearful, to be ill Prognosticasts, and the
Direct forerunners of mischief, But in themselves they are Vain Apparitions,
and have no kind of Solidity, no Permanence or Duration at all. For after a
little while the Vapor spends it self, and then the Base Exhalation quickly
falls back again into that Earth from whence it came.

Religion and Liberty stand secured by the most Sacred Ties that are, Nay the
King has a greater Interest in the preservation of both, then you your selves;
For as Religion, the Protestant Religion, commends your indispensable
obedience, so it is a Just and Lawful Liberty which swettens that command, and
endears it to you.

Let other Princes therefore Glory in the most resigned obedience of their
Vassals, His Majesty values Himself upon the Hearts and affections of His
people, and thinks His Throne within Seated there, better Established then the
most Exalted. Sovereignty of those who tread upon the Necks of them that rise
up against them.

Since the world stood, never any King had so great a Cause to rest upon this
Security.

They were your Hearts that mourned in Secret for the absence of the King; They
were your Hearts and affections to the King which Tired out all the late
Usurpations, by your invincible Patitience and fortitude; It was you that
Taught our English World to See and Know that no Government could be settled
here, but upon the true foundations of Honor and Allegiance.

This, This alone made way for all the happy Changes which have followed.

And yet Posterity will have cause to doubt, which was the greater Felicity of
the two, That Providence which restored the Crown, or that which sent us such a
Parliament to preserve it when it was restored. What may not the King now hope
from you? What may not you assure your selves from him? Can any thing be
difficult to Hearts so united, To Interests so Twisted and interwoven together,
as the Kings and yours are.

Doubtless the King will surpass himself at this time in Endeavoring to
procure the good of the Kingdom, Do but you Excel your selves too in the
continued Evidences of your affections, and then the Glory of Reviving this
State will be entirely due to this Session.

Then they who Wait for the Languishing and Declination of the present
Government, will be Amazed to see so happy a Crisis, so blessed a Revolution.

And Ages to come will find cause to Celebrate your Memories, as the truest
Physicians, the wisest Counselors, the Noblest Patriots, and best Session of
the best Parliament that ever King or Kingdom met with.

FINIS.

